Support System for Caregivers with Optical Fiber Sensor and Cleaning Robot
Junko Ichikawa, Tetsuya Kon, Kazuhiro Watanabe and Norihiko Shinomiya
Dept. Information Systems Science
Soka University
Tokyo, Japan
shinomi@soka.ac.jp
Abstract—Population aging is one of the serious issues in
developed nations. Because of the increase in the number of
senior citizens, the demand for care of them has been enhanced.
Consequently, some facilities such as group homes are provided
in order to support their life. However, shortage of caregivers
in group homes provides lack of attentions to situations or
accidents of the elderly. Therefore, this research aims to propose a
supporting system with sensor network technology and robots for
caregivers in such facilities that can reduce workload of nurses
and assure safety of facility residents.
Keyword—monitoring system; sensor network; robot; nursing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Society is aging globally, and the number of the elderly
dramatically is increasing especially in developed countries.
Japan also encounters this serious problem. The rate of aging
of Japan, which is deﬁned as the percentage of the population
of over 65 years old has monotonously been rising since 1950
and exceeded 24% in 2012 [1]. Furthermore, it is expected to
exceed 30% in 2025. Following the increase in the number of
elderly residents, some social problems have emerged such as
insurance structure issues and health problems. Because many
of them suffer from physical issues, the demand for health
caret enhances.
In Japan, the number of facilities that support elderly people
is over 25,000 sites [2], and group homes account for 47% of
these facilities. A group home is a facility where caregivers
stay overnight and nurse the elderly with senile dementia. In
these facilities, one caregiver is usually required to take care
of approximately 10 elderly people during night time. In this
situation, caregivers are possibly not aware of accidents of
the elderly. For example, falling from a bed and wandering
aimlessly in a facility might not be found, and elderly people
can be fatally injured.
In order to solve the problem, the video monitor systems
in group homes have been developed [3]. Caregivers can
monitor elderly people behaviours through cameras which are
installed in living rooms, bathrooms and entrances in group
homes 24 hours of day. However, such monitoring systems
directly display private behaviours with images and sounds.
Thus, it may make elderly people stressed because of invasive
surveillance.
Using sensor network is conceived as a solution for pre-
vention of the invasive surveillance. Sensor networks can
indirectly retrieve environmental information and situations
by setting many sensor nodes. An advantage of sensor net-
works in the fact that they detect the information without
use of videos. Nonetheless, detection of abnormal behaviours
with sensors can be a misjudged recognition. For instance,
something falling on the ﬂoor can be regarded as a fall
of an elderly person, and this incorrect reports confused
caregivers. Thus, another technique is needed in order to
conﬁrm a reported situation by sensor networks. Robots that
function autonomously are expected to collect more detailed
information, which cannot be found only with wired sensor
networks because they can move to the incident location and
conduct interactive conﬁrmation processes using sounds.
Hence, this research proposes a Support System for Care-
givers (SSC) with optical ﬁber sensors and a cleaning robot,
which monitors behaviours for elderly people and notices the
caregiver about an abnormal behaviour. Section III summarizes
some requirements for SSC that gained from our hearing
researches to caregivers. This section also discusses necessary
elements for the systems based on the requirements. Further-
more, section IV describes the design and utilized technologies
in our prototype system. Finally, the progress of development
and the results of preliminary experiments are demonstrated
in sectionV.
II. RELATED WORK
In order to assist the elderly to safely spend their daily life,
some monitoring systems have been proposed. For example,
a homecare monitoring system is proposed by Bourennane
et. al. [4]. The research suggests that the utilization of multi-
sensor networks realizes behaviour observance of an elderly
person, who lives alone at home. Due to the observance,
the proposed system provides the alert function in case of
dangerous accidents. However, this research does not suppose
the use of such a system in welfare facilities where many
elderly people inhabit.
Another instance is a monitoring system in group homes
[3]. The paper suggests a method to monitor facility residents
with videos and install such equipments into the group homes.
Nevertheless, the use of cameras is hesitated in terms of
privacy problems. Moreover, such a camera system cannot be
sited in bathrooms where accidents such as tumble frequently
occur.
Both the proposed systems partly solves the problems in
care of the elderly; however, a support system that considers
the use in facilities where many incidents simultaneously hap-
pen and privacy issues is required. Thus, this paper proposed
the support system, which is to ﬁnd an abnormal behaviour of
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

residents in welfare facilities and prevent invading privacy of
the elderly.
III. SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR CAREGIVER
This section summarizes some requirements for SSC that
gained from our hearing researches to caregivers. This section
also discusses necessary elements for the systems based on
the requirements.
A. Assumed Situation
Our system presupposes the situation that elderly person
suddenly fall down on the ﬂoor, and caregivers does not
become aware of the accident. This system aims at the goal
which are to detect a fall quickly and to conﬁrm safety for
elderly person without cameras by using sensors and robots.
In addition, the system informs caregivers about the place
where the elderly fells down and the information of safety
conﬁrmation. Thus, the system supports caregivers to notice
accidents that are not aware so far. Moreover, it is expected to
reduce the load of care because even though caregivers do not
watch the elderly people carefully all of the day, they were
able to know when the elderly person needs care.
B. System Overview
In this system, sensors embedded in a ﬂoor are used to
detect fall. A situation of fall is acknowledged by that more
than two sensors continue to simultaneously retrieve pressure
over certain time interval. Furthermore, a robot with touch
sensor is used to conﬁrm safety of elderly person.
Fig. 1.
System component diagram
The system overview of support system for caregivers is
shown in Figure 1. An agent of Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP) regularly observes the state of sensors and
sends trap number to a manager. The manager retrieves the
information and monitors a behaviour of an elderly person.
When the manager recognizes the fall, it calculates a route
to the incident location for a robot. The manager sends the
route to a robot, and the robot moves toward the location
following the route. After the robot arrives the location, it
beeps in order to check whether or not the elderly person is
unconscious. If the elderly does not push the touch sensor as
the response to the beep, a robot reports on the state of the
elderly to the manager. Then, the manager notiﬁes caregivers
about the abnormal situation.
IV. PROTOTYPE OF SSC
This section presents details of system components, such as
sensor device, network management, SSC manager and robot
in our prototype system.
A. Sensor Device
The system uses sensor technologies to detect the accident.
Generally, wireless sensor networks are set to observe the
motion such as falling [5]. A wireless sensor gathers a lot
of information to distribute the sensor nodes among a wide
area. However, wireless sensor networks demand to supply an
electric power to all sensor nodes.
To solve this issue, the hetero-core spliced optical ﬁber
sensors have been developed. The ﬁber sensor does not need
to be supplied power, and furthermore, the sensor can work
as not only sensing device but also communications links [6].
Fig. 2.
Structure of hetero-core spliced optical ﬁber sensor
A structure of a hetero-core spliced optical ﬁber sensor
is shown in Figure 2. It is composed of two single mode
transmission ﬁbers. One ﬁber has 9 µm core diameter, the
other is 5 µm diameter. A few millimeters of 5 µm core
diameter ﬁber is inserted into 9 µm core diameter ﬁber
segmented into some parts. The part where the 5 µm core ﬁber
is inserted is called hetero-core portion. When the hetero-core
portion is bent from outside by pressures, light waves leak
into the cladding region. The hetero-core spliced optical ﬁber
sensor can work as sensor by measuring the light leakage. By
utilization of the sensor, the smart pressure sensing mats to
monitor human activities can be developed. The mats detect
motions of walking and tumbling by surveillance of the change
of an optical signal attenuation [7].
B. Sensor Network Management
Optical Sensory Nerve Network (OSN) with hetero-core
spliced optical ﬁber sensors is a network that realizes commu-
nication and sensing simultaneously [8]. The OSN uses SNMP
to manage sensor network equipments and distinguishes the
sensor states by trap [9].
Figure 3 shows the structure of the binary switch sensor.
The switch sensors are one of the hetero-core spliced optical
ﬁber sensor module, and one hetero-core portion is inserted in
the sensor. When the button is pressed, the curvature of hetero-
core portion changes, and the sensor is given the optical loss.
Figure 4 shows the component of sensor network management
system. First, the media converter (A) converts from voltage
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

Fig. 3.
Binary switch sensor module
Fig. 4.
Sensor states detection by SNMP
to light signal, and it sends the signal. Next, the signal went
through the sensors to the media converter (B), and it is
converted to voltage. When the binary sensors are pressed,
the optical loss is occurred. An SNMP agent measures the
optical loss and issues trap to an SNMP manager. The trap
previously was set to a threshold voltage per each sensor. Thus,
the manager can detect the sensor pressed location to check
the trap.
C. SSC Manager
An SSC manager fulﬁlls two types of roles: detecting the
state of sensors and routing for robot. As a sensor manager, it
handles sensor information; additionally, it calculates a route
for guiding a robot with its routing function.
1) Detecting the State of Sensors: The manager regularly
analyzes the sensor information provided by an SNMP agent
that observes state of each sensor and detects an abnormal
situation. The abnormal situation is deﬁned as the state which
is more than two sensors continue to simultaneously retrieve
pressure over the time interval, which is set 5 seconds. If the
manager ﬁnds the situation, it sends routing information to
robot.
2) Routing for Robot: The manager also has a routing
function to give a route to a robot. In the routing process,
the manager adopts a shortest path algorithm that has been
studied in the ﬁeld of graph theory. A shortest path algorithm
is a solution to obtain a path with the minimum weights from a
given source vertex to a destination vertex in a graph consisting
of vertices and edges.
First, the manager makes a map which represents the layout
of a facility and obstacles, such as furniture, walls and doors.
On the map, it marks possible turning points for a robot
and two speciﬁc location points. One of the location points
describes the position where an elderly person falls down,
and the other is the present location of the robot. The manager
regards these points as vertices and calculates the shortest path
from the current location to the incident location which passes
though the turning points based on the Dijkstra’s algorithm
[10].
After a robot receives the routing information from the
manager, it moves along the given shortest path. However,
the robot does not move precisely on the given path because
the tires of the robot may slip on ﬂoor. Thus, the route given
to a robot needs to be revised.
The revision of the route is conducted by certain time
intervals. When the gap between the present location detected
by sensors and the given path exceeds a certain distance, the
manager provides the robot a route to return from the current
location to the closest turning point on the given path. When
the robot returns on the given track, it resumes moving along
the path.
D. Robot
The system uses a robot to conﬁrm safety for the elderly in
order to reduce misinformation of the sensor, and the following
is the requirements for a robot that is suitable for our system.
• Appearance of the robot does not offend a user.
• Any cameras are not attached on the robot.
• The robot can autonomously move.
• The movement can be controlled remotely.
• In order to conﬁrm safety, a robot has beep function and
a bumper.
As a robot which fulﬁlls these requirements, a vacuum
cleaning robot, such as Roomba [11] is likely to be selected.
Recently, Roomba has penetrated in general households; thus,
it is easily conﬁgured in our system. Roomba designed simply
that does not threaten the elderly. Additionally, it can beep
sounds as its alert, and a bumper is installed on ahead of the
body, which is used as a button in our system. Besides, though
it autonomously moves around rooms in its cleaning mode, its
movements are able to be controlled by programs from remote
locations.
The following describes the behaviour of conﬁrming safety
by Roomba. Roomba that is provided the routing information
by the manager shifts to the location where a elderly person
falling down. After Roomba arrives the location, in order to
check whether the elderly has consciousness, it beeps a sound
during certain time. The manager observes the reaction from
the elderly person to the beeps. When the bumper on the
Roomba body is pushed within the certain time, the manager
judges that the person is conscious. In contrast, when the
bumper is not pushed, the person is judged as unconscious
by the manager.
V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
This section explains results of SSC trial experiment, exam-
ining the sensor management and robot control function. SSC
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

is developed by Java Universal Network/Graph Framework
(JUNG). This framework is an open source library for Java
in order to analyze and visualize the structure of graphs. The
library contains many algorithms in graph theory such as a
shortest path algorithm.
Fig. 5.
Logical map and robot path calculated by manager
TABLE I
SEPARATED COMMANDS FOR A ROBOT IN A MANAGER
Order
Command
1
Go Straight 30cm
2
Go Straight 30cm
3
Go Straight 30cm
4
Go Straight 30cm
5
Go Straight 30cm
6
90 right spin
7
Go Straight 30cm
8
Go Straight 30cm
9
90 left spin
10
Go Straight 30cm
In this experiment, 54 sensors are embedded in a ﬂoor at
intervals of 30cm. At ﬁrst, manager recognizes connection
relationship of the sensors and model it with a graph as shown
in Figure 5. When arbitrary sensors are pressed, the manager
detects the change of the sensor states. The pressed sensors
are shown as white nodes in Figure 5. When more than two
sensors are adjacent each other, the manager judges the place
as the accident location where an elderly person falls down.
In Figure 5, adjacent sensors (x2, y1), (x5, y3) and (x6, y1)
are pressed, so the manager set the place of the sensors as an
incident location. Then, the manager recognizes the present
place of robot (x8, y5). Furthermore, the manager calculates
the shortest path between the place of the robot and one of
the sensors. The path calculated by the manager is indicated as
arrows of broken line. Finally, the manager generates routing
information as a set of commands to send the robot. Table
I describes the set of commands, which corresponds to the
shortest path in Figure 5.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In summary, this paper proposes a support system for
caregiver, which uses a optical ﬁber sensor and cleaning
robot. This system aims to monitor the elderly without the
use of video recording in order to prevent privacy invasion.
By using the hetero-core optical ﬁber sensor network and
a vacuum cleaning robot, the network realizes detection of
tumble of a elderly person and conﬁrmation of the detection.
First, some requirements to realize the assumed system are
summarized, and the system overview and components are
also mentioned. Furthermore, the concrete technologies such
as hetero-core ﬁber sensors and Roomba that suits for our
system requirements are introduced, and the prototype system
consisting of the equipments is described. In addition, two
types of roles of an SSC manager, which are the sensor
management system and robot control function are shown,
and an experiment results of these functions are presented.
However, the experiment is not considered an initial direction
of the robot. Furthermore, to decrease the gap between an
distance calculated and a distance moved robot also remains
an issue as future works.
REFERENCES
[1] Cabinet
Ofﬁce,
government
of
Japan,
“Statistics
and
analysis
of
population
aging
in
Japan
in
2012.”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.cao.go.jp/index-e.html [retrieved: Oct, 2013]
[2] Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, government of Japan, “Survey
of number of elderly supporting facility in 2012.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/ [retrieved: Sep, 2013]
[3] S. Taro, F. Tsutomu and T. ryozo , “An analysis of Problems on
Developmenr and Installation of Mimamori-care support Camera System
for Persons with Dementia in Group Home”
in Sociotechnica, 7, pp.
54-65, Mar. 2010.
[4] W. Bourennane, Y. Charlon, F. Bettahar, E. Campo and D. Esteve,
“Homecare monitoring system: A technical proposal for the safety of
the elderly experimented in an Alzheimer’s care unit,”
in IRBM, 34,
pp. 92-100, Apr. 2013.
[5] Abbate, S., Avvenuti, M., Corsini, P., Light, J. and Vecchio, A, “Moni-
toring of human movements for fall detection and activities recognition
in elderly care using Wireless sensor network: a survey”
in InTech, pp.
2688-2710, Oct, 2010.
[6] K. Watanabe, K. Tajima and Y. Kubota, “Macrobending Characteristics
of a Hetero-Core Splice Fiber Optic Sensor for Displacement and Liquid
Detection,”
in IEICE Trans. Electron., Vol. E83-C, No.3, pp. 309-314,
Mar. 2000.
[7] M. Nishiyama, H. Sasaki, S. Nose, K. Takami, and K. Watanabe, “Smart
Pressure Sensing Mats with Embedded Hetero-Core Fiber Optic Nerve
Sensors,”
in Materials and Manufacturing Processes, Vol. 25, pp. 264-
267, Apr. 2000.
[8] N. Abe, Y. Hanada, N. Shinomiya, and Y. Teshigawara, “A Demonstration
of Sensing and Data Communication in Optical Sensory Nerve Network
with Hetero-core Fiber Optics Sensors,”
in IEICE Technical Report,
Vol. 107, pp. 67-71, Oct. 2007.
[9] L. S. Goh, K. Watanabe, and N. Shinomiya, “Feasibility Evaluation
of Multi-point Sensing for Hetero-core Spliced Optical Fiber Sensor
Using Internet-based Protocol,”
in Proceedings of the 2013 Seventh
International Conference on Sensing Technology, pp. 569-572, Dec, 2013.
[10] Dijkstra, E.W. “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,”
in
In Numerische Mathematik, 1, pp. 269-271, 1959.
[11] iRobot
“Roomba”
[Online].
Available:
http://www.irobot-
jp.com/index.html [retrieved: Sep, 2013]
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-319-3
ICONS 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems

