Application of System Thinking in Developing of the Public Transportation
Network in Norway
Ebrahim Qaredaghi
Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
Kongsberg, Norway
Email: qaredaghi@gmail.com
Mo Mansouri
Professor at Department of Science and Industry Systems
University of South-Eastern Norway
Kongsberg, Norway
Email: mo.mansouri@usn.no
Abstract—Public transportation systems have always provided
important services to people. People or customers, as the main
stakeholders,
need available, fast and reasonably priced
transportation
systems.
However,
developing
the
public
transportation system, on one hand, needs educated people to
run and update the system based on the new technologies, and,
on the other hand, needs to cover environmental agencies'
requirements.
Global
warming
as
the
main
concern
of
environmental agencies has forced the public transportation
system to control the greenhouse gas emission and find
environmentally friendly solutions for public transportation
networks. It is, therefore, important to not just think about the
development of the public transportation network, but also
consider other stakeholders’ requirements as well. In this
paper, the authors apply the “system thinking” approach to
understand the stakeholders’ requirements and how to have a
public transportation system that respects all stakeholders’
requirements. By using the systemigram method, we model the
public transportation network in Norway, and analyze where
we could affect the problems of its development.
Keywords-system thinking; public transportation system;
systemigram; system context diagram.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Developing public transportation networks starts when
people need to have an available system near their homes to
cover daily basis requirements. It could be access to their
workplace, shopping malls, their children’s school and so on.
The network development could be based on the other
stakeholders request as well. However, developing the public
transportation system is not just to build roads or rail tracks
or physical development, it could be an update based on the
new technologies, and it has its complexity both technically
and environmentally.
In this paper, the authors applied a system thinking
approach to analyze the existing public transportation system
and
how
the
stakeholders’
requirements
affect
the
development of it. The authors tried to study the current
system to investigate different stakeholders, their roles, and
requirements as well. Moreover, the authors tried to explore
all the stakeholders, their interests, and look at the external
influences that have evolved the problem to its existing state.
Next, the systemigram method was implemented to obtain an
understanding of what influences the issues and development
of the system, and finally, the concept of openness [1] is
applied to the systemigram in order to understand what part
of the problem of the network development can be
addressed.
The case. In this paper, the development of the public
transportation network is followed. The public transportation
system organization starts network development as a direct
response to the stakeholders’ requirement or their need for a
new facility. This requirement is given to the organization in
order to develop the existing network or build a new
network. The organization should consider several solutions,
and choose the feasible one in terms of cost, being
environmentally friendly, and being compatible with the new
technologies.
System (organization) of research. The system being
targeted for this research is an organization that works under
the supervision of the Public Transport and Communication
Ministry. In other words, the organization works in the
private sector and the government is one of the main
stakeholders to ask directly or indirectly the organization for
network development. The authors have conducted the
research within a Norwegian transportation system.
II.
BACKGROUND
There are several definitions of system thinking in the
literatures. According to INCOSE (International Council on
Systems Engineering), “system thinking is a way of thinking
use to address the complex and uncertain real-world
situations with emphasis on interconnected technical and
social entities which are hierarchically organized producing
emergent behavior”. In addition, system thinking can be
defined as a method to a problem or issue that considers how
elements within the whole system interact and operate over
its
lifecycle,
and
how
to
optimize
the
design,
implementation, and evaluation [2]. Haraldsen [3] defined
system thinking
as the “science that deals with
the
organization of logic and integration of disciplines for
understanding patterns and relations of complex problems.
System thinking is also known as principles of organization
or theory of self-organization and the way of using it
involves “systemic” or “holistic thinking”. It is a science
based on understanding connections and relations between
seemingly isolated things”. He stated that, in general terms,
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

system thinking is both the science of structuring the logic,
the
mental
modelling,
asking
relevant
questions,
and
practical applications through System Analysis and System
Dynamics. As can be seen in Figure 1, system thinking
embeds two concepts, System Analysis (SA) and System
Dynamic (SD). System analysis involves group modeling,
where the initial questions of the problem can be asked, and
a mental model structure can be created by using Causal
Loop Diagrams, to reflect that problem. However, the system
dynamics is a mathematical recreation of our mental models
to deals with and numerical analysis and understanding
uncertainty of the practical representation in the developed
mathematical model.
For defining the system openness, we define three
boundaries for the system. Control, Influence or transactional
environment and appreciate. Control is for the item of the
system we could control to some extent. Influence is for
items, we only influence and cannot control, and appreciate
is for the environment the system operates in [4].
Systemigram is a system thinking tool whose evaluation
may be recognized in three phases. First, its development as
a structure of visual language. In this phase, the development
of the technique focuses on the graphical portrayal of a
structured pose. Second, its development as a procedure for
business
architecture.
It
is
vital
to
emphasize
that
systemigram is not an architecture itself, but rather it can
provide an inactive and simple environment for comparing
and aligning business architectures. The last phase is its
modification
as
a
grateful
learning
system.
The
systemigram’s writer creates a storyboard using carefully
selected scenes which are subnets of the systemigram [5].
III.
THE PROBLEM CONTEXT
In order to define the context for the problem, first we
need to study and define the System Of Interest (SOI). In the
following, we present the system of interest definition.
A.
The System Of Interest For Development
The public transportation in Norway is the SOI in this
paper. The main purpose of the public transportation is to
provide transportation vehicles and networks for people who
want to use them daily. Several parameters are necessary for
customers or people as the main stakeholder, such as price,
access to transportation vehicles, roads, and its network,
being environmentally friendly etc. In order to cover these
requirements,
there
are
many
other
systems,
and
infrastructures which should cooperate with the SOI. The
public transportation system in Norway consists of rail
transportation, road transportation, water transportations, and
aviation transportation. Trains, trams, subway count as rail
public transportation system. Taxis, busses and minibuses
are road public transportation systems, and ferry is the water
public transportation system. The authors of this article do
not count aviation transportation since they are not used as
daily purposes. However, trains are public transportation
because many people take them every day from their
hometown to
workplace. Basically, all the mentioned
transportation services can be found in the big cities like
Oslo. However, for small cities, we have some of them.
The two popular public transportation vehicles among
people are electrical scooters and electrical bicycles these
days. Normally, people are using them inside the cities for
short-distance travel. To use them, it is necessary to install an
Application (App) on the phone and scan a barcode that is on
the vehicles. The payment is based on the time and is very
reasonable. The municipalities of the cities have also
provided enough parking slots for electrical bicycles. There
are several operators that provide electrical scooters, and
services as well. However, safety, lower speeds, a campaign
to get users to be more considerate, and better parking
facilities, are among measures discussed these days to
address this new business’s issue in municipalities. Since it is
necessary to implement the new rules for using them in
cities, the writers of this article considered these two new
public transportations systems as the new technology and did
not consider them as the main and
common public
transportation system in Norway.
B.
The System Boundaries-Developing Context
Figure 2 presents the system boundaries for development
context. The public transportation organization is in the inner
circle. We can control it, and the team and organization that
is responsible for network development is in this circle.
Environment, particularly CO2 emission, sub-contractors
included maintenance contractor, education system (schools,
universities),
and
business
such
as,
shopping
malls,
restaurants, companies can be developed, and are influenced
by the public transport network development system. Other
items that are in the boundary include people, political
decisions, new technologies, and government. These are
items which we cannot influence and we should appreciate.
C.
Stakeholders Context Diagram
After the SOI explanation and system boundaries, we can
define the stakeholders and their main interests. Figure 3
illustrates the high-level stockholders. The main stakeholder
is represented by the people or customers who are using the
public transportation system. Since in Norway, people pay a
Figure 1. System thinking definition diagram [3]
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

high amount of tax from their salaries, they expect high-
quality services in terms of new and comfortable facilities in
public transportation vehicles, roads, and infrastructures. In
addition, Norway is a relatively expensive country compared
to the other European countries, and price is the main
concern of the people for receiving services from public
transportation
system.
Developing
new
methods
of
transportation could be an option to tackle the expensive
transportation system.
On the left side of the interest map, we have people who
have an interest in the public transportation system with
yellow color in Figure 3. People or customers, tourists,
politicians, private owners of lands, people who are working
as staff or clerks for public transportation organization are in
this category. Customers, tourists and clerks are willing to
have a developed transportation system, while owners of
land who should sell their land to government do not want it.
In order to solve lands’ owner issue, either the government
should pay good money for it or change the network root.
For both solutions, the organization should spend money to
tackle these issues.
On the right side of the interest map, there are
organizations that have an interest in the SOI with green
color in Figure 3. Government, environmental agencies,
banks,
and
legal
regulation
organizations
are
these
organizations. By developing the public transportation, all
these organizations or institutes receive a benefit. The
government could get people satisfactions by developing the
public transportation system. Environmental agencies should
set some rules for transportation system organization to
control the greenhouses gas emissions and pollutants based
on their criteria and limitations. Banks could provide the
loan for SOI, and could also receive interest. The legal
organization authorities could set some urban rules for
public transportation organization such as, parking places,
speed limit etc.
At the bottom of the interest map, we can see the rest of
the stakeholders with orange color in Figure 3. These
stakeholders are IT and ICT companies, neighbor countries,
suppliers or manufacturers, maintenance companies, and the
new businesses or markets.
All these stakeholders have connection with the public
transportation system directly or indirectly. IT companies
need to provide the App(s) and Internet infrastructures to
keep updating the business based on the new technologies
and communication services. Neighbor countries could
develop
their
transportation
network
to
Norwegian
transportation network easily. Manufacturer or suppliers and
maintenance companies or subcontractors could earn money
from the public transportation development. They could hire
more people and expand their businesses. In addition, new
markets or business such as, electrical scooters and electrical
bicycles, could be developed as well as existing public
transportation to expand the network.
IV.
THE PARIS AGREEMENT
In 2016, there was an international agreement called the
Paris agreement to control global warming. This agreement
is an agreement within the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to prevent
dangerous
anthropogenic interference with
the
climate
change. This agreement gives the long-term temperature aim
Figure 2. System boundaries in development context
Figure 3. Stakeholders' interest map
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

holding the increase in the global average temperature to
below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and to follow efforts
to restrict the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-
industrial levels, recognizing that this would reduce the risks
and effects of climate change pointedly [6]. The countries
involved in this agreement have tried to find solutions to
control and mitigate global warming. Norway, as one of the
European countries involved this agreement, has tried to play
a role by developing green industries and applying a green
energy mindset in all aspects of industries, as well as
transportation. Therefore, using renewable fuels instead of
fossil fuels was part of the Norwegian public transportation
development plans. In order to follow this plan, the suppliers
need to develop new technologies and update the current fuel
consumption system in the public transportation systems
which cost them as well. As mentioned before, the electrical
scooters and electrical bicycles are new technologies to
mitigate the greenhouse gas emissions as well.
V.
THE SYSTEMIGRAM
Following the stakeholders' interest maps, we developed
the systemigram to visually represent the problem. Figure 4
illustrates the systemigram for the whole system of interest.
A.
The Mainstay – The Purpose of the System
Development
Figure 5 shows the mainstay of the system. We can read
the story as “Public transportation organization shall
develop the new transportation network and system to cover
environmental criteria to provide accessible transportation
services to tackle customer requirements.” The mainstay is
the path for how the public transportation systems develop
from where they are today to where they should be in the
future.
B.
The Other Parameters
Figure 6 presents the agencies that set sorts of rules and
instructions for the system. Environment quality control
centers, legal regulations authorities, and traffic control
centers communicate directly, and control the developing
system. The environment quality center sets environmental
regulations to ensure that greenhouse gas emissions is under
the criteria, and the public transportation system is working
properly. This center will communicate with the organization
to ask them to make a change in their system and modify it
to cover the environmental criteria in case of any deviation
from the regulations.
The traffic control center is responsible to monitor the
public
transportation
traffic.
This
center
is
also
communicating with the organization if there are issues that
could be solved by public transportation cooperation.
Basically, this center either receives a report from public
transportations, or checks the transportation system itself and
if there is an issue that could be managed by the
organization, they will contact the organization. Normally,
the
issues
discussed
with
the
public
transportation
organization first, and if they could manage it, they will
cooperate. The issues that could be tackled, such as traffic
jams, the design of the public transportation system network,
and improvement of the transportation network can be
discussed with the traffic control system.
The legal regulation authority is responsible to set the
driving rules such as, speeding control, parking zones, road
pricing, road taxes etc. This center will impose rules to the
new public transportation network, and the existing network.
In addition, this legal regulation authority regularly controls
the transportation system to find out if there is any need for
improvement of the network. Basically, government asks this
organization
to
set
these
rules
and
impose
to
the
transportation system.
Figure 4. Systemigram
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 7 shows the subsystems and sub-contractors. The
education system, the potential market, ICT (Information and
Communications Technology) companies, audit (third party)
company, and maintenance contractor are listed in this
group. These subsystems and sub-contractors either support
the system or the system gets influenced by them.
Education systems play a significant role in the public
transportation development. On one hand, the education
system receive money from the government to increase the
education quality, and, on the other hand, they have a close
relationship with the transportation organization to keep the
education system updated, and if necessary, start to research
and find a solution about the possibilities to increase the
efficiency of public transportation system. As an output of
the education system, either they perform the research based
on the public transportation system order or they provide
educated people to help the transportation organization with
their knowledge. The education system keeps itself updated
and supply the manpower for the public transportation
organization by providing and updating the education
courses. The main goal of the education system is to support
the public transportation system and increase its efficiency.
The potential market is referred to new markets and
technologies that could improve the public transportation
network services. Since the potential market and new
technologies are underdeveloped, they try to find how to
impact the SOI.
As mentioned earlier, the electrical scooters and electrical
bicycles are the new technologies that could help the current
public transportation system. In addition, the SOI has several
departments and they can study the new markets and
possibilities. The studies could be about the new roots and
finding new networks.
The main responsibility of the ICT companies is to keep
the SOI updated in terms of online services such as, Apps
and available internet networks. Nowadays, customers buy
online tickets, and it is important for them to know the
schedule of the public transportations as well. In this regard,
Norway is one of the countries that online information and
tickets are available for customers, and customers need to
receive accurate information in time. It is therefore important
for customers to have accessible information in time to plan
based on them. The SOI, basically, order to ICT companies
what they need, and the ICT companies are responsible to
develop the online infrastructures.
Another subsystem that supports public transportation
organization is the audit companies. The audit companies
perform audits based on the standards to issue certificates.
Besides, they perform audits to show the transportation
system organization's possible improvement areas. Since the
audit companies are external companies, they do not hide the
system management negative points and organizations can
trust their advice in order to improve the system.
Figure 5. The mainstay
Figure 6. The regulation agencies
Figure 7. The subsystems and sub-contractors
Figure 8. The customer service
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

The main responsibility of the maintenance contractors is to
fix any damage or possible damage. Unlike ICT companies
that are trying to support online services, the maintenance
companies provide physical services and they are much
bigger than ICT companies in terms of the staff and
hardware facilities. The maintenance companies have plans
and schedules to give SOI services. So, it is very vital for
customers and SOI to receive high-quality services from the
maintenance
subcontractors
based
on
educated
and
experienced staff.
Figure 8 illustrates the customer service of the SOI. As
can be seen from this figure, there are two options for
customers to give feedback to the SOI. One possibility is to
contact the customer service centers and provide their
feedback to them. This could be by calling or even by
sending emails. Even some centers have their online
questionnaire forms to receive feedback from customers.
Another method or way is to contact to government. The
customers can provide their feedback to the government
through political parties. This method takes more time
compared to another way and customers normally use this
method if they are not satisfied with the SOI at all, and the
consequence of this method could change the whole system.
VI.
HOW TO TACKLE THE PROBLEM
We used the systemigram to analyze the system of
interest and to have a good visual representation of all the
factors and forces that can play a role in our system. In order
to analyze the system better, we will use the openness
principle of the systemigram to analyze where the system
interest can influence other forces and where the system of
interest can be influenced by the other forces.
Figure
9
presents
the
openness
principle
to
the
systemigram and we categorized the systemigram the nodes
into control with green color, influence with purple color and
appreciate with red color. Following is the brief explanation
of each of them.
A.
Control
As Figure 9 shows, the important nodes that can be
controlled to develop public transportation systems are
technical factors. In other words, ICT companies and
maintenance
sub-contractors
are
the
most
important
subsystems
for
controlling
the
SOI.
Basically,
ICT
companies and maintenance companies receive orders from
the public transportation organization to develop the public
transportation system.
B.
Influence
The most important nodes that can be influenced in the
influence category are customer requests and the SOI itself.
These two nodes are important since the aim of the
development of the public transportation system is to cover
the customer requirements. On the other hand, by developing
the public transportation system the organization can be
influenced as well.
C.
Appreciate
Many nodes in Figure 9 are categorized as appreciate
nodes. These nodes cannot be controlled or influenced and as
we can see clearly the legislation organizations such as,
environmental quality control center and traffic control
center are in this group. The main nodes as can be seen are
the government, environment quality control center, legal
regulation authority, and the traffic control center. One of the
main concerns during the developing public transportation
system is to cover the environment quality control criteria
based on the Paris agreement. The environmental quality
center is the most important center among other nodes in the
appreciate group.
Based on the openness principle of the systemigram and
analyzing of the systemigram, we could say that the main
factor to have a successful development of the public
transportation is first to analyze and understand the customer
requirements. The customer requirements for having a public
transportation network consist of ticket price, accessible
public
transportation
system,
comfortable,
and
environmentally friendly services. The next step is to start a
technical study of the possible networks and select the
feasible one among other options in the public transportation
system development organization. The next step is to
influence the items that development the organization can
do. The next step is to cover the rules and standards which
are sets by the legislation agencies and authorities such as,
traffic control agencies, legal regulation authorities in the
design and in the construction phase of the development, and
the final step is to control the items that can be controlled by
the development system. Basically, the factors and aspects
that could be controlled are technical factors.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK
Public transportation plays a significant role in the daily
life of the people. It is, therefore, important to cover, and
plan based on the stakeholder’s requirements. Normally, the
customers require for public transportation development.
They are expecting a high quality of the services. In order to
analyze the stakeholders' requirements, in this paper, we
used the application of the system thinking. Specifically, we
used the systemigram method and principle of the openness
to analyzing the necessary factors to develop the public
transportation system.
Figure 9. The openness principle
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

Systemigram is a useful method in order to analyze the
system. This method also gives the visual presentation of the
system and the connection between the factors. By applying
the openness principle, we could analyze and tackle the
problem and provide the solution for the issue step by step.
There are several stakeholders that are involved in the public
transportation development. The government, people, and
education system play a significant role among stakeholders.
The
environmental
quality
center
sets
the
rules
and
regulations in order to control the greenhouse gas emission
and find the environmentally friendly solutions for public
transportation system development.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Gharajedaghi, Systems thinking: Managing chaos and
complexity: A platform for designing business architecture.
Elsevier, 2011.
[2]
B. A. Addae and Z. Ling, "Acculturation of systems thinking
for
requirements
need
analysis
for
smart
energy
city
development: A case study in Accra," International Journal of
Management, Information Technology and Engineering, pp.
9-20, 2018.
[3]
H. V. Haraldsson, Introduction to system thinking and causal
loop diagrams. Department of Chemical Engineering, Lund
University, 2004.
[4]
S. Engen, M. Mansouri, and G. Muller, "Application of
system
thinking
to
frame
the
problem
in
a
subsea
development projects with high-level business requirements,"
in SoSE, 2019, pp. 81-86.
[5]
C.
D.
Blair,
J.
T.
Boardman,
and
B.
J.
Sauser,
"Communicating
strategic
intent
with
systemigrams:
Application to the network‐enabled challenge," Systems 
Engineering, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 309-322, 2007.
[6]
C.-F. Schleussner et al., "Science and policy characteristics of
the Paris Agreement temperature goal," Nature Climate
Change, vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 827-835, 2016/09/01 2016, doi:
10.1038/nclimate3096.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

