 
 
Systemigrams for PESTEL Analysis of an Offshore Windfarm System 
Yayun Chen 
Department of Science and Industrial Systems 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
e-mail: edithchen03@gmail.com 
Mo Mansouri 
Department of Science and Industrial Systems 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
e-mail: mo.mansouri@usn.no
 
 
Abstract—As energy transition is ongoing, many companies are 
looking for new opportunities in new markets. Offshore 
windfarm systems, especially those with large-scale hydrogen 
storage functions, have become an important part of the global 
energy transition. Companies often use PESTEL (Political, 
Economic, Social, Technological, Environmental and Legal) 
Analysis to get a macro picture of an industry environment 
when deciding whether to join an opportunity. However, the 
PESTEL Analysis analyzes each aspect one by one, often 
missing their interdependencies. This makes it more difficult to 
discover all relevant factors; moreover, the results of the 
PESTEL perspectives may not be well integrated. In this 
paper, the authors use Systemigrams as a tool to integrate the 
individual perspective from PESTEL aspects into a holistic 
understanding of an offshore windfarm system for Faroe 
Islands. Using this tool, management can gain a comprehensive 
understanding of a renewable energy system for the Faroe 
Islands that will inform their decision on whether to bid for the 
project.  
Keywords-system 
thinking; 
PESTEL 
Analysis; 
Systemigrams; offshore windfarm; Faroe Islands. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This section includes three parts: first, the background of 
the case project; second, explaining what the PESTEL 
Analysis is; thirdly, the case system introduction. 
A. Background 
The Faroe Islands is one of the world’s leading producers 
of renewable electrical power, with 50% of its electricity is 
derived from renewable energy sources. The other 50% 
comes from fossil fuels. Denmark aims to become 100% 
independent of fossil fuels by 2030 [1]. Fig. 1 shows that the 
Faroe Islands are located in the North East Atlantic Ocean, 
where the average wind speed is above 11 m/s from October 
to April [2]. This is ideal for producing clean renewable 
wind power. However, in June and July, the wind speed 
drops below 8 m/s, which means that a hybrid system is 
needed to balance the low wind season. 
An offshore windfarm system is being developed to help 
the Danish government to achieve the goal by 2030. A 
project team has been developing the concept, and the next 
phase is convincing the company`s management that it is the 
ideal solution and using the concept to bid the project. 
During the project, the team focuses on a holistic approach 
that includes the Political, Economic, Social, Technological, 
Environmental and Legal aspects of the system of interest. 
 
Figure 1. Location of Faroe Islands [3] 
B. PESTEL Analysis 
A PESTEL Analysis is an analysis of the external macro 
environment (big picture) in which a business operates. 
These are often factors which are beyond the control or 
influences of a business, however, are important to be aware 
of when doing product development, business or strategy 
planning [4]. It is important to understand that all external 
factors of the environment need to be checked and identified 
before making a decision. PESTEL Analysis allows to 
determine and analyze the key factors of change in business 
environment [5]. The PESTEL aspects are shown in Fig. 2.  
 
Figure 2. PESTEL aspects [6] 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

 
 
• 
Political aspects refer to the influences from the 
government. They include all the policies, laws and 
restrictions. 
• 
Economical aspects have a major influence on how 
organizations run business and how profitable they 
are [5]. they include the taxes, duties, exchange 
rates, cost of living and Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP), etc.  
• 
Social aspects refer to the size and growth rate of 
the 
population, 
immigration rates, lifestyles, 
education levels, and attitudes regarding investing, 
etc. 
• 
Technological factors have become a huge 
influence for organizations in assessing and listing 
issues that could have a potential impact on its 
operations and that could be critical to its long-term 
future [5]. 
• 
Environmental factors relate to the influence of the 
surrounding environment and the impact of 
ecological aspects [5]. They include the weather, 
environmental policies, climate and support for 
renewable energy, etc. 
• 
Legal aspects include, for example, employment 
laws, health and safety laws, taxation, etc.  
It is very important to understand the offshore windfarm 
project from the PESTEL aspects` perspective. However, the 
results of the PESTEL perspectives may not be well 
integrated. In this context, it is necessary to apply a system 
thinking approach to integrate these perspectives into a 
comprehensive view of the offshore windfarm system.  
C. Offshore windfarm system for Faroe Islands 
The offshore windfarm system is a sustainable renewable 
energy system that uses offshore wind energy to generate 
electricity and extract green hydrogen from seawater. The 
system will supply electricity to the Faroe Islands without 
interruption year-round, making the Faroe Islands 100% 
fossil fuel free by 2030. 
The system includes a wind turbine system, an 
electrolysis system, a hydrogen storage system, a fuel cell 
system, and a seawater treatment system. When the wind is 
active, the power from the wind turbines is fed directly to the 
grid. During periods of excess electricity available, 
electricity will be used to split water into hydrogen, which 
will be stored in storage tanks onshore, with a portion of the 
hydrogen distributed to transport fuel and another portion of 
the hydrogen converted into electricity again when there is 
no or low wind. An overview of the system is shown in Fig. 
3 [7].  
 
 
Figure 3. Offshore windfarm system overview 
 
 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

 
 
II. 
SYSTEM THINKING APPROACH 
In this section, the purpose of using Systemigrams is 
explained. Then, we describe how Systemigrams are used to 
integrate the PESTEL aspects of the Faroe Islands offshore 
windfarm system, and thereby address project challenges and 
opportunities. 
A. Systemigrams 
Systemigrams provide a powerful tool for the analysis of 
systems first described in written form. Using Systemigrams 
to integrate the PESTEL, especially considering the 
interdependencies between sub-aspects, is very useful for a 
project to establish a holistic view of the system. Because 
PESTEL Analysis analyzes all aspects one by one, a 
Systemigram can provide a verification platform that helps 
analysts ensure that all relevant PESTEL aspects have been 
discovered. All individual aspects can be integrated through 
a Systemigram. This can provide a common basis for group 
discussions [8] and presentation to the management.  
Fig. 4 shows the Systemigram of the offshore windfarm 
system in terms of PESTEL. From top left to bottom right is 
the mainstay, which is the purpose of the system. This 
renewable energy system will be able to produce electricity 
and hydrogen for consumers year-round. This will make the 
Faroe Islands 100% independent of fossil fuel. Furthermore, 
the PESTEL aspects are developed around the mainstay and 
are categorized by different colors. 
• 
Blue represents political aspects. The political 
situation in Denmark and the Paris Agreement will 
both be considered. For example, the Danish 
government`s goal of having green energy supply 
all electricity in the Faroe Islands by 2030 shows 
the Danish government`s support for the Paris 
Agreement. In addition, tax laws such as the CO2 
tax are DKK (Danish Krones) 173 per ton of CO2 
[9]. From this, we can conclude that this system 
will help to save huge CO2 taxes compared to fossil 
fuel systems. 
• 
Economic aspects are shown in light green. The 
most important economic parameters of the system 
are 
CAPEX 
(Capital 
Expenditure), 
OPEX 
(Operating Expenses), and Consumables [6] that 
make up the energy cost. The cost is high, however, 
 
 
Figure 4. Systemigram of offshore windfarm 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

 
 
the Danish government will incentivize the 
renewable energy project, which will lower the 
project`s costs. At the same time, the CO2 tax 
impacts the cost significantly. 
• 
The system will combine the existing technology 
with the new technology. Offshore windfarm is 
expected to be existing technology, as several large-
scale offshore wind farms have already been 
deployed in the UK. However, due to the explosive 
nature of hydrogen, hydrogen storage presents 
significant risks. This requires new technology to 
improve it. Furthermore, since the location is new, 
some new knowledge input may be required during 
installation. These will affect the cost of energy. 
Despite that, using new technologies will increase 
the efficiency of the system, thereby increasing the 
output of energy. On the other hand, new 
technologies will make the system safer and have 
less impact on the environment.  
• 
The project will create job opportunities for the 
local community, thereby increasing the local 
economy. This will benefit the residents who are 
consumers of the system.  
• 
Environmentalists 
are 
normally 
against 
the 
windfarm project because wind turbines take up the 
space where the wildlife lives. However, there is 
clear evidence that this energy source is much safer 
than other methods.  In addition, weather conditions 
will be considered as an important aspect of the 
environment. As mentioned earlier, wind speeds in 
the Faroe Islands are ideal for wind turbines all year 
round except in summer.   
• 
All operations and activities follow Danish 
regulations. 
B. Challenges and opportunities 
The current challenge for the project is that the initial 
cost of the system is higher than traditional energy sources, 
and new technologies can lead to overruns. Meanwhile, there 
are still some impacts on local wildlife. But it is also full of 
opportunities, for example, this project will provide the 
Faroe Islands with a stable supply of renewable energy. The 
hydrogen will be able to balance electricity consumption 
throughout the year, in addition to fueling ships. Because of 
this project, Faroe Islands to be seen as a pioneer in clean 
energy. The company also will become a pioneer of the 
offshore windfarm system with large scale hydrogen storage 
and has a great opportunity to get more projects.  
III. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a system thinking approach as a 
Systemigram has been applied to an offshore windfarm 
project to integrate individual PESTEL aspects into a holistic 
view of the system. At the same time, the opportunities and 
challenges have also been addressed. These will make the  
presentation to management more convincing. 
Further application of Systemigrams in every aspect will 
be more in-depth. A Causal Loop Diagram will be created 
for the system of interest and the balance of dynamic forces 
will be examined.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Danish Ministry of Energy, Utilities and Climate, “Denmark’s 
National Statement to the COP23” . [Online]. Available from: 
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/conferences/un-
climate-change-conference-november-2017/events-and-
schedules/high-level-segment/high-level-segment-statements-
of-cop23/cmp13/cma12. 2022.02.01 
[2] D. Katsaprakakis, E. Dakanali, and K. Tzirakis, “Faroe 
Islands: Towards 100% R.E.S penetration” Conference on 
Clean Energy in European Islands, April. 2018, pp. 6. 
[3] D. Katsaprakakis, E. Dakanali, and K. Tzirakis, “Faroe 
Islands: Towards 100% R.E.S penetration” Conference on 
Clean Energy in European Islands, April. 2018, pp. 2. 
[4] M. Morrison, “Introduction to the PESTEL Analysis tool”. 
[Online]. Available from: https://rapidbi.com/Introduction-to-
the-PESTLE-analysis-tool/ 2022.02.01 
[5] E. Shatskaya, M. Samarina, and K. Nekhorosheva, “PESTEL 
Analysis as a tool of strategic analysis in international 
markets”, 2nd International Conference on Science and 
practice: a new level of integration in the modern world, Dec. 
2016, pp. 48-51. 
[6] E. Syverud, “New Energy Systems” University of South-
Eastern Norway (USN). 2021. 
[7] R. Segev, “ Optimizing Renewable Energy Storage With 
Hydrogen 
Fuel 
Cells” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://blog.ballard.com/renewable-energy-storage  
2020.12.17 
[8] R. Edson, “ System Thinking. Applied” Applied Systems 
Thinking Institute (ASysT), Analytic Services INC. 2008, pp. 
21. 
[9] Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD). Taxing Energy Use 2019: Country Note-Denmark. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-941-6
ICONS 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Systems

