Interplay Between Traffic Dynamics and Network 
Structure
Ziping Hu, Pramode K. Verma 
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering  
The University of Oklahoma  
Tulsa, OK 74135 
{ziping.hu, pverma}@ou.edu 
 
Krishnaiyan Thulasiraman 
Department of Computer Science  
The University of Oklahoma  
Norman, OK 73019 
   thulasi@ou.edu 
 Abstract—This paper studies the interplay between traffic 
dynamics and network structure in complex communication 
networks. 
Complex 
communication 
networks 
of 
distinct 
structural features are chosen as the underlying networks. We 
use node betweenness centrality, network polarization, and 
average path length to capture the structural characteristics of a 
network. Network throughput and average packet delay are the 
main performance measures. We study how internal traffic, 
throughput, and delay change with increasing incoming traffic 
through simulation. We further investigate the relationship 
between network performance and network structure. Our work 
reveals that the parameters chosen to reflect network structure, 
including node betweenness centrality, network polarization, and 
average path length, play important roles in different states of 
the underlying networks. 
Keywords-Complex networks; traffic; network structure; 
network performance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Many social, biological, and communication systems are 
called complex systems. In network science, complex systems 
are described as networks consisting of vertices and 
interactions or connections among them. The study of 
structural and dynamical properties of complex systems has 
been receiving a lot of interests. One of the ultimate goals of 
the studies is to understand the influence of topological 
structures on the behaviors of various complex systems, for 
instance, how the structure of social networks affects the 
spread of diseases, information, rumors, or other things [1-3]; 
how the structure of a food web affects population dynamics 
[4-5]; how the structure of a communication network affects 
its robustness, reliability [6-7], and so on.  
   There is a wealth of literature focusing on different 
performance aspects of communication networks. By viewing 
communication networks as weighted graphs, authors in [7-9] 
have developed a concept called network criticality. They 
found that network criticality directly relates to network 
performance metrics such as average network utilization and 
average network cost.  Most network centrality indices have 
structural significance. In [10], the authors compare different 
centrality indices for the measuring of nodal contribution to 
global network robustness. Since the discovery of power-law 
degree distribution of the Internet topology [11], much effort 
has been made on the study of scale-free (SF) networks. In 
[12-17], different routing strategies have been proposed in 
order to improve the performance of SF networks. To enhance 
the traffic transport efficiency of SF networks, an optimal 
resource allocation scheme is presented in [18]. Lattice 
networks are widely used, for example, in distributed parallel 
computation 
[19], 
distributed 
control 
[20], 
satellite 
constellations [21], and sensor networks [22]. Authors in [22] 
study the effect of routing on the queue distribution, and 
investigate the routing algorithms in lattice networks that 
achieve the maximum rate per node under different 
communication models.  
In our previous work [23], we compared the latency of SF 
networks and random networks under different routing 
strategies. In order to better understand the structural influence 
on the performance of communication networks, in this paper, 
we devote ourselves to explore the relationship between 
network structure and network performance under dynamic 
input traffic. Four different types of networks are chosen as 
the underlying networks. They are SF networks, square lattice 
(SL) networks, random networks, and ring lattice (RL) 
networks. We use node betweenness centrality, network 
polarization, and average path length, to capture the structural 
features of different networks. Since both throughput and 
delay are especially important for communication networks, 
they are used here as main performance measures. 
In the work, based on observed traffic dynamics in the 
networks studied, three network states are classified: traffic 
free flow state, moderate congestion state, and heavy 
congestion state. Simulation results indicate that during each 
different state, the structural differences among the underlying 
networks play important roles in network performance. 
Through the work, it is possible that a better comprehension of 
the interplay between traffic dynamics and network structure 
could help in designing better network structures and better 
routing protocols. 
   The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents our 
network model. Simulation results and analysis are provided 
in Section III. Section IV concludes the work.  
II. 
NETWORK MODEL 
In the paper, four different types of networks are chosen as the 
underlying networks. They are the SF network, the random 
network, the SL network, and the RL network. One of their 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

structural differences lies in their distinct nodal degree 
distribution. The degree of a node is the total number of links 
connecting it. The SF network is built based on the Barabasi-
Albert (BA) model proposed in [24]. It has a power law 
degree distribution so that most nodes have very low degrees, 
but a few nodes (called hubs) could have extremely high 
degrees. The random network is formed according to the 
Erdős-Rényi (ER) model proposed in [25]. The random ER 
network follows Poisson degree distribution when network 
size is large. In the random ER network, the degrees of most 
nodes are around the mean degree. In the SL network, all the 
nodes except those located on the edge of the square have the 
same degree. The RL network is constructed by connecting 
each node on a circle to its 2m (m ≥ 1) nearest neighboring 
nodes. Apparently, all the nodes in the RL network have the 
same degree.  
    In the paper, we use node betweenness centrality, network 
polarization, and average path length to capture the structural 
characteristics of complex communication networks. The node 
betweenness Bi for a node i is defined here as the total number 
of shortest path routes passing through that node. Nodes with 
high betweenness values participate in a large number of 
shortest paths. Therefore, initial congestion usually happens at 
nodes of the highest betweenness value. Node betweenness 
reflects the role of a node in a communication network. 
Normally, high betweenness nodes also have high degrees. 
The node betweenness distribution of a communication 
network is demonstrated through a measure of the 
polarization, π, of the network [26]. It is defined as: 
                          
B
B
B


max

                                         (1) 
Where Bmax is the maximum betweenness value, <B> is the 
average betweenness value. We find that π as an indication of 
node betweenness distribution suits our work better than 
others (e.g. standard deviation). The large polarization value 
of a network tells us that at least one node possesses much 
larger betweenness values than most of the other nodes in the 
network. Therefore, the larger the value π is, the more 
heterogeneous the network is. On the other hand, for very 
homogeneous networks, π is very small. For example, for the 
RL network, we have π ≈ 0. The average path length <D> of a 
network is defined as the average of the shortest path lengths 
among all the source-destination pairs. We will show in the 
next section that the average path length directly relates to the 
total amount of internal traffic in the network. It also relates to 
average packet delay. 
    The above three parameters capture the structural features 
of a network from different angles. They are also interrelated. 
Usually, the more heterogeneous (larger π, or relatively higher 
Bmax) the network is, the shorter the average path length <D> 
is. The reason is that high betweenness (or degree) nodes serve 
as shortcuts for connecting node pairs. In addition, the 
following relationship between shortest path length and node 
betweenness centrality can be easily found, 
                        



i
i
j
i
ij
B
D
,
                                          (2) 
Where Dij stands for the shortest path length from node i to 
node j, Bi stands for the betweenness value of node i. 
    The networks are treated as packet-switched networks. In 
these networks, fixed shortest path routing strategy is 
implemented. The length of the shortest path is the minimum 
hop count between a source-destination pair. Given network 
topology, each node calculates the shortest paths to all the 
other nodes using Dijkstra’s algorithm. Then a routing table is 
constructed at each node. A routing table contains three 
columns: the destination node, next node to route a packet to 
the destination, and the hop count to the destination. 
In the networks studied, traffic dynamic is governed by the 
following network model, similar to the one discussed in [27]. 
In the model, we assume that time is slotted. During each time 
slot, first, packets are generated at each node i with a rate λi, 
the destination of a packet is randomly chosen among all other 
nodes. Each node is endowed with a first-in-first-out (FIFO) 
queue in which packets are stored waiting to be processed.  
Then, if its queue is not empty, each node i transmits packets 
at a rate ri, which represents bandwidth, to one of its neighbors 
according to its routing table. When a packet reaches its 
destination, it is absorbed by the destination node. For 
simplicity, for all the nodes, we assume the packet generation 
rate is the same or let λi equals to λ. We also assume ri equals 
to 1, which means during each time slot, each node can 
process one packet. 
We use throughput and average packet delay as two main 
performance measures. Throughput is defined as the average 
number of delivered packets per time slot. The average packet 
delay is defined as the average time that a delivered packet 
spent in the network. Our task is by observing traffic dynamics 
in different networks, to find out the relationship between 
network structure and network performance.  
III. 
SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
In the simulation, a discrete time clock k is used. Simulation 
starts with k = 0, for each passed time slot, k is incremented by 
1. The performance of a packet-switched network is measured 
by   its   throughput   o(k)   and   average   packet   delay   τ(k).  
 
TABLE I 
NETWORK PARAMETERS 
 
Bmax 
<B> 
π 
<D> 
SF network 
802 
127 
5.32 
2.59 
Random ER 
449 
141 
2.19 
2.87 
SL network 
376 
224 
0.68 
4.67 
Ring lattice 
416 
325 
0.28 
6.63 
 
 
Both o(k) and τ(k) are calculated respectively as the average 
from the start of  simulation (k = 0) to time k. We use n(k) to 
represent the total number of packets within the network at 
time k. In the simulation, the SF network, the random ER 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

network, and the RL network are all generated with 50 nodes 
and 100 links. The SL network is generated with 49 nodes and 
84 links because of its structural restriction. Simulation 
includes two parts. The first part investigates how n(k) change 
as a function of λ and k. In this part, we observe a network 
phase transition from traffic free flow to congestion as 
reported in [27-28]. The second part investigates network 
performance as a function of λ. Three network states are 
classified accordingly. At last, we demonstrate that how, in 
different network states, the structure of a network influences 
its performance. 
    Table I lists the related parameters of the underlying 
networks. It tells us that the RL network has the longest 
average path length <D>; while the average path length of the 
SF network is the shortest. In addition, the RL network has the 
lowest polarization value π, which shows its almost 
homogeneous structure in terms of node betweenness 
distribution; while the SF network has the highest π, which 
demonstrates 
its 
most 
heterogeneous 
structure. 
The 
corresponding parameters of the random ER network and the 
SL network lie somewhere in between. One exception is that 
the SL network has the lowest Bmax. In our simulation, each 
data obtained is averaged over 100 runs. 
A. n(k) vs. λ, k 
This part investigates the change of n(k) as a function of λ and 
k in the networks studied. Simulation results are plotted in 
Fig.1and Fig. 2. 
 
 
                  (a) The SF network                       (b) The random ER network 
 
                 (c) The SL network                                (d) The RL network 
Fig. 1 n(k) as a function of λ (k = 1000, 1500, 2000) 
 
 
                  (a) The SF network                       (b) The random ER network 
 
                   (c) The SL network                               (d) The RL network 
Fig. 2 n(k) as a function of k for subcritical and supercritical values of λ  
Fig. 1 shows that all four networks display similar 
performance. When the incoming traffic λ increases, a critical 
point λc is observed in all these networks where a network 
phase transition takes place from traffic free flow to 
congestion. Fig. 2 presents the change of n(k) as a function of 
time k for subcritical and supercritical values of λ. In the case 
of subcritical value of λ, n(k) remains constant; while in the 
case of supercritical value of λ, we observe continuous 
accumulation of packets in the networks with the passing of 
time k.  
    When
  c
, a network is in steady state or traffic free 
flow state. In this sate, n(k) remains almost unchanged with 
the increase in incoming traffic λ, and/or time k. However, for 
different networks, n(k) is proportional to the average path 
length of a network (shown in Fig. 2). According to Little’s 
law, for a network of size N, the number of packets created per 
unit time (given by N × λ) must be equal to the number of 
packets delivered per time slot. Since the number of delivered 
packets per time slot is 
)
(
( )
k
n k

, hence 


N
k
n k
) 
(
( )
.  
When
  c
, the networks enter into congestion state, 
where n(k) start increasing quickly with the increase in λ, and 
/or time k. From Fig. 1, we observe that compared with the 
other networks, the SF network has the lowest value of λc. The 
reason lies in its highest Bmax among all the networks studied.  
According to the definition of node betweenness, the node 
with maximum betweenness value Bmax has to handle the 
heaviest traffic because it participates in the largest number of 
shortest path routes. With increasing incoming traffic, initial 
congestion (or quick accumulation of packets) shall take place 
first at the node with Bmax. The results conform to the 
theoretical analysis provided in [17].  
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

B. o(k), τ(k)  vs. λ 
Performance comparison among the networks is shown in Fig. 
3 in terms of throughput o(k) and average packet delay τ(k). 
Based on network performance, three network states are 
classified: traffic free flow state, moderate congestion state, 
and heavy congestion state. 
   As stated in previous section, when
  c
, a network is said 
to be in traffic free flow state.  From Fig. 3 (a), we observe 
that in this sate, all the networks perform the same in terms of 
throughput (throughput increases linearly with λ.), but not so 
in terms of average packet delay. In traffic free flow state, 
from


N
k
n k
) 
(
( )
, we obtain


N
n k
k
( )
( )

. Since n(k) depends on 
the average path length of a network, the average packet delay 
τ(k) also depends on the average path length <D> of the 
network. Our simulation results show that the SF network has 
the lowest τ(k) because it has the shortest average path length. 
Therefore, in traffic free flow state, the average path length 
plays a major role in network performance. 
When λ exceeds the critical point λc, congestion happens 
because packets start to accumulate in the network. When
  c
, Fig. 3 (a) shows that with continuous increase in λ, 
the increase in throughput becomes slower. We say that a 
network is in moderate congestion state. With further increase 
in λ, if the throughput starts to decrease, we say that the 
network has entered into heavy congestion state.  
 
 
(a) o(k) vs. λ 
 
(b) τ(k) vs. λ 
Fig. 3 Performance comparison among the networks (k = 2000) 
From Fig. 3, we find that the SF network is the first that 
enters into moderate congestion state, during which the 
increase in throughput slows down, and its average packet 
delay starts to increase very quickly. Compared to the others, 
the performance of the SF network is the worst. The reason 
lies in its most heterogeneous structure (largest π). In the SF 
network, huge amount of packets start to accumulate at one or 
several nodes of extremely high betweenness values when 
many other nodes are idle (or do not have enough packets to 
send). A similar phenomenon is observed in the random ER 
network in moderate congestion state, but the random ER 
network performs much better than the scale-free network 
because of its much smaller polarization value π. According to 
the same reasoning, we find that both the RL network and the 
SL network achieve higher throughput and lower delay than 
the other two because of their much lower polarization value 
π. However, Fig. 3 shows that with just a little increase in λ, 
they quickly enter into heavy congestion state. We find that 
even though in moderate congestion state, congestion happens 
at only a few nodes, the performance of a network depends 
heavily on the traffic load distribution. The less the value of 
network polarization is, the more homogeneous (in terms of 
node betweenness distribution) a network is, the more 
balanced the traffic load is distributed; therefore, the better the 
network performs. For the RL and SL networks, their almost 
uniform node betweenness distribution results in more 
balanced traffic load distribution among all the nodes so that 
many packets are delivered successfully. Therefore, we may 
say that in moderate congestion state when traffic is not yet 
very heavy, network performance strongly relates to network 
polarization. 
When λ increases beyond a specific value (this value is 
different for different networks), the networks enter into heavy 
congestion state. In this state, network throughput starts to 
decrease. For the SF network and the random network, 
because of their heterogeneous structure (large π), most traffic 
is jammed at more nodes of high betweenness values, only a 
small amount of traffic bypassing those congested nodes can 
still be delivered successfully. However, compared to the SF 
network, the performance of the random network is much 
better because the random network is relatively less 
heterogeneous (relatively smaller π). For the RL network and 
the SL network, their structures are more homogeneous. 
However, since the incoming traffic becomes very heavy, their 
very long average path length and high average betweenness 
value causes huge amount of internal traffic. In addition, since 
their node betweenness distribution is almost uniform, almost 
all the nodes are congested (few packets can be delivered 
successfully). Compared to the RL network, the SL network 
performs better because of its relatively shorter average path 
length and lower betweenness values. Therefore, in heavy 
congestion state, both average path length and node 
betweenness distribution play important roles in network 
performance. 
     The above analysis is verified by our observation on the 
changes in queue length (total number of packets in a queue) 
through simulation. In traffic free flow state (we choose λ = 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

0.05), most queues in all the networks are almost empty. In 
moderate congestion state (we choose λ = 0.13), most queues 
in the RL network contain several packets, a few queues 
contain several tens of packets, and the length of one queue 
exceeds one hundred packets. It is similar for the SL network. 
Most queues in the random network are almost empty, but the 
queues at a few nodes of high betweenness values contain 
hundreds of packets. Similar to the random network, most 
queues in the SF network are almost empty, but two queues at 
two nodes of extremely high betweenness values contain 
thousands of packets respectively. In heavy congestion state (a 
different λ is chosen for each network), for the RL network, 
the whole network is congested (most queues contain several 
tens of packets, a few queues contain even hundreds of 
packets). It is similar to the SL network. While for the random 
network and the SF network, more than half of the queues are 
still almost empty, more nodes of high betweenness values are 
heavily congested. Interestingly, we find that no matter what 
the structure of the underlying network is, congestion always 
takes place when a large number of packets start to 
accumulate at a few nodes. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have investigated how internal traffic, throughput, and 
average packet delay change as a function of incoming traffic 
in networks of different structures. Three network states have 
been classified: traffic free flow state, moderate congestion 
state, and heavy congestion state. Network performance has 
been measured and compared in terms of throughput and 
average packet delay. Under fixed shortest path routing, node 
betweenness, network polarization, and average path length all 
play important roles in different states of the underlying 
networks. In traffic free flow state, average path length plays 
the major role; it directly affects average packet delay. In 
moderate congestion state and heavy congestion state, both 
average path length and node betweenness distribution play 
important roles in network performance. Based on our 
investigation, an optimal network structure should have short 
average path length (which results in less total internal traffic), 
and small network polarization π (which leads to more 
balanced traffic load distribution). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Simon Cauchemez, Achuyt Bhattarai, Tiffany L. Marchbanks, Ryan P. 
Fagan, Stephen Ostroff, Neil M. Ferguson, David Swerdlow, and the 
Pennsylvania H1N1 working group, “Role of social networks in shaping 
disease transmission during a community outbreak of 2009 H1N1 
pandemic influenza,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
108, 2825–2830, 2011 
[2] D. Wang, Z. Wen, H. Tong, C.-Y. Lin, C. Song, and A.-L. Barabasi. 
“Information spreading in context,” The International World Wide Web 
Conference, 2011 
[3] B. Doerr, M. Fouz, and T. Friedrich, “Social networks spread rumors in 
sublogarithmic time,” Proceedings of the 43rd ACM Symposium on 
Theory of Computing (STOC'11), 21-30, 2011. 
[4] Sharon P. Lawler and Peter J. Morin, “Food web architecture and 
population dynamics in laboratory microcosms of protists,” The 
American Naturalist, Vol. 141, No. 5, 675-686, 1993. 
[5] Gary A. Polis and Donald R. Strong, “Food web complexity and 
community dynamics,” The American Naturalist, Vol. 147, No. 5, 813-
846, 1996. 
[6] Ziping Hu and Pramode K. Verma, “Improved reliability of free-space 
optical mesh networks through topology design,” Journal of Optical 
Communications and Networking, Vol. 7, Issue 5, 436-448, 2008. 
[7] Ali Tizghadam, Alberto Leon-Garcia, “Robust network planning in non 
uniform traffic scenarios,” Computer Communications, Elsevier, 2011 
[8] Ali Tizghadam, Alberto Leon-Garcia, “On traffic-aware betweenness 
and network criticality,” Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, 2010. 
[9] Ali Tizghadam, Alberto Leon-Garcia, “A graph theoretical approach to 
traffic engineering and network control problem,” IEEE 21st 
International Teletraffic Congress, 2009 
[10] T. Feyessa and M. Bikdash, “Measuring nodal contribution to global 
network robusness,” Proceedings of  IEEE Southeastcon, 2011. 
[11] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, "On the power-law 
relationships of the Internet topology," Computer Communication 
Review, vol. 29, pp. 41-51, 1999. 
[12] Zhi-Hong Guan, Long Chen, Tong-Hui Qian, “Routing in scale-free 
networks based on expanding betweeness centrality,” Physica A: 
Statistical mechanics and its applications, Vol. 390, 1131-1138, 2011.   
[13] Xiao-Gai Tang, Eric W. M. Wong, Zhi-Xi Wu, “Integrating network 
structure and dynamic information for better routing strategy on scale-
free networks,” Physica A: Statistical mechanics and its applications, 
Vol. 388, 2547-2554, 2009.  
[14] Jianwei Wang, Lili Rong, Liang Zhang, “Routing strategies to enhance 
traffic capacity for scale-free networks,” The IEEE International 
Conference on Intelligent Computation Technology and Automation, 
451-455, 2008. 
[15] Ming Tang, Zonghua Liu, Xiaoming Liang, and P. M. Hui, “Self-
adjusting routing schemes for time-varying traffic in scale-free 
networks,” Physical Review E 80, 2009. 
[16] Ming Tang, Tao Zhou, “Efficient routing strategies in scale-free 
networks with limited bandwidth,” Physical Review E 84, 2011. 
[17] Sameet Sreenivasan, Reuven Cohen, Eduardo Lopez, Zoltan Toroczkai, 
and H. Eugene Stanley, “Structural bottlenecks for communication in 
networks,” Physical Review E 75, 2007. 
[18] Liu Wei-Kai, Guan Zhi-Hong, Liao Rui-Quan, “Optimal capacity 
allocation on heterogeneous complex transport networks,” Chinese 
Physics Letters, Vol. 27, No. 10, 2010. 
[19] R. Duncan, “A survey of parallel computer architectures,” IEEE 
Computer, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 5–16, Feb. 1990. 
[20] R. D’Andrea and G. E. Dullerud, “Distributed control design for 
spatially interconnected systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Contr., vol. 48, 
no. 9, pp. 1478–1495, Sep. 2003. 
[21] J. Sun and E. Modiano, “Routing strategies for maximizing throughput 
in satellite networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 22, no. 2, 
pp.273–286, Feb. 2004. 
[22] Guillermo Barrenetxea, Baltasar Berefull-Lozano, and Martin Vetterli, 
“Lattice networks: capacity limits, optimal routing, and queuing 
behavior,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, Vol. 14, No. 3, 492-
505, 2006 
[23] Ziping Hu and Pramode K. Verma, “Impact of network structure on 
latency in complex networks,” IEEE 35th Sarnoff  Symposium, 2012. 
[24] Albert-László Barabási and Réca Albert, “Emergence of scaling in 
random networks,” Science, Vol. 286, No. 5439, pp. 509-512, 1999. 
[25] P. Erdős, and A. Rényi, “On random graphs I,” Publicationes 
Mathematicae 6: 290–297, 1959. 
[26] R. Guimera et al., “Optimal network topologies for local search with 
congestion,” Physics Review Letters 89, 248701, 2002. 
[27] Daniele De Martino, Luca Dall Asta, Ginestra Bianconi, and matteo 
Marsili, “Congestion phenomena on complex networks,” Physics Review 
E. Vol. 79, Issue 1, 2009. 
[28] P. Echenique, J. Gomez-Gardenes, and Y. Moreno, “Dynamics of 
jamming transitions in complex networks,” Europhysics letters 71, 325 
(2005).  
 
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-246-2
ICONS 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems

