Automated Irrigation System
Maryam Alkaabi1, Ali Al-
Humairi12, Nafaa Jabeur1
1Department of Computer Science,
German University of Technology
in Oman, Oman
2Department of Communication
Technologies, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Duisburg,
Germany
meamrashid@gmail.com
ali.alhumairi@gutech.edu.om
nafaa.jabeur@gutech.edu.om
Aydin Azizi, PooryaGhafoorpoor,
Ali Fakhrulddin,
Department of Engineering,
German University of Technology
in Oman, Oman
aydin.azizi@gutech.edu.om,
poorya.ghafoorpoor
@gutech.edu.om,
ali.fakhrulddin@gutech.edu.om
Hayat El Asri
Faculty of Engineering &
Computing, Coventry University,
United Kingdom
elasrih@uni.coventry.ac.uk
Abstract— This research paper tackles the issue of irrigation
systems in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), such as large
consumption of water. It presents a contemporary model for
an automated irrigation system controlled directly from a
mobile application. The aim behind such a project is to
minimize the use of resources (i.e., workers, water, and
electricity) and manual intervention, maximize the operational
speed and the agriculture production while preserving plants
from fungi. All the above highly contribute to the sustainability
of the proposed model and make it an exceptional option to be
considered to improve the agriculture sector from an irrigation
efficiency standpoint. The result of the analysis shows that the
automated irrigation system is able to control and monitor
three types of plants; we also found that the mint plant
consumes the least resources when compared to the mango and
lemon plants.
Keywords— Irrigation, Smart systems, Embedded System,
Automated System, Agriculture.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Over the past decades, quick advancements in smart
agricultural systems were noted [1]. This showcases the great
importance of the agriculture industry worldwide. In India,
for instance, about 70% of the people rely on agriculture [1].
In the past, irrigation systems used to fully depend on the
mills to irrigate farms by conventional methods without a
thorough understanding of the appropriate quantities of these
crops. Such systems contribute to the water waste problem,
which, in turn, contributes to the destruction of crops as there
is
no understanding
of
adequate
quantities
of
water.
However, with the recent technological advancements, new
innovative
systems
for
irrigation
without
the
farmer
interfering in the irrigation process have seen light [2].
Furthermore, because of the geographical region where the
Sultanate of Oman is located, it suffers from the lack of rain
throughout the year and lack of groundwater, this modern
irrigation system will reduce these two main issues. Indeed,
smart systems have proven their capability to regulate the
irrigation of crops while minimizing the water-waste and the
number of resources, which, in turn, will reduce costs. This
research paper intends to solve irrigation issues, such as the
consumption of large quantities of water and the human-
errors that affect trees and their fungi. The
farmers
experience is an important factor to be taken into account to
achieve a high efficiency of modern irrigation systems. With
the increase of the world population, the need for farming
yields is increasing exponentially. Further, the farmers’
potential and abilities in the agriculture filed are reduced due
to different enterprises that attract workers away from the
farming zone. For example, 28% of farmers in Japan are over
65 years old [3].The expected outcomes of this project are as
follows: to facilitate the irrigation system by installing and
designing an automatic system to increase crop performance,
and to reduce overwatering a saturated soil. This system will
also prevent irrigation happening at the wrong time by
switching the engine ON or OFF by utilizing the irrigation
system data. The system controller will be responsible for
switching the engine ON or OFF depending on what is
needed. This process is all automated and does not need any
human interaction, which is the contribution of this project.
This will help reduce human errors and preserve resources
from waste. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In
Section 2, we present the literature review. In Section 3, we
discuss the research objectives followed by design and
implementation of the system. In the last section we present
the results of implementing this system.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Several studies that address irrigation issues are found
in literature, as follows:
1) Automated irrigation system using solar power in
Bangladesh. This study was applied in the rice field in
Bangladesh. The primary goal of this gadget is to balance
out the level of water in agricultural fields to avoid losing
the merchandise due to floods. The sensor sends a message
from the field to an operator mentioning the level of water
within the area and mentions whether it is expected to
increase or decreases. The operator, then, controls the pump
to regulate the water level accordingly [4].
2) Design
and
implementation
of
an
Automatic
irrigation system in Nigeria. The basic idea is to rely on the
type of soil and the amount of water needed by each one.
This process is carried out by measuring the level of
moisture in each type and using the pump to supply water.
The result indicates that sandy soil requires less water than
clay soil [5].
3) Automated Irrigation System based on GSM for use
of resource and crop planning in India. This device is
placed on agricultural lands and works by using Bluetooth
or GSM signal. The goal of this device is to monitor the
humidity and temperature in the agricultural land in addition
to monitoring the state of the climate through the weather
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

temperature, humidity, and dew drops. It, then, sends a text
message to the user's machine [6].
III. RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
The main objective of this project is to develop an
automated system that solves problems related to irrigation
and agriculture, such as controlling and saving resources
(water mainly), increasing the agricultural production using
small quantities of water, minimizing manual interventions
in watering operations while increasing the watering speed,
and preserving plants from fungi. All these features make the
automated system a sustainable option to be considered to
improve the agriculture and irrigation efficiency. The goal of
this study is to discover the excellent automation technique
for
irrigation
system
automatically
controlled
through
software in a way that allows the user to monitor all
information and manage the device immediately from a
mobile device. The objectives to consider are: Simplify the
irrigation system by installing and designing the whole
irrigation system, Optimize the water consumption, Fully
automate the system, Decrease the cost of operation, and
Make the system user-friendly. The system method includes
the implementation of a prototype device that works
robotically and is controlled through a mobile application.
Reading the related works and drawing the timeline of the
project constitutes step one of this project. After looking into
the benefits and drawbacks of the previous studies on the
matter, the implementation starts with the layout and the
automation method for the executable. To implement this
project, we start by describing the idea. Next, we identify the
objects of this project, such as why this project is important,
and what is the exact object of this project. The second step
is to read related studies to know if there is such idea and
how they implemented in different way. Then, comes the
choice of materials; this step takes more time because the
materials should be of certain specification. Following that,
we started building a small version of the project to try the
scenario and test materials. We write the code of each item
and then combine all codes together. Next, we build the
prototype and test the code, followed by the implementation
of a mobile application for the system. The main idea of
building a mobile application was to be able to control the
system remotely. The last step is to review and test.
IV.
DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
To achieve the exact project objectives, using Arduino as
the operating system seems to be the best choice as it
contains a number of open supply hardware and software as
well as it is cheap and available in our country. Choice of
materials: The first step of this process of building the
prototype of the automated irrigation system was the choice
of materials. Field Control System: This step depends on the
working of different sensors used in this project which are
(moisture, temperature, light, and rain). First of all, we
choose an open source operating system which is Arduino.
Then, we programmed every sensor separately. We started
with the moisture sensor, and so on, and then combined all
nine sensors, including the rain, temperature, light and flow
meter sensors. We included in our code pump and valve and
tested. Project Preparation: For the purpose of building the
structure of this project, two tables were used to make parts
more stable. However, to create a perfect structure, the size
was measured for each part that will be used in the project
later on: the types of sensors based on the environment that
they will work on, two 12 volt batteries, a small plastic tank,
an LCD screen for monitoring, the different type of
connecting wires, and controller (Arduino type AT mega
328V).
Mechanical Design: In the beginning, a sketch
design for the project was made, then the measurements were
taken. Two wood tables (1.6-meter x l.6 meter) have been
chosen as a base and stand for this project. The first step of
designing the system was to draw the sketch of the system to
know the exact materials and measurements needed.
A. Design Process
As shown in Figures 1 and 2, three pieces of foam were
used for the area below the grass mat and the area where all
wires, flowmeter, and valves are located. The size of the
grass mat was cut to make nine holes to set the plastic plates.
A special cutter was used to cut the grass into nine equal
squares. The plastic water tank was chosen in a way that it is
large in size, but light in weight. Moreover, nine moisture
sensors, one temperature sensor, four solenoid valves, one
water pump, one breadboard, two (12 volts’ batteries), wires
and an LCD screen are the main parts that were used to
implement this project. There were difficulties in choosing
the type of pipes for this project since it should be easy to
connect as well as easy in the cutting process. Thus, two
types of connection joints (T-joint and L–joint) were needed
to simplify the installation process. The Arduino controller
has been chosen as the processor since it is an open source,
simple program that combines three models at once, which
are: a digital input, an analog input, and a processor. Every
sensor and tool have been tested individually before being
connected to a large-scale project, as shown in Figures 1 and
2. Tests were run for every part of the system to make sure it
works as expected.
Figure 2. Valve Testing and Connection
Figure 1. Control Tools and Wiring
Valve
Pump
Moisture sensor
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 3. Whole system
The last step was to assemble all parts together to
finalize the project construction, as shown in Figure 3. The
last step in the coding process was to gather all codes in one
single program and run it in a large-scale project to make
sure
that
everything
is
working
perfectly.
Figure
4
showcases the circuit design of the whole system with the
wiring.
Figure 4. Circuit design
B. Sequence scenario of the system
As shown in Figure 3, the project was divided into 3
fields, namely: field A, field B, and field C. Each field will
have one valve and one flow meter sensor in order to
measure and monitor the amount of consumed water in each
field. Field A has valve_1 and flow meter 1, field B has
valve_2 and flow meter_2, field C has valve_3 and flow
meter_3 in addition to valve_4 with flow meter that will be
located near the tank in order to measure and monitor the
total amount of consumed water. As it shows in the flow
chart (Figure 5), if two or more moisture sensors are active,
the
system
will
automatically work.
In
addition,
the
temperature sensor and the light sensor work together. For
example, when the temperature is more than 40°C and the
light sensor is active, then the system will be switched OFF
because the heat of the sun works to evaporate the water.
This system was configured to stop the process and schedule
it. Moreover, the purpose behind such a system is to work in
a
smart way;
therefore,
if
it rains,
the
system
will
automatically be OFF. One should keep in mind that the
main water tank will be monitored carefully so that it does
not go below the level where the pump cannot suck the
water. The system will not work if the water level is low.
C. Implementation
Figure 5 presents the start of the process where two or
three moisture sensors of field B must be activated to move
to the next step. Next, the rain sensor must be dry to
continue the process and the weather temperature sensors
should not exceed 40°C to enable the process to move to the
next step. If the water tank level is not low, the pump will
run, valve_2 and 4 will open and the flow meter_2 and 4
will have the same reading. If two or three moisture sensors
of all fields (A, B, C) are active at the same time and the
rain sensor is dry while the temperature sensor remains
under 40°C and the light sensor is not active, then the
system proceeds to the next step. Also, if the water level
sensor is not below the threshold, then the pump will be ON
and valves_1, 2, 3 and 4 will open and the flow meter (1,2,3,
4) will have the same readings.
Figure 5. Flow chart of implementation process
D. Mobile Application
Figure 6 presents the application process of the mobile
application. It starts with the app installation on a phone and
opening it. First of all, the main screen (Figure 7) of the app
will be loaded when the user will choose the device to be
connected to Bluetooth. The system will check whether or
not the device is connected and notify the user in either case.
On the main screen, the user can directly switch ON /OFF
the entire system. Moreover, if the “Details Button” is
pressed, it will load the details screen (Figure 7). In this
screen, the user will be able to see all details related to the
whole system. For instance, if he pressed on the “plant 1
button”, he will be able to see the amount of water, the soil
moisture, and the temperature. Further, if a problem occurs
in this line, the user has the option to switch it ON /OFF.
The app inventor is an open source tool provided by Google.
This program allows beginners to create programs that can
run under Android. It uses a graphical user interface such as
Scratch [8].
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 6. Flow chart of application process
In Figure 7:
1-
If “Button 1”is pressed, it send the user to About
Page, which provides app information.
2-
If “Button 2” is pressed, the user gets directed to
the Help Page.
3-
When the List Picker is clicked, it shows a list of
all connected Bluetooth devices When a Bluetooth device is
clicked.
4-
Regarding
the
connection,
if
the
device
is
connected, the text colour changes to green for feedback and
writes ‘Connected'.
5-
The “ON /OFF buttons” allow the user to switch on
or off the system.
6-
When the “Details button "is pressed, it takes the
end user to a details page that shows all the information and
let user control the system line by line.
7-
When the “List Picker” is pressed, it shows a list
of all connected Bluetooth devices.
8-
The two labels show the temperature and amount
of water going from tank flow 4 is the main one.
9-
The “Plant” button shows the user a list of details
about a plant, such as name of the plant, humidity and
amount of water.
10-
The three labels are not visible unless the user
clicks on the plant button.
11-
The “Responsive” button takes the user to the
Home page.
12-
The “ON/OFF” button in each line allows a user to
switch on or off each line individually.
Figure 7. App Screenshot
V. RESULTS
The process of manual irrigation involving one user to
control the irrigation process has been done in real world
environment for three types of plants (lemon, mint, and
mango) for one month and the results were recorded. The
irrigation process takes place twice a week in the morning
and the remaining days in the evening because the manual
irrigation process is usually done at that time. For data
analysis purposes, data of a chosen plant twice a day, once
between 9 am - 5 pm and the second one between 6 pm-
11pm, was taken. The line graph in Figure 8 depicts the
humidity data of the mint. The y-axis represents the
humidity rate while the x-axis represents the day and time.
We notice that Sunday and Wednesday have the largest
humidity rate, which is 900-800. When the humidity is more
than 800, it means that the plant is dry and needs to be
irrigated. The humidity rate decreases on Monday evening
and Thursday morning and reaches 200-120. This means
that the plant is not dry and does not need watering. From
this data, we can say that the mint gradually dries up and it
retains water more than other plants.
Figure 8. Humidity data of mint
The line graph in Figure 9 presents the humidity data of
the lemon plant. The y-axis shows the humidity rate while
the x-axis shows the day and time. Sunday and Wednesday
have the largest humidity rate (1000); which means that the
plant is very dry and needs to be irrigated as soon as
possible.
On
Monday
and
Thursday,
the
humidity
decreased; however, it is noticed from the graph and the
data that the lemon needs to be irrigated more than twice a
week because it loses water fast. Therefore, we conclude
that lemon needs water more than mint.
4
6
5
2
3
1
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

Figure 9. Humidity data of lemon
The line graph in Figure 10 shows the humidity data of
the mango plant. Sunday, Thursday, and Saturday have the
largest humidity rate; this means that the plant is very dry.
We also notice a rapid decrease and a rapid increase in the
amount of moisture; this means that mango loses water very
fast and needs to be irrigated more than twice a week.
Figure 10. Humidity data of mango
Based on the data above, we observe the following in
Figure 11. All the plants were watered at one time and in
equal quantities almost twice a week, but after comparing
the results, we found that the lemon and mango needed to be
watered more than twice a week because the humidity ratio
is significantly reduced (taking into account the temperature
and the time of irrigation). When they are irrigated in the
morning,
the
plants
lose
humidity quickly and
very
significantly because the irrigation is at the wrong time; the
sun evaporates the water much faster. As for the mint plant,
through the results, we found that this plant does not lose
moisture quickly as it can withstand a longer period
compared to the mango and the lemon. Hence, we conclude
that using an automatic irrigation system is much more
efficient because it solves almost all the problems of using a
manual system. The automatic irrigation system works
based on the needs of plants, so it solves the problem of
irrigation at the wrong time by using light and temperature
sensors together.
Figure 11. Humidity data of all plants
In Figure 12, the result of the flow meter sensor is
presented. As shown in Figure 12, the amount of water
using manual irrigation system is equal for all plants and
administered at the same time. Because all plants do not
need the same amount of water, using a moisture sensor
connected to a flow meter gives better results.
Figure 12. Flow meter data
VI.
DISCUSSION
After we completed the project and all the requirements
were implemented, in order to finish this smart irrigation,
system testing was the next step. In fact, the system will not
work until two or three of the moisture sensors from any
line of the 3 fields sends a signal to the Arduino that the soil
is dry and the crop needs water. After the signal reaches the
Arduino, it will send a command to the relay of that specific
line field valve to be energized to open the valve and a
command to the relay of the pump to exchange it directly to
irrigate that field. Moreover, all 3 fields can be irrigated at
the same time if a minimum of 2 of all 3 plants moisture
sensors are activated. Thus, all solenoid valve relays may be
energized to open all valves and the pump runs to irrigate all
3 plants. There has been a problem at the beginning to
choose a suitable pump to irrigate all plants at the same
time. The program of the system has been configured and
the system will no longer operate unless two or three
moisture sensors are activated. But, if one sensor is
activated of any line, the system will no longer perform
because that sensor can also be defective. If the water tank
level is low, the system will not operate even if all plant
sensors
are
activated
to
protect
the
water
pump.
Furthermore,
this
smart
irrigation
system
has
been
configured in a way that, if it rains, it will not work. This is
because the rain sensor will be activated and will send a
signal to Arduino to stop the water pump and to close all
valves as well. Further, during daytime, the system will no
longer work due to the mild sensor that will be activated and
that will close the plant's valve as well as switch OFF the
pump. Concerning the system programming, it has been
precisely chosen, as stated in the previous sections, to apply
UNO Arduino. The wire connections from the controllers to
the Arduino have been difficult to implement, as a single
mistake can damage any electric element. It was not easy to
program the smart irrigation system and upload it in
Arduino to run the water pump and starting valves with
eighteen sensors, but with the assistance of Arduino library,
this system was completed. Connecting the wires can
become complicated, but by using the plastic breadboard, it
became easier to connect the wires. For designing the plant,
special flexible pipes were used to facilitate the connection
from the water tank to the plant. However, we faced the
problem of connecting the pipes together. So, two types of
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

pipe joints (T-joint and L-joint) were used to solve this
issue.
VII. CONCLUSION
With this project, we achieved successful results. The
purpose of the smart irrigation system for large or small
scale is to make it the process more effective. Different
sensors (soil moisture, light, temperature, level, rain, flow)
together with other devices (water pump, battery, LCD
screen, solenoid valve) have been used in this project. Using
Arduino proved profitable, as it is able to serve a number of
different sensors of various types and sizes. Arduino boards
are other devices. Furthermore, two wood tables and three
sheets of foam have been used in the project. Several design
criteria have used in this system. The sensors used were
suitable for detecting and sending signals to Arduino, to
control the water pump and to open the solenoid valve. The
system was tasted in indoor conditions similar to the ones
on the farm. The purpose of the screen monitor is to show
the flow for each line, which shows if there is any passing of
water in pipes. Also, if it is raining, the system will not work
in order to save the water. The mobile application is to
control the system remotely. It allows a user to monitor the
whole system and, if there is any problem or passing of
water, the user can switch off the system through this
application.
Finally,
results
analysis
proves
that
the
proposed automated irrigation system is able to control and
monitor three types of plants. We found that the mint plant
consumes the least resources. Following what has been done
for this project, in the future works, we intend to transfer the
system to a larger scale. Furthermore, controlling the system
via Zig Bee instead of using wire connections could be a
great addition. Moreover, creating a more responsive mobile
application would provide more controlled data. We can
also think of developing this system by using renewable
energy, which is solar power instead of batteries using solar
energy, in an effort to help reduce future costs.
REFERENCES
[1]
FAO, “The Future of Food and Agriculture –Trends and
Challenges“
[online]
Available
at:
http://www.fao.org/3/a-
i6583e.pdf [Accessed: Sep. 2018].
[2]
OECD,
“Modern
Irrigation
Technologies.”
[online]
Available
at:
https://www.oecd.org/env/outreach/KG_study_irrigation.pdf
[Accessed: Sep. 2018].
[3]
T. Clint,
“Japan’s Agriculture Dilemma”, 2018 [online]
Available at: https://thediplomat.com/2014/09/japans-agriculture-
dilemma/ [Accesed Sep. 2018]
[4]
J. Moller, “Computer Vision - A Versatile Technology in
Automation
of
Agriculture
Machinery”,
2010.
[online]
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2b94/d72a5088af674743caefe9fe0
4078db133ca.pdf [Accessed Sep., 208]
[5]
Anon, International Journal of Science and Research (IJSR),
2017
[online]
Available
at:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/e560/202dd4acba3429bc64deb811
e67f20d6abbc.
[6]
Jee.ro,
2017
[online]
Available
at:
http://www.jee.ro/covers/art.php?issue=WK1446219610W56338f5
a49ec9
[7]
Iosrjournals.org,
2017
[online]
Available
at:
http://www.iosrjournals.org/iosr-jmce/papers/vol11-
issue4/Version-1/I011414955.pdf
[8]
Appinventor.mit.edu.
About our new MIT App Inventor
logo | Explore MIT App Inventor, 2018
[online] Available at:
http://appinventor.mit.edu/explore/blogs/karen/2017/08/about.html
[Accessed: May, 2018].
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

