Identifying Requirements for a Social Media-based
Emergency Management System
Marko J¨antti, Taina Kurki
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
P.O.B 1627, 70211 Kuopio, Finland
Email: {marko.jantti, taina.kurki}@uef.ﬁ
Laura Hokkanen
Emergency Services College
P.O. Box 1122, FI-70821 Kuopio, Finland
Email: laura.hokkanen@pelastusopisto.ﬁ
Abstract—Social media tools provide public safety organiza-
tions with a new communication channel for the management
of crises and emergencies. While existing studies have mainly
focused on exploring how authorities use social media tools,
citizens role in producing information for emergency management
has not been studied adequately. The research problem of this
study is: How social media tools support emergency management
from a citizens perspective? The main contribution of this paper
is to identify requirements for social media -based emergency
management systems. Data on requirements were collected during
an a emergency management exercise in Finland. Results indicate
that citizens consider authorities presence in social media valuable
and reassuring during emergency situations.
Keywords—Emergency; social media; public safety.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Social media has rapidly become one of the daily used
communication channels. At the same time citizens are more
and more equipped with mobile technologies that enable them
to be constantly interactive in online social media networks,
anytime and almost anyplace. This online behavior is also
present in emergencies, where an emerging trend of growing
citizens participation through social media can be seen. Both
citizens involved in and outside the emergency provide and
seek information with implications for both the informal and
the formal response effort.
Social media therefore provides opportunities for engaging
citizens in response activities both by pushing information to
the public and by pulling information from those involved
in the emergency, enabling online exchange of information
through conversation and interaction [1]. Public Safety Orga-
nizations have recently started to discuss how this citizen pro-
vided resource could be best utilized in emergency response.
Large scale natural disasters, such as earthquakes trigger the
need for more agile and scalable emergency communication
channels [2].
Public authorities in emergency management domain in
Finland include: police, rescue services, municipalities and
emergency response centre. In this study, we call these organi-
zations Public Safety Organizations (PSOs). Public Safety Or-
ganizations in Finland now face the demand on being present
online and there is also (more or less so) shared understanding
in the ﬁeld of emergency response that public authorities
should be there where the citizens are, including social media
[3], [4]. All of the 22 regional rescue departments in Finland
have at least a Facebook account, some use also Twitter.
Municipalities play an important communication-related role
in Finnish emergency management model.
The usage of social media is, however, still taking its ﬁrst
steps. Communications in social media is mainly dissemination
of safety information for citizens, and utilization of the in-
formation provided by citizens during crisis and emergencies,
such as silent signals, ﬁrst-hand reports, (geotagged) photos
and video, or interactive communication between citizens and
public safety organizations, is still meagre. Research on the
use of social media in the ﬁeld of emergency management in
U.S. and UK have provided similar ﬁndings [5], [6], [7].
Studies on the theme show that one of the key barriers for
the adoption of social media tools for emergency management
is the lack of related policies and guidelines [8]. These studies
have focused mainly on the adoption of social media enabled
communication from the point of view of public authorities,
focusing less on guidelines for citizens on the use of social
media in emergencies and crises.
Additionally, there are studies that have explored social
media tools in information sharing of disasters [9], [10] and
how social media has been used in disaster management life
cycle: prevention, preparedness, response, and recovery [11].
Carter [12] has studied how social media has been used in
storm situations in US. Some of the studies have focused
on challenges of using social media [13]. As a new mode
of communication, its adoption shall likely cause change
resistance among emergency management employees.
This study is related to EU Framework Programme funded
research projects iSAR+ and SOTERIA that aim at producing
recommendations to leverage the use of online and mobile
social media in crises and emergency response efforts. In
this paper, we focus on a citizen’s viewpoint of emergency
management. The study reports ﬁndings from a user showcase
on social media in emergency management. The purpose of the
showcase was to study the effectiveness of the interactive com-
munication between the citizens and PSOs in crisis situations
through three scenarios: hazardous material accident, aviation
accident and a summer storm. These scenarios provided a fruit-
ful playground for studying the bidirectional communication
between the citizens and Public Protection and Disaster Relief
organizations (PPDRs) in social media as well as testing the
social media data analytics platform.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

Fig. 1.
The context of the study
tion 2, the research method and settings of this are described.
In Section 3, the results of the study are presented. Section 4
includes analysis of results. Conclusions are given in Section
5.
II.
RESEARCH PROBLEM & METHODOLOGY
The case study research method was used to explore
social media-based emergency management from a citizens
perspective. Yin [14] deﬁnes a case study as an empirical
inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon within
its real life context using multiple sources of evidence. The
showcase was conducted in controlled environment in order to
avoid misunderstanding and panic in social media. The closed
environment also enabled protecting participants privacy and
anonymity.
A.
Research environment
The Finnish user showcase (on social media in emergency
management) was organized along with Emergency Services
Colleges Crises and Large Scale Emergencies exercise (Krisu
exercise). This exercise is carried out twice a year and it is
a part of studies of Rescue Activities Management of the
graduating course of ﬁre sub-ofﬁcers and ﬁre ofﬁcer students.
The aim of the Krisu exercise is to practice management
of crises and large scale emergency situations in which several
public authorities take part, and in which rescue services is
the authority responsible for the overall management of the
situation. Several public safety authorities took part in the
showcase. In the showcase, the settings of Krisu exercise
were utilized bringing new tools for the players to support
communication and crisis management. The context of the
study is presented in Figure 1.
Showcase description: The showcase consisted of three
simulated scenarios: Hazardous material accident in Finland
nearby Finnish Russian border area, where a tank wagon of
a freight train containing ammonium was leaking at the rail
yard. The second scenario was an aviation accident in Helsinki-
Vantaa airport: Airbus 320’s landing fell short 200 meters
Fig. 2.
A photo of an emergency situation tweeted by a citizen
before runway. The third scenario was a storm, during which
few hundred tasks were reported to the emergency number 112,
one of them a trafﬁc accident with two cars and a tank truck.
During a storm scenario a detection of an emergency without a
call to 112 was also tested: lightning / damaged power started
a ﬁre in a building.
Facilities: The showcase was organized in two different
locations: Command and Control Center positioned in facilities
of Emergency Services College. Citizen players were located
in Korvaharju training ground that is a 36-hectare wide area
with over 100 training and testing facilities for ﬁre ﬁghters.
B.
Data collection and analysis
Data collection was carried out during the showcase in
February 2015. The following data collection sources were
utilized: documentation (showcase reports from previous show-
cases, showcase plan), archival records (iSAR project survey
for citizens, tweets sent by citizens during a showcase), partic-
ipative observation (participation in organizing the showcase,
observation reports by citizen players), interviews and coffee
table discussions (collecting information during the showcase
from citizen players), direct observation (observation of Twitter
feed and citizens action), physical artefacts (airplane, train,
tank truck simulators (for rescue services training purposes),
and feedback survey (directly after showcase and another after
showcase).
A within case analysis technique was used in this study
[15]. The technique focuses on exploring the case as a stan-
dalone entity. The showcase was also part of validation of
results. In the analysis, we utilized a pattern matching analysis
technique that focuses on comparing empirically based patterns
with predicted patterns. Predicted patterns (categories) were
created based on previous studies on emergency management
and evaluation reports of the previous showcase. Categories
focused on citizens viewpoint in management of emergencies.
Finally, for each category, we aimed to establish subcategories
that described the ﬁndings.
Settings: The study has been conducted as a part of EU
Seventh Framework projects SOTERIA (Online and Mobile
Communications for Emergencies) and iSAR+ (Online and
Mobile Communications for Crisis Response and Search and
Rescue). Pictures and data were collected from the showcase
of February 2015 in training area (see Figure 2).
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

TABLE I.
FINDINGS OF THE STUDY (SOCIAL MEDIA AS A CONTACT
CHANNEL)
Id
Citizens’ comments
Subcategory
1.1
If I had an urgent need, I would primar-
ily call 112. But, of course, the more
communication channels the PSOs use,
the more useful it would be in emergen-
cies.
Social
media as
an
add-on
channel
1.2
Through
social
media,
one
can
receive
much
more
information
on
emergency
situation,
compared to phone calls.
Rich in-
formation
source
1.3
It should go in this way also in real life!
Immediate response to the tagged tweet.
Fast
response
1.4
Contacting the PSOs via social media
felt a bit difﬁcult and unclear.
Challenges
in contact
1.5
I
sent
a
tweet
with
a
picture
and
location
data
(GPS).
The
response
came
within
a
minute
as a private message .
Private
message
as a
contact
channel
1.6
PSOs
could
send
their
contact
details as a private message (a direct
phone number).
Private
message
as a
contact
channel
1.7
I wonder why I cannot use SoMe as a
contact channel at the moment.
Social
media as
an add-on
channel
iSAR+ project aimed at research and development of set
of guidelines that enable citizens using new mobile and online
technologies to actively participate in the response effort,
through the bidirectional provision, dissemination, sharing and
retrieval of information essential for critical Public Protection
and Disaster Relief (PPDR) intervention, in search and rescue,
and medical assistance. On-line and Mobile Communications
for Emergencies (SOTERIA) project will result to developing
recommendations, to provide guidelines and courses of action
for Public Safety Organizations and citizens on how social
media tools are best utilized to beneﬁt both citizens and
public authorities in emergencies. The participants consisted of
Finnish end-user community, such as national PPDRs entities
(Rescue Services, Police, municipalities), and citizen players.
III.
RESULTS
Results from the case study are presented according to the
following categories: 1) Social media as a contact channel, 2)
Reaction of citizens to authorities messages and other citizens
messages (reliable and reassuring), 3) Communication (mes-
sage content, reaction time, information clarity, right timing,
unambiguity), and 4) Usefulness of social media tools.
Social media as a contact channel. Table I shows the
main ﬁndings related to social media as a contact channel.
Citizens addressed the role of social media as an additional,
value-adding communication channel and emphasized the di-
versity of social media channel in relation to the traditional
contact channel, phone. Citizen players were not trained or told
to use private Twitter messages during the exercise. However,
several citizen players used this for private communication
with authorities.
TABLE II.
FINDINGS OF THE STUDY (REACTION OF CITIZENS)
Id
Citizens’ comments
Subcategory
2.1
There was a large number of unneces-
sary tweets and thus, I started to think
whether emergency contacts can be eas-
ily identiﬁed among junk tweets.
Identiﬁcation
of
essential
informa-
tion
2.2
Yes. Decreases speculations. In real situ-
ations I would read messages but would
only trust messages from PSOs.
Trust
2.3
Social
media
could
surely
be
used
also
in
real
situations
but
mining
the
accu-
rate
information
from
the false and unnecessary information is
relatively hard.
Identiﬁcation
of
essential
informa-
tion
2.4
The
citizens
tweeted
various
infor-
mation and I really could not con-
nect with authorities. However, the an-
nouncements from the PSOs felt reas-
suring .
Authorities
presence
in social
media
2.5
The PSOs were actively present in Twit-
ter, and they published some informa-
tion this was good.
Authorities
presence
in social
media
Citizens comments also showed the perception of social
media as a bidirectional communication channel by nature.
Contact with the PSOs was expected. Nevertheless, even when
a personal contact with PSOs did not occur, the presence of
PSOs and their messages in social media was found important.
Regarding PSOs viewpoint, we observed during the study that
authorities proceed carefully in their social media initiatives.
This might be due to unfamiliarity of social media use in
PSO communication. Additionally, the persons who deal with
emergencies are not communication specialists.
Reaction of citizens to the messages of authorities and
other citizens. Table II shows the main ﬁndings related to
citizens reactions to communication of authorities and other
citizens during the showcase. Some of the authorities messages
included too generic language. For example, if they refer to
a press release, it would be nice to get the webpage where
it appears. (IN) Bi-directional communication through social
media is surely useful for public authorities.
Citizens’ reactions related to social media usage by PSOs
was positive. Information provided by the public authorities
through social media was considered trustworthy. In this study,
the impact of the PSO communication to the citizen behavior
was not explored, but the trust in PSO messages indicates that
e.g. giving instructions or codes of conduct in social media
would lead to preferred action. Citizens reported that PSOs
participation in social media discussions was active but also
highlighted that information was inconsistent between different
data sources.
Communication. Table III shows our ﬁndings related to
communication between PSOs and citizens.
Our ﬁndings emphasized the importance of social media
literacy skills (skills required in reading social media feeds
and understanding common terminology used in tweets and
updates). Capturing essential information) from the ﬂow of
tweets (some were true, some spam and some misleading)
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

TABLE III.
FINDINGS OF THE STUDY (COMMUNICATION)
Id
Citizens’ comments
Subcategory
3.1
It would be useful to advise people
to avoid accident area as early as possi-
ble
Proactive
commu-
nication
3.2
I
think
interactive
communication
between
citizens
and
PPDRs
is useful as long as the tweets from
PPDRs are clear, open and fast enough.
Quality
of
commu-
nication
3.3
It
was
good
that
au-
thorities
reported
only
the
essential
information
such
as
number of injured persons
Quality
of
commu-
nication
3.4
Does the tank truck have warning
signs of Hazardous material? If yes what
kind of signs?
Emergency
details
3.5
I
sent
a
tweet
with
a
picture
and
location
data
(GPS).
Now,
authorities
were
well
aware
and
the response came within a minute
as a private message
Private
message
as a
contact
channel
3.6
PSOs
could
send
their
contact
details as a private message (a direct
phone number)
Private
message
as a
contact
channel
3.7
I wonder why I cannot use SoMe as a
contact channel at the moment.
Social
media as
an add-on
channel
was seen to require skills on media literacy (for social media),
especially when considering the reliability of the information
provided on social networks.
PSO communication should be timely, fast and active.
Some citizen players considered authorities response too slow
in the exercise. Authorities explained that response takes time
due to validation of information provided by citizens. In most
cases the validation requires a ﬁeld visit. One solution could
be that authorities ﬁrst message is that the situation is under
investigation or some generic information.
Citizens would also have liked the PSOs to deﬁne hashtags
for the ongoing situations. During the showcase, citizens
communication involved tweets, private messages, video con-
tent, and images related to emergency situation. Authorities
considered this information useful because it provided details
of accident scene such as number and type of cars, color of
smoke and warning signs in a tank truck.
Usefulness of social media tools for emergency man-
agement. During the showcase, the following tools were used
by PSOs: the iSAR+ alerting services (My Public Alerts),
iSAR+ fusion centre services (social media monitoring, SMM
crawler, text analysis tool), and iSAR+ portal software. A
closed Twitter-based platform was used to manage commu-
nication between citizens and PSOs. Three citizen players
used Permiloc application that enabled locating the citizen
and receiving real-time messages. (e.g., evacuation commands,
progress notiﬁcations on emergency situations) from PSOs.
The showcase scenarios included the following data:
•
Real time messages (e.g., tweets, photos and video
streams of the events, tweets with geolocation data)
TABLE IV.
FINDINGS OF THE STUDY (USEFULNESS OF TOOLS)
Id
Findings
Subcategory
4.1
It would be good if the PSOs used these
tools in real situations.
Need for
improve-
ment
4.2
The closed Twitter environment worked
almost perfectly.
Retweeting
4.3
The main idea of hashtags was not clear
to everybody
Hashtags
4.4
This
system
would
work
in
real
situations!
I would use it and I would know
who to inform. Might create spam.
Spam
ﬁltering
4.5
I
received
a
good
under-
standing
of
train
accident
only
based
on
following
Twitter
feeds.
Progress
of emer-
gency
handling
generated by the players.
•
Photos from real emergency situations provided by
Emergency Services College.
•
Updates created based on previous, real life commu-
nications during emergencies
•
Rumours and trolls produced intentionally by the
citizen players.
Table IV describes the ﬁndings concerning how useful citi-
zens considered social media tools in emergency management.
IV.
ANALYSIS
According to our ﬁndings, social media is a very promising
communication channel for emergency situations. However,
emergency services ﬁeld needs guidelines and policies to
establish and maintain these channels. Social media might be
used as an additional channel to provide richer information on
accident scenes than a phone-based channel. We observed that
Twitter-based social media tool was easy and fast to use from
a citizens perspective, even with no previous experience.
The research problem of this study was: How social
media tools support emergency management from a citizens
perspective? As main contribution of the paper, we showed
the citizens’ perspective to the social media-based emergency
management. The following requirements for social media
-based emergency management systems can be derived from
our results:
Fast response to citizens’ social media updates and
messages. Citizens require immediate and almost real time
response to their messages in social media. During the show-
case, we observed that citizens would require some kind of
response on emergency event from authorities in early phase.
Authorities’ perspective seems to be to ﬁrst validate the event
before commenting anything. (Findings 1.2, 1.3)
Support for public and private messages. In addition
to public communication (tweets), some of the citizens tested
direct communication with PSOs and this type of tailored
communication was considered very useful and effective. We
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

observed that before a citizen is able to send a direct message
to PSOs, he/she has to be a follower of the PSO role. From a
citizen’s perspective, opening an emergency chat channel from
a hyperlink could be perhaps simpler way to open a direct
communication. (Findings 1.4, 1.6, 3.5, 3.6)
Hashtags. Hashtags enable tagging and linking tweets on
the same subject together. Some citizen players suggested
that social media based emergency system could recommend
citizens which hashtags should be used during the emergency
situation. We also observed that the role of hashtags remained
unclear for some citizens. (Finding 4.3)
Effective and reliable location based services. During
the showcase, location based alerting systems (citizen players
were using a mobile application) were tested. We observed that
in some cases, inside the main building (of training area) the
location-based alerting system did not work reliably because
the mobile device and application lost the GPS signal.
Sharing information in periodic intervals scheduling.
There were several citizen players that were asked (according
to a script) to request information from PSOs during the show-
case. Often, citizens ask simple questions related to who they
should take contact with or where to get medical treatment.
A certain number of these questions could be avoided by
scheduling functions of social media tools. For example, a tool
could be set to automatically post contact details of a hospital
every 15 minutes. (Findings 2.1, 2.4)
Validation and analysis of emergency events. Especially,
management of trolls provides social media tools with chal-
lenges. Image and video analysis tools should be used to check
whether images and videos are real and have been taken from a
correct place. Validation and analysis should be conducted not
only reactively, but also proactively, for example scanning guns
from images and analysing landslides from satellite images.
During our showcase, some citizen players complained about
slow response of PSOs. However, there were also citizens that
had received immediate response to their tweets. (Findings 2.4,
2.5)
Educating citizens on what type of information is
needed from accidents. The social media -based emergency
management system should inform citizens what type of in-
formation is most useful for PSOs. For example, in hazardous
material accidents, images on warning signs of container trucks
and the colour of smoke help PSOs to identify what type of
chemical the container is leaking. (Findings 3.4, 3.5)
The showcase results showed that social media enables
new kind of citizen engagement in emergencies and crises.
Disseminating information, providing eye-witness accounts,
sending and receiving alert messages, exchanging experiences
of the emergency response and searching and publishing
information related to the event were conducted during a
showcase in a closed social media platform. We observed that
social media platform established strong real-time collabora-
tion mechanisms that led to improved situational awareness of
emergency situations.
Social media has been successfully used in several natural
disasters to connect people and inform authorities of the scope
of disasters/emergency situations. Our ﬁndings are congruent
with previous studies that emergency management organiza-
tions still lack consensus on how the social media can be
utilized in sharing emergency-related information. Negative
impacts of social media use could be partly overcome by edu-
cating the citizens how they should or can act in social media
channels. Our results showed that citizens would be willing to
help if they knew what type of information authorities need
in managing emergencies. Our study also addressed the role
of rumor (troll) management. More effective data analytics
capabilities of emergency management systems might speed up
the validation of emergencies and lead to faster identiﬁcation
and more accurate response to trolls.
As implications for theory, our study contributes to emer-
gency management theory by focusing on citizens viewpoint
and exploring how they consider the use of social media as a
contact channel and means of communications. Our main cat-
egories (social media as a contact channel, reaction of citizens
to authorities and other citizens messages, communication, and
usefulness of tools) and identiﬁed subcategories can be used by
future social media case studies on emergency management.
As implications for practice, we validated the social media
based emergency management approach with three accident
scenarios and collected information on the limitations of social
media tools and user experiences.
V.
CONCLUSION
This study aimed to answer the research problem: How
social media tools support emergency management from a
citizens perspective? The main ﬁndings showed that the social
media-based platform used in the study was easy to use and
enabled the PSOs to ﬁnd the most essential information from
the information sent by citizens in social media. According to
the showcase observations, using social media tools enhances
the situational awareness of PSOs by providing information
(photos, videos and tweets from emergency sites) directly from
the citizens involved in the crisis.
However, some of the feedbacks collected from citizens
indicated that implementation of these kind of new practices
requires time. Using common hashtags in updates about the
ongoing situations would have been useful; in this exercise, the
citizen players thought that the PSOs could have recommended
some hashtags. Citizen participants were worried that the
important updates of the PSO might not be noticed among
the ﬂood of tweets. Spam and unreliable information was seen
as a disadvantage of using social media during crisis situations.
Following social media and in this case the ﬂow of tweets
of which some are true, some spam and some trolls requires
skills on media literacy, especially when considering the relia-
bility of the information provided on social networks. During
the scenarios demonstrated there was genuine need of ofﬁcial
information, as it there would be in real life situations.
Pictures were found useful information, also from the point
of view that they are helpful for foreigners who do not know
the language used in the tweets. Although social media tools
are actively used among involved citizens, our observations
and interviews showed that utilizing them in bidirectional
emergency management situations is relatively new.Feedback
from the showcase and the earlier survey indicated that citizens
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

trust authorities. This is not obvious in other countries. The
citizens considered the presence of PSOs in social media
and the bidirectional communication valuable and reassuring
during and after a crisis. Our results indicate that social media
could be an additional communication channel between public
safety organizations and citizens.
This case study contains certain limitations. First, data were
collected during a relatively short time period (2 days incl. a
showcase and a feedback workshop). However, we managed
to get a rich set of material for the analysis through using
six sources of evidence recommended by Yin. Second, we
used a single case design in this study. We agree that this
causes difculties in generalizing results. However, case studies
should not aim at generalization but extending the theory.
Third, regarding the construct validity, most of the players were
relatively young (students) that use social media more actively
on their free time than elderly people. Finally, the fact that the
showcase was a simulated exercise certainly affects the results.
Further research will continue in Soteria project. Barents
Rescue Exercise 2015 will be a starting point for campaigns of
experimentations, where the role and impact of social media
and related tools will be tried, experimented, analyzed, tested
and evaluated in real and realistic simulated environments. This
will be instrumental to the production of recommendations on
the understanding of the impact and role of social media in
emergencies and efﬁcient and effective ways to incorporate
mobile technology and social media into emergency response
efforts.
Further research efforts could focus on exploring the op-
tions how social media based emergency platforms should be
organized and provided as a viable business model. Rescue ser-
vices could apply service management approach for managing
social media based emergency services.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study is funded by the European Union Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under the Grant
Agreement n 606796 — Soteria. We would like to thank
SOTERIA project partners for their valuable contribution to
emergency management research and the Finnish showcase.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Merchant, S. Elmer, and N. Lurie, “Integrating social media into
emergency-preparedness efforts,” New England Journal of Medicine,
vol. 365, no. 4, pp. 289–291, 2011.
[2]
J. L. Wybo, and M. Latiers, “Exploring complex emergency situations
dynamic: Theoretical, epistemological and methodological proposals
tarkista vuosi,” International Journal of Emergency Management, vol. 3,
no. 1, pp. 40 – 51, 2015.
[3]
L. Hokkanen, K. Pylv¨as, T. Kankaanranta, N. P¨aivinen, and T. Kurki,
“Using social media in emergency and crisis situations
viewpoints
of authorities and citizens (in ﬁnnish),” Poliisiammattikorkeakoulun
katsauksia 1/2014, Poliisiammattikorkeakoulu, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[4]
K. Pylv¨as, L. Hokkanen, and T. Kankaanranta, “Social media and
mobile technology in communication between public safety authorities
(in ﬁnnish),” Project ﬁnal report, Tech. Rep., 2015.
[5]
Y. San Su, C. Wardell III and Z. Thorkildsen, Social Media in the
Emergency Management Field. 2012 Survey Result.
CNA Analysis
and Solutions, 2013.
[6]
S. R. Hiltz, J. Kushma and L. Plotnick, “Use of social media by
u.s, public sector emergency managers: Barriers and wish list,” in
Proceedings of the 11th International ISCRAM Conference.
USA:
Pennsylvania State University, 2014, p. 600609.
[7]
C. Wendling, J. Radisch and S. Jacobzone, “The use of social media
in risk and crisis communicationl,” OECD Working Papers on Public
Governance, No. 25, OECD Publishing, 2013.
[8]
R. Beneito-Montagut, S. Anson, D. Shaw and C. Brewster , “Govern-
mental social media use for emergency communication,” in Proceedings
of the 10th International ISCRAM Conference.
Germany: Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology, 2013, p. 15.
[9]
T. Sakaki, F. Toriumi, K. Uchiyama, Y. Matsuo, K. Shinoda, K. Kazama,
S. Kurihara, and I. Noda, “The possibility of social media analysis for
disaster management,” in Proceedings of the Humanitarian Technology
Conference (R10-HTC), 2013.
USA: IEEE, 2013, pp. 238,243.
[10]
Y. Tyshchuk, and W. A Wallace, “Actionable information during ex-
treme events – case study: Warnings and 2011 tohoku earthquake,” in
Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on Social Computing
(SocialCom).
USA: Academy of Science and Engineering, 2012, pp.
338–347.
[11]
B. Abedin, A. Babar, and A. Abbasi, “Characterization of the use of
social media in natural disasters: A systematic review,” in Proceedings
of the 2014 IEEE Fourth International Conference on Big Data and
Cloud Computing (BdCloud).
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2014,
pp. 449–454.
[12]
L. Carter, J. B. Thatcher, and R. Wright, “Social media and emergency
management: Exploring state and local tweets,” in Proceedings of the
47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS).
USA: IEEE, 2014, pp. 1968–1977.
[13]
S. Luna, and M. Pennock,, “Social media in emergency management
advances, challenges and future directions,” in Proceedings of the 9th
Annual IEEE International Systems Conference (SysCon). USA: IEEE,
2015, p. 792797.
[14]
R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage Publishing, 1994.
[15]
K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,” Academy
of Management Review, vol. 14, pp. 532–550, 1989.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

