Transformative Computing for Cyber-Security Protocols 
 
 
Lidia Ogiela 
AGH University of Krakow 
30 Mickiewicza Ave, 30-059 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: logiela@agh.edu.pl 
Marek R. Ogiela 
AGH University of Krakow 
30 Mickiewicza Ave, 30-059 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: mogiela@agh.edu.pl 
 
 
Abstract—This paper will discuss the main techniques based on 
transformative solutions, dedicated to data protection and 
security. Transformative computing is designed to collect and 
analyze data obtained from various sources, taking into account 
their updates and changes. The analysis of data obtained from 
various sources is possible by using linguistic and semantic 
techniques to describe and interpret data in order to properly 
extract information contained in large data sets. Linguistic 
techniques guarantee the proper description of the analyzed 
data and the selection of relevant information in a given analysis 
process. These processes allow for proper data protection both 
in common use systems and in cyberspace. 
Keywords-Transformative computing; linguistic techniques; 
cyber-security protocols. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Transformative computing methodology is dedicated to 
the implementation of complex and large data sets processing, 
obtained from various sources, at various times, recorded by 
various recorders [2][4][5]. Thus, these are calculations that 
process different data sets. Their diversity allows to obtain 
information of great importance for the data processing 
process. Determining the meaning is possible thanks to the use 
of linguistic techniques in the process of interpretation and 
inference. Linguistic techniques dedicated to the tasks of 
meaningful interpretation of data allow to obtain information 
that can significantly affect the process of automatic data 
understanding [6][7]. Data understanding processes, on the 
other hand, are an innovative solution in the field of 
constructing data protection and security protocols. The main 
area of application of the discussed solutions are 
cryptographic threshold schemes, intended for data security 
tasks through their sharing [1][3][7]. 
The novelty presented in this paper is the possibility of 
dedicating transformative techniques to the processes of data 
security for cyber-security protocols. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, 
we introduce the concept of the Transformative Computing 
paradigm. In Section III, a security protocol based on 
linguistic threshold schemes will be described. Finally, we 
conclude the work in Section IV. 
II. 
TRANSFORMATIVE COMPUTING METHODOLOGY 
Transformative computing methodology is used to 
implement complex computational processes. Their important 
aspect is that the data on the basis of which the calculations 
are made, may come from various sources recording 
information in real time. An important advantage of such 
computing is therefore the ability to combine data sets of 
different nature, size and format. This is possible thanks to the 
use of techniques that are primarily used to extract important 
(from the analysis point of view) information that is important 
for the process of description and inference. This stage is 
carried out on the basis of the use of linguistic techniques in 
the process of describing the interpreted data.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Transformative computing methodology. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

Linguistic techniques allow the extraction of semantic 
information contained in data sets. This information is used to 
describe the importance of the analyzed collections and thus 
allows for a significant reduction of the obtained information. 
At this stage, the method of description the analyzed data is 
also selected, using linguistic techniques of data interpretation 
in the form of formal grammars. The choice of the right 
grammar rules depends on the type of data for which the 
analysis is carried out, but it is focused on the choice of 
sequence, tree or graph grammar. A schematic representation 
of the transformation calculation process is shown in Figure 
1. 
III. 
CYBER-SECURITY PROTOCOLS 
Data security protocols based on the use of linguistic 
techniques for the proper extraction of data constituting secret 
information that may be subject to confidentiality processes 
are gaining more and more importance. Their main task is to 
protect and secure confidential, secret or strategic data. High-
priority data protection are in classical cryptographic systems, 
but also in the cyber security. The idea behind the new 
generation of solutions is the ability to use effective methods 
of securing data with a high security priority. A new solution 
is the possibility of using linguistic techniques in threshold 
schemes to provide a semantic description of a shared secret 
and the possibility of splitting data obtained from 
transformative computing. An important advantage of this 
solution is the acquisition of relevant data with semantic 
meaning while eliminating irrelevant or low-importance data. 
In addition, this solution allows the use of linguistic 
techniques in the process of dividing a secret between a 
specific group of secret keepers. At the same time, the 
semantic analysis of the secret may constitute its part as an 
element subject to secrecy. The method of choosing the 
optimal data protection protocol takes place at the stage of 
defining the threshold scheme that is to be used to implement 
the data protection process (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. Transformative computing for linguistic threshold schemes in security protocols. 
Linguistic techniques included in the data protection 
process based on threshold schemes, can be used in data 
protection processes in cyber security. Their advantage is high 
flexibility resulting from the possibility of selecting data 
recording sources for the implementation of transformative 
computing, the use of universal secret description techniques 
using linguistic methods, and the use of linguistic threshold 
schemes that guarantee an accurate description of the secured 
data enriched with elements of semantic description.  
Data security protocols dedicated to cyber security 
guarantee high security and the possibility of their continuous 
modification due to emerging changes in procedures, 
opportunities and threats, both external and internal. The 
threshold schemes proposed in this paper, based on 
transformative computing methodology and semantic 
inference techniques, guarantee a high level of data protection. 
Transformative 
computing 
combined 
with 
linguistic 
reasoning techniques can be applied to multi-level structures, 
which makes it much easier to manage them from different 
levels of the entire process and structure. Such a solution can 
therefore be effectively used in cyber security, where data 
security processes are carried out at various levels. The 
universality of the presented solution results from the use of 
transformative computing techniques in the process of 
obtaining and processing data, which constitute information 
of a secret nature, results from the possibility of extracting the 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

semantic meaning only for relevant data, and from the 
possibility of constructing threshold schemes in order to 
divide the secret along with its semantic description 
(contained in the additional secret shadow) between the secret 
trustees. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents an innovative approach to the process 
of securing data using linguistic threshold schemes, in which 
semantic information presenting the meaning of the secret 
plays an important role. The linguistic description of the secret 
is the result of data processing based on transformation 
techniques that allow the collection and processing of various 
data sets from different data recorders. The universality of the 
discussed solutions allows for their wide application, 
especially in cyber security. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially supported by the funds of the 
Polish Ministry of Education and Science assigned to AGH 
University of Krakow. The research project was supported by 
the program „Excellence initiative – research university” for 
the AGH University of Krakow.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Biro, A. Mashkoor, and J. Sametinger, “Safety and security 
of cyber-physical systems,” J. of Softw.-Evol. and Proc. e2522, 
2022, doi: 10.1002/smr.2522. 
[2] S. Gil at al., “Transformative effects of IoT, Blockchain and 
Artificial Intelligence on cloud computing: Evolution, vision, 
trends and open challenges,” Inter. of Things. Vol.8, paper 
100118, 2019. 
[3] A. Menezes, P. van Oorschot, and S. Vanstone, “Handbook of 
Applied Cryptography.” CRC Press, Waterloo, 2001. 
[4] Y. Moustafa and F. Kawsar, “Transformative computing and 
communication,” Computer. Vol. 52 (7), pp. 12-14, 2019. 
[5] L. Ogiela, “Transformative computing in advanced data 
analysis processes in the cloud,” Inf. Process. Manage. Vol. 
57(5), paper 102260, 2020. 
[6] M. R. Ogiela, L. Ogiela, and U. Ogiela, “Biometric methods 
for advanced strategic data sharing protocols,”. In: 2015 9th 
International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet 
Services in Ubiquitous Computing IMIS 2015, pp. 179–183, 
2015, doi: 10.1109/IMIS.2015.29. 
[7] M. R. Ogiela and L. Ogiela, “Cognitive cryptography 
techniques for intelligent information management,” Int. J. of 
Inf. 
Manage. 
40, 
pp. 
21-27, 
2018, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.01.011. 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

