Automatic Ship Identification Approach for Video Surveillance Systems 
 
 
Natalia Wawrzyniak 
Marine Technology Ltd. 
Szczecin, Poland 
e-mail: n.wawrzyniak@marinetechnology.pl 
Tomasz Hyla 
Marine Technology Ltd. 
Szczecin, Poland 
e-mail: t.hyla@marinetechnology.pl 
 
 
Abstract—Existing methods and systems for ships identifica-
tion are mostly tailored for large, commercial vessels. Nowa-
days, a need to automatically identify smaller craft emerged, 
especially in coastal, port or busy river waters. This paper 
presents a proposal of automatic vessel identification method 
using video streams from existing marine and inland surveil-
lance systems that are part of vessel traffic services. The identi-
fication uses image processing methods to detect and classify 
ships, as well as recognize vessel plates. The results of these 
processes are then matched with vessels hull data from internal 
and external data bases. Fuzzy logic and historical analysis are 
used to assess identification certainty. The proposed prelimi-
nary solution is described and visualized with the use of sys-
tems logic schema. 
Keywords-ship 
identification; 
marine 
systems; 
image 
processing; video surveillance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Identification of vessels taking part in marine and inland 
ships traffic is a complex and difficult task. Especially now, 
in turbulent times, when the risk of pirates or terror attacks is 
rising, fast and reliable identification of ships in coastal, port, 
and busy river areas has become a crucial task for traffic 
information services systems. Existing solutions differ in 
assumptions, used sensors and scale of operation depending 
on reasons why such identification must be undertaken. Nev-
ertheless, in each situation, identification means comparing 
results of object detection and recognition with some reliable 
sort of source information on existing vessels.  
Identification of vessels not covered by International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) [1] con-
vention is the biggest challenge, because such vessels are not 
required to own and use Automatic Identification System 
(AIS) or Long-Range Identification and Tracking (LRIT) 
transponders, which allow to identify ships automatically 
and at least passively. These non-conventional ships are 
small, but they are the most numerous group of units present 
on inland waterways. The group includes leisure crafts, mo-
torboats, yachts, authorities’ vessels, specialized port units, 
etc. Due to this fact, video surveillance plays a very im-
portant role in restricted areas both marine and inland (inland 
waterways class 4b, ports, and others) [2]. The surveillance 
is usually a part of traffic information systems - Vessel Traf-
fic Services (VTS) on marine waters and River Information 
Services (RIS) on inland waters [3]. However, video moni-
toring and ship identification is done manually by an opera-
tor, which is time consuming, resource intensive and insuffi-
cient at the same time. Usually, all other information in such 
systems (built mostly using Service Oriented Architecture 
(SOA)) is pushed via Simple Object Access Protocol 
(SOAP) to different traffic participants and to other systems 
(e.g., authorities). Hence, the need for automation of identifi-
cation in such systems is urgent. 
In this paper, we propose an initial solution for conduct-
ing automatic ship identification using video streams from 
existing surveillance systems on areas covered by vessels 
traffic information systems, such as RIS or VTS. We propose 
the scheme for ships identification and discuss its evaluation 
method. The research is done as a part of Automatic Recog-
nition and Identification System for Ships in Video Surveil-
lance Areas (SHREC) project [4]. SHREC is a system that is 
going to use multiple existing video streams to identify pass-
ing ships. The system does not require specialized cameras 
and has modular and scalable architecture that allow con-
necting many surveillance cameras. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the problem of identification and current state of 
the art. Section III presents the identification approach used 
in SHREC system. Section IV describes our approach to 
system evaluation. The conclusion closes the article. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
There are four main approaches to track and monitor 
ships traffic: AIS, LRIT, Vessel Monitoring System (VMS), 
and via already mentioned VTS and RIS traffic services. The 
first two are imposed by the SOLAS convention, and there-
fore, work for large international voyaging ships, passenger 
crafts, offshore drilling units, etc. Moreover, AIS [5] is a 
passive way of identification, because ships for a variety of 
reasons can turn off their transponders or send false messag-
es. VMS is used in commercial fishing for environmental 
and regulatory purposes and uses a variety of sensors. Now-
adays, more and more of such systems use airborne and sat-
ellite-borne imaging sensors. In the detection and tracking 
domain, the main research is going in two ways: (i) using 
optical sensors [6][7] and (ii) Synthetic Aperture Radar 
(SAR) [8]. Still some additional information must be used to 
identify units. Usually, the identification is based on data 
provided by AIS [9] or some other referenced data, e.g., Ship 
Arrival Notification System [10]. 
The problem of detection and identification of small, 
noncommercial crafts remains a challenge. VTS and RIS 
systems, besides AIS (when possible) and radars (for detec-
tion and tracking), use video monitoring [11] as a way to 
visually identify units. Surveillance is used by a system op-
erator to observe current traffic or to make an assessment of 
archival situations. Detection, recognition and identification 
of units based only on surveillance in coastal and inland 
areas are very complicated due to many factors including 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

scene characteristics: illumination changes, reflections, ex-
istence of high frequency background objects [12], etc., as 
well as the lack of unification of ships markings [4].  
Contrary to data in other VTS/RIS subsystems, infor-
mation on ships identification is not processed in any way, 
nor passed to other receivers in the system. RIS and VTS 
systems were developed to primarily exchange information 
between its centers and other external systems (e.g., authori-
ties or shipowners). On the other hand, there is no standard-
ized marking system for vessels side marks, which could 
possibly facilitate remote craft identification. 
In image or video stream analysis, the identification pro-
cess is usually the third step after objects detection and 
recognition (or classification). The identification itself is to 
compare results of classification/recognition and match it 
with actual knowledge from systems own information on 
vessels or some external data source (e.g., Hull Data Base in 
RIS). In order to identify objects, a number of image pro-
cessing algorithms must be executed to analyze video 
streams. There is vast ongoing research on this matter. De-
tection can be done using multiple approaches [13][14]. 
Many times, classification, besides traditional image pro-
cessing approach (Feature-based template Matching, pattern 
matching, etc.), uses artificial intelligence methods like neu-
ral networks or other deep learning algorithms [8][15]. 
Moreover, from systems’ performance perspective, it is 
much more difficult to execute these methods in close to 
real-time mode. They use more resources, take more time to 
execute and training database must be large and well-
structured. Interestingly, recognition of vessel plates (side 
marks) can be very helpful [16]. 
III. 
IDENTIFICATION IN SHREC SYSTEM 
SHREC is being developed as a system that can be easily 
integrated with existing RIS or VTS systems. The core of 
SHREC system is the ships recognition and identification 
method. It will need an access to any number of video 
streams in order to run image analysis and to systems vessel 
database to be able to perform identification. The simplified 
schema of SHREC identification process is shown in Figure 
1. 
The system can be divided into four layers. The video 
capture layer is responsible for receiving and decoding of 
video streams into series of bitmap. Each stream is decoded 
separately and forwarded to corresponding frame analysis 
module in detection and recognition layer. This module con-
sists of three different submodules responsible for ship detec-
tion, ships classification and text (vessels plate) recognition. 
After a ship is being detected, a cropped frame and detection 
mask is forwarded for classification purposes. The classifica-
tion is being processed on cropped image, but in original 
resolution. Detailed classification method is being part of 
ongoing separate research in SHREC project. Simultaneous-
ly to classification, a text analysis is being processed on ves-
sels’ labels, when they extracted from cropped frame. Infor-
mation of classification and text recognition results are 
passed into identification layer with corresponding quality 
measures. 
Here, the main identification process takes place. First, 
the collected information for a single frame is checked if it is 
sufficient for fast identification (a classification ratio and 
percentage of recognized text allows comparing it with refer-
enced information in the traffic systems database). When it is 
positively identified, the information about ship and the qual-
ity of the identification with the original data frame is passed 
into Vessel Identification Log and later Identification History 
Database. If not, the recognition results are passed into AI-
Based Identification module, which uses additional infor-
mation to identify a vessel. Primarily, it uses a buffered, 
short term history of frames that were analyzed before the 
current candidate frame. A built-in voting system, using 
fuzzy logic [17], allows classifying a ship based on earlier 
results from n video stream frames. The output of the ship 
type classification algorithm for each frame is fuzzified, 
which  means that there is a quality indicator for each class 
telling how good the adjustment is to each ship type. When 
the indicator value is firm, it outputs one ship type of high 
positive quality. However, sometimes the classification 
shows good or average matching to few types based on one 
frame. The fuzzy processing is used to calculate the final 
ship type and the voting is based on the output of this process 
and on a series of n previous results. 
Secondly, the system can perform analysis with the use of 
rough sets theory [18] using systems Identification History, 
that stores the information on identified vessel, and the cor-
responding identification quality measure. When the spatial 
configuration of cameras in the monitoring system is known 
(e.g., two cameras point at the same area), then a Multi-
View Analysis can be performed using recognition results 
from frames of two video streams from Short Term History. 
Rough sets are used to build decision rules needed to per-
form final identification. Multiple input arguments from the 
modules mentioned above are mapped into conditional at-
tributes. Decisional attributes are different types of identifi-
cation output: no ship, moving unknow ship, ship with 
known type, locally identified ship (e.g, the ship was previ-
ously seen by the system), or externally identified ship (e.g., 
the ship’s registration number was matched with an external 
ships’ registry). That approach helps to manage ambiguous 
cases that occur due to properties of coastal and inland vid-
eo monitoring. The biggest influence on the proposed ap-
proach has an existence of a large amount of poor quality 
data. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
The proper verification of the ship identification method 
is a complex task and requires preparing a database with 
video samples that can be used in automated benchmarks. In 
SHREC, the database consists of video samples and corre-
sponding files with structured description. The video sam-
ples are divided into two data sets. The first one contains 
around 500 samples taken from publicly available video 
streams from different ports in Europe. The second one 
consists of around 2000 video samples that were gathered 
on waterways around Szczecin by our team during the  
summer of 2018. The next step is to describe these samples 
using expert opinion, i.e., an expert must identify exact 
points in time (frames in a video sample) where she or he 
thinks the ship should be detected, its type recognized and 
identified. That later allows to compare answer given by the 
system with actual data that was visually confirmed by a 
witness/expert. The description for each sample is written to 
a structured file (a spreadsheet), so an automatic test can be 
easily executed. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

The quality of the identification algorithm will be meas-
ured using two parameters. The first parameter is a False 
Negative Identification Ratio (FNIR). It will measure the 
ratio of ships that have not been identified to all ships iden-
tification events. It is worth mentioning that it does not mat-
ter if a ship that passes through camera is identified based 
on one frame or more frames. The positive identification 
event is a situation when the occurrence of a ship is properly 
identified in a video sample regardless of the number of 
frames that contain that ship. The second parameter is a 
False Positive Identification Ratio (FPIR). It measures the 
ratio of incorrect ship identification events to all ships iden-
tification events. 
Before we will start testing the identification algorithm, 
the detection algorithm, as well as the ship type classifica-
tion And the text recognition algorithms will be tested using 
a similar approach. Based on our video samples database 
and structured description, the FNIR and FPIR will be 
measured. Regarding the identification algorithm, we as-
sume that positive result is when a ship is properly detected 
or recognized through its occurrence in front of a camera 
one or more times. Additionally, the algorithms will be 
tested on the frame basis using a parameter that will show a 
ratio of frames in which the ship was detected to the number 
of frames provided by an expert. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  
Ship Identification schema in SHREC system.  
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have presented a vessel identification method using 
video surveillance that is a part of traffic information ser-
vices and is an ongoing research in SHREC project. The 
architecture of VTS/RIS systems allows using these systems’ 
databases as a reference crucial for the identification process. 
Also, the databases can also be used when VTS/RIS has 
access to external systems (authorities, shipowners). 
The main purpose of the research is to develop a flexible 
solution that identifies voyaging vessels regardless of their 
size and other passive identification systems. In the SHREC 
system, a single camera stream is analyzed separately using 
image processing methods for detection, classification and 
text recognition to properly recognize a ship. When the 
recognition quality is sufficient, matching with data from a 
traffic system database provides identification. When the 
quality of recognition is unsatisfactory then identification 
using historical data and AI methods, namely, fuzzy logic 
and rough sets theory, are used. Multi-view analysis is also 
possible, when monitoring system’ configuration allows 
recognizing that two cameras point at the same area.  
Some limitations were discovered in initial tests of each 
part of the proposed system. They are concerning the visual 
layer, such as quality of camera image, the maximum dis-
tance between ship and camera that allows for a detec-
tion/recognition, visibility of vessels plate, etc.. They were 
expected and will be precisely specified in further develop-
ment of the system. However, the biggest challenge to over-
come seems to be the performance limitations that appear 
due to massive computational effort, which needs to be con-
ceived especially for better classification results. This issue 
can be reduced by introducing some manual interference into 
the systems operation, e.g., limiting the area where ships can 
appear in the cameras’ scene. 
Nevertheless, the proposed solution will automate the 
process of visual tracking of a camera image by the operator 
of the surveillance system. The system can work as an inde-
pendent service and use SOAP protocol to push information 
of identified ships to other subsystems of vessels traffic in-
formation services.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This scientific research work was supported by National 
Centre for Research and Development (NCBR) of Poland 
under grant No. LIDER/17/0098/L-8/16/NCBR/2017). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] International Maritime Organisation, “SOLAS International 
Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea”, 1974. 
[2] A. Stateczny, D. Gronska, and W. Motyl, “Hydrodron – new 
step for profesional hydrography for restricted waters”,  
Proceedings of Baltic Geodesy Congress BGC, IEEE, June 
2018, 
pp. 
226-230, 
DOI: 
10.1109/BGC-
Geomatics.2018.00049 
[3] A. Stateczny, “Sensors in River Information Services of the 
Odra River in Poland: Current State and Planned Extension”. 
Proc. Baltic Geodesy Congress (BGC), IEEE, June 2017, 
pp.301-306,  DOI: 10.1109/BGC.Geomatics.2017.77 
[4] N. Wawrzyniak and A. Stateczny, “Automatic watercraft 
recognition and identification on water areas covered by video 
monitoring as extension for sea and river traffic supervision 
systems,” Polish Maritime Research, vol. 25, no. s1, June 
2018, pp. 5-13, DOI:10.2478/pomr-2018-0016.. 
[5] S. Chaturvedi, Ch. Yang, K. Ouchi and P. Shanmugam “Ship 
recognition by integration of SAR and AIS”. Journal of 
Navigation. 
Vol. 
65(02). 
2012, 
pp. 
323-337, 
DOI:10.1017/S0373463311000749 
[6] Ch. Corbane, L. Najman and E. Pecoul, “A complete 
processing chain for ship detection using optical satellite 
imagery”, Dec. 2010 INT J REMOTE SENS. 31(22). pp. 
5837–5854 DOI:10.1080/01431161.2010.512310. 
[7]  F. Maquera and E. Gutierrez, “Wakes-ship removal on high-
resolution optical images based on histograms in hsv color 
space”, 
IJACSA 
, 
vol.9 
(7), 
2018, 
pp.223-227, 
DOI:10.14569/IJACSA.2018.090732 
[8] G. Margarit and A. Tabasco, “Ship classification in single-pol 
SAR images based on fuzzy logic,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. 
Remote Sens., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 3129-3138, 2011 
[9] G . Margarit , J. J. Mallorqui, J. M. Rius, and C. Lopez-
Martinez, “On the usage of GRECOSAR , an orbital 
polarimetric SAR simulator of complex targets, to vessel 
classification studies,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., 
vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 3517-3525, 2006.  
[10] M. D. Sullivan and M. Shah, “Visual surveillance in maritime 
port facilities”, Mar. 2008, SPIE Proceedings, Visual 
Information 
Processing 
XVII, 
vol. 
6978, 
pp.8 
DOI:10.1117/12.777645 
[11] D. Bloisi, F. Previtali, A. Pennisi, D. Nardi, and M. Fiorini,  
"Enhancing Automatic Maritime Surveillance Systems With 
Visual Information", Aug 2016, IEEE Transactions on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol.8(4) pp.824-833, 
DOI:10.1109/TITS.2016.2591321 
[12] D. Bloisi, L.Iocchi, M. Fiorini, and G. Graziano „Automatic 
maritime 
surveillance 
with 
visual 
target 
detection” 
Proceedings of the International Defense and Homeland 
Security Simulation Workshop DHSS, pp. 141-145, 2011 
[13] K.  Prasad,  D.  Rajan,  L.  Rachmawati,  E.  Rajabaly,  and  
C.  Quek, “Video processing from electro-optical sensors for 
object detection and tracking in maritime environment: A 
Survey,”Intelligent 
Transportation 
Systems, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , 2017, 
vol. 18(7), pp. 1993-2016, DOI: 10.1109/TITS.2016.2634580 
[14] R. da Silva Moreira, N. F. F. Ebecken, A. S. Alves, F. 
Livernet, and A. Campillo-Navetti, “A survey on video 
detection and tracking of maritime vessels,” International 
Journal of Research and Reviews in Applied Sciences, vol. 
20, no. 1, July 2014, pp. 37–50. 
[15] Q. Zhou, L. Ma, M. Celenk, and D. Chelberg, "Object 
Detection and Recognition via Deformable Illumination and 
Deformable Shape", Nov 2006, pp. 2737 – 2740, 
DOI:10.1109/ICIP.2006.313113 
[16] J. C. Ferreira, J. Branquinho, P. C. Ferreira, and F. Piedade, 
“Computer vision algorithms fishing vessel monitoring—
identification of vesselplate number,” Ambient Intelligence– 
Software and Applications – 8th International Symposium on 
Ambient Intelligence (ISAmI 2017), J. F. De Paz, V. Juli´an, 
G. Villarrubia, G. Marreiros, and P. Novais, Eds. Cham: 
Springer 
International 
Publishing, 
2017, 
pp. 
9–17, 
10.1007/978-3-319-61118-1_2. 
[17] K. Valášková, T. Kliestik, and M. Mišanková, “The Role of 
Fuzzy Logic in Decision Making Process”, Proc. of ICMIBI 
2014, Jan 2014, Lecture Notes in Management Science, 
vol.44  DOI: 10.5729/lnms.vol44.143 
[18] N. Wawrzyniak and T.Hyla, “Managing Depth Information 
Uncertainty in Inland Mobile Navigation Systems”. In: 
Kryszkiewicz et al. (eds) 2014 Joint Rough Sets Symposium, 
Springer LNCS (LNAI), vol. 8536 pp. 343-350,  
 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

