 
 
A Five-Factor Market Approach for Long-Term Product Development: A Result of 
Systems Thinking 
Andy Mattulat Filipovic 
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering  
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Trondheim, Norway 
email: filipovic.a.mattulat@ntnu.no 
Mo Mansouri 
Faculty of Technology, Natural Sciences, and Maritime 
Sciences 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
email: mo.mansouri@usn.no  
 
 
Abstract— Current product development practices face 
challenges when adapting to long-term changes in early-stage 
development. This challenge happens due to missing awareness 
of the future dynamic conditions that influence future market 
conditions. This paper introduces five factors to investigate the 
future 
dynamic 
complexities 
for 
product 
development 
organizations. Findings show interdependencies between the 
factors, Business model, Politics and regulation, Trends, 
Funding and Insurance, and Technology. Each factor consists 
of an individual system, which can be influenced by each other 
over time. Further investigation of the interdependencies 
linking five factors set out to reveal the new and unexplored 
potential for product development organizations. The paper 
introduces a systemic approach to facing future challenges of 
managing long-term product development management.  
Keywords- Systems of systems; Future market. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Today, we face the challenge of missing the objectives of 
the Paris agreement if we continue to produce and develop 
technologies as we have been doing so far [1] [2]. When 
managing their project portfolios nowadays, companies have 
already faced the challenge of predicting short-market 
conditions as the market is rapidly changing.  
However, with the increasing complexity of the world 
and increasing numbers of near-tipping-point incidents over 
the last year, the war in Europe, the rising cost of goods, etc., 
is the green transition, something we all need to participate 
in. Changes will not emerge by themselves and arise in a 
magical moment but need development through innovation 
and research. 
For decades, scholars and researchers have claimed that 
modern product development stresses increased demand for 
new incremental solutions and is more complex than ever. 
Could it be that no matter when we develop new 
technologies, we anticipate the current situation full of 
unrecognized possibilities and risks and, therefore, see it as 
the challenges of the time? Therefore, by acknowledging the 
complexity of the socio-technical, environmental complex 
reality, we need a dynamic framework for dealing with the 
dynamics in the complexity or reality to distinguish between 
complex structures and complicated mechanisms.   
Systems thinking is known in multiple works of literature 
for being able to grasp systems complexity, visualize 
interdependencies, create an understanding of boundaries, 
and many more valuable things. Therefore, this makes 
systems thinking suitable for addressing systems complexity, 
as we do in this article. 
 The future market will remain dynamic, and nothing will 
appear in 10 years as it does today. Moreover, as we 
acknowledge that market conditions are rapidly changing, 
we need a framework to identify future uncertainties to help 
guide organizational development.  
The research goal of this paper is to explore the holistic 
landscape, from an enterprise perspective, for interrelated 
systems of systems that together shape the conditions for the 
future development of products and systems. This sum of 
information from the five factors introduced in this paper, 
can support portfolio managers in design- and decision-
making processes to allocate resources best towards the 
organizations long-term strategy.  
The structure of the paper consists of six sections, where 
Section I continues to introduce a background overview of 
and establishes the challenges the paper addresses. Section II 
presents the methods used in producing the results. Section 
III introduces the five factors of the market. Section IV 
addresses some of the direct dynamics in the system. Section 
V places the five factors into the system of product 
development introduced in Section I. Section VI concludes 
and addresses further research. 
A. Background 
Product development of physical products is becoming 
more complex as requirements for the green transition are 
adopted. The green transition influences all product life cycle 
stages, including the whole value chain [3].  
While many companies have adopted some form of an 
agile workflow in areas of organizations, the portfolio 
management processes often follow a waterfall–stage gate 
approach for governing the whole enterprise [4]. This 
approach has some shortcomings in the later stages of 
development, where the data collected as part of testing is 
not returned into the process to feed the early innovation 
activities (see Figure 1).  
Figure 1 illustrates the current portfolio practice in a 
typical stage gate approach. The flow of the main activities 
follows from the left top to the bottom right side. At the top, 
project sponsors provide input on requirements, evaluate the 
project, and approve the project to continue to the following 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

 
 
 
Figure 1. Innovation system of systems. 
stages of development. Innovation consists of activities  
involving inputs from research and development and detailed 
information on innovation projects and requirements. The 
output for the process can be in concept ideas or process 
innovation 
to 
improve 
areas 
like 
manufacturing. 
Manufacturing is responsible for evaluating the concept 
requirements and manufacturing processes align and make it 
possible to deliver products that fulfill requirements in cost 
and quality.   
Existing 
product 
development 
practices 
get 
the 
specifications and requirements from various sources (for 
example, customer interviews, product testing, and sales 
numbers) [5]. The current way may be holistic but ignores 
the dynamic perspective of potential future requirements.  
Other researchers have addressed uncertainty in project 
portfolio management and product development of radical 
innovation 
[6] 
[7]. 
Despite 
recognizing 
certain 
interdependencies, this area has not yet been properly 
investigated, particularly when it comes to long-term 
uncertainties in dynamic systems. The traditional product 
development and innovation methodologies treat each 
system as singular units, such as law and regulation or 
technology, and so forth. Thereby overlooking how these 
seemingly independent systems influence one another by, for 
example, how technology helps shape and form new laws 
and regulations by setting collecting data for science-based 
targets and, consequently, miss addressing the circumstances 
that enable this dynamic. By ignoring the whole picture, we 
believe that opportunities and potential are overlooked for 
systems innovations that truly can impact society and the 
environment.   
B. Challenge 
The challenge in the existing systems is the missing 
consideration of long-term conditions related to each aspect 
of the system. Various uncertainties must be managed 
throughout development as potential risks are involved in 
new product development.  
Traditional product development practices tend to look at 
various inputs to the product development process, taking 
“influencing factors” as a static parameter in the design 
process. However, the different factors of uncertainty in 
product 
development 
practices 
are 
not 
static 
and 
independent. The individual requirements are, over time, 
dynamic and connected through mechanisms and processes.  
The existing approach for evaluating the influencing 
factors in product development and portfolio management is 
segmented and shared between operational units in the 
organization. The challenge, in this case, as time is a factor, 
is that implications made in one area of the system will not 
immediately result in changed behavior in all other affected 
system elements.  
The finite purpose of an organization is to provide 
products or services to bring value to a market in exchange 
for money. As the market will be dynamic over time, we see 
the market as constructed from different influencing factors. 
Therefore, we will spend the rest of this paper constructing a 
systems framework to consider the influencing factors that 
shape the future context for the enterprise and introduce 
those into the earlier described product development 
practice. We do this to raises awareness of the 
interdependencies within the context where organizations 
develop and deliver products and services. Exploration of 
uncertainties is essential for designers and managers within 
product development. Hence, they can focus their innovation 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

 
 
 
Figure 2. Market influencing systems of systems. 
 
and possibilities on managing development and resources by 
understanding each element and its dynamics within their 
working systems and how these address the circumstances 
and requirements that affect their projects.  
II. 
METHOD 
The data for the system identification was discovered and 
structured using Checkland’s Soft system model [5] [6]. The 
model introduces a 7-step process where steps 1-4 consist of 
identifying the existing system and developing a conceptual 
model of the system in an iterative process. Step 5 uses the 
conceptual model and learning to raise discussion of 
challenges in the existing system, which are desirable and 
feasible. Step 6 consists of developing a suggested to-be 
version acceptable for all the including world views. Step 7 
is to implement the suggested changes into the analyzed 
system. This final step is out of the scope of this article.  
During identifying the different subsystem agents, 
relations, interfaces, and boundaries, we used the acronym 
CATWOE to identify the reactive forces and their roots [10]. 
CATWOE stands for, Customers – identifies who gains or 
losses value in the process, Actors – identifies who 
implements the active element, Transformation – What the 
functions in the system transform, World view – Justification 
of the system’s existence, Owner – Who can establish 
changes to the system, and Environment – the external 
condition and constraints.  
Finally, a systemigram is a method to introduce the 
system story of how future strategic impact might benefit 
companies in their product development [11].  
 
III. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE SYSTEM 
We see the high-level system of systems consisting of 
five subsystems each as a market influencing factors. Each 
contributes to shaping the market conditions where the 
organization operates. Figure 2 shows the five subsystems 
named: 
Business 
model, 
Technology, 
Political 
and 
regulatory, Trends, and Funding and insurance. The 
dynamics in the system of systems are complex due to the 
high number of agents involved in the activities related to 
each subsystem. Therefore, each following introduction of 
the subsystems happens in isolation. It is worth noting that, 
in Figure 2, no human actors are included, but all mentioned 
elements only exist due to the development and influence of 
groups and individuals. 
A. Business model 
The business model is at the core of the system activity, 
and it is expected of the organization to know its capabilities, 
placement in the market, and product assortment [12]. The 
purpose of placing the business model as the core activity is 
that the company fully controls this element and can adjust 
accordingly to changes in other systems. Furthermore, a 
resilient business model can adapt to changes in the 
remainder of the system.  
B. Technological field  
The technological fields include existing internal 
technologies. Technology covers projects in all stages of 
development, from the conceptual ideas to the preparation 
for product launch as well as experimental technologies 
under research and development, existing patents, competing 
technologies, and planned concepts that already exist in the 
technological pipeline or road maps. 
External technologies are also included and can consist 
of existing competitive technologies and technologies under 
development in other companies.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

 
 
C. The political and regulatory system 
The political and regulatory system consists of sections 
and units working with and developing standards, laws, and 
regulations. The purpose of this system is to convert political 
decisions into tools when implemented, either reinforcing a 
specific systemic behavior or diminishing a systemic 
behavior. For example, the political decision in the EU 
parliament to ban throwaway plastic has led to an expansion 
in the market of single-use cutlery made of wood and 
bamboo  [13]. 
D. Trends 
Specific trends release opportunities for technology 
development. Therefore, trends are a vital part, of the 
dynamics, of shaping the existing and future markets. We 
identify elements in the Trend systems, including lifestyle 
trends, for example, equality, work-life balance, and Eco-
friendly. Other trends including working trends. An example 
where we have seen movement, especially during the Corona 
virus pandemic, was when the work environment accepted 
remote workdays. Such changes open new opportunities for 
technologies to emerge. Furthermore, we also see 
organizational trends, which are trends within the 
management of organizations. For example, new work 
methods influence the working environment and work 
behavior.  
E. Finance and insurance 
Innovation of technologies is highly dependent on the 
sources of finance supporting development and research. 
Funding sources can come from internal sources in the 
organization’s budget or external funding by various public 
and private funds or governmental support.  
Some studies indicate high support from governmental 
funds to support technological development to push society 
in the desired direction [14]. This is placing financial risk in 
institutions and constellations where profit is not the 
overarching purpose. As a result, funding is addressing 
research activities and specific technological flagship 
projects that might create a leap in technological 
development.  
Inventing and developing new technologies involves high 
risks as many uncertainties are related to new and untested 
technologies. Therefore, insurance of the development 
activities during the process is essential. Furthermore, 
insurance of the testing facilities and human interaction is 
essential and impacts the decisions of what technologies are 
tested and at what speed technologies can be carried forward. 
F. Outside of the system 
Outside of the drawn system of systems, we have the 
macro environment. The model does not include the macro 
environment because of its reduced effect on the direct 
subsystems identified earlier. Elements such as resources and 
materials would be relevant to discuss but are left out of the 
system mapping since resources and materials are 
subcomponents for multiple subsystems described earlier. 
Materials are expected to be a limited resource based on laws 
and regulations. Also, the tendencies of what the products 
will consist of are highly dependent on the technology and 
requirements of the product. Requirements towards material 
and resources need to follow the regulations of, for example, 
production, consumption, and recyclability, to name a few. 
Finally, when discussing materials and resources, companies 
conduct a cost-benefit analysis of optimizing the specific 
products for the conditions they will meet in their life cycle. 
This optimization also relates to insurance as the selection of 
materials relates to the requirements of robustness needed for 
the specific technology or product. These different factors 
are analyzed together with the company’s business model. 
Other researchers might argue that the market condition 
is a vital factor for the future approach. We have decided not 
to include market dynamics because the interdependencies 
between multiple factors will cover market behavior. For 
example, political implications can assign regulations in the 
form of taxation or subsidies that can adjust sales 
mechanisms and regulate the market of products and 
services. Such regulations can be combined with production 
mechanisms used to produce goods or services.  
From an enterprise perspective, the business model 
influences the shaping of market trends. Does the company 
decide for a fixed production output, or is production 
possible to adjust? What are the customer relations, and how 
do the additional factors impact the supply chain?  
Trends consists of direction and dynamic patterns within 
each systems of finance, politics, technology, and human 
behavior. Trends will, therefore, influence the possibilities 
and behavior of the market. The result is when reviewing the 
factors as a function of time, the five factors are all involved 
as shaping forces for the future market where each factor 
contributes, individually and as part of a whole, to the  
behavior of the future market and its dynamics.   
IV. 
THE DYNAMIC IN THE SYSTEM AND HOW THE 
SYSTEMS REACTS TO CHANGES 
Undoubtedly, when looking at the isolated system's 
elements, it is, in the short term, easy to say that each system 
is quite static. However, when investigating the influencing 
factors on the market over an extended period, it becomes 
apparent that shaping forces influence each other. 
Technology development happens according to the 
company’s business model and strategy. Technology 
development is largely related to the available financial 
resources, is influenced by the political landscape, and gets 
constrained 
by 
regulations 
and 
restrictions 
in 
the 
technological area. The technology takes its form from 
existing trends in the technology environment, developed 
through further specifications and requirements, both 
technical and non-technical. The existing reality also shows 
how new emerging technologies help shape the political 
landscape, which becomes evident if we consider what has 
happened within cyber security, education, and healthcare 
over the last century. Furthermore, when planned and 
distributed in certain ways, technologies can support the 
creation of new trends within society, considering what 
Apple has done. New technologies such as artificial 
intelligence also help the Funding and insurance market take 
risk assessments, decide where to invest, and provide 
investments and security. Finally, technology is also the 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

 
 
 
Figure 3. System suggestion for improved market exploration 
 
source for establishing new business models within 
organizations and companies. 
Politics and regulation are one source of new emerging 
technologies. Funding in development and limitations in 
legal targets for emission force companies to develop new 
business models. The political agenda and regulations can 
also set forward new market trends or trends in public. 
The company can also develop a new business model 
that inspires innovative technological development. A part of 
the business model could also be to investigate how to 
collect the right among the right source of funding to execute 
experimental 
development. 
Another 
business 
model 
interaction can focus on where politics and regulation might 
be obsolete within a particular technological field. The value 
behind such activity could aim at being the first mover and 
the first to exploit a new market condition. Being the first to 
get a license to produce or reuse a specific resource could 
lead to profit and gain the most significant market shares.  
Funding and insurance is a vital shaping force in the 
future market. Particular funding opens up new opportunities 
for companies to test concepts and ideas, lowering the 
individual risk of the company going bankrupt or out of 
business. Companies must still consider insurance as a vital 
part of new product development. If the company develops a 
“new to the world technology,” it is vital for the people 
involved, the environment, and the company itself to have  
security in place. The company's guidelines might support 
the development of a safe environment until it can be 
approved as a potential as a future technology. 
Trend will also shape future market conditions based on 
public 
trends, 
but 
trends 
within 
technology 
path 
dependencies might be challenging to break. If public trans 
goes into grass root movements, there is a possibility for a 
new emerging company providing new unseen technical 
solutions to the marketplace. However, it could also impact 
the political and regulatory system, especially since 
grassroots movements tend to collect inspiring people with 
much energy to push the system into creating their agenda. 
Due to the private trends, companies must adapt their 
business models to meet social trends and public awareness. 
Furthermore, in funding and insurance, there will probably 
be certain trends within specific areas, for example, green 
investments portfolios in pension funds, but these trends also 
shape the public perception of the company's reputation 
V. 
THE SUGGESTED NEW SYSTEM 
Figure 3 shows a systemigram of how the new optimized 
system brings knowledge of the new market condition into 
the development complexity. We find it helpful to place the 
five-factor system at the front end of innovation, where 
market tendencies are researched and explored. The system 
of a new future market condition should feed the innovation 
process and inspire new ideas based on potential 
opportunities in future markets. In addition, the system 
analysis can feed the top management with information from 
scenario creation, with uncertainties and potential risks to 
consider in planning the company’s future. Based on the 
explorative knowledge, the top management gets a better 
source of information on to base their prediction and 
decisions. Even though this process does not eliminate the 
uncertainty, it visualizes and brings forward the uncertainties 
of the future, and by visualizing future challenges, it allows 
the company to react and make decisions on how to deal 
with the uncertainties. Top management can decide to 
investigate uncertainties and quantify them as risks or 
opportunities. This investigation will undoubtedly spark 
inspiration toward innovation projects and new areas to 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

 
 
investigate in the future. As in the old system, top 
management will evaluate conceptual ideas, but now there is 
an integrated feedback loop that feeds the latest market-
testing and prototype-testing market conditions into the 
innovation process. The innovation process will catch any 
change or realization in the testing phase and work as input 
and constraints in the next iteration. Finally, uncertainties 
and risks identified in the future scenarios can be included in 
the product development process to be strengthened and 
prepared in the pipeline for the next module; this leads to 
more resilient/adaptable/flexible solutions or technologies to 
meet future conditions. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
The research goal set in this paper is to examine the 
holistic landscape of market-related systems that shape 
future conditions of products and systems and how 
information can feed portfolio design- and decision-making.  
Through a systems perspective of the organization 
interfaces with market conditions, and acknowledgment of 
the future market as dynamic, this paper identifies five 
factors: 
Business 
model, 
Technology, 
Political 
and 
regulatory, Trends, and Funding and insurance. The paper 
discusses how these factors are systems of systems and are 
interrelated and, through various relations, shape the 
conditions around future solutions. These relations are highly 
context depended, and every change to a system will 
influence the possibilities within the system. 
Therefore, we suggest using the factors as interrelated 
systems to analyze future market conditions. We found the 
system valuable in the front end of innovation within the 
innovation portfolio exploration and development process. 
Here, it informs the organization's innovation team and top 
management with helpful identification of future scenarios 
and addresses interrelations that might hold business 
potential that demands further investigation and innovation 
resources.   
Further studies from this field will be industry-related 
case studies to map the interrelation and identify the relations 
and actors that shape the dynamics. Furthermore, an analysis 
of how the interdependencies influence portfolio managers' 
decision-making. Finally, we will address what to consider 
what to consider when reviewing the system and analyzing 
future 
conditions 
when 
establishing 
and 
aligning 
requirements 
to 
address 
and 
solve 
societal- 
and 
environmental challenges?   
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. M. Smith et al., “Predicted Chance That Global 
Warming Will Temporarily Exceed 1.5 °C,” Geophys. 
Res. Lett., vol. 45, no. 21, pp. 11,895-11,903, Nov. 2018, 
doi: 10.1029/2018GL079362. 
[2] 
R. P. Barston, “The Paris agreement,” in Modern 
Diplomacy, 
2019, 
pp. 
492–505. 
doi: 
10.4324/9781351270090-20. 
[3] 
WBCSD and WRI, “Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) 
Accounting and Reporting Standard – Supplement to the 
GHG Protocol Corporate Accounting and Reporting 
Standard,” Greenhouse Gas Protocol. 2011. 
[4] 
R. G. Cooper and A. F. Sommer, “New-Product Portfolio 
Management with Agile,” Res. Manag., vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 
29–38, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1080/08956308.2020.1686291. 
[5] 
R. Cooper, A. Wootton, and M. Bruce, “Requirements 
capture as process of technology-market integration,” Int. 
J. Technol. Manag., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 582–596, 1999, 
doi: 10.1504/IJTM.1999.002737. 
[6] 
M. Martinsuo, T. Korhonen, and T. Laine, “Identifying, 
framing and managing uncertainties in project portfolios,” 
Int. J. Proj. Manag., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 732–746, 2014, 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijproman.2014.01.014. 
[7] 
G. C. O’Connor and M. P. Rice, “A Comprehensive 
Model 
of 
Uncertainty 
Associated 
with 
Radical 
Innovation,” J. Prod. Innov. Manag., vol. 30, no. SUPPL 
1, pp. 2–18, Dec. 2013, doi: 10.1111/jpim.12060. 
[8] 
P. 
Checkland 
and 
J. 
Poulter, 
“Soft 
Systems 
Methodology,” in Systems Approaches to Making 
Change: A Practical Guide, Springer, London, 2020, pp. 
201–253. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4471-7472-1_5. 
[9] 
P. Checkland, “Soft systems methodology: A thirty year 
retrospective,” Syst. Res. Behav. Sci., vol. 17, no. SUPPL., 
pp. 
11–58, 
2000, 
doi: 
10.1002/1099-
1743(200011)17:1+<::aid-sres374>3.0.co;2-o. 
[10] 
B. Bergvall-Kåreborn, A. Mirijamdotter, and A. Basden, 
“Basic principles of SSM modeling: An examination of 
CATWOE from a soft perspective,” Systemic Practice 
and Action Research, vol. 17, no. 2. pp. 55–73, 2004. doi: 
10.1023/B:SPAA.0000018903.18767.18. 
[11] 
L. B. Rainey and A. Tolk, Modeling and Simulation 
Support for System of Systems Engineering Applications. 
2015. doi: 10.1002/9781118501757. 
[12] 
D. J. Teece, “Business Models, Business Strategy and 
Innovation,” Long Range Plann., vol. 43, pp. 172–194, 
doi: 10.1016/j.lrp.2009.07.003. 
[13] 
European 
Parliament, 
“Parliament 
seals 
ban 
on 
throwaway plastics by 2021 | News | European 
Parliament,” Eur. Parliam., pp. 2019–2022, 2019, 
Accessed: 
Mar. 
21, 
2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-
room/20190321IPR32111/parliament-seals-ban-on-
throwaway-plastics-by-2021 
[14] 
M. Mazzucato, The entrepreneurial state : debunking 
public vs. private sector myths. S.l.: Penguin, 2018. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-037-7
ICONS 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems

