Privacy Issue in Federated IDMS for Cloud Computing 
 
Yeongkwun Kim 
School of Computer Sciences 
Western Illinois University 
Macomb IL, USA 
Y-Kim2@wiu.edu 
       
Injoo Kim 
Department of Computer and 
Information Science 
East-West University 
Chicago IL, USA 
injoo@eastwest.edu 
Charlie Y. Shim 
Department of Computer Science and 
Information Technology 
Kutztown University of Pennsylvania 
Kutztown PA, USA 
shim@kutztown.edu
Abstract— Federated cloud identity management systems 
(IDMS) enable users to use the same identity information to 
access all network services and resources in the trusted 
domain. Federated cloud IDMS has gained significant 
attention from the IT industry due to its support of cross 
organizational boundaries without creating additional user 
accounts. However, using the same identity information can 
disclose comprehensive user profile information, such as usage 
pattern, interests, or the behavior of the user. In this paper, we 
discuss possible security concerns, especially privacy issues, 
and ultimately propose a way to preserve privacy in the 
federated cloud IDMS by use of same single user identity 
information. 
Keywords - cloudcomputing; federal identity management; 
privacy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the rapid development of computer and network 
communication technologies, cloud computing has achieved 
increased popularity. The National Institute of Standards 
and Technology [1] defines cloud computing as “a model 
for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network 
access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources 
such as networks, servers, storage, applications, and 
services.” In order to access network services or resources, 
users are required to present their personal identities for the 
purposes of authentication. This subsequently results in 
cloud computing posing potential a significant challenge to 
the user’s information, security realization and privacy 
protection.  Thus, in response, industries have introduced 
IDMS as a means of managing the identity information of 
different users [2]. According to deployment architecture, 
IDMS can be classified into the isolated cloud IDMS, the 
centralized cloud IDMS, and the federated cloud IDMS [3]. 
The federated cloud IDMS enables users to use the same 
identity information to acquire access to all network 
services and resources within any trusted group of 
enterprises [4]. For the purpose of authentication, network 
users typically maintain a set of user identity credentials 
such as a username/password combination with every 
service provider. Unfortunately, the number of interactions 
service provider typically engage in with the user has grown 
beyond the point of ordinary users’ ability to memorize and 
recall the necessary access information. Thus, using the 
same identity credential to access network services or 
resources provided by any service provider has underscored 
the apparent ease and efficiency of the federated cloud 
IDMS and a possible solution is Single Sign-On (SSO). 
However, one of the main problems SSO poses is user 
privacy. User identity information can be shared with 
identity provider(s) and service providers, who can obtain 
the information from the identity provider. Thus, malicious 
identity and service provider can reveal users’ identity 
information and activities. In this paper, we discuss a 
possible solution to preserve users’ privacy in the federated 
cloud IDMS based on the SSO.                                                                     
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The SSO provides the ease of single authentication which 
subsequently allows users to become automatically logged 
into all other service providers within the same trust 
domain, thereby eliminating further manual interaction with 
the service provider. As such, SSO increases the overall 
usability of network. SSO system can be classified into 
pseudo-SSO and true SSO [5]. The pseudo-SSO component 
manages the service provider specific user authentication 
information. In the true SSO, the authentication service 
provider verifies the user. The authentication service 
provider must establish a trusted relationship with all 
service providers in order for the SSO to be achieved. 
Typically, the relationship may be established by a 
contractual arrangement. The federated cloud IDMS 
consists of a group of identity providers and service 
providers. Sharing user information and activities may result 
in further revealing by malicious providers and users have 
no control mechanism over disclosure of their identity 
information. Suriadi and et al. [6] have proposed a 
mechanism to provide user privacy by allowing users to 
enact some degree of control of their identity information. 
In the My Private Cloud project, Chadwick and et al. [7] 
proposed a trust based approach for federated access to 
cloud resources.  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

III. 
PROPOSED APPROACH 
In our proposed approach, we assume that 1) there is a 
group of trusted third parties that provide identity services to 
users and service providers; 2) there are two levels of 
trusted identity providers; 3) identity service providers and 
actual service providers have a trusted relationship with 
each other; 4) proper encryption mechanisms are already in 
place to ensure secure transmission among users, identity 
providers and service providers. Exchanging security 
information must be based on the trustworthiness of users, 
identity providers, and actual service providers.  In this 
paper, as a possible way of preserving users’ privacy, we 
consider a group of identity service providers in a two-level 
hierarchical architecture. The higher layer (level 2) identity 
providers act as a central identity server and generate a 
security token (e.g., random number or nickname) based on 
the user’s registration request. Only these providers know 
the user’s actual identity information. This proposal also 
includes lower layer (level 1) identity providers for purposes 
of actual authentication of the authorized users based on the 
token provided by the user. When the level 2 identity 
provider receives registration, it generates a token that 
corresponds to the user’s real identity, which in turn ensures 
the privacy of users. This token is then forwarded to the 
level 1 identity service provider to cooperate generating a 
certificate and security key(s) based on the token provided 
by the user. Thus, the level 1 identity provider does not have 
any information to identify the user’s real identity. And the 
certificate itself does not reveal the user’s real identification.  
The level 1 identity provider may send the generated 
certificate back to the level 2 identity provider that retains a 
record of the user’s real identification if needed, while 
sending the corresponding certificate and security key(s) to 
the user without storing any relevant information. The level 
2 identity providers should not be able to see the security 
key(s) and certificate. Furthermore, the level 1 identity 
provider only has information of the token, and the 
generated certificate and security key(s) based on the token. 
Government agencies need to be able to access both the 
level 2 and the level 1identity providers to obtain the user’s 
real identity. Users will not be at risk of having their 
personal information revealed, even if they log on/off to 
access network services and resources from any service 
provider.  Figure 1 illustrates the information flow in our 
proposed approach.      
                                                                                                
IV. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
When we subscribe the new cloud service, it is important 
for users to firstly complete a registration to accrue a new 
set of credentials. Unfortunately, users tend to generate 
weak and easy to remember passwords, which can in turn 
cause users to easily become targeted by potential security 
attacks. Thus, one possible solution is to create single sign-
on that allows users to authenticate just one time and then be 
automated for further authentication during the same login 
session. However, single sign-on caused another security 
issue, such as user privacy. This is because malicious 
identity service providers and actual service providers can 
cooperate to reveal and trace both the real identity and the 
activities of the user. Hence, in this paper, we proposed a 
way to mitigate the concerns regarding protecting the 
privacy of users in the federated cloud IDMS. We believe 
that the fruits of this work are evident, but remain in need of 
continued research.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   Figure 1. Information flow in privacy preserving SSO 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Vince Lo Faso, “A practical view of NIST’s cloud 
definition”, Global Knowledge. 
[2] M. S. Ferdous and R. Poet, “ A comparative analysis of 
identity management systems”,  Proceedings of the 
International conference on high performance computing and 
simulation (Madrid, Spain, July 2-6, 2012), pp 454-461. 
[3] U. Habiba, R. Masood, M. Shibli, M. Niazi, “Cloud identity 
management security issues and solution: a taxonomy”, 
Complex Adaptive Systems Modeling. Vol. 2, No. 5. 
[4] Y. Cao and L. Yang, “A survey of identity management 
technology”, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
IEEE 
International 
conference on information theory and information security 
(Beijing, China, December 17-19, 2010), pp 287-293.  
[5] A. Pashalidis and C. Mitchell, “A taxonomy of single sign-on 
systems”, Proceedings of the 8th Australasian conference on 
Information security and privacy (Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2003), pp 249-264. 
[6] S. Suriadi, E. Foo, and A. Josang, “A user-centric federated 
single sign-on system”, Proceedings on IFIP International 
conference on network and parallel computing workshops 
(Liaoning , China, September 18-21), pp 99-106.  
[7] D. Chadwick, M. Casenove, and K. Siu., “Security APIs for 
My Private Cloud – Granting access to anyone, from 
anywhere at any time”, Proceedings of the IEEE conference 
on cloud computing technology and science (Athens, Greece, 
2011), pp 792-798 
Generating certificate and  
  security key / token 
Registration 
Token 
Authentication 
Service request 
Identity set up 
by verification 
 and response 
Service/resource access 
granting 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-451-0
ICONS 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Systems (includes EMBEDDED 2016)

