Algorithm for Dealing with Complaints Data from the Use Phase
Is the application of the 8D report still contemporary and sufficient to deal with the predominant
complexity in present time?
Nadine Schlüter
University of Wuppertal
Product Safety and Quality
Engineering
Wuppertal, Germany
email: schluete@uni-
wuppertal.de
Marius Heinrichsmeyer
University of Wuppertal
Product Safety and Quality
Engineering
Wuppertal, Germany
email: heinrichsmeyer@uni-
wuppertal.de
Amirbabak Ansari
University of Wuppertal
Product Safety and Quality
Engineering
Wuppertal, Germany
email: Amirbabak.Ansari-hk@uni-
wuppertal.de
Abstract — The increasing complexity of products, services,
and organizations, as well as the resulting surge in failures,
demonstrate an increasing need for complaint management in
organizations. Nevertheless, this raises the question of whether
the possibilities of complaint management can even master the
prevailing complexity. In order to investigate this, the method
of the 8D report, which is highly regarded in the automotive
industry, was questioned concerning its limits. First, the
advantages
and
disadvantages
of
the
8D
report
were
researched and analyzed related to the current problem. It
turns out that the 8D report is no longer able to deal with the
extensive flow of information. For this reason, an approach in
form of an algorithm, which should make it possible to use
complaint information for failure cause search and solution
finding, is proposed in this article. It is a prototype that needs
to be systematically validated and evaluated in the industry.
With a total of four different phases, the algorithm should help
to make the complaint management up-to-date and, above all,
to improve the search for failure causes and the solution
finding. The evaluation of the approach based on specific
requirements for the algorithm showed that it is perfectly
capable of making the enormous flow of information in the
field of complaint management more usable. Nevertheless,
further
elaborations
are
needed
on
how
a
practical
implementation of the algorithm can be realized.
Keywords-
Complexity;
Systems;
Failure;
Algorithm;
Complaint; Solution.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Whether it is to increase the creation of new ideas for the
innovation process [7] or to prevent customer churn [10],
complaint management seems to be necessary, especially
today. One aspect of this, among other things, is the sensible
handling of complaints data from the use phase in order to
estimate the customer's opinion, for example [12]. However,
not only the measurement of customer satisfaction but also
the detection of weaknesses and potentials to improve the
company or the products can be realized with complaint
data. Above all, the focus is on the identification of failures
and the effective search for causes, since some failures and
their causes can only be identified through complaints in the
use phase [13]. It is important to use the data as an
opportunity to improve continually the consumer protection
and the image of the company. Despite the opportunity to
profitably use complaint data from the use phase, companies
often
underestimate
the
relevance
and
importance
of
generated information [6]. One of its reasons is, that
complaints are often seen as a nuisance of extra work,
especially in medium-sized companies [2]. In addition there
is a lack of complaints management in such companies [2].
A study from 2018 on data usage shows that data is often
collected, however despite its potential, remain unused and
"hoarded"
[9].
Although
this
study
refers
to
service
companies,
the
problem
can
still
be
assigned
to
manufacturing companies. In order to counteract this kind of
problem, some companies are focusing on methods such as
the 8D report, which through their structured procedure
should help to process complaints purposive and organize
the search for causes of failures more efficient. Nevertheless,
is this always the case? Kiem [4] rightly points out that the
use of the 8D report also requires a great effort in order to be
able to successfully handle complaints. Especially today,
where
product
and
production
systems
are
becoming
increasingly complex, the goal should be to minimize the
effort so that the resource “time” can be used as efficient as
possible. Accordingly, within the context of the problem, it
must be questioned whether current methods, in this case
explicitly the 8D report, can still meet this requirement or if
it makes sense to develop new approaches that reduce the
challenges for companies.
To find this out, Section 2 first gives an overview of the
method of the 8D report. Therefore, the procedure and the
advantages and disadvantages will be presented. In addition,
requirements for the algorithm are derived based on the
advantages and disadvantages. After that, Section 3 presents
all four phases of the failure cause searching and the solution
finding algorithm. For that, the theoretical concept will be
clarified and then explained on the basis of a practical
example. In Section 4, the algorithm will be evaluated in
terms of derived requirements in order to obtain a summary
of how the development of the algorithm should be
progressed in the future. We conclude the paper in Section 5.
II.
METHOD OF THE 8D REPORT
The method of the 8D report describes a problem-solving
method, which is divided into a total of eight disciplines
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

(8D) and used by companies for complaint processing. It
serves, as already mentioned, as a method of communication
between supplier and customer. A targeted problem-solving
can be achieved by the realization of a structured procedure
in eight steps and the use of tools such as Ishikawa diagram,
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) or Pareto
Analysis [1] and [5].
A. Procedure
Beginning with the "Team Building" (S1), people, who
should coordinate the problem-solving process, have to be
defined. This might be persons such as the production
section manager or the quality engineer, for example. This
team will then initiate the second step, the "Problem
Description" (S2). In this step, the relevant information has
to be collected to ensure a clear and understandable
acquisition of the problem. Available tools that can be used
for the description
are, among
other things,
Failure-
Collecting Cards, Histograms or Pareto Analysis. Just after
the description of the problem, the next step takes place,
"Immediate
Measures"
(S3).
This
step
minimizes
the
consequence of the problem, initially. Nevertheless, it should
be noted at this point that these immediate measures are
usually not sufficient to eliminate problems since the causes
of the failures are often still unknown. Tools in step three are
the
Inspection
Plan,
for
example.
Since,
as
already
mentioned, the cause of the failure is often still unknown, it
is necessary to carry out a "Cause Analysis" (S4) in the
fourth step. In the problem-solving team, causes of the
problem and their interactions can be identified using tools
such as Cause-and-Effect Analysis or the Correlation/Scatter
Plot. If the causes of the failure are known, it is necessary to
act. The "Definition of remedial Measures" (S5) should
eliminate them. Nevertheless, it should be noted that the
measures are only successful if tools such as the FMEA or
Process Capability Tests could also prove their effectiveness.
In addition, it should be noted that the measures would only
serve
their
purpose
if
they
are
"Anchored
in
the
Organization" (S6). For this purpose, the measures can be
incorporated in Training Plans, for example. Building on the
anchoring, the knowledge gained should be reflected. For
this reason, "Prevention Measures are taken" (S7) in the
seventh step. These measures are documented in Design
Guidelines, for example. Finally, with the 8D report, the
problem-solving process is completed (S8) [1] and [5].
B. Advantages and disadvantages
Based on the procedure, the first advantages and
disadvantages of the method can already be deduced. Above
all, the recording of the advantages and disadvantages should
help to derive requirements for the handling of complaint
data with the algorithm. Starting with the advantages of the
method, it can be stated that the 8D report contributes to the
problem-solving process through a structured and goal-
oriented approach. Above all, the high level of acceptance,
for example, in the automotive industry, highlights the
importance of the method in practice. By identifying causes,
deriving countermeasures, as well as documenting and
anchoring, the method aims to continually improve the
organization. The findings of problems that have already
occurred are translated into improvement measures and often
allow
an
increase
in
customer
satisfaction
through
compliance with the measures. Nevertheless, the method also
has weak points. A major disadvantage is, as already
mentioned, the high time and personnel implementation
effort. This can cause employees to consider the method as a
burden and to use it only sporadically. However, especially
nowadays it may also lead the employee to invest too much
time and resources to use the method and therefor, postpone
processing other tasks, such as performing process audits.
Another disadvantage of this method is that although it
provides a structured approach over eight-step sequence, it
has a lack of a standardized survey of the required complaint
data. This means that the method does not specify which
parameters are necessary in order to promote efficient and
goal-oriented problem solving. Companies often have their
own company-specific approach. For example, the second
step
"Problem
Description"
(S2)
is
carried
out
very
differently in different companies. This should be avoided in
order to simplify cross-company communication as well as
to facilitate efficient problem solving by setting uniform
parameters. This should save time, which can be used for
execution
of
other
activities.
In
addition
to
the
standardization, there is also a lack of automation of the
processing of complaint data from the use phase. Again, the
aspect of time is a crucial factor. The more automated the
processing of data, the fewer resources are needed. This
should also save time and above all costs. By way of
example, the automation could be realized with the aid of an
algorithm, which processes the complaint data. It turns out,
therefore, that the method of the 8D report holds above all a
potential for the time factor, which should be used [1] and
[5]. The advantages and disadvantages are summarized in
Table I.
TABLE I.
PROS AND CONS OF THE 8D REPORT METHOD [3] AND [14]
Pros
• The method is widely accepted in the automotive industry and
has been tried and tested in practice.
• Detected problems will be avoided in the future by means of
documentation.
• Insights gained flow into improvement measures.
• The method is based on a structured approach.
• Cross process and departmental thinking are promoted.
• It is an effective way to increase customer satisfaction.
Cons
• The method causes a high implementation effort, in terms of
both time and personnel.
• Hasty emergency measures could be problematic.
• The method does not foresee the use or coupling of a model to
master the currently prevalent complexity.
• Standardized collection of complaint data from the usage
phase is not specified.
• Automated processing (eg. by means of an algorithm) of the
collected complaint data from the usage data is not given.
C. Derivation of requirements
It was already mentioned at the beginning that based on
the
advantages
and
disadvantages
of
the
8D-Report,
requirements on the method for the handling of the
complaint data from the use phase are derived. On the one
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

hand, it has the purpose that based on the requirements, a
possibility for an algorithm can be developed, which takes
the not fulfilled aspects by the 8D report into account. On the
other hand, it offers a possibility of evaluating the proposed
algorithm. By evaluating the algorithm concerning the
fulfillment of the requirements, conclusions can be derived
regarding improvement potentials and weaknesses of the
algorithm. This points out, in turn, new research projects. By
deriving the requirements it is especially important that the
requirements for the algorithm are even more extensive than
the requirements for the method of the 8D report. Therefore,
all benefits of the 8D report are translated one-to-one as
“must-have requirements” for the algorithm. Furthermore,
“should requirements” are worked out by means of the
disadvantages. To summarize, the requirements for the
algorithm about dealing with complaint data are shown in
Table II.
TABLE II.
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE ALGORITHM
Must-have
(MhRe)
1. High acceptance and validation in practice
2. Documentation of already detected problems
3. Derivation of improvement measures based on knowledge
4. Structured approach
5. Promotion of process and departmental thinking
6. Increase customer satisfaction
Should
(SRe)
1. Time and personnel expenses should be as low as possible
2. Prevention of hasty emergency measures
3. Use of a model approach
4. Standardized collection of complaint data
5. Automated processing of the collected complaint data
The table illustrates that, among other things, the
algorithm must be a structured approach, which document
already recognized problems. In addition, the algorithm
should use a model approach and make the automated
processing of complaint information possible.
III.
ALGORITHM FOR HANDLING COMPLAINT DATA
Based on the above-mentioned must-have and should
requirements, it is now possible to develop a prototype for an
algorithm. It is first necessary to determine which steps the
algorithm should have to deal with complaint data. In
considering of SRe 4 "standardized collection of complaint
data", the algorithm must first be able to collect complaint
data from the usage in such a way that they can be used for
further processing. Furthermore, it must be able to extract
relevant information from the complaint data, because
further processing of all complaint data would not be
expedient. In the second and third step of the algorithm, it
should be possible to prioritize complaints and use the
relevant information from the first step in order to locate the
cause of the failure in the production system. Only by such a
step, a clear system limitation can be made, which should
reduce the additional expenses of solution finding. The final
step is to find a solution to the located cause of the failure.
Therefor, case-related solutions, depending on the cause of
the failure, are used to illustrate ways to deal with the failure
cause. In order to present the individual steps of the process
in a more transparent way, a prototype of the algorithm was
developed and tested on an application example from the
industry (Complaint of Shaft W0943). This prototype will be
explained in the following sections, first from a theoretical
point of view and then based on the industrial example.
A. Probing of complaint data
The first step is called probing of complaint data. It
should serve to filter relevant information from the amount
of complaint data. This is necessary to make the unstructured
volume of complaint data manageable for failure cause and
solution finding and thereby making complaint management
more attractive to employees.
To achieve this kind of probing process, the algorithm
must be able to distinguish between relevant and irrelevant
information. In order to put this process into practice, it was
programmed using Visual Basic for Applications (VBA).
Since the representation of the entire programming code
would be too extensive, the process is shown schematically
in Figure 1.
Figure 1.
Schematic representation for probing complaint data.
From Figure 1, it can be seen that the algorithm is able to
probe relevant complaint information for the application
example of the "Shaft W0943". This is made possible by
comparing the contents of the complaint text, for example,
the product name "Shaft W0943" or the information on
product requirements "Dimension Ø 24 ± 0.1 mm", with the
information from systems of the company, including, for
example, Enterprise-Resource-Planning (ERP) or Computer-
Aided Quality (CAQ). If the algorithm detects relevant
information within the complaint text, it probes them for
further processing. Since this process can be automated and
work on a wide variety of systems, a saving of personal and
time resources is already realized in the first step. However,
as there is still a lot of information to work with, it is
important to investigate which complaint has the highest
priority.
B. Prioritization of failure causes
In order to realize this, the previously probed relevant
complaint information is being used for prioritization,
thereby enabling the company to focus on the most relevant
complaints. Only in this way the resources of the company
can be used as effectively as possible for a targeted failure
cause searching and solution finding.
On Tuesday 03.07.2018 a delivery of 3000 pcs.
of the shaft W0943 was claimed due to a
dimensional failure in the casing bore. Since the
casing bore is not dimensionally correct, these
parts cannot be installed, so that the completion
of the end product cannot be realized. Please
check why the dimension Ø 24 ± 0. 1 mm
deviates by at least 0.3 mm, within 24 hours.
Complaint Information
Product: shaft W0943
Failure type: dimensional failure
Frequency: 3000 pcs.
Damage severity: no completion of the end
product
Product requirement: Dimension Ø 24 ± 0. 1
mm
Relevant Complaint Information
Probing
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

To apply the prioritization of complaints successfully in
practice, this step has also been programmed in VBA. Once
again, a representation of the entire programming code is too
extensive so that only a schematic representation of the
prioritization step is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2.
Schematic representation of the prioritization of complaints.
As shown in Figure 2, prioritization is based on different
dimensions. The total of nine prioritization dimensions,
including, for example, the type of failure or the frequency of
the failure, are first calculated by the algorithm and
subsequently evaluated. For example, in the case of the
"Shaft
W0943",
the
algorithm
uses
the
failure
type
"dimensional failure" or the frequency "3000 pcs." and
bundles all this information into a priority value. In this way
it can be deduced which complaint is to be classified as very
critical and which as less critical. Based on the most critical
complaint,
the
algorithm
initiates
the
third
step,
the
localization of the cause of the failure.
C. Localization of failure causes
So that localization of causes of failure within a
production system is even possible, it is necessary to connect
the unfulfilled requirement (the failure) of the complaint with
the production system. For the example of "Shaft W0943"
this means that the algorithm has to find out at which point
of the production system the requirement "dimension Ø 24 ±
0.1 mm" was not fulfilled. To make the complexity of the
product system more manageable, it is recommended to use
a model. This example uses the approach of enhanced
Demand Compliant Design (eDeCoDe) by [8] and [15]. The
background to the choice of eDeCoDe is that it can map
socio-technical systems through a minimal number of views
(requirements,
persons,
components,
processes,
and
functions). On the other hand, it is able to record correlations
and thus make the traceability of responsibilities possible.
This is exemplified in Figure 3.
Figure 3.
Schematic representation of the localization of failure causes.
Figure 3 shows the schematic process of locating the
cause of the fault. This was also programmed with the help
of VBA and checked based on the "Shaft W0943" example.
The figure shows that the "Shaft W0943" is assigned to the
corresponding
manufacturing
system.
This
is
possible
because the algorithm checks in which process step the
requirement "Dimension Ø 24 ± 0.1 mm" theoretically
should have been implemented. In this example, the
algorithm explicitly recognized the „turning process“, which
should realize the requirement "Dimension Ø 24 ± 0.1 mm".
Because the requirement has not been fulfilled, the algorithm
concludes that a cause of the failure is to be suspected within
the "turning process". This achieves a decisive system
limitation and leads to the fact that the cause of the fault is
not searched within the systems in which it cannot occur.
Thus, with the help of the third step, resource saving by
focusing can be realized.
Although the algorithm is able to locate the cause of the
failure, it cannot yet determine which exact cause led to the
complaint.
D. Solution finding for failure causes
To determine the exact cause, it must be able to evaluate
the system in which the cause of the fault was located. In the
case of the example "Shaft W0943" this was the "turning
process" which was recognized in the "manufacturing
system" (Figure 4).
Figure 4.
Schematic representation of complex visualization of the
manufacturing subsystem
Product: Shaft W0943
Type of failure: Dimensional failure
Frequency: 3000 pcs.
…etc.
R2: Relevant Complaint Information
Product: Spindle 1031
Type of failure: Optical failure
Frequency: 200 pcs.
…etc.
R3: Relevant Complaint Information
Product: bushing 0307
Type of failure: Packaging failure
Frequency: 1700 pcs.
…etc.
R1: Relevant Complaint Information
R1: Product: bushing 0307
Priority value: 3.1416
R2: Product: Shaft W0943
Priority value: 10.4256
R3: Product: Spindle 1031
Priority value: 6.1167
Prioritized Complaint Information
Prioritisation
Product: shaft W0943
Product requirement:
Dimension Ø 24 ± 0. 1 mm
Relevant Complaint Information
manufacturing system
1. purchase
2. turning
3. wash
4. grinding
5. wash
6. shipment
machine CNC13
turningfunction
Realize Dimension
Ø 24 ± 0. 1 mm
operator
Localization
Subsystem: Production
P1 turning
P1.1 grab
P1.2 positioning
P1.3 rotate
P1.4 deburring
P1.5 cut
Pe1 operator
Pe2 head of manufacturing
C1 machine CNC13
F1 turningfunction
E1 delay of material
E2 temperature
E3 oscillations
E4 humidity
E5 wind
R1 requirements for the turning process
R1.1 marking OK
R1.2 diameter OK
R1.3 dimensions OK
R1.4 roundness OK
R1.5 chamfer OK
R1.6 angle OK
R1.7 concentricity OK
R1.8 radii OK
R1.9 roughness OK
R1.10 knurl OK
I1 material
I2 order
I3 energy
I4 tools
I5 machine settings
I6 oil
O1 raw parts accordning to specification
O2 waste products (splinter)
O3 contaminated oil
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

In order to be able to clearly assign a cause to the
occurrence of the failure, it is necessary to analyze the
interrelations
of
the
unfulfilled
requirement
from
the
complaint,
in
this
case,
the
imperfect
dimensional
compliance of the “diameter Ø 24 ± 0.1 mm”. Since a
manual evaluation would result in an extra effort, it is
recommended to resort to a software solution, which makes
the evaluation of causal chain relationships transparent and
can be coupled with the eDeCoDe model. For example, the
software
LOOMEO
from
the
company
REDPOINT.TESION can be used for this purpose [11]. It
allows systems to map over self-defined domains as well as
the creation of elements and their interrelationships using
matrices. In particular, the so-called "focus function" of the
software is a decisive advantage if the limited subsystems are
to be examined regarding isolated elements. Using the "focus
function" for the requirement "diameter i.O", which was
declared unfulfilled in the context of the complaint, the
interrelations to other elements and thus possible causes of
failures are clearly highlighted.
Figure 5.
Schematic representation of the application of the "Focus
Function" to the complex representation of the Subsystem Manufacturing
Figure 5 illustrates that by focusing on the unfulfilled
requirement, it is possible to achieve a clear assignment of
causes of failures through the relations. Thus, for example,
the “operator” or the “machine CNC13” is a possible cause
of failure, which resulted in the non-fulfillment of the
diameter and thus the complaint. This presentation provides
a basis for the desired solution finding. If the machine is
actually the reason for the failure, constructive measures,
such as the conversion or adaptation of the device, are
necessary. If the operator is identified as the cause of the
failure, organizational measures, such as training, are likely
to be the solution. However, these approaches must be
defined case-related and more specifically depending on the
cause of the failure. The knowledge that results from the
solution-finding must then be returned to the production
system and the company to avoid consequential failure. All
these steps should be bundled in course of the algorithm. In
order to investigate the meaningfulness of the algorithm, it is
now evaluated based on the previously defined requirements.
IV.
VALIDATION OF THE ALGORITHM
With the presentation of the algorithm, an evaluation can
now
be
carried
out
based
on
the
previously
stated
requirements.
These
will
be
subsequently
evaluated
regarding to their degree of fulfillment and the resulting
conclusions used for further research projects in the outlook.
In order to be able to assess the fulfillment of the
requirements, it is first necessary to define an assessment
scheme.
For
this
purpose,
three
classifications
are
considered. The symbol "●" describes requirements that have
been fully met, "◑" requirements that were met only to a
certain percentage and "○" requirements that could not be
met. Once again, it should be noted that the both must-have
requirements "MhRe 1: High acceptance and valid in
practice" and "MhRe 6: Increase customer satisfaction" can
only be validated by validation in practice, thus evaluating
this
is now not possible. Based
on this rating, the
requirements could be evaluated as follows:
A. Must-have requirements (MhRe):
◑ = MhRe 2: Documentation of already detected
problems. As the knowledge gained through the feedback
from production leads to continuous improvement, problems
are "documented" by the already derived and implemented
improvement measures. However, a separate recording by
means of a document is not considered, as a result of which
the requirements can only be met in part.
● = MhRe 3: Derivation of improvement measures based
on knowledge. Based on the effective failure cause search,
targeted improvement measures can be carried out. This
means that the findings of the model evaluation are included
in the derivation.
●
= MhRe 4: Structured procedure. The structure
specification by the eDeCoDe approach and the application
of an automated four-step processing method by means of an
algorithm
contribute
to
a
structured
procedure.
The
identification of the cause of the failure using LOOMEO also
follows a given structure.
● = MhRe 5: Promotion of process and departmental
thinking. The cross process and departmental thinking are
sharpened in the presentation and evaluation of individual
subsystems of the production system.
B. Should requirements (SRe):
● = SRe 1: Time and personnel expenses should be as
low as possible. Automated data sounding, troubleshooting
and solution finding using algorithms help to reduce the time
and effort required. Instead of a team from different
disciplines, which typically performs the problem-solving
process, it is only an employee required, who processes the
complaint, and a person, who is responsible for the limited
subsystem.
◑ = SRe 2: Prevention of hasty emergency measures. Due
to the effectiveness of the algorithm, the causes of failure can
be assigned much more specifically and also faster to a
subsystem. According to that, the need of performing of
hasty emergency measures should be greatly minimized.
P1 turning
P1.1 grab
P1.2 positioning
P1.3 rotate
P1.4 deburring
P1.5 cut
Pe1 operator
Pe2 head of manufacturing
C1 machine CNC13
F1 turningfunction
E1 delay of material
E2 temperature
E3 oscillations
E4 humidity
E5 wind
R1 requirements for the turning process
R1.1 marking OK
R1.3 dimensions OK
R1.4 roundness OK
R1.5 chamfer OK
R1.6 angle OK
R1.7 concentricity OK
R1.8 radii OK
R1.9 roughness OK
R1.10 knurl OK
I1 material
I2 order
I3 energy
I4 tools
I5 machine settings
I6 oil
O1 raw parts accordning to specification
O2 waste products (splinter)
O3 contaminated oil
2
R1.2 diameter OK
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

Nevertheless, it cannot be completely proved, so that this
requirement can only be partly met.
● = SRe 3: Use of a model approach. Using eDeCoDe,
both the product system and the production system can be
represented with a minimal number of system views.
● = SRe 4: Standardized collection of complaint data. By
using a data-screening filter, information about the product is
collected
in
a
standardized
manner.
Thus,
relevant
information is filtered and provided uniformly.
● = SRe 5: Automated processing of the complaint data
collected. Based on the presented four steps, which together
shall form the automated algorithm, this requirement can be
fulfilled completely.
Based
on
the
symbols,
it
can
be
seen
that
all
requirements, with the exception of "Documentation of
already detected problems" and "Avoiding hasty emergency
measures", could be assessed as completely fulfilled.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
Based
on
the
previous
validation
regarding
the
fulfillment
of the requirements of the algorithm,
the
following conclusions can be made. On the one hand, it
turned out that the method of the 8D report was able to
establish itself very strongly in practice. Nevertheless, it
could be shown that the disadvantages of the 8D report,
especially in these days, should not be underestimated. This
allows the statement that it makes sense to develop new
approaches about dealing with complaint data from the usage
phase. On the other hand, this should be more efficient in
terms of personnel and time. In addition, a model approach
should be used to minimize complexity. An automated
evaluation
should
also
have
strived.
Based
on
these
requirements,
the
article
developed
an
algorithm
that
incorporates
the
benefits
of
the
8D
report
while
compensating for its disadvantages. The application of the
eDeCoDe approach creates an efficient and, above all, goal-
oriented process to
localize causes of failure in the
production process and to reduce or avoid them by carrying
the solution out. By using the knowledge regarding the cause
of the failure, potential for improvement can be identified
and used.
It turns out in summary as an outlook that it makes sense
to expand and further develop the presented algorithm within
further
research
projects
and
carry
out
a
systematic
validation and evaluation in different companies in order to
highlight the potential of the algorithm and to highlight weak
points. In addition, it makes sense to investigate whether the
algorithm can also be applied to complaints social networks
and to measure the actual savings in terms of personnel and
time-related implementation efforts and draw conclusions on
how to save costs.
To achieve this, it applies to work out a uniform structure
for the data screening filter from the survey and to prepare a
procedure, which according to it, the prioritization of the
complaints and finally the search for the causes of the failure
are carried out. Furthermore, it makes sense to develop a
method kit that provides solutions depending on the case-
related cause of the failure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank the German Research Foundation
(DFG) for the support of the FusLa-Projekt [FKZ: SCHL
2225/1-1].
REFERENCES
[1] M. A. Barsalou "The Quality Improvement Field Guide," vol. 1,
CRC Press, Portland, 2015.
[2] M. Brückner "Complaint Management," vol. 2, Redline
Wirtschaft, Heidelberg, 2011.
[3] P. Gorecki and P. Pautsch "Practical Book Lean Management,"
vol. 2, Hanser, München, 2014.
[4] R. Kiem "Quality 4.0," vol. 1, Hanser, München, 2016.
[5] V. Kumar "Total Quality Management," vol. 1, LuLu,
Morrisville, North Carolina, 2013.
[6] V. Leiner "Complaint Management," vol. 1, Bachelor + Master
Publishing, Hamburg, 2014.
[7]
S.
Nasir
"Customer
Retention
Strategies
and
Customer
Loyalty,"
in
Advertising
and
Branding,
vol.
3
Hershey,
Pennsylvania IGI Global, 2017.
[8] J.-P. G. Nicklas "Approach to Model-Based Requirements
Management for Business Networks," vol. 1, Shaker, Aachen, 2016.
[9] F. Optehostert "Data Collecting is no longer enough; Data
Algorithm as a Success Factor for Service Companies," DGQ QZ
the magazine for quality management and quality assurance, vol.
63, pp. 36–38, 2018.
[10]
D.
Peppers
and
M.
Rogers
"Managing
Customer
Relationships," vol. 1, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, N.J., 2004.
[11] REDPOINT.TESEON "LOOMEO," [Online]. Available from:
https://redpoint.teseon.com/, 2019 [retrieved March, 2019].
[12] J. Rodríguez Pérez "Handbook of Investigation and effective
CAPA Systems," vol. 2, ASQ, Milwaukee, WI, 2016.
[13] J. Stark "Product Lifecycle Management," vol. 3, Springer,
Cham, 2016.
[14] G. Ullmann "Holistic Production Systems: IPH - Method
Collection,"
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.iph-
hannover.de/_media/files/downloads/IPH_Lean_Methodensammlu
ng.pdf, 2009 [retrieved January, 2019].
[15] P. Winzer "Generic Systems Engineering," vol. 2. Auflage,
Springer Vieweg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-696-5
ICONS 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems

