A Capability Based Approach for Warship Design 
 
 
Paola Gualeni 
DITEN - UNIGE 
Genoa, Italy 
email: paola.gualeni@unige.it 
Paola Bonofiglio 
Fincantieri S.p.A. 
Genoa, Italy 
email: paola.bonofiglio@fincantieri.it 
 
Lucio Tirone 
Fincantieri S.p.A. 
Genoa, Italy 
email: lucio.tirone@fincantieri.it 
Maria Giovanna Scognamiglio 
Fincantieri S.p.A. 
Genoa, Italy 
email: maria.scognamiglio@fincantieri.it 
 
 
Abstract— Traditional Naval Warship design is based on a 
rather sharp separation between two domains: the Platform and 
the Combat System. Naval engineers are primarily concerned 
with the Platform, with tight interaction with other disciplines 
such as mechanical and electrical engineers. On the other hand, 
Combat Systems engineers are more concerned with the 
technological component of the Warship, working in tight 
coordination with electronic, software or telecommunications 
engineers. The resulting system (the Warship) is often closer to 
a Federation of Systems, with more or less controlled 
interactions among each other, rather than to a truly integrated 
system. The focus of this paper is to present a novel approach to 
the design of a Warship that avoids the a-priori distinction 
between Platform and Combat System, but considers the 
Warship as a single, coherent whole. Thus, the approach shifts 
the focus on the level of the whole warship’s capabilities, and its 
related measures of effectiveness and performance, rather than 
on its components and subsystems. The aim of such effort is to 
increase the mutual awareness of the problems specific of each 
of its components among the entire range of teams called to 
design, develop, produce, integrate, test and maintain a system 
as complex as a modern Warship. 
Keywords-capabilities; systems engineering; naval; ship 
design. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Naval ships are increasingly large, complex and 
technologically advanced systems, suggesting a review of the 
traditional ship design procedure to better tackle with the 
interdependent ship aspects and to rationally identify the ship 
final configuration, able to meet operational requirements 
within technical an programmatic constraints. 
Along the decades, interesting discussions and proposals 
about new ship design philosophy have been launched [1][2], 
mainly exemplified with applications in the naval ships’ fields 
[3]. In particular, the Systems Engineering approach is 
recognized as a powerful guide to rationally and successfully 
develop complex systems [4][5][6]. 
In the perspective to capture and manage the interactions 
between the vessel (the ship meant as a platform) and the 
different installed systems on board (the so called “payload”), 
from multiple points of view and in a concurrent 
accomplishment, Systems Engineering appears to offer an 
effective support, based on a system thinking paradigm rather 
than on a reductionist and mechanistic view. In fact, it enables 
to overcome the traditional approach limitations and to focus, 
since the early design phase, on the naval ship functions rather 
than on the several singular components the ship is made of.  
This radical change of mindset implies that ship 
performance is to be pursued and observed as an emergent 
property i.e., as arising from the collaborative functioning of 
different parts of a system, but not expressed by any of the 
individual items alone. Typical examples are ant colonies, a 
flock of birds, the bees hive and, of course, our brain. In other 
words, emergent properties manifest themselves as the result 
of various system components working together, not as a 
property of any individual component. 
The term “emergent” is used within systems theory, 
biology, chemistry, ecology, science, philosophy. Since 
emergent properties are accessible and evident at higher levels 
of analysis, only examining individual parts of the system will 
prevent one from seeing them.  
The necessity of a comprehensive ship performance 
prediction regarding the ship system as a whole, characterized 
by significant complexity, motivates the exploitation of 
“tools” like the “measurements of performance” and the 
“measurement of effectiveness”, suggested by Systems 
Engineering.  
As a starting point, ship capabilities need to be identified 
and discussed. In the perspective of what stated above, they 
may represent, in fact, the Warship emergent properties to 
pursue as design goals, and required to comply in turn with 
the customer expectations. 
The paper is structured as follows: 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

 Section I: the present Introduction 
 Section II: a description of the Capability approach 
 Section III: a detailed description of the taxonomy of 
Capabilities 
 Section IV: a preliminary analysis of Capability 
interdependencies 
 Section V: the Conclusions 
II. THE CAPABILITY BASED APPROACH 
The INCOSE Systems Engineering Handbook [7] defines 
a Capability as “an expression of a system […] ability to 
achieve a specific objective under stated conditions”. It is 
rather common in Warship specifications to find descriptions 
of the abilities of the “Combat System” to achieve specific 
objectives, such as “Command and Control”, “Combat” or 
“Surveillance” [8][9]. Very few references can be found 
[10][11] to the basic abilities of the Warship itself, in its 
quality of “ship” before anything else, such as the ability to 
float on the surface of the sea, or the ability to remain stable 
in an upright position in order to allow any activities to be 
carried onboard. 
Section III of this paper describes an innovative effort, to 
further deepen the topic and contribute to the relevant naval 
literature, aimed at the definition of the Warship Capabilities 
in order to provide a coherent framework for the 
categorization of the key performance requirements of the 
Warship. This is achieved by reducing the complexity of the 
Warship through a decomposition of the problem (the 
Capabilities that the Warship has to exhibit), rather than of the 
solution (the systems and subsystems that will be part of the 
Warship). Nevertheless in the following the Warship 
Capabilities are discussed in their details in order to start 
paving the link with the solution domain.   
 
III. DEFINITION OF THE WARSHIP CAPABILITIES 
A possible categorization of the capabilities related to a 
Warship should start with the obvious recognition that the 
Warship itself is a ship in its own right, and even before, that 
it is a platform floating on the sea, used by and interacting with 
human operators.  
The basic Capabilities for any sea faring “platform” are 
shown in Figure 1 and can be recognized as: 
 Buoyancy: the platform has to float on the waters, 
carrying its load 
 Stability: it has to avoid capsizing 
 Structural Strength: it has to avoid falling apart 
Following the analysis, any such platform needs to be 
operated by humans, and will interact with them, with man 
made infrastructures, and with the environment, and so needs 
the following Capabilities: 
 Safety: no humans, or their properties, or the 
environment, should be harmed 
 Security: it should not be tampered with malicious 
intent  
The next step is to consider the Capabilities that are 
necessary to make use of such platform as a “ship”: 
 Power Generation: either by oars, sails, or engine and 
propeller, the platform needs to sail  
 Controllability: the operators need to control its 
heading and speed 
 Navigation: the operators need to know where it is 
located on the earth surface, and where they intend it 
to sail 
The type of ship we are interested in is a modern platform, 
with automated functions, and technology aiding the human 
operators in all their tasks, and this brings to the next required 
Capabilities: 
 Command and Control: the computer based 
automation of all operations performed through the 
ship’s equipment  
 Communications: the means to exchange voice, data, 
and other types of information, among the on board 
persons, and with the outside world 
Finally, we have to consider the ultimate Capabilities that 
make our ship a Warship, able to carry out its intended 
missions: 
 Surveillance: the Capability to discover and monitor 
any potential threats 
 Combat: the Capability to neutralize those threats 
 
The following Figure 1 shows a representation of all the 
identified Warship Capabilities, which are described one by 
one in the next sections: 
 
Figure 1.  Warship Capabilities. 
A. Buoyancy 
Buoyancy is the Warship’s Capability to float above the 
sea surface. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The Buoyancy Capability. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

As evidenced in Figure 2, the Buoyancy can be further 
divided in “base buoyancy” and “reserve of buoyancy” as 
discussed in the following. A comprehensive watertight hull 
volume is to be guaranteed, normally able to provide “base 
buoyancy”, exceptionally able to provide “reserve of 
buoyancy” in case it is needed.  
Moreover the waterline that is identified by the ship 
floating position should be suitable for operations i.e., the ship 
shall be upright and even keel (a small trim by stern can be 
accepted). 
 
1) Base buoyancy 
The ship capability to float is enabled by the buoyancy 
force (Archimedes’s law) experienced by the ship in relation 
with the weight of the water that the immersed hull volume 
displaces. The hull geometry is to be selected is such a way 
that the buoyancy force (directed upward) balances the   total 
amount of weights force (directed downward) identified by 
the total amount of weights the ship is made up of.  
 
2) Buoyancy reserve 
It might happen however that during the ship operational 
life, some further accidental situations require an additional 
buoyancy as a reserve (i.e., the above mentioned hull water-
tightness is to be guaranteed also in case of a possible draft 
increment). 
 
3) Even keel waterline buoyancy 
The floating position of the ship cannot be whatever. The 
operational profile of the ship requires suitable condition. This 
state can be achieved paying particular attention to the 
position of the centre of gravity of the ship (application point 
of the total weight force) and of the centre of the immersed 
volume (application point of the buoyancy force). Their 
relative position in terms of longitudinal coordinate x and 
transverse coordinate y generate the equilibrium waterline 
features. 
B. Stability 
Stability is the Warship’s capability to resist to inclining 
actions, and a further characterization is given in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  The Stability Capability. 
The capability of the ship to resist and respond to inclining 
actions (e.g., wind and waves action, shift of weights, turning 
at speed, …) is to be guaranteed both in the intact and in the 
damaged condition. In the latter case often it is referred to as 
residual stability. 
In case large heel angles are reached, some (necessary) 
ship openings might be immersed; this is going to further 
jeopardize the ship stability performance due to the possible 
ingress of water and due attention is to be given to the issue. 
(Actually, the accidental ingress of water can also jeopardize 
the buoyancy performance). 
In the specific case of damage, the capability to pump out 
the flooding water might be requested as a recovery measure, 
to improve both residual buoyancy and residual stability. 
 
1) Intact Stability 
The capability of the ship to react to inclining actions and 
to return to the upright position is given by the righting 
moment. A satisfactory performance of ship stability is 
defined acting on the ship geometry and on the vertical 
position of the center of gravity.  
 
2) Damaged stability 
Also in case of a damaged ship, some inclining moments 
can act on the ship and further worsen the emergency 
situation. In this case, the capability of the ship to react to the 
inclining actions, i.e., the righting moment, is influenced by 
the ship flooded condition. 
 
3) Down flooding 
For the operational activity of the ships, some openings are 
necessary. They represent a critical point both for the intact 
stability and the damage stability.  
An opening can be  
- 
Unprotected 
- 
Protected by weathertight closure 
- 
Protected by watertight closure 
In case of the intact ship, an opening can be submerged by 
the waterline due to a large heel angle. In this case, to 
eliminate the critical situation, it is enough to provide a 
weathertight closure (if possible). 
In case of ship in damaged condition, the final waterline 
after a damage can reach an opening. In this case to eliminate 
the critical situation, it is necessary to provide a watertight 
closure (if possible). 
 
4) Residual Stability 
Notwithstanding a damage, a ship is requested to 
guarantee a residual buoyancy and a residual stability also in 
degraded conditions. 
A specific attention is to be paid to the internal subdivision 
in order to manage the flooding extent and to provide the 
sufficient residual stability.  
Different levels of residual capability can be requested, in 
order to resist a sufficient amount of time to wait for 
emergency support or to sail back home toward protected 
water or to maintain an operational capability.  
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

5) Water removal management 
The water ingress due to the damage compromises the 
residual buoyancy capability and can be a serious threat for 
the residual stability, especially in case of large free surfaces. 
To recover from this situation, specific systems (e.g., high 
capacity bilge pumps) and operational measures can be 
applied, to guarantee the water amount removal in reasonably 
short time. 
Equalization systems can be also provided in order to 
reduce and balance the list angle after damage. 
 
C. Structural Strength 
Structural Strength is the capability to ensure the vessels 
structural integrity in normal and damaged conditions, as 
evidenced in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  The Structural Strength Capability. 
The ship hull and superstructures are usually built in steel 
and/or aluminum alloy and/or composite materials. Structure 
scantlings and details are to be designed in such a way that 
enough strength is guaranteed against local and global loads. 
For ships with significant length, in fact, the hull girder is 
characterized by global stresses that are to be properly 
addressed in such a way that the ship shall not suffer structural 
damage during her operational life in waves. At the same time, 
local stresses (e.g., due the presence of a crane in deck or a 
fluid head action on a bulkhead) are to be considered. 
As already mentioned, the ship is supposed not to suffer a 
structural damage in operating condition, even in extremely 
rough seas; nevertheless an accidental damage (e.g., collision, 
grounding) might happen and the ship can be requested to 
guarantee a residual structural strength in the damaged 
conditions. 
 
1) Intact Structural Strength 
The ship structure (basically made of shell plates, girders 
and stiffeners) in operational condition is under the effect of 
local and global loads. The structure scantling are defined in 
relation with regulation requirements, which are defined with 
refence to safety margins, in order to avoid structural collapse 
and permanent deformation. Possible corrosion and fatigue 
effects on structures are also taken into account. 
 
2) Damaged Structural Strength 
Even though the ship is designed in order not to suffer 
structural damage, it may happen that for accidental events 
like collisions, grounding, fire, hits, the structure is damaged. 
A residual capability can be requested, especially as far as 
residual longitudinal strength is concerned, in order to resist a 
sufficient amount of time for emergency support or to sail in 
protected water or to maintain an operational capability.  
 
3) Global Structural Strength 
The ship girder is under the stress created by the weight 
distribution along the ship length, the buoyancy given by the 
submerged watertight hull, in calm water and in waves. 
This is going to create, along the ship,  shear forces and  
bending moment that are to be tackled with by  the whole ship 
seen as a girder. In the evaluation of the ship structures able to 
guarantee the longitudinal strength, only longitudinal 
elements are to be considered.   
 
4) Local  Structural Strength 
Beside the scantlings of ship structures in charge of 
sustaining the longitudinal strength, also assessment at local 
level are to be carried out (e.g., the scantling of transverse 
bulkheads), with specific reference to local loads.  
 
D. Controllability 
Controllability is the capability to control the vessels 
speed and heading in order to accomplish a defined objective, 
as described in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The Controllability Capability. 
The ship is assumed able to sail at the desired speed, with 
the capability to arrange the suitable route, even in heavy 
adverse environmental conditions.  
 
1) Propulsion 
The capability to use the generated power to produce 
thrust and therefore ship speed is usually obtained by means 
of a propulsion system like shaft lines with propellers. Other 
possible propulsion devices, not very much common for naval 
ships applications actually, are pump-jets, Voith-Schneider 
systems, azipods. 
 
 
2) Steering 
In the traditional solution where shaft lines and propellers 
are used, the ship maneuvering is guaranteed by rudders 
controlled by steering systems, in the stern part of the ship. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

The other above mentioned propulsion systems are 
intrinsically provided with a steering devices. 
The proper maneuvering of ships in restricted water can be 
supplemented also by bow and stern thrusters placed in the 
symmetry plan of the ship. 
 
 
E. Power Generation 
Power Generation is capability to generate power for the 
entire vessel including all organic equipment, and it can be 
further discussed as represented in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  The Power Generation Capability. 
A sufficient amount of power generation on board is to be 
guaranteed in order to provide the ship propulsion and to 
provide support for all the other possible  electrical load 
requests onboard. 
In naval ships the distribution of power generation systems 
onboard is requested to be adequate to provide energy to the 
ship also in a residual mode in degraded condition after a 
damage. Also in this case (see residual buoyancy, stability, 
structural strength) different levels of residual power 
generation can be requested after the damage, in relation with 
the capability to resist waiting for emergency support, to sail 
in protected waters, to  express a residual operational 
capability. 
 
 
1) Propulsion Power Generation 
The typical power generation system on board navy ships 
in made of diesel engines and gas turbines with several 
possible combinations. These are properly able to provide 
power for propulsion in relation with the power distribution 
systems described later.  In some cases also electrical engines 
are used for the propulsion and the power supply is guaranteed 
by the electrical power distribution system, properly powered. 
 
 
2) Propulsion Power Distribution 
In general, the propulsion power distribution is guaranteed 
by a gear box/boxes (more or less complex in relation with the 
number and the typology of the power generator units) and 
shaft lines, provided with appropriate joints and bearings.   
 
3) Equipment Power Generation 
Shipboard power is generated using  prime movers and an 
alternators working together. Typically diesel generators are 
used on board in the sufficient number to provide the 
necessary power, enough flexibly and redundancy. 
In some cases the alternators are able to derive power from 
the main propulsion shaft lines of the ship. 
 
4) Electrical Power Distribution 
The electrical power distribution is to be guaranteed with 
the proper technical characteristic (e.g., voltage and 
frequency)  in relation with the final electrical users. 
Beside the power generation units, the propulsion power 
distribution systems is made of main switch board,  bus bars , 
circuit breakers,  transformers,  wires and cables. The 
distribution systems is designed in such a way to provide 
redundancy and reliability. 
 
5) Emergency power Generations 
It can be requested to provide an emergency power 
generation for supply in case of ship total black out. The size 
is selected making reference to the selected electrical load 
requests that are to be guaranteed in emergency situation. 
 
F. Safety 
Safety is the capability to achieve and maintain a state in 
which all embarked persons, tangible properties interacting 
with the vessel and the environment surrounding the vessel are 
free from risk. This definition is also shown in Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  The Safety Capability. 
Safety is generally meant as a freedom from risk. In the 
case this is impracticable, it can be accepted to focus on the 
reduction of risk at a level as low as reasonably possible. In 
this perspective, attention is paid on both the probability of 
occurrence of an hazardous event and on the severity of its 
consequences. It is important to point out that the loss (total or 
partial loss) is the result of an hazardous situation that in a 
specific scenario has evolved in a loss. Since it may be 
difficult to foresee an unexpected scenario, it is difficult to 
have control on it. Therefore during the design process, the 
attention is more focused on the hazard identification and 
relevant avoidance or countermeasures. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

1) Preservation of Personnel 
The safety of life at sea has not been the same along the 
history and still now it is not practically the same all around 
the world. Nevertheless at present this is a very well addressed 
issue by means of application of the most demanding 
international safety rules. In the merchant ships context, the 
SOLAS convention is the most important IMO international 
safety rule and it prescribes, among others, requirements for 
residual buoyancy and stability, fire fighting, evacuation and 
life saving appliances, dangerous goods transportation, safe 
management of ships. 
It is important to point out that the ship safety is meant as 
the safety of the system and not as professional safety that is 
ruled by other international conventions (STCW, MCL2006) 
 
2) Preservation of Environment 
Attention on the effect of ship navigation on the 
environment is rooted in the seventies of the twentieth 
century. The most important international regulation is the 
MARPOL convention, developed by IMO, often used as a 
reference for the navy fleets, where appropriate.  
At first, the attention was only on the sea pollution (e.g., 
due to oil leakage, sludge water, garbage) but recently the 
attention is very much on the air pollution relevant to the 
engines exhaust gases (MARPOL annex VI) 
 
3) Preservation of Property  
This aspect is not explicit in the safety regulation, but it is 
implied in the concept of safety of life at sea that in any case 
has the priority. 
The attention to the preservation of property is reasonable 
due to the huge economical value of a ship (e.g., several 
hundreds of millions of dollars), but it is even more sensible 
in case of naval ships that usually have an even higher value 
and financially supported by public money. 
G. Navigation  
As evidenced in Figure 8, Navigation is the capability to 
perform Warship positioning and route planning, and to 
monitor and control the Warship’s adherence to the planned 
route.  
 
Figure 8.  The Navigation Capability. 
Two main elements compose the Navigation capability: 
Sensing and Route planning: 
1) Sensing 
Sensing is the capability to acquire information about the 
Warship position, heading, motion and attitude, and the 
operational environment (both natural and tactical) 
surrounding it. In detail, the Sensing capability is composed 
by other specific capabilities: 
 Navigation Surveillance refers to the detection, 
localization, recognition/classification and tracking of 
external sea surface contacts 
 Attitude 
Acquisition 
refers 
to 
the 
precise 
determination of the tilts of the Warship’s frame with 
respect to "local" coordinate axes. This capability is 
tightly connected to the Warship performance, for 
example, successful missiles launch, or successful 
detection and tracking of missile threats are deeply 
influenced by precise attitude data acquisition. 
 Environmental Data Acquisition and Management 
refers to the capability to perform data acquisition 
about meteorological and marine/oceanographic 
environment surrounding the Warship and about its 
global position and reference time.  
 
2) Route Planning  
Route Planning refers to the capability to plan and 
establish the Warship route. Wind, waves and currents and 
sea ice cover are crucial factors in choosing a route at sea. 
Advanced routing systems support the crucial decisions 
about the route. Avoiding hostile entities or rough weather 
and having the best possible advance route planning can 
minimize damage and allow more precise control of the 
Warship. Choosing the optimum route also lays the 
foundation for reducing fuel consumption. All these aspects 
highlight the importance of the Route Planning Capability. 
H. Command and Control  
Command and Control is the Capability to allow the 
operators to perform full control of the Warship’s equipment, 
in order to optimize the tactical use of the Warship within its 
naval task force. Further details to this regard are given in 
Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9.  The Command and Control Capability. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

Command and Control (C2) includes a wide range of 
specific capabilities, which can be grouped in the following 
broad 
categories: 
“Surveillance”, 
“Engagement” 
and 
“Support”, as described below.  
 
1) C2 Surveillance Related Capabilities 
Maritime Picture Compilation is the Capability to 
process the data received from passive and active sensors, 
from Data Links and from manual insertion by Operators. The 
scope is to display to the Operator a unique representation of 
the Real World Objects (RWOs) around the Warship.  
Situation Assessment is the Capability to identify and to 
classify any tracks in the maritime picture as friends or 
possible threats. Many track functionalities for identification 
are necessary: initialization, association, coupling, splitting, 
merging etc.  
 
2) C2 Engagement Related Capabilities 
Capabilities dedicated to the management of potential 
threats around the unit and the coordination of any reactions.  
Threat Evaluation is the Capability to evaluate threats 
and set priority levels in their engagement.  
Weapon Assignment is the Capability to identify the 
suitable weapon system to use against given threats. The 
reaction must be coherent with kinematics features, doctrine 
elements, threat category, weapon system limitations.  
Threat Engagement is the Capability to perform 
engagements against given threats through the identified 
weapon systems. Typically an Engagement Plan is defined 
with a detailed schedule of reactions, and adaptation margins 
to handle unpredicted situations.  
Manoeuvre Recommendation is the Capability to 
recommend the motions and attitude the Warship should 
assume during an engagement in order to minimize the 
vulnerability against a specific threat.  
Kill Assessment is the Capability to evaluate the result of 
the neutralization action on an engaged threat, based on data 
acquired from sensors, telemetries in downlink from the used 
weapon when available, or operator manual inputs.  
 
3) C2 Support Capabilities 
Resource Management is the Capability to monitor and 
control the status of organic equipment, including the 
management of alarms and the control of electromagnetic 
emissions. 
Data Recording and Analysis is the Capability to store, 
extract and process data exchanged among all Warship 
equipment. 
Support to Navigation is the Capability to support safe 
navigation of the Warship through navigation aids 
management. 
Mission Planning is the capability to define mission 
parameters and relevant data for the Warship. 
Post Mission Analysis is the Capability to analyze 
mission recorded data for the purpose of validating actions 
taken during the tactical phase, potentially generating new 
contact data based on discovered missed detection/ 
classification opportunities. 
Approach Control is the Capability to support aircraft 
operations, including approach, deck landing and take off. 
UXV Management is the Capability to manage 
Unmanned 
Aerial, 
Surface 
or 
Underwater 
Vehicles 
operations. 
Air Traffic Control is the capability to direct air traffic in 
coordination with ATC centers.  
Training is the Capability to simulate possible scenarios 
in which the Warship could be involved in order to support 
Operator training.  
Administrative Services is the Capability to provide 
administrative services such as mail, intranet, data processing, 
printing facilities etc.  
 
I. Communications 
As better detailed is Figure 10, Communications is the 
Capability to manage the exchanges of information both 
internally among the Warship components, and with other 
units or land centers to receive data and orders and participate 
as a force asset.  
  
Figure 10.  The Communications Capability. 
The first relevant component of this Capability is 
Communications Management, the Capability to allocate 
communications resources and to coordinate the provision of 
communication services to the users. 
Following, 
Communications 
can 
be 
categorized 
according to the type of Service that is conveyed (voice, data, 
entertainment, etc.), and the media through which the 
services are delivered, both internally on the Warship, and 
externally.  
1) Communications Services 
The following Services are typically delivered by the internal 
and external communications networks: 
 Tactical Communications 
 Voice Communications 
 Message Handling 
 Video Conferencing 
 Internet Services 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

 Phone Communications 
 Distress Communications 
 Administration Services 
 Entertainment Services 
2) Internal Communications Media 
The following list reports the typical Internal Media through 
which the communication services are delivered: 
 Local Area Networn (LAN) 
 Intercom 
 Wireless Communications 
 Public Announcements 
 Emergency Communications 
3) Internal Communications Media 
The following list reports the typical External Media through 
which the communication services are delivered: 
 Wide Area Networn (WAN) 
 Radio Communications 
 Satellite Communications 
 Shore Communications 
 Underwater Communications 
 Helo Communications 
 
J. Surveillance  
Surveillance is the Capability to detect, localize, 
recognize and classify and track contacts in all domains 
related to the Warship’s Area of Operations, as shown in 
Figure 11.  
 
 
Figure 11.  The Surveillance Capability. 
Based on the Surveillance domains, types and employed 
technology, three different categorizations can be made:  
 
1) Surveillance domain 
The Surveillance Capabilities are related to the Aerial, 
Sea Surface or Underwater domains:  
Air Surveillance allows detecting air based objects such 
as aircrafts, or missiles.  
Surface Surveillance allows detecting objects on the 
surface of sea, lakes, oceans or located near the coast. 
Underwater Surveillance allows detecting underwater 
objects, such as submarines or mines. 
 
2) Surveillance Type 
Active Surveillance is performed involves the emission 
of signals, typically in the form of electromagnetic or acoustic 
waves. Exploiting this capability, the Warship can cover a 
wide range of kilometers in the domain where detecting 
occurs. The drawback of the active surveillance consists in 
being more visible and easily discovered by other entities.  
Passive Surveillance on the other hand is performed by 
receiving signals emitted by other systems but not issuing any 
interrogation. Lesser performance in sensitivity and range of 
the detection is traded off by the ability to remain more 
effectively hidden from enemy detection. 
 
3) Surveillance Technology 
This categorization is related to the technology employed to 
perform the Surveillance activities. 
Radar Based Surveillance allows the Warship to detect 
both fast and slowly moving non-cooperating objects, through 
the acquisition of their radar echo. Their position and velocity 
are determined using distance and azimuth information for 2D 
radar surveillance, and also with elevation for 3D radar 
surveillance. 
Message Based Surveillance is performed through the 
exchange of coded messages for the mutual exchange of 
identity and voyage related information, and is implemented 
using base stations and transponders. Typical examples of 
message based surveillance are Interrogation Friend or Foe 
(IFF), used for determining the identity of an unknown contact 
on the basis of the response to a direct interrogation message, 
and the AIS, a relay network connecting all commercial and 
military vessels on the VHF Maritime Mobile Band, carrying 
information such as departure and destination ports, 
transported cargo or precise positioning.  
Electro Optical Based Surveillance consists in the 
optical and infrared spectrum scanning through high 
performance cameras, able to operate both during day and 
night and in all possible weather conditions. 
Acoustic Based Surveillance allows the Warship to 
detect underwater objects, through the acquisition of their 
acoustic echo. Acoustic surveillance makes use of several 
types of sonar sensors, either active or passive, and which can 
be installed directly attached to the hull, or as arrays of 
multiple elements towed by cable.  
Communication 
Based 
Surveillance 
consists 
in 
performing analysis on emissions from radio channels in order 
to achieve information related to the source, such as the 
relative direction of emission, the type of equipment used for 
transmission, or even the gathering of intelligence based on 
the content of the communications.  
 
K. Combat 
Combat is the Warship Capability of denying the enemy 
the effective use of threats against the Warship itself, its 
protected assets, or tactical/operational/strategic interests. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

More details are schematically provided in Figure 12. 
 
Figure 12.  The Combat Capability. 
There are four main categorizations of the Combat 
Capability, starting from the warfare domain to which a given 
threat belongs, to the type, scope and range of the engagement 
that is required to neutralize such threat. 
1) Warfare Domain/Area 
The warfare Domain is related to the environment to 
which the threat to be faced belongs: 
 Above Water Warfare concerns threats that originate 
above the water surface, and is divided in two Warfare 
Areas: Anti Air Warfare (AAW), including threats 
such as airplanes, missiles, or helicopters; and Anti 
Surface Warfare (ASuW), including threats such as 
ships or land based platforms 
 Below Water Warfare concerns threats that originate 
below the water surface, and is divided in two main 
Areas: Anti Submarine Warfare (ASW) and Mine 
Warfare (MW) 
 Electronic Warfare (EW) concerns threats that affect 
the electromagnetic spectrum, independently from the 
physical domain of their bearer. EW is further 
characterized by Electronic Attack Measures, and 
Electronic Protection Measures 
2) Engagement type 
Two types of Engagement can be performed by the 
weapons carried on board the Warship: 
 Hard Kill, when the weapons physically engage 
threats by destroying/altering their payload/ warhead 
in such a way that the intended effect on the target is 
severely impeded 
 Soft Kill, when the weapons alter the electromagnetic, 
acoustic or other signature(s) of a target thereby 
altering the tracking and sensing behavior of an 
incoming threat 
3) Engagement range  
Entirely different weapons are devoted to the facing of 
threats according to their range: 
 Close In Defense relates to the neutralization of threats 
within a few Nautical Miles (NM) from the Warship, 
and is typically performed with small caliber artillery 
 Short Range Defense relates to the neutralization of 
threats within tens of NM, and is typically performed 
with large caliber artillery, missile systems, torpedoes 
and so on 
 Long Range Defense relates to the neutralization of 
threats within several thousands of NM from the 
protected asset; Long Range is further divided in 
Tactical Range (12-50 NM), Theater Range (up to 
several hundred NM), Strategic Range (up to national 
or regional range) 
4) Engagement scope  
Engagement Scope regards the definition of the asset(s) 
that the Warship is assigned, by a specific mission, to protect: 
 Self Defense is concerned with avoiding/neutralizing 
threats against the Warship itself, and includes other 
capabilities, such as Signature Management and 
CBRNE (the Capability to resist to Chemical, 
Bacteriological, Radioactive, Nuclear or Explosive 
threats) 
 Local Defense is concerned with the neutralization of 
threats against a protected asset (High Value Unit, 
HVU), such as another ship within the same convoy, 
or a port 
 Area Defense is concerned with the neutralization of 
threats against a specific protected geographical area, 
such as a Sea Line Of Communications (SLOC) 
 Finally, Power Projection is devoted to the protection 
of strategic level interests, by actively employing force 
against enemy assets, and is further divided in 
Maritime Strike when the target is naval, Naval 
Surface Fire Support (NSFS) when the target is land 
based, and Amphibious Warfare when the contribute 
of the Warship is essentially logistic  
IV. CAPABILITIES INTERDEPENDENCIES 
The thorough description of all Whole Warship related 
Capabilities can be followed by a discussion on mutual 
interactions 
and 
interdependency. 
For 
example 
the 
Surveillance Capability can be enhanced by increasing the 
Radar’s height, however this will have a direct impact on the 
Warship’s Stability; or at the same time, optimizing 
Surveillance will have an impact on the Warship’s 
Controllability in terms of required Power Generation. This 
in turn will affect the Buoyancy due to the different weight 
of the power generators.  
These considerations become really effective when all 
Capabilities are taken into account comprehensively at the 
same time, allowing an holistic view of the entire Warship as 
a whole in its operational environment. This type of effort 
will be the objective of future works based on the findings 
presented in this paper. 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
In the paper it is postulated that, during the design process 
of complex Warships, a shift of attention is necessary to an 
initial activity of thorough analysis focused on the problem 
domain. Thus, the approach shifts the focus on the level of the 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

whole warship’s capabilities, rather than on its components 
and subsystems that belongs to the solution domain.  
A set of twelve Capabilities characterizing the naval vessel 
has been proposed, further detailed and commented. Their 
identification enables and instructs the investigation and 
development of the solution domain. They are assumed to be 
effective to comprehensively represent all the necessary 
Capabilities for the Warship to fulfill a superior mission by 
means of proper implementation of the operational 
requirements. 
All the identified Capabilities are meant as Warship 
emergent properties deriving from the successful and 
concurrent interaction among the different parts and systems. 
In this perspective, an overcoming of the typical separation 
between the Warship platform and the Warship combat 
systems is pursued.  
As a further step it will be possible to discuss how the 
different Capabilities are related to each other and with the 
Warships technical characteristics as well. In this perspective 
the relation of the contents of this paper and the traditional 
naval ship design process is elucidated: the traditional design 
spiral provides an effective model for the assessment and the 
relevant discussion.  
The Capability formulation enables also: 
 the systematic identification of the necessary 
technology to be installed onboard with specific 
reference 
to their interfaces 
and 
interference 
characteristics with the ship platform. 
 the 
identification 
of 
workable 
Measures 
of 
Effectiveness and derived Measures of Performance, 
to afterwards give evidence of the Warship compliance 
with design goals. 
In conclusion the content of this paper represents a 
proposal to better set out the naval ship design process since 
the very beginning for a comprehensive and robust final 
fulfilling of the customer needs following a documented and 
informed process. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Mistree, W. F. Smith, B. A. Bras, J. K. Allen and D. Muster, 
“Decision-Based Design: a Contemporary Paradigm for Ship 
Design”, SNAME Annual Meeting, san Francisco, California, 
1990. 
[2] D. J. Andrews, “A Comprehensive Methodology for the 
Design of Ships (and Other Complex Systems)”, Proc. R. Soc. 
Lond. A 454, pp. 187-211, 1998. 
[3] S. Esbati “Design for Support in the Initial Design of Naval 
Combatants”, PhD Thesis in Naval Architecture and Marine 
Engineering, 
Department 
of 
Mechanical 
Engineering, 
University College London, 2018. 
[4] C. N. Calvano, O. Jons and R. G. Keane,  “Systems 
Engineering in Naval Ship Design”, Naval Engineers Journal 
July 2000. 
[5] W. J. Tudor and N. Harrison, “Virtual integration: managing 
complex warship design through model based engineering”, 
Engine As A Weapon International Symposium, 2019. 
[6] H. Wang, D. Pei, L. Gan, R. Chen and Z. Li “A Short Review  
of U. S. Naval Ship Concept Design Technology Development 
Features”, International Journal of Maritime Science & 
Technology, Vol. 64, Issue 2, ISSN: 0469-6255, EISSN: 1848-
6320, 2017. 
[7] INCOSE, “Systems Engineering Handbook – a guide for 
System lifecycle processes and activities”,  published by John 
Wiley & Sons, 2015. 
[8] M. Manfredi and L. Tirone “Application of the Model Based 
Systems Engineering Approach for Modern Warship Design”, 
28th Annual INCOSE International Symposium, Washington 
DC, 2018 
[9] L. Tirone, C. Agostinelli, P. Petrinca, E. Guidolotti, L. Fornaro, 
M. Nardini, S. Solazzi, “Application of the Unified 
Architecture Framework for the Definition of a Generic System 
Architecture of a Combat System”, Conferenza INCOSE Italia 
su Systems Engineering, CIISE’17, Naples, November 2017 
[10] J. P. Olivier, S. Balestrini-Robinson and S. Briceñno, 
“Approach to capability-based system-of-systems framework 
in support of naval ship design”, IEEE International Systems 
Conference Proceedings, pp. 388–395, 2014. 
[11] J. P. Olivier and S. Balestrini -Robinson “Capability -Based 
System-of-Systems Approach in Support of Complex Naval 
Ship Design” , Complex Systems Design & Management 
(CSD&M) conference, 2014. 
 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-838-9
ICONS 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Systems

