Plasmonic Nano-Tweezers for Dielectric or Metallic Nano-Objects Trapping  
 
Djeber Guendouz, Pierrick Lample, Giovanni Magno, 
Béatrice Dagens and Vy Yam 
Center of Nanosciences and Nanotechnologies, CNRS, 
University Paris-Sud  
Palaiseau, France 
e-mail: djeber.guendouz@u-psud.fr, 
pierrick.lample@etudiant.univ-brest.fr, giovanni.magno@u-
psud.fr, beatrice.dagens@u-psud.fr, vy.yam@u-psud.fr 
 
Giovanna Calò 
Department of Electrical and Information Engineering, 
Polytechnic of Bari  
Bari, Italy 
e-mail: giovanna.calo@poliba.it
 
 
Abstract— Optical tweezing is an emerging application of 
plasmonic nanostructures that aims at the exploitation of the 
enhanced light-matter interaction to trap nano-objects for 
sensing, biosensing, and spectroscopy purposes. In this 
contribution, we report the numerical analysis of efficient 
tweezing of subwavelength nanoparticles with radii smaller 
than 50 nm, in localized surface plasmon nanoantennas strongly 
coupled with Silicon on Insulator (SOI) waveguides. This 
integrated scheme ensures an intense excitation of the plasmonic 
resonators. Moreover, the dimer-like topology of the plasmonic 
nanoantenna further enhances the nearfield, leading to an ultra-
efficient trapping. 
Keywords-Optical 
tweezers; 
Optical 
manipulation;  
Plasmonics;  Integrated optics devices. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As firstly demonstrated in [1], focused laser beams can 
trap small particles released into liquid. The interaction 
between light and objects results in optical forces that arise 
from their momentum exchange.  In general, the tweezing 
action depends on the electromagnetic nature of both the trap 
and the particle. To evaluate and quantify the tweezers 
performance, we can consider three linked quantities: the total 
force, the stiffness, and the potential energy. 
The total force accounts for the contribution of two 
components, namely the scattering and the gradient force. In 
particular, the gradient force occurs when a displaceable 
object experiences a localized electromagnetic field. It is 
proportional to the cube of the particle radius r and to the 
gradient of the electric field modulus: 
 
The stiffness, representing the restoring action intensity of 
the trap, also gives an idea of both its efficiency and its spatial 
extent. The following expression holds for the stiffness 
calculated along the i direction: 
 
The potential energy, which can be expressed as 
, 
gives an idea of the trap stability. According to the Ashkin 
criterion [2], the potential energy well must be much deeper 
(at least 10 times) than the thermal energy kBT of the system.  
In order to ensure a stable trapping, in fact, it is imperative 
to compensate for the random kicks the particle receives in the 
presence of thermal agitation. It is worth pointing out that 
smaller particles are more difficult to trap since the gradient 
term depends on the cube of the particle radius. In order to 
compensate for the effect of the particle size, we can achieve 
stronger gradients by increasing the field localization.  
Plasmonic structures are particularly efficient in 
concentrating 
the 
electromagnetic 
field 
in 
deep 
subwavelength volumes thanks to Surface Plasmon Polaritons 
(SPPs) and Localized Surface Plasmons (LSPs) at the 
interface between a dielectric material and Noble Metal 
Nanoparticles (NMPs). The excitation of the NMPs can be 
achieved by internal total reflection or, more effectively, by 
coupling the NMPs with a Silicon on Insulator (SOI) 
waveguide, as demonstrated by the authors in [3]-[5]. 
Here, we propose a plasmonic dimer configuration (i.e., 
nanoantenna) coupled to a silicon waveguide, which is 
capable of strongly enhancing the near field in the proximity 
of the dimer gap and, therefore, of achieving a stable trapping 
of subwavelength particles. In this contribution, we 
investigate the effect of the particle position, with respect to
 
 ∝ ||	. 
 ∝  
 ||	. 
 ∝ |E|	 
 
Figure 1. Scheme of the plasmonic gold dimer coupled to the SOI 
waveguide. A trapped particle is also rapresented (grey sphere). 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

the nanoantenna, on the trapping efficiency of dielectric and 
metallic nanoparticles dispersed in water. 
In Section II, we report the results of the design and of the 
numerical simulations of plasmonic nano-tweezers, whereas, 
the conclusion is reported in Section III. 
II. 
INTEGRATED PLASMONIC NANO-TWEEZERS 
The proposed plasmonic tweezers configuration is 
schematized in Figure 1. In particular, the considered dimer is 
constituted by two gold ellipsoidal nano-cylinders aligned 
along the y-axis and separated by a gap g=25 nm. The 
geometrical sizes of each nano-cylinder are: radii rx=30 nm 
and ry=90 nm and thickness t=30 nm. The particle to be 
trapped is also schematized as a sphere of radius r. 
The dimer is coupled to a silicon waveguide having width 
w=500 nm and height h=220 nm. The geometrical sizes were 
optimized to achieve the optimal coupling between the Si 
waveguide and the dimer around the wavelength λ=1.55 µm. 
We simulated the integrated dimer structure by three-
dimensional Finite Difference Time Domain (FDTD) in 
presence of either a dielectric (polystyrene with refractive 
index np=1.59) or a metallic (gold) spherical particle. The 
calculation of the total force F acting on the bead was 
performed from the total electromagnetic field, for a set of 
discrete positions of the bead. In all the simulations, we 
considered water as superstrate with refractive index n=1.33. 
As an example, the numerical results obtained by the 
simulation of a polystyrene sphere immersed in water are 
reported in Figure 2. In particular, Figure 2 (a-c) show, 
respectively, the x component of the total force Fx, the x 
component of the stiffness kx, and the z component of the total 
force Fz, as a function of the position x and of the wavelength 
λ when y=0. Similarly, Figure 2 (d-f) show Fy, ky, and Fz, as a 
function of the position y and of the wavelength λ, when x=0.  
In Figure 2 (d-f), where we consider a displacement of the 
particle along the y direction, we report the positions with 
positive values of y for the sake of reducing the computational 
time. Nonetheless, the behavior is symmetric with respect to 
the x-axis.  
In Figure 2, the white solid lines correspond to the center 
of the dimer gap, the dotted blue lines denote the zeros of the 
stiffness and the solid green curves denote the equilibrium 
locus (i.e., the total force along x or y is zero). Since the 
corresponding stiffness is negative (see Figure 2(b)), along the 
green curve the object lies on a minimum of the potential 
energy, which also satisfies the Ashkin criterion for stable 
trapping as long as λ >1.57µm.  
III. 
CONCLUSION 
The proposed dimer configuration is capable of efficiently 
trapping polystyrene nanoparticles in the middle of the dimer 
gap. Similar analyses were performed in the case of metallic 
nanoparticles, showing that the achieved optomechanical 
energy is one order of magnitude greater (in modulus) than in 
the case of dielectric particle trapping. Moreover, this effect is 
associated with a significant variation of the SOI waveguide 
transmittance, thus allowing the detection and the monitoring 
of the particle-trapping event. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research was conducted in the framework of the 
project Galileo 2018 G18-625/PHC Galilée 39622NL. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ashkin, “Acceleration and Trapping of Particles by 
Radiation Pressure”, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 24, pp. 156-159, 
1970. 
[2] A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm, and S. Chu, 
“Observation of a single-beam gradient force optical trap for 
dielectric particles”, Opt. Lett., vol. 11, pp. 288–290, (1986). 
[3] G. Magno et al., "Integrated plasmonic nanotweezers for 
nanoparticle manipulation," Opt. Lett., vol. 41(16), pp. 3679-
3682, 2016. 
[4] A. Ecarnot, G. Magno, V. Yam, and B. Dagens, "Ultra-efficient 
nanoparticle trapping by integrated plasmonic dimers," Opt. 
Lett., vol. 43(3), pp. 455-458, 2018. 
[5] G. Magno et al., "Strong coupling and vortexes assisted slow 
light in plasmonic chain-SOI waveguide systems", Scientific 
Reports, vol. 7, pp. 7228, 2017. 
 
Figure 2. (a) Total force Fx, (b) stiffness kx, and (c) total force Fz as a 
function of the position x and of the wavelength λ, and (d) Total force 
Fy, (e) stiffness ky, and (f) total force Fz as a function of the position y 
and of the wavelength λ, for a polystyrene sphere of radius r=25 nm. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

