Monte Carlo Studies of Particle Diffusion on a
Patchwise Bivariate Surface
Alexander Tarasenko and Lubomir Jastrabik
Institute of Physics, v.v.i.
Academy of Sciences CR
Prague, Czech Republic
Email: taras@fzu.cz, jastrab@fzu.cz
Abstract—The diffusion of particles adsorbed on a patchwise
surface with two non equivalent sites is investigated in the
framework of a lattice-gas model. We derived the analytical
expressions for the diffusion coefﬁcients. Using the kinetic Monte
Carlo simulations we calculate the coverage dependencies of the
diffusion coefﬁcients in the wide region of the lateral interaction
between the particles. The theoretical dependencies are compared
with the numerical data. The good coincidence of the data
obtained by the two different methods corroborates the validity
of the approach developed for the description of the particle
migration over such complex heterogeneous lattices.
Index Terms—surface diffusion; kinetic Monte Carlo simula-
tions; patchwise lattice.
I. INTRODUCTION
The diffusive mass transfer controls the rates of a multitude
of physical, chemical, and biological processes. The theoretical
investigations of these processes attract much attention, but
the complexity of the real systems also makes their study
extremely difﬁcult. The majority of the widely used systems
are strongly heterogeneous. Crystals and thin ﬁlms consist of
small nanocrystals, domains, and other heterogeneities. The
surfaces have random potential reliefs with broad distributions
of energetic parameters like adsorption energies and potential
barriers.
A theoretical model has been developed by Ross and Olivier
to describe the particle (atoms, molecules) adsorption on
such heterogeneous surfaces [1]. In this model the surface
is composed of a number of randomly distributed or ordered
patches with different adsorption sites. The model is widely
used in experimental and theoretical investigations of effects
of the heterogeneity on a variety of surface processes like
adsorption, desorption, diffusion and catalysis [2]. Due to the
great versatility and complexities of the patchy surfaces, it
seems impossible to do some deﬁnitive conclusions about
the transport of particles over such surfaces. Nevertheless,
it occurs that in some simple cases one can obtain a rather
satisfactory description of the particle diffusion over the het-
erogeneous surfaces.
We study the inﬂuence of the heterogeneity on the surface
diffusion of adsorbed particles in the framework of the lattice-
gas formalism. In particular, we consider a special case of
the surface with only two different types of the adsorption
sites, grouped into small square clusters of a given size,
and given energy of adsorption. This simple model includes
the most important features that are expected to inﬂuence
the transport over such surfaces. The general and universal
approach developed for the investigation of the migration of
particles adsorbed on the strongly heterogeneous lattices is
applied here for the description of the particle migration on
the patchwise bivariate lattices [3].
We rederive the analytical expressions for the diffusion
coefﬁcients for the patchwise lattice. The coefﬁcients are also
evaluated by the kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) simulations [4]
of the particle migration over the patchwise lattice mentioned
above. The theoretical dependencies are compared with the
numerical data. It occurs that the coincidence between the
data, obtained by the two independent qualitatively different
methods, is rather good.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe
the model and give the deﬁnitions of the diffusion coefﬁcients
and other necessary quantities. In Section III, we analyze the
peculiarities of the particle migration over the lattice. Some
details of the kMC method are presented in Section IV. The
results are discussed in Section V. Finally, we present the
summary of our results and conclusions in Section VI.
II. THE LATTICE-GAS MODEL AND DIFFUSION
COEFFICIENTS
We consider the migration of particles adsorbed on a square
lattice of N adsorption sites with a regular and periodic
heterogeneity. The lattice is composed of the deep, d, and
Fig. 1.
Schematic view of the square patchwise bivariate lattice. The open
and ﬁlled circles denote the shallow and deep adsorption sites.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

shallow, s, sites arranged in the square 2 × 2 patches, as
shown in Figure 1. The corresponding adsorption energies, ε d
and εs, are large relative to the thermal energy, kBT . The Na
particles populate the sites, jumping occasionally to the nearest
neighbor (NN) empty adsorption sites. When the duration of
the jumps is much shorter than the particle sojourn in the sites,
the state of the particle system is completely described by a
set of the occupation numbers ni with
ni =
! 1,
if the ith site is occupied,
0,
if the ith site is empty.
(1)
The double occupancy is forbidden. The particle concentration,
or surface coverage θ, equals to Na/N. There is also a lateral
interaction ϕ between the NN particles.
The particle migration is described by some diffusion co-
efﬁcients. Conceptually, the simplest diffusion coefﬁcient is a
single particle, or tracer diffusion coefﬁcient, Dt. It addresses
the random walks of the individual tagged particles
Dt = lim
t→∞
1
4tNa
" Na
#
k=1
⃗r 2
k (t)
$
.
(2)
The jump, or center-of-mass diffusion coefﬁcient, D j, de-
scribes the asymptotic behavior of the center of mass of the
system of adsorbed particles
Dj = lim
t→∞
1
4tNa
"% Na
#
k=1
⃗rk(t)
&2$
.
(3)
Here ⃗rk(t) is the displacement of the kth particle after the
time t; the brackets ⟨· · ·⟩ denote the average over the particle
conﬁgurations. The coefﬁcients are well-suited for the kMC
simulations, as they are expressed in terms of the directly
accessible quantities ⃗rk(t).
The Fickian (also chemical, collective, transport) diffusion
coefﬁcient Dc, describing the mass transfer over the lattice,
is determined by the Fick’s ﬁrst law which constitutes the
relationship between the ﬂux of the particles, ⃗J(⃗r, t), and the
gradient of their concentration, θ(⃗r, t)
⃗J(⃗r, t) = −Dc⃗∇θ(⃗r, t).
(4)
III. DIFFUSION OF PARTICLES OVER THE PATCHWISE
LATTICE
In the following we consider the case of a strongly hetero-
geneous lattice, i.e., exp(εd) ≫ exp(εs). The heterogeneity
results in the striking difference between the s and d sites.
The particles tend to occupy the deep sites. Therefore, in the
low coverage region, θ < 1/2, almost all s sites are empty,
and the overwhelming majority of the particles occupy the d
sites. In the high coverage region, θ > 1/2, almost all d sites
are ﬁlled and the rest Na − N/2 particles occupy the shallow
sites.
Also, the inhomogeneity implies the much higher jump rate
νs for the fast s → d and s → s jumps than for the slow d → s
and d → d jumps with the jump rate νd. We call them fast and
slow jumps, that means not the duration of a jump itself, but
the fact that the averaged time of a particle sojourn in the d
sites, ν−1
d , is considerably longer than the corresponding time
for the s sites, ν−1
s . There is an important difference between
fast and slow jumps. The slow and fast jumps take place on the
largely different time scale as νs ≫ νd. The particles do not
stay long in the s sites. Any jump to a shallow site gives rise
to the fast jump, which occurs almost immediately after the
previous slow jump. In the time scale determined by the slow
jumps the fast jump cannot be separated from the precedent
slow jump. They should be considered together like a single
elementary act of the particle migration. The characteristic
coverage, θ = 1/2, separates concentration regions where the
particle migration has qualitatively different behavior. In the
following Subsections, we consider the speciﬁc properties of
the diffusion in these regions.
A. Low coverage region
At low coverages, the d patches are partially ﬁlled and the
s patches are empty. Any migration act starts with a slow
jump from an initial d site. There are two possibilities for
the activated particle. It can jump to some d or s empty NN
site. The d → d jumps correspond to the ordinary diffusion
over the homogeneous lattice of d sites. But the jumps to the
shallow sites are more effective. In this case, the particle can
perform 1, 2, . . . fast jumps until it ﬁnds an empty d site. The
particle migrates performing sequence of jumps: the ﬁrst slow
jump and some fast jumps. The ﬁnal fast jump to the d site
ﬁnishes the succession. These jump successions, performed by
single particles, give the main contribution to the total particle
displacement in the low coverage region.
The probability to ﬁnd an empty ﬁnal d site decreases as
θ → 1/2. At the stoichiometric coverage θ = 1/2 the system
of particles is strongly ordered: almost all d sites are occupied
and almost all s sites are empty. Many activated particles
cannot ﬁnd the empty d sites and return to their initial sites.
The tracer and jump diffusion coefﬁcients have minimum at
this coverage. An interesting consequence of the fact that the
particle migration proceeds by the jump sequences performed
by single particles is the similar behavior of the tracer and
jump diffusion coefﬁcients: they are practically equal in the
wide coverage region 0 ≤ θ < 1/2.
The probabilities of the jump successions are determined by
the particle conﬁgurations on the perimeter d sites surrounding
the s patch. There are z = 4l sites surrounding the l × l
patch, which we label by the index i = 1, 2, . . ., z. The
particle conﬁguration on the perimeter sites is determined
by the occupation numbers of these sites: for particles n i
and for vacancies hi ≡ 1 − ni. For example, h1n2 · · · hz
denotes the conﬁguration when the 1st site is empty, the
second is ﬁlled,..., the zth is empty. The probabilities of the
particle conﬁgurations are the average values of the product
⟨h1n2 · · · hz⟩.
Let us suppose that the probability to occupy an empty
perimeter d site is the same for all these sites. It is a
rather simple approximation. The sites located closer to the
initial site have higher probabilities to be occupied than the
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

further located ones. To obtain the correct probabilities one
should calculate, in principle, the inﬁnite series of jumps for
every conﬁguration. But, our aim is to demonstrate only the
applicability of the approach to the description of the parti-
cle diffusion over the patchwise lattice. This approximation
permits to derive the analytical expressions for the diffusion
coefﬁcients, which are rather simple, but, nevertheless, give
quite satisfactory results.
B. High coverage region
At high coverages all d sites are occupied. The N/2 particles
are trapped in the deep patches and the rest Na−N/2 particles
occupy the s sites. The weakly adsorbed particles perform a
lot of the fast jumps in the s patches. But it is easy to see that
these fast jumps do not give noticeable contribution to the total
displacement. The particles are conﬁned in the s patches and
cannot migrate over the surface jumping between the s sites
only.
It is a speciﬁc feature of the patchwise lattices, that there
is no inﬁnite connected cluster of the s sites spanning over
the whole lattice. The migration over the whole lattice should
include slow jumps. The non-zero contribution to the diffusion
is produced by successions of slow and fast jumps. But these
successions are different from the previous low coverage case.
Again, the ﬁrst jump of the succession is a slow one. A
particle jumps from a d site to some empty s site. And the
vacancy in the d patch is ﬁlled very fast by the other mobile
particle. If the fast jump is performed by a particle from
another s patch, these succession of the slow and fast jumps
performed by different particles transfers particle between the
s patches (over the occupied d patch). Such jump successions,
performed by different particles, give the main contribution to
the diffusion in the high coverage region θ > 1/2. These jump
successions considerably reduce the tracer diffusion coefﬁcient
as compared with the jump diffusion coefﬁcient: D j ≫ Dt, if
1/2 < θ < 1.
The probabilities of the jump successions are determined
by the particle conﬁgurations in the two s patches (denoted as
1st and 2nd), which are the NNs of the initial d site. There are
z′ = 2l2 s sites, which we label by the index i = 1, 2, . . . , z ′.
The particle conﬁgurations in the patches are determined by
the occupation numbers of the s sites. After the slow jump
from the initial d site to the 2nd patch, the particles from
the 1st and the 2nd patches try to occupy the vacancy in the
initial site. The jump succession ends when some particle ﬁlls
the vacancy. If the particle jumps from the 1st patch, the total
particle displacement changes. The jump succession transfers
one particle from the 1st patch to the 2nd patch. This concerted
jumps of different particles are equivalent to a single jump of
a particle between the NN s patches. In the case, when the
vacancy is ﬁlled by a particle from the 2nd patch, the total
particle displacement remains the same. There is no particle
transfer between the s patches.
As in the previous case, we supposed that the probability for
any particle in the 1st and 2nd s patches to occupy the vacancy
in the initial site is the same. To justify this approximation it
may be useful to consider the ideas developed in the method
of the real-space renormalization group [5]. Analogously with
this approach, the patches should be considered as the block
sites, deep or shallow, depending on the type of lattice sites
composing the block site. The lattice is transformed to the
ordinary heterogeneous square lattice of d and s block sites
arranged in the alternating order. The particle diffusion is a
sequence of jumps between the NN sites. As the migration
path for any particle includes many jumps between the block
sites, the details of the particle migration inside the blocks
(patches) should be smoothed out in some sense, averaged.
The migration proceeds by the jump pairs between the blocks.
And the jumps will be characterized by some renormalized
jump rates and the jump length only. The similar character
of the particle migration results in the similar expressions for
the diffusion coefﬁcients. The analytical expressions derived
for the case of the patchwise lattice are the modiﬁed expres-
sions obtained for the heterogeneous square lattice [3]. These
expressions relate the kinetic quantities Dj and Dc with the
equilibrium thermodynamic quantities as follows:
Dj
=
νdL2
zP00P <
z eµ/θ,
Dc
=
νdL2
zP00P <
z eµ/χT ,
θ < 1/2,
and
Dj
=
νdL2
z′P00P >
z′ eµ/θ,
Dc
=
νdL2
z′P00P >
z′ eµ/χT ,
θ > 1/2.
(5)
Here
P <
z =
1
z − 1
'
z − 1 − nd − n2
d − n3
d − · · · − nz−1
d
(
P >
z′ =
1
z′ − 1
)
z′ − 1 − hs − h2
s − h3
s − · · · − hz′−1
s
*
P00 = ⟨hihj⟩ is the probability to ﬁnd a pair of empty s and
d NN sites; z = 4l = 8 is the number of d sites surrounding
an s patch, and z′ = 2l2 = 8 is the number of s sites in two
s patches; nd, ns are the average occupancies of the d and
s sites; L2
z and L2
z′ stand for the mean square displacements
and hd = 1 − nd, hs = 1 − ns.
It should be noted the following. The analytical expres-
sions derived for the inhomogeneous lattices work perfectly
because all NN sites for the d and s sites are equivalent.
The jumping particles occupy them with equal probabilities.
In the patchwise lattice, the NN sites are not equivalent, and
particles occupy these sites with different probabilities. The
probabilities depend on the distance between the initial and
ﬁnal sites. The more distant sites give smaller contribution to
the total displacement. Really, the quantities Lz, Lz′, z, and z′
should be considered as the ﬁtting parameters of the approach.
IV. MONTE CARLO SIMULATIONS
For the kMC simulations, we used a 2D square arrangement
of M = 4096 sites with periodic boundary conditions. The
initial particle conﬁgurations are generated by placing Mθ par-
ticles on the randomly chosen sites. The initial conﬁgurations
{ni} are equilibrated by the ﬁrst idle kMC run.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

To simulate the particle diffusion one should deﬁne the
rate of particle jumps, the so-called transition algorithm. We
assume that the particles perform thermally activated jumps to
their NN empty adsorption sites. A particle should surmount
the potential barrier separating the initial and ﬁnal sites. The
activation energy is given by the difference between the saddle
point energy εsp(= 0) and the initial state energy εi. Usually,
the interaction between the activated particle at the saddle
point and its NNs is neglected. We select the well established
expression for the jump rate derived in the transition state
theory [6], [7]
νif = ν0 exp
+
−εi + ϕ
4
#
k=1
nk
,
.
(6)
Here νif is the jump rate from the initial ith site to the NN
ﬁnal fth site; the summation is carried out over the NNs of
the initial site and εi = εd,s depending on the type of the
initial site. Here and henceforth we use the system of units
with kBT = 1.
The jump rate is the same for all possible jumps from the
ith site. The repulsive interaction increases and the attractive
one decreases the particle energy and the jump rate.
For the kMC simulations we use the BKL algorithm [4]. The
algorithm operates in a space of possible events. In contrast to
the standard technique, where we consider ﬁxed time intervals
at which a jump may occur with a certain probability, the
BKL algorithm randomly selects a jump out of all possible
events and subsequently associates the number of clock ticks
that must be passed for the event to take place. There are
no rejected attempts, which results in a higher efﬁciency
of the kMC simulations. We used the kMC simulations for
the calculations of the tracer and jump diffusion coefﬁcients,
adsorption isotherms, the pair NN correlation function P 00,
and the isothermal susceptibility
χT = N −1 #
ij
⟨(ni − θ)(nj − θ)⟩.
(7)
The Fickian diffusion coefﬁcient Dc is calculated via the
Kubo–Green equation [8]
Dc = θDj/χT .
(8)
The values of the energetic parameters used for the kMC
simulations are the same for all dependencies: εd − εs = 6,
ϕ = −2.5, −2, . . ., 2.5. In order to obtain accurate values of
the necessary quantities, runs of 106 kMC steps for up to
5 × 105 different initial conﬁgurations were performed.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The coverage dependencies for the tracer diffusion coefﬁ-
cient Dt(θ) are plotted in Figures 2 and 3 for the repulsive and
attractive lateral interaction, respectively. As it was mentioned
above, the tracer diffusion coefﬁcient describes the behavior
of the tagged particles. For the homogeneous systems D t
is a monotone decreasing convex function of the surface
coverage θ. In the heterogeneous lattices, the dependencies
Fig. 2.
The coverage dependencies of the tracer diffusion coefﬁcient, Dt,
for the repulsive interaction 0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 2.5. Symbols denote the kMC data.
Fig. 3.
The coverage dependencies of the tracer diffusion coefﬁcient, Dt,
for the attractive interaction −2.5 ≤ ϕ ≤ 0. The notations are the same as
in the previous Figure 2.
Dt(θ) have minimum at the stoichiometric coverage θ = 1/2.
The nature of this minimum can be explained as follows.
At this coverage, all d sites are ﬁlled and the overwhelming
majority of the jump sequences are unsuccessful. Particles
jump to the shallow sites and return back. The minimum is a
characteristic feature for the tracer and jump diffusion coefﬁ-
cients for many heterogeneous lattices of different geometries
and dimensions.
We have two independent sets of data for
the jump diffusion coefﬁcient: the kMC data and the analytical
dependencies 5. They are plotted as symbols and solid lines,
respectively, in Figures 4 and 5. The coverage dependencies
have qualitatively the same behavior as the corresponding
dependencies for the tracer diffusion coefﬁcient. As in the
previous case, the dependencies Dj(θ) have minimum at the
stoichiometric coverage θ = 1/2.
There is a good coincidence of the kMC data with the
analytical dependencies 5. The expressions give a qualitatively
correct description of the coverage dependencies in the whole
coverage region for the wide region of the lateral interaction.
In Figures 6 and 7, we present the coverage dependencies
for the Fickian diffusion coefﬁcient Dc(θ). The dependencies
have maximum at the half coverage θ = 1/2 for the weak
lateral interaction. The dependence Dc(θ) is symmetrical
for the Langmuir lattice gas, i.e. ϕ = 0. But the lateral
interaction spoils the symmetry. The limiting values of the
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

Fig. 4.
The coverage dependencies of the jump diffusion coefﬁcient, Dj,
for the repulsive interaction 0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 2.5 as indicated. Symbols denote the
kMC data. The solid lines are analytical dependencies 5.
Fig. 5.
The coverage dependencies of the jump diffusion coefﬁcient, Dj,
for the attractive interaction −2.5 ≤ ϕ ≤ 0. The notations are the same as
in previous Figure 4.
Fickian diffusion coefﬁcient for the empty and ﬁlled lattices
are different. On the empty lattice jumping particles do not
have NN particles. If θ → 1, every jumping particle has 3
NNs, which change its jump rate. The ordering in the particle
system at the stoichiometric coverages θ = 1/4 and θ = 3/4
produces the additional ﬁne structure and weak maxima on the
coverage dependencies of the Fickian diffusion coefﬁcient.
As it was mentioned above, the sites in the patches are
located at different distances from the initial site. Then, their
participation in the jump successions will be also different.
The simplest way to account this difference is to ﬁt the
numerical data with the analytical dependencies calculated
for the different z and z ′. The dependencies Dj and Dc
are smooth, slowly varying functions of z and z ′. The best
coincidence between the kMC and analytical data is achieved
for z = 5 and z′ = 4. One can consider them as the effective
numbers of the NN sites participating in the particle migration.
They are signiﬁcantly reduced as compared with the exact
geometrical values z = z′ = 8.
VI. SUMMARY
We have investigated the diffusion of particles over the
inhomogeneous patchwise lattice with two kinds of the ad-
sorption sites. Such lattices have speciﬁc features qualitatively
inﬂuencing the particle diffusion. The lattice inhomogeneity
Fig. 6.
The coverage dependencies of the Fickian diffusion coefﬁcient, Dc,
for the repulsive lateral interaction 0 ≤ ϕ ≤ 2.5 as indicated. The notations
are the same as in previous Figure 4.
Fig. 7.
The coverage dependencies of the Fickian diffusion coefﬁcient, Dc,
for the attractive lateral interaction −2.5 ≤ ϕ ≤ 0 as indicated. The notations
are the same as in previous Figure 4.
governs the migration of particles. It imposes a very speciﬁc
correlation on the particle jumps. The slow and fast jumps
collect in the jump successions. The approach developed for
the investigations of the particle diffusion in the heterogeneous
lattices gives simple analytical expressions for the diffusion
coefﬁcients, which describe perfectly the particle migration
in many heterogeneous lattices of different symmetry and
dimensionality [3]. These expressions perfectly describe the
particle diffusion in many heterogeneous lattices with two
types of adsorption sites: 1D chain, square, honeycomb, dice,
cubic, anisotropic, triangular (see, for example, [9]).
The successions of the correlated slow and fast jumps,
performed by single particles, are the main migration acts in
the low coverage region θ < 1/2. The successions transfer
particles between the d patches. They describe quite well the
particle diffusion in this region.
Another type of the jump successions, performed by the two
particles, dominates in the high coverage region θ > 1/2. Such
jump successions transfer particles between the s patches.
The coverage dependencies of the tracer, center-of-mass and
Fickian diffusion coefﬁcients are calculated using the kMC
simulations of the particle migration and the theoretical ap-
proach based on the conception of jump successions. It should
be noted the almost perfect coincidence between the analytical
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

dependencies and the kMC data in the rather wide region
of the lateral interaction −1.5 < ϕ < 1.5. The noticeable
discrepancies appear for the very strong lateral attractions
|ϕ| > 1.5. The strong attraction results in the non-uniform
distribution of the particles, i.e., the formation of islands of the
dense phase with θ → 1 surrounded by a rareﬁed LG phase
with θ → 0. The strong lateral repulsion tends to arrange
particles in the ordered structures with alternating empty
and ﬁlled sites. These correlations in the particle distribution
should be accounted for the better coincidence of the theory
with the kMC simulations.
The analytical expressions 5 can be used for the estima-
tions of the diffusion coefﬁcients for such lattices. The good
coincidence demonstrates the correctness of the used approach
based on the conception of the correlated jump successions.
The long jump successions control the particle diffusion
over different heterogeneous lattices [11], [12]. But, it is
salient to emphasize an important difference between the
lattices mentioned above and the lattice considered here. The
common feature of these quite different heterogeneous lattices
(disordered square and triangular lattice) is the existence of
an inﬁnite connected cluster of shallow sites. The particles
can migrate over the lattices jumping exclusively over the s
sites. They perform long sequences of jumps and the diffusion
is described by the simple law Dt, Dj ∼ (1 − nd)−1. The
percolation determines the character of the particle migration
on these lattices. These lattices are equivalent for the particle
diffusion, and the diffusion coefﬁcients are the same. There
is no such inﬁnite connected cluster on the patchwise lat-
tices. The particles perform long jump successions, but the
effective length of these succession does not grow with the
concentration of the particles trapped in the deep sites n d. The
coefﬁcients Dt and Dj have a minimum at the stoichiometric
coverage. The long jump successions transfer particles like
ordinary pairs of slow and fast jumps. Only the ﬁrst slow jump
and the ﬁnal fast jump are really effective. Many fast jumps
over the s patches do not give any contribution to the migra-
tion. Therefore, the diffusion is described by the corresponding
analytical expressions derived for the ordinary jump pairs [3].
It is rather interesting that almost the same expressions with
some minor modiﬁcations describe the particle diffusion in the
patchwise lattice, which looks very different from the above
mentioned heterogeneous lattices.
It should be noted that the analysis and conclusions have a
general character. One should expect that the results obtained
for this lattice can be applied for a wide class of the patchwise
surfaces. The speciﬁc character of the particle migration by the
sequences of the jump pairs should not change considerably
on the lattices with patches of the irregular forms and different
sizes. The cardinal properties of the lattices, as the lattice sym-
metry and dimensionality, play a minor role when diffusion is
determined by the long jump successions.
The main advantage of the proposed approach is the uniﬁed
description of the particle diffusion in different heterogeneous
lattices. The theoretical expressions for the diffusion coefﬁ-
cients give good description of the particle diffusion in the
different heterogeneous structures. The coincidence between
the analytical and numerical data is really satisfactory despite
the numerous approximations made during the derivation of
the expressions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported in part by the grants
P108/12/1941 of the GACR and TA01010517 of the TACR.
REFERENCES
[1] S. R. Ross and J. R. Olivier, “On physical adsorption. XII. The adsorp-
tion isotherm and the adsorptive energy distribution of solids,” J. Phys.
Chem., vol. 65, April 1961, pp. 608-615, doi: 10.1021/j100822a005.
[2] “Equilibria and dynamics of gas adsorption on heterogeneous solid
surfaces”, W. W. Rudzinski, W. A. Steele, and G. Zgrablich, Eds.,
Amsterdam: Elsevier 1997.
[3] A. Tarasenko, L. Jastrabik, and T. Muller, “Modeling diffusion on
heterogeneous lattices: Derivation of general analytical expressions and
veriﬁcation for a two-dimensional square lattice,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 75,
April 2007 pp. 085401(11), doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.75.085401.
[4] A. B. Bortz, M.H. Kalos, and J.L. Lebowitz, ”A new algorithm for
Monte Carlo simulations of Ising spin systems”, J. Comput. Phys., vol.
17, Jan. 1975, pp. 10-18, doi: 10.1016/0021-9991(75)90060-1.
[5] Th. Niemeyer and J. M. J. van Leeuwen, “Wilson theory for 2-
dimensional Ising spin systems”, Physica, vol. 71, Jan. 1974, pp. 17-40,
doi: 10.1016/0031-8914(74)90044-5.
[6] M. G. Evans and M. Polanyi, “Some applications of the transition
state method to the calculation of reaction velocities, especially in
solutions”, Trans. Faraday Soc., vol. 31, March 1935, pp. 875-894, doi:
10.1039/TF9353100875.
[7] H. Eyring, “The activated complex in chemical reactions”, J. Chem.
Phys., vol. 3, Feb. 1935, pp. 107-115, doi: 10.1063/1.1749604.
[8] D. Forster, “Hydrodynamic Fluctuations, Broken Symmetry and Corre-
lation Functions”, London: Benjamin 1975.
[9] A. Tarasenko and L. Jastrabik, ”Diffusion in heterogeneous lat-
tices”, Appl. Surf. Sci., vol. 256, June 2010, pp.5137-5144, doi:
10.1016/j.apsusc.2009.12.076.
[10] A. Tarasenko and L. Jastrabik, “Diffusion of particles over anisotropic
heterogeneous lattices”, Physica A, vol. 391, April 2012, pp. 1048-1061,
doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2011.11.006.
[11] A. Tarasenko and L. Jastrabik, “Diffusion of particles on an inhomoge-
neous disordered square lattice with two non-equivalent sites”, Surf. Sci.,
vol. 602, Aug. 2008, pp. 2975-2982, doi: 10.1016/j.susc.2008.07.037.
[12] A. Tarasenko and L. Jastrabik, “Diffusion of particles over triangular
inhomogeneous lattice with two non-equivalent sites”, Physica A, vol.
388, Feb. 2009, pp. 2109-2121, doi: 10.1016/j.physa.2009.02.009.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

