Naturally Inspired SERS Substrate Properties of Silver Nanoparticles 
Deposited on TiO2-Coated Insect Wings 
 
Ichiro Tanahashi and Yoshiyuki Harada 
Nanomaterials and Microdevices Research Center 
Osaka Institute of Technology 
Osaka, Japan 
e-mail: ichiro.tanahashi@oit.ac.jp, yoshiyuki.harada@oit.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Ag nanoparticles were photocatalytically deposited 
on TiO2-coated insect wings (Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings). 
Wings of dragonfly, cicada and butterfly with different 
micro/nanostructured surfaces were investigated as substrates 
based on natural materials. We have investigated the surface 
enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrate properties of the 
six types of Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings. The size and shape of 
the deposited Ag nanoparticles were influenced by the surface 
structures of the insect wings. The SERS signal intensities of 
Rhodamine 6G adsorbed on the Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings 
with spherical-shaped Ag nanoparticles of 100-250 nm 
diameter and flake-shaped Ag nanoparticles were more than 
one order of magnitude larger than those on the Ag thin film 
grown by sputtering on glass slides. 
 
Keywords-metal nanoparticle; silver; SRES; insect; wing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, surface-enhanced Raman scattering 
(SERS) has attracted much attention because of its 
application in the detection of trace amount of chemical and 
biological agents. As the SERS-active materials, roughened 
metal films and metal nanoparticles have been investigated 
[1][2]. In the case of metal nanoparticles, the local 
electromagnetic 
field 
enhancement 
induced 
by 
the 
excitation of the localized surface plasmon resonance 
(LSPR) is the major mechanism for SERS. It is known that 
the size and shape of the metal nanoparticles affect their 
LSPR properties. In particular, silver (Ag) nanoparticles 
with clear LSPR absorption are the most suitable candidate 
for SERS-active materials. However, the appropriate size 
and shape of the Ag nanoparticles for SERS-active materials 
are still not clear. 
The size and shape of the deposited metal nanoparticles 
on the substrates are also largely affected by the surface 
structures of the base substrates. The artificial base 
substrates such as glasses, ceramics and plastics are widely 
used. On the other hand, some biological surfaces of insect 
wings are structured at the micro/nanometer scale. Thus, 
scientists have been trying to develop the new types of 
SERS-active substrates using natural biological materials 
such as cicada and butterfly wings [3][4].  In our previous 
studies [5], we have reported the preparation and SERS 
properties of the Ag nanoparticles on TiO2-coated cicada 
wings with nanopillar array structures. However, it is not 
clear what types of micro/nanostructured surfaces of insect 
wings are more suitable for the naturally inspired SERS-
active substrates. In this paper, we have reported the 
characterization, optical and SERS properties of the six 
types of Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS 
We used three species of dragonflies, two species of 
butterflies and one species of cicada. All the investigated 
insects were captured in the Kansai region of Japan. Wing 
samples were collected from Sympetrum darwinianum 
(Summer Darter, small to medium-sized skimmer dragonfly 
with clear and transparent wings): denoted as dragonfly (a), 
Mnais costalis (small-sized one with orange color wings): 
dragonfly (b), Mnais pruinosa (small-sized one with clear 
and transparent wings): dragonfly (c), Panantica sita 
(Chestnut Tiger, the Danaid group butterfly, black and 
bluish-white subhyaline markings on the forewings): 
butterfly (d), Parnassius citrinarius (the Parnassiinae one, 
white and subhyaline markings on the forewings): butterfly 
(e) and Cryptotympana facialis (a black cicada with clear 
and transparent wings): cicada (f). The male dorsal 
forewings of the samples were used in the experiments. 
The detailed preparation processes of the Ag/TiO2-coated 
insect wings have been described previously [5]. By using 
TiO2 (Ishihara Sangyo Kaisha, ST-K211) as a photocatalyst, 
Ag metal was produced by photoreduction of Ag+ ions. 
Photographs of the insect specimens and prepared 
samples were taken using a digital camera. Scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) analysis, X-ray diffraction 
(XRD) and UV-Vis absorption spectra measurements were 
carried out to characterize the bare insect wings and 
Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings. 
SERS measurements were performed by irradiating the 
sample with 50 mW of 514.5 nm line of an Ar+ laser in back 
scattering geometry at room temperature. The laser beam 
was focused on a spot with a diameter of 2 μm and the data 
acquisition time was 1 s. The intensities of Raman spectra of 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-431-2
ICQNM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

10-3 mol L-1 Rhodamine 6G (R6G, 2 μL) adsorbed on 
various samples were compared. As a reference, R6G (2 μ
L) adsorbed on a mirror-like smooth surface Ag thin film 
prepared by an RF magnetron sputtering system was used. 
 
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
In the SEM micrographs, the wings of the dragonfly (a), 
(b) and (c) showed sub-micrometer-scale relief structures. 
The pitch of the concavo-convex pattern of the dragonfly (a), 
(b) and (c) increased in that order. The wing membrane 
(bluish-white subhyaline marking part) of the butterfly (d) 
had a wrinkle-like irregular shape surface. A small number 
of scales were observed on the bluish-white subhyaline 
markings. The wing scales of the butterfly (e) possessed 
uniform ordered ridge structure. The wings of the cicada (f) 
had a dense nanopillar array structure [5]. 
In all the investigated six types of Ag/TiO2-coated insect 
wings, the color of the wings was changed to metallic gray 
after the UV irradiation indicating the formation of Ag 
metal on the insect wings. In the case of the Ag/TiO2-coated 
insect wings of the dragonfly (a) shown in Fig. 1, (c) and 
cicada (f), densely stacked Ag nanoparticles with 100-250 
nm in diameter were seen. The mean diameter of Ag 
nanoparticles of the Ag/TiO2-coated insect wing of the 
dragonfly (c) was smaller than those of the dragonfly (a) 
and cicada (f). In the case of the Ag/TiO2-coated insect 
wings of the butterfly (d) (membrane) and dragonfly (b) 
shown in Fig. 1, flake-shaped Ag nanoparticles with various 
sizes were seen. 
Figure 1. SEM micrographs of Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings 
of the dragonfly (a) and (b). 
 
On the other hand, the uniform ordered ridge structures of 
the Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings of the butterfly (e) (scales) 
were covered with the Ag films and small number of 
nanoparticles. Among the investigated six types of insect 
wings, the size and shape of the Ag nanoparticles deposited 
on the TiO2-coated insect wings were largely influenced by 
the surface structures such as sub-micrometer-scale relief 
and nanopillar array ones. 
In the XRD patterns of the six types of Ag/TiO2-coated 
insect wings, it was seen that the peak at 2 =38.1
  which 
was assigned to the (111) reflection line of cubic Ag. From 
the results of the XRD, the TiO2-coated insect wings were 
successfully covered by the metallic Ag. 
In the optical absorption spectra of the Ag/TiO2-coated 
insect wings of the dragonfly (a), (c) and cicada (f), the 
broad absorption band peaking at about 430 nm was 
observed. The band was due to the LSPR absorption of the 
Ag nanoparticles. These results were in accordance with the 
SEM observations. Thus, the Ag nanoparticles could be 
made on the TiO2-coated sub-micrometer-scale relief and 
nanopillar array structured wings by the photoreduction. 
SERS spectra of R6G adsorbed on the six types of 
Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings and the Ag thin film sputtered 
on a glass slide were measured. In the SERS measurements, 
R6G (10-3 mol L-1) as standard remarks was dripped and 
dried on the surface of the Ag/TiO2-coated insect dorsal 
forewings and the Ag thin film. In all the SERS spectra, the 
distinct peaks and a broad band from 600 to 1800 cm-1 were 
seen. The observed Raman peaks were characteristic of R6G 
[6]. The peak intensities at ca. 1649 cm-1 (the C-C stretching 
mode) of the six types of Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings were 
compared with that of the Ag thin film. The intensities of the 
Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings of dragonfly (c), butterfly (d) 
and (e) were about 1-4 times larger than that of the Ag thin 
film. On the other hand, the intensities of the Ag/TiO2-coated 
insect wings of dragonfly (a), (b) and cicada (f) were 
respectively about 15, 10 and 10 times larger than that of the 
Ag thin film. 
The Ag/TiO2-coated insect wings with large-area, low-
cost and high-SERS performance seem to be a promising 
candidate for the naturally inspired SERS-active substrates. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Wu, B. Zhao, W. Xu, B. Li, Y. M. Jung, and Y. Ozaki, 
“Near-Infrared Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering Study of 
Ultrathin Films of Azobenzene-Containing Long-Chain Fatty 
Acids on a Silver Surface Prepared by Silver Mirror and Nitric 
Acid Etched Silver Foil Methods,” Langmuir, 1999, 15, pp. 
4625-4629. 
[2] W. Xie, P. Qui, and C. Mao, “Bio-Imaging, Detection and 
Analysis by Using Nanostructures as SERS Substrates,” J. 
Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, pp. 5190-5202. 
[3] P. R. Stoddart, P. J. Cadusch, T. M. Boyce, R. M. Erasmus, and 
J. D. Comins, “Optical Properties of Chitin: Surface-Enhanced 
Raman 
Scattering 
Substrates 
Based 
on 
Antireflection 
Structures on Cicada Wings,” Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, pp. 
680-686. 
[4] Y. Tan, et al., “Morphological Effects on Surface-Enhanced 
Raman Scattering from Silver Butterfly Wing Scales 
Synthesized via Photoreduction,” Langmuir, 2011, 27, pp. 
11742-11746. 
[5] I. Tanahashi and Y. Harada, “Naturally Inspired SERS 
Substrates Fabricated by Photocatalytically Depositing Silver 
Nanoparticles on Cicada Wings,” Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 
pp. 1/298-5/298. 
[6] Y. Lu, G. L. Liu, and L. P. Lee, “High-Density Silver 
Nanoparticle Film with Temperature-Controllable Interparticle 
Spacing for a Tunable Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering 
Substrate,” Nano. Lett., 2005, 5, pp. 5-9. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-431-2
ICQNM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

