  Electrical and Structural Analysis of CNT-Metal Contacts in Via Interconnects 
  
Patrick Wilhite, Anshul Vyas, Jason Tan, and  
Cary. Y. Yang 
Santa Clara University, Center for Nanostructures 
Santa Clara, USA 
pwilhite@scu.edu; avyas@scu.edu; jttan@scu.edu; 
cyang@scu.edu 
Phillip Wang, Jeongwon Park, Hua Ai, and Murali 
Narasimhan 
Applied Materials 
Santa Clara, USA 
phillip_wang@amat.com; jeongwon_park@amat.com; 
hua_ai@amat.com; murali_narasimhan@amat.com  
 
 
Abstract- Vertically aligned carbon nanotubes grown by plasma-
enhanced chemical vapor deposition offer a potentially suitable 
material for via interconnects in next-generation integrated 
circuits.  Key performance-limiting factors include high contact 
resistance and low carbon nanotube packing density, which fall 
short of meeting the requirements delineated in the ITRS 
roadmap for interconnects. For individual carbon nanotube s, 
contact resistance is a major performance hurdle since it is the 
dominant component of carbon nanotube interconnect resistance, 
even in the case of vertically aligned carbon nanotube arrays. In 
this study, we correlate the carbon nanotube-metal interface 
nanostructure to their electrical properties in order to elucidate 
growth parameters that can lead to high density and low contact 
resistance and resistivity. 
 
Keywords-carbon nanotube; via; resistance; contact resistance. 
 
 
I.    INTRODUCTION 
 
Nanocarbons, in general, and Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs) in 
particular are expected to be implemented in next-generation 
integrated circuit (IC) technologies, due to their high tolerance 
to electromigration and high current-carrying capacity [1-3]. 
Moreover, with resistivities reported in the range of 10-6 Ωcm 
for single-walled CNTs [3], they are indeed viable materials to 
replace copper (Cu) in vias and interconnects for ICs with sub-
20 nm feature sizes. Attaining a CNT resistivity of 10-6 Ωcm 
for functional devices or simply meeting the industry 
requirement for interconnect resistance [1] is a daunting 
challenge for researchers, but its superior current capacity over 
Cu is already a distinct advantage, as the current capacity of 
Cu in the sub-20 nm regime is expected to be significantly less 
than half of its bulk value of 106 A/cm2 [4]. Aside from 
resistivity, the greatest challenge to overcome is minimization 
of the resistance between CNT and metal contact, which 
critically depends on CNT growth and subsequent device 
fabrication processes.  
Recently, we reported individual CNT resistances of about 1 
kΩ in a vertically aligned CNT array with average diameter 
~100 nm and length ~1.5 µm [4].  Of such resistance, about 
800 Ω is attributed to the contact between the CNT and metal 
electrodes. These results are consistent with prior reports using 
similar techniques [5,6]. High-resolution transmission electron 
microscopy (HRTEM) images revealed a clean interface 
between CNT and the underlayer metal, albeit with significant 
surface asperity and large metal grains [4].   
 
Further, energy-dispersive   x-ray   spectroscopy   (EDS)  
showed   significant amounts of oxygen and nitrogen present 
in the interfacial region, which could negatively impact the 
contact resistance. 
Currently, we have succeeded in reducing the average 
diameter of the PECVD-grown CNTs to about 15 nm, while 
increasing the packing densities to >1011 cm-2.  This result is 
comparable to recent work reported for CNT vias [5] and is 
closer to values delineated by the current ITRS roadmap [1]. 
However, initial current-voltage (I-V) measurements suggest 
that the underlayer metal surface graininess is the primary 
cause for high contact resistance. To improve CNT electrical 
behavior, we have made changes to the CNT growth process 
to improve the as-grown CNT-metal contact with the primary 
objective of reducing the contact resistance, thus yielding a 
total CNT via resistance closer to that of Cu.  
In this paper, the CNT-metal interface is studied extensively 
using HRTEM to gain a better understanding of the physical 
origin of contact resistance, and to provide the needed 
feedback for process improvement. I-V characteristics of 
individual CNTs are measured to allow extraction of electrode 
contact resistance and CNT resistivity. Correlation of these 
electrical performance parameters for CNTs grown under 
different conditions with their respective HRTEM images 
provides the needed insight that will lead to the eventual 
functionalization of CNT via interconnects.  
In the next sections, we will elaborate on the device 
fabrication, followed by the characterization of these devices 
using HRTEM and electrical measurements. 
 
II.  
CNT GROWTH AND DEVICE FABRICATION 
 
Titanium (Ti) is an excellent underlayer metal due to its 
compatibility with current IC technology. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Cross-sectional SEM images of substrates consisting of Ni catalyst 
film on Ti underlayer. Smooth or continuous films (a) results in lower contact 
resistance compared with grainy substrate (b).  
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

High-density CNT growth is observed on Ti film with 
significant surface roughness, where the Ti grains serve as 
templates for the nickel (Ni) catalyst film deposition, as shown 
in Fig. 1. CNTs appear to grow on the grain boundaries, and 
smaller grains result in higher density. Different film 
deposition conditions can be used to study the effect of 
graininess on CNT packing density and diameter distribution, 
as well as contact resistance. 
The starting wafer consists of a thin silicon dioxide layer 
that serves as a diffusion barrier to subsequent film deposition. 
The Ti underlayer and Ni catalyst films are deposited using 
magnetron sputtering. This underlayer serves as the base 
electrode, and provides a clean interface to the as-grown 
CNTs. CNTs are then grown using a plasma-enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) reactor, with acetylene as 
the carbon source and ammonia as reducing agent. PECVD 
growth parameters are optimized for the Ni/Ti layers to yield 
the highest CNT packing density. Smooth Ti substrates with 6 
nm of Ni yield higher CNT array density (1.9 x 1010 cm-2), 
than grainy substrates (1.2 x 1010 cm-2) with ~8 nm of Ni. 
Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) images of as-grown 
CNT arrays are shown in Fig. 2. 
After CNT growth, the exposed surface is encapsulated in a 
polymer matrix to fill the interstitial spacing within the CNT 
arrays. This provides electrical isolation among the CNTs, 
while providing the structural rigidity necessary to land the 
nanoprober tips for electrical measurements. The CNT surface 
is then planarized using ion-beam sputtering and mechanical 
polishing. Sections of the same substrate are further polished 
to different lengths for electrical probing, as described below. 
 
III.  
DEVICE CHARACTERIZATION 
 
A. Electrical Measurements 
 
Due to the geometry of the vertically-aligned CNT array, a 
four-point-probe measurement is not feasible to directly 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Top-view (a) and (b) tilted-view SEM images of as-grown CNT 
arrays on smooth Ti underlayer with density ~ 1.9 x 1010 cm-2. (c) Top-view 
and (d) tilted-view of as-grown CNT on grainy substrate with density ~ 1.2 x 
1010 cm-2. Growth on smooth Ti substrate shows smaller average diameter and 
narrower diameter distribution. 
determine the CNT resistivity and contact resistance. To 
extract these values, a linear fit of the CNT total resistance, RT, 
versus CNT length, LCNT, behavior is used with the assumption 
that each CNT and its contacts are ohmic resistors. Because 
the 
contact 
resistance 
RC 
is 
diameter-dependent, 
all 
measurements are performed on CNTs with similar diameters. 
Thus, RC and CNT resistivity ρ can be extracted using 
 
𝑅! =   𝑅! + 𝑅!"# = 𝑅! +
!!
!!!"#
!
𝐿!"# .               (1) 
 
RC is simply the resistance intercept of the RT vs. LCNT line as 
shown in Fig. 3, while LCNT and diameter (DCNT) are 
determined from SEM images. The CNT resistivity is then 
determined from the slope of the line and using Eq. (1). 
For these measurements, the nanoprober-CNT contact 
resistance is minimized with Joule heating from current 
stressing. This improves RC by several orders of magnitude [4-
6]. Despite such improvement, RC is still the dominant factor 
governing CNT device performance, as apparent from Fig. 
3(a) for CNTs grown on a grainy substrate. With a smooth 
substrate, we are able to grow CNTs with individual contact 
resistance below 400 Ω, as shown in Fig. 3(b). And contact 
resistance around 300 Ω and CNT resistivity in the 10-4 - 10-5 
Ωcm range as given in Table I are now achievable. 
 
B. High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy 
 
HRTEM images of the CNT-Ti interface reveal two 
significant differences in CNTs grown on the smooth Ti 
substrate  compared  with   those  on  the  grainy  substrate,  as  
 
 
  
Fig. 3. Total resistance RT versus CNT length LCNT for grainy substrate (a) 
and smooth substrate (b). Each data point corresponds to an individual CNT 
measurement.  
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

TABLE I. PROJECTIONS OF  30 nm-CNT VIA RESISTANCE BASED 
ON PRESENT RESULTS FROM US AND OTHERS [10], AND 
COMPARED WITH THAT OF CU.  CALCULATED RESULTS ARE 
BASED ON 120 nm-LONG VIA AND CNT DENSITY OF 4.4 X 1011 cm-2.  
 
 
shown in Fig. 4. CNTs on the smooth substrate show parallel 
graphitic planes perpendicular to the metal underlayer, while 
those on the grainy substrate have structures resembling 
stacked cups. The latter structure is generally called carbon 
nanofiber (CNF) [7,8]. These distinct nanostructures near the 
metal interface appear to be dictated by the catalyst particle 
shape and size, and defined in the early stages of CNT growth 
[9]. While both structures appear to have a clean interface with 
Ti, the smoother substrate shows less grain boundaries and 
provides a more effective conduction path across the interface. 
Further, the HRTEM images confirm that a smooth underlayer 
results in more uniform CNT growth and higher density. And 
the multi-wall structure near the interface is clearly the 
primary reason for a lower contact resistance. Such findings 
are valuable for the eventual optimization of the CNT growth 
process to yield functional via interconnects. 
 
IV.  
CONCLUSION 
 
Using a PECVD reactor, we have grown CNTs on Ni/Ti 
substrates with different degrees of graininess to elucidate the 
growth parameters that can eventually lead to via fabrication 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. (a) TEM cross-sectional image of as-grown CNTs on (a) smooth Ti 
substrate, and (b) HRTEM image of an individual CNT-metal interface as 
indicated in (a). (c) & (d) Corresponding images for a grainy Ti substrate. 
Both sets of interface images display a clean interface between CNT and 
underlayer metal. 
process optimization. For a functional CNT via, maximal CNT 
density, minimal average CNT diameter, very low CNT-metal 
contact resistance, and parallel multi-wall CNT structure are 
needed. This study provides the basis to define the growth and 
fabrication tasks to achieve such targets. To quantify these 
targets based on our present results, simple projections of 
resistance for a 30 nm via are given in Table I, where 
comparison with Cu is also shown. 
It is clear from such comparison that the key in “matching” 
Cu via resistance lies in minimizing the CNT-metal contact 
resistance and to a lesser extent, maximizing the CNT density. 
Efforts on CNT growth and device fabrication are underway to 
achieve densities >1011 cm-2, while further improving the 
CNT-metal interface. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  2011 International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors,  
http://www.itrs.net/Links/2012ITRS/Home2012.htm. 
 
[2]  T. Saito, T. Yamada, D. Fabris, H. Kitsuki, P. Wilhite, M. 
Suzuki, and C.Y. Yang, "Improved contact for thermal and 
electrical transport in carbon nanofiber interconnects," Applied 
Physics Letters 93, 102108 (1-3) (2008). 
 
[3]  M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, and P. Avouris, “Carbon 
nanotubes: synthesis, structure, properties, and applications,” 
Berlin, New York, Springer, 2001. 
 
[4]  P. Wilhite, A. Vyas, J. Tan, P. Wang, J. Park, M. Jackson, and 
C.Y .Yang, “Nanostructure Characterization of Carbon 
Nanotube/Metal Interfaces,” MRS Spring Meeting, San 
Francisco, 2012. 
 
[5]  W. Wu, S. Krishnan, T. Yamada, X. Sun, P. Wilhite, R. Wu, K. 
Li, and C.Y. Yang, "Contact resistance in carbon nanostructure 
via interconnects," Applied Physics Letters 94, 2009, 163113 (1-
3). 
[6]  K. Li, R. Wu, P. Wilhite, V. Khera, S. Krishnan, X. Sun, and 
C.Y. Yang, "Extraction of contact resistance in carbon nanofiber 
via interconnects with varying lengths," Applied Physics 
Letters 97, 2010, 253109 (1-3). 
[7]  Q. Ngo, A.M. Cassell, V. Radmilovic, J. Li, S. Krishnan, M. 
Meyyappan, and C.Y. Yang, "Palladium catalyzed formation of 
carbon nanofibers by plasma enhanced chemical vapor 
deposition," Carbon 45, 2007, 424-428. 
[8]  A. V. Melechko, V. I. Merkulov, T. E. McKnight, M. A. 
Guillorn, K. L. Klein, D. H. Lowndes, and M. L. Simpson, 
“Vertically aligned carbon nanofibers and related structures: 
Controlled synthesis and directed assembly,” J. Appl. Phys. 97, 
2005, 041301 (1-7). 
[9]  A. V. Melechko, K. L. Klein, J. D. Fowlkes, D. K. Hensley, I. 
A. Merkulov, T. E. McKnight, P. D. Rack, J. A. Horton, and M. 
L. Simpson, “Control of carbon nanostructure: From nanofiber 
toward nanotube and back,” J. Appl. Phys. 102, 2007, 074314 
(1-7). 
[10]  M. Nihei, “CNT/Graphene Technologies for Advanced 
Interconnects,” IITC Short Course, San Jose, 2012. 
Via 
RC 
ρ  
(Ω cm) 
DCNT 
(nm) 
RCNT 
30 nm Via 
resistance 
AIST 
N/A 
~ 1 x 10-4 
~ 4 
9.55 kΩ 
(calc.) 
190 Ω 1 
(calc.) 
SCU 
300 Ω 
~5 x 10-5 
15  
340 Ω 
160 Ω 2 
(projected) 
Cu 
~15 Ω 
5 x 10-6 
 
 
~25 Ω 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

