DNA Lattice Nanostructures as Biointerface Materials for Electrochemical  
Biosensor Studies 
Nanobiocomposite Biosensor 
Murugan Veerapandian, 1 Chang-Hyun Jang1, Guie-Sam Lim,2 Sung Ha Park,3 Min-Ho Lee4 and Kyusik Yun,1* 
1Kyungwon University, 2LG Electronics, 3Sungkyunkwan University, 4Korea Electronics Technology Institute,  
Republic of Korea    Email: ykyusik@kyungwon.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—We demonstrate the use of well designed artificial 
DNA lattices as active biointerface material for electrochemical 
biosensing. Gold-PCB electrodes were modified with metalloid-
polymer 
nanocomposite 
in 
presence/absence 
of 
DNA 
nanostructures and then characterized for its electrochemical 
response toward antigen, bovine serum albumin (BSA) and 
antibody, anti-bovine serum albumin (anit-BSA) interaction.  
The surface chemical modifications were achieved by 
utilization of suitable alkane dithiol and 1-ethyl-3-(3-
dimethylaminopropyl) 
carbodiimide 
hydrochloride/N-
Hydroxysuccinimde 
(EDC/NHS) 
coupling 
reaction, 
respectively. Furthermore, UV-visible spectral and Field 
Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) studies 
ensured the immobilization and morphological characteristics 
of the designed nanobiocomposite biosensor. 
 
Keywords-DNA cross tile; Metalloid-polymer; BSA/Anti-
BSA; Biosensor; Biointerface 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
  DNA is well known as a biomolecular carrier of genetic 
information, but in recent years the application of DNA- 
based nanostructures are invaluable for material science and 
nanotechnology. 
Unique 
structural 
composition 
and 
physical-chemical properties makes them possible for 
diverse architectures [1].  The incorporation of DNA into 
nano-object design is of great interest to establish high 
selective 
and 
reversible 
interactions 
between 
the 
components of a nanosystem. Many researchers have 
highlighted the immobilization and characterization of DNA 
on surfaces including X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
(XPS) [2, 3], ellipsometry [2], neutran reflectivity [4], 
surface plasmon resonance (SPR) [5], Raman spectroscopy 
[6] and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) [7]. However, 
relationship 
between 
different 
nanostructures 
and 
orientation of surface-tailored DNA, their biological 
adherence and the behavior of DNA modified electrodes are 
still remaining as fundamental issues for its exploitation in 
biosensor studies. By using suitable surface linking/ 
modifying agent optimal concentration of DNA can be 
easily immobilized on the electrodes. Generally, scanning 
probe microscopes (STM and AFM) are utilized to achieve 
imaging of DNA nanostructures [8, 9]. Zhang et al. studied 
the orientation of DNA on gold electrodes using 
electrochemical (EC)-STM [8]. Kelly et al. investigated the 
different applied potential effect on the orientation of self-
assembled DNA helices on gold by EC in-situ atomic force 
microscope [10].  
      The target of the present research work is to extend the 
application of DNA-based nanostructures as biointerface 
materials. To this regard, we have utilized the artificially 
designed DNA lattices and modified at the interface of 
nanocomposite materials and gold-PCB electrodes and 
performed the biosensing of antigen-antibody interaction. 
The two different nanocomposite materials incorporated in 
the 
current 
experiments 
are 
poly(ethyleneglycol)-
silica@silver core (PEG-SiO2@Ag) and poly (p-dioxanone-
co-caprolactone)-block-poly 
(ethylene-oxide)-block-poly-
(p-dioxanone-co-caprolactone) 
(PPDO-co-PCL-b-PEG-b-
PPDO-co-PCL)/ ABA-poly (ethyleneglycol)-silica@silver 
core (ABA/ PEG-SiO2@Ag) [11]. DNA lattices are 
immobilized on gold-PCB electrodes by ethane dithiol 
activation (EDT). The electrochemical properties of the 
above nanocomposite (in absence of DNA lattices) and 
bionanocomposite (in presence of DNA lattices) structures 
were 
evaluated 
through 
biofunctionalization 
(using 
EDC/NHS coupling reaction) of model protein BSA and 
anti-BSA. The reaction mechanism and relationship at the 
bio-nano interface were briefly discussed for its possible 
application in biosensor studies. Fundamental determination 
of changes in the oxidation and reduction peak potential 
from the surface modified nanocomposite particles on 
before and after treatment with BSA and anti-BSA gives a 
considerable chance of sensing abilities. Further the 
morphological and wavelengths of maximum absorbance 
(λmax) characterization of the immobilized nanostructures 
were obtained from FE-SEM and UV-visible spectroscopy, 
respectively. The two hybrid nanocomposite particles used 
in the current experiment has several distinct features such 
as polymer/copolymeric shell (PEG/ABA), metalloid core 
(SiO2@Ag) and film forming ability for surface and 
interface studies [11].  
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL  
A. Fabrication of nanocomposite particles and DNA 
lattice structures 
      poly(ethyleneglycol)-silica@silver core (PEG-SiO2@ 
Ag) 
and 
poly(p-dioxanone-co-caprolactone)-block-poly 
63
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

(ethyleneoxide)-block-poly-(p-dioxanone-co-caprolac -tone) 
(PPDO-co-PCL-b-PEG-b-PPDO-co-PCL)/ABA-poly (ethyl 
eneglycol)-silica@silver core (ABA/PEG-SiO2@Ag) were 
prepared by our previous report [11]. DNA nanostructures 
of double cross over tiles (DX1 and DX2) [12] were 
successfully self assembled for DNA lattice growth. These 
DNA nanostructures are fairly stiff and considerably stable 
at room temperature [13] sequenced by multiple DNA 
crossovers. Final concentration of DNA lattice sample 
utilized in electrode preparation is about 200 nM. The 
details of DNA base sequence can be found from Table 1. 
DX1 cross tiles and DX2 cross tiles are composed of 
individual strands such as DX1#1, DX1#2, DX1#3, DX1#4 
and DX2#1, DX2#2, DX2#3, DX2#4, respectively.  
B. Electrode pretreatment and immobilization of 
nanocomposite particles/DNA lattice structures   
Platinum and Ag/AgCl electrodes were used as counter 
and reference electrodes, respectively. Surface of working 
electrode (gold-PCB) were cleaned by soaking the electrode 
surface under acetone and ethanol for 5 m separately and 
rinsed thoroughly with D.I H2O. Prior to surface 
functionalization of prepared colloidal PEG-SiO2@Ag and 
ABA/PEG-SiO2@Ag nanocomposite particles the surface of 
gold-PCB electrode was made hydrophilic by oxygen-
plasma coating for 300 s. After plasma cleaning, the 
electrode surface were drop coated with EDT (1 mM) and 
kept under room temperature for 12 h. EDT activated 
electrode surface were then drop coated with 4 µL of above 
nanocomposite particles, separately. DNA lattice (200 nM) 
modification on the nanocomposite/gold-PCB surface was 
prepared by same procedure. Biofunctionalization of BSA 
and anti-BSA on the surface of these nanocomposite/ (in 
presence and absence of DNA lattice) gold-PCB electrode 
were done via EDC/NHS coupling reaction [14]. Cyclic 
voltammetry scans were recorded under 5 mL PBS (10 mM; 
pH 7.4) solutions in the potential range of -0.1 to 0.450 V 
and at the scan rate of 80 mV/s. Each CV scans were 
repeated for three times. To observe the CV measurements, 
three-electrode 
configuration 
from 
BioLogic 
science 
instrument SP-300 was utilized in the current experiment. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The schematic representation of immobilization of 
nanocomposite particles and its surface modification is 
explained in Scheme 1. Colloidal solution of nanocomposite 
particles (ABA/PEG-SiO2@Ag) is self assembled onto the 
surface of oxygen plasma treated gold-PCB electrodes. 
Further a thin film of DNA lattice structures is developed on 
the nanocomposite particle surface through drop casting 
method. Evaporation induced self assembly result in the 
deposition of biointerface membrane. It is demonstrated that  
 
 
Scheme 1. Fabrication of biocompatible nanobiocomposite biosensor. 
(unpublished mateiral). 
 
the development of thin structures of polymer film or 
biomolecules such as DNA or peptides are feasible for 
number of applications in biosensor studies. For instance, 
DNA microarrays on polymers such as poly (methyl 
methacrylate) (PMMA) [15], the synthesis of star shaped 
poly (ethylene glycol) (PEGs) [16] and immobilization of 
genetically engineered proteins on gold-MWNT films for 
biosensor platforms [17]. Further the confinement of sub 
100 nm thin films has been reported to have influence in the  
 
Figure 1. UV-visible spectral studies. (A) PEG-SiO2@Ag and (B) 
ABA/PEG-SiO2@Ag 
nanocomposite 
particles 
of 
different 
concentration (100 µL, 80 µL, 60 µL and 40µL (a-d)  in D.I water used 
for analysis). (C) BSA (a), anti-BSA (b) and mixture of BSA/anti-BSA 
(c). 
(D) 
BSA/ABA/PEG-SiO2@Ag 
(a), 
Anti-BSA-
BSA/ABA/PEG@SiO2@Ag (b), BSA/DNA/PEG-SiO2@Ag (c) and 
Anti-BSA-BSA/DNA/ABA/PEG-SiO2@Ag (d).(unpublished material). 
 
64
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

diffusion of polymer molecules comprising the film, as well 
as diffusion of small, lower-molar-mass tracer molecules 
and other altered properties [18]. 
Figure 1 (A) and (B) denotes the maximum absorbance 
spectrum of two nanocomposite particles. As seen from the 
images the curve peak indicates the presence of SPR from 
the core silver particles. Further the increased wavelength of 
maximum absorbance (from (A) 390 to (B) 405 nm) 
indicates the successful surface modification of ABA 
triblock copolymer on the PEG/SiO2@Ag core. This is in-  
 
TABLE I. THE SEQUENCE DETAILS OF ALL STRANDS FROM 
 5` to 3` (UNPUBLISHED MATERIAL) 
 
Strand 
No. of Base 
Sequence(5’ to 3’) 
DX1#1 
26 MERS 
TGCTA CTACCGCA CCAGAATG 
CTAGT 
DX1#2 
48 MERS 
CATTCTGG ACGCCATA AGATAGCA 
CCTCGACT CATTTGCC TGCGGTAG 
DX1#3 
48 MERS 
CAGTAGCC TGCTATCT TATGGCGT 
GGCAAATG AGTCGAGG ACGGATCG 
DX1#4 
26 MERS 
CATAC CGATCCGT GGCTACTG 
TCACT 
DX2#1 
26 MERS 
GTATG GGCAATCC ACAACCGC 
AGTGA 
DX2#2 
48 MERS 
GCGGTTGT CCAACTTA CCAGATCC 
ACAAGCCG ACGTTACA GGATTGCC 
DX2#3 
48 MERS 
GCTCTACA GGATCTGG TAAGTTGG 
TGTAACGT CGGCTTGT CCGTTCGC 
DX2#4 
26 MERS 
TAGCA GCGAACGG TGTAGAGC 
ACTAG 
 
consistent with our previous report [10]. On the other hand 
the BSA, anti-BSA and mixture of both doesn’t give a 
significant absorbance on this specific region (Figure 1(C)). 
Notably, after surface modification of final nanocomposite 
particles (in presence/absence of DNA lattice) with BSA 
and anti-BSA, there is a change observed in the wavelength 
of maximum absorbance and shape of the peak. For instance 
in presence of anti-BSA, both the normal BSA-
nanocomposite particles and BSA/DNA-nanocomposite 
particles shows broad peaks. Whereas, in absence of anti-
BSA the other two nanocomposite (a: BSA/ABA/PEG-SiO2 
@Ag and c: BSA/DNA/ABA/PEG-SiO2@Ag) particles 
shows a short but intense peak, which attributes the surface 
characteristics of the reacted/unreacted nanostructured 
surface, respectively. 
       Biocompatibility, biointegration and functionality are 
the crucial factors for biomedical devices and implants, but 
also applicable for biosensor in various forms. For instance, 
immobilization of biomolecules for biosensing studies needs 
a suitable biocompatible interface material [18]. The key 
strategy 
demonstrated 
here 
is 
the 
use 
of 
hybrid 
nanocomposites (PEG-SiO2@Ag and ABA/PEG/SiO2@Ag) 
as an electrochemical substrate based on their excellent 
electrical properties and large surface areas for the 
immobilization of bioreceptors and to fabricate a sensing 
platform by using an advanced DNA lattice nanostructures 
as suitable interface material specifically for binding on the 
surface of nanocomposite-gold-PCB electrode, which 
adheres the antigen BSA and significantly interfere with 
anti-BSA through the antigen-antibody interactions.  
 
 
Figure 2. Shows the cyclic voltammagrams of nanocomposite particles-Au-
PCB electrode at different conditions (Note: (a) PEG-SiO2@Ag: black 
trace and (b) ABA/PEG-SiO2@Ag: red trace) such as bare (A) (a: 
Epc=0.34; Epa= -0.04, b: Epc=0.19; Epa =0.12), BSA modified (B) (a: Epc= 
0.30;  Epa= -0.007, b: Epc= 0.26; Epa = 0.0003), BSA-Anti-BSA modified 
(C) (a: Epc= 0.24; Epa=0.02: b: Epc= 0.25; Epa =0.03), DNA-BSA modified 
(D) (a: Epc=0.22; Epa=0.05, b: Epc=0.16; Epa =0.08) and DNA-BSA-Anti-
BSA modified (E) (a: Epc= 0.15; Epa=0.13, b: Epc=0.20; Epa =0.07). F: 
depicts the FE-SEM image of Au-PCB electrode coated with 
nanocomposite (b) particles and DNA lattice structures. (unpublished 
material). 
 
Figure 2 shows the cyclic voltammagrams and its relevant 
cathodic peak potential (Epc) and anodic peak potential (Epa). 
As seen from the images, it is clear that there is a possibility 
of sensing the significant changes occur between the 
antigen-antibody interactions that taken place on the hybrid 
nanocomposite and bionanocomposite surfaces immobilized 
on the gold-PCB electrode. Figure 2 (F) represents the FE-
SEM image of gold-PCB electrode surface modified with 
nanocomposite 
particles-DNA 
lattice 
structures. 
As 
observed from the magnified inset image the well aligned 
DNA lattice structures and nanocomposite particles are 
65
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

densely packed with large surface areas. Incorporation of 
DNA lattice nanostructures as interface material acted both 
as a suitable surface linker/compatible material for 
integration of biomolecules on the hybrid environment.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, we have developed a nanobiocomposite 
biosensor platform for antigen-antibody interaction. A well 
defined DNA lattice nanostructure shows significantly a 
biocompatible environment for both nanomaterial and 
biomolecules (such as model protein BSA) utilized in the 
study. 
Furthermore, 
we 
demonstrated 
the 
cyclic 
voltammetry response for different surface modified 
biosensor platform in presence and absence of DNA lattice. 
A detailed study is in progress to unravel the underlying 
efficiency for concentration dependant biosensing abilities. 
Further Bio-AFM based investigations of orientation of 
these hybrid nanoenvironments are underway.  We believe 
that the concept of integration of DNA lattice nanostructures 
as interface materials with nanocomposite particles will be 
sure opens a new insight into other nanobiotechnology. It is 
expected that a fundamental study performed in the present 
research will allows us to exploit the present situation of 
DNA nanotechnology towards a facile construction of new 
nanomaterial 
platform 
for 
many 
other 
biomedical 
applications. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Kyungwon University 
Research Fund in 2011, the GRRC program of Gyeonggi province 
(2010-B02, Development biodevice using DNA tile structure) and  
Grant No. 10032112 from the Regional Technology Innovation 
Program of the Ministry of Knowledge Economy to K. S. Yun and 
by the Research Grant from the National Research Foundation of 
Korea (NRF2008; 331-2008-1-C00126) to S. H. Park. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.B. Lee, M.J. Campolongo, J.S. Kahn, Y.H. Roh, M.R. Hartman, and 
D. Luo, “DNA-based nanostructures for molecular sensing,” Nanoscale, 
vol.2, pp.188–197, 2010. 
[2] T.M. Herne and M.J. Tarlov, “Characterization of DNA probes 
immobilized on gold surface,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. vol. 119, pp. 8916-
8920, 1997. 
[3] T. Strother, W. Cai, X.S. Zhao, R.J. Hamers, and L.M. Smith, 
“Synthesis and characterization of DNA-modified cilicon (111) 
surface” J. Am. Chem. Soc. vol. 122, pp. 1205-1209, 2000. 
[4] R. Levicky, T.M. Herne, M.J. Tarlov, and S.K. Satija, “Using self-
assembly to control the structure of DNA monolayers on gold: a 
neutron reflectivity study” J. Am. Chem. Soc. vol. 120, pp. 9787-9792, 
1998. 
[5] M.S. Yang, H.C.M. Yau, and H.L. Chan, “Adsorption kinetics and 
ligand-binding properties of thiolmodified double-stranded DNA on a 
gold surface” Langmuir vol.14, pp.6121-6129, 1998. 
[6] Y.D. Zhao, D.W. Pang, S. Hu, Z.L. Wang, J.K. Cheng, Y.P. Qi, H.P. 
Dai, B.W. Mao, Z.Q. Tian, J. Luo, and Z.H.  Lin, “DNA-modified 
electrodes Part 3.: spectroscopic characterization of DNA modified 
gold electrodes” Anal. Chim. Acta vol.388, pp. 93-101, 1999. 
[7] Y. Kim, E.C. Long, J.K. Barton, and C.M.  Lieber, “Imaging of 
oligonucleotide-metal complexes by scanning tunneling microscopy” 
Langmuir vol. 8, pp. 496-500, 1992. 
[8] H. Yokota, J. Sunwoo, M. Sarikaya, E. Ger van den, and R. Adbersold, 
“Spin-stretching of DNA and protein molecules for detection by 
fluorescence and atomic force microscopy” Anal. Chem. vol. 71, pp. 
4418-4422, 1999. 
[9] 
L.Z. Zhi, W.P. Dai, and Y.Z. Rong, “Investigation of DNA 
orientation on gold by EC-STM” Bioconjugate Chem. vol. 13, 
pp.104-109, 2002. 
[10] S.O. Kelly, J.K. Barton, N.M. Jackson, L.D. McPherson, A.B. Potter, 
E.M. Spain, M.J. Allen, and M.G. Hill, “Orienting DNA helices on 
gold using applied electric fields” Langmuir vol. 14, pp. 6781-6785, 
1998. 
[11] M. Veerapandian and K.S. Yun, “Ultrasonochemically conjugated 
metalloid/triblock copolymer nanocomposite and subsequent thin 
solid laminate growth for surface and interface studies,” Langmuir 
vol.26(17), pp. 14216-14222, 2010. 
[12] M. Veerapandian, B.G. Kim, R. Amin, J.W. Lee, K.S. Yun, and S.H. 
Park, “NMR studies of double cross over DNA tiles,” in 
communication. 
[13] X. Li, Xi. Yang, J. Qi, and N.C. Seeman, “Ligation of Triangles Built 
from Bulged 3-Arm DNA Branched Junctions,” J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
vol. 118, pp. 6121-6130, 1996. 
[14] W. Huang, S. Taylor, K. Fu, Y. Lin, D. Zhang, T.W. Hanks, A.M. 
Rao, and Y.P. Sun, “Attaching proteins to carbon nanotubes via 
diimide-activated amidation,” Nano Lett. vol. 2(4), pp. 311-314, 2002. 
[15] F. Fixe, M. Dufva, P. Telleman, and C. B. V. Christensen, 
“Functionalization of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as a 
substrate for DNA microarrays,” Nucleic Acids Res. vol. 32(1), pp.     
e9, 2004. 
[16] K. Wang, W. Huang, Y. Zhou, and D. Yan, “Synthesis and   
characterization of three-arm star-shaped polyethylene glycols with 
1,1,1-trihydroxmethylpropane as cores,” Front. Chem. China. vol.3(3), 
pp. 298-303, 2008.  
[17] H.S. Park, T.J. Park, Y.S. Huh, B.G. Choi, S.G. Ko, S.Y. Lee, and 
W.H. Hong, “Immobilization of genetically engineered fusion 
proteins on gold-decorated carbon nanotube hybrid films for the 
fabrication of biosensor platforms,” J. Colloid. Interf. Sci. vol. 350 pp. 
453–458, 2010. 
[18] S. Holger, “Biofunctionalizzation of polymeric thin films and surfce,” 
in Nanostructured thin films and surfaces, S.S.R. Kumar Challa. Ed. 
Weinheim: Wiley-VCH, 2010. pp.55-91.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

