Carbon Nanotube Emitters in Sensoric Application 
 
Jan Pekarek, Radimir Vrba, Martin Magát, Jana 
Chomoucka, Jan Prasek, Jaromir Hubalek 
Department of Microelectronics, Faculty of Electrical 
Engineering and Communication 
Brno University of Technology 
Brno, Czech Republic 
e-mail: pekarek@feec.vutbr.cz 
Ondrej Jasek, Lenka Zajickova 
 
Department of Physical Electronics, Faculty of Science 
 
Masaryk University 
Brno, Czech Republic 
 
Abstract—A contemporary approach to study the emission 
properties of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in low distances 
between two electrodes is described in this paper. The method 
could be used in modern MEMS pressure sensor applications. 
The field emission works on the principle that the field 
emission current is correlated with the electrical field intensity, 
i.e., the anode-emitter distance when the applied voltage is 
fixed. This means that the CNTs array serves as the emitter 
source of electrons between the cathode and the anode in the 
electric field. The measurement of emission current density 
flowing through the electrodes is carried out in a vacuum 
chamber pumped by a turbomolecular pump. The vacuum 
chamber is equipped with a linear nano-motion drive SmarAct 
that enables precise changes of the distance between two 
electrodes inside the vacuum chamber (step width from 50 nm 
to 1000 nm, sub-nanometer resolution). For this experiment, 
CNTs are deposited using a thermal chemical vapour 
deposition. 
Keywords-carbon nanotubes; emission properies; thermal 
chemical vapour deposition; microwave torch deposition. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are molecular-scale tubes of 
graphitic carbon with outstanding properties. They are 
among the stiffest and strongest fibres known, and have 
remarkable electronic properties and many other unique 
characteristics. The diameter of a nanotube is on the order of 
a few nanometers (approximately 50 000 times smaller than 
the width of a human hair), while they can be up to several 
millimeters in length [1] [2]. For these reasons, they have 
attracted huge academic and industrial interest, with 
thousands of papers on nanotubes being published every 
year.  
Field emission involves the extraction of electrons from 
a solid by tunnelling through the surface potential barrier. 
The emitted current depends directly on the local electric 
field at the emitting surface E, and on its work function, ɸ. 
Fowler-Nordheim model [3] shows that the dependence of 
the emitted current on the local electric field E and the work 
function ɸ, is exponential like. As a consequence, a small 
variation of the slope or surrounding of the emitter and/or the 
chemical state of the surface has a strong impact on the 
emitted current. The small diameter of carbon nanotubes is 
very favourable for field emission. The device emits 
electrons when an electric field or voltage is applied [4] [5]. 
Several techniques have been developed to produce 
nanotubes in sizeable quantities, including arc discharge, 
laser ablation, high pressure carbon monoxide and chemical 
vapour deposition (CVD). Most of these processes take place 
in vacuum or with process gases. Large quantities of 
nanotubes can be synthesized by CVD methods; advances in 
catalysis and continuous growth processes are making CNTs 
more commercially viable [6-8]. 
This paper is structured as follows: The field emission 
mechanism is described in Section II. In Section III, we 
describe the sample preparation and measurement setup. 
A short discussion about the obtained results and the method 
for possible packaging of emission pressure sensor is 
described in Section IV. Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
THEORY - EMISSION MECHANISM 
Large field amplification factor, arising from the small 
radius of curvature of the nanotube tips, is partly responsible 
for the good emission characteristics. It is however still 
unclear whether the sharpness of the nanotubes is their only 
advantage over other emitters, or if intrinsic properties also 
influence the emission performances. 
If the nanotubes seem to follow the Fowler-Nordheim 
law, they can be thought of as metallic emitters. Nanotube 
emissions deviate from Fowler-Nordheim model. Such 
deviations are usually attributed to space-charge effects, 
which induce a diminution of the F-N slope at high fields. 
Thus nanotubes cannot be considered as usual metallic 
emitters [3]. 
Theory of emission mechanism is shown in Fig. 1. Field 
emission involves the extraction of electrons from a solid by 
tunnelling through the surface potential barrier. The emitted 
current (IE) depends directly on the local electric field at the 
emitting surface E, and on its work function, ɸ. If the applied 
voltage is fixed, the emitted current depends directly on 
emitter distance x. The variable EF represents Fermi level. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

 
Figure 1.  Theory of emission mechanism (Fowler-Nordheim law) [3] 
Also, for nanotubes, electrons are not emitted from 
a metallic continuum as in usual metallic emitters, but rather 
from well-defined energy levels of ~0.3 eV half width 
corresponding to localized states at the tip. The energy 
spread of nanotubes is typically half of the metallic emitters 
(~0.2). The shape of the energy distribution suggests that the 
electrons are emitted from narrow energy levels. The greatest 
part of the emitted current comes from occupied states with 
a large density of states near the Fermi level, but the other 
deeper levels also contribute to the field emission. The 
position of these levels with respect to the Fermi level, which 
depends primarily on the tip geometry (i.e., tube chirality, 
diameter and the eventual presence of defects), would be, 
together with the tip radius the major factors that determine 
the field emission properties of the tube. Finally, it is worth 
noting that the presence of localized states influences the 
emission behaviour greatly. Local density of states at the tip 
reaches values at least 30 times higher than in the cylindrical 
part of tube increasing the carrier density for strong 
emission. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
A contemporary approach to study the emission 
properties of carbon nanotubes in low distances between two 
electrodes was used in this paper. Each electrode consists of 
high doped silicon substrate. The field emission works on the 
principle that the field emission current is correlated with the 
electrical field intensity, i.e., the anode-emitter distance 
when the applied voltage is fixed. This means that the CNTs 
array serves as the emitter source of electrons between the 
cathode and the anode in the electric field. The 
measurements were five times repeated and the same results 
were obtained. 
 
Figure 2.  Schematic illustration and principle of measuring the emission 
properties. 
The measurement of emission current density flowing 
through the electrodes was carried out in a chamber pumped 
by a turbomolecular pump and equipped with feedthroughs 
for voltage application and current measurement. The 
vacuum chamber was equipped with a new vacuum 
compatible linear nano-motion drive SmarAct that enables 
precise changes of the distance between two electrodes 
inside the vacuum chamber (step width from 50 nm to 1000 
nm, sub-nanometer resolution). Special software, enabling to 
set up the step size, number of the steps and speed of the 
motion, was developed for its control. Additionally, 
a measurement control unit and the software were prepared 
for an automatic electrical measurement. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The workplace for emission measuring (up) and the detail of 
nano-motion drive SmarAct (down). 
Electrode substrates on silicon wafer were fabricated 
using lithography and standard thin-film technology. The 
base for silicon electrodes is monocrystalline N-type 4” Si 
wafer with <100> orientation and the thickness of 525 µm 
(ON Semiconductor). Wafer is doped with antimony and its 
EF 
E = 0 
E 
E1  >  E2 
Φ 
x 
I(E) 
V 
electrons 
anode 
cathode 
vacuum 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

resistivity is 0.005 Ω.cm. On the places where the MWCNTs 
should grow, the 300 nm thick layer of Ti/Ta were sputtered 
to ensure better adhesion of lately deposited MWCNTs. 
Then on the tantalum layer was evaporated 5 nm thick 
catalyst layer of iron. Prepared substrates were then cut to 
separate microelectrodes and used as the substrate for grown 
of vertically aligned MWCNTs. 
For this experiment, carbon nanotubes were deposited 
using a thermal chemical vapour deposition. Typical 
deposition process was as follows. The substrate was placed 
in quartz boat and put in the centre of horizontal furnace 
equipped with quartz glass tube (1000 mm long) terminated 
with flanges as it is schematically shown in the Fig. 4.  
 
Figure 4.  Scheme of thermal CVD furnace. 
Gas flow rates were controlled by electronic flow 
controllers. The inner diameter of quartz glass tube is 45 mm 
and hot zone length is 150 mm. The furnace deposition 
temperature was measured by K type thermocouple. 
The substrate was heated under mixture of Ar, flow rate 
2800 sccm, and H2, flow rate 500 sccm, to 800 °C with ramp 
rate of 25 °C.min-1. The CNTs were grown at 800 °C under 
mixture of Ar (1400 sccm) and C2H2 (30 sccm). Deposition 
time was 20 minutes. After the deposition the substrate 
cooled down under Ar flow (1400 sccm). A detailed study of 
the deposition of CNTs and their characterization were 
published in [9] [10]. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Successfully 
fabricated 
electrodes 
with 
deposited 
MWCNTs were analysed optically using SEM (TESCAN, 
Czech Republic). SEM micrographs of fabricated electrode 
with different scale are shown in Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5.  SEM analysis of the CNTs. 
Measurements were performed at pressure of 10-4 Pa for 
ten electrode distances – from 84 µm to 100 µm. For these 
ten distances, the same results were obtained for multiple 
times. The emission current in dependence on the applied 
voltage was measures as basic results. Graphs of these 
dependences are shown in Figs. 6 and 7. 
 
Figure 6.   Result of measured emission current in dependence on the 
applied voltage. 
 
Figure 7.  The detail result of measured emission current in dependence on 
the applied voltage for higher voltages. 
In the set of experiments on the array with CNTs with 
dimension of 4x4mm, the field emission results show that in 
the small electrode distance, there is the low turn-on field 
(smaller than 1 V/µm) and there is achieved a high current 
density at 1,8 V/µm. 
 
Figure 8.  Results of current density in dependence on intensity for ten 
electrode distances. 
electrode (Si substrate) 
800 °C 
gas outlet 
gas inlet 
Ar, H2, C2H2 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

The measured results follow the Fowler-Nordheim law as 
expected. For smaller electrode distances, it is expected 
a higher current density for same applied voltages or vice 
versa, the same current density at lower applied voltages. 
 
Figure 9.  Results of emission current in dependence on the electrode 
distance for applied voltage from 80 to 150 V. 
The curves in Fig. 9 show, that the emission current 
depends on electrode distance when the applied voltage is 
fixed. This could be a confirmation of the proposed solution 
and CNTs could be used as emitters in a pressure sensor. 
A method for packaging emission pressure sensor was 
also invented so the emission could exist outside the 
laboratory vacuum chamber. The entire sensor could be 
encapsulated in the housing known from the production of 
vacuum tubes (Fig. 10).  
  
Figure 10.  Possible package for emitter made from carbon nanotubes. 
Two conductive silicon electrodes are bonded together. 
The cathode is with carbon nanotubes, the anode is flexible. 
The pressure from external inlet causes the bend of anode, 
i.e., the emission current (electrode distance) is changing 
when the applied voltage is fixed. 
The zirconium getter should be inside the tube to 
maintain vacuum for long-term activities. Getter is used for 
disposal of residual gases and mainly for moisture 
absorption. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, we successfully fabricated vertically 
aligned carbon nanotubes using CVD method. The tips of 
nanotubes serve the electrons. The emission current is 
dependent on electrode distance. The measured dependencies 
show that the CNTs are stable and low noise. If one of the 
electrodes will be flexible (membrane), this system could be 
used for pressure sensing. We also introduced the method for 
packaging emission pressure sensor for application outside 
the laboratory vacuum chamber. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Grant Agency of the 
Czech Republic under 205/10/1374 project, by the project 
Prospective applications of new sensor technologies, No. 
FEKT-S-11-16, and by the project Research4Industry, the 
registration number CZ.1.07/2.4.00/17.0006. 
The described research was performed in laboratories 
supported by the SIX project; the registration number 
CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0072, the operational program Research 
and Development for Innovation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. de Volder, D. O. Vidaud, E. R. Meshot, S. Tawfick, and 
A. J. Hartet, “Self-similar organization of arrays of individual 
carbon nanotubes and carbon nanotube micropillars”, 
Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 87, no. 5-8, 2010, pp. 1233-
1238. 
[2] M 
Meyyappan, 
“Carbon 
Nanotubes: 
Science 
and 
Application”, 1st ed. Boca Raton, Florida: CRC Press, 2005. 
304 p. ISBN 978-0849321115. 
[3] D. Tomanek and R. J.  Enbody, “Science and application of 
nanotubes”. New York: Kluwer Academic Publisher, 2002. 
398 p. 
[4] M. Magat, J. Pekárek, and R. Vrba, “Characterization and 
field emission properties of fields of nanotubes”, 3rd 
International Conference on Nanocon, 2011, pp. 696-700. 
[5] K.R. Izrael’yants, A.L. Musatov, A.B. Ormont, E.G. 
Chirkova, and E.F. Kukovitsky, “Emission characteristics of 
planar field electron emitters containing carbon nanotubes 
operating in the high current density mode”, Carbon, 2010, 
vol. 48, 2010, pp. 1889-1896. 
[6] D. 
Vairavapandian, 
P. 
Vichchulada, 
and 
M. 
Lay, 
“Preparation and modification of carbon nanotubes: Review 
of recent advances and applications in catalysis and sensing”, 
Anal. Chim. Acta, vol. 626, pp. 119-129. 
[7] J. Prasek, et al., “Electrochemical properties of CNT's 
modified microelectrodes”, 3rd International Conference on 
Nanocon, 2011, pp. 497-502. 
[8] J. Pekarek, R. Ficek, R. Vrba, and M. Magát, “Electrodes 
Modified by Carbon Nanotubes for Pressure Measuring”, 
32nd 
International 
Spring 
Seminar 
on 
Electronics 
Technology, 2009, pp. 629-633. 
[9] J. Pekarek, R. Vrba, M. Magát, and P. Kulha, “Possible 
applications of freestanding carbon nanotubes in MEMS 
technology”, 3rd International Conference on Nanocon, 2011, 
pp. 491-496. 
[10] L. Zajickova et al., “Synthesis of carbon nanotubes by plasma 
enhanced chemical vapor deposition in an atmospheric-
pressure microwave torch”, Pure and Applied Chemistry, vol. 
82, no. 6, pp. 1259-1272. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

