Effect of Adhesion Layer on Morphology and Optical Properties of Self-Organized 
Metal Nanostructures 
 
Victor Ovchinnikov 
MICRONOVA Nanofab 
School of Electrical Engineering, Aalto University 
Espoo, Finland 
e-mail: Victor.Ovchinnikov@aalto.fi
 
 
Abstract—The 
inexpensive 
fabrication 
method 
of 
self-
organized metal nanostructures with adhesion layer over large 
area is proposed. The method combines dry etching using a 
self-organized mask to prepare a template and directional 
metal deposition on the elevated part of the obtained template. 
The technique peculiarities were studied during fabrication of 
metal lace-like nanostructures prepared with Ti layer and 
without it. The results demonstrate the overall difference in 
transmittance and reflectance spectra of the samples due to 
presence of Ti layer. Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy 
(SERS) experiments were performed with methylene blue and 
confirmed decreasing of SERS intensity of the gold 
nanostructures with adhesion layer. The obtained results can 
be used in fabrication of self-organized metal nanostructures 
with controllable adhesion. 
Keywords-self-organized; 
fabrication 
method; 
metal 
nanostructure; random array; plasmonics; SERS substrate 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Metal 
nanostructures 
have 
greatly 
broadening 
applications in many areas of chemical and biological 
sensing [1], subwavelength imaging[2], metamaterials[3] and 
etc. The best studied and attractive from the theoretical point 
of view are periodic arrays of metal nanoparticles, but their 
mass production is a challenging task, which waits for the 
decision. Traditional semiconductor technology provides 
reliable and reproducible process flows, but its acceptance as 
a general fabrication tool of metal nanostructures has been 
hindered by two obstacles: (1) limited resolution of optical 
lithography and (2) lack of dry etching processes for most 
metals. That is why, the dominant fabrication method of 
regular metal nanostructures is electron beam lithography 
(EBL) together with lift-off removing of useless metal. 
However, by this process is highly difficult to obtain features 
smaller than 50 nm. Additionally, the extensive processing 
time needed in EBL for fabrication of arrays of 
nanostructures over large areas makes it expensive and time-
consuming. 
As alternative to serial EBL, several non-lithography or 
self-organizing methods exist to produce nanostructures in 
parallel way. These techniques create structures with a 
random nature, i.e. arrays of metal nanostructures with 
randomly distributed size and space of elements. Active 
areas beyond 1×1 cm2 and low price are inherent to the 
techniques, but functional properties of nanostructures 
deteriorate, narrowing application area of random arrays.  In 
spite of this, the random nanostructures are used as a catalyst 
in carbon nanotube growth [4], as a light trapping layer in 
thin film solar cells [5], as magnetic nanodot arrays [6], as 
surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrates [7] 
and sensors [8]. As examples of non-lithography techniques 
can be mentioned nanosphere lithography [9], using of 
porous alumina template [10], oblique angle deposition [11] 
and etc. They have own application areas, but the most 
attractive method is generation of metal nanostructures by 
self-assembling on the surface with poor adhesion, e.g., Au-
Ag nanoislands on glass [12]. The method possesses 
nanometer range resolution, cheapness and compatibility 
with semiconductor technology. 
Unfortunately, broad application of this self-organizing 
technique is restrained by poor adhesion of produced metal 
structures to a dielectric substrate and limited set of structure 
configurations (mainly round-shaped islands and holes). By 
the nature of phenomenon, self-organization occurs in a thin 
layer of noble metal on dielectric substrate at non-
equilibrium thermodynamic conditions without firm contact 
between metal and substrate. The fabricated random arrays 
can be easily damaged during rinsing in de-ionized water and 
are not suitable for incorporation in more complicated 
devices. It is therefore desirable to improve the adhesion 
properties of self-organized structures, e.g., by introducing of 
intermediate adhesion layer. 
Lift-off based methods, including EBL, inherently 
include an adhesion layer to preserve functional metal 
elements during mask removing. Therefore, nanostructures 
without adhesion layer cannot be produced by these methods 
and direct estimation of influence of intermediate layer on 
the functional properties is impossible.  As a consequence, 
there are only experimental results for different (non-zero) 
thicknesses of adhesion layer in nanostructures or 
comparison of flat (non-patterned) metal films with and 
without adhesion layer [13, 14]. 
In this paper, a fabrication method of self-organized 
metal nanostructures with adhesion layer over large area is 
considered. The method was used to create lace-like Au and 
Ag nanostructures with and without Ti layer on glass and 
silicon substrates. This gave an opportunity to study the 
influence of adhesion layer on morphology and optical 
properties of fabricated nanostructures by direct comparison.  
6
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

 
Figure 1.  Fabrication process of metal nanostructures with intermediate 
layer. 
Despite of vast transformation of optical response due to 
presence of Ti layer, it was demonstrated that gold lace-like 
nanostructures with gap width below 10 nm can be used as 
effective SERS substrates. 
In the subsequent sections, the description of the 
fabrication method is presented, followed by detailed sample 
preparation and measurement procedures. After presenting of 
SEM images of the obtained nanostructures, the reflectance 
and SERS spectra are discussed. 
II. 
FABRICATION METHOD 
The idea of the method consists in fabrication of a 
nanostructure template from a substrate and directional 
deposition of metal layers on the template. For template 
preparation any patterning method, providing vertical 
sidewalls can be used: lithography and etching, self-
organizing structures and etching, direct writing by laser or  
focused ion beam [15, 16]. In this work, self-organized gold 
nanostructures are used as a mask for anisotropic dry etching 
of the substrate (Fig. 1a,b). To create the mask a thin gold 
layer is evaporated on the substrate at low deposition rate. 
The film has lace-like structure, if the gold thickness does 
not exceed 15 nm and the adhesion between metal and the 
substrate is poor. Other metals or additional annealing after 
deposition can be used to modify the mask morphology. For 
example, silver provides round-shaped nanoislands with size 
and separation controlled by annealing [17]. The poor 
adhesion of gold to a substrate limits the etching methods for 
patterning of the nanostructures, e.g., wet etching must be 
eliminated. On the other hand, dry etching still can be used, 
because surface tension forces and interlayer diffusion of 
liquid have no place. Additionally, dry etching, e.g., reactive 
ion etching (RIE), provides vertical (Fig. 1b) sidewalls of the 
nanostructures.  
In the next step the residues of the mask metal are 
removed by selective wet etching to obtain a nanotemplate 
made of the substrate material (Fig. 1c). The template 
elements replicate the shape and size of the mask (e.g., lace-
lice structure) and, in general, can have any lateral geometry 
(e.g., disks for silver self-organizing mask). The template is 
then covered by a thin adhesion layer of easily oxidized 
metal (e.g., Ti or Cr). At atmospheric ambient the adhesion 
layer, which is not protected by upper metal is readily 
oxidized and does not affect on functional properties of 
nanostructures. It is important to deposit the adhesion layer 
only on horizontal surfaces of the template and leave the 
sidewalls uncovered (Fig. 1d) to avoid firm contact of the 
second metal with vertical surfaces. This requirement is 
fulfilled by using a physical vapour deposition (e.g., 
evaporation) at normal incidence. Due to poor adhesion of 
the metal to sidewalls, it can be easily removed by rinsing in 
ultrasound bath. 
The final step is coating of the template with a functional 
metal layer, for example gold or silver. It is done 
immediately after deposition of the adhesion layer to prevent 
possible oxidation of the latter. This time metal coating of 
the template can be made in two ways. In the first one, the 
metal is evaporated in a direction normal to the wafer 
surface, which simultaneously deposits metal on the elevated 
nanostructure planes and the backplane (Fig. 1e). In the 
second way, the metal is deposited at the angle (Fig. 1f) on 
the rotating or unmovable template. The rotation provides 
uniform covering of structure tops, while static deposition 
leads to 3D nanostructures, in which sidewalls and tops are 
covered simultaneously. The deposition angle α is chosen to 
be large enough to minimize metal coating of backplane. In 
this case, the height h of the sidewall metallization 
(measured from structure top) can be roughly estimated as 
[18] 
 
,
tanα
l
hm =
 
(1) 
where l is the average space between structures. In practice, 
deviations from (1) are happened, especially for small l, 
when sidewalls are not become covered by metal at all. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
The samples were fabricated on precleaned squares of 
borosilicate glass and oxidized Si (100) with size 22×22×0.5 
mm3. The cleaning procedure begins with sonicating in 
acetone and 2-propanol. After that the samples were RCA-1 
cleaned for 10 minutes and processed in oxygen plasma 
during 1 minute. The pretreatment is needed to equalize the 
surface conditions through the whole substrate. The Si pieces 
with a 60 nm thick layer of SiO2 were used to optimize the 
whole process, because it makes possible to observe the 
fabricated nanostructures with SEM. At the same time all 
process steps lead to identical results on glass and on oxide. 
The metal films were deposited in e-beam evaporation 
system IM-9912 (Instrumentti Mattila Oy) with adjustable 
substrate inclination and rotation speed at base pressure of 
4×10-7 Torr and at room temperature of the substrate. The 
deposition rates for each film were measured using quartz 
crystal microbalance. The RIE of template was done in a 
13.56 MHz driven parallel electrode reactor Plasmalab 80 
(a) 
(b) 
(d) 
(c) 
(e) 
(f) 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
7
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

 
 
Figure 2.  SEM images of lace-like nanstructures after main process steps: 
(a,b) 10 and 15 nm thick gold films; (c,d) RIE for 20 and 25 minutes, 
respecticely; plain (e) and tilted (f) views of 16 nm thick gold 
nanostructures. 
Plus 
(Oxford 
Instruments 
Plasma 
Technology). 
An 
anisotropic etching process based on fluorine chemistry (gas 
mixture CF4:CHF3=1:3) was used for glass and SiO2 etching. 
The etching experiments were performed at a total gas flow 
of 80 sccm, pressure 30 mTorr and rf power 40 W. The 
remaining gold was removed in aqua regia (1:3 volume 
mixture of 69% HNO3 and 37% HCl, respectively) during 
20 s at room temperature, leaving a lace-like structures from 
SiO2 or glass. 
Plane-view and tilted at 30⁰ SEM images of the samples 
were observed with Zeiss Supra 40 field emission scanning 
electron 
microscope. 
Transmittance 
and 
reflectance 
measurements at normal incidence were carried out using 
PerkinElmer Lambda 950 UV-VIS spectrometer in the 
spectral range from 300 to 850 nm. All reflectance spectra 
were collected with integrating sphere as a detector. Raman 
scattering was studied in WITec Alpha 300 Raman 
microscope equipped with a Nd:YAG (532 nm) laser as an 
excitation source. Methylene blue (MB) at the concentration 
of 3×10-4 M was used as a test molecule with water as a  
solvent. MB solution was dropped on SERS samples using a 
pipette and then dried in air to obtain a uniform molecule 
deposition.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
To check the method lace-like nanostructures from gold 
and silver with Ti adhesion layer were fabricated. Both 
metals have poor adhesion to glass, but are very attractive for 
plasmonic applications. Fig. 2 illustrates most important 
steps in the nanofabrication. As a self-organized mask was 
used a 10 nm thick gold layer deposited at 0.5 Å/s. In  
Figure 3.  SEM images of nanostructures: (a,b) 8 nm thick gold 
nanostructures without Ti and with Ti, respectively; (c,d) 8 nm thick silver 
and 16nm gold nanostructures with Ti deposited at 70⁰ with rotation. 
contrast to well known self-organizing masks from Au and 
Ag [19], annealing is not required; the film is used as-
deposited to preserve feature sizes as small as possible. Such 
a procedure results in lace-like structure, consisting of 
channels (depressions) and protrusions (projections) (Fig.2a). 
Average width of the first ones is about 7 nm, the second 
ones – 30 nm. Protrusion and channel sizes can be tuned by 
gold thickness, substrate temperature and deposition rate. As 
an example, in Fig. 2b is shown the 15 nm thick gold film 
deposited at the same conditions, which has smaller width 
and density of the channels. Unfortunately, mask thickness is 
only a little larger than the thickness of the deposited metal 
and limits the depth of RIE (Fig. 2c,d). Till the certain 
moment during etching the mask pattern is unchanged (Fig. 
2c) and channel widths in SiO2 and gold are equal. Further  
etching increases channel width and destroys flatness of 
protrusion tops (Fig. 2d), what is connected with gold mask 
erosion during ion bombardment. Additionally, it leads to 
deviation of sidewall profile from vertical. The maximum 
etching depth of 75 nm reached after 25 minutes of RIE (Fig. 
2d), resulted in increasing of channel width to 25 nm. 
Deposition of 1 nm thick Ti and 16 nm thick gold layers on 
the structure shown in Fig. 2d was done in static mode 
(Fig.1e,f) and led to shrinking of the channel width back to 7 
nm. 
To further clarify the mechanism of nanostructure 
metallization, the gold film was also deposited on the 
template without Ti adhesion layer (Fig. 3a). Metal 
nanostructures do not exactly follow the template pattern, 
like in case of Ti layer (Fig. 3b); instead of this, they are 
broken in shorter segments and surrounded by small 
nanoclusters. It looks that on the tops of protrusions there are 
favorable thermodynamic conditions for gold migration to 
the centre of isolated areas. This facilitates formation of large 
islands in the middle of protrusions due to non-wetting 
property of Au on SiO2 surface. At the same time, protrusion 
edge is a favorable place for cluster nucleation, but due to 
limited amount of gold, these clusters are small in size. In  
(a) 
(b) 
(d) 
(c) 
(e) 
(f) 
(a) 
(c) 
(b) 
(d) 
8
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

 
0
20
40
60
Transmittance (%)
Ti 0 nm rot
Ti 2 nm rot
Ti 0 nm st
Ti 1 nm st
Ref
 
0
20
40
300
400
500
600
700
800
Reflectance (%)
Wavelength (nm)
 
0
20
40
60
80
Transmittance (%)
 
0
20
40
300
400
500
600
700
800
Reflectance (%)
Wavelength (nm)
Ti 0 nm
Ti 2nm
Ref
Figure 4.  Transmittance (a) and reflectance (b) spectra of 8 nm thick gold 
nanstructures with Ti and without Ti on glass deposited at normal angle (st) 
or at 70⁰ with rotation (rot). Ref – 8 nm gold on glass without Ti. 
case of Ti/Au layer (Fig. 3b), surface diffusion of gold atoms 
is limited and the film grows uniformly above protrusion 
tops. Growth rate of the metal film is higher on the 
protrusion edge, what leads to formation of rim around 
nanostructure (Fig. 2f). The rim shadows sidewalls from 
metal deposition, decreases channel width and diminishes 
amount of metal on the backplane. The lateral growth rate of 
the rim can be controlled by tilting and rotating the substrate 
during deposition. Fig. 3c, d display lace-like Ag structures 
similar ones shown Fig. 3b and SiO2 pillars covered by gold, 
respectively. In both cases deposition was done on rotating 
substrate at the angle 70⁰. As a result of rotation, the channel 
width is smaller in comparison with static deposition (Fig. 
3b) and diameter of metal disks on the pillar tops is 40 nm 
larger than pillar diameter. 
Whatever the deposition result, samples appear extremely 
attractive for plasmonic and especially SERS applications. 
This supposition is confirmed by transmittance and 
reflectance of gold nanostructures on glass substrate shown 
in Fig. 4. To make the template, glass was etched during 16 
minutes, what was resulted in channel depth about 65 nm. 
The reference sample is 8 nm thick gold film deposited on 
plain surface of glass substrate. Optical properties for 
wavelength shorter 500 nm reflect interband transitions of d-
electrons in gold and are not connected with surface plasmon 
resonance (SPR). All samples consist of strongly interacting 
structures with size deviation, what leads to broadening and  
Figure 5.  Transmittance (a) and reflectance (b) spectra of 8 nm thick 
silver nanstructures with Ti and without Ti on glass deposited at 70⁰ with 
rotation. Ref – 8 nm silver on glass without Ti. 
shifting of resonance peaks inherent to gold nanoparticles 
[20]. 
Samples without Ti layer demonstrate SPR near 650 nm, 
which is stronger for sample deposited at angle and weaker 
for sample deposited at normal direction. But spectra of 
structures with Ti layer are totally different. Low 
transmittance in the blue half of spectra is caused by high 
reflectance and justifies narrowing of the channels 
(increasing metal covered area). Redshift and broadening of 
maximum transmittance band near 500 nm is attributed to 
influence of Ti layer absorbance, which monotonically 
decreases for visible range of wavelength. Modification of 
red half of spectra is connected with flattening of metal 
nanostructures (Fig. 3) and increased interaction between 
oscillators due to shrinking of channels. The result is strong 
and non-uniform splitting of SPR, observed as featureless 
spectrum. 
Transmittance and reflectance of silver nanostructures, 
prepared on the same template as gold ones are shown in 
Fig. 5. As well as in case of gold nanostructures, reference 
sample and lace-like nanostructures without Ti demonstrate 
similar spectra. There are longitudinal SPR at 460 nm and 
transverse SPR at 360 nm. However, after introducing of Ti 
layer only weak sings on these SPRs can be visible on 
practically flat spectra due to nanostructure shape variation 
and dampening caused by Ti layer. It cost to note, that for 
wavelength longer than 600 nm the appearance of Ti/Au and 
(b) 
(a) 
(a) 
(b) 
9
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

 
0
20
40
60
300
400
500
600
700
800
Reflectance (%)
Wavelength (nm)
Ti 0 nm
Ti 1 nm
Ref
 
0
500
1000
1500
2000
Intensity (a.u.)
Raman shift (1/cm)
Ti 0 nm
Au film
Ti 1 nm
Si/SiO2
Figure 6.  Reflectance spectra of 8 nm thick gold nanstructures with and 
without Ti on Si/SiO2 deposited at normal angle. Ref – 11 nm gold on the 
same substrate. 
Ti/Ag spectra is practically the same (Fig. 4, 5), in contrast to 
the behavior of Au and Ag reference samples. It can be 
considered as evidence of template (not metal) effect on 
optical properties of nanostructures. 
Reflectance of gold nanostructures, prepared in the same 
process as glass samples, but on silicon substrate, is shown in 
Fig.6. Spectra demonstrate interference picture in the system 
Si/SiO2 modified by absorption in nanostructure layer. Due 
to this, SPRs manifest themselves as minimums of 
reflectance and can be visible in pure Au sample (600 nm) 
and extrapolated in reference sample (beyond of 900 nm). 
SPRs are redshited in comparison with glass samples (Fig. 
4b), due to high effective dielectric constant of environment, 
modified by Si substrate. At the same time redshift in pure 
Au sample (no Ti layer) is much less than in reference 
sample, because the etched channels partly compensate 
effect of Si substrate on permittivity of environment. Low 
reflectance in the left part of spectra (shorter 500 nm) is 
attributed to absorption in gold together with destructive  
Figure 7.  SERS spectra of methylene blue for the gold nanostructures 
desribed in Fig. 6. 
interference in SiO2 layer. The special point at 375 nm is 
connected with peak of reflectance in crystalline Si. As in 
case of glass substrate, sample with adhesion layer is 
featureless. 
The raw Raman spectra of MB on Si/SiO2 samples, 
represented by reflectance spectra in Fig. 6 are shown in Fig. 
7 (blue and red lines). The peak at 530 cm-1 corresponds to 
the Raman scattering of the crystalline Si substrate. Black  
and green spectra present the Raman scattering of the bare 
Si/SiO2 and 11 nm thick gold layer on Si/SiO2. It is not 
surprise, that the maximum enhancement effect on Raman 
scattering demonstrates sample without Ti layer. Indeed, this 
sample possesses SPR (600 nm) close to SERS excitation 
wavelength (532 nm). Relatively strong SERS activity is also 
attributed to plain substrate with Au film. But SERS intensity 
of the sample fabricated with Ti layer exceeds only the 
intensity of bare oxide layer. This difference clearly indicates 
that plasmonic properties drastically deteriorate by adhesion 
layer. However, intensity of observed SERS signal for the 
Ti/Au nanostructures is still enough to distinguish the 
characteristic peaks of MB at around 1638 and 466 cm-1 
[21]. This fact and high mechanical stability of the Ti/Au 
nanostructures make them attractive for embedding in 
complex devices. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In summary, it has been proposed and demonstrated a 
new nanofabrication method of self-organized nanostructures 
both with adhesion layer and without it. With the help of 
proposed method it has been experimentally studied the 
influence of Ti adhesion layer on morphology and optical 
properties of lace-like nanostructures from gold and silver by 
direct comparison of the samples. The pure gold and silver 
nanostructures 
repeat 
template 
shape 
only 
roughly, 
concentrating in the middle part of the protrusion tops. The 
presence of a very thin adhesion layer (e.g., 1 nm thick Ti) 
leads to uniform covering of top planes of the template and 
drastically changes nanostructure morphology. As a 
consequence, SPR features in absorbance and reflectance 
spectra of the samples with Ti layer are transformed and 
weakened. Despite of this Ti/Au lace-like nanostructures 
demonstrate relatively high SERS activity measured with 
MB as the reference analyte. The obtained results suggest 
that developed nanofabrication method is promising in 
preparation of noble metal nanosturctures with adhesive 
layer to withstand further process treatments. The method is 
also valuable in fabrication of self-organized nanostructures 
from any evaporatable metal, e.g., Fe or Al. For future work, 
it is expected to optimize the template structure and gold 
thickness for obtaining of maximum SERS enhancement.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. N. Anker et al., “Biosensing with plasmonic nanosensors”, 
Nature Materials, vol. 7, 2008, pp. 442 – 453. 
[2] X. Zhang and Z. Liu, “Superlenses to overcome the 
diffraction limit”, Nature Materials, vol. 7, 2008, pp.  435 – 
441. 
10
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

[3] E. Cortes, L. Mochán, B. S. Mendoza, G. P. Ortiz, “Optical 
properties of nanostructured metamaterials”, Phys. Status 
Solidi B, vol. 247, 2010, pp. 2102 – 2107. 
[4] Y. F. Guan, A. V. Melechko, A. J. Pedraza, M. L. Simpson 
and P. D. Rack, “Non-lithographic organization of nickel 
catalyst for carbon nanofiber synthesis on laser-induced 
periodic surface structures,” Nanotechnology, vol. 18, 2007, 
pp. 335306 – 335312. 
[5] X. Sheng et al., “Design and Non-Lithographic Fabrication of 
Light Trapping Structures for Thin Film Silicon Solar Cells”, 
Adv. Mater. vol. 23, 2011, pp. 843 – 847. 
[6] R M. Tofizur, N. N. Shams, C.-H. Lai, “Nonlithographic 
fabrication of 25 nm magnetic nanodot arrays with 
perpendicular anisotropy over a large area”, J of App. Phys. 
vol. 105, 2009, pp. 07C112 – 07C112-3. 
[7] M. Fan, G. F.S. Andrade and A. G. Brolo, “A Review on the 
fabrication of substrates for surface enhanced Raman 
spectroscopy and their applications in analytical chemistry”, 
Analytica Chimica Acta, (in press). 
[8] E. Galopin et al., “Short- and Long-Range Sensing Using 
Plasmonic Nanostructures: Experimental and Theoretical 
Studies”, J. Phys. Chem. C, vol. 113, 2009, pp. 15921 – 
15927. 
[9] X. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. Gao, W. Zhou, S. Xie, “High-
Resolution Nanosphere Lithography (NSL) to Fabricate 
Highly-Ordered 
ZnO 
Nanorod 
Arrays”, 
J. 
Nanosci. 
Nanotechnol., , J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., vol. 10, 2010, pp. 
7432 – 7435. 
[10] Y. Piao, H. Kim, “Fabrication of nanostructured materials 
using porous alumina template and their applications for 
sensing and electrocatalysis”, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., vol. 
9, 2009, pp. 2215 – 2233. 
[11] S. Jayawardhana, G. Kostovski, A. P. Mazzolini, and P. R. 
Stoddart, “Optical fiber sensor based on oblique angle 
deposition”, Appl. Opt., Vol. 50, 2011, pp. 155 – 162. 
[12] J. Sancho-Parramon et al., “Optical and structural properties 
of Au-Ag islands films for plasmonic applications”, Appl. 
Phys. A, vol. 103, 6 January 2011, Online First, doi: 
10.1007/s00339-010-6231-x. 
[13] B. Lahiri, R. Dylewicz, R. M. De La Rue, and N. P. Johnson, 
“Impact of titanium adhesion layers on the response of arrays 
of metallic split-ring resonators (SRRs)”, Optics Express, vol. 
18, pp. 11202 – 11208. 
[14] K.W. Vogt, P.A. Kohl, W.B. Carter, R.A. Bell and L.A. 
Bottomley, “Characterization of thin titanium oxide ashesion 
layers on gold: resistivity, morphology, and composition”, 
Surf. Sci., 1993, vol. 301, 1994, pp. 203 – 213. 
[15] K.C. Vishnubhatla et al., “Femtosecond laser direct writing of 
gratings and waveguides in high quantum efﬁciency erbium-
doped Baccarat glass”, J. Phys. D, vol. 42, 2009, p. 205106 – 
201112. 
[16] R.M. Langford, “Focused ion beam nanofabrication: a 
comparison with conventional processing techniques”, J. 
Nanosci. Nanotechnol., vol. 6,  2006, pp. 661 – 668. 
[17] C. Eminian, F.-J. Haug, O. Cubero, X. Niquille, C. Ballif, 
“Photocurrent enhancement in thin film amorphous silicon 
solar 
cells 
with 
silver 
nanoparticles”, 
Progress 
in 
Photovoltaics: Research and Applications, vol. 19, 2011, pp. 
260 – 265. 
[18] V. Ovchinnikov and A. Shevchenko, “Large-Area Arrays of 
Pillar-Based Metal Nanostructures”, Proc. Third International 
Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies 
(ICQNM 2009), The IEEE Computer Society, Feb. 2009, pp. 
125-129, 
doi 
bookmark: 
http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ICQNM.2009.31. 
[19] G. Gupta et al., “Cross-sectional Transmission Electron 
Microscopy 
and 
Optical 
Characterization 
of 
Gold 
Nanoislands”, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol. 48, 2009, pp. 080207 – 
080208. 
[20] J. Fu and Y. Zhao, “Au nanoparticle based localized surface 
plasmon 
resonance 
substrates 
fabricated by 
dynamic 
shadowing growth”, Nanotechnology, vol. 21, 2010, pp. 
175303 – 175311. 
[21] R. R. Naujok, R. V. Duevel, R. M. Corn, “Fluorescence and 
Fourier Transform surface-enhanced Raman scattering 
measurements of methylene blue adsorbed onto a sulfur-
modified gold electrode”, Langmuir, vol. 9, 1993, pp. 1771 – 
1774. 
 
 
11
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

