Exploring Analog Emulation of Quantum Computation Using Quadrature Modulation
Kyle Sundqvist, Isaac Grubb, Kristopher McBrian
Department of Physics
San Diego State University
San Diego, California 92182
Email: ksundqvist@sdsu.edu
Rohit De
Del Norte High School
San Diego, California
Raymond Moberly, Jeremy Juybari
Faster Logic, LLC
San Diego, California 92115
Email: info@fasterlogic.com
Abstract—With the capability to emulate quantum computing,
our benefactors will be able to explore the behaviors of the
same algorithms being tested in leading research centers, and
develop new algorithms to approach new problems. A driven
pair of coupled oscillators produce normal modes that emulate the
behavior of a two-level system. A system of coupled LC oscillators
produces a general Hilbert space achievable within classical
systems. While operating at a fraction of the true quantum speed,
and perhaps trailing in the number to IBM’s and Google’s ≥
50, we will achieve exploration of the design space, utilizing a
hybrid electronics solution, operating at room temperatures. In
the collaborative effort, SDSU furthers the innovation of oscillator
models for the qubit emulation, while Faster Logic designs an
architecture to provide a coprocessor as a product.
Keywords–LC Oscillators; Qubit; Emulation; Innovation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Whereas quantum computers stand to drastically transform
computation for a number of existing and future problems
and are much studied [1]; their near-term realization comes
with challenges. The quantum computing (QC) industry has
devised a metric called the total quantum factor (TQF) to
aid comparison of the size and performance of the quantum
circuit[2]. Simulations can provide noise modeling, a step that
is recommended prior to migrating circuit designs to the IBMQ
system[3]. As a means of reducing risk of quantum-computing
adoption, simulation and emulation techniques make it possible
to consider the advantages in the real-world applications of
cryptography, machine learning, signal processing, and cyber-
security.
The quantum state has a continuum of possible superpo-
sitions. The properties of linear superpositions in a Hilbert
space provide quantum computers their enhanced efﬁciencies
relative to classical computers. Other researchers [4] [5] have
recognized this since the Hilbert space and the linearity of the
operations upon it impart efﬁciency to quantum computation.
The allowed eigenstates in the representative Hilbert space
scale exponentially with the number of implemented qubits.
Therefore, it makes sense to explore more readily available
classical systems which have an adequately similar mathemat-
ical structure. It may be possible to exploit such systems in
order to emulate properties of quantum computers.
Our advancement under Navy Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) funding will be to interface these classical
electronic circuits into a coprocessor architecture that works
together with the more ubiquitous digital computer. Because
of their natural parallelism, quantum computers show promise
for solving difﬁcult optimization problems related to sensor
signal processing. Through the utilization of existing analog
and mixed-signal integrated circuit platforms, an alternative to
quantum computing could be possible.
The Navy seeks a quantum emulation device that can
be integrated as a co-processor into shipboard computing
platforms. While there exist devices which manifest actual
quantum behavior, such as superconductors and trapped ions,
quantum states in such devices can be extremely fragile and are
easily affected and contaminated by external disturbances. Our
effort will produce a classical, emulated system using mixed-
signal integrated circuit platforms, as an appealing alternative
to actual quantum computing and as a surrogate tool that serves
well in the interim.
Beginning with the concept development of a circuit level
simulation platform for the quantum emulation device, we
will design a 5-qubit quantum emulation device co-processor
that connects to a computer via the Peripheral Component
Interconnect Express (PCIe) standard interface. A selection of
computational benchmarks are addressed based on previous
simulations and the active use of existing quantum computing
systems. We address the means to evaluate the performance
of a quantum emulation device; we have a capability that can
compare how algorithms will scale on QC systems.
The business direction is to fabricate and test the com-
ponents used to assemble the 5-qubit quantum emulation
device. Our research includes analyzing the scaling within
our constructions, and exploring other limitations such as
memory and processor speed. Based upon benchmark results,
we will extend the co-processor’s capability to 10 qubits or
more. Ofﬁce of Naval Research (ONR) is looking to offer
this extended qubit co-processor card for use in a variety of
Navy applications. The emulation devices also offer a low-cost
educational tool for teaching quantum computing methods and
for testing quantum computing algorithms.
These techniques open the doors to learning and educa-
tional outreach. Like the simple, intuitive systems used to
model more abstract physics, coherent quantum states are
emulated in classical analog electronics. This modeling has
been a crucial step in our San Diego State University (SDSU)
laboratory work, as we have been preparing to build and deploy
actual low - temperature superconducting devices.
In the paper, Section II describes the theory and back-
ground behind emulation. Section III provides the project
accomplishments, including several simulation efforts being
worked by our research team; it also describes the planned
work ahead. Section IV explains how the work will produce a
result of interest to the customer and the QC industry.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-824-2
ICQNM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

II.
AN EMULATED QUBIT: AN ELECTRONIC TWO-LEVEL
SYSTEM
The arguably simplest localized system in quantum me-
chanics, a two-level atom, also serves as the ideal qubit. It is
restricted to two discrete energy levels and is characterized by
a two-dimensional Hilbert space. Its wavefunction is a linear
combination representing the occupation probabilities of the
two states. Because of their simplicity and adaptability, two-
level systems are the basis of some of the most fundamental
studies of quantum mechanics. A two-level atom in a coherent
state is depicted by the following
|Ψ(t)⟩ = a(t) |−⟩ + b(t) |+⟩ .
(1)
where a and b are time-dependant, complex amplitudes of the
ground |−⟩ and excited |+⟩ states respectively. When used to
describe a single two level system, the normalization condition
aa∗ + bb∗ = 1 is required to ensure the system is normalized.
The density matrix, ρ, clearly depicts the state of a quantum
ensemble. It is an Hermitian matrix deﬁned as the outer
product of the wave functions of the system
ˆρ =
X
i
pi |Ψi(t)⟩ ⟨Ψi(t)|
(2)
For the two-level system, speciﬁcally in a coherent state,
ˆρ =

b∗b
ba∗
ab∗
aa∗

=

|b|2
|a||b|eiφ
|a||b|e−iφ
|a|2

.
(3)
Complex elements of this density matrix can be rearranged
to depict a real 3-space by the following components.
u = ρ12 + ρ21
v = i (ρ12 − ρ21)
w = ρ22 − ρ11.
(4)
The time evolution of this vector is given by the well-known
Bloch equations.
d
dt
" u
v
w
#
=
" −1/T2
−δ
0
δ
−1/T2
A
0
−A
−1/T1
# " u
v
w
#
.
(5)
Here δ is the detuning, A is the Rabi frequency, and T1 and
T2 are relaxation times. The Rabi frequency is the frequency
at which the system rotates around the u-axis as the ﬁeld
is applied. Motion of the coherent state may be depicted on
the Bloch Sphere, as in Figure 1. Our prototype includes this
mapping for our data.
Our emulated two-level system is based on the dynamics
of an electronic system containing two normal modes, from
the coupled action of two inductor-capacitor LC oscillators,
as in Figure 2. By introducing symmetrical voltage-controlled
inductors, the equivalent to atom-photon interaction is intro-
duced, an external coupling to our qubit. As with true two-level
atoms, the state of this emulated atom can be manipulated
around points on the Bloch sphere by way of resonant pulse
sequences.
The coupling capacitor present between these oscillators
of equal resonant frequency will create hybridized states and
an energy splitting. Therefore, electronic states which emulate
the presence of a “ground” and “excited” state are produced.
The inﬂuence of an external control in this “emulated atom”
Figure 1. Coherent states of a single qubit map onto the Bloch Sphere.
Figure 2. Coupled oscillators emulate the behavior of a two-level system.
is provided by the action of symmetric voltage-controlled
inductors. The coupling produced by these dynamical inductors
emulates an atom-photon interaction, and provides external
control of this system. Classical analogs to quantum phenom-
ena are produced; one example being the manifestation of
Rabi oscillations. Measuring our atom’s output ports details
the voltage modulations at the resistor in the feedback loop. By
overlaying the modulations upon the source-carrier frequency,
we can visualize our classical analog to Rabi oscillations
(Figure 3).
III.
DETAILS
In the interim report of our contracted research, in a format
meeting the requirements of DI-MGMT-80555A, we provided
the Ofﬁce of Naval Research, our Government customer, with
the means to evaluate program progress made by the Faster
Logic contractor and SDSU subcontractor.
A. Research to emulate
Our research and experimentation includes numerous soft-
ware packages for personal computers which have been de-
veloped to simulate quantum computation. The software sim-
ulators are a family of solutions used to explore quantum
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-824-2
ICQNM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

computation memory and processor architectures; the FPGA
simulators are well-suited for the heavily parallel problems re-
quired in quantum state evolution. Progressing from simulation
to emulation addresses the quantum gate matrix operations of
complex numbers.
In a recent work [6], a discussion of hierarchical modeling
considers approaches and improved re-usability in previous
works. The modeling of each quantum gate as an individual
component requires greater resources, reduces accuracy, and
limits scalability. Their approach to pipelining the entire matrix
architecture signiﬁcantly reduces the resource utilization and
emulation times, thus improving scalability and allowing the
use of ﬂoating-point precision improving accuracy.
B. Schedule
The Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) program
offers a six-month phase I timeline, truly a challenge even
in normal non-pandemic times. Upon award of Phase II,
the company and academic collaborator will proceed from
concept to prototype. The phases of Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) are tied to the Technology Readiness Levels
(TRL)[7].
C. Simulation Studies
Classical simulation techniques, while inadequate for gen-
eral quantum computation, serve to guide a path toward
quantum supremacy (super-classical behavior of controllable
quantum systems). In some particular cases, such simulation
is known to be easy. Yet, both digital and analog quantum sim-
ulation aid the investigation of coupled quantum phenomena.
[8]
We wish to ultimately produce a full-scale emulation of a
Hilbert space structure capable of acting as a basis for quantum
computation. As this goal requires several layers of engineer-
ing sophistication, we have found that we gain insight through
several variations of independent, numerical simulation. While
we recognize classical emulation as a goal far superior to (and
separate from) simulation, we also acknowledge simulation
as a necessary staging tool in our path forward. Here, we
Figure 3. Laboratory qubit emulation results: Rabi oscillations.
summarize three independent student-simulation efforts that
emphasize different aspects of our work.
1) Cirq: Introduced in 2018, Google Cirq, [9] a software li-
brary for simulation, implements the behavioral functionalities
of a quantum computer. Working from available Python source
models for Deutsch-Jozsa [10], Grover’s Algorithm [11] and
the QFT [12], three of the most frequently-studied algorithms;
we varied the number of qubits. We also added supporting
code [Listing 1] to measure simulation compute time [13] as
our measurement and indication of complexity.
Listing 1: measuring simulation run times
start_time = process_time ()
result = simulator.run(cirq.Circuit
(circuit_under_test ()), repetitions=N)
end_time = process_time ()
simulation_time = end_time - start_time
Simulation runtime irregularities, likely a factor of Python’s
built-in caching and memory management [14] on our cloud-
compute platform [15], and timing measurement precision
were remedied by large repetition counts and repeated exper-
iments subject to a median ﬁlter to remove outliers. As the
quintessential illustration, we generalized Deutsch’s algorithm
to multi-Qubit inputs. The algorithm determines if a given
function Uf, also known as the oracle, is balanced or a
constant. The schematic diagram for the algorithm is obtained
from [6] and visually comments our code.
Figure 4. Deutsch-Jozsa in Cirq Jupyter notebook
For benchmarking, we avoid timing the set-up time (oracle
creation) for Uf, instead measuring just the simulation. We
extended the Cirq Workshop Bootcamp Final [16] from its 1-
qubit and 2-qubit examples to address more qubits. Our cloud
simulation processes [15] will support simulations beyond the
5-qubit requirement of the contract sponsor. Other simulators
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-824-2
ICQNM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

have been compared [17]. The classical computer’s function
evaluations, of which at least 2n−1 + 1 out of 2n are required,
could be replaced with a single process on the actual quan-
tum computer, giving an exponential speedup [18]. Figure 4
shows the constructed Deutsch-Jozsa oracles within Cirq, and
illustrates our approach to group them for comparison. Every
n-input-qubit oracle has one or two meaningful comparison
approaches to observe the scaling results with m > n input
qubits.
2) Verilog on Intel (Altera): Simulation efforts are also
being investigated using FPGAs (Field-Programmable Gate
Arrays). FPGAs allow for rapid calculations. As they are
inherently parallel in architecture, FPGAs achieve some of
the massively parallel needs required for quantum computing
simulations. Our FPGA solution can also serve as a test
architecture for our future low-temperature circuitry.
We are presently investigating the progress made in matrix
manipulation algorithms and tensor products on FPGAs, which
simulate combinations of gate operations [19]. Matrix-matrix
multiplication, a computationally expensive part of simula-
tions, permits exploring algorithmic trade-offs which may give
insight into speeding up quantum computing and simulations
in general.
FPGA chips do have hardware limitations. While the
parallel nature of an FPGA lends itself to simulating quantum
entangled systems, it can ultimately only perform classical
computations. The speed of these operations are determined
by memory and processor speed.
3) National Instruments’ LabVIEW: Based on the emu-
lation scheme in [5], we use quadrature modulation (e.g., I
and Q) to represent qubit states. We identify multiple qubits
by characteristic frequencies. Hilbert states are formed by
products of these waveforms. The resulting quantum state
may be decomposed for gate operations by projecting onto
subspace projection signals. In order to investigate the octave
spacing scheme described by La Cour (2015), a quadrature
modulation I&Q scheme was used to represent qubit states
using National Instruments’ LabVIEW Virtual Instruments.
This approach offers a practical block-level description of the
synthesis process for constructing arbitrary quantum states,
as well the possibility for exploring physically feasible meth-
ods for performing single or multi-qubit gate operations and
measurements. Figure 5 shows an important laboratory result,
a 100 MHz carrier signal modulated by the wave function
describing a 3-qubit state. The real and imaginary parts of the
wave function can be extracted from the carrier signal using
I&Q demodulation. The harmonic components representing
distinct Hilbert states can be analyzed or operated on using
gates to produce new states. Our wavefunction is
|Ψ⟩ = |000⟩ + |001⟩ + |010⟩ + |011⟩
+ |100⟩ + |101⟩ + |110⟩ + |111⟩ .
The n qubits are identiﬁed with octave-spaced frequencies
ωn below the carrier frequency ωc. The qubit states |0⟩n and
|1⟩n are represented by the positive or negative frequency
components of e±iωnt. Each of the 2N computational basis
states are then eiΩxt, where each Ωx is a unique permutation of
sums and differences of the n qubit frequencies. The quantum
state |Ψ⟩ is a linear combination of these distinct frequency
Figure 5. LabVIEW simulation output results for the 3-qubit state
components, with complex coefﬁcients. Using I&Q modula-
tion the real and imaginary parts of |Ψ⟩ can be constructed
explicitly in LabVIEW using a system of sine and cosine wave
generators, ampliﬁers, inverters, and adders.
D. Experimental Work / Test Procedures
Based on the work of [4], a time-domain voltage waveform
can represent an entire 2-level coherent state by way of an
I and Q quadrature representation. This was later adopted
and extended with modulation techniques as per La Cour [5].
Using a carrier and n-frequencies to represent n qubits, the
Hilbert-space compound states can be represented as signals
with staggered frequencies.
Available in our laboratory, we have several signal gen-
erators, oscilloscopes, PCB fabrication tools, computer inter-
facing modules enabled by LabVIEW, and the NI Engineering
Laboratory Virtual Instrumentation Suite (ELVIS) board. These
allow us to construct and manipulate analog signals for staging
our designs.
Using LabVIEW virtual instruments along with the Siglent
signal generator, models 1025 and 1032X, we set the fre-
quencies 366 KHz, 732 KHz, 1.464 MHz 2.928 MHz, 5.856
MHz, 1.365 MHz, ﬁnding this to be a solution within the
output capacity of our in-lab Siglent 1025 signal generators
and having unique values for all possible permutations of the
frequency sum. The potential laboratory installation concept is
shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6. Signal Generators provide stable coordinated oscillations in the
laboratory
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-824-2
ICQNM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

As we continue with the Phase I, we will progress to
experimental work with the Siglent waveform generators.
These bench-top systems are ISO 9001 manufactured; they
address the record-keeping and traceability of measurement so
that we can architect an ISO/IEC 17025 testing and calibration
approach. Our laboratory is equipped with the Voltera V-
One circuit board printer, already employed in one master’s
student’s fabrication accomplishments.
E. Designs
The description of our emulation architecture design is still
in progress. Utilizing frequency-mixing protocols described
in [5], we interface with a digital computer, and represent
coherent qubit states with separate physical ports for ground
and excited-state waveforms. We believe this is a useful
compromise in reducing the complexity in constructing Hilbert
space states from frequency-mixed states in return for addi-
tional layout complexity.
F. Test equipment
Our teaching laboratory has 12 of the Siglent 1025 systems.
The Siglent 1032X waveform generator, which we plan to up-
grade entirely to, offers LAN connectivity. We are considering
an advanced model with I/Q modulation.
The Digital to Analog interface is a Pmod DA1 Four-
Channel 8-bit DAC. There is no special test equipment required
in the near-term plan; all of our test equipment is commercial
off-the-shelf (COTS).
IV.
CONCLUSION
While the quantum computing revolution has shown
promise over the last two decades, we have seen an oppor-
tunity to advance emulation in just the course of this year.
Recommended to consider the PICe coprocessor interfacing,
we will experience a doubling of speed as PCIe version 4
reaches the desktop community. Exploring the advantages of
quantum computation gives the learner and developer a new
interest in the use of classical analog electronics. Our SDSU
laboratory work continues on course as the quantum computing
program introduces new course offerings.
In our SDSU laboratory work, we have successfully
demonstrated the analog to a two-level system (and potential
qubit) with pair of driven LC oscillators. Advancement under
Navy STTR funding will allow us to better interface and
control these classical electronic circuits.
Quantum computer models that can be realized using exist-
ing analog and mixed-signal integrated circuit platforms [20]
and, when integrated as a ﬁeldable solution, meets the Navy
need, integrated as a co-processor into shipboard computing
platforms.
A selection of quantum computational benchmarks have
been modeled in the Google Colab environment using iPython
Jupyter notebooks. These will resurface to evaluate the per-
formance of the quantum emulation device; by varying the
number of qubits, we can compare how algorithms will scale
on QC systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the U.S. Ofﬁce of Naval
Research, contract N6833520C0355. The team of Faster Logic,
LLC and SDSU recognizes the contributions of recent Masters
in Physics graduates Chrisman Payne and Tristan Paul.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Nielsen and I. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Infor-
mation.
Cambridge, 2000.
[2]
E. A. Sete, W. J. Zeng, and C. T. Rigetti, “A functional architecture for
scalable quantum computing,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference
on Rebooting Computing (ICRC).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[3]
“Learn Quantum Computation using Qiskit,” 2020, URL: http://www.
somewebpage.org/ [accessed: 2020-10-10].
[4]
D. K. Ferry, R. Akis, and J.Harris, “Quantum wave processing,”
Superlattices Microstructures, vol. 30, no. 2, 2001, p. 81–94.
[5]
B. R. La Cour and G. E. Ott, “Signal-based classical emulation of a
universal quantum computer,” New Journal of Physics, vol. 17, no. 5,
2015.
[6]
N. Mahmud et al., “Efﬁcient Computation Techniques and Hardware
Architectures for Unitary Transformations in Support of Quantum
Algorithm Emulation,” Journal of Signal Processing Systems, vol. 92,
2020, p. 1017–1037.
[7]
M. A. Frerking and P. M. Beauchamp, “JPL technology readiness
assessment guideline,” in 2016 IEEE Aerospace Conference.
IEEE,
2016, pp. 1–10.
[8]
J. Preskill, “Quantum computing and the entanglement frontier,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1203.5813, 2012.
[9]
A. Ho et al., “Announcing Cirq: an open source framework for NISQ
algorithms,” 2018.
[10]
“Google colaboratory.” [Online]. Available: https://colab.research.goo
gle.com/drive/1mrDPc0HSBxgD\ \-wwif\ gUGriM3VTNYoy
[11]
“Grover’s Algorithm (Github Repository),” URL: https://github.com/q
uantumlib/Cirq/blob/master/examples/grover.py [accessed: 2020-10-
10].
[12]
“Quantum Fourier Transform (Github Repository),” URL: https://gith
ub.com/quantumlib/Cirq/blob/master/examples/quantum\ fourier\ tra
nsform.py [accessed: 2020-10-10].
[13]
“Python: time — Time access and conversions,” 2014, URL: https:
//docs.python.org/3/library/time.html [accessed: 2020-10-10].
[14]
M. Ismail and G. E. Suh, “Quantitative overhead analysis for python,”
in 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization
(IISWC), 2018, pp. 36–47.
[15]
“Google Colaboratory,” 2020, URL: https://research.google.com/cola
boratory/faq.html [accessed: 2020-10-10].
[16]
“Cirq Workshop Bootcamp,” 2020, URL: https://colab.research.google.
com/drive/1mrDPc0HSBxgD\ \-wwif\ gUGriM3VTNYoy [accessed:
2020-10-10].
[17]
“Quantiki,” 2014, URL: https://www.quantiki.org/wiki/list-qc-simulato
rs [accessed: 2020-10-10].
[18]
D. Deutsch and R. Jozsat, “Rapid solution of problems by quantum
computation,” in IN PROC, 1992, pp. 553–558.
[19]
A. U. Khalid, Z. Zilic, and K. Radecka, “FPGA emulation of quantum
circuits,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Design: VLSI
in Computers and Processors, 2004. ICCD 2004. Proceedings.
IEEE,
2004, pp. 310–315.
[20]
T. C. Paul, “Emulating Two-Level Quantum Systems Using Coupled
LC Oscillators,” Master’s thesis, 2018.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-824-2
ICQNM 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

