Measurement of Optical Properties of Nanofluids and its Effects in Near-wall Flow 
Evaluation 
Kanjirakat Anoop and Reza Sadr 
Micro Scale Thermo Fluids (MSTF) Laboratory 
Texas A&M University at Qatar 
e-mail: anoop.baby@qatar.tamu.edu 
email: reza.sadr@qatar.tamu.edu 
 
Abstract—There have been several ongoing researches in 
nanofluids (suspensions of nanoparticles in a basefluid) due 
to the anomalous heat transfer enhancement that were 
reported earlier. Exploration of the near-wall flow region 
using Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) technique could 
bring more insights for reasons behind such enhancements. 
However, such measurement techniques are extremely 
depended on the optical properties of the fluid under study. 
Hence prior measurements of the optical properties are 
necessary for estimating velocity values while implementing 
these fluids. In present study, optical properties of SiO2 –
water nanofluids at various particle concentrations are 
investigated. Measurements of refractive indices and the 
optical transmittance of nanofluids, which are directly 
related to the depth of penetration and visible depth in nPIV 
(nano PIV) measurements, are carried out. Further, near-
wall velocities of water and nanofluids are measured using 
nPIV technique as a case study. 
 Keywords-Refractive index, transmittivity, nPIV 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Cooling of components still remains as one of the 
major challenges faced by electronic industries. Many 
modes of cooling techniques were tried in the past. 
Improving the heat transfer capacity of the cooling liquid 
by suspending solid particles was one among them. 
Suspending micron-sized particles however resulted in 
effects such as particle sedimentation, higher pumping 
power requirement, and erosion of heat exchanger 
surfaces. Suspending nano-sized particles seemed to be a 
better option, hence introducing of new class of cooling 
fluid known as nanofluids.  Nanofluids, are engineered 
colloidal suspensions of nano-sized particles in a heat 
transfer fluid, and have received considerable attention; 
due to the anomalous thermal properties reported earlier 
[1,2]. However, in recent times, many contradicting results 
with respect to thermal performance of nanofluids are 
being reported. Main reason for such contradicting 
observation is due to the unclear understanding of the 
phenomenon behind the thermal enhancements. Non-
intrusive near-wall velocity measurements are expected to 
bring insights explaining reasons for the anomalous 
thermal enhancements. However, any non-intrusive optical 
flow measurement techniques would be highly dependent 
on the optical properties of the medium.  As nanofluids are 
fluids with suspended nan-sized particles, estimation of 
optical properties based on classical theories may be 
unreliable. Hence, detailed investigations of its optical 
properties are required before implementing them in 
measurements. In present work optical properties of 
nanofluids are measured, and a case study analysis is 
carried out on its effects in near-wall flow measurements.  
 Initial attempt to measure near-wall flow fields of 
nanofluids was made by Walsh et al. [3] by using a Micro 
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) technique. They 
obtained velocity profiles of nanofluids flowing inside a 
microchannel. However, the spatial resolution of their 
work was limited to several microns and could not capture 
details of velocity field very close to the walls. To surpass 
this limitation and to achieve a detailed flow field 
evaluation at near-wall region, efforts were made by 
Anoop and Sadr [4] to conduct nPIV (nano Particle Image 
Velocimetry) measurements while using nanofluids. nPIV 
is  an extension of μPIV working on evanescent-wave 
illumination generated by total internal reflection (TIR) of 
a laser beam at the fluid-solid interface between the flow 
and the wall [5]. The effects of errors in measured velocity 
values in nPIV measurements as a result of particle 
mismatch of tracers was investigated by Sadr et al. [6]. 
This was further expanded by including the effects of 
Brownian motion, light penetration profiles, surface forces 
such as van der Waals, and electrostatic forces, and the 
velocity gradient on the near-wall measurements using a 
traditional PIV cross-correlation method [7].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.     Schematic showing nPIV measurement principle. 
The working principle behind the nPIV measurement 
technique is described next. When a light beam travels 
through a medium with a refractive index n1, into another 
transparent medium with a lower refractive index of n2 at 
 
 
 
 
Water (n2) 
Glass (n3) 
Incident laser 
beam 
>c 
Immersion 
oil (n1≈ n3) 
Fluorescent tracers 
n2<n1 
n1 
~300nm 
 
Microscope 
objective 
zp 
zv 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

an angle exceeding the critical angle, θc=sin-1(n2/n1), it gets 
totally reflected at the interface (Fig.1). However, the 
electromagnetic field penetrates into the lower refractive 
index region and propagates for a small distance parallel to 
the interface, creating what is known an evanescent wave. 
This evanescent wave is capable of exciting fluorescent 
particles in this region while the large numbers of particles 
farther away in the bulk liquid remain unexcited. 
Evanescent wave intensity, I, in the direction normal to the 
interface decays exponentially with distance, z: 
              
⁄
                             (1) 
where I0 is the maximum intensity at the wall and zp is 
the penetration depth. 
   
  
    (           
⁄
 )
    
⁄             (2) 
 is the wavelength of the light and is the incident 
angle. For visible light at a glass water interface, zp is on 
the order of O (100nm). Figure 1 shows the schematic of a 
general TIRF setup used in an nPIV experiment where 
only the near-wall fluorescent particles in the fluid are 
excited and viewed from the bottom of the microscope 
plate [6]. The emission intensity of the tracer particles in 
this region is an exponential function of the distance from 
the wall with a decaying trend as stated by (1) [7]. It can 
be noted that the penetration depth is depended on 
refractive index of the medium (2). When nanofluids are 
used as the medium their refractive index values of the 
medium will change with respect to particle loading. 
Hence, prior knowledge of refractive index values of 
nanofluid would be crucial while implementing them in 
nPIV measurements.  
For an evanescent wave, zp is the penetration depth, 
however, the actual depth that could be imaged would be 
larger than it and is defined as visible depth (zv). 
Depending on the optical characteristics of the imaging 
system, this depth of visible region, zv, changes with the 
intensity of the incident laser beam, transmission of light 
through the medium, fluorescent particle characteristics, 
camera and the background noise of the imaging system. 
In short, zv represents actual visible depth in the captured 
image. Another point to be noted is the opaque nature of 
nanofluids. From visual observation of nanofluids, it can 
be noted that the opacity of medium is increased with 
particle addition. This in-turn could reduce the visible 
depth. Hence, it would be important to see the effect of 
light transmittivity in nanofluids also while implementing 
them in nPIV measurements. It is assumed that any 
reduction in transmittivity due to use of nanofluids would 
reduce visible depth.  
Even though nPIV measurements were made earlier 
for nanofluids [4], the optical characterisation of 
nanofluids were not carried out and were estimated on 
theoretical studies alone. No experimental efforts were 
made to investigate the optical properties of them. Thus, in 
present study, the optical properties of nanofluids are 
measured and their influence on nPIV measurements are 
analysed. Refractive index value and transmittivity values 
are measured to obtain their influence on penetration depth 
(zp) and visible depth (zv). Nanoparticle concentrations are 
varied from 0 to 6% by mass. Further, nPIV measurements 
are conducted with nanofluids to see the effect of 
nanoparticles in the near-wall flow region. 
II. 
MEASURMENT OF OPTICAL PROPERTIES 
Before detailing the measurements of nanofluids 
optical properties, a brief description on preparation of 
nanofluids is given. SiO2-water nanofluids are used in the 
present study. Nanofluids are prepared by a top down 
approach in which commercially bought nanoparticles are 
mechanically dispersed in a basefluid (in present case 
water).  Appropriate amounts of SiO2 nanoparticles (~ 
20nm average diameter, Sigma Aldrich, #637238) are 
dispersed in de-ionized water using an ultrasonic bath 
(VWR ultrasonic cleaner, 35 kHz) for 30 minutes. Further, 
the colloidal suspension is subjected to intensified 
ultrasonication by immersing a probe type sonicator 
(QSonica S-4000, 20 kHz). Cyclic ultrasonic pulses for 
about 45 minutes are given to the suspension so as to 
achieve maximum possible de-agglomeration of particles. 
Particle concentrations varying from 0 to 6% by mass 
(henceforth represented as %wt) are considered for present 
investigation. 
In present work, refractive indices of nanofluids are 
measured using a laboratory refractometer (RE40D, 
Mettler Teldo), which measure reflective index values 
based on total internal reflection principle. Light from a 
LED light source gets partially reflected to an optical 
CCD sensor at the surface of sapphire prism and sample 
interface.  Measurement from the sensor is used in 
evaluation of refractive index values. The equipment had 
a measurement range of refractive index values from 1.32 
to 1.7, which matches with the measurement requirements 
of the nanofluids. Prior to actual measurements, the 
refractometer was calibrated with standard distilled water 
at ambient conditions. 
To acquire information of transmission of visible light 
through the nanofluid sample, experiments are conducted 
to determine the transmittance using a spectrometer. 
Percentage transmittance of the nanofluid samples are 
measured using a Perkin Elmer Lamda 950 spectrometer 
in the visible region. The spectrometer consists of a light 
source, a mono-chromator, a wave length selector, a 
sample holder having a specified path length, and a 
detector. Light at a desired wavelength is passed through 
the sample and the transmitted light through the medium 
is measured by the detector. The sample path lengths can 
be varied using different sizes of cuvettes. During 
experimentation, initial baseline readings are obtained by 
placing the basefluid (water) in the spectrometer and are 
later compared with the nanofluid samples. Percentage 
transmittance is measured for the sample at wavelengths 
in the visible region. In present work, experiments were 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

conducted with two path lengths, 10mm and 1mm (Starna 
Cells Inc.). 
III. 
NANO-PIV MEASUREMENTS 
After measuring the optical properties of nanofluids, 
near-wall velocity measurements of nanofluids are 
performed using nPIV technique. An objective based TIR 
method is used in present study. The microchannel flow 
cell (Translume Inc) used in the experiment is fabricated 
in quartz and has a rectangular cross section (300m 
width and 100m Height). The bottom quartz plate is 
customized to have a thickness of 0.12mm in order to 
have a clear TIR falling on the objective of the 
microscope. During the experiment, different flow rates 
ranging from 0.005ml/min (±0.1%) to 0.06ml/min is 
maintained in the micro channel using a syringe pump 
(KDS200, KD Scientific) along with a 2.5 ml gas-tight 
glass syringe (Hamilton). The excitation light in the near-
wall region was provided by an Argon-Ion CW laser 
beam with a wave length of 488 nm (Spectra Physics 
BeamLok 2060). Images were obtained using an EMCCD 
camera (ProEM 512, Princeton Instruments) attached to 
an 
inverted 
epi-fluorescence 
microscope 
(Leica 
DMI6000B) via a 63x 1.47NA oil immersion objective. 
The pixel resolution for the images obtained from this 
imaging set up was 4106 (pixel/meter). The nPIV 
seeding particles used were 100nm (±5%) diameter 
polystyrene fluorescent particles (F8803, Invitrogen) 
having peak excitation and emission wavelengths of 
505nm and 515nm, respectively.  
In all the experimental runs, the fluorescent particle 
concentration was maintained at a constant volume 
concentration of 0.017%. When nanofluid samples were 
prepared, the fluorescent particles were added to the 
nanofluids suspension and sonicated thoroughly, keeping 
the same fluorescent particle concentration. Thus, the 
nanofluids sample contained both SiO2 nanoparticles as 
well as the fluorescent particles suspended in it. However, 
when visualizing the flow it was observed that fluorescent 
particles 
were 
alone 
getting 
excited. 
The 
SiO2 
nanoparticles were seen not self-illuminating or creating a 
background illumination. The angle of incidence of light 
in the water-quartz interface was evaluated to be 65o, 
based on the numerical aperture value of the objective 
lens and refractive indices at the interface. This yielded a 
penetration depth of zp  90nm (2). The depth of visible 
region (zv) is then estimated to be 350±20nm for the 
basefluid, based on the penetration depth and the intensity 
value of the background noise in captured images.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Initially, the optical properties of nanofluids are 
discussed. Figure 2 shows the effective refractive index 
values of nanofluids measured for various concentrations. 
Measurements show a rapid increase in refractive index 
values at lower particle loadings (from 0 to 1wt%) and a 
gradual increase after that up to 6wt%. A careful 
observation, however, would reveal that the total 
percentage increase in refractive index values were below 
1% even while particle loading were increased by 6wt%. 
Similar orders of refractive index values were reported in 
earlier studies for other nanofluids [8, 9]. 
Figure 2: Refractive index values of nanofluids. 
Even though the increases in refractive index values 
were low, their effect in increasing penetration depth (zp) 
needs to be considered. The penetration depth is evaluated 
using (2) and is plotted in Fig. 3.  
 
Figure 3: Effect refractive index of nanofluids on penetration depth 
Effects of three incident angles which are above 
critical angles are plotted. Only a minimal increase in 
penetration depth is observed while using nanofluids. It is 
observed that penetration depth has increased by about 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

7nm for 6wt% nanofluid when compared with that of 
water.   
Effect of opacity of nanofluids and its influence on 
transmission of visible light is examined next. Figures 4 
and 5 show the percentage transmittance of nanofluid 
samples measured using 10mm and 1 mm path length 
respectively. Percentage transmission at a wavelength of 
488nm 
(wavelength 
of 
incident 
light 
in 
nPIV 
measurements) is chosen for estimation. Inset figure 
shows the transmittance spectrum of all the samples in the 
entire visible region wavelengths. Photograph of the 
cuvette used in the measurement is also given in the 
figure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4:  Percentage transmittance for nanofluids measured with 
10mm path length. 
 
Figure 5: Percentage transmittance for nanofluids measured with 1mm 
path length. 
It is observed that adding nanoparticle in the basefluid 
has increased the opacity of the solution. With 10mm path 
length, percentage transmittance became almost zero 
when the particle loading has reached 1wt%. Further 
measurements were not possible with this path length. 
However, percentage transmittance measurements were 
possible at higher particle loadings while using 1mm path 
length cuvette. Measurements up to 4 wt% were possible 
with 1mm path length as shown in Fig. 5. A maximum of 
±2% uncertainty is observed in all the measurements.  
Following Beer-Lambert law, transmittance (T) is 
related to path length (l) and absorption coefficient () of 
the liquid as given below [10]. 
 
                                            (3) 
 
In order to combine the results of 1mm path 
length and 10mm path length, variation of absorption 
coefficient with that of particle loading is plotted in Fig. 
6. 
  
Figure 6: Variation of absorption coefficient with particle concentration 
Ideally, absorption coefficient for a suspension needs 
to be constant for a particular loading even while 
measuring with varying path lengths. However, present 
measurements did not show considerable matching 
beyond 0.5 wt% particle loading. One reason for this 
could be the fact that the sensor in the spectrometer was 
not getting sufficient signals to evaluate transmittivity 
beyond particle loading of 0.5wt% (Note from Figure 4 
that the percentage transmission was below 1% above 
0.5% 
particle 
loading 
for 
10 
mm 
path 
length 
measurements). At 1wt% the percentage transmittance 
measurement was 0.122%, which would be highly 
unreliable. Similarly for 1mm path length experiments 
beyond 2 wt% seems unreliable. Further examination of 
Fig. 6 shows that, the linear trend of absorption 
coefficient with respect to concentration for nanofluids 
was true only below 2 wt% particle loading. Thus, it 
would be judicious to consider only measurements with 
10mm path length 
1mm path length 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

1mm path length below 2wt% concentration in our further 
analysis. A linear fit in this region is made and is 
estimated to be, 
                                             (4) 
where, is the particle loading by mass. Using equations 
3 and 4, transmittivity at any given path length could be 
evaluated. 
The 
maximum 
focal 
depth 
in 
nPIV 
measurements is of magnitude 500nm. For a path length 
of 500nm and particle loading of 6wt%, the percentage 
reduction in transmittivity could be evaluated to be less 
than 1%. In other words, percentage reduction in 
transmittivity in a depth of 500nm for nanofluids would 
be very minimal. 
 Thus, from the measurement and analysis of optical 
properties of nanofluids it is clear that the changes due to 
refractive index values and opacity would not influence 
nPIV measurements in the measurement depth. To 
evaluate the effect of nanofluids on nPIV measurements, 
preliminary near-wall velocity measurements using water 
and nanofluids at various particle concentrations are 
made. The flow rates are varied from 0.005ml/min to 
0.06ml/min and near-wall images are captured. For each 
experiment, 1500 nPIV image pairs of 256x80 pixels 
were acquired with a inter frame time delay of 0.6 ms. 
The images were then post–processed using a standard 
FFT-based cross correlation program that uses a 3D 
Gaussian peak finding algorithm based on a Gaussian 
surface fit to determine the tracer particles’ displacements  
and velocities[4]. In nPIV measurements, the focal depth 
of the objective lens is larger than the penetration depth of 
the evanescence wave, therefore, all the particles in the 
image are in focus and there would be no back-ground 
light.  Figure 7 shows the near-wall velocities measured 
for nanofluid and water at a visible depth of 350nm.  
Figure 7. Near-wall velocity of nanofluids measured using nPIV 
technique. 
It is observed from the figure that there is not much 
noticeable variation in near-wall velocity values measured 
for 
nanofluids 
even 
after 
considerable 
amount 
nanoparticles loading. The velocity variations measured 
for each flow rates are all falling within the experimental 
uncertainty values [11].The plot shows that even after 
increasing the particle loading by one order of magnitude, 
the near-wall velocity behaves the same. This indicates 
that nanofluids behaves as a homogeneous mixture and 
have Newtonian flow characteristics. Similar observation 
was made in earlier studies with nanofluids also [3, 4].  
It should be kept in mind that, in present study, visible 
depth (zv) variation while using nanofluids were estimated 
qualitatively from the transmittivity values. Their actual 
effect in nPIV measurements may be different owing to 
their effect on background and increasing noise levels. 
More efforts to measure zv quantitatively and to include 
them in the near-wall velocities are being currently 
undertaken at our laboratory. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The present work investigates the effect of optical 
properties of SiO2-water nanofluids on near-wall flow 
measurements. Particle concentrations were varied from 0 
to 6wt%. Refractive index values of nanofluids, which 
affect penetration depth of the evanescent wave (zp) were 
measured. Less than one percent increase in refractive 
index values were observed for nanofluids. Transmittivity, 
which would indirectly influence visible depth (zv) were 
measured using a spectrometer. Analysis showed that 
transmittivity of light or opacity, in a depth of 500nm was 
not much affected by the use of nanofluids. No significant 
variation in near-wall velocities were recorded for 
nanofluids in comparison with that of water. nPIV 
measurements 
vindicated 
the 
homogeneous 
and 
Newtonian nature of the nanofluids.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This publication was made possible by NPRP grant # 
08-574-2-239 from the Qatar National Research Fund (a 
member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein 
are solely the responsibility of the authors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. K. Das,  S. U. S Choi,  W. Yu and T. Pradeep,  
“Nanofluids Science and Technology,” John Wiley, New 
York, 2008. 
[2] W.Yu and H.Xie, “A review of nanofluids: Preparation, 
Stability mechanisms, and applications,” Journal of 
Nanomaterials, 435873, 2012, doi:10.1155/2012/435873. 
[3] P. A. Walsh, V. M. Egan and E. J. Walsh, “Novel micro-
PIV study enables a greater understanding of nanoparticle 
suspension flows: nanofluids,” Microfluid Nanofluid, 8, 
June 2010, pp.837–842, doi:10.1007/s10404-009-0553-z. 
[4] K. Anoop  and R. Sadr, “nPIV Velocity Measurement of 
Nanofluids in the Near-Wall Region of a Microchannel,” 
Nanoscale Research Letters, vol. 7, May 2012, 284, doi: 
10.1186/1556-276X-7-284. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

[5] C. M. Zettner and M. Yoda, “Particle velocity field 
measurements in a near-wall flow using evanescent wave 
illumination,” Experiments in Fluids, vol. 34, Jan 2003, pp. 
115-121,doi: 10.1007/s00348-002-0541-5. 
[6] R. Sadr, H. Li and M. Yoda, “Impact of hindered brownian 
diffusion on the accuracy of particle-image velocimetry 
using evanescent-wave illumination,” Experiments in 
Fluids, vol. 38 (1), 2005, pp.  90-98, doi: 10.1007/s00348-
004-0895-y 
[7] R. Sadr, K. Anoop and R. Khader, “ Effects of surface 
forces and non-uniform out-of plane illumination on the 
accuracy of nPIV velocimetry,” Measurement Science and 
Technology, vol. 23, 2012, 055303,  doi:10.1088/0957-
0233/23/5/055303.  
[8] R. A. Taylor, P. E. Phelan, T.P. Otanicar, R. Adrian and R. 
Prasher,  “Nanofluid optical property characterization: 
towards efficient direct absorption solar collectors,” 
Nanoscale 
Research 
Letters, 
6:225,2011, 
doi:10.1186/1556-276X-6-225. 
[9] I. Kim and K. D. Kihm,“Measuring near-field nanoparticles 
concentration profiles by correlating surface Plasmon 
resonance reflectance with effective refractive index of 
nanofluids,” Optics Letters, 35(3), 2010, pp. 393-395, doi: 
10.1364/OL.35.000393. 
[10] Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 56thEdition, Weast, 
R.C., CRC Press, Cleveland, 1975. 
[11] L. H. Benedict and R. D. Gould, “ Towards better 
uncertainty 
estimates 
for 
turbulence 
statistics,” 
Experiments in Fluids, vol. 22,1997, pp. 129-136. 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

