Evanescent Wave-based Near-wall Thermometry Utilizing Brownian Motion 
 
Kanjirakat Anoop 
Micro Scale Thermo Fluids (MSTF) Laboratory 
Texas A&M University at Qatar 
Doha, Qatar 
e-mail: anoop.baby@qatar.tamu.edu 
 Reza Sadr 
Micro Scale Thermo Fluids (MSTF) Laboratory 
Texas A&M University at Qatar 
Doha, Qatar 
e-mail:reza.sadr@qatar.tamu.edu
 
 
Abstract—Evanescent 
wave-based 
Particle 
Image 
Velocimetry (or nPIV) is known to be an effective tool in 
estimating near-wall velocity fields. nPIV uses evanescent 
wave illumination of particle tracers in the fluid within 
order of O(100nm) from the wall where illumination 
intensity decays exponentially with distance normal to the 
wall. Brownian motion of the sub-micron tracer particles 
used in nPIV is a function of fluid temperature in this 
region. Monte Carlo simulation of particle movement in this 
region is used to investigate the possibilities of utilizing this 
effect for near-wall thermometry. Synthetic nPIV images of 
the illuminated polystyrene particles of 100nm diameter in 
the near-wall region are initially generated for different 
fluid temperature measurement. The spatial distribution of 
the particles takes into account the forces such as buoyancy, 
electrostatic repulsion and van der Waals attraction, in 
addition to the hindered Brownian motion near the walls. 
The synthetic images were then processed using standard 
cross-correlation function. The results of the numerical 
simulation show that the temperature variation causes a 
change in width and height of the nPIV correlation function. 
Initial experimental studies are conducted to verify the 
results of simulations.  
Keywords-Total Internal Reflection; nPIT; thermometry. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Near-wall temperature measurement of a fluid at micro 
scale is an important part of studying convection heat 
transfer. 
Nano/micro-fabricated 
thermocouples 
and 
resistance temperature detectors (RTD) provides the highest 
out-of-plane resolution for temperature measurement [1]. 
However, these sensors are often complicated, somehow 
intrusive and can affect the flow structure in micro-scale 
flows. 
Non-intrusive 
thermometry 
such 
as 
infrared 
thermometry (IRT), molecular tagging thermometry (MTT), 
laser induced fluorescence thermometry (LIFT)  and particle 
image velocimetry (PIV) based thermometry are generally 
preferred for micro-scale flow investigations [2].  In 
micro/nano-PIV, fluorescent tracer particles are seeded in the 
fluid to track the flow assuming they faithfully follow the 
fluid. Inevitably, as the seeding particle sizes are small, they 
undergo Brownian motion, where at low speed; this could 
introduce undesirable bias in the velocity measurements. The 
effect of the Brownian motion in PIV when using cross-
correlation method, is a width-wise spreading of correlation 
peak. This effect is generally undesirable in velocimetry as it 
reduces signal-to-noise ratio of the results and increases the 
uncertainty in determination of the averaged particle 
displacement. Olsen and Adrian [3] proposed that such 
spreading of correlation peak could be utilized for 
thermometry, as Brownian motion of the seeded particles has 
direct dependence on temperature. Hohreiter et al. [4] 
demonstrated the use of correlation based micro-PIV 
technique utilizing Brownian motion of seeded particles to 
determine temperature. Their result shows a temperature 
measurement with an experimental accuracy of ± 3oC inside 
a micro channel. In a separate study, Chamarthy et al. [5] 
noted that low image density PIV tracking method to process 
particle images performed better than cross-correlation based 
thermometry. The average difference between the predicted 
and measured fluid temperature was recorded to be ± 2.6oC 
at an out-of plane resolution of ~ 20µm.   
Zettner and Yoda [6] introduced an extension to μPIV 
technique based on evanescent-wave illumination generated 
by total internal reflection (TIR) of a laser beam at the fluid-
solid interface between the flow and the wall, known as 
nano-PIV (nPIV). Sadr et al. [7] investigated the introduced 
error in velocity measurements as a result of particle 
mismatch due to “drop out” and “drop in” of particle tracers 
in the illuminated region brought in by the effects of 
hindered Brownian motion. Later, using an analytical 
approach, Sadr et al. [8] introduced an empirical relation 
between mean particle displacement and the average shear 
fluid velocity in the near-wall region with a given thickness. 
This was later expanded by studying the effects of Brownian 
motion, light penetration profiles, surface forces such as van 
der Waals, and electrostatic forces and the velocity gradient 
on the near-wall measurements using a traditional PIV cross-
correlation method [9].  
This paper extends the applicability of nPIV technique 
for temperature measurements utilizing the Brownian motion 
of seeded particles and proposes the use of nPIT (nano- 
particle image thermometry) technique for investigating 
near-wall temperatures. Monte Carlo simulation [8] is used 
to generate artificial images of particles in the evanescent 
wave region. Simulations are performed for fluid at 
stationary condition at different temperatures to simulate 
Brownian motion at varying temperatures. Effect of non-
uniform illumination, hindered Brownian motion and the 
surface forces acting on the particles near the wall are 
considered while generating images of particles. Image pairs 
generated with a given time delay are cross-correlated to 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

analyze the spread of correlation peak width with 
temperature.  Details of the methodology and theoretical 
model used are discussed next. Finally, experimental efforts 
are reported to verify the results of the simulations.  
II. 
THEORETICAL MODEL 
As mentioned earlier, in nPIV evanescent wave 
generated at the glass water interface is used to illuminate 
particles only in the near-wall region. When a light beam 
travels through a medium, with a refractive index n1, into 
another transparent medium with a lower refractive index of 
n2 at an angle exceeding the critical angle, θc=sin-1(n2/n1), it 
is totally reflected at the interface. However, the 
electromagnetic field penetrates into the lower refractive 
index region and propagates for a small distance parallel to 
the interface creating what is called an evanescent wave. 
This evanescent wave is capable of exciting fluorescent 
particles in this region while the large numbers of particles 
farther away in the bulk liquid remain unexcited. Evanescent 
wave intensity, I, in the direction normal to the interface 
decays exponentially with distance, z: 
 
(
)
0 exp
p
I
I
z z
=
−
                                (1) 
where I0 is the maximum intensity at the wall and zp is 
the penetration depth: 
1
2
2
2
0
2
1
1
sin
4
p
n
z
n
n
λ
θ
π
−






=
− 







                                (2) 
λ0 is the wavelength of the light and θ  is the incident 
angle. For visible light at a glass water interface, zp is on the 
order of O(100nm). Figure 1 shows the schematic of a 
general TIRF setup used in an nPIV experiment where only 
the near-wall fluorescent particles in the fluid are excited and 
viewed from the bottom of the microscope plate. The 
emission intensity of the tracer particles in this region is also 
an exponential function of the distance from the wall with a 
decaying trend as stated by Equation 1. However, depending 
on the optical characteristics of the imaging system, ultimate 
depth of visible region, zv, depends on the intensity of the 
incident laser beam, fluorescent particle characteristics, 
camera and the background noise of the imaging system. In 
practice, this depth is usually more than the estimated 
penetration depth. In nPIV the focal depth of the objective 
lens is larger than the penetration depth of the evanescence 
wave, therefore, all the particles in the image are in focus 
and there is no back-ground light. 
For a stationary fluid, the particle movement is a result of 
Brownian motion and surface forces. Brownian motion is the 
micro-scale movement of particles immersed in a fluid as a 
result of the thermal energy of the fluid. At submicron scale, 
Brownian displacement is of the same length scale as that of 
fluid convection and therefore becomes important during 
fluid velocimetry. Brownian motion is usually expressed in 
terms of its diffusion coefficient. 
In an unconfined flow, Brownian diffusion coefficient is 
represented in the form of the Stokes-Einstein equation [10]: 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  
Schematic of nPIV measurement technique. 
 
6
kT
D
πµa
=
                                    (3)  
where k is the Boltzmann constant, T and µ are 
temperature and viscosity of the fluid, respectively. For 
liquids, with increase in temperature, absolute viscosity 
value decreases. Hence, for a smaller seeding particle 
diameter (100nm in this case) diffusion coefficient increases 
with increase in temperature when suspended in a liquid. 
Quantifying the relative change in random particle 
movement due to Brownian motion is the key principle used 
in nPIT. 
In the near-wall region, where nPIT is interrogating, the 
diffusion coefficient is hindered due to the additional 
hydrodynamic effects at the wall and the Brownian diffusion 
coefficient, β, can be expressed in the tensor form as: 
 
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
x
y
z
D
D
D
D
D
β
β
β⊥








=
=














              
(4) 
 
where β⊥ and β|| are the wall correction factors for 
movement 
perpendicular 
and 
parallel 
to the 
wall, 
respectively [11]:  
 
    (5) 
and 
2
2
2
(3
)
(6
9
2
)
h
h
a
h
ah
a
β⊥


⋅
+
= 

+
+

                        
(6)
    
where a is the particle radius and h=(z-a). As the 
particles move away from the wall, the correction factors 
tend to unity and the diffusion coefficient tends to that of the 
Stokes-Einstein value. In present simulation, this anisotropic 
nature of Brownian diffusion coefficient is considered. 
Particle displacements due to Brownian motion are 
obtained from Langevin equation, which describes the 
displacement of a spherical particle, 
, over a time period, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Water 
Glass  
substrate 
Incident laser 
beam 
θ>θc 
Immersion 
oil 
Fluorescent tracers 
n2<n1 
n1 
zv=200-300nm 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
Microscope 
objective 
 
z 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
z/r
PDF
 
 
Distribution with surface forces
Distribution with no surface forces
DLVO-Boltzman curve
∆t, [12]. For a stationary fluid with no external forces acting 
on the particle, the Langevin equation in x direction reduces 
to [11]: 
{
}
0
t
t
x
t
x
χδ r
=∆
∆ = ∑ =
                         (7) 
 
where χ is an array of normally distributed random 
numbers with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one 
and 
=
2 δ
D t . In z direction, perpendicular to the wall, 
there is no translational velocity and only the first term in the 
Langevin equation reduces to: 
 
 
0
t
t
z
z
z
z
t
D
dD
z
F
t
t
r
kT
dz
δ
δ
χδ
=∆
=


∆ =
+
+




∑
          (8) 
External forces acting on particles in the direction 
perpendicular to the wall include, electrostatic forces and van 
der Waals forces [13, 14], Fel and  Fvdw, respectively, caused 
by the presence of the wall, plus buoyancy force, Fb, which 
is a result of density mismatch between the suspending 
medium and the tracer particles. The total force acting on a 
particle in the direction normal to the wall would be the 
summation of all these forces, Fz= Fel + Fvdw + Fb, where, 
the combined effects of electrostatic, van der Waals, and 
buoyancy forces generate a net repulsive force that pushes 
the tracers away from the wall [9]. 
III. 
MONTE CARLO SIMULATION 
Simulations are carried out with exponentially decaying 
illumination. Artificial images of tracer particles at time t = 0 
and later at time t=∆t are generated. Particle displacements in 
the x, y and z directions are calculated for different time steps 
of ∆t = ∑δt using equations 7 and 8 which encompasses the 
effects of Brownian motion and other external forces. The 
time step δt = 5 μs used in this work is much smaller than ∆t 
and is an order of magnitude larger than the particle 
momentum relaxation time. Particle–wall collisions are 
considered to be perfectly elastic, preventing any particles 
from going ‘through’ the wall.  
Non-uniform illumination is considered while generating 
artificial images for present work replicating an actual 
evanescent wave illumination. The brightness (size) of the 
particle images are a function of their distance from the wall, 
where particles near the wall look bigger and brighter than 
those further away. By implementing an exponentially 
decaying intensity of illumination normal to the wall, 
variation in particle image sizes in the field was created. 
Particle images in this work were assumed to be circular with 
a Gaussian intensity distribution profile with a peak 
greyscale value calculated using the equation 
 
(
)
 
exp
/
p
p
I
C
h z
=
⋅
−
                                    (9) 
 
where h=(z-a) and C represents the net power emitted 
and collected from the bottom of each sphere and a is 
particle radius [7]. The effective particle image diameter, 
Dimage = 8 pixels, has an Airy disk pattern, which can be 
approximated using a Gaussian profile with an approximate 
diameter of the point spread function of the microscope 
system [15]. Electronic noise and shot noise are also added 
to the image using a combination of white and Gaussian 
distribution noise, respectively [9] to mimic real image 
characteristics. 
Figure 2.  PDf’s of particle distribution throughout zv. 
Initially, 1500 particles of radius 50 nm are distributed 
over a distance of 5zp normal to the wall in the fluid for 
simulation. This results in a particle density of ~1.89 
particles/µm3, in an image size of (653x70) pixels in the x 
and y directions, similar to actual experimental images. 
Particles are initially uniformly distributed in the flow and 
then surface forces move the particles to their final steady 
state distribution. The final Probability Distribution Function 
(PDF) of the particles throughout the visible region, zv, at this 
stage is shown in Fig. 2 for two cases of a) no surfaces 
forces, b) surface forces for ζ-potentials of  ζ particle = 100mV 
and ζ wall = 80mV respectively [16, 17]. The surface forces 
and zeta potential of the particles and surface contribute 
significant effect in the distribution of particles near the wall. 
As can be seen from the figure, when the surface forces 
effects are considered, the particles are seen pushed away 
from the wall region, making sparse density of particles near 
to the walls. It is also observed that the steady state 
probability distribution function of the particles, for a given 
surface force, can adequately be modeled by a Boltzmann 
profile as reported before [16]. In present simulations, inter-
frame time delays more than 2ms are used. This is mainly 
due to the fact that longer time delays provided better 
measurement sensitivity with variation in temperature. 
However with increase in time delays, the noise-to-signal 
ratio also increased, reducing the accuracy. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
2500 independent artificial image pairs of 653 x70 pixels 
of tracer particles at time t=0 and later at time t=∆t were 
generated. The images in each pair were then post–processed 
using a standard FFT-based cross correlation program that 
uses a 3D Gaussian peak finding algorithm based on a 
Gaussian surface fit [9].  Each image was divided into five 
adjacent interrogation windows, each 186×68 pixels size 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

with an overlap of ~50%, with the midpoints positioned 
along the center line of the image in the y direction. The 
image pairs are then cross- correlated to obtain the cross 
correlation coefficient.   
Figure 3 shows the cross-correlation coefficient variation 
for different fluid temperatures after ensemble averaging. As 
can be noted, the peak height decreases whereas the peak 
width of the correlation increases with increase in fluid 
temperature. The above variation is for an inter-frame time 
delay of 3ms. The correlation function as depicted in Fig. 3 
is obtained after carrying out ensemble averaging of all the 
correlation planes of 2500 image pairs. The main advantage 
of ensemble averaged correlation approach is the fact that the 
noise in individual correlation planes is significantly reduced 
by having an averaged correlation plane. 
 
Figure 3.     Cross-correlation coefficient for different fluid temperatures 
 
Usually, ensemble averaging alone would mitigate the 
noises present, however, it is noticed in the simulations that 
there exits some correlation planes (about 1-2%) which had 
higher noise-to-signal ratio.  Including them in analysis, 
would increase the uncertainties while determining peak 
widths and heights. Hence, before averaging bad correlation 
planes that are having a noise-to-signal ratio below 0.9 are 
removed from the analysis. It is noted that at lower 
temperatures, more number of correlation planes exists 
which has lower noise-to-signal ratio. As temperature is 
increased, the number of correlations with higher noise-to-
signal ratio also increased. Since correlations with lower 
noise-to-signal ratio could adversely affect the peak width 
and height evaluation. 
Figure 4(a) shows peak width variation with temperature 
for two inter-frame time delays of 3ms and 5ms. Peak width 
is estimated by fitting a Gaussian surface with at least 13 
points in the peak region:  
(
)
(
0 )
0
2
2
2
2
( , )
e
 e
y
x
y y
x x
G x y
A
σ
σ
−
−
−
−
=
⋅
×
         (10) 
 
where A is the peak height and σx and  σy  are 
representatives peak widths in x and y directions. 
For a stationary fluid, both the widths should be similar 
in magnitude [5]. The error bars as depicted in the figure 
represent 95% confidence levels of the presented data 
calculated as suggested by Benedict et al. [18]. A close 
observation of the figure shows that the uncertainty in the 
width estimated for a time delay of 5ms is higher than that 
for 3ms. Uncertainties are also observed to be higher at the 
higher temperatures. The reason for the above observation 
would be an existence of a better correlation, which is having 
a smaller spread in uncertainties at lower time delays. 
However, higher temperature sensitivity is observed for the 
longer time delays, as the effect of temperature on Brownian 
motion is more reflected when time delays are higher. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  (a) Peak width variation with temperature (b) Peak height 
variation with temperature. 
 
Figure 4(b) shows variation of the peak height with 
temperature for the same time delays as given in Fig. 4(a). 
As peak width and height variations seem to have opposing 
trends, therefore, the ratio of peak width to height would be a 
better parameter for thermometry. Peak width to height ratio 
variation for various temperatures for two time delays is 
depicted in Fig. 5. In this figure also, the sensitivity with 
temperature is seen to be more for 5ms than for 3ms. 
However, the uncertainties are lower in the case when the 
inter-frame time delay was 3ms.  It can be concluded that the 
ratio of correlation width to height may be used to obtain 
fluid temperature in the near-wall region for an nPIT setup. 
After noticing the feasibility of using nPIT technique based 
on synthetic images efforts are made to conduct experiments. 
(a) 
(b) 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

 
Figure 5.     Variation of peak width to height ratio with temperature 
V. 
INITIAL EXPERIMENTS 
 Some initial experiments are conducted to practically 
validate the observed effects of simulations. An experimental 
setup as depicted in Fig. 6(a) is used to confine the fluid at a 
constant temperature and to analyze the Brownian motion of 
seeded particles. Constant temperature condition is achieved 
using a temperature controlled microscope stage. The 
temperature of the stage is adjusted by circulating water from 
a constant temperature water supply (F25-ED Julabo). A 
metal substrate with a hole drilled and a glass coverslip 
(0.13mm thick) pasted below holds the sample fluid. The 
heat from the microscope stage is effectively conducted to 
the sample fluid through the metal substrate. The fluid 
temperature 
is 
recorded 
using 
a 
precision 
K-type 
thermocouple inserted in the sample through an insulated 
block, placed on top of the metal substrate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  (a) Schematic of experimental setup used (b) Typical nPIV 
image obtained 
 
An Argon-Ion CW laser beam with a wave length of 488 
nm (Spectra Physics BeamLok 2060) was used to provide 
excitation light in the near-wall region. Images were 
obtained using an EMCCD camera (ProEM 512, Princeton 
Instruments) attached to an inverted epi-fluorescence 
microscope (Leica DMI6000B) via a 63x 1.47NA oil 
immersion objective. The pixel resolution for the images 
obtained from this imaging set up was 4×106 (pixel/meter). 
The nPIV seeding particles used were 100nm (±5%) 
diameter 
polystyrene 
fluorescent 
particles 
(F8803, 
Invitrogen) having peak excitation and emission wavelengths 
of 505nm and 515nm, respectively. In all the experimental 
runs, the fluorescent particle concentration was maintained at 
a constant volume concentration of 0.017%. Evanescent 
wave illumination was generated on the bottom glass-water 
interface in the microchannel. The angle of incidence of light 
in the water-quartz interface was evaluated to be 75o, based 
on the numerical aperture value of the objective lens and 
refractive indices at the interface. This yielded a penetration 
depth of zp ≅ 105nm (Eq. 2). The depth of visible region (zv) 
is then estimated to be 310nm for the basefluid. This 
estimation is based on the penetration depth and the intensity 
value of the background noise in captured images. A typical 
nPIT image obtained during experimentation is shown in 
Fig. 6 (b). 
For each experiment, 1500 nPIT image pairs of 200x200 
pixels were acquired with a inter frame time delay of 0.5 ms. 
The interrogation window size was set at 186×68 pixels with 
a search radius of 15 pixels. In each case, there were 
sufficient numbers of matched tracer particles in the 
interrogation windows. The images are then post–processed 
using the same cross-correlation program used in the 
simulation section to determine the correlation peak width 
and height.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.     Experimental cross-correlation coefficient for different fluid 
temperatures 
 
Figure 7 shows the experimental observation of cross-
correlation function for temperatures varied from 25oC to 
45oC. The trend of peak height reduction and peak width 
(b) 
(a) 
63x 1.47NA oil 
immersion 
objective 
Temperature 
controlled 
microscope stage 
Metal substrate 
Thermocouple 
Insulator  
Fluid with seeded 
particles 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

broadening are observed to be similar to that of the 
simulations. In order to strengthen the correlation and to 
reduce the spread of uncertainties in peak width, a smaller 
inter-frame time delay of 0.5ms is considered in the 
experiment. 
However, 
experimental 
uncertainties 
are 
observed to be much higher than simulations. Nevertheless, 
the initial experimental results are presently reported here to 
show the practical feasibility of using nPIT technique and 
more strenuous efforts are required in future to obtain a 
highly repeatable cross-correlation relation with temperature.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 The present work investigated the feasibility of using 
evanescent wave illumination technique for temperature 
measurement. Monte Carlo simulation is used to artificially 
generate nPIV images of stationary fluid seeded with 
fluorescent particles with an exponentially decaying intensity 
from the wall. These images are then cross-correlated to 
investigate the effect of temperature on the peak width and 
height of the cross-correlation function. The results of 
simulations show that correlation width increase whereas its 
height decreases with increase in fluid temperature. 
Uncertainties in the measured peak width are lower when the 
inter-frame time delays are short. However, the sensitivity 
with temperature is observed to be more when the time 
delays are longer. Peak width to height ratio is observed to 
be a better parameter for quantifying while using nPIT 
technique. More elaborate experimental observations with 
varying time delays are required in the future in order to 
completely quantify the effect of Brownian motion on 
thermometry. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This publication was made possible by NPRP grant # 08-
574-2-239 from the Qatar National Research Fund (a 
member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein 
are solely the responsibility of the authors. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. R. N. Childs, J. R. Greenwood, and C. A. Long, “Review 
of temperature,” Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 71, 
pp. 2959-2978, 2000. 
[2] P. Chamarthy, S. V. Garimella, and S. T. Wereley, 
“Measurement of the temperature non-uniformity in a 
microchannel heat sink using microscale laser-induced 
fluorescence,” International Journal of Heat and Mass 
Transfer, vol. 53, pp. 3275-3283, 2010 
[3] M. G. Olsen and R. J. Adrian 2000, “Brownian motion and 
correlation in particle image velocimetry,” Optics & Laser 
Technology vol. 32, pp. 621-627,2000. 
[4] V. Hohreiter, S. T. Werely, M. G. Olsen, and J. N. Chung,  
“Cross-correlation analysis for temperature measurement,” 
Measurement Science and Technology, vol. 13, pp. 1072-
1078, 2002 
[5] P. Chamarthy, S. V. Garimella, and S. T. Wereley, “Non-
intrusive 
temperature 
measurement 
using 
microscale 
visualization techniques,” Experiments in Fluids, vol. 47, pp. 
159-170, 2009. 
[6] C. M. Zettner and M. Yoda, “Particle velocity field 
measurements in a near-wall flow using evanescent wave 
illumination,” Experiments in Fluids, vol. 34, pp. 115-121, 
2003. 
[7] R. Sadr, H. Li, and M. Yoda, “Impact of hindered brownian 
diffusion on the accuracy of particle-image velocimetry using 
evanescent-wave illumination,” Experiments in Fluids, vol. 
38, pp.  90-98, 2005. 
[8] R. Sadr, C. Hohenegger, H. Li, P. J. Mucha, and M. Yoda, 
“Diffusion-induced bias in near-wall velocimetry,” Journal of 
Fluid Mechanics, vol. 57, pp. 443-56, 2007 
[9] R. Sadr, K. Anoop, and R. Khader, “ Effects of surface forces 
and non-uniform out-of plane illumination on the accuracy of 
nPIV velocimetry,” Measurement Science and Technology, 
vol. 23, 055303, 2012  
[10] A. Einstein, “Uber die von der molekularkinetischen theorie 
der 
warme 
geforderte 
bewegung 
von 
in 
ruhenden 
flussigkeiten suspendierten teilchen,” Ann Physics, vol. 17 
pp. 549, 1905. 
[11] M. A. Bevan and D. C. Prieve, “Hindered diffusion of 
colloidal particles very near to a wall: revisited,” Journal of 
Chemical Physics, vol. 113, pp.  1228-36, 2000 
[12] A. T. Clark, M. Lal, and G. M. Watson, “Dynamics of 
colloidal particles in the vicinity of an interacting surface,” 
Faraday Discussion of the Chemical Society, vol. 83 pp. 179-
191, 1987. 
[13] M. Oberholzer, N. Wagner, and A. M. Lenhoff, “Grand 
canonical Brownian dynamics simulation of colloidal 
adsorption,” Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 107 9157-67, 
1997. 
[14] A. Banerjee and K. D. Kihm, “Experimental verification of 
near-wall hindered diffusion for the Brownian motion of 
nanoparticles using evanescent wave microscopy,” Physics 
Review E, vol. 72, 042101/1-4, 2005. 
[15] C. Meinhart and S. T. Wereley, “The theory of diffraction-
limited resolution in microparticle image velocimetry,” 
Institute of Physics Publishing, Measurement Science and 
Technology, vol.  14, pp. 1047-53, 2003. 
[16] P. Huang, J. S. Guasto, and K. Breuer, “The effects of 
hindered mobility and depletion of particles in near-wall shear 
flows and the implications for nanovelocimetry,” Journal of 
Fluid Mechanics, vol. 637, pp. 241-265, 2009. 
[17] J. A. Fagan, P. J. Sides, and D. C. Prieve, “Calculation of ac 
electric field effects on the average height of a charged 
colloid: effects of electrophoretic and Brownian motions,” 
Langmuir, vol. 19, pp.  6627-32, 2003. 
[18] L. H. Benedict and R. D. Gould, “ Towards better uncertainty 
estimates for turbulence statistics,” Experiments in Fluids, 
vol. 22, pp. 129-136, 1997. 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

