Analysis of Furnace Operational Parameters for Controllable Annealing of Thin 
Films 
 
Victor Ovchinnikov 
Department of Aalto Nanofab 
School of Electrical Engineering, Aalto University 
Espoo, Finland 
e-mail: Victor.Ovchinnikov@aalto.fi
 
 
Abstract—Annealing of thin silver films in different furnaces is 
studied. It is shown that identical parameters of thermal 
treatment do not guarantee reproducibility and annealing 
provides 
different 
results, 
e.g., 
shape 
and 
size 
of 
nanostructures, in different furnaces. To clarify the source of 
variation, morphology and reflectance spectra of the samples 
are analyzed. Additionally, numerical simulation of heating 
process in a diffusion furnace has been performed. It is 
demonstrated that uncontrollable heating and cooling of silver 
film itself leads to variation of annealing results. 
Keywords-self-assembling; 
silver 
thin 
film; 
diffusion 
furnace; annealing 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Annealing is well known and broadly used in 
microfabrication heat treatment of inorganic materials. In 
case of polymer, heat treatment is called baking, curing or 
drying. From the beginning of semiconductor technology, 
annealing is used to modify properties of thin films, 
substrates and interfaces. Annealing is not the crucial 
microfabrication method like lithography or etching, but it is 
utilized in every process flow for doping of semiconductors, 
silicide formation, densification of deposited films and 
sample surface conditioning [1]. Annealing is done in 
furnaces, which can have different design: convection and 
diffusion furnaces, hot plates and rapid thermal processing 
tools, infrared (IR) and curing ovens. Usual description of 
annealing in publications includes only temperature and 
duration of the process [1, 2]. Sometimes information about 
gas flow is added [3, 4] and it is very seldom written about 
furnace design and sample position in the furnace [5]. 
However, different annealing tools deliver heat energy to a 
sample in different ways what directly affects on obtained 
results. 
During annealing, the heat exchange between sample and 
furnace is performed by thermal conductivity, convection 
and thermal radiation. Depending on furnace design, one or 
other heat transfer mode can be done dominant. For example, 
a hot plate mainly heats a sample by thermal conductivity, a 
diffusion furnace - by thermal radiation and convection, an 
IR oven - by thermal radiation. In all furnaces heat is not 
only generated, but is also dissipated. As a result, the sample 
temperature is controlled by thermal balance between 
heating and cooling processes. 
Additionally, the sample thermal parameters (emissivity, 
thermal conductivity and heat capacitance) and sample 
arrangement in a furnace (position, holder design and 
shields) affect on the heating process dynamics and the 
sample temperature. The most complicate situation happens 
in case of phase transition of the heated thin film, e.g., 
melting or recrystallization. As a consequence, the sample 
emissivity is changed and the new thermal balance is 
installed. 
In this paper, we demonstrate that identical heating ramp, 
temperature and time of the annealing are not sufficient 
conditions for reproducing of nanostructures fabricated by 
annealing of thin silver films. We compare design of three 
annealing tools and analyze relative strength of different 
heating modes in all tools. On the base of optical properties 
and crystalline structure of the annealed and as-deposited 
samples we 
make conclusions 
about melting 
and 
crystallization of silver nanostructures. To find temperature 
field of the furnace and the real sample temperature we 
simulate the heating processes in the diffusion furnace for 
different gas flows and sample emissivities. The obtained 
results are used to find correlation between annealing 
conditions and morphology of silver nanostructures.  
The paper is organized as follows. In the subsequent 
Section II, details of sample preparation and measurement 
procedures are presented. In Section III, the results of work 
are demonstrated by scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
images and reflectance spectra of the silver films and also by 
heat transfer simulations. The effect of furnace design on 
silver film annealing is discussed in Section IV. In Section 
V, the conclusions are drawn. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTS 
Four identical samples were prepared to compare 
annealing in different furnaces. For this purpose, a 12 nm 
thick silver film was deposited by electron beam evaporation 
at rate 0.2 nm/s. As a substrate was used 4” silicon wafer 
with 21 nm layer of thermal oxide. After deposition the 
whole  wafer  was  cut  on  four  quotes,  which  were  further  
processed separately. Annealing was done at 400 ºC during 5 
minutes with heating ramp 21 ºC/min, and cooling ramp 3.6 
ºC/min. However, all samples were processed in various 
furnaces (Fig. 1). 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-380-3
ICQNM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

 
a)
b)
c)
 
Figure 3. Plan SEM images of the annealed (#1 - #3) and as-deposited (#4) samples. 
Figure 1.  Design of the diffusion furnace (a), the fast ramping furnace (b) 
and the hot plate (c). Thermocouple positions  and gas flows are denoted by 
blue and vilolet arrows, respectively. Heating surfaces are orange. 
The sample #1 was annealed in the diffusion furnace 
(Fig. 1a). As a sample holder was used a 4” silicon wafer on 
a quartz boat, which was located in the centre of the furnace 
during experiment. It was supposed that heat exchange 
through the quartz boat was negligible. The quartz furnace  
Figure 2.  Optical images of the annealed (#1 - #3) and as-deposited (#4) 
samples. 
tube had 4½ inch diameter, 96 cm length and 3 mm thick 
walls. The resistive heater (orange strips in Fig. 1a) was 
situated around the tube with the gap 1 cm. The furnace 
temperature was controlled according to thermocouple 
measurements on the tube surface. Room temperature 
nitrogen with flow 8.3×10-5 standard m3/s was introduced in 
the furnace along its axis. 
The sample #2 was annealed in a fast ramping furnace 
(Fig. 1b). Temperature, gas flow and process duration were 
similar for both furnaces (Fig. 1a and 1b). However, in the 
 
#1 
#2 
#3 
#4 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-380-3
ICQNM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

0
20
40
60
80
Reflectance (%)
0
20
40
60
Reflectance (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
1500
1700
Reflectance (%)
Wavelength (nm)
#1
#2
#3
#4
C
fast ramping furnace the quartz tube length was 35 cm and 
the sample position was close to the exhaust of furnace. As a 
heater were used tungsten lamps. The quartz tube was 
covered by the heat absorbing shield (black lines in Fig. 1b). 
The gas temperature in the tube was measured by 
thermocouple and was used for process control. Nitrogen 
was introduced through array of holes in the right part of the 
furnaces. The sample #3 was annealed between two hot 
plates in vacuum (Fig. 1c). Both hot plates had 4 inch in 
diameter and were separated by 2.5 mm gap. The chamber 
wall temperature was close to room temperature. 
The silver films were deposited in the e-beam 
evaporation system IM-9912 (Instrumentti Mattila Oy) at 
base pressure of 2.7×10-5 Pa and at room temperature of the 
substrate. Annealing of the sample #1 was done in the 
diffusion furnace THERMCO Mini Brute MB-71. Annealing 
of the sample #2 was done in the fast ramping furnace PEO-
601 from ATV Technology GmBH. Annealing of the sample 
#3 was done in the wafer bonder AML AWB-04 from 
Microengineering Ltd. 
Plan view SEM images of the samples were observed with 
the Zeiss Supra 40 field emission scanning electron 
microscope. Reflectance measurements were carried out 
using the FilmTek 4000 reflectometer in the spectral range 
from 400 to 1700 nm. Crystalline structure of the silver films 
was estimated by reflection high-energy electron diffraction 
(RHEED) observations with the help of the diffractometer 
embedded in a molecular beam epitaxy tool. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Fig. 2 shows the optical image of three annealed samples 
(#1-#3) and as-deposited silver film (#4). The picture was 
taken by the digital camera with flash. Despite of identical 
temperature and time of annealing all samples have different 
colours of surface. The sample #1 is yellow-green, the 
sample #2 is brown-red, the sample #3 is yellow-blue and the 
as-deposited sample is grey. Bulk silver is a perfect reflector, 
however, 
nanostructured 
silver 
possesses 
plasmon 
resonances, which modify reflection spectra of the samples 
[5-7]. Therefore, the obtained colour variation could be 
explained by silver nanostructures formed on the sample 
surface instead of the continuous silver film. To clarify the 
suggestion we have observed all samples in SEM (Fig. 3). 
The as-deposited silver film (#4) is already discontinuous, 
has lace like structure and silver covers relatively large part 
of surface in comparison with annealed films. The annealed 
samples have close values of silver areal density and 
nanostructure sizes, but shape of nanoislands depends on 
annealing conditions. The sample #2 demonstrates most 
irregular islands with straight flats on some of them. The 
sample #3 has roundish nanostructures with large shape 
deviation and the sample #1 shows intermediate picture 
between two previous cases. The height of all annealed 
nanostructures is around 30 nm. 
It was mentioned above that colour variation of the 
samples could be explained by their reflection spectra, which 
are connected with plasmonic properties of nanostructures. 
Fig. 4a demonstrates reflection spectra of the annealed and  
Figure 4.  Reflection spectra for normal (a) and inclined (70º) light 
incident for p-(b) and s- polarization (c). Dashed lines show calculated 
spectra. 
as-deposited samples at normal light incidence. In the Fig. 4b 
and 4c the same spectra are shown for inclined light incident 
(70º) and for p- and s- polarization, respectively. According 
to surface colour, the sample #2 has main peak at the longest 
wavelength 498 nm, the sample #3 at the shortest 
wavelength 411 nm and the sample #1 at the intermediate 
wavelength 449 nm for s-polarized light (Fig. 4c). The as-
deposited sample (#4) has no reflection peaks in the range of 
measurements, but it has trough at the wavelength 658 nm. 
On the other hand, the sample #2 has no troughs at all 
and the samples #3 and #1 have troughs at 694 nm and 806 
nm, respectively. For p-polarized light strong reflection is 
observed only in visible range (below 800 nm). In IR 
a) 
b) 
c) 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-380-3
ICQNM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

 
 
Figure 5.  Temperature fields of the diffusion furnace for high (a) and low 
(b) nitrogen flows. The gas inlet is on the right. 
p-polarized reflectance falls down to 1-2% for all annealed 
samples and to 5% for the as-deposited sample. In IR range 
(above 1200 nm), spectra of the annealed samples coincide 
with each other what justifies suggestion about identical 
silver areal density. Dashed lines show theoretical spectra of 
the samples, calculated with the help of bulk silver optical 
parameters. 
The RHEED showed relatively sharp, continuous Laue 
circles in addition to amorphous background pattern for the 
sample #3. Therefore, this sample contains separate 
crystalline particles, but their orientation varies from island 
to island [8]. For other samples, intensity and sharpness of 
the diffraction patterns were weaker and decreased in the 
following order: sample #1, as-deposited sample, sample #2. 
In other words, sample #2 includes nanoislands with the 
most disordered crystalline structure. 
3D simulations of annealing process were done for the 
diffusion furnace (Fig. 1a) with the help of software 
COMSOL Multiphysics 3.5a. Due to high computational 
load the simulations were done in two phases. Firstly, 
temperature and velocity fields inside of the empty furnace 
were found. For this purpose two models were used in 
coupled mode: general heat transfer model (calculates 
thermal conduction and convection) and Navier –Stokes 
model for non-isothermal flow. Gravitational force arisen 
due to gas density variation was taken into account in the 
Navier –Stokes model. At the second phase, the obtained 
temperature and velocity of gas were used as boundary 
conditions for simulation of silicon wafer heating in the hot 
cylindrical tube. At this stage all heat transfer modes, 
including sample, tube and gas thermal conduction, 
convection in nitrogen and surface-to-surface radiation were 
taken into account. 
Fig. 5 demonstrates the simulation results obtained at the 
first phase. Temperature distributions in the diffusion furnace 
(Fig. 1a) were calculated for quartz tube temperature 400 ºC 
and for gas flows 8.3×10-5 standard m3/s (Fig. 5a) and 
1.0×10-5 standard  m3/s (Fig. 5b). Large flow of cold gas 
creates non-uniform temperature distribution inside of the 
tube and the gas temperature in the middle of the furnace 
(below  sample  holder)  can  be  150  ºC  lower  than  the  tube  
temperature (Fig. 5a). At the same place gas velocity reaches 
maximum value 0.18 m/s. At small flow of nitrogen (Fig. 
5b), temperature variation and gas velocity in the middle of 
furnace do not exceed 15 ºC and 0.03 m/s, respectively. 
Temperature and velocity fields near the wafer are 
illustrated in Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b, respectively. They are 
obtained at the second phase of simulations (temperature and 
velocity  of  gas  at  the  entrance  are  taken  from  Fig.  5a)  for  
nitrogen flow 8.3×10-5 standard m3/s and sample emissivity 
İ=1. The internal furnace volume is divided by the wafer-
holder in two parts – the upper one with high temperature 
and low velocity and the lower one with low temperature and 
high velocity. In the upper volume gas has temperature 398 
ºC and slowly moves with velocity 0.02 m/s. In the lower 
volume high temperature and velocity gradients exist. 
However, the wafer temperature variation does not exceed 
1ºC due to high thermal conductivity of silicon. In the 
present experiment, the wafer temperature depends on tube  
Figure 6.  Temperature (a) and velocity (b) fields near the wafer for high 
nitrogen flow and İ=1. Gas moves from right to left. 
a) 
b) 
a) 
b) 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-380-3
ICQNM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

 
temperature, nitrogen flow and wafer emissivity İ. Cross 
sections of the temperature fields in the centre of the furnace 
for İ=1 and İ=0 are given in Fig. 7a and Fig. 7b, 
respectively. Temperature of the heat absorbing sample (İ=1) 
is 35 ºC higher than temperature of the reflective sample 
(İ=0). As a consequence, the temperature distribution in the 
upper volume is more uniform for İ=1. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Annealing of thin silver films is complicated by three 
circumstances. Firstly, silver films and nanostructures are 
melted at low temperature [3, 9, 10]. In our previous study 
[5], it was shown that this melting point is close to 250 ºC. 
However, this transformation happens only once and the 
second heating of the sample does not change morphology of 
silver nanostructures. Secondly, liquid silver tends to 
spherical shape of nanoislands due to low cohesive forces to 
SiO2 surface. Thirdly, silver is the best plasmonic material 
[6] and silver nanostructures appeared after breaking apart 
continuous film modify optical properties of the sample 
surface [7]. 
The first sign of not identical annealing conditions in the 
studied furnaces is different sample colours (Fig. 2) and  
Figure 7.  Vertical cross sections of the temperature fields at high 
nitroghen flow in the centre of the furnace for İ=1 (a )and İ=0 (b). 
corresponding changing of reflection spectra after annealing 
(Fig. 4). Reflection spectra demonstrate strong plasmon 
properties of silver nanostructures formed after silver film 
annealing. The troughs in the range 690 – 810 nm 
correspond to dipole plasmon resonance and peaks at 410 – 
500 nm correspond to quadrupole resonance [7]. The non-
annealed sample possesses only very weak dipolar plasmon 
resonance (see spectrum of as-deposited sample). Till some 
extent plasmon properties can be estimated by the difference 
between calculated and measured spectra – the larger 
difference, the stronger plasmon resonances. Based on this 
criterion, the strongest plasmon resonances are observed in 
the sample #3. Plasmon properties are very sensitive to 
asymmetry of dielectric environment. In the studied samples, 
refractive index of silicon (n=3.5) is much higher than 
refractive  index  of  SiO2 (n=1.5). Due to this local electric 
field is concentrated in silicon and optical properties of silver 
are modified. It is illustrated by reflection of p-polarized 
light (Fig. 4b), which mainly excites electric field at 
silver/substrate interface. For p-polarization deviations of 
real spectra from calculated ones are much larger than for s-
polarized light. 
In Section III, we have shown that that all annealed 
samples have close values of silver areal density and 
nanostructure sizes. Therefore, relatively large redshift of 
peaks and troughs in Fig. 4 cannot be only explained by 
changing of island geometry. Due to identity of the studied 
samples, the spectrum variations can be only connected with 
material modification, e.g., changing of silver dielectric 
function. Moreover, from spectral peak and trough 
broadening (the broadest peak has sample #2) follows that 
imaginary part of silver dielectric function increased [6]. 
Usually, annealing is used to improve and restore 
crystalline structure. However, there are reports about 
increased defect concentration in melted silver samples [11]. 
Our RHEED observations also showed that crystalline 
structure of the annealed sample #2 is worse than structure 
of the as-deposited one. Taking into account the broadest 
reflection peak and absence of dipolar trough for sample #2 
we can conclude that this sample has highest disorder of 
crystalline structure among the studied samples. 
In the diffusion furnace (Fig. 1a) the target temperature 
400 ºC was supported on the external side of the quartz tube. 
In the fast ramping furnace (Fig. 1b) the target temperature 
400 ºC was supported inside of furnace, 1 cm above bottom 
of the quartz tube. According to Fig. 6a the measured 
temperature in this point can be 150 ºC lower than the tube 
temperature, i.e., in our experiment the tube temperature of 
the fast ramping furnace could be close to 550 ºC. Nitrogen 
flow 8.3×10-5 standard m3/s is very low for the fast ramping 
furnace (Fig. 1b) and provides laminar gas flow inside tube. 
In case of diffusion furnace (Fig. 1a), the same nitrogen flow 
is too high and provides turbulent gas flow in the lower part 
of the tube (Fig. 5a). Higher temperature of the absorber 
shield (İ~1) around the quartz tube makes thermal radiation 
in the fast ramping furnace much higher than in the diffusion 
one. 
In case of thin silver layer on silicon, most of radiation 
energy is absorbed in silver and during heating up in laminar 
a) 
b) 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-380-3
ICQNM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

gas flow (the fast ramping furnace) the silver temperature is 
higher than the temperature of the substrate. In turbulent gas 
flow, intensive heat exchange between silver and nitrogen 
prevents overheating of silver nanostructures (the diffusion 
furnace). 
After melting silver starts to form droplets due to surface 
tension forces and decreases silver areal density. However, 
absorbed thermal radiation is proportional to silver areal 
density or absorbing cross-section. Thus, geometry change 
decreases radiative heat transfer to silver. The cold substrate 
cools down silver nanostructures and causes their rapid 
solidification. The quenching happens without proper 
crystallization and silver solidifies in amorphous phase 
(sample #2). 
In case of low radiative heat transfer (samples #1, #3), 
melting happens at higher substrate temperature and without 
silver overheating. Depending on conductive and radiative 
heat fluxes the melted silver is cooled with much lower rate 
and solidifies in polycrystalline phase. In our study, sample 
#3 has the best crystalline structure due to lower cooling rate 
between two hot plates in vacuum. One of the reasons for 
quenching in this case is reduction of the surface energy 
[12]. Another reason is heating of silver nanostructures by 
conductive flux through interfacial thermal resistance. Silver 
melting acquires additional heat flux from the substrate to 
the nanostructure. This heat flux increases temperature drop 
on the interfacial thermal resistance between the substrate 
and the silver droplet, what in turn leads to decreasing of 
silver temperature and quenching. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS  
We have demonstrated that annealing of identical 
samples in identical conditions, but in different furnaces 
leads to different results. The effect of furnace operational 
parameters (gas flow, sample and thermocouple position, 
sample emissivity) on annealing of thin silver films has been 
analyzed. Radiation heating of silver films can be very strong 
and provides overheating of the silver relatively substrate. 
However, silver areal density is shrunk after melting and 
droplet formation what causes decrease of radiation heating. 
As a result, melted structures are quenched to solid state with 
irregular shape and high crystalline disorder. The effect 
depends on rate of solidification and explains variation of 
annealing results from furnace to furnace. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was undertaken at the Micronova 
Nanofabrication Centre of Aalto University. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Franssila, “Introduction to Microfabrication”, 2nd edition, 
Wiley, 2010, 534p. 
[2] V. Ovchinnikov, A. Malinin, S. Novikov, and C. Tuovinen, ” 
Silicon Nanopillars Formed by Reactive Ion Etching Using a 
Self-Organized Gold Mask”, Physica Scripta, vol.T79, 1999, 
pp.263-265. 
[3] S.  R.  Bhattacharyya  et  al.,  “Growth  and  Melting  of  Silicon  
Supported Silver Nanocluster Films”, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 
vol. 42, 2009, pp. 035306-1 - 035306-9. 
[4] D. Adams, T. L. Alford, and J. W. Mayer, “Silver 
Metallization: Stability and Reliability”, Springer, 2008, 
123p. 
[5] V. Ovchinnikov, “Effect of Thermal Radiation during 
Annealing on Self-organization of Thin Silver Films”, 
Proceedings of ICQNM 2013, ThinkMind Digital Library 
(ISBN: 978-1-61208-303-2), pp. 1-6. 
[6] M. A. Garcia, “Surface Plasmons in Metallic Nanoparticles: 
Fundamentals and Applications”, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 
44, 2011, pp. 283001-1 - 283001-20. 
[7] V. Ovchinnikov and A. Shevchenko, “Self-Organization-
Based Fabrication of Stable Noble-Metal Nanostructures on 
Large-Area Dielectric Substrates”, Journal of Chemistry, vol. 
2013, 
2013, 
Article 
ID 
158431, 
pp. 
1 
- 
10., 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/158431. 
[8] A. Ichimiya and P. I. Cohen, “Reflection High-Energy 
Electron  Diffraction”,  Cambridge  University  Press,  2004,  
353p. 
[9] O. A. Yeshchenko, I. M. Dmitruk, A. A. Alexeenko, and A. 
V. Kotko, “Surface Plasmon as a Probe for Melting of Silver 
Nanoparticles”, Nanotechnology, vol. 21, 2010, pp. 045203-1 
- 045203-6. 
[10] M. Khan, S. Kumar, M. Ahamed, S. Alrokayan, and M. Salhi, 
“Structural and Thermal Studies of Silver Nanoparticles and 
Electrical Transport Study of Their Thin Films”, Nanoscale 
Research Letters, vol. 6, 2011, pp. 434-1 - 434-8. 
[11] S. A. Little, T. Begou, R. E. Collins, and S. Marsillac, 
“Optical Detection of Melting Point Depression for Silver 
Nanoparticles 
via 
in 
situ 
Real 
Time 
Spectroscopic 
Ellipsometry”, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 100, 2012, pp. 051107-
1 -1 051107-4. 
[12]  E. P. Kitsyuk, D. G. Gromov, E. N. Redichev, and I. V. 
Sagunova, “Specifics of LowTemperature Melting and 
Disintegration into Drops of Silver Thin Films”, Protection of 
Metals and Physical Chemistry of Surfaces, vol. 48, 2012, pp. 
304–309. 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-380-3
ICQNM 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

