Nano Fabrication of Oxide Patterns Using Atomic Force Microscopy on Titanium:  
Towards the Development of Nano Devices 
 
N. Guillaume, E. Puyoo, M. Le Berre, D. Albertini, N. Baboux, B. Gautier, F. Calmon 
Lyon Institute of Nanotechnology (INL), UMR 5270 
INSA de Lyon, Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France 
e-mail: martine.leberre@insa-lyon.fr
 
 
Abstract—In this paper related to the field of nano 
technologies, we report on nano lithography for the fabrication 
of oxide patterns on titanium thin film using Atomic Force 
Microscopy (AFM). The patterns consist of lines, dots, and 
surfaces. Their morphology is assessed in terms of width and 
height as a function of the growth conditions, e.g., for lines, 
bias voltage and sweep velocity, and for dots bias voltage and 
duration of application of the bias voltage. We show that the 
results present a satisfactorily reproducibility. This opens the 
way to further developments: nano devices among which 
simple and double junctions are currently in development, the 
final goal being the development of single electron devices 
(SETs). 
Keywords-Atomic force microscope; Nano lithography; 
Ti/TiOx, Nano devices 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
For more than 4 decades, Complementary Metal Oxide 
Semiconductor (CMOS) technology has enabled a tenfold 
increase in computing performance every 5 years. 
Throughout that period, this trend has mainly been achieved 
by scaling down MOS devices. Nowadays it is threatened by 
ever increasing power dissipation of integrated circuits. 
Among competing emerging research devices, we can find 
“the one electron electronics” in which the elementary block 
is the Single Electron Transistor (SET), which features 
particularly low power consumption [1]. The SET is a three 
terminal switching device which conveys electrons through 
successive tunnel events between two electrodes separated 
with one conductor island (Figure 1). Because its way of 
working lies in the controlled transport of electrons one by 
one, the SET is the great winner in terms of electrical 
consumption comparatively to the others emergent devices. 
The realization of an island in such devices brings the 
necessity of creating tunnel junctions. For electron tunneling 
to occur in a controlled manner, it is crucial to control 
distances at a nanometer scale. This has been carried out 
using various techniques such as break junctions [2], 
electromigration 
[3], 
electrodeposition 
[4], 
scanning 
tunneling microscopy [5], electron beam lithography/shadow 
evaporation (alone or associated with other techniques like 
Chemical-Mechanical Planarization) [6][7], nanoparticle 
positioning [8] and nanoscale oxidation [9][10][11][12]. 
However, to our knowledge, no systematic study enabling 
systematic parameter study and derivation have been 
completed using the latter process when applied to the 
fabrication of components. Moreover, this technology, which 
enables “drawing” the mono-electronic component on a thin 
metal layer, presents the advantage of high flexibility in 
terms of dimension variability. 
This AFM direct writing technique enables the 
processing 
of 
electronic 
components 
of 
increasing 
complexity 
(nanowires, 
nanojunctions, 
monoelectronic 
components like SETs), with a possibility of varying the 
geometry. However this flexible technology involves many 
parameters (nature of the AFM tip as well as voltage applied, 
duration, humidity, temperature) which need to be assessed. 
This is the goal of the present work.  
 
Figure 1.  Illustration of the topography of a SET [10]. 
This paper will be divided in three parts, the first one will 
be related to the protocol and the equipment used at the 
laboratory to obtain our results, the second one will show 
our work on oxide characterization using three main 
parameters like height of the oxide, width of the oxide and 
the reproducibility of the method. In the last part, we will 
discuss of our results and the future perspectives of our 
work. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

II. 
PROTOCOL AND EQUIPMENTS 
All measurements reported in this paper were made using 
an Atomic Force Microscope NT-MDT Integra. The tips 
used were conductive tips Nanosensor PPP-EFM Silicon 
coated with 25 nm of PtIr. The force constant was about 
2.8 N/m and the resonance frequency is comprised between 
45 and 115 kHz. The resonance frequency is very important 
in this case because all the experiments were made using the 
semi-contact mode of the AFM. 
In order to regulate the humidity in the microscope 
chamber, we used two channels of nitrogen. One goes 
through a water bubbler in order to add some humidity to the 
nitrogen introduced in the microscope chamber, the other 
not. Thanks to this set-up the humidity rate was constantly 
maintained at 55%.  
The samples studied were originally silicon substrates 
with a thermal oxide layer of thickness 520 nm. Then we 
deposited 5 nm of Ti using e-beam assisted evaporation. As 
the samples were stored in an ambient environment, a native 
oxide layer of about 2 nm arose on the Ti layer (as measured 
by ellipsometry). The roughness parameter Rq or RMS after 
the Ti deposition reached 0.2 nm. 
 
III. 
OXIDE CHARACTERIZATION 
 
The working principle of the method implemented here 
to fabricate nano devices relies on the oxidation using AFM, 
works as follows.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Schematic of the oxidation process with an AFM tip [9]. 
In ambient environment we can find a thin layer of water 
on every surface due to humidity contained in the air. When 
the tip of the AFM approaches the surface, a meniscus of 
water is formed around the tip. Then, if a bias voltage is 
applied to the tip, a current carried by the oxyanions comes 
up, which leads to an oxido-reduction reaction between the 
oxyanions and the metallic surfaces and proceed to the 
growth of TiOx as shown on the Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  AFM image and corresponding line scan showing oxides lines 
fabricated using different sweep velocities (0.4µm/s->2.0µm/s per step of 
0.4µm/s every two lines) with a bias voltage of -6V. 
First, we evaluated the geometrical properties of oxide 
lines by measuring their height and protrusion width 
(FWMH), as this method takes into account the topology of 
the AFM tip. These parameters have been extracted using the 
average of the profile of the oxide lines as shown on the 
Figure 3. The evolution of these parameters is assessed as 
function of the bias voltage applied on the tip and the sweep 
speed of the tip, or the time per dots in the case of the 
oxidation of table of dots. 
A. Characterization of the oxide height 
The experimental height of the oxide lines measured as a 
function of the bias voltage of the AFM tip is reported in 
Figure 4. This graph displays also the dependency of the 
oxide height on the sweep velocity of the AFM probe. The 
tendencies observed here are in agreement with those of the 
literature [11]: the oxide height decreases sharply with the 
absolute value of the bias voltage and also, but to a lesser 
extent, for increasing sweep velocity. 
 
Figure 4.  Experimental height of the oxide lines as a function of the bias 
voltage (comprised between -5V and -7V). 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

B. Characterization of the oxide width 
Figure 5 shows how the full width at half maximum 
(FWHM) of the lines varies depending on the bias voltage 
and on the sweep velocity. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Experimental FWHM of the oxide lines as a function of the bias 
voltage (comprised between  5V and -7V). 
The line width is found to remain roughly constant over 
the whole span of parameters tested here. The small 
discrepancies measured belong indeed to the experimental 
uncertainty which is estimated to ± 8 nm, the image 
resolution being 256 pixels × 256 pixels for a scan length 
reaching 2 µm. 
C. Process reproducibility 
 
The process reproducibility has been assessed by 
generating arrays of 36 oxide dots. For the results shown in 
Figure 6, the voltage applied was respectively -6V and -7V. 
In both cases the duration of the applied voltage reached 
200 ms/point. For comparison, the oxide lines considered in 
the preceding paragraph were performed with scanning 
velocities ranging between 2 µm/s and 0.4 µm/s, which 
correspond to a duration of applied voltage ranging from 
4 ms/point to 20 ms/point.  
Table 1 summarizes the measured height and FWHM of 
the dots. The standard deviation for either the dot height or 
FWHM remains very low. This attests for a good 
reproducibility of the oxidation process.  
TABLE I.  
EXPERIMENTAL HEIGHT AND FWHM OF OXIDE DOTS 
Voltage 
applied 
FWHM (nm) 
Height (nm) 
 
Average 
Standard 
deviation 
Average 
Standard 
deviation 
-7V 
42.5 
3.7 
4.5 
0.5 
-6V 
36 
3.2 
2.4 
0.5 
 
 
Figure 6.  Arrays of oxide dots performed at a bias voltage of  -7V 
and -6V respectively. The duration of the applied voltage is 200 ms/point. 
Note that the averaged values reported for the height are 
slightly exceeding those reported in the figures 4 and 5 and 
confirm the tendency of increasing the oxide height with the 
oxidation time. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In this work dedicated to nano lithography, we evaluated 
the influence of the applied voltage and of the sweep velocity 
when fabricating oxide patterns using AFM. The oxide 
patterns consist in lines, dots, and surfaces. Their width and 
height, which depend on the growth conditions, were 
assessed as well as the process reproducibility. The height of 
the lines increases with the absolute value of the bias voltage 
and with decreasing sweep velocity for lines (or increasing 
duration of the voltage applied per point for dots). On the 
other hand, the line width is not parameter-sensitive in the 
range evaluated.  
The immediate outlook of this study is the processing of 
nano devices of increasing complexity, among which 
nanowires, simple junctions, double junctions, the final goal 
being the development of single electron devices (SETs). As 
a first example of nano device, Figure 7 illustrates a 
nanowire-type structure. A Ti-nanowire, having a width of 
20 nm arises between 2 surfaces of µm-size of locally 
anodized Ti.  
 
-6V 
-7V 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

 
 
 
Figure 7.  Example of a nano-wire processed by local anodization. 
This first demonstration opens the way to more 
sophisticated devices which will be further developed in the 
oral talk. 
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
Deposition of the titanium films occurred on the 
Nanolyon Platform. We are particularly indebted to 
K. Ayadi, J. Grégoire and R. Perrin for their technical 
support. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] The International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors - 
2007 
Edition, 
Emerging 
Research 
Devices, 
Online:http://www.itrs.net/Links/2007ITRS/2007_Chapters/2
007_ERD. 
[2] J.J. Parks, A.R. Champagne, G.R. Hutchison, S. Flores-
Torres, H.D. Abruna and D.C. Ralph, “Tuning the kondo 
effect with a mechanically controllable break junction”, Phys. 
Rev. Lett., Vol. 99, 2007,  pp 0266011. 
[3] K. I. Bolotin, F. Kuemmeth, A. N. Pasupathy, D. C. Ralph, 
“Metal-nanoparticle single-electron transistors fabricated 
using electromigration”, Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 84, 2004, pp. 
3154-3156. 
[4] M.M. Deshmukh, A.L. Prieto, Q. Gu, H. Park, “Fabrication of 
asymmetric electrode pairs with nanometer separation made 
of two distinct metals”, Nano Lett., Vol. 3, 2003, pp. 1383-
1385. 
[5] C. A. Nijhuis, N. Oncel, J. Huskens, H.J.W. Zandvliet, B.J. 
Ravoo, B. Poelsema and D.N. Reinhoudt, « Room-
temperature single-electron tunnelling in dendrimer-stabilized 
gold nanoparticles anchored at a molecular printboard”, 
Small, Vol. 2, 2006, pp. 1422-1426. 
[6] Y. A. Pashkin, Y. Nakamura, and J. S. Tsai, “Room-
temperature Al single-electron transistor made by electron-
beam lithography”, Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 76, 2000, pp. 
2256-2258. 
[7] C. Dubuc, J. Beauvais, D. Drouin, “A nanodamascene process 
for advanced single-electron transistor fabrication”, IEEE 
Transactions on Technology, Vol. 7(1), 2008, pp. 68-73. 
[8] V. Ray, R. Subramanian, P. Bhadrachalam, L.-C. Ma, C.-U. 
Kim, and S. J. Koh, “CMOS-compatible fabrication of room-
temperature single-electron devices”, Nat. Nano., Vol. 3, 
2008, pp. 603-608. 
[9] K. Matsumoto, M. Ishii,  K. Segawa Y. Oka, B. J. Vartanian, 
J. S. Harris, “Room temperature operation of a single electron 
transistor made by the scanning tunneling microscope 
nanooxidation process for the TiOx/Ti system”, Appl. Phys. 
Lett., Vol 69, 1996, pp. 34-36. 
[10] Y. Gotoh, K. Matsumoto and V. Bubanja, “Experimental and 
Simulated Results of Room Temperature Single Electron 
Transistor Formed by Atomic Force Microscopy Nano-
Oxidation Process”, Jpn. J. of Appl. Phys, Vol 39, 2000, pp. 
2334-2337. 
[11] C. Huh and S.J. Park, “Atomic force microscope tip-induced 
anodization of titanium film for nanofabrication of oxide 
patterns”, J. Vac. Sci. and Technol. B, Vol. 18, 2000, pp. 55-
59. 
[12] J. Martinez, R.V. Martinez and R. Garcia, “Silicon Nanowire 
Transistors with a Channel Width of 4 nm Fabricated by 
Atomic Force Microscope Nanolithography”, Nano Letters, 
Vol 8(11), 2008, pp. 3636-3639. 
 
Nanowire 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-303-2
ICQNM 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

