Quantum Dynamics and Coherence of Qubits 
Vladimir Privman 
 
Department of Physics, Clarkson University, Potsdam, NY 13699, USA 
E-mail privman@clarkson.edu; Web http://www.clarkson.edu/Privman
 
 
 
Abstract — We review results in theoretical modeling of 
quantum systems in support of the studies of decoherence and 
qubit interactions for quantum information processing. The 
developed modeling tools have been applied to semiconductor 
materials 
and 
nanostructures 
that 
show 
promise 
for 
implementation of coherent, controlled quantum dynamics at 
the level of registers of several quantum bits (qubits), such as 
spins. Field-theoretical techniques have been utilized to 
address decoherence and more generally the origin and effects 
of quantum noise and the loss of entanglement in quantum 
dynamics of qubits and several-qubit registers. Qubit coupling 
mechanisms via the indirect exchange interaction have been 
investigated, and quantum computing designs have been 
evaluated for scalability. We also describe general and specific 
research challenges, the solution of which will advance the field 
of modeling “open quantum systems” to further our 
understanding 
of 
how 
environmental 
influences 
affect 
quantum coherence and its loss during quantum dynamics. 
Keywords — qubit; decoherence; exchange; entaglement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We review results in the field of “controlled quantum 
dynamics,” aimed at investigating general aspects of 
quantum noise, as well as single- and multi-qubit 
decoherence, robustness of entanglement, and origins of two-
qubit interactions, the latter mediated via the qubits’ 
coupling with a many-body bath of modes (e.g., acoustic 
phonons, conductions electrons). Study of “open quantum 
systems,” with new challenges suggested by the emerging 
field of quantum information, requires utilization and 
development of field-theoretical many-body techniques for 
the description of quantum dynamics. These studies have 
facilitated evaluation of scalability of existing and emerging 
quantum computing schemes, for instance, for spin- and 
quantum-dot based quantum computer designs. 
  
Emergence of entanglement, by induced indirect-
exchange Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida (RKKY) type 
interactions, and its loss due to quantum noise can be 
quantified by developed calculation techniques for the 
system’s dynamics, with the environmental (bath) modes 
traced out, to describe the induced interaction and quantum 
noise in a unified treatment. 
  
The reported research has been focused on the 
maintenance of coherence of quantum dynamics controlled 
by qubit-qubit interactions and quantum noise, both 
mediated by coupling to external baths, such as acoustic 
phonons or conduction electrons coupled to quantum-dot and 
impurity-atom 
spin 
qubits 
in 
semiconductor-material 
heterostructures. The latter, RKKY-type mechanism of spin-
spin (qubit-qubit) interaction offers an approach to 
incorporate scalable control of entanglement into solid state 
quantum computing schemes. Calculations of bath-induced 
interactions and decoherence have been carried out for 
systems of relevance to the ongoing measurement and 
interaction experiments. 
 
In Section II, we generally cite our modeling results. In 
Section II, we survey the status of research work in the field 
of evaluation of decoherence. In Section IV, we outline 
research challenges in the topics involving induced 
interactions (RKKY-type) and their interplay with quantum 
noise. Finally, in Section V we address some longer-term 
issues in the physics of open quantum systems subject to 
environmental noise.  
 
II. 
DECOHERENCE AND INDUCED INTERACTIONS 
Decoherence (quantum phase noise) [1] and, for more 
than a single qubit, the associated loss of entanglement, are 
the main obstacles to scalable quantum computation. 
Theoretical evaluation of a quantum computing scheme 
includes identification of system parameter ranges for which 
the level of quantum noise is within the conditions for fault-
tolerant quantum error correction. Coherent quantum control 
of systems and structures on the nanoscale, but larger than 
single atoms and molecules, has been explored in 
experiments that control quantum dynamics beyond the 
traditional energy-level spectroscopy. Reduction of quantum 
noise to maintain quantum coherence over the experimental 
time scales is key to probing processes and concepts that 
were until recently out of the reach of experimental 
observations, 
including 
such 
recent 
discoveries 
as 
observation of an electron spin resonance (ESR) signal from 
a single spin [2,3], or probing RKKY-type indirect exchange 
interaction that, via conduction electrons, influences the 
dynamics of two spins of electrons located in separate 
quantum dots [4]. 
 
Here we outline research to advance theoretical 
evaluation of decoherence, entanglement, and interactions. 
From the earlier focus on the quantum-Hall-effect systems 
[5-7], our research has extended to rather general results on 
decoherence [1,8-10] and, more recently, disentanglement 
46
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

and RKKY-type interactions for two qubits [11-13], as well 
as to additive measures of decoherence for multi-qubit 
registers [1,14]. Model calculations have been carried out for 
a range of spin- and quantum-dot-based quantum computing 
schemes in semiconductor nanostructures, e.g., [1,10,15,16]. 
While the focus has been on semiconductor materials, most 
of these approaches apply to any qubit-based quantum 
computing scheme. 
 
III. 
DECOHERENCE DURING QUANTUM GATE FUNCTIONS 
It has been recognized that for times, t, larger than ħ/kT, 
which is about 2.5×10–14 sec at room temperatures of 300K, 
Markovian approximation schemes, e.g., [17,18], can be 
used. For NMR/ESR, these have been utilized primarily for 
single-qubit calculations of the relaxation and dephasing 
time scales, T1 and T2, and of the asymptotic large-time 
properties of the density matrix elements of the qubit, with 
the environmental (bath) modes traced out.  
 
Quantum 
information 
processing 
necessitates 
the 
development of techniques applicable for the “short-time” 
regime 
t < ħ/kT, 
because 
most 
quantum-computation 
schemes are for systems at very low temperatures, for which 
gate times are shorter than or comparable to ħ/kT. Then the 
bath mode correlations with the system of qubits cannot be 
entirely 
treated 
within 
the 
no-memory, 
immediate-
rethermalization Markovian approximations. We have 
developed a new calculational approach designed for this 
regime, which does not include the Markovian assumption, 
and reported its applications, e.g., [8-10,16]. 
 
 
The level of quantum noise in the idling state, for a single 
qubit, as well as during the simplest quantum gates, has been 
well quantified [1,10,19-38]. The calculation involves 
evaluation of the qubit’s density matrix, followed by 
calculation of numerical measures of the degree of 
decoherence. The calculations can be done within both our 
short-time and the Markovian approximations, and the 
largest (the worst-case scenario) noise measure values can 
then be used to test the system as candidate for scalable 
quantum computer designs. 
 
 
We have introduced new quantitative measures of 
decoherence which are approximately additive [1,10,14] as 
long as the noise for each qubit is small (for the short 
duration of a quantum gate function), and therefore these 
measures can be used to further extend the results to several-
qubit quantum registers, in terms of the noise measures of 
the individual qubits, even when these qubits are strongly 
entangled.  
 
 
In these calculations, the Hamiltonian of the qubit system 
and bath of environmental modes, is modeled by 
S ( )
B
SB
H
H
t
H
H



, 
 
 
(1) 
where 
( )
( )
S
i
g
H
t
H
H
t


.  
 
 
(2) 
Here 
i
H  is the Hamiltonian of the idling qubit register, 
while 
Hg ( )
t  represents time-dependent gate control. The 
Hamiltonian of the environment is given by 
B
H , and 
HSB
 
is its interaction with the qubits. The environment is often 
modeled as a bath of bosonic quantum modes (e.g., 
phonons).  
 
 
There have been few available results for evaluation of 
quantum 
noise 
during 
general 
time-dependent 
gate 
functions. The time dependence introduced by non-zero 
Hg ( )
t , requires time-ordering in the evaluation of the qubit 
evolution operator, which makes many standard techniques 
for dynamical calculations inapplicable. We initiated a new 
approach [39] yielding the first results for a gate-controlled 
qubit interacting with a boson bath of modes. 
 
 
Recently reported first experimental successes in 
coherent control of single electron spins in quantum dots, 
e.g., [40], pose an interesting theoretical challenge to develop 
systematic modeling techniques for general-time-dependence 
gate-controlled qubits, as well as establish additivity criteria 
to enable evaluation of the level of noise for registers of 
several such controlled qubits.  
 
IV. 
INDUCED INTERACTION AND QUANTUM NOISE 
Modeling of an open quantum system within the 
Hamiltonian description, Eqs. (1)-(2), involves significant 
technical difficulties: While the system Hamiltonian can be 
just single- or two-spin, the bath-mode Hamiltonian involves 
many modes, in the simplest case a collection of 
noninteracting bosonic fields, 
†
B
k k k
k
H
  b b
. 
 
 
 
(3) 
The qubit-bath interaction can involve terms of the form 
 
†
†
*
...
SB
S
k k
S
k k
k
k
H
g b
g b
 
 



, 
 
(4) 
where 
S
  is a system operator, as well as more complicated 
expressions in the case of fermionic bath fields (e.g., 
electrons). There can usually be several interaction terms 
involved in Eq. (4), and also in Eq. (3), when more than one 
qubit is studied, and for various bosonic polarizations, for 
instance for acoustic phonons, or for more than one bath 
dominating the relaxation of the system.  
 
 
However, and even more importantly, there are physical 
assumptions that have to be invoked to supplement this 
description. The open-quantum system dynamics cannot be 
entirely specified by the Hamiltonian for the system and the 
selected bath of external modes. We have to also model the 
effects of the thermalization imposed by the “rest of the 
universe” on the bath, as well as consider the choice of the 
initial conditions for the whole system, the latter an issue that 
represents an important challenge on its own, which will not 
be addressed here. These topics have a long history in the 
NMR and ESR literature, primarily for single, idling spins 
within Markovian approximations [17,18,41-44]. 
 
Recent experimental efforts to create and maintain 
entanglement of two electron spins in gate-formed double 
quantum dots with interaction mediated by electrons in 
conducting channels [4,45], have drawn interest to a new set 
47
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

of problems. The bath modes, while serving as the main 
source and mediator of the quantum noise causing 
decoherence, will also cause loss of entanglement of two 
(and more) spins. However, the same modes, via their 
interactions with the qubits can also mediate an indirect 
exchange (RKKY-type) interaction. The latter can create 
entanglement and, for appropriate initial conditions, drive the 
approximately coherent quantum dynamics for some time. 
Ultimately, for long enough times the quantum noise effects 
will dominate and cause thermalization (unless the qubits are 
perturbed by quantum-control gate function external 
potentials).  
 
Let us remark that the original RKKY calculation 
corresponds to the zero-temperature evaluation of the 
coupling induced between localized magnetic moments by a 
“bath” of conduction electrons. The ideas to utilize various 
solid-state excitations as a medium to couple qubits for 
quantum information processing have been advanced by 
several groups [5-7,12,13,46-50]. The main advantage of 
such coupling is that it should allow for larger distances 
between qubits and therefore for their easier fabrication and 
control. 
 
Besides the need to properly incorporate the physics of 
the environmental influences in the open-quantum-system 
description, which is not a fully understood problem and is 
usually handled within phenomenological approaches, one 
should also aim at tractability of the resulting equations for 
the quantities of interest, for instance, the density matrix of 
the qubits, 
S
 , after the environmental effects were traced 
out. Typically, a Markovian approximation scheme can lead 
to a quantum Liouville equation of the type 


,
coherent terms
noise terms
S
S
S
i
H





 
. (5) 
The hope is to be able to derive the “coherent” terms, which 
correspond to Hermitian additions to 
S
H  in the commutator, 
and the noise terms due to the bath modes. 
 
 
The added terms in Eq. (5), induced by the system’s 
interactions with the bath modes, are usually evaluated 
within the second-order (in the interaction strength) 
expansion, as well as other approximations [12,13,18,50] 
aimed at making the results tractable for calculations. For 
more than one qubit, the qubit-qubit entanglement is created 
both by the internal qubit-qubit interactions in 
S
H , and by 
the induced interactions, which are part of the coherent 
terms, whereas other coherent terms involve for instance 
single-qubit operators and represent Lamb shifts.  
 
The noise terms, however, act to unravel the 
entanglement. Indeed, results have been reported for a 
system of two qubits, suggesting that the noise-induced 
decoherence of two entangled noninteracting qubits and their 
disentanglement are closely related [11,51], with the 
suppression of entanglement taking place at least as fast as 
the product of the factors that describe the suppression of 
each qubit’s coherence. These results were obtained both for 
a Markovian-type noise model and for the short-time regime, 
but limited to uncorrelated noise sources for each qubit. 
 
We have reported the first systematic calculations 
[12,13,50] of the combined effects of the induced interaction 
and quantum noise due to the phonon or (interacting, 
correlated) conduction electron bath, with applications for 
qubit geometries suggested by possible experiments [2-4,45]. 
While the actual calculations are quite formidable, the 
expression for the induced interaction is relatively compact, 
because it only involves components of two spin operators. 
As an illustration, here is the result for the calculated [50] 
indirect exchange interaction between two spins at separation 
d , mediated by acoustic phonons, 




(1)
(2)
2
, ,
int
2 (
) Re 1
1
( )
.
m
m
m
m
n
n
m
m
c
s
n
c
m
m
n
m
x y z
c
s
n
i
c
c
H
t

















d
d
 (6) 
Here 
(1),(2)
, ,
m x y z

 are the Pauli matrixes of the qubits, 
sc  is the 
speed of sound, and 
c
  is the phonon cut-off frequency. For 
a system of two spins (of outer electrons) of P-donor 
impurities, placed in bulk Si at a distance d  apart, and 
subject to a constant uniform magnetic field, 
Hz
, the 
exchange interaction is primarily due to the longitudinal 
acoustic phonons [50]. The coupling is super-Ohmic: we can 
assume that 
3
nm

 in Eq. (6), for the small-frequency 
dependence of the standard Caldeira-Leggett spectral 
function, and that the coupling parameters due to the spin-
orbit 
interaction, 
satisfy 
,
x
z
y
x
y
z
n
n
n





 with 
2
10
3
8.4 10
.
z
 c



 The cut-off frequency is due to the 
localization 
of 
the 
wave 
function, 
12
1
B
9.3 10 s
,
c
sc
a





 which in this case is much 
smaller than the lattice Debye cut-off (
9
B
10
m
a


 is half 
of the effective Bohr radius of an electron at the P-impurity). 
 
 
The expression for the noise effects is much more 
cumbersome [13,50], and is model-assumption dependent. 
The interplay of the induced interaction and quantum noise 
can be used to control the creation of time-dependent 
entanglement, as illustrated in Figure 1. The obtained results 
suggest future research into both the buildup of the 
entanglement and its unraveling, for interacting (and 
ultimately also controlled via time-dependent external “gate-
function” interactions) qubits subject to quantum noise due 
to various bosonic and fermionic bath modes, in both the 
short-time and Markovian regimes. Entanglement should be 
explored as a fragile resource for quantum information 
processing, and for the relation [11,51] of disentanglement to 
decoherence. 
 
 
The concurrence is by now a generally accepted, 
calculable in closed form measure of quantum-information 
content of two-qubit entanglement [52]. For the dynamics of 
two spins interacting with an acoustic-phonon environment, 
the concurrence as a measure of entanglement can reveal a 
rather nontrivial behavior; see Figure 1. We point out, 
48
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

however, that with the full reduced density matrix of the 
system available, other quantities can also be calculated as 
needed, e.g., [53]. 
  
 
 
 
V. 
 CHALLENGES 
With the actual experimental probes now being carried 
out at the nanoscale, long-standing open problems have 
become more pressing, and some new ones have been 
suggested by experimental developments. For definiteness, 
we consider time-independent 
S
H  from now on.  
 
 
Perhaps the most fundamental of these problems is the 
matter of thermalization vs. bath-induced coherent-dynamics 
effects in open quantum systems. The “textbook” approach 
to thermalization [17,42-44] has been to assume that, for 
large enough times the time evolution of the system plus 
bath is not just controlled by the combined Hamiltonian, but 
is supplemented by the instantaneous loss-of-memory 
(Markovian) approximation, which introduces irreversibility 
and imposes the bath temperature on the reduced system 
dynamics in the infinite-time limit, which is then approached 
as the density matrix elements assume their thermal values: 


/
/
( )
Tr
S
S
H
kT
H
kT
S t
e
e




, 
 
(7) 
with the exponential relaxation (diagonal) and decoherence 
(off-diagonal) rates defining the time scales 1,2
T
. 
 
 
However, 
it 
turns 
out 
that 
the 
traditional 
phenomenological no-memory approximations, yielding 
thermalization and the Fermi golden rule for the transition 
rates, etc., assume in a way too strong a memory loss: They 
erase the possible bath contributions to the coherent part of 
the dynamics at shorter times, such as the Lamb shift for a 
single qubit as well as the induced RKKY interactions for a 
bi-partite system. Indeed, while relaxation leading to Eq. (7) 
is driven by the “on-shell” exchanges with the bath, it is the 
memory of (correlation, entanglement with) the bath modes 
that drives the induced interaction via virtual exchanges. 
Actually, the “on-shell” condition (imposed by the so-called 
secular approximation, see Section 8.1.3 in [17]) also 
underestimates additional decoherence at short times: the 
“pure” or “adiabatic” contribution to the off-diagonal 
dephasing, that has been estimated by using other approaches 
[1,8,9,16,33].  
 
 
Perhaps the simplest way to recognize the ambiguity is to 
ask if the Hamiltonian in Eq. (7) should have included the 
bath-induced interaction terms (not shown)? Should the final 
Boltzmann distribution correspond to the energy levels / 
basis states of the original “bare” system or the one with the 
RKKY-interaction / Lamb shifts added, and more generally, a 
bath-renormalized, “dressed” system? 
 
 
There is presently no consistent treatment that will 
address in a satisfactory way all the expected physics of the 
bath-mode effects on the dynamics. The issue is partly 
technical, because we are after a tractable, rather than just a 
“foundational” answer. It is well accepted that the emergence 
of irreversibility cannot be treated within tractable and 
calculationally convenient approaches derived directly from 
the microscopic dynamics: phenomenology has to be 
appealed to. However, even allowing for phenomenological 
solutions, all the known tractable schemes yielding the 
indirect exchange interaction, treat thermalization in a 
cavalier 
way, 
resulting 
typically 
in 
noise 
terms 
corresponding to getting the infinite temperature limit at 
large times, which thus artificially avoids the issue of which 
S
H  should enter in Eq. (7), whereas the established schemes 
that yield thermalization at large times, lose some 
intermediate- and short-time dynamical effects. 
 
 
We have just discussed the challenges in formulating 
unified treatments that will cover all or most of the 
interesting dynamical effects for various time scales, from 
short to intermediate (for induced interaction effects and pure 
decoherence) to large (for the onset of thermalization), 
providing a tractable calculational (usually perturbative, 
many-body) scheme. This discussion also alludes to several 
other interesting conceptual challenges in the theory of open 
quantum systems.  
 
 
Let us presently comment on the issue of the bath-mode 
interactions with each other, as well as with impurities, the 
latter particularly important and experimentally relevant 
[45,54] for conduction electrons as carriers of the indirect-
exchange interaction. Indeed, the traditional treatment of 
open quantum systems has assumed noninteracting bath 
modes. When the bath mode interactions had to be accounted 
for, we have treated the added effects either perturbatively 
[6], or, for strong interaction, such as Luttinger-liquid 
electrons in a 1D channel, we took [12] the collective 
excitations as the new “bath modes.” Generally, however, 
especially in Markovian schemes, one has to seek 
approaches that do not involve certain double-counting. 
Indeed, the assumption that the bath modes are at a fixed 
Figure 1.  The concurrence as a function of time for various qubit 
separations, here quantifies the entanglement of two spin-1/2 qubits, 
due to the interaction and quantum noise induced by a bath of acoustic 
phonons. The parameters were for P-donor electrons in Si, at T = 1 K, 
in external magnetic field Hz = 3×104 G. In terms of the single-spin 
basis |
|
|
 
 


 ; the two spins were initially in |   ; the bath 
was initially thermalized at the temperature T. 
49
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

temperature, could be possibly considered as a partial 
accounting for the effects of the mode-mode and mode-
impurity interactions, because these interactions can 
contribute to themalization of the bath, on par with other 
influences external to the bath. This may be particularly 
relevant for phonons that always have strong anharmonicity 
for any real material. In a way this problem fits with the 
previous one: We are dealing with effects that can be, on one 
hand, modeled by added terms in the total Hamiltonian but 
on the other hand, may be also mixed up in the process of 
thermalization that is modeled by actually departing from the 
Hamiltonian description and replacing it with Liouville 
equations that include noise effects. Recent experimental 
advances bring these long-standing challenges to the level of 
application that requires tractable solutions that can be 
confronted with experimental data.  
 
 
There are other interesting topics to be considered, for 
instance, the question of whether additional sources of 
quantum noise are important? It has recently been 
established [55] that potential difference between two leads 
(reservoirs, or baths, of electrons) can be a source of 
quantum noise, with the potential difference magnitude 
playing the role of the temperature parameter. What, then, 
about a system (qubit) coupled to two thermal baths at 
different temperatures? Will the resulting heat transfer 
(energy flow between the bath via the system) generate 
added quantum noise?  
 
 
As an example of a more practical issue, let us mention 
the possible effect of the sample geometry on phonon and 
conduction electron induced relaxation and interactions. We 
have already explored [12] the one-dimensional aspect of the 
electron gas in a channel. Indeed, electrons are easy to 
confine by gate potentials. The situation for phonons, 
however, is less clear: can geometrical effects modify, and 
particularly reduce, their quantum-noise generation capacity, 
or change the induced interactions? Our preliminary studies 
[50] seem to indicate strong overall geometry dependence. 
However, the situation is not entirely clear, especially for the 
strength of the noise effects, and suggests future explorations 
because recent experiments with double dot nanostructures 
in Si membranes [56] indicate that true nanosize 
confinement (due to the sample dimensions) of otherwise 
long-wavelength 
modes 
(in 
the 
transverse 
sample 
dimensions) is now possible and will have dramatic effect on 
the phonon spectrum and, as a result, on those physical 
phenomena that depend on the phonon interactions with 
electron spins. 
 
 
Finally, we point out that several recent experiments, e.g. 
[57-62], have explored aspects of coherence and control in 
semiconductor nanostructures for quantum computing. 
While the progress has been impressive, there is no clear 
“winner” system. It is likely that the future promising 
designs will be hybrid, based on the presently explored 
schemes. It is notable that the ensemble-NMR quantum 
computing approaches have presently reached partial control 
and manipulation of 12 qubits [63], which allows 
consideration of “algorithmic” concepts in multi-qubit 
system design while the other approaches catch up. 
 
To summarize, we have outlined ongoing theoretical 
research and a selection of challenging open problems to 
address, in support of the emerging field of quantum 
information, ultimately aimed at achieving quantum control 
of multi-qubit systems. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Fedorov, L. Fedichkin and V. Privman, Evaluation of 
Decoherence for Quantum Control and Computing, J. Comp. Theor. 
Nanosci. 1, 132 (2004).  
[2] 
M. Xiao, I. Martin, E. Yablonovitch and H. W. Jiang, Electrical 
Detection of the Spin Resonance of a Single Electron in a Silicon 
Field-Effect Transistor, Nature 430, 435 (2004).  
[3] 
I. Martin, D. Mozyrsky and H. W. Jiang, A Scheme for Electrical 
Detection of Single-Electron Spin Resonance, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 
018301 (2003). 
[4] 
N. J. Craig, J. M. Taylor, E. A. Lester, C. M. Marcus, M. P. Hanson 
and A. C. Gossard, Tunable Nonlocal Spin Control in a Coupled-
Quantum Dot System, Science 304, 565 (2004). 
[5] 
V. Privman, I. D. Vagner and G. Kventsel, Quantum Computation in 
Quantum-Hall Systems, Phys. Lett. A 239, 141 (1998). 
[6] 
D. Mozyrsky, V. Privman and I. D. Vagner, Nuclear-Spin Qubit 
Dephasing Time in the Integer Quantum Hall Effect Regime, Phys. 
Rev. B 63, 085313 (2001). 
[7] 
D. Mozyrsky, V. Privman and M. L. Glasser, Indirect Interaction of 
Solid-State Qubits via Two-Dimensional Electron Gas, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 86, 5112 (2001). 
[8] 
V. Privman, Initial Decoherence of Open Quantum Systems, J. Stat. 
Phys. 110, 957 (2003). 
[9] 
V. Privman, Short-Time Decoherence and Deviation from Pure 
Quantum States, Modern Phys. Lett. B 16, 459 (2002). 
[10] Review: L. Fedichkin and V. Privman, Quantitative Treatment of 
Decoherence, Ch. 8 in: Electron Spin Resonance and Related 
Phenomena in Low Dimensional Structures, Pages 137-162, edited by 
M. Fanciulli, Topics in Applied Physics 115 (Springer, Berlin, 2009). 
[11] D. Tolkunov, V. Privman and P. K. Aravind, Decoherence of a 
Measure of Entanglement, Phys. Rev. A 71, 060308 (2005). 
[12] D. Mozyrsky, A. Dementsov and V. Privman, Quantum Dynamics of 
Spins Coupled by Electrons in One-Dimensional Channel, Phys. Rev. 
B 72, 233103 (2005). 
[13] D. Solenov, D. Tolkunov and V. Privman, Coherent Interaction of 
Spins Induced by Thermal Bosonic Environment, Phys. Lett. A 359, 
81 (2006). 
[14] L. Fedichkin, A. Fedorov and V. Privman, Additivity of Decoherence 
Measures for Multiqubit Quantum Systems, Phys. Lett. A 328, 87 
(2004). 
[15] S. Saikin, D. Mozyrsky and V. Privman, Relaxation of Shallow 
Donor Electron Spin due to Interaction with Nuclear Spin Bath, Nano 
Lett. 2, 651 (2002). 
[16] D. Tolkunov and V. Privman, Short-Time Decoherence for General 
System- Environment Interactions, Phys. Rev. A 69, 062309 (2004). 
[17] K. Blum, Density Matrix Theory and Applications (Plenum, NY, 
1996). 
[18] N. G. van Kampen, Stochastic Processes in Physics and Chemistry 
(Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2004), Chapter XVII.  
[19] P. Zanardi, Dissipative Dynamics in a Quantum Register, Phys. Rev. 
A 56, 4445 (1997).  
[20] Y. Makhlin, G. Schön and A. Shnirman, Josephson-Junction Qubits, 
Fort. Phys. 48, 1043 (2000).  
[21] A. A. Clerk, S. M. Girvin, A. K. Nguyen and A. D. Stone, Resonant 
Cooper-Pair 
Tunneling: 
Quantum 
Noise 
and 
Measurement 
Characteristics, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 176804 (2002).  
50
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

[22] C. J. Wellard and L. C. L. Hollenberg, Thermal Noise in a Solid State 
Quantum Computer, J. Phys. D 35, 2499 (2002). 
[23] J. M. Martinis, S. Nam, J. Aumentado, K. M. Lang and C. Urbina, 
Decoherence of a Superconducting Qubit due to Bias Noise, Phys. 
Rev. B 67, 094510 (2003).  
[24] T. Itakura and Y. Tokura, Dephasing due to Background Charge 
Fluctuations, Phys. Rev. B 67, 195320 (2003). 
[25] S. A. Gurvitz, L. Fedichkin, D. Mozyrsky and G. P. Berman, 
Relaxation and the Zeno Effect in Qubit Measurements, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 91, 066801 (2003). 
[26] A. J. Berkley, H. Xu, M. A. Gubrud, R. C. Ramos, J. R. Anderson, C. 
J. Lobb and F. C. Wellstood, Decoherence in a Josephson-Junction 
Qubit, Phys. Rev. B 68, 060502 (2003). 
[27] A. Shnirman and Y. Makhlin, Quantum Zeno Effect in Cooper-Pair 
Transport through a Double-Island Josephson System, JETP Lett. 78, 
447 (2003). 
[28] T. Itakura and Y. Tokura, Effect of Multiple Charge Traps on 
Dephasing Rates of a Josephson Charge Qubit System, J. Phys. Soc. 
Japan 72, 2726 (2003). 
[29] E. M. Chudnovsky, Universal Decoherence in Solids, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 92, 120405 (2004). 
[30] G. Ithier, E. Collin, P. Joyez, P. J. Meeson, D. Vion, D. Esteve, F. 
Chiarello, A. Shnirman, Y. Makhlin, J. Schriefl and G. Schön, 
Decoherence in a Superconducting Quantum Bit Circuit, Phys. Rev. 
B 72, 134519 (2005).  
[31] X. T. Liang, Short-Time Decoherence of Josephson Charge Qubits in 
Ohmic and 1/f Noise Environment, Physica C 432, 231 (2005).  
[32] C. Calero, E. M. Chudnovsky and D. A. Garanin, Field Dependence 
of the Electron Spin Relaxation in Quantum Dots, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 
166603 (2005). 
[33] E. Paladino, M. Sassetti, G. Falci and U. Weiss, Pure Dephasing due 
to Damped Bistable Quantum Impurities, Chem. Phys. 322, 98 
(2006).  
[34] Y. M. Galperin, B. L. Altshuler, J. Bergli and D. V. Shantsev, Non-
Gaussian Low-Frequency Noise as a Source of Qubit Decoherence, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 097009 (2006).  
[35] M. Mottonen, R. de Sousa, J. Zhang and K. B. Whaley, High-Fidelity 
One-Qubit Operations under Random Telegraph Noise, Phys. Rev. A 
73, 022332 (2006).  
[36] D. Nghiem and R. Joynt, Exact Solution of Qubit Decoherence 
Models by a Transfer Matrix Method, Phys. Rev. A 73, 032333 
(2006).  
[37] J. H. Kim, R. P. Dhungana and K. S. Park, Decoherence in Josephson 
Vortex Quantum Bits: Long-Josephson-Junction Approach to a Two-
State System, Phys. Rev. B 73, 214506 (2006).  
[38] B. Dong, N. J. M. Horing and X. L. Lei, Qubit Measurement by a 
Quantum Point Contact: a Quantum Langevin-Equation Approach, 
Phys. Rev. B 74, 033303 (2006). 
[39] D. Solenov and V. Privman, Evaluation of Decoherence for Quantum 
Computing Architectures: Qubit System Subject to Time-Dependent 
Control, Int. J. Modern Phys. B 20, 1476 (2006). 
[40] F. H. L. Koppens, C. Buizert, K. J. Tielrooij, I. T. Vink, K. C. 
Nowack, T. Meunier, L. P. Kouwenhoven and L. M. K. Vandersypen, 
Driven Coherent Oscillations of a Single Electron Spin in a Quantum 
Dot, Nature 442, 766 (2006). 
[41] Review: V. Privman, Onset of Decoherence in Open Quantum 
Systems, Proc. SPIE 5115, 345 (2003). 
[42] W. H. Louisell, Quantum Statistical Properties of Radiation (Wiley, 
1973).  
[43] A. Abragam, Principles of Nuclear Magnetism (Clarendon Press, 
1983).  
[44] C. P. Slichter, Principles of Magnetic Resonance (Springer, 1991). 
[45] M. R. Sakr, H. W. Jiang, E. Yablonovitch and E. T. Croke, 
Fabrication and Characterization of Electrostatic Si/SiGe Quantum 
Dots with an Integrated Read-out Channel, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 
223104 (2005). 
[46] C. Piermarocchi, P. Chen, L. J. Sham and D. G. Steel, Optical RKKY 
Interaction between Charged Semiconductor Quantum Dots, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 89, 167402 (2002). 
[47] D. Braun, Creation of Entanglement by Interaction with a Common 
Heat Bath, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 277901 (2002). 
[48] D. Porras and J. I. Cirac, Effective Quantum Spin Systems with 
Trapped Ions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 207901 (2004). 
[49] Y. Rikitake and H. Imamura, Decoherence of Localized Spins 
Interacting via RKKY Interaction, Phys. Rev. B 72, 033308 (2005).  
[50] D. Solenov, D. Tolkunov and V. Privman, Exchange Interaction, 
Entanglement and Quantum Noise Due to a Thermal Bosonic Field, 
Phys. Rev. B 75, 035134 (2007). 
[51] T. Yu and J. H. Eberly, Finite-Time Disentanglement via 
Spontaneous Emission, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 140404 (2004). 
[52] W. K. Wootters, Entanglement of Formation of an Arbitrary State of 
Two Qubits, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 2245 (1998). 
[53] V. Privman, D. Solenov and D. Tolkunov, Onset of Entanglement and 
Noise Cross- Correlations in Two-Qubit System Interacting with 
Common Bosonic Bath, in: Proc. Conf. ICSICT-2006, Part 2, 1054, 
edited by T.-A. Tang, G.-P. Ru and Y.-L. Jiang (IEEE Press, 
Piscataway, NJ, 2006). 
[54] H. W. Jiang, private communication. 
[55] D. Mozyrsky and I. Martin, Quantum-Classical Transition Induced 
by Electrical Measurement, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 018301 (2002). 
[56] P. Zhang, E. Tevaarwerk, B.-N. Park, D. E. Savage, G. K. Celler, I. 
Knezevic, P. G. Evans, M. A. Eriksson and M. G. Lagally, Electronic 
Transport in Nanometre- Scale Silicon-on-Insulator Membranes, 
Nature 439, 703 (2006). 
[57] M. H. Mikkelsen, J. Berezovsky, N. G. Stoltz, L. A. Coldren and D. 
D. Awschalom, Optically Detected Coherent Spin Dynamics of a 
Single Electron in a Quantum Dot, Nature Phys. 3, 770 (2007). 
[58] K. C. Nowack, F. H. L. Koppens, Y. V. Nazarov and L. M. K. 
Vandersypen, Coherent Control of a Single Spin with Electric Fields, 
Science 318, 1430 (2007). 
[59] E. A. Laird, C. Barthel, E. I. Rashba, C. M. Marcus, M. P. Hanson 
and A. C. Gossard, Hyperfine-Mediated Gate-Driven Electron Spin 
Resonance, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 246601 (2007). 
[60] S. Amasha, K. MacLean, I. P. Radu, D. M. Zumbühl, M. A. Kastner, 
M. P. Hanson, and A. C. Gossard, Electrical Control of Spin 
Relaxation in a Quantum Dot, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 046803 (2008). 
[61] D. Press, T. D. Ladd, B. Zhang and Y. Yamamoto, Complete 
Quantum Control of a Single Quantum Dot Spin Using Ultrafast 
Optical Pulses, Nature 456, 218 (2008). 
[62] D. J. Reilly, J. M. Taylor, J. R. Petta, C. M. Marcus, M. P. Hanson 
and C. Gossard, Suppressing Spin Qubit Dephasing by Nuclear State 
Preparation, Science 321, 817 (2008). 
[63] C. Negrevergne, T. S. Mahesh, C. A. Ryan, M. Ditty, F. Cyr-Racine, 
W. Power, N. Boulant, T. Havel, D. G. Cory and R. Laflamme, 
Benchmarking Quantum Control Methods on a 12-Qubit System, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 170501 (2006). 
 
51
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

