Charge Qubits in Doped Quantum Dots : Effects on Computation and Coherence
1⋆ Thierry Ferrus, 1Tsung-Yeh Yang, 2Yu Yamaoka, 2Tomohiro Kambara, 2Tetsuo Kodera, 2Shunri Oda
and 1David Arfon Williams
1Hitachi Cambridge Laboratory, J J Thomson avenue, CB3 0HE, Cambridge, United Kingdom
2Department of Physical Electronics, Quantum Nanoelectronics Research Centre, Tokyo Institute of Technology,
Tokyo, 152-8552 Japan
⋆ Email: taf25@cam.ac.uk
Abstract—Doping in quantum information architectures is
often presented as a source of decoherence for the qubit to study.
However, high doped material also present additional properties
that could be used in quantum computation. Here, we show that
the application of GHz photons to a doped double quantum dot
allows a pair of active dopant to be selected and gate operation
to be implemented with potential coherence time exceeding 200
µs.
Index Terms—Quantum computing; silicon; charge qubit;
quantum dots
I. INTRODUCTION
In a previous paper, we did present a scalable and in-
dustrially compatible architecture for performing quantum
computation [1]. In this proposal, qubit states are deﬁned by
the spatial location of an extra charge in an highly doped
double quantum dot (IDQD) [2][3]. The structure is realized
by implanting at high dose phosphorous atoms into the 40-
nm thick silicon layer of a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer to
obtain an effective doping density of about 3 1019 cm−3. Full
electrical insulation of the qubit is then achieved by etching
away any conducting material between the various structures
(gates, detector and qubit), a method leading to a signiﬁcant
decrease in the electron temperature of the qubit [4]. The
device is further encapsulated by a 12-nm thick thermal silicon
oxide with a ﬁnal value for the dot diameter reaching about
60 nm. Doping by phosphorous atoms and the realization
of constrictions in order to deﬁne the quantum dot tunnel
barriers offer a substitutionary method to standard Metal-
Oxide-Semiconductor (MOS) device fabrication, enhancing
the scalability possibilities.
Despite attractiveness for manufacturing purposes, doped
architectures are rarely used in practical qubit implementations
and, most of the research on charge or spin qubits concentrates
on the use of ﬁn ﬁeld effect transistors (FinFETs) or nanoscale
transistor technology pushing the well know Moore law [5]
below the 100-nm scale [6]. One obvious justiﬁcation is the
presence of dopants that are often associated with localization
effects, especially at interfaces, causing random telegraph
signal events and contributing to electronic noise. Ensemble
of donors may also be difﬁcult to manipulate due to electron-
electron interaction and glassy behavior that may arise near
the metal-to-insulator transition [7], whereas controlling single
donors has not been possible until recently [8].
In this paper, we would like to discuss some major differ-
ences in operation between doped and undoped qubits, show-
ing in particular that dopants are not necessarily detrimental
to qubit operations if an adapted control is designed. We also
discuss some surprising striking consequences on the value of
coherence time in doped quantum dots and give some insight
for the realizing spin qubits in a doped environment.
In Section II, we ﬁrst discuss the realization charge
qubit states in semiconductors. We then describe the dif-
ferences in pulsing experiments between a doped (Sec. III.
A.) and undoped device (Sec. III. B.), bringing the notion
of dopant degeneracy. Effects on coherence are discussed
in Section IV before some conclusions and comments on
scalability are drawn.
II. CHARGE QUBIT STATES IN SILICON
Within the large number of qubit implementations, charge
qubits are one of the simplest ways to realize quantum com-
putation in semiconductors and, in particular, silicon. There
are two possible qubits that could be implemented. In the ﬁrst
case, localized states are used and the | 0⟩ and | 1⟩ are deﬁned
by the spatial location of a charge in a double quantum dot. In
this case, the quantum gate | σx⟩ is simply implemented by the
tunneling of an electron between the two dots across the tunnel
barrier. Another possibility is to use hybridized states so that
qubits states are deﬁned by the bonding-antibonding states,
similarly to the hydrogen molecule model. In both cases, there
is the need for conﬁnement. There are currently two different
methods for achieving this.
The ﬁrst is to use a standard Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor
layer in order to create a two-dimensional electron gas at the
Si-SiO2 interface (Fig. 1a). A change in the voltage applied
to the top metal gate will bend the silicon conduction band,
accumulating electrons at the interface. This allows an easy
control of the electron density and the single electron regime
can potentially be attained in nanoscale structures and a double
dot system can be created from corner states [9]. Conﬁnement
itself is then attained by shaping the gate around a predeﬁned
etched silicon dot or wire and then realizing a FinFET structure
or by reducing the gate length to several tens of nanometers.
In some structures, an additional back-gate can be used and
gives the ability to control independently the electron-electron
interaction and the disorder strength [10]. However, these types
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-431-2
ICQNM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

of devices are in general very susceptible and sensitive to
defects, in particular Pb centers [11] resulting from the lattice
mismatch between silicon and silicon oxide. Reliability of
quantum operations also relies on a high quality oxide and,
in the case of SiO2, it should be free of fast diffusers like
ions (K+, Na+...) or heavy metals (Cu, Au, Cr...) as this
induces localized states at the interface [12]. This is potentially
a problem for quantum computing schemes as this type of traps
tend to localize spins 1/2 at the Si-SiO2 interface.
The other possible method consists in implanting atoms at
high dose and at energies exceeding few tens of keV that
will substitute themselves to silicon atoms. In the case of
phosphorous, the atom is pentavalent whereas silicon atoms
have four covalent bonds (Fig. 1b). This leaves an extra free
electron in the lattice and, at high concentration, this method
provides a sufﬁciently high electron density so that conduction
occurs in the device despite natural silicon being intrinsic
and insulating at low temperatures. In this case, quantum
dots are deﬁned by etching away parts of the doped material
and by realizing two constrictions where tunnel barriers are
most likely to be formed due to the local modiﬁcation of the
electrostatic potential (Fig. 1c). It is important to realize that,
some localized states will still be present even at very high
concentration. This is the results of i) dielectric screening that
enhance electron trapping around Pb centers at the Si-SiO2
interface as well as phosphorous atoms that have diffused
into the oxide during the device process, ii) partial electron
screening at the center of the dot due to non-uniform doping
and long-range disorder due to distant traps. Density of states
for these localized centers is in general small but inﬂuence
greatly transport properties. Here, most of the noise source
arises from defects at the edge of the structure where non-(100)
surfaces are present. Edge localization could be important and
is responsible for the commonly observed aperiodic conduc-
tivity background in quantum dot transport measurements [2].
III. PULSING EXPERIMENTS AND THE DOPANT
DEGENERACY
To operate a qubit, a set of quantum gates have to be deﬁned
so that the Bloch sphere could be entirely accessible and a
pulsing scheme have to be devised. The latter is generally
implemented by a series of DC voltage pulses applied to
one or several gates or a series of microwave pulses at
given frequencies and powers. For both methods, there is
conceptually a major difference between doped and undoped
devices.
A. Undoped devices
In a MOS-based quantum dot, quantum levels are well de-
ﬁned and their energies in the absence of gate or source-drain
biases are generally well approximated within the constant
interaction model [13]:
E =
n
∑
i
niεi + n2e2/2C
(1)
Doped Si
Protective oxide
Metal SiO2
Si
2DEG
CB
EF
200 nm
IDQD
Detector
SiO2 substrate
Si atom
P
e
-
covalent bond
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig. 1. a) 2D electron gas formation in a MOS structure. b)Structure of the
silicon lattice after implantation with phosphorous atoms. c) SEM image
showing an IDQD with its charge detector. d) Typical structure of a doped
device.
Bias
Fig. 2. Photon assisted tunneling in undoped devices.
where ϵi and ni are respectively the single particle state
energies due to the quantum dot energy quantization and the
occupation number of the level i, n the quantum number and
C the capacitance of the quantum dot that is linked to its
diameter R by C = 4πϵ0R where ϵ0 ∼ 11.7 is the dielectric
constant in silicon.
In the case of a DC pulse, the voltage at the end of the gate
modiﬁes the electric potential of the double dot. Quantized
energies then acquire an additional term proportional to the
pulse amplitude and dependent on the capacitive coupling
between the gate and the qubit. This leads to a change in
the structure of the levels that modiﬁes the electron tunneling
between the two dots (localized states) or modiﬁes the double
dot wavefunction (hybridized states).
If photons are to be used for realizing quantum operations,
then the relative position of the levels of each dot remains
unchanged and gets determined by the predeﬁned values
of the gate voltage. Photon assisted tunneling [14] is then
used to perform gate operations. The resonant condition is
obtained when the photon energy matches the difference in
level energies. This effect is much less disturbing for the
double dot as levels are not modiﬁed during the operation
and consequently, this method is less sensitive to the eventual
surrounding traps (Fig. 2)
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-431-2
ICQNM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

rij << 1
Dot 2
a)
b)
c)
Bias
e)
d)
Dot 1
Tunnel
barrier
rij >> 1
Fig. 3. Photon assisted tunneling in doped devices : a) non-equivalent
tunneling, b) Microwave induced tunneling, c)-d) Possible site pairs
involved.
B. Doped devices
In doped devices, the situation is far more complex. The
presence of a narrow band of levels and surrounding traps
lift the degeneracy that would have prevailed in the absence
of disorder. Consequently, not all tunneling events remain
equivalent (Fig. 3a). This makes a substantial difference with
the undoped version of the device. It is important to notice that
degeneracy should be recovered in principle if the temperature
exceeds the average level energy spacing within the band but,
this is not observed in practice. The reason comes from the
bad thermalization of these structures by the phonon bath
due to the phonon wavelength getting smaller than the dot
dimensions (λγ ∼ 26 nm in highly doped silicon at 4.2 K
[15]). As a result, excitations with energies below kBT can
still be observed if the process involves a timescale shorter
than the thermalization time and the longitudinal relaxation
time T1.
One consequence on DC pulsing, is that the pair of
sites involved in the tunneling may not be the same if the
experiment is repeated under the same conditions despite
a single charge being transferred across the tunnel barrier
each time. Although semi-classical operations like quantum-
cellular-automata could be preformed with high probability,
coherence may be affected in the quantum case. However, the
situation is much different with photons. Indeed, it has been
proposed recently [16] that, in doped devices, microwave pho-
tons can both select a pair of sites by their energy difference
but also by their spatial location, so that the resonant condition
differs sensibly from the usual photon assisted tunneling’s by
the addition of a interaction term (Fig. 3b):
hν = Ej − Ei − e2/(4πϵ0rij) exp(−rij/λTF)
(2)
λTF ∼ n−1/2
e
is the Thomas-Fermi screening length and
takes into account the presence and inﬂuence of the other
electrons at a density of ne. Ei and Ej are the respective level
1
10
100
12.400
12.405
12.410
 
dtunnel barrier ~10 nm
Ei-Ej (µeV)
rij (nm)
hν = 3 GHz
dP-P ~ 2 nm
Possible solutions
Fig. 4. Solutions of Eq. 2 for a 10 nm tunnel barrier and hν = 3 GHz.
energies of site i and j whereas rij is the distance between
the two sites.
If the two sites are spatially distant, the Coulomb term
becomes negligible and resonance frequencies in the GHz
range imply a substantial difference in levels energies. This
situation can be encountered mostly at the edge of the structure
where localized states and disorder are present and so, where
the density of states has long tails (Fig. 3c). At the center of
the dots, the individual wavefunctions overlap quite signiﬁ-
cantly leading to an effective screening by other surrounding
electrons. Consequently, strong localization seems unlikely.
However, the presence of acceptors (for example Boron that
is used in p-type silicon wafer as background doping) that are
trivalent and can consequently create a vacant site in silicon,
can locally affect electron screening and weak localization is
possible around such a defect. This would allow electrons to
tunnel between two sites at the center of the dot (Fig. 3d).
Indeed, recent simulations have shown that, in the case of
trap formation at the center of the dot, electron screening is
only partial.
On the contrary, if the sites are spatially close then Coulomb
interaction is strong and sites involved are most likely located
at or near the tunnel barriers (Fig. 3e).
C. Site pair selection and effect on coherence
Microwave pulsing is particularly adapted to doped struc-
tures due to its ability to select pairs of sites within a highly
doped environment. However, for quantum computation, high
ﬁdelity has to be achieved and coherence time should be as
long as possible, so the active pair has to be isolated from
all the other possible pairs for at least T1. The apparent
difﬁculty in achieving this comes from the fact that the solution
of equation 2 is, a priori, not unique and that the number
of possible pairs depends both on the trap distribution and
the disorder strength, e.g. the shape of the density of states
of the localized states. Figure 4 shows possible solutions of
Eq. 2 allowing charge tunneling between the two IDQD dots
separated by a 10-nm tunnel barrier in the case hν = 3
GHz. This is in contrast with experimental ﬁndings where the
uniqueness of the pair and long coherence times have been
previously reported [16],[17].
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-431-2
ICQNM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

In the case of a double quantum dot, the two high electron
density regions are separated by a tunnel barrier and, to realize
a σx rotation, a pair of sites have to be found on either sides
of the tunnel barrier. With the exception of localized states
at the edges of the structure or lattice defects, these pairs are
mostly non-interacting owing to the large distance between the
two sites and screening in the high density regions. However,
we can show that single electron tunneling between the two
IDQD dots is still possible in the case of weakly localized and
screened states. In this case, the situation is indeed very similar
to how microwaves can select a resonant pair of Rydberg
atoms within a large ensemble and how the population of
excited states is limited, in practice [18]. In the present case,
microwaves can be used to excite one electron from one site
i in one of the dot to a higher level (excited states or virtual
states) where Coulomb interaction with the other vacant site
j from the other dot is unscreened. This microwave-induced
interaction adds the Coulomb term e2/rij that was initially
screened. The other possible pairs (k, k’) now becomes non-
resonant allowing many oscillations to occur between the
two sites before loss of coherence. This phenomenon is well
known as dipole blockade. At sufﬁciently short distances,
dipole interaction may be non-negligible and additional terms
in 1/r3
ij may need to be taken into account. Considering that
the limiting factor will either be the electron-phonon coupling
strength or the timescale for interaction with the surrounding
electrons, both being respectively weak and long in this type
of device, the coherence time could potentially be as large as
2T1. Yet, the experimental value of T1 is surprisingly large and
can exceed several 100 µs [19] due to the glassy behavior of
doped materials. Consequently, it is possible to envision that
the coherence time T2 could be as large as 200 µs despite
the very high doping concentration. Current experiments are
actually ongoing to investigate this possibility.
IV. CONCLUSION
We have shown that doped double quantum dots can offer
interesting opportunities for optical manipulation in the mi-
crowave range by allowing to address a single pair of donors
individually located in each dot of a double quantum dot
structure. Surprisingly, the process is coherent with a large
coherence time due to microwave-induced blockade for the
other possible states. Such a selection process for a pair of
sites can thus potentially be extended to the realization of spin
qubits in a dopant-rich environment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grants-
in-Aid (Nos. 26709023, 26630151, and 26249048), and the
Project for Developing Innovation Systems of the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT)
of Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Ferrus, A. Rossi, A. Andreev, P. Chapman, and D. A. Williams,
Quantum Computing with Charge States in Silicon : Towards a Leadless
Approach, 5th International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro
Technologies, 2011, pp 41.
[2] T.
Ferrus,
A.
Rossi,
M.
Tanner,
G.
Podd,
P.
Chapman,
and
D. A. Williams, Detection of charge motion in a non-metallic silicon
isolated double quantum dot, New J. Phys., vol 13, no 10, 2011, pp
103012.
[3] A. Rossi, T. Ferrus, G. J. Podd, and D. A. Williams, Charge Detection
in Phosphorus-doped Silicon Double Quantum Dots, Appl. Phys. Lett.,
vol 97, 2010, pp. 223506.
[4] A. Rossi, T. Ferrus, and D. A. Williams, Electron temperature in
electrically isolated Si double quantum dots, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol 100,
no 13, 2012, pp. 133503.
[5] G. Moore, Cramming More Components onto Integrated Circuits, Elec-
tronics Magazine, vol. 38, No. 8, 1965
[6] H. Sellier, et al, Transport Spectroscopy of a Single Dopant in a
Gated Silicon Nanowire, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol 97, 2006, pp 206805;
V. Deshpande, et al, Scaling of Trigate Nanowire (NW) MOSFETs
Down to 5 nm Width: 300 K Transition to Single Electron Transistor,
Challenges and Opportunities, Solid-State Device Research Conference
(ESSDERC), 2012 Proceedings of the European , 2012, pp.121,124.
[7] S. Bogdanovich and D. Popovic, Onset of Glassy Dynamics in a Two-
Dimensional Electron System in Silicon, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol 88, 2002,
pp 236401.
[8] J. J. Pla, et al, High-ﬁdelity readout and control of a nuclear spin qubit
in silicon, Nature, vol 496, no 7445, 2013, pp 334-338.
[9] M. F. Gonzalez-Zalba, S. Barraud, A. J. Ferguson and A. C. Betz, Prob-
ing the limits of gate-based charge sensing, Nature Communications, vol
6, 2015, pp 6084.
[10] A. Lewalle, et al, Relative importance of the electron interaction strength
and disorder in the two-dimensional metallic state, Phys. Rev. B, vol
66, 2002, pp 075324.
[11] G. J. Gerardi, E. H. Poindexter, P. J. Caplan and N. M. Johnson, Interface
traps and Pb centers in oxidized (100) silicon wafers, Appl Phys Lett,
vol 49, 1986, pp 348-350.
[12] T. Ferrus, R. George, C. H. W. Barnes and M. Pepper, Disorder and elec-
tron interaction control in low-doped silicon metal-oxide-semiconductor
ﬁeld effect transistors, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol 97, no 14, 2010, pp 142108.
[13] C. W. J. Beenaker,
Theory of Coulomb-blockade oscillations in the
conductance of a quantum dot, Phys. Rev. B 44, vol 4, 1991, pp 1646-
1656. D. V. Averin, A. N. Korotkov, and K. K. Likharev,
Theory of
single-electron charging of quantum wells and dots, Phys. Rev. B 44, vol
12, 1991, pp 6199-6211. S. Oda and D. Ferry, Silicon nanoelectronics,
Taylor and Francis, CRC Press, 2006, pp 159-160.
[14] L. P. Kouwenhoven, et al, Photon-assisted tunneling through a quantum
dot, Phys. Rev. B, vol 50, 1994, pp 2019-2022; G. Platero and R.
Aguado, Photon-assisted transport in semiconductor nanostructures,
Physics Reports, vol 395, 2004, pp 1-157.
[15] J. Seyler and M. N. Wybourne, Acoustic waveguide modes observed
in electrically heated metal wires, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol 69, 1992, pp
1427-1430.
[16] T. Ferrus, et al, GHz photon-activated hopping between localized states
in a silicon quantum dot, New J. Phys., vol 16, no 1, 2014, pp 013016.
[17] J. Gorman, D. G. Hasko, and D. A. Williams, Charge qubit operation
of an isolated double quantum dot, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol 95, 2005, pp
090502.
[18] M. D. Lukin, et al, Dipole Blockade and Quantum Information Process-
ing in Mesoscopic Atomic Ensembles, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol 87, 2001,
pp 037901; E. Urban, et al, Observation of Rydberg blockade between
two atoms, Nat. Phys., vol 5, 2009, pp 110; M. Weidemuller, Rydberg
atoms: There can be only one, Nature Physics 5, 2009, pp 91-92.
[19] T. Ferrus, et al Cryogenic instrumentation for fast current measurement
in a silicon single electron transistor, J. Appl. Phys., vol 106, 2009, pp.
033705.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-431-2
ICQNM 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

