Dry Film Resist Microfluidic Channels on Printed Circuit Board and its Application 
as Fluidic Interconnection for Nanofluidic Chips: Fabrication Challenges 
 
N. B. Palacios-Aguilera, J. Bastemeijer,                
J. R. Mollinger, A. Bossche 
Electronic Instrumentation Laboratory 
Delft University of Technology 
Mekelweg 4,  
2628CD Delft, the Netherlands 
n.b.palaciosaguilera@tudelft.nl, 
j.bastemeijer@tudelft.nl, j.r.mollinger@tudelft.nl, 
a.bossche@tudelft.nl 
V. R. S. S. Mokkapati 
Nanosystems, Health and Environment Department 
Austrian Institute of Technology 
Donau city strasse 1 
1220 Vienna, Austria 
v.r.s.s.mokkapati.fl@ait.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, nanofluidic chips are usually fabricated 
with silicon and/or glass. A simple and reliable integration 
packaging method that provides fluidic interconnection to the 
outside world has not been yet fully developed. The use of PCB 
material as substrate to create dry film resist microfluidic 
channels is the core technology to provide such an integration 
method. The feasibility and potential of the proposed 
packaging method is demonstrated in this work. 
Keywords-dry film resist; fluidic interconnection; printed 
circuit board; nanofluidic channels, integration 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Microfluidic devices fabricated with dry film resist 
(DFR) and silicon (Si) and/or glass substrate have been 
reported [2, 3, 5]. Moreover, nanofluidic devices are usually 
fabricated with silicon and/or glass [1, 3, 7, 8, 9]; even if 
nanoimprint technologies are used to fabricate them, a rigid 
substrate (usually glass) is required [10, 11].  
The use of silicon and/or glass to build fluidic systems 
elevates their cost [6]. Furthermore, the reliable fluidic 
connection of nanofluidic devices to the outside world still 
needs to be optimized in order to reduce costs and simplify 
the fabrication process. 
A low-cost fabrication method for microfluidic channels 
as fluidic interconnection for nanofluidic chips is here 
presented. Printed circuit board (PCB) material is proposed 
as the substrate to laminate DFR for the fluidic 
interconnections.  
Following this approach, the fluidic chip can be kept 
small thus decreasing its cost. Furthermore, the low-cost 
PCB facilitates the fluidic and electrical connections to the 
outside world allowing the integration of micro- and 
nanodevices in a simple and fast way. 
In this work, the principle of the packaging integration 
technology is explained. In Section III, the physical 
properties of the materials used are presented. In Section IV, 
the fabrication process is detailed. Then, the challenges 
associated with the fabrication process are treated; first the 
challenges associated with the fabrication of DFR fluidic 
channels on PCB, then, the challenges associated with the 
use of different materials as a substrate. Finally, the devices 
are tested against leakage and the compatibility of the 
materials is studied by means of a thermal shock test in order 
to determine delamination.  
II. 
PRINCIPLE 
The key material enabling the use of DFR microfluidic 
channels on PCB for its use as the fluidic interconnection of 
nanofluidic chips is a nonconductive adhesive (NCA). Figure 
1 shows a schematic of the concept. 
 
Figure 1.  Schematic of the interconnection of nanofluidic chips by means 
of dry film resist channels on top of PCB material. 
The already fabricated nanofluidic chips are inlaid on the 
PCB material by means of a NCA. The fluidic chip(s) 
together with the PCB material compose the substrate. 
Finally, the lamination of dry film resist on top of the 
substrate allows fabricating the microfluidic channels that 
interconnect the nanofluidic chips to the outside world. 
Concerning the electric access to the nanofluidic chip(s), 
ink-jet printed interconnection lines can be applied between 
the electronic contacts of the fluidic chips and the pads on 
the PCB. This latter topic however is not treated in this 
paper. 
III. 
MATERIALS 
TMMF dry film resist poses a unique stability when in 
contact with alkaline solutions and acids [3, 5] and provides 
high resolution and aspect ratios [2, 5] making it the resist of 
choice for the fabrication of microfluidic channels. 
71
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

The DFR used to fabricate the microfluidic channels is 
TMMF S2030, a permanent photoresist for MEMS from 
Tokyo Ohka Kogyo Co., Ltd. This negative photoresist is 
composed 5% of antimony compound and 95% of epoxy 
resin [2, 3]. 
Furthermore, the PCB material used as mechanical 
support for the whole system is Rogers RO4003C, a glass 
reinforced hydrocarbon laminate with low roughness 
characteristics. 
Table 1 shows the physical characteristics of TMMF 
S2030 and Rogers RO4003C. 
TABLE I.  
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF TMMF S2030 AND ROGERS 
RO4003C [2, 13] 
Physical Properties of TMMF S2030 and Rogers RO4003C 
Physical Property 
TMMF S2030 
Rogers 
RO4003C 
Coefficient 
of 
thermal 
expansion 
(ppm/°C) 
65 
X 11 
Y 14 
Z 46 
Transition glass temperature (°C) 
230 
>280 
Moisture absorption (%) 
1.8 
0.06 
Dielectric constant 
3.8 
3.38±0.005 
Transparency (nm) 
400-600 
- 
Breaking strength (MPa) 
60.3 
- 
Young modulus (MPa) 
2100 
26.889 
 
The NCA used to glue the fluidic chip to the PCB 
material is a colorless epoxy-based adhesive with a glass 
transition temperature (Tg) of 45 °C and a coefficient of 
thermal expansion (CTE) of 56 ppm/°C when below the 
glass transition temperature, and 211 ppm/°C when above 
the glass transition temperature. 
IV. 
FABRICATION PROCESS 
The very first step to proceed to the fabrication of the 
TMMF microfluidic channels on top of PCB material for the 
fluidic interconnection of nanochips is to form the substrate 
composed by the PCB and the fluidic chip(s). Figure 2 
illustrates this process. 
According to Figure 2, to align the PCB material and the 
nanofluidic chip a double side Kapton tape is rolled in a 
silicon wafer or glass (a). The PCB and the chip are mounted 
on the Kapton tape (b). The epoxy-based adhesive is 
dispensed in the space between the PCB material and the 
chip (c). The materials are placed in an oven or hot plate at 
80 °C for 3 hours to cure the adhesive (d). When the 
adhesive is totally cured, the materials are left at room 
temperature for a while to allow them to cool down. The new 
substrate consisting of the chip inlaid in the PCB material is 
removed from the Kapton tape (e). 
The second stage of the fabrication process consists in 
laminating the TMMF microfluidic channels on top of the 
formed substrate. Figure 3 shows the flowchart for this 
process. 
 
Figure 2.  PCB material and nanofluidic chip leveling process flow chart. 
 
Figure 3.  TMMF microfluidic channels lamination on top of the formed 
substrate. 
72
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

The substrate is cleaned with ethanol, dried on a hotplate 
for 2 hours at 120 °C (f). This will avoid that the humidity 
absorbed by the PCB material affects the DFR lamination 
process. An oxygen plasma treatment is performed to the 
substrate in order to improve the adhesion between the 
TMMF resist and the formed substrate.  
The substrate is kept at 45 °C. One of the polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET) protective layers is removed from the 
DFR and the TMMF resist is laminated on the substrate (g). 
The other PET layer is removed after the sample has cooled 
down. A soft baking step is performed at 90 °C during 5 
minutes. The exposure is performed after the sample cools 
down to room temperature. A post exposure baking step is 
performed with the same temperature and time as the soft 
baking step. The TMMF is developed with PGMEA after the 
sample has cooled down to room temperature (i).  A second 
layer of TMMF is laminated at 45 °C in order to close the 
microfluidic channels. The second layer is exposed after 
lamination without removing the remaining PET layer. The 
sample is cured at room temperature during one day. The 
PET layer is removed and access holes to the channel are 
punched with the help of a needle (j). Tests are conducted. 
V. 
CHALLENGES ASSOCIATED WITH THE FABRICATION 
PROCESS 
Here, the challenges encountered are grouped by: 
• 
Challenges associated with the lamination of 
TMMF on PCB material. 
• 
Challenges associated with the TMMF lamination 
on top of the fluidic chips. 
A. TMMF and Rogers  
The challenges associated with the processing of TMMF 
resist on Rogers materials are: pinholes in the photoresist, 
trapped bubbles between the resist and the PCB material, 
cracks in the photoresist, and closed channels. 
a) Pinholes: TMMF might present pinholes after the 
soft baking step.  
 
Figure 4.  PCB material immersed under water prior to TMMF lamination 
(left) and PCB material dried at 120 °C prior to TMMF lamination (right). 
The presence of pinholes on the TMMF resist after soft baking is 
influenced by the moisture absorbed by the PCB. 
Experiments were conducted, and up to some extent, the 
pinholes can be decreased by using a plasma treatment, 
nevertheless, the crucial factor determining their presence is 
the moisture absorbed by the PCB material. 
Figure 4 shows two PCB materials where TMMF was 
laminated and soft baked. In the sample on the left side, the 
PCB material was immersed in water during 2 hours and its 
surface was dried with nitrogen prior to TMMF lamination. 
In the specimen on the right, the PCB material was placed on 
a hotplate during 2 hours at 120 °C in order to evaporate the 
absorbed moisture prior to TMMF lamination. 
b) Trapped 
bubbles 
and 
cracks: 
Conducted 
experiments show that if the baking times are either higher 
or lower than the optimal time and the PCB material 
contains humidity absorbed from the atmosphere, trapped 
bubbles and cracks will form in the photoresist structures. 
The formation of trapped bubbles is directly related to the 
humidity absorbed by the PCB material and the use of 
inadequate baking times. The formation of cracks is related 
to the thermal stresses that result from a forced cooling 
down of  the specimens after the baking steps and improper 
baking times. Furthermore, the humidity absorbed by the 
PCB material promotes the formation of cracks. 
  
Figure 5.  Trapped bubbles between the TMMF resist and the PCB 
material and cracks due to the humidity absorbed by the PCB material and 
the improper baking times used for processing of the TMMF. 
Figure 5 shows trapped bubbles between the TMMF and 
the PCB material as well as cracks in the dry film resist 
structures. The PCB material used for this experiment was 
not dried prior to TMMF lamination. Moreover, the baking 
times used in the processing were not optimal. 
 
73
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

 
Figure 6.  Cracks in the TMMF structures with angles close to 90 °C. The 
circle in the image points the crack.The cracks are caused by the use of not 
optimal baking times.  
Figure 6 shows a crack in the photoresist structure, but 
no trapped bubbles. The PCB material used for this 
experiment was dried prior to TMMF lamination, 
nevertheless, the baking times were not optimal. 
c) Closed channels: The exposure time should be 
controlled accurately when working with Rogers’ materials. 
The effects of an underexposed resist, as Figure 7 shows, 
are well known. On the other hand, overexposure can result 
in partially or totally closed fluidic channels. 
 
Figure 7.  Effects of insufficient exposure time. The circle points an 
obvios underexposure effect on the TMMF structure. 
Scattering and diffraction of ultraviolet (UV) light during 
exposure is unavoidable when using a nontransparent 
material. Furthermore, the white color of the PCB material 
makes reflection of the waves a bigger problem. 
 
Figure 8.  Closed channels on PCB material due to overexposure of the 
TMMF resist. The arrow in the left image points the effects of an 
overexposure of 2 seconds. The arrow in the right image points the effects 
of an overexposure of 6 seconds. 
The more a sample is overexposed, the more closed the 
channels will be. Figure 8 shows a sample overexposed by 2 
seconds (left) and a sample overexposed by 6 seconds 
(right).  
B. TMMF and the nanofluidic chips 
Nanofluidic chips are usually made of glass and/or 
silicon. PCB material and Si poses different thermal 
characteristics. The thermal conductivity of the PCB material 
is approximately 0.71 W/m/°K [13] and the thermal 
conductivity of Si is around 140 W/m/°K [12].  Due to the 
thermal characteristics of the materials, heat transport at the 
baking steps is not a problem for the PCB material but it is 
for the Si fluidic chip. 
The most common problem associated with the 
lamination of TMMF on silicon is cracks due to heat 
transport at the baking steps and the CTE [3]. Figure 9 
illustrates this problem. 
 
Figure 9.  Cracks in the TMMF resist due to the CTEs difference between 
silicon and the TMMF resist. 
When the PCB material and the fluidic chip are of almost 
the same thickness, the microfluidic chip will conduct heat 
around 25 times more than the PCB material. Therefore, 
placing the substrate directly at 90 °C during the baking 
steps will originate cracks on the TMMF laminated over the 
fluidic chip. To solve this, the temperature needs to be 
ramped (2 °C/min) starting at 55 °C during the baking steps, 
74
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

when the temperature reaches 90 °C the samples are baked 5 
minutes. Afterwards the hot plate’s temperature is set to 25 
°C and the sample is removed from the hot plate when the 25 
°C is reached. 
Furthermore, if the fluidic chip is considerably thinner 
than the PCB material, the substrate can be placed directly at 
90 °C. In this case, the thermal conductivity of the air 
between the chip and the hot plate will limit the heat flux to 
the chip, avoiding the presence of cracks on the TMMF. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENT SETUP 
In order to test the feasibility of the proposed 
interconnection technology, a leakage test was conducted to 
the devices together with a reliability test. 
The leakage test consists of injecting a rodhamine + 
ethanol + di water solution in the TMMF channels through 
one of the inlets. A visual inspection follows to detect any 
leakage. Special attention is given to the interconnection area 
between the different materials.  Figure 10 shows the 
mentioned interconnection area before closing the TMMF 
channels. 
 
Figure 10.  Close up of the interface between the different materials that 
form the fluidic interconnections to the nanofluidic chips. 
The reliability test consists of a thermal shock test based 
on the MIL–STD–883C. The purpose of this test is to 
accelerate the appearance of delamination and cracks. The 
test consists of 15 cycles where each cycle is composed by a 
high temperature and a low temperature step. The high 
temperature step is performed at 100 °C (+10 °C, -2 °C) and 
the low temperature step at 0 °C (+2 °C, -10 °C). Each step 
is performed for 5 minutes. The liquid used to perform the 
test is water. After completing the test, a visual inspection is 
performed at a magnification no greater than 3x [4]. 
VII. RESULTS 
In this section, the results are presented in three 
subsections. First the results concerning the lamination of 
TMMF on PCB material are presented. Then the leakage test 
results are exposed. Finally, the results concerning the 
compatibility of the different materials and the reliability of 
the packaging method are presented. 
A. TMMF resist channels on PCB material  
To obtain good results fabricating microfluidic channels 
on PCB materials some factors should be kept in mind.  The 
baking times provided by the companies are optimal, 
nevertheless, different materials conduct the heat in a 
different rate, and therefore, the material temperatures might 
deviate from the prescribed temperature, especially when 
using a hot plate. Furthermore, PCB materials are more 
reflective than silicon or glass; because of this the exposure 
time should be tuned accurately, if channels of less than <20 
µm are desired, this parameter is critical.  
 
Figure 11.  Microfluidic channels on PCB material. The image shows the 
results of optima processing parameters (exposure and baking times). 
Figure 11 shows a TMMF structure on PCB material 
fabricated with optimal exposure and baking times.  
B. Leakage test 
Concerning the leakage test, Figure 12 shows a device 
with the packaging technology presented in this work.  
 
Figure 12.  TMMF microfludic channels on PCB material as fluidic 
interconnections for nanofluidic chips. The small image in the lower left 
corner zooms in at the interface of the different materials that compose the 
device; it shows no leakage of the rodhamine solution. 
The pink liquid flowing through the TMMF channel is a 
solution of rodhamine + ethanol + di water. It is possible to 
75
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

observe that no leakage occurs. The small image at the lower 
corner in the left was obtained with a 1X71 Olympus 
inverted microscope equipped with a los noise self cooling 
CCD camera (color view II, Olympus); it shows, with 10x 
magnification, the area where the different materials 
interconnect. It is possible to observe the liquid solution 
flowing through the TMMF channel without leakage.  
C. Reliability test 
Figure 13 shows a device without closed channels after 
the thermal shock test. 
 
Figure 13.  TMMF delamination on top of the Si chip after the thermal 
shock test. The circle points at the place where the delamination occurs. 
The red circle makes emphasis on a failure result from 
the test. Delamination of TMMF occurs on top of the fluidic 
chip. From the 3 tested specimens, the failure was observed 
only in the specimen from Figure 13. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The use of TMMF resists for the fabrication of 
microfluidic channels on PCB as fluidic interconnections of 
nanofluidic chips to the outside world is feasible, providing 
of simplicity the fabrication process. 
The thermal shock reliability test showed that the use of 
high temperature conditions could bring delamination 
problems mainly at the interface TMMF–Si chip. This means 
that the strength of the TMMF microfluidic interconnections 
decreases and so the probability of leakage increases. 
Further work includes the study of the usability of ink-jet 
printing to create the electrical interconnections between the 
fluidic chip electrodes and the PCB tracks. The PCB in turn 
can carry the necessary electronics for control and read-out. 
This will enable the PCB as the core for the integration of 
micro- and nanofluidic chips together with the electronics 
into a complex system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the Delft Institute of Microsystems 
and Nanoelectronics (Dimes) staff for their valuable help. 
Furthermore, the authors thank Rogers Corporation for 
providing low-roughness Rogers’ material free of cost and 
Tokyo Ohka Kogyo Co., Ltd. for providing TMMF S2030 
resist to develop this research. This work is supported by the 
Dutch Technology Foundation STW. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. T. Nguten and S. T. Wereley., “Fundamentals and 
applications of microfluidics”, Artech House Publishers, 
2002, pp. 67-129. 
[2] L. Zhang, Thesis: “Bioparticle separation in microfluidic 
devices for in-line application”, Delft University of 
Technology, Delft, the Netherlands, 2009, pp.112-113. 
[3] V. R. S. S. Mokkapati, “Micro and nanofluidic devices for 
single cell and DNA analysis”, Delft University of 
Technology, Delft, the Netherlands, 2011. 
[4] Military 
standard: 
test 
methods 
and procedures 
for 
microelectronics MIL-STD-883C notice 6, August 1987. 
[5] U. Stöhr, P. Vulto, P. Hoppe, G. Urban and H. Reinecke, 
“High-resolution 
permanent 
photoresist 
laminate 
for 
microsystem 
applications”, 
J. 
Micro/Nanolith. 
MEMS 
MOEMS, vol. 7(3), Jul.-Sep. 2008, doi: 10.1117/1.2964217. 
[6] K. Kalkandjiev et al, “Microfluidics in silicon/polymer 
technology as a cost-efficient alternative to silicon/glass”, 
Journal of micromechanics and microengineering, Vol. 21, 
2011, doi:10.1088/0960-1317/21/2/025008. 
[7] K. Wang et al, “Nanofluidic channels fabrication and 
manipulation 
of 
DNA 
molecules”, 
IEE 
Proceedings 
Nanobiotechnology, 
Vol. 
153, 
No. 
1, 
Feb. 
2006, 
doi:10.1049/ip-nbt:20050044. 
[8] C. Song and P. Wang, “Fabrication of sub-10 nm planar 
nanofluidic channels through native oxide etch and anodic 
wafer bonding”,  IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology, Vol 
9, No. 2, Mar. 2010, doi:10.1109/TNANO.2009.2038377. 
[9] C. Wu et al, “Design and fabrication of a nanofluidic channel 
by selective thermal oxidation and etching back of silicon 
dioxide 
made 
on 
a 
silicon 
substrate”, 
Journal 
of 
Micromechanics and Microengineering, Vol 17, 2007, 
doi:10.1088/0960-1317/17/12/001. 
[10] L. J. Guo, X. Cheng and C. Chou, “ Fabrication of size-
controllable nanofluidic channels by nanoimprinting and its 
application for DNA stretching”, Nanoletters, Vol. 4, No. 1, 
2004. 
[11] R. Yang et al, “Fabrication of micro/nano fluidic channels by 
nanoimprint 
lithography 
and 
bonding 
using 
SU-8”, 
Microelectronic 
Engineering, 
2009, 
doi:10.1016/j.mee.2009.02.002, Article in Press. 
[12] H. R. Shanks et al, “Thermal conductivity of silicon from 300 
to 1400 °K”, Phys. Rev. (USA), Vol. 130, No. 5, pp. 1743–
1748, 1963. 
[13] Rogers Corporation Avanced Circuit Materiaals, “RO4000® 
laminates 
– 
data 
sheet”, 
Retrieved 
from 
http://rogerscorp.com/acm/products/16/RO4000-Series-High-
Frequency-Circuit-Materials-Woven-glass-reinforced-
ceramic-filled-thermoset.aspx on January 20th 2011. 
 
 
76
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

