Rotating magnetic field assisted formation of highly ordered two-dimensional 
magnetic bead arrays 
 
Frank Wittbracht, Bernhard Eickenberg, Andreas 
Hütten 
Department of Physics, Thin Films and Physics of 
Nanostructures 
Bielefeld University 
Bielefeld, Germany 
fwittbra@physik.uni-bielefeld.de 
Alexander Weddemann 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, Research Laboratory of Electronics/Laboratory 
for Electromagnetic and Electronic Systems 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, United States 
 
 
Abstract—The authors present a method for the formation of 
highly ordered two-dimensional arrays of magnetic beads 
based on dipolar particle interactions in rotating magnetic 
fields. Growth mechanisms of the arrays inside the carrier 
liquid are presented. After evaporation of the carrier liquid, 
the resulting bead monolayers on silicon substrates are 
analyzed with respect to size and defect structure.  
Keywords- magnetic bead arrays; formation of bead 
monolayers; rotating magnetic fields 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Magnetic beads and nanoparticles are promising 
candidates for various lab-on-a-chip applications [1-3]. Their 
magnetic moments allow for the manipulation by external 
magnetic gradient fields [4, 5]. Detection of magnetic beads 
or nanoparticles may be achieved by the use of 
magnetoresistive sensors due to their magnetic stray field 
[6]. When combined with appropriate functional groups on 
the surfaces, the individual magnetic bead or particle may act 
as markers for biological or chemical analytes. For these 
applications, low particle concentrations have to be applied 
in order to prevent particle coupling based on dipolar 
interactions.  
If superparamagnetic beads are suspended in a liquid and 
immersed in a homogeneous external magnetic field, a 
torque acts on their magnetic moment vector favoring 
parallel alignment with the external field orientation. Since 
the external magnetic field is homogeneous, no magnetic 
force is acting on the particle ensemble. However, in the case 
of high particle concentrations, the inhomogeneous magnetic 
stray field of neighboring particles leads to an attractive 
force, which entails the formation of one-dimensional 
agglomerates [7]. These one-dimensional assemblies may be 
used as, e.g. static components in on-chip sandwich 
immunoassays [8] or as dynamic components in micropumps 
driven by magnetic gradient fields [9]. Magnetic assemblies 
may also be influenced by rotating magnetic fields allowing 
for stable rotations depending on the applied field frequency 
[10]. Higher rotation frequencies of the external magnetic 
field lead to higher shear stresses along the bead chains due 
to the hydrodynamic interaction with the carrier liquid. At 
higher shear stresses the probability for chain collapse is 
enhanced [11]. Therefore, two dimensional assemblies of 
magnetic beads may be formed. This work will focus on the 
growth of such two-dimensional bead arrays and analyzes 
the size of resulting monolayers after evaporation of the 
carrier liquid.  
In this contribution we describe the experimental 
techniques to generate magnetic bead assemblies based on 
dipolar particle interactions in rotating magnetic fields. 
Furthermore, the resulting monolayers are analyzed with 
respect to symmetry, growth modes and sizes of the resulting 
monolayers in dependence of the particle concentration. 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
Superparamagnetic microbeads Dynabeads M-270 SA 
[12] were used in the experiments. These microbeads have a 
radius of 1.4 µm with a standard deviation below 2% and 
are coated with a streptavidin functionalization. The iron 
content of these beads is 14%. In order to avoid salt 
crystallization after liquid evaporation, the buffer of the 
stock solution was exchanged with deionized water by 
subsequent centrifugation and resuspension. Two different 
suspensions at 0.2 and 1.0 mg/ml were prepared. The 
rotating magnetic field was created by a magnetic stirrer 
RCT classic (IKA, Germany) at a maximum field strength 
of 330 Oe. At this field strength a linear response of the 
magnetization in dependence of the external magnetic field 
is expected according to the magnetic characterization of the 
beads [13]. Assemblies were performed on a silicon wafer, 
which was cleaned with acetone and ethanol prior to 
spotting the solutions. Optical microscopy images were 
collected with a Keyence VHX-600 during formation of the 
agglomerates and after liquid evaporation. Rotation 
frequencies of 400, 800 and 1200 rounds per minute (rpm) 
are applied. 
The microscopy data is evaluated with respect to 
agglomerate sizes based on the analysis of pixels at a 
defined color value within a certain area. The expected error 
of this counting method is about 2.43% when compared to 
manual counting of magnetic beads. Furthermore, the defect 
concentrations are obtained by manual counting of one-
99
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

dimensional and two-dimensional defects within the bead 
arrays. 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
After spotting the microbead solutions, the rotational 
magnetic field entails the formation of two-dimensional 
agglomerates due to stray field interaction. In Fig. 1 a 
typical resulting cluster is shown. The in-plane rotating 
magnetic field strongly favors the growth of two-
dimensional 
agglomerates 
over 
three-dimensional 
assemblies. From Fig. 1(a) we can identify a hexagonal 
symmetry for the agglomerates which is also reproduced in 
the fast Fourier transform (FFT) image of Fig. 1(a) as 
presented in Fig. 1(b). The Voronoi tessellation of Fig. 1(a) 
is shown in Fig. 1(c), where Voronoi cells with 4, 5, 6 and 7 
neighbors are dyed in yellow, red, white and green, 
respectively. The Voronoi tessellation also shows the high 
degree of hexagonal ordering inside the clusters, but 
additionally reproduces the frustration along the edge of the 
cluster and the two vacancies in the middle of the cluster 
shown in Fig. 1(a). The formation of clusters can be 
described as a two step process. In the first step collapsing 
chains form agglomeration seeds, comparable to nucleation 
in nanoparticle synthesis [14]. In the second step, these 
nuclei grow at the cost of chains and single particles. Chain 
addition to previously formed clusters corresponds to a slow 
growth mode which entails the formation of highly ordered 
arrays with low defect concentration. Besides, also merging 
of clusters can be observed, which is exemplarily shown in a 
series of microscopy images in Fig. 2. Neighboring clusters 
merge due to attractive magnetic forces. The rotating 
magnetic field entails reordering processes along the cluster-
cluster interface in order to obtain a stable magnetic 
configuration. However, due to the larger areas of broken 
symmetry along the boundaries, the merging of clusters may 
lead to a higher concentration in the bead arrays when 
compared to the growth based on chain addition. During 
evaporation of the carrier liquid superstructures are 
transferred to the substrate. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Optical microscopy image of a highly ordered two-dimensional 
assembly under the influence of a magnetic field rotating at 400 rpm (a). 
FFT of (a) showing the hexagonal symmetry of the assemblies and the high 
degree of ordering (b). Voronoi tessellation of (a) where cells with 4-, 5-, 
6- and 7-fold symmetry are dyed in yellow, red, white and green, 
respectively. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Series of optical microscopy images showing the merging of 
previously formed clusters under the influence of a rotating magnetic field 
at a frequency of 400 rpm. 
 
The resulting structures are exemplarily shown in Fig. 3 
for the case of three subsequent 
spotting procedures of a 1 mg/ml bead solution. If no 
magnetic field is applied (Fig. 3(a)), a randomly dispersed 
pattern of superstructures and single particles is obtained, 
which shows no visible ordering. The FFT of the image also 
reproduces this finding: no sharp peaks can be observed in 
the FFT pattern (Inset of Fig. 3(a)). In contrast, the sample 
which was prepared under the influence of a rotating 
magnetic field with a frequency of 400 rpm clearly shows 
hexagonal ordering (Fig. 3(b)) in the microscopy image and 
the corresponding FFT pattern (Inset of Fig. 3(b)). Fig. 3(b) 
shows one cluster with low particle coverage in the second 
layer. An analysis of the second layer growth shows that the 
second layer coverage of clusters assembled under the 
influence of a rotating magnetic field is below 5%. The 
quantitative evaluation of the cluster sizes for different 
experimental parameters is depicted in Fig. 4(a). The inset 
of Fig. 4(a) shows the agglomerate sizes without the 
influence of the magnetic field. For both of the investigated 
concentrations, an increase in the cluster size by applying a 
rotating magnetic field when compared to the reference 
sample (inset) is obtained. The iterative supply of bead 
solution in order to enhance the effective bead concentration 
on the substrate may lead to a shift of the cluster sizes to 
higher particle numbers. This particular aspect of the cluster 
growth mechanism resembles the behavior of nanoparticles 
in the growth regime of Ostwald ripening [15]. The 
assembly of few larger particle arrays is favored over the 
formation of many small clusters. According to our 
experiments, the rotation frequency of the magnetic field 
does not influence the size of the resulting agglomerates. 
However, the defect concentrations show a dependence on 
100
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

 
 
Figure 3. Optical microscopy images of the resulting particle layers after 
liquid evaporation. If no rotating magnetic field is applied, the beads show 
a randomly dispersed pattern (a), which is also reproduced in the 
corresponding FFT of the image (inset). Under the influence of a rotating 
magnetic field, particles assemble in two-dimensional arrays (b) with a 
high degree of hexagonal ordering, which is also visible in the FFT pattern 
(inset). 
 
the field frequency as shown in Fig. 4(c). In Fig. 4(b) an 
example for a one-dimensional defect structure within the 
bead arrays is shown. The concentration of one-dimensional 
and two-dimensional defects increases with increasing 
rotation frequency of the external magnetic field. This 
behavior may be attributed to a difference in the time scales 
of magnetic and geometric reorganization processes. While 
remagnetization occurs on a nanosecond timescale [16], the 
geometrical reordering of particles cannot follow the fast 
magnetodynamics inhibiting the geometric reordering. 
 
 
Figure 4. Evaluation of cluster growth for concentrations of 0.2 mg/ml and 
1 mg/ml and 1, 3 and 5 iterative replenishments (a). The inset shows the 
results without applying a magnetic field. A one-dimensional defect 
structure of a particle clusters prepared under the influence of a rotating 
magnetic field (b). The defect concentration of one- and two-dimensional 
defect structures increases with increasing the rotation frequency (c). 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
We have shown that highly ordered two-dimensional 
arrays consisting of superparamagnetic beads can be 
prepared by applying a rotating magnetic field. The 
properties, such as one- and two-dimensional defect 
concentrations, can be controlled by the field frequency. 
The magnetic field entails a high degree of hexagonal 
ordering and leads to the formation of larger clusters when 
compared to the reference samples that were prepared 
without a magnetic field.  
The ability to assemble these highly ordered objects on 
demand by switching on a magnetic field may lead to the 
design of novel microfluidic devices based on the 
reconfigurability of the particle arrays. Especially the 
possibility to assemble bead arrays with specific surface 
functionalization in certain regions of lab-on-a-chip devices 
may be of major interest in future works.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the FOR 945 for financial support in 
the framework of the project 3. Alexander Weddemann 
gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the 
Alexander von Humboldt foundation. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Pamme, “Magnetism and Microfluidics,” Lab Chip, vol. 6, 
pp. 24-38, 2006 
[2] M.A.M. Gijs, ”Magnetic bead handling on chip: new 
opportunities 
for 
analytival 
applications,” 
Microfluid. 
Nanofluid., vol. 1, pp. 22-40, 2004 
[3] A. Hütten, D. Sudfeld, I. Ennen, G. Reiss, K. Wojczykowski, 
and P. Jutzi, „Ferromagnetic FeCo nanoparticles for 
biotechnology,“ J. Magn. Magn. Mat., vol. 293, pp. 93-101, 
2005 
[4] M. Panhorst, P.B. Kamp, G. Reiss, and H. Brückl, “Sensitive 
bond-force measurements of ligand-receptor pairs with 
magnetic beads,“ Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 20(8), pp. 1685-
1689, 2005 
[5] U. Lehmann, C. Vandevyver, V.K. Patashar, and M.A.M. 
Gijs, “DNA-Reinigung in Tröpfchen auf einem magnetischen 
“La-on-a-Chip,” Angew. Chem., vol. 118, pp. 3132-3137, 
2006 
[6] C. Albon, A. Weddemann, A. Auge, K. Rott, and A. Hütten, 
“Tunneling magnetoresistance sensors for high resolutive 
particle detection,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 95(2), pp. 023101-
023104, 2009 
[7] J.H.E. Promislow, A.P. Gast, and M. Fermigier, “Aggregation 
kinetics of paramagnetic colloidal particles,” J Chem. Phys., 
vol. 102(13), pp. 5492-5498, 1995 
[8] F. Lacharme, C. Vandevyver, and M.A.M. Gijs, “Full on-chip 
nanoliter immunoassay by geometrical magnetic trapping of 
nanparticle chains,” Anal. Chem., vol. 80(8), pp. 2905-2910, 
2008 
[9] R.J.S. Derks, A.J.H. Frijns, M.W.J. Prins, and A. Dietzel, 
”Multibody interactions of actuated magnetic particles used as 
fluid drivers in microchannels,” Microfluid. Nanofluid., vol. 
9, pp. 357-364, 2010 
101
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

[10]  I. Petousis, E. Homburg, R. Derks, and A. Dietzel, “Transient 
behaviour of magnetic micro-bead chains rotating in a fluid 
by external fields,” Lab Chip, vol. 7, p. 1746-1751, 2007  
[11] F. Wittbracht, B. Eickenberg, A. Weddemann, and A. Hütten, 
“Towards a programmable microfluidic valve: Formation 
dynamics of two-dimensional magnetic bead arrays in 
transient magnetic fields”, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 109, pp. 
114503-1-114503-5, 2011 
[12] M-270 SA datasheet: www.invitrogen..com (last access date: 
06.07.2011)  
[13] G. Fonnum, C. Johansson, A. Molteberg, S. Mørup, and E. 
Aksnes, “Characterisation of Dynabeads® by magnetization 
measurements and Mössbauer spectroscopy,” Journal of 
Magn. Magn. Mat., vol. 293, pp. 41-47, 2005 
[14] V.K. LaMer and R.H. Dinegar, “Theory, Production and 
Mechanism of Formation of Monodispersed Hydrosols,” J. 
Am. Chem. Soc., vol. 72, pp. 4847-4854, 1950 
[15] W. Ostwald, Lehrbuch der allgemeinen Chemie, vol. 2, part 1, 
1896, Leipzig, Germany 
[16] A. Weddemann, A. Auge, D. Kappe, F. Wittbracht, and A. 
Hütten, “Dynamic simulations of the dipolar driven 
demagnetization 
process 
of 
magnetic 
multi-core 
nanoparticles,” J. Magn. Magn. Mat., vol. 322(6), pp. 643-
646, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

