Quantum Structure in Cognition: Fundamentals and Applications
Diederik Aerts, Sandro Sozzo
Center Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Krijgskunderstraat 33, B-1160 Brussels, Belgium
diraerts@vub.ac.be, ssozzo@vub.ac.be
Liane Gabora, Tomas Veloz
Department of Psychology and Computer Science
University of British Columbia
Okanagan Campus, 3333 University Way, Kelowna, Canada
liane.gabora@ubc.ca, tomas.veloz@ubc.ca
Abstract—Studies in cognitive science show that the ways
in which people combine concepts and make decisions cannot
be described by classical logic and probability theory. This has
serious implications for applied disciplines such as information
retrieval, artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics. Inspired by a
mathematical formalism that generalizes quantum mechanics
we have constructed a contextual framework for modeling
both concept representation and decision making, together
with quantum models that are in strong alignment with
experimental data. The results can be interpreted by assuming
the existence in human thought of a double-layered structure,
a classical logical thought and a quantum conceptual thought,
the latter being responsible for the non-classical effects. The
presence of a quantum structure in cognition is relevant,
for it shows that quantum mechanics provides not only a
useful modelling tool for experimental data but also supplies
a structural model for human and artiﬁcial thought processes.
This approach has strong connections with theories formalizing
meaning, such as semantic analysis, and has also a deep impact
on computer science, information retrieval and artiﬁcial intel-
ligence. Speciﬁc links with information retrieval are discussed
in this paper.
Keywords-quantum mechanics; quantum cognition; decision
theory; information retrieval;
I. INTRODUCTION
The aim of this article is to present to the community of
quantum technology researchers a newly emerging approach
to the modelling of human and artiﬁcial thought processes
that makes use of the formalism of quantum mechanics.
We will introduce and describe the main aspects of this
approach which though well developed has not yet been
applied to technological problems. There is a community
of researchers, physicists, computer scientists and psycholo-
gists, focusing on this approach, and the emerging domain of
research has been called ‘Quantum Cognition’ [1]. It outlines
the application of the formalism of quantum mechanics to
situations that traditionally are a subject of investigation
in cognitive science, artiﬁcial intelligence and semantic
theories. More speciﬁcally, it aims at modelling entities
and/or processes of a cognitive nature, and also puts forward
potential solutions to some difﬁcult problems in cognitive
science, artiﬁcial intelligence, semantic theories and infor-
mation retrieval. Some interesting technological applications
of our perspective to symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence and
robotics will be outlined in a forthcoming paper [4]. We
focus here on the applications in knowledge representation
and with respect to information retrieval.
Let us brieﬂy summarize this paper. In Sec. II we report
the problems and paradoxes discovered in decision theory
and cognitive science, such as the Allais and Ellsberg
paradoxes, the disjunction effect and the conjunction fallacy,
and the Pet-Fish problem. In particular, we stress in this
section that these difﬁculties required a signiﬁcant change
of perspective in our understanding of the role played by
classical logic in human thought. In Sec. III we show how
the quantum approach is used to model the contextual man-
ner in which concepts interact and combine. Contextuality
makes it possible to elaborate quantum models for the
above mentioned paradoxes which correctly reproduce the
experimental data existing in the cognitive science literature.
An explanation of the obtained results can be given by
assuming that two differently structured and superposed,
classical logical and quantum conceptual, modes coexist in
human thought and their simultaneous presence is respon-
sible of the failures of classical structures to cope with the
aforementioned difﬁculties. Finally, we discuss in Sec. IV
the fact that our quantum cognition approach supplies an
intuitive basis for the application of the quantum formalism
in information retrieval, which is thus more ﬁrmly founded.
II. NON-CLASSICAL EFFECTS IN ECONOMICS AND
PSYCHOLOGY
Some of the effects in cognition which the quantum
cognition community has identiﬁed as requiring quantum
structures to be modeled were ﬁrst observed by economists.
In two seminal papers Maurice Allais [5] in 1953 and Daniel
Ellsberg [6] in 1961 observed that experimental situations
exist in economics that are inconsist with the traditional
economic theory of rational choice, namely violations of the
so-called Sure-Thing Principle [7] and the expected utility
hypothesis [8], [9]. These deviations, often called paradoxes,
were identiﬁed as indicating the existence of an ambiguity
aversion; that is, individuals prefer ‘sure choices’ over
‘choices that contain ambiguity’ and ‘risk taking’. Although
it was was not (explicitly) identiﬁed at the time, they could
not be explained by classical logic and probability theory.
57
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

However, solutions to them have been proposed within the
new ﬁeld of quantum cognition.
The second identiﬁcation of effects of a non-classical
nature was in psychology, and Amos Tversky and Daniel
Khaneman played a crucial role in them [10]. The effects
brought to light by them have meanwhile been studied
extensively and are referred to as the conjunction fallacy
[11] and the disjunction effect [12]. However, the funda-
mental contradiction of these effects with classical logic and
probability theory, although identiﬁed at the time, was not
believed to be the core of the problem.
The domain where most manifestly the classical set-
theoretical based structures were identiﬁed to be failing was
in the study of ‘how concepts combine’. This was revealed
by James Hampton’s experiments [13], [14] which mea-
sured the deviation from classical set-theoretic membership
weights of exemplars with respect to pairs of concepts and
their conjunction or disjunction. Hampton’s investigation
was motivated by the so-called Guppy effect in concept
conjunction found by Osherson and Smith [15]. These
authors considered the concepts Pet and Fish and their
conjunction Pet-Fish, and observed that, while an exemplar
such as Guppy was a very typical example of Pet-Fish, it was
neither a very typical example of Pet nor of Fish. Therefore,
the typicality of a speciﬁc exemplar with respect to the
conjunction of concepts can show an unexpected behavior
from the point of view of classical set and probability
theory. As a result of the work of Osherson and Smith, the
problem is often referred to as the Pet-Fish problem It can
be shown that neither fuzzy set based theories [16], [17]
nor explanation based theories [18], [19] can model this
‘typicality effect’. Hampton identiﬁed a Guppy-like effect
for the membership weights of exemplars with respect to
pairs of concepts and their conjunction [13], and equally so
for the membership weights of exemplars with respect to
pairs of concepts and their disjunction [14], e.g., Olive is
found to be a not very strong member of Fruits and also a
not very strong member of Vegetables, but it is a very strong
member of Fruits ‘or’ Vegetables. The empirical deviations
from the expectations of fuzzy set theory are referred to
as overextension and underextension. Several experiments
have since been conducted (see, e.g., [20]) but none of the
currently existing concepts theories provides a satisfactory
description or explanation of these effects. The combination
problem is considered so serious that it is sometimes said
that not much progress is possible in the ﬁeld if no light is
shed on this problem [19], [20], [21].
Each of the previous problems share a common feature:
they have to do with modelling meaning and the structure
of human thought, hence a solution to these problems could
shed a new light on some disciplines that try to reproduce
what happens in human mind, such as artiﬁcial intelligence
and robotics (see [4]).
III. QUANTUM STRUCTURE IN HUMAN THOUGHT
This section summarizes the results achieved by our
research group on quantum cognition. For the sake of clarity,
we proceed by steps.
A. Statistical studies of decision processes
Hypothesizing the presence of non-classical logical and
probabilistic structures in human thought one of us proposed
a quantum model for the modeling of a decision process
during an opinion poll [22]. The inspiration for this proposal
came primarily from an extensive study carried out on the
nature of the quantum probability model [23], [24], and the
becoming aware of the exact and detailed difference between
classical probability and quantum probability.
This perspective suggested that classical probabilistic
structures model only situations that are deterministic in
essence, and where the observers ‘lack knowledge about’.
Situations of this kind may occur also in quantum mechan-
ics, but this theory predicts the existence of situations that
are indeterministic in depth, in the sense they do not admit
an underlying deterministic process independent of context.
For example, in a measurement process the result of the
measurement cannot be attributed to the physical entity that
is measured, hence the probability of that result in a given
state cannot be interpreted as formalizing a subjective lack
of knowledge about the entity. It is the interaction of the
measured entity with the measurement context that deter-
mines the result of the measurement. As a consequence, the
measurement context provokes an indeterministic inﬂuence
on the physical entity, and quantum probability models this
indeterminism.
Whenever the above reasoning is applied to decision
processes, it can be shown that models of decision making
are quantum in essence, because opinions are not always
determined ‘before the testing of these opinions take place’,
and can hence in principle easily been inﬂuenced by the
testing itself [22]. This is evident if one considers an opinion
poll, that is, a testing of the dynamics of human decision
making with statistics. For certain questions, for example a
question such as ‘Are you a smoker or not’, the situation for
classical probability is satisﬁed. Indeed, people being tested
’are always smokers or not smokers before the test being
applied during the opinion poll’. Hence the test for such type
of properties only consists of lifting a lack of knowledge.
However, if one considers another type of question, e.g.,
‘Are you against or in favor of the use of nuclear energy’,
then it seems to be a better hypothesis about the reality
of the states of mind of human beings that there are three
cases now (i) the person’s mind is made up already, in
favor; (ii) the persons mind if made up already, against;
(these are the two ‘classical probability situations, the test
only lifts lack of knowledge’); (iii) the persons mind is not
made up, and formed ‘during and hence partly by the test
58
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

itself’. It is this third possibility which introduced a ‘non-
classical probabilistic effect’. As a consequence, human
decision making is intrinsically non-classical, and quantum
probability is an obvious choice as an alternative to classical
probability, since in quantum probability this extra aspect is
‘exactly the one that is allowed to exist’.
B. The Pet-Fish problem within a SCOP formalism
The SCoP formalism was developed to cope with the
difﬁculties presented in Sec. II. It is a generalization of the
quantum formalism and in which context plays a relevant
role in both concept representation and decision processes
[25], [26]. This role is very similar to the role played by
the measurement context on microscopic entities in quantum
mechanics. In the SCOP formalism, a concept is an entity
that can be in different states, and such that a given context
provokes a change of state of the concept. Let S be a
concept. We denote by Σ the set of its states, by M the set
of its contexts and by L the set of its properties. Moreover,
we introduce a special state of the concept S called the
ground state, denoting it by ˆp. The ground state can be
considered as the state the concept is in when it is not
evoked by any particular context. Furthermore, we introduce
for a given concept S a unit context 1 which describes
the situation where no context occurs. A given context e1
induces a change of state of the concept S from the the
ground state ˆp to another state, say p1. That ˆp and p1 are
different states is manifested by the fact that the frequency
measures of different exemplars of the concept, as well as
the applicability values of the properties of the context are
different for different states.
To build a SCOP model we need not only the three
sets Σ, M and L, that is, the set of states, the set of
contexts and the set of properties, respectively, but also two
additional functions µ and ν are required. The function µ is
a probability function that describes how state p under the
inﬂuence of context e changes to state q. Mathematically,
µ is a function from the set Σ × M × Σ to the interval
[0, 1], where µ(q, e, p) is the probability that state p under
the inﬂuence of context e changes to state q. We write:
µ : Σ × M × Σ → [0, 1]; (q, e, p) 7→ µ(q, e, p).
(1)
The function ν describes the weight, i.e. the renormalization
of the applicability of a certain property given a speciﬁc
state. Mathematically, ν is a function from the set Σ × L to
the interval [0, 1], where ν(p, a) is the weight of property a
for the concept in state p. We write:
ν : Σ × L → [0, 1]; (p, a) 7→ ν(p, a).
(2)
Thus a SCOP model is deﬁned by the ﬁve elements
(Σ, M, L, µ, ν). To build a SCOP model, we collect the
contexts thought to be relevant to the model we want to build
(more contexts lead to a more reﬁned model). M is the set
of these contexts. Starting from the ground state ˆp for the
concept, we collect all the new states of the concept formed
by having each context e ∈ M work on ˆp and consecutively
on all the other states. This gives the set Σ. Note that M
and Σ are connected in the sense that to complete the model
it is necessary to consider the effect of each context on each
state. We collect the set of relevant properties of the concept
and this gives L. The functions µ and ν that deﬁne the
metric structure of the SCOP system have to be determined
by means of well chosen experiments.
It follows from the above representation Psychological
studies have revealed that concepts change continuously
under the inﬂuence of a context, and this change is described
using SCOP by a change of the state of the concept. For each
exemplar of a concept, the typicality varies with respect
to the context that inﬂuences it. Analogously, for each
property, the applicability varies with respect to the context.
This implies the presence of both a contextual typicality
and an applicability effect. The Pet-Fish problem is solved
in the SCOP formalism because in different combinations
the concepts are in different states. In particular, in the
combination Pet-Fish the concept Pet is in a state under the
context The Pet is a Fish. The state of Pet under the context
The Pet is a Fish has different typicalities, which explains
the Guppy effect.
C. A quantum model for concept combinations
On the basis of the SCOP formalism, a mathematical
model using the formalism of quantum mechanics, both the
quantum probability and Hilbert space models, has been
worked out. This allows one to reproduce the experimental
results obtained by Hampton on conjunctions and disjunc-
tions of concepts. It is interesting to observe that typically
quantum effects, i.e. superposition and interference, appear
at once if one considers the following simple quantum model
for the disjunction of two concepts [28].
Let us consider two concepts A and B. Both A and
B are described quantum mechanically in a Hilbert space
H, so that they are represented by the unit vectors |A⟩
and |B⟩ of H, respectively. We represent the concept ‘A
or B’ by means of the normalized superposition vector
1
√
2(|A⟩ + |B⟩), and also suppose that |A⟩ and |B⟩ are
orthogonal, i.e. ⟨A|B⟩ = 0. An experiment considered in
Hampton [13], [14] consists of a test aimed at ascertaining
whether a speciﬁc item X is ‘a member of’ or ‘not a member
of’ a concept. We represent this experiment by means of
a projection operator MX on the Hilbert space H. This
experiment is applied to the concept A, to the concept B, and
to the concept ‘A or B’, yielding the probabilities µX(A),
µX(B) and µX(A or B), respectively. These probabilities
represent the degrees to which a subject is likely to choose
X to be a member of A, B and ‘A or B’, respectively. In
accordance with the quantum rules, these probabilities are
59
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

given by µX(A) = ⟨A|MX|A⟩, µX(B) = ⟨B|MX|B⟩ and
µX(A or B) = 1
2(⟨A| + ⟨B|)MX(|A⟩ + |B⟩).
(3)
Applying the linearity of Hilbert space and taking into
account that ⟨B|MX|A⟩∗ = ⟨A|MX|B⟩, we have
µX(A or B) = µX(A) + µX(B)
2
+ ℜ⟨A|MX|B⟩
(4)
where ℜ⟨A|MX|B⟩ is the real part of the complex number
⟨A|MX|B⟩. This is called the interference term in quantum
mechanics. Its presence produces a deviation from the aver-
age value 1
2(µX(A)+µX(B)), which would be the outcome
in the absence of interference. It is the interference term that
we found to be responsible of the deviations from classically
expected membership weights measured by Hampton.
We note that Eq. (4) is not the most general formula for
reproducing all empirical data on the disjunction of concepts.
To work out a general model for the disjunction of two
concepts, we need to introduce the notion of quantum ﬁeld
theory. More precisely, the Hilbert space H describing the
‘one-particle way’ must be combined with the tensor product
Hilbert space H⊗H describing the ‘two-particle way’ to get
the Fock space (H ⊗ H) ⊕ H to explain the emergence of
the new concept ‘A or B’. The latter is then represented by
the normalized vector
ψ(A, B) = meiθ|A⟩ ⊗ |B⟩ + neiφ
√
2 (|A⟩ + |B⟩),
(5)
where m2 + n2 = 1, the experiment is described by the
projection operator MX ⊗ MX ⊕ MM, and the probabilities
representing the degrees to which a subject is likely to
choose the item X to be a member of ‘A or B’ is given by
µX(A or B) = m2(µX(A) + µX(B) − µX(A)µX(B))
+n2(µX(A) + µX(B)
2
+ ℜ⟨A|MX|B⟩).
(6)
We do not discuss here the deep reasons for introducing
these quantum ﬁeld aspects, for the sake of brevity. We limit
ourselves to observe that, whenever a subject is asked to
decide about the membership of an item X with respect to
the concept ‘A or B’, the subject will consider two identical
items X pondering on the membership of one of them with
respect to A ‘and’ the membership of the other with respect
to B [28].
The above quantum mechanical formalism has been em-
ployed [28] to model all the experimental data obtained in
Hampton’s experiments [13], [14].
The formulation above identiﬁes the presence of typically
quantum effects in the mechanism of combination of con-
cepts, e.g., contextual inﬂuence, superposition, interference,
emergence and entanglement [27], [28], [29], [30], [33],
[34]. Furthermore, quantum models have also been elab-
orated to describe the disjunction effect and the Ellsberg
paradox, which accord with the experimental data existing
in the literature [28], [30], [35]. It has been shown that it is
the overall conceptual landscape, or context, that generates
the paradoxical situation encountered in real experiments.
D. Superposed layers in human thought
The analysis above has allowed the authors to suggest the
hypothesis that two structured and superposed layers can
be identiﬁed in human thought: a classical logical layer,
that can be modeled by using a classical Kolmogorovian
probability framework, and a quantum conceptual layer, that
can instead be modeled by using the (non-Kolmogorovian)
probabilistic formalism of quantum mechanics. The thought
process in the latter layer is given form under the inﬂuence of
the totality of the surrounding conceptual landscape, hence
context effects are fundamental in this layer [30]. We are still
clarifying the relationship between these layers of thought
and the two modes of thought – analytic and associative –
discussed elsewhere [31], [32], as well as their relationship
to convergent versus divergent thought, and the notions of
explicit versus implicit cognition.
We conclude this section with two remarks. Firstly, we
note that in our approach the explanation of the violation of
the expected utility hypothesis and the Sure-Thing Principle
is not (only) the presence of an ambiguity aversion. On
the contrary, we argue that the above violation is due to
the concurrence of superposed conceptual landscapes in
human minds, of which some might be linked to ambiguity
aversion, but other completely not. We therefore maintain
that the violation of the Sure-Thing Principle should not
be considered as a fallacy of human thought, as often
claimed in the literature but, rather, as the proof that real
subjects follow a different way of thinking than the one
dictated by classical logic in some speciﬁc situations, which
is context-dependent. Secondly, we observe that according to
our approach ‘there is a deﬁnite holistic aspect’ related to the
structuring of meaning. However, this holistic aspect is not
the one mentioned sometimes with reference to ‘quantum
consciousness’ or other very speculative related issues, the
presence of holism is of a ‘down to earth’ nature and simply
revealing that ‘meaning is related to the whole landscape of
conceptual, emotional, ..., content’.
IV. QUANTUM COGNITION AND INFORMATION
RETRIEVAL
Quantum mechanical structures have also been used in
the domain of information retrieval [36], [37], [38]. An in-
formation retrieval system ﬁnds relevant information from a
collection of information objects, which may be documents,
web pages, images, videos, etc. For example, search engine
algorithms exploit the link structure of the web besides the
lexical content in web pages. Roughly speaking, they mine
human decisions about what pages are good to link to for
a particular subject. Novel techniques developed since the
eighties have shown that vector space based information
60
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

retrieval is potentially more powerful than Boolean logic
based information retrieval (in particular, key words match-
ing). Recently, vector space models have been extended to
incorporate Hilbert spaces together with the representation
and manipulation of word meaning. It has been shown, in
particular, that it is the quantum logic structure underlying
quantum mechanics that is effective in producing theoret-
ical models for information retrieval. Widdows and Peters
[37] proved that the use of quantum logic connective for
negation, i.e. orthogonality, is a powerful tool for exploring
word meaning and it is more efﬁcient than Boolean ‘not’
of classical logic in document retrieval experiments. Van
Rijsbergen [38] introduced a general theory for information
retrieval based on quantum logic structures. More precisely,
he showed that three keystone models used in information
retrieval, a vector space model, a probabilistic model and a
logical model, can be described within Hilbert space, where
a document can be represented by a vector and relevance by
a Hermitian operator.
The above results ﬁt in naturally with the quantum cogni-
tion approach outlined in Sec. III, which provides theoretical
support for the use of the quantum mechanical formalism
in information retrieval and natural language processing in
terms of the quantum conceptual layer. It is quite reasonable,
indeed, to maintain that a given human or artiﬁcial system
aiming at extracting information and knowledge from a
user should be quantum based, since concepts are combined
by human minds in such a way that they entail quantum
mechanical structure, more speciﬁcally, combined concepts
are entangled [28], [39]. But there are other strong reasons
for claiming the necessity of using contextual quantum based
structures in information retrieval, arising from the research
developed in our quantum cognition approach. In fact, the
following results have been obtained by using search engines
on the world-wide-web.
(i) A Guppy-like effect can be identiﬁed by collecting data
on concepts and their conjunctions using internet search en-
gines. This effect appears as a consequence of the contextual
meaning landscape surrounding the concepts considered and
their conjunctions [40].
(ii) Some of Bell’s inequalities can be deduced by con-
sidering coincidence experiments and gathering data on
concepts and their combinations on the world-wide-web.
One can show that these inequalities are violated, which
reveals the presence of entanglement [41].
We conclude this paper by suggesting a possible line of
research. Knowledge organization systems (KOS) play an in-
creasingly important role in modern society [42], [43]. They
employ classical structures to model properties and concepts
and hence are subject to the difﬁculties mentioned in Sec. II.
But, one could provide a generalized, or ‘quantized’, version
of a KOS using a SCOP quantum based formalism for the
properties and concepts. Taking into account the preceding
analysis, together with the results obtained by van Rijsbergen
and Widdows, we expect that a SCOP version of KOS will
give rise to greater adaptiveness and performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by Grants G.0405.08 and
G.0234.08 of the Flemish Fund for Scientiﬁc Research and
a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council of Canada.
REFERENCES
[1] We stress that in this paper we are mainly concerned with
the Brussels approach to Quantum Cognition. Meanwhile,
several researchers have been involved in this domain, and
we refer to the Wikipedia page [2] and to the Proceedings of
the conferences on Quantum Interaction [3] for an overview.
[2] See the recent wikipedia page on Quantum Cognition:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum cognition.
[3] P. Bruza, W. Lawless, K. van Rijsbergen and D. Sofge, D.,
Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Quantum
Interaction, Stanford University, US, March 27–29, 2007.
Washington: AAAI Press, 2007; P. Bruza, W. Lawless and
K. van Rijsbergen, Second International Symposium, QI 2008,
Oxford, UK, March 26–28, 2009, Proceedings. Oxford: Col-
lege Publications, 2008; P. Bruza, D. Sofge, W. Lawless, K.
van Rijsbergen and M. Klusch, Third International Sympo-
sium, QI 2009, Saarbrcken, Germany, March 25–27, 2009,
Proceedings, LNCS, Vol. 5494. Berlin: Springer, 2009.
[4] D. Aerts, M. Czachor, and S. Sozzo, “Quantum interaction
approach in cognition, artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics,”in
Proceedings of the The Fifth International Conference on
Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies (ICQNM 2011),
Nice, France, August 21–27, 2011, accepted for publication.
[5] M. Allais, “Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant
le risque: Critique des postulats et axiomes de l’´Ecole
Am´ericaine,” Econometrica, vol. 21, pp. 503–546, 1953.
[6] D. Ellsberg, “Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms,” Quart.
J. Econ., vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 643–669, 1961.
[7] L. J. Savage, The Foundations of Statistics. New York, NY:
Wiley, 1954.
[8] J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games
and Economic Behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1944.
[9] Ellsberg was studying ‘decision making’ from the White
House with respect to the war in Vietnam, having access
to all highly classiﬁed material with respect to the Vietnam
war, when he wrote his seminal article, and it is the same
Ellsberg who later released the Pentagon papers containing
this classiﬁed material, in this way starting the end of the
Vietnam war (and risking to go to prison).
[10] Daniel Khaneman was later to receive the Nobel Price for
Economics as a psychologist, and is also considered to be
one of the founding fathers of ‘Behavioral Economics’, where
some of the effects mentioned in the present article are
studied.
61
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

[11] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Extension versus intuitive
reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability judgment,”
Phych. Rev., vol. 90, pp. 293–315, 1983.
[12] A. Tversky and E. Shaﬁr, “The disjunction effect in choice
under uncertainty,” Psych. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 305–309, 1992.
[13] J. A. Hampton, “Overextension of conjunctive concepts:
Evidence for a unitary model for concept typicality and class
inclusion,” J. Exp. Psych.: Lear. Mem. Cog., vol. 14, pp. 12–
32, 1988.
[14] J. A. Hampton, “Disjunction of natural concepts,” Memory &
Cognition, vol. 16, pp. 579–591, 1988.
[15] D. N. Osherson and E. E. Smith, “On the adequacy of
prototype theory as a theory of concepts,” Cognition, vol.
9, pp. 35–58, 1981.
[16] L. Zadeh, “A note on prototype theory and fuzzy sets,”
Cognition, vol. 12, pp. 291–297, 1982.
[17] D. N. Osherson and E. E. Smith, “Gradedness and conceptual
combination,” Cognition, vol. 12, pp. 299–318, 1982.
[18] L. K. Komatsu, “Recent views on conceptual structure,”
Psych. Bull., vol. 112, pp. 500–526, 1992.
[19] L. J. Rips, “The current status of research on concept com-
bination,” Mind and Language, vol. 10, pp. 72–104, 1995.
[20] J. A. Hampton, “Conceptual combination,” in Knowledge,
Concepts, and Categories, K. Lamberts and D. Shanks, Eds.
Hove, UK: Psychology Press, 1997, pp. 133–159.
[21] H. Kamp and B. Partee, “Prototype theory and composional-
ity,” Cognition, vol. 57, pp. 129–191, 1995.
[22] D. Aerts and S. Aerts, “Applications of quantum statistics in
psychological studies of decision processes,” Found. Sci., vol.
1, pp. 85–97, 1994.
[23] D. Aerts, “A Possible explanation for the probabilities of
quantum mechanics,” J. Math. Phys., vol. 27, pp. 202–210,
1986.
[24] D. Aerts, “Quantum structures, separated physical entities and
probability,” Found. Phys., vol. 24, pp. 1227–1259, 1994.
[25] L. Gabora and D. Aerts, “Contextualizing concepts using a
mathematical generalization of the quantum formalism,” J.
Exp. Theor. Art. Int., vol. 14, 327–358, 2002.
[26] D. Aerts and L. Gabora, “A theory of concepts and their
combinations I & II,” Kybernetes, vol. 34, pp. 167–191 &
192–221, 2005.
[27] D. Aerts, “Quantum particles as conceptual entities. A Pos-
sible Explanatory Framework for Quantum Theory,” Found.
Sci., vol. 14, pp. 361–411, 2009.
[28] D. Aerts, “Quantum structure in cognition,” J. Math. Psych.,
vol. 53, pp. 314–348, 2009.
[29] D. Aerts, S. Aerts, and L. Gabora, “Experimental evidence for
quantum structure in cognition,” Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 5494, pp. 59–70, 2009.
[30] D. Aerts and B. D’Hooghe, “Classical logical versus quantum
conceptual thought: Examples in economy, decision theory
and concept theory,” Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 5494, pp. 128–142, 2009.
[31] L. Gabora, “Contextual focus: A cognitive explanation for
the cultural transition of the Middle/Upper Paleolithic.”. In
(R. Alterman and D. Hirsch, Eds.) Proceedings of the 25th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 126-
133, 2003.
[32] L. Gabora, “Revenge of the ’neurds’: Characterizing creative
thought in terms of the structure and dynamics of human
memory”. Creativity Research Journal, vol. 22(1), pp. 1-13,
2010.
[33] D. Aerts, “Quantum interference and superposition in cogni-
tion: Development of a theory for the disjunction of concepts,”
in Worldviews, Science and Us: Bridging Knowledge and Its
Implications for Our Perspectives of the World, D. Aerts, B.
D’Hooghe, and N. Note, Eds. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc,
2011, to be published.
[34] D. Aerts, “General quantum modeling of combining concepts:
A quantum ﬁeld model in Fock space,” archive reference and
link: http://uk.arxiv.org/abs/0705.1740.
[35] D. Aerts, B. D’Hooghe, and E. Haven, “Quantum experimen-
tal data in psychology and economics,” Int. J. Theor. Phys.,
vol. 49,pp. 2971–2990 (2010).
[36] D. Widdows, Geometry and Meaning, CSLI Publications, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2006.
[37] D. Widdows and S. Peters, “Word vectors and quantum logic:
Experiments with negation and disjunction,” in Mathematics
of Language 8, Indiana, IN: Bloomington, 2003, pp. 141–154.
[38] K. van Rijsbergen, The Geometry of Information Retrieval,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[39] D. Aerts and S. Sozzo, “Quantum structure in cognition: Why
and how concepts are entangled,” archive reference and link
http://arxiv.org/abs/1104.1322.
[40] D. Aerts, M. Czachor, B. D’Hooghe, and S. Sozzo, “The
pet-ﬁsh problem on the world-wide-web,” in AAAI Fall Sym-
posium on Quantum Informatics for Cognitive, Social, and
Semantics Processes, P. Bruza et al., Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg,
Germany: Springer, 2010, pp. 17–21.
[41] D. Aerts, “Interpreting quantum particles as conceptual enti-
ties,” Int. J. Theor. Phys., vol. 49, pp. 2950–2970, 2010.
[42] G. Hodge, Systems of Knowledge Organization for Digital li-
braries. Beyond Traditional Authority Files, Washington, DC:
the Council on Library and Information Resources (2000).
[43] W. G. Stock, “Concepts and semantic relations in information
science,” J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Tech., vol. 61, pp. 1951-1969,
2010.
62
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

