Microfluidic Cell Trapping Device Based on Standard PCB Technology 
Nuria-Berenice Palacios-Aguilera, Ting Zhou, Jeroen Bastemeijer, Jeff Mollinger, Andre Bossche 
Electronic Instrumentation Laboratory, Delft University of Technology 
Mekelweg 4, 2628CD Delft, the Netherlands 
n.b.palaciosaguilera@tudelft.nl, 54zhouting@gmail.com, j.bastemeijer@tudelft.nl, j.r.mollinger@tudelft.nl, 
a.bossche@tudelft.nl 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, the methods used to determine cell 
concentration either count the cells per volume or measure the 
cells weight per volume. This paper presents the design, 
fabrication and measurement of a microfluidic cell trapping 
device envisaged for cell concentration measurements. The 
work presented here focuses mainly in the fabrication of the 
device. Measurements are made to validate the fabricated 
device. The device separates different size particles by using 
dielectrophoresis. Horizontal as well as vertical electric fields 
can be used to trap the particles by controlling the amplitude 
and frequency of AC voltage signals.  The device presented 
here is fabricated using low-cost and low-temperature 
technologies. 
Keywords-dielectrophoresis; cell trapping; microfluidic;, 
vertical electric field; PCB 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Cell concentration is of high importance to medicine and 
food industry. In the case of medicine, measuring cell 
concentration is relevant for medical diagnosis; for food 
industry, it is useful for monitoring the concentration of yeast 
cells in food production. 
Nowadays, the methods used to determine cell 
concentration either count the cells per volume or measure 
the weight of cells per volume. Those methods consume time 
and resources. The cell trapping device presented here is 
envisaged for cell concentration determination. 
This paper presents the design, fabrication and 
measurements of a low-cost cell trapping microfluidic 
device. The design feasibility of the device was tested using 
COMSOL; however, this is not part of this work. Special 
attention is given to the fabrication process/method of the 
device since it uses other technologies than silicon and glass. 
The fabrication of the device is based on a standard PCB 
(Printed Circuit Board) and the use of SU-8 photoresist, 
making the device fabrication a low-temperature process. 
The PCB offers mechanical stability to the device. 
An innovative fabrication method is presented making 
use of an ITO (Indium Tin oxide) glass slide to close the 
channel. The ITO glass offers optical transparency and the 
possibility to apply vertical electric fields in the channel. 
Since different size cells respond in a different way when 
inhomogeneous 
electric 
fields 
are 
present, 
the 
dielectrophoretic technique is used to trap and release 
different size cells. Measurements are performed to validate 
the fabricated device and therefore the study of the 
associated models with the control of the particles’ position 
with the use of an electric field is not part of this work. 
Furthermore, the cell trapping device in combination 
with the packaging technology presented in [1] can be used 
for fast prototyping of low-cost and low-temperature 
fabricated µTAS (Micro Total Analysis Systems). 
The packaging technology presented in [1] consists of 
inlaying an either fluidic or electronic chip in a PCB material 
and to build microfluidic channels on top of them. The 
electrical connections between the components are inkjet-
printed. 
In summary, the benefits of the device presented here 
with respect to commercially available devices are little 
consumption of sample volume, economic, high speed 
detection and flexibility of integration. Furthermore, it is 
small with a size of 70 mm x 70 mm x 1.6 mm. 
The paper describes the relevant properties of the 
materials used for fabrication of the device. The fabrication 
process is detailed as well as the fabrication challenges and 
how to overcome them. 
The experimental setup is explained and the results are 
presented. The paper finalizes presenting the conclusion and 
future work. 
This paper does not include how to measure the cell 
concentration itself. Furthermore, analysis of the kinematic 
model of the particles as well as a deeper study of the 
associated control method to achieve very accurate 
positioning are not within the scope of this work. 
II. 
MATERIALS 
The materials used to fabricate the device are ITO glass, 
SU-8, and PCB material. ITO glass consists of a glass with a 
thin layer of indium oxide (In2O3) and tin oxide (SnO2) on it. 
The two properties that make it very attractive for 
microfluidic devices are its electrical conductivity together 
with 
its 
optical 
transparency. 
Furthermore, 
it 
is 
biocompatible. Its main disadvantage is its high electrode 
impedance; 4 to 5 times higher than similar size gold 
electrodes [2]. The ITO glass used in this project was 
ordered from DELTA Technologies LTD., USA and Table I 
enlists its properties. 
TABLE I.  
ITO GLASS PROPERTIES [3] 
ITO glass properties 
Property 
Value 
Sheet resistance Rs 
5-15 Ω 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

ITO glass properties 
Property 
Value 
Normal transmittance 
>85 % 
Nominal coating thickness 
1200-1600 Å 
Substrate thickness 
0.5 mm 
Substrate dimensions 
25 mm x 50 mm x 0.5 mm 
 
SU-8 is an epoxy-based negative photoresist used to 
pattern high aspect ratio structures [4]. This material is 
widely used as a structural material for microfluidics due to 
its physical properties as excellent chemical resistance, great 
biocompatibility and good adhesion to a wide range of 
materials. SU-8, when properly hard baked, is difficult to 
remove; moreover, if it is not completely exposed it tends to 
outgas. SU-8 2000 series offer low viscosity. SU-8 2002 is 
used to flatten the PCB surface and SU-8 2025 is used to 
build the microfluidic channel wall. Table II enlists the 
properties of SU-8 2002 and SU-8 2025. 
TABLE II.  
PROPERTIES OF SU-8 2002 AND 2025 [5], [6] 
Properties of SU-8 2002 and 2025 
Property 
Value 
(SU-8 2002) 
Value 
(SU-8 2025) 
Viscosity 
7.5 cSt 
4500 cSt 
Density 
1.123 g/ml 
1.219 g/ml 
Thickness 
~2-3 µm 
~20-80 µm 
Glass transition 
temperature Tg 
210 ˚C 
210 ˚C 
Thermal conductivity 
0.3 W/mK 
0.3 W/mK 
 
The PCB is used to mechanically support the electronic 
components, the microfluidic channel structure and to offer 
electrical connections. Compared with silicon, the PCB is 
much cheaper. Table III enlists relevant properties of FR-4 
(flame retardant 4). 
TABLE III.  
RELEVANT PROPERTIES OF FR-4 [7] 
Relevant properties of FR-4 
Property 
Value 
Glass transition temperature 
Tg 
135 ˚C 
Thermal conductivity 
0.255-0.290 W/mK 
Substrate thickness 
1.6 mm 
Substrate dimensions 
70 mm x 70 mm x 1.6 mm 
 
The fabricated PCB has no solder mask and the electrical 
connections are gold plated to keep the biocompatibility of 
the device. 
III. 
DEVICE DIMENSIONS 
Figure 1 illustrates the cross-section of the electrodes 
area in the device, showing the dimensions of the 
microelectrodes as well as the microfluidic channel. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Dimensions of the microfluidic device. Cross-section of the 
electrodes area. 
The PCB used is a 7 cm x 7 cm FR-4 PCB. Four 
electrodes and two holes for fluidic connections are pre-
fabricated in the PCB.  
The four electrodes have the same dimensions, 130 µm 
width and 1000 µm length. The distances between each 
couple of electrodes are 500 µm between electrodes 1 and 2, 
130 µm between electrodes 2 and 3, and 500 µm between 
electrodes 3 and 4. The radius of the inlet and outlet holes is 
400 µm. The microchannel length is 30 mm and the width of 
the channel is 1 mm. The depth of channel is approximately 
30 µm.  
IV. 
FABRICATION 
The fabrication of the devices is divided in two stages: 
the flattening of the PCB surface and the fabrication of the 
microfluidic channel. 
Since the electrodes and other electrical connections are 
pre-fabricated in the PCB, using standard PCB fabrication 
procedures, the thickness of the tracks is around 13 µm.  The 
ratio between the channel depth and the thickness of the 
electrodes is rounded to 2. The flow of the media in the 
channel would be distorted due to this surface profile thus 
the surface of the PCB has to be flattened before building the 
microfluidic channel. 
Figure 2 shows the steps followed to flatten the PCB 
surface. The steps in Figure 2 are performed 6 times since 
the SU-8 2002 provides layers of 2-3 µm thick, depending 
on the spinning speed.  
First, a plasma treatment is performed to improve the 
adhesion between the SU-8 and the PCB (a). SU-8 2002 is 
spun on the surface of the PCB (b), (c). The specimen is 
subject to a soft baking step at 90 º C (d). The SU-8 is 
exposed (e) and a post exposure bake step is performed at 90 
ºC (f). The photoresist is developed thus the SU-8 covering 
the electrodes and electrical connections area is removed (g). 
A hard baking step is performed at 120 °C. The cycle 
initiates again performing the plasma treatment to the new 
surface. 
The cycle is performed 6 times in order to achieve an 
SU-8 layer of around 13 µm thick, achieving the same level 
between the new PCB surface and the electrodes. 
Figure 3 shows the steps followed to fabricate the 
microfluidic channels without going into detail in the surface 
flattening process.  
The PCB is cleaned with ethanol to remove dust, grease 
and other forms of contamination from the surface. To 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

remove the humidity adsorbed during storage, it is 
dehydrated for two hours at 120 ºC (b). Subsequently, an 
oxygen plasma treatment is performed to improve the 
wetability of the substrate and the surface of the PCB is 
flattened using SU-8 2002 (c). The walls of the microchannel 
are fabricated using SU-8 2025 (d). Silver ink is deposited in 
order to make the electrical connection from the ITO glass to 
the PCB (e). The channel is closed using ITO glass. The ITO 
glass is attached to the SU-8 channel structure using a non-
conductive adhesive (NCA) (f) and the adhesive is cured at 
80 ºC during 3 hours (g). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Process to flatten the PCB surface. 
 
Figure 3.  Flowchart to fabricate the microfluidic channels. 
The fluidic connections to access the channel are made 
with a through vias during the fabrication of the PCB. The 
tubes to access the channel are press fit in the through vias 
on the back side of the device and glued. The device is ready 
to be used. 
Figure 4 shows a fabricated device. The device is built on 
a prefabricated PCB including the electrodes.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

 
 
Figure 4.  Fabricated device. 
The electrical connection from the PCB to the ITO glass 
is made with silver ink. The fluidic connections for accessing 
the channel are made in the back side of the PCB. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Fluidic connections for accesing the channel. 
Figure 5 shows the back side of the PCB. The metal 
tubes for the inlet and the outlet holes are press fit in the 
holes and secured on the back side of the device with an 
epoxy adhesive. 
V. 
FABRICATION CHALLENGES 
During the fabrication of the device, there are two 
challenges to overcome.  
The first one is to flatten the PCB surface. Figure 6 
shows the PCB surface profile in the area of the electrodes 
measured with a Dektak profiler; the electrodes have a height 
of around 13 µm above the PCB surface. 
The electrodes and electrical connections are fabricated 
with copper gold plated on the PCB. The surface is flattened 
with SU-8 in order to avoid contact of the media with copper 
and to avoid the flow of the media to be disturbed by the 
electrodes profile. This process is described in the previous 
section. 
 
 
Figure 6.  PCB surface profile in the area of the electrodes. 
The second challenge to overcome is the way of sealing 
the channels. A low viscosity NCA is used for that purpose. 
Nevertheless, if the channel walls are fabricated with the SU-
8 processing parameters recommended by the manufacturer, 
capillary forces make the NCA flow into the channel, 
blocking it. To overcome this, a channel on top of the 
channel walls is fabricated. Figure 7 shows (a) the cross-
section of the wall of the channel when the recommended 
processing parameters are used and (b) the cross-section of 
the channel´s wall when different parameters are used for 
processing. 
"The recommended processing parameters" refers to the 
way the temperature is taken from room temperature to the 
specified temperature, and vice versa, during the baking 
steps.  
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

 
Figure 7.  Cross-section of the wall of the channel when slow ramping of 
the temperatures during the baking steps is used (a) and when no ramping 
is used (b). 
If the step from room temperature to baking temperature, 
and from baking temperature to room temperature is made in 
a fast way, stress in the resist will form such that two small 
walls are created in the top of the channel´s wall, creating a 
small channel on top of the walls of the channel; this small 
channel is used to flow the NCA avoiding it from coming 
into the fluidic channel. The NCA is cured and the channel is 
sealed. By sealing the channel in this way, no bonding 
equipment and heavy weights are necessary. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTS 
The DEP (dielectrophoresis) force depends on the flow 
velocity, frequency and amplitude of the AC voltage signal, 
and particle size. Frequency and amplitude are isolated in 
this work to study their effects on trapping particles with a 
different size. 
A syringe pump KdScientific model 200 is connected to 
the inlet tube of the microfluidic device to drive the flow of 
demi water with polystyrene particles by applying pressure 
difference between the inlet and the outlet. 
An AC generator KROHN-HITE model 4300 is 
connected to the electrodes via the pads on the PCB to 
generate electric fields in the channel. 
In order to test horizontal electric fields, a voltage 
difference is applied between adjacent electrodes, that is to 
say, between electrodes 1 and 2, 2 and 3, and 3 and 4. 
To test vertical electric fields, a voltage difference is 
applied between the ITO glass and electrodes 2 and 4. 
An oscilloscope HP54601B is used to check the applied 
AC signals. 
The device is placed on the table of a microscope IX71 
Olympus which has a low noise CCD camera ColorView 
Olympus to acquire images while the particles are being 
trapped. The software used to acquire the images is analySIS 
docu Olympus. 
The trapped particles are plain microspheres of 
polystyrene from Phosphorex, Inc. with a mean diameter of 
2, 6 and 10 µm. 
VII. RESULTS 
Table IV shows the results for trapping different size 
particles by regulating the frequency of the AC signal. The 
flow velocity used in this case is 0.1 µl/h. 
TABLE IV.  
FREQUENCY REQUIRED FOR TRAPPING DIFFERENT SIZE 
PARTICLES WITH A HORIZONTAL ELECTRIC FIELD 
Frequency required for trapping different size particles 
(horizontal electric field) 
Particle 
radius 
(µm) 
Voltage  
Frequency 
 (KHz) 
Voltage difference 
between electrodes 
 (V) 
10 
>140 
26 
6 
>160 
26 
2 
>1600 
26 
TABLE V.  
VOLTAGE AMPLITUDE REQUIRED FOR TRAPPING 
DIFFERENT SIZE PARTICLES WITH A HORIZONTAL ELECTRIC FIELD 
Voltage amplitude required for trapping different size 
particles 
(horizontal electric field) 
Particle 
radius 
(µm) 
Voltage 
 Frequency 
(MHz) 
Voltage difference 
between electrodes 
(V) 
10 
6 
6.4 
6 
6 
10.4 
2 
6 
23.3 
 
Table V shows the results for trapping different size 
particles by regulating the amplitude of the AC signal. The 
flow velocity in this case is 2 µl/h. 
 
 
Figure 8.  10 µm and 6 µm particles trapped with a horizontal electric field 
at 400 KHz and a voltage difference between electrodes of 25 V. 
Figure 8 shows trapped particles with a diameter of 10 
µm and 6 µm. The frequency of the AC signal is 400 KHz 
and the voltage amplitude difference between the electrodes 
is 25 V. The flow velocity used is 0.1 µl/h. A horizontal 
electric field is used. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

Figure 9 shows trapped particles with a diameter of 10 
µm. The frequency of the AC signal is 160 KHz and the 
voltage amplitude difference between the electrodes is 7.5 V. 
The flow velocity used is 0.1 µl/h. A horizontal electric field 
is used. 
 
 
Figure 9.  10 µm particles trapped with a horizontal electric field at 160 
KHz and a voltage difference between electrodes of 7.5 V. 
Table VI shows the results for trapping different size 
particles using a vertical electric field. The frequency and 
amplitude of the AC signal are regulated. The flow velocity 
in this case is 1 µl/h. 
TABLE VI.  
FREQUENCY AND VOLTAGE REQUIRED TO TRAP DIFFERENT 
SIZE PARTICLES WITH A VERTICAL ELECTRIC FIELD 
Frequency and voltage amplitude required to trap 
different size particles 
(vertical electric field) 
Particle 
radius 
(µm) 
Voltage 
Frequency 
 (KHz) 
Voltage difference between 
ITO and electrodes 2, 4 
 (V) 
10 
160 
8.0 
6 
160 
23.2 
2 
1200 
23.2 
 
The tables and figures show that the device is capable of 
trapping different size particles by controlling the frequency 
and the amplitude of the AC voltage signal using horizontal 
as well as vertical electric fields. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This work shows the fabrication of a dielectrophoretic 
microfluidic device for particle trapping and separation. 
Particles with different size can be separated by controlling 
the amplitude and frequency of AC voltage signals. 
Furthermore, the device can trap particles using 
horizontal electric fields as well as vertical electric fields. 
The device shows better performance in the vertical 
electric field than in the horizontal electric field; the 
frequencies required to trap particles of the same size are 
lower in the vertical direction than in the horizontal 
direction. 
Moreover, the device is fabricated using low-cost and 
low-temperature technologies allowing fast prototyping and 
the integration of the device with the technology proposed in 
[1] to form µTAS. 
As a part of future work, the cell concentration 
determination method is going to be developed enabling the 
measurements of cell concentration in blood for medical 
diagnosis and the monitoring of yeast cells’ concentration in 
food production. 
Furthermore, the analysis of the kinematic model of the 
particles and the deeper study of the associated control 
method to achieve very accurate positioning is also part of 
future work.  
Moreover, future work can enlarge the field of 
application to the analysis of biological fluids by trapping 
living cells as different types of microorganisms or nuclei. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The 
authors 
thank 
DIMES 
(Delft 
Institute 
of 
Microsystems and Nanoelectronics) staff members for their 
valuable support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N.B. Palacios-Aguilera, V.R.S.S. Mokkapati, J. Bastemeijer, 
J.R. Mollinger and A. Bossche, “Dry film resist microfluidic 
channels on printed circuit board and its application as fluidic 
interconnection for nanofluidic chips: fabrication challenges”, 
International Conference on Quantum Nano and Micro 
Technologies (ICQNM 2011), Saint Laurent du Var, France, 
pp. 71-76, August 2011. 
[2] R. Joshi, “Biosensors”, Isha Books, Dehli, India, 2006. 
[3] http://www.delta-technologies.com/Products.asp?c=1&s=23 
retreived on 20 – Apr – 2012. 
[4] J. Liu et al., “Process research of high aspect ratio 
microstructure 
using 
SU-8 
resist”, 
Microsystem 
Technologies, Vol. 10, Number 4, pp. 265–268, 2004. 
[5] http://www.microchem.com/pdf/SU-
82000DataSheet2000_5thru2015Ver4.pdf retreived on 20 – 
Apr – 2012. 
[6] http://www.microchem.com/pdf/SU-
82000DataSheet2025thru2075Ver4.pdf retreived on 20 – Apr 
– 2012. 
[7] http://www.p-m-services.co.uk/fr4_data_sheet.htm 
retreived 
on 20 – Apr – 2012. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

