 
 
Assessment of High-Frequency Peformance Potential 
of Graphene Field-Effect Transistors 
Jyotsna Chauhan, Leitao Liu, Yang Lu and Jing Guo  
Department of ECE, University Florida 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, 32611-6130, USA 
{jyotsna.chauhan, leitaoliu, yanglu, guoj}@ufl.edu
 
Abstract—We assess high frequency performance potential 
of graphene field-effect transistors (FETs) down to a 
channel length of 10nm by using self-consistent ballistic 
and dissipative quantum transport simulations. The results 
indicate that with a thin high-κ gate insulator, the intrinsic 
ballistic cut off frequency fT is above 5THz at a gate length 
of 10nm. Inelastic phonon scattering in graphene FETs 
lowers both fT and the unitary power gain frequency fMAX, 
mostly due to decrease of the transconductance. fMAX and fT 
are severely degrading in presence of source and drain 
contact resistance.  To achieve optimum extrinsic fMAX 
performance, careful choice of DC bias point in quasi-
saturation regime and gate width is needed. Modeling of 
dissipative quantum transport is based on implementation 
of parallel simulation algorithms for the self-consistent 
Born approximation in the non-equilibrium Green’s 
function (NEGF) formalism. 
 
Keywords-graphene transistors, RF performance, quantum 
transport simualtion 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Extraordinary electronic transport properties like high 
mobility and high saturation velocity make graphene attractive 
for radio frequency (RF) electronics applications [1]. Although 
the zero bandgap of 2D graphene leads to a low on-off ratio 
not desired for digital electronics applications, RF electronics 
applications do not require a large on-off ratio. Scaling down 
the channel length plays a critically important role for 
boosting the RF performance of a field-effect transistor (FET), 
and aggressive channel length scaling of graphene FET has 
been experimentally pursued. Recent experiments have 
demonstrated graphene transistors with intrinsic cut-off 
frequency projected to be at the hundreds of GHz range at sub 
100nm channel scale [2-3]. The issues of the ultimate channel 
scaling, role of inelastic phonon scattering and performance 
potential of the unitary power gain frequency of graphene RF 
transistors, however, remain unclear. 
II. 
APPROACH 
Graphene FETs were simulated by solving the quantum 
transport equation using the non-equilibrium Green’s function 
(NEGF) formalism with the Dirac Hamilton, self-consistently 
with a two-dimensional Poisson equation. Quasi-static 
approximations are used to assess its high-frequency 
performance [4]. Dissipative quantum transport due to 
inelastic phonon scattering, such as scattering due to polar 
optical phonons of the gate insulator and the intrinsic optical 
phonon of graphene, is modeled by using parallel simulation 
implementation of the self-consistent Born approximation in 
the NEGF formalism [5]. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
 
We first analyze the small signal parameters of graphene 
FETs with channel scaling down to 5nm.The ideal 
performance limits for graphene FETs are studied by running 
ballistic simulations. The potential profile of the device at VG 
=-0.6V and VD =0.5V is also shown in Fig. 1(c).  To model 
scattering, the effect of optical phonon scattering for 
ћω=180meV and ћω=55meV on device characteristics is 
included. The elastic scattering by acoustic phonons and 
charge impurities in high quality graphene has a much longer 
mean free path than inelastic phonon scattering. Therefore, 
elastic scattering is not considered as part of this study, 
focused on channel length scaling in sub 100nm regime. The 
small signal equivalent model for graphene FETs is shown in 
Fig. 1(b) where gm is the transconductance, gds is the output 
conductance, Rg is the gate resistance, RS (Rd) is the source 
(drain) contact resistance, Cgs is the small signal gate to source 
capacitance, Cgd is the small signal gate to drain capacitance 
and Cps (Cpd) is the parasitic capacitance. The model is similar 
to that of conventional silicon MOSFETs, however, with the 
element parameters being determined by device physics of 
graphene transistors. The small signal parameters are extracted 
by running quasi static simulations for channel lengths down 
to 5nm. The small quasi static approximations are valid for 
graphene FETs when the frequency of interest is lower than 
the intrinsic cut-off frequency. The channel scaling behaviors 
of the unity current gain frequency fT and unity power gain 
frequency fMAX are studied under ballistic limit as well as in 
presence of optical phonon scattering. The rest of section 
addresses the effect of parasitic source and drain contact 
resistance on fT and fMAX.  
Figure 2(a) shows the ID-VD characteristics at VG=-0.6V. 
A kink behavior with a quasi-saturation region is observed in 
graphene FETs even at Lg=20nm.This quasi-saturation 
behavior is due to the drain Fermi level aligning with  the 
Dirac point profile in the channel , followed by onset of 
ambipolar regime. The low density of states around the Dirac 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

 
 
point gives rise to decrease in current increment and explains 
the saturation observed for voltages where drain Fermi level is 
in vicinity of conduction band in channel. Since the density of 
states is low in a very small energy range around Dirac point, 
graphene FETs do not exhibit complete saturation seen in 
conventional silicon MOSFETs. The minimum output 
conductance needed for RF performance is exhibited in this 
quasi-saturation regime. The minimum output conductance 
simulated for ballistic condition is gds5.96103µS/µm. The 
value of the minimum output conductance is lowered in 
presence of optical phonon scattering.  The minimum output 
conductance simulated for ћω=180meV and ћω=55meV is  
gds4.92103µS/µm and gds4.71103µS/µm showing 17.5% 
and 20.9% decrease respectively from ballistic value. The 
decrease of the minimal gds in presence of scattering affects 
the unity power gain frequency of GFETs. 
 
Figure 1. (a) Device structure for the modeled graphene FET. 
Pd is used as the contact material, Al2O3 is used as the 
insulator material, and its thickness is 2nm. (b) Small-signal 
equivalent circuit of GFET where gm is the transconductance, 
gds is the output conductance, Rg is the gate resistance, Rs (Rd) 
is the source (drain) contact resistance, Cgs is the small signal 
gate to source capacitance, Cgd is the small signal gate to drain 
capacitance and Cps (Cpd) is the parasitic capacitance . (c) 
Band profile of the GFET at VD = -0.5V and VG = -0.6V. The 
channel length is 20 nm and EFS (EFD) is the source (drain) 
Fermi level. 
 
Figure 2(b) shows the ID-VG characteristics at VD=-0.5V. 
In presence of optical phonon scattering the transconductance 
is degraded .The maximum simulated transconductance for 
ballistic condition is gm7.228103µS/µm. While, the 
maximum simulated transconductance for  ћω=180meV and 
ћω=55meV 
are 
gm4.669103µS/µm 
and 
gm4.3281103µS/µm showing 35.5% and 40.2% degradation 
respectively from ideal ballistic behavior.  
The small signal analyses for graphene FETs is carried 
out using the equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 1(b) . The effect 
of parasitic capacitance has already been studied as part of 
earlier study. The small signal analyses require careful choice 
of DC bias conditions to get maximum value of fT and fMAX.  
Since graphene FETs exhibit quasi-saturation behavior, gds 
value is minimum only for very small drain bias voltage range. 
Therefore, the optimum DC bias point for simulations to 
ensure maximum fT and fMAX is chosen by running quantum 
quasi static simulations for gds as functions of VD at different 
VG values. Optimum bias point is taken to be a gds minima 
point in gds variation with drain voltage VD at given gate 
voltage VG . It can be extracted from Fig. 2(c). The minima 
point for gds is also dependent on VG value chosen. Fig. 2(c) 
shows the gds minima point shifts to right from VD-0.3V at 
VG=-0.4V to VD0.45V for  VG=- 0.6V in ballistic simulations. 
Similar behavior is replicated in presence of phonon 
scattering. Therefore, bias points are carefully chosen to be 
VD=-0.5V and VG=-0.6V which are optimized bias point values 
with minimum value of gds for all channel lengths from 50nm 
to 5nm under ballistic as well as in presence of  scattering . 
 
Figure 2.  I-V characteristic of the GFET as shown in Fig.1(a) 
at the ballistic limit and with scattering. Inelastic phonon 
scattering is modeled for two different phonon energies 
ћω=54meV and ћω=180meV. The gate length is Lg=20nm. . 
(a) ID versus VD at VG =-0.6V. (b) ID versus VG at VD = 0.5V. (c) 
Output Conductance gds as a function of drain voltage, VD at VG 
=- 0.4V and- 0.6V, respectively.  
 
Next part focuses on studying scaling of the small signal 
parameters at with the channel length under ballistic and 
scattering conditions.  The gate to drain capacitance, Cgd and 
gate to source capacitances Cgs are calculated by running quasi 
static simulations at VD=-0.5V and VG=-0.6V. At a channel 
length above about 10nm, both Cgd as shown in Fig. 3(a) and 
Cgs as shown in Fig. 3(b) approximately linearly increases as 
the channel length increases. Scattering has a small effect on 
the values of the intrinsic capacitances compared to its effect 
on the transconductance. The total gate capacitance is the 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

 
 
serial combination of the gate insulator capacitance and the 
quantum capacitance, and it is estimated that the gate insulator 
capacitance is a more dominant factor than the quantum 
capacitance for the modeled device at this bias point. 
The output conductance, gds increases with decrease of the 
channel length as shown in Fig. 3(c). The increase of the 
output conductance is due to the electrostatic short channel 
effects becoming more prominent at shorter channel lengths. 
Fig. 3(d) shows the transconductance gm, as a function of the 
channel length. As the channel length scales from 50nm to 
15nm, the ballistic transconductance only decreases very 
slightly from the value of about 8118µS/µm.  As the channel 
length scales down to 5nm, the transconductance, however, 
drops significantly due to electrostatic gate effect already 
explained as part of earlier study. Similar electrostatic gate 
affected degradation of gm below 15nm is observed in even in 
presence of inelastic phonon scattering. However, at gate 
lengths above 15nm, gm decreases in presence of inelastic 
phonon scattering with increase in gate length. This is 
attributed to scattering becoming stronger at larger gate 
lengths. Since fT as well as fMAX are dependent on gm, the 
degradation of gm due to scattering is not favorable. 
 
Figure 3.  Extracted circuit parameters from quantum device 
simulations as a function of the gate length at VD =-0.5V and 
VG = -0.6V at the ballistic limit and in the presence of inelastic 
scattering with two different phonon energies ћω=54meV and 
ћω=180meV . (a) Small signal gate to drain capacitance Cgd 
(b) small signal gate to source capacitance Cgs (c) output 
Conductance gds and (d) transconductance gm as function of 
channel length Lg. 
 
Next, we examine the dependence of the unity current 
gain frequency fT on channel length and scattering. Figure 4(a) 
shows that the intrinsic fT  increases with decrease in channel 
length down to 5nm due to smaller intrinsic gate capacitance 
Since gm is degraded in presence of scattering, the same effect 
is manifested in lower fT values in the presence of inelastic 
phonon scattering.  The decrease in transconductance below 
15nm is not reflected in fT because the decrease in Cgd and Cgs 
with channel length outpaces the decrease in transconductance 
as shown part of earlier study15.  The intrinsic unity power 
gain frequency, fMAX as a function of channel length is 
examined in Fig. 4(b).  Below 10nm, fMAX falls off with 
decrease in channel length. This can be explained due to 
strong dependence of fMAX on output conductance, gds and gate 
resistance Rg, which increase with the decrease in channel 
length . 
 
Figure 4. RF figures of merit of GFET vs. the gate length at VD 
= -0.5V and VG= -0.6V at the ballistic limit and in the presence 
of inelastic phonon scattering with phonon energies of 
ћω=54meV and ћω=180meV. (a) Intrinsic unity current gain 
frequency (the cutoff frequency) fT (b) intrinsic unity power 
gain frequency (the maximum oscillation frequency) fMAX , 
which 
is 
computed 
with 
zero 
source/drain 
parasitic 
capacitance and resistance (c) extrinsic unity current gain 
frequency fT and (d) extrinsic unity power gain frequency fMAX 
as a function of the gate length. The extrinsic frequencies are 
computed by considering a parasitic source and drain 
resistance of Rs=Rd =500
  m
. 
 
The RF performance is also limited by the parasitic 
contact resistance, which can limit the performance of FETs in 
real applications. Next, we study the extrinsic performance of 
graphene FETs including source and drain contact resistances 
in small signal equivalent model as shown in Fig. 1(b). 
However, the parasitic capacitance, Cps (Cpd) shown in small 
signal model is assumed to be zero in all simulations. The 
effect of parasitic capacitance has already been studied as part 
of earlier study. The contact resistances are taken to be 500Ω-
µm. The chosen value for contact resistance is typical for 
metal-graphene contacts reported in experiments at room 
temperature. Figure 4(c) shows extrinsic unity current gain 
frequency fT in presence of source and drain contact 
resistances. The extrinsic fT is less than intrinsic fT shown in 
Fig. 4(b) by a factor of 15. Similarly extrinsic fMAX is degraded 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

 
 
by a factor of 10 as shown in Fig. 4(d). Thus, the source and 
drain parasitic resistance can lower the RF performance of 
graphene FETs significantly. Therefore, the channel scaling 
should be complemented with reduced parasitic source and 
drain resistances to obtain good RF performance of graphene 
FETs.  
 
It is found that better gate design can also improve fMAX 
performance. The power gain frequency fMAX is highly 
sensitive to the width of gate. We next studied graphene FETs 
performance with metal gate as shown in Fig. 5 for gate 
widths of 1µm and 10µm. The gate resistance for metal is 
calculated with Rsh=0.33 /
