Introducing Interconnection Crossing in Ternary Quantum-dot Cellular Automata
Primoz Pecar
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Computer and Information Science, Ljubljana, Slovenia
primoz.pecar@fri.uni-lj.si
Abstract—The ternary Quantum-dot Cellular Automaton
(tQCA), a processing platform based on interacting quantum
dots, was demonstrated to be a promising paradigm for
multi-valued processing. With the development of the ternary
functionally complete set of elementary logic primitives and
the ternary memorizing cell the design of complex processing
structures is becoming feasible. Hence, the research focus is
moving from the bottom-up design approach to the logic design
approach. With the increase of processing functionality there
comes also the increase in design complexity. Due to the speciﬁc
tQCA cell geometry one of the most problematic area tends
to be the interconnection crossing. This paper introduces a
solution using a multi-layer approach.
Keywords-ternary Quantum-dot Cellular Automaton, tQCA
interconnection, tQCA wire, tQCA interconnection crossing,
multi-layer design
I. INTRODUCTION
The Quantum-dot Cellular Automaton (QCA) is perceived
as one of the promising computing paradigms, which could
be a solution to the technological limitations of the CMOS
platform [1]. Its novel concept of operation where infor-
mation is encoded in charge orientation lets information
transmission and processing to be carried out by the same
entities, named QCA cells [2].
The promising results in the binary domain have en-
couraged the research of possible implementations in the
realm of multi-valued logic [3]. The redesign of the binary
QCA (bQCA) cell, called ternary QCA (tQCA) cell, allowed
the representation of three logic values [4]–[6] and the
adaptation of adiabatic pipelining was used to solve the
issues of the tQCA logic primitives [7], [8]. Hence, the
adjustments were made to preserve the operation mechanics
and design rules that were extensively researched in the
binary domain [9]–[12].
Ternary logic is deﬁned as a generalization of binary logic
so one cannot simply use the binary functionally complete
set [13]. Therefore chain-based Post logic [14] was used
as the foundation of the tQCA implementation of a ternary
functionally complete set. The set comprises the ternary
majority gate, used to obtain conjunction and disjunction,
and the ternary characteristic functions. While the majority
gate was implemented using proven approaches from bQCA
design [8], this was not the case for the characteristic
functions. They were developed following the bottom-up
approach, i.e., by observing the behavior of simple tQCA
segments and their subsequent composition according to
Figure 1.
The geometry of the ternary quantum-dot cell.
physical design rules [15]. The existence of a functionally
complete set made the design of the basic ternary memoriz-
ing cell possible [16].
The described ternary building blocks promote composi-
tion of complex ternary processing structures following a
logic design approach. However, the research results from
the bQCA domain show that efﬁcient design highly depends
on effective solutions of building block interconnection [17].
The currently developed basic tQCAs are constrained to
remain on a coplanar surface, hence the increase of process-
ing functionality brings also the increase in interconnection
complexity. A great deal of it is contributed by crossover
problems. Due to speciﬁc tQCA cell geometry one of the
unique bQCA paradigm features, a coplanar wire crossing,
cannot be efﬁciently implemented in the tQCA domain. This
paper presents a study of a possible noncoplanar (multi-
layer) approach, which promises an efﬁcient solution of the
previously described issue.
Section II starts with a brief overview of the tQCA
platform. Section III continues with the presentation of
the tQCA wire, the interconnection crossing problem and
proposes the multi-layer solution. The conclusion follows in
Section IV.
II. TQCA PLATFORM
In general, a QCA is a planar array of quantum-dot (QCA)
cells [1]. The fundamental unit of a ternary QCA is a tQCA
cell [4]. It comprises eight quantum dots and two mobile
electrons. The quantum dots with diameter D = 10 nm are
arranged in a circular pattern with radius R = D/sin (π/8),
so that the distance between neighboring quantum dots
equals 2D (see Fig. 1). The electrons can only reside at
quantum dots or tunnel between adjacent quantum dots,
but cannot tunnel outside the cell. The Coulomb interaction
1
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

Figure 2.
The four possible arrangements of the electrons contained in a
tQCA cell that are mapped to balanced ternary values -1, 0 and 1.
between the electrons causes them to localize in quantum
dots that ensure their maximal separation (energetic minimal
state). The four arrangements, which correspond to the
energetic minimal states (ground states), are marked as A, B,
C and D (see Fig. 2). The four states can be interpreted as
balanced ternary logic values, so A is interpreted as logic
value −1, B as logic value 1 and C and D as 0. The
arrangement D is typically not allowed (desired) for input
or output cells [5]–[7]. The charge distribution in one or
more cells in the observed cell’s neighborhood, causes one
of the four arrangements to become the favored ground state.
The cell to cell interaction is strictly Coulombic and involves
only rearrangements of electrons within individual cells, thus
it enables computation. With speciﬁc planar arrangements
of cells it is possible to construct logic gates as well as
interconnects among them [18].
The reliability of the behavior of a QCA device depends
foremost on the reliability of the switching process, i.e., the
transition of a cell’s state that corresponds to one logic value
to a state that corresponds to another and vice versa. It is
achieved by means of the adiabatic switching concept, where
a cyclic signal, namely adiabatic clock, is used to control the
cells’ switching dynamic [7], [9]. The signal comprises four
phases. The switch phase serves the cells’ gradual update of
the state with respect to their neighbors. The hold phase is
intended for the stabilization of the cells’ states when they
are to be passed on to the neighbors that are in the switch
phase. The release and the relax phase support the cells’
gradual preparation for a new switch.
The correct behavior of tQCA logic gates requires a
synchronized data transfer, achievable through a pipelined
architecture based on the adiabatic clock [8]. The four
phased nature of the clock signal allows any tQCA to be
decomposed to smaller stages, or subsystems, controlled
by phase shifted signals, each deﬁning its own clocking
zone (see Fig. 3). Subsystems that are in the hold phase
act as inputs for subsystems that are in the switch phase.
A subsystem, after performing its computation locks its
state and acts as the input for the following subsystem.
As the transaction and processing in the second subsystem
is ﬁnished it can lock its state while the ﬁrst prepares for
accepting new inputs. With the correct assignment of cells to
clocking zones, the direction of data ﬂow can be controlled.
Large regions of nearby cells are usually assigned to the
same clocking zone in order to eliminate the challenges that
Figure 3.
The four phase shifted adiabatic clock signals and an example of
the adiabatic pipeline architecture applied to the QCA wire. Let C0 denote
the base signal and Ci, i = {0, 1, 2, 3} the base signal phase shifted by i
phases.
Figure 4.
The coplanar layout of tQCA cells (a) and the result of cell to
cell interaction (b).
would be caused by attempting to deliver a separate clock
signal to every cell.
The latency of a QCA circuit is determined by the number
of clocking zones along its critical path. A sequence of
four clocking zones causes the delay of one clock cycle.
Consequently minimizing the number of clocking zones
leads to better designs [19].
III. INTERCONNECTION CROSSING
The basic cell to cell interaction shown in Fig. 4a com-
prises two coplanar tQCA cells, where cell X acts as the
input and cell Y as the observed output. Current simulations,
based on the Intercellular Hartree Approximation (ICHA)
method that uses a tight-binding Hubbard-type Hamilto-
nian, show that a suitable coplanar intercellular distance
for correct state transfer equals r = 110 nm, hence the
minimum spacing between quantum-dots of neighboring
cells is approximately h = r − 2R = 58 nm [8]. The
interaction result showed in Fig. 4b reveals that the output
cell assumes the same state when the input cell’s state is A
(logic value −1) or B (logic value 1). However, when the
input cell’s state is C (logic value 0) the state propagates
2
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

Figure 5.
The pipeline architecture for a robust tQCA wire: straight wire
(a), corner wire (b).
Figure 6.
The noncoplanar layout of tQCA cells (a) and the result of cell
to cell interaction (b).
in an alternating fashion. This empowered the construction
of the basic tQCA logic primitive called tQCA wire. The
alternating propagation of state C effectively means that
wires have to be of odd lengths [6].
While the straight wire can be constructed as a single
stage pipeline (see Fig. 5a), the correct behavior of the corner
wire is ensured by means of a pipeline of two stages, as can
be seen on Fig. 5b. The ﬁrst stage ensures the propagation of
the input value to the corner, and the second stage ensures
its propagation to the output cell.
One of the unique features of bQCA is coplanar rectan-
gular wire crossover [18]. Unfortunately, in case of tQCA
this is not possible as there is no equivalent to the rotated
bQCA cell [2]. The only possible solution is the noncoplanar
approach (using multiple layers of tQCA cells), at least until
an alternative approach is found.
The vertical transmission of a cell’s state can be achieved
with the rearrangement of cells in a manner that one cell
is placed above the other so that the minimum spacing h
between quantum-dots remains unchanged (see Fig. 6a).
Thus, both layouts, i.e., coplanar and noncoplanar, obey
the same spacing rules, only the intercellular position is
changed. With the described vertical tQCA cell placement
one can construct a vertical tQCA wire that is used for
the propagation of data between layers. The analysis of
the behavior of the vertical wire (see Fig. 6b) during the
transmission of states from input cell X to output cell Y
shows that states propagate in alternating fashion, regardless
of the input state. Comparing the behavior results in Fig. 4b
and Fig. 6b indicates that the cell-cell Coulomb interaction
and minimum energy condition differ between co-axial and
co-planar arrangements in case of input states A and B, while
remain the same in case of states C and D.
The promotion of states from a coplanar wire to a vertical
Figure 7.
The two possible pipeline solutions of vertical corner wire.
wire, and vice versa, requires the presence of a tQCA that
acts as a vertical corner wire, as presented in Fig. 7. Robust
behavior can be achieved using the pipeline concept, i.e.,
splitting the corner wire to two stages, controlled by two
phase shifted clock signals C0 and C1. The implementation
itself is not so rigid as in the case of its coplanar counterpart
(see Fig. 3b) and offers two possible approaches. The one
demonstrated in Fig. 7a is directly derived from the coplanar
solution, while the one showed in Fig. 7b uses clock signal
C0 for the control of the coplanar wire and signal C1 for
the control of the vertical wire.
The presented tQCAs facilitate the construction of a
noncoplanar tQCA wire crossover. The two implementations
of the vertical corner wire result in four possible solutions
for the crossover, where two of them are shown in Fig. 8
and the other two are their combinations. For example, the
crossover approach in Fig. 8a uses the pipeline solution
based on corner wire shown in Fig. 7a for input and for
output part. In order to avoid interference between the
crossing wires two additional layers are needed, i.e., besides
the main (bottom) layer. The middle layer is used only as
a via layer, while the top one acts as the crossing wire.
Hence, the crossing wires are separated by a distance of 2h.
The distance between the vertical wire and the wire that is
crossed has to be at least 2r.
Simulations show that the correct behavior of the
crossover requires four pipeline stages controlled by four
phase shifted clock signals C0, C1, C2 and C3, which
determine a delay of one clock cycle. This means that the
behavior of the crossover wire is independent of the clock
phase applied to the crossed wire. It can be easily seen that
the crossover wire can span across multiple wires on the
bottom layer. The span depends only on the length of the
crossing wire on the top layer.
IV. CONCLUSION
The interconnection crossover represents one of the most
challenging design problems in the tQCA domain. This
3
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

Figure 8.
Two multilayer tQCA wire crossovers.
paper gives a solution that exploits a noncoplanar, i.e., multi-
layer, arrangement of tQCA cells with adiabatic pipeline
control. The crossover constructed in this manner exhibits
robustness and ﬂexibility of data propagation. The latter
goes on the account of using four pipeline stages, which on
the other hand may introduce a synchronization problem,
specially in the case of multiple crossovers of the same
wire. Therefore, our research is focused on developing a
crossover that would need less stages, thus diminishing
data transfer delay. One of the most promising is a two-
layer approach, which would also substantially simplify the
fabrication challenges [20].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was done at the Computer Structures and
Systems Laboratory, Faculty of Computer and Information
Science, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia and is part of a
PhD thesis that is being prepared by P. Pecar. It was funded
in part by the Slovenian Research Agency (ARRS) through
the Pervasive Computing research programme (P2-0395).
REFERENCES
[1] C. Lent, P. Tougaw, W. Porod, and G. Bernstein, “Quantum
cellular automata,” Nanotechnology, vol. 4, pp. 49–57, 1993.
[2] C. Lent and P. Tougaw, “Lines of interacting quantum-dot
cells: A binary wire,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 74,
no. 10, pp. 6227–6233, 1993.
[3] K. Walus and G. Jullien, “Design Tools for an Emerging SoC
Technology: Quantum-Dot Cellular Automata,” Proceedings
of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 6, pp. 1225–1244, Jun. 2006.
[4] I. Lebar Bajec and M. Mraz, “Towards multi-state based
computing using quantum-dot cellular automata,” in Un-
conventional Computing 2005: From Cellular Automata to
Wetware, C. Teucher and A. Adamatzky, Eds.
Beckington:
Luniver Press, 2005, pp. 105–116.
[5] I. Lebar Bajec, N. Zimic, and M. Mraz, “The ternary
quantum-dot cell and ternary logic,” Nanotechnology, vol. 17,
no. 8, pp. 1937–1942, 2006.
[6] ——, “Towards the bottom-up concept: extended quantum-
dot cellular automata,” Microelectronic Engineering, vol. 83,
no. 4-9, pp. 1826–1829, 2006.
[7] P. Pecar, M. Mraz, N. Zimic, M. Janez, and I. L. Bajec,
“Solving the ternary QCA logic gate problem by means of
adiabatic switching,” Japanese Journal of Applied Physics,
vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 5000–5006, 2008.
[8] P. Pecar, A. Ramsak, N. Zimic, M. Mraz, and I. Lebar
Bajec, “Adiabatic pipelining: A key to ternary computing with
quantum dots,” Nanotechnology, vol. 19, no. 49, p. 495401,
2008.
[9] P. Tougaw and C. Lent, “Dynamic behaviour of quantum
cellular automata,” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 80, no. 8,
pp. 4722–4736, 1996.
[10] C. Lent and P. Tougaw, “A device architecture for computing
with quantum dots,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 85, no. 4,
pp. 541–557, 1997.
[11] G. H. Bernstein, I. Amlani, A. O. Orlov, C. S. Lent, and G. L.
Snider, “Observation of switching in a quantum-dot cellular
automata cell,” Nanotechnology, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 166–173,
Jun. 1999.
[12] K. Walus, G. Schulhof, G. Jullien, R. Zhang, and W. Wang,
“Circuit design based on majority gates for applications
with quantum-dot cellular automata,” in Signals, Systems and
Computers, 2004. Conference Record of the Thirty-Eighth
Asilomar Conference on, vol. 2, 2004, pp. 1354 – 1357 Vol.2.
[13] E. Dubrova, Y. Jamal, and J. Mathew, “Non-silicon non-
binary computing: Why not?” in 1st Workshop on Non-Silicon
Computation, Boston, Massachusetts, 2002, pp. 23–29.
[14] E. L. Post, “Introduction to a general theory of elementary
propositions,” American Journal of Mathematics, vol. 43,
no. 3, pp. 163–185, 1921.
[15] M. Janez, I. Lebar Bajec, P. Pecar, A. Jazbec, N. Zimic, and
M. Mraz, “Automatic design of optimal logic circuits based on
ternary quantum-dot cellular automata,” WSEAS Trans. Cir.
and Sys., vol. 7, pp. 919–928, 2008.
4
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

[16] P. Pecar, M. Janez, N. Zimic, M. Mraz, and I. Bajec, “The
ternary quantum-dot cellular automata memorizing cell,” in
VLSI, 2009. ISVLSI ’09. IEEE Computer Society Annual
Symposium on, May 2009, pp. 223 –228.
[17] A. Chaudhary, D. Z. Chen, X. S. Hu, M. T. Niemier,
R. Ravichandran, and K. Whitton, “Fabricatable Intercon-
nect and Molecular QCA Circuits,” IEEE Transactions on
Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems,
vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 1978–1991, Nov. 2007.
[18] P. D. Tougaw and C. S. Lent, “Logical devices implemented
using quantum cellular automata,” Journal of Applied Physics,
vol. 75, no. 3, pp. 1818–1825, 1994.
[19] M. T. Niemier and P. M. Kogge, “Problems in designing with
QCAs: Layout = timing,” International Journal of Circuit
Theory and Applications, vol. 29, pp. 49–62, 2001.
[20] A. Gin, P. D. Tougaw, and S. Williams, “An alternative
geometry for quantum-dot cellular automata,” Journal of
Applied Physics, vol. 85, no. 12, pp. 8281–8286, Jun. 1999.
5
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

