Microfluidic Gate 
Utilization of Self-Assembling, Free-Flowing Superstructures of Superparamagnetic 
Beads for Enhanced Mixing and Colloidal Separation 
 
Bernhard Eickenberg, Frank Wittbracht, Andreas 
Hütten 
Department of Physics, Thin Films and Physics of 
Nanostructures 
University of Bielefeld 
Bielefeld, Germany 
e-mail: beickenb@physik.uni-bielefeld.de 
Alexander Weddemann 
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science 
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, USA 
 
 
Abstract— Due to dipolar interactions, superparamagnetic 
beads 
self-assemble 
into 
one- 
and 
two-dimensional 
superstructures under the influence of a homogeneous 
magnetic field. When the magnetic field is adiabatically rotated 
in-plane, the superstructures follow the rotation. We developed 
a microfluidic device in which the rotation of these 
agglomerates is used to simultaneously enhance mixing and 
allow for colloidal separation. The device shows high 
separation efficiencies. When taking the mass separation rate 
into account, the optimal working regime of the device lies 
around 120 µm/s, where it yields 80% of the total amount of 
beads.  
Keywords- microfluidics; superparamagnetic beads; dipolar 
coupling; reconfigurable matter; rotating magnetic fields. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to promising applications in biomedical analysis, 
superparamagnetic beads have been thoroughly studied 
during the last decades [1-3]. Their surface functionalization 
allows the specific binding of biomolecules like DNA or 
proteins[4,5] whereas the permanent magnetic moment of 
the particles makes it possible to manipulate their movement 
in microfluidic channels through external magnetic fields 
[6-8] or detect them with magnetoresistive sensors [9-11]. 
This makes them applicable as carriers or markers for 
biomedical diagnostics in lab-on-a-chip systems. 
Another promising application is the utilization of the 
beads as reconfigurable matter [12]: Under the influence of 
a homogeneous magnetic field, the magnetic moment 
vectors align parallel to the external field. This alignment 
leads to an increase in the effective magnetization and thus 
results in a higher magnetic stray field. Since the stray field 
is inhomogeneous, adjacent particles attract each other and 
form 
one- 
(chains) 
or 
two-dimensional 
(clusters) 
superstructures [13-15]. Once the magnetic field is removed, 
the superstructures disassemble on a time scale of several 
seconds. 
Just 
like 
the 
particles, 
superstructures 
can 
be 
manipulated with external magnetic fields as their 
orientation follows the direction of the field. Therefore, 
adiabatic rotation of the field leads to rotation of the 
agglomerates [16] which can be utilized to enhance mixing 
in microfluidic devices, as demonstrated by Lee et al. [17] 
and Sawetzki et al. [18]. They used microfluidic chambers 
and optical tweezers to confine magnetic assemblies in 
microfluidic compartments and utilize them as active 
micromixers. 
In 
this 
work, 
the 
formation 
and 
rotation 
of 
superstructures composed of superparamagnetic beads is 
employed to design a combined microfluidic system which 
enables enhanced fluid mixing and colloidal separation. 
Figure 1 shows the overview of the separation mechanism 
of the device: Superparamagnetic beads form one- and two-
dimensional rotating superstructures under the influence of 
an external homogeneous magnetic field. At the separation 
junction (two diverging channels separated by a barrier) the 
rotation of the agglomerates leads to a transversal 
movement due to interactions of the superstructures with the 
barrier. The direction of this movement depends on the 
orientation of the rotation (clockwise or counter-clockwise). 
Thus, the flow of agglomerates can be limited to either one 
of the two diverging channels, depending on the parameters 
of the external field. If no magnetic field is applied, the 
individual particles are distributed statistically over both 
channels.  
At the T-junction (depicted in Figure 2), the rotation of 
the superstructures leads to a perturbation of the boundary 
layer between the two parallel, laminar flows. A convective 
fluid flux from the upper layer into the lower layer and vice 
versa is created and leads to enhanced mixing. Without the 
rotation, thermal diffusion would be the only driving force 
for mixing. Unlike the other magnetic mixing devices 
mentioned 
above, 
this 
device 
utilizes 
free-flowing 
components that can be assembled in real-time. 
94
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

In this paper, we describe the experimental realization of 
the proposed microfluidic device. In the results section, both 
the performance of the colloidal separation and the mixing 
enhancement are evaluated. 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL 
The microfluidic structure was created by soft-
lithography techniques [19]. Figure 2 shows a microscopy 
image of the SU8-3025 casting mold. The actual channel 
system was made from PDMS that was sealed with a silica 
wafer by plasma oxidation of the surfaces. 
The structure consists of two inlet reservoirs I1 and I2 
that are connected to a T-junction via channels of 77 µm 
width. A bead reservoir B is used to introduce beads into the 
system. The main channel connecting the T-intersection 
with the outlet reservoir O has a width of 79 µm and is split 
into two channels of 28 µm width by a 23 µm wide barrier. 
Liquid flow is induced by hydrostatic pressure. 
Dynabeads MyOneTM beads with a mean diameter of 
1.05 µm at a standard deviation of 1.9% were chosen for the 
experiments [20]. The bead surface is covered with 
carboxylic acid ligands. The mass saturation magnetization 
of the MyOneTM beads is 23.5 Am2/kg. For the experiments, 
a stock solution of 10 mg/mL was diluted with deionized 
water to a final concentration of 120 µg/mL. Reservoir B 
was then filled with this solution, whereas I2 was filled with 
a 65 mM solution of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) to 
allow for optical evaluation of the mixing behavior. The 
ratio of the flow from I1 and I2 to O, respectively, was 
adjusted via the water level in I1. 
A modified RCT basic (IKA) magnetic stirrer with a 
maximum in-plane field strength of 690 Oe was placed 
beneath the microfluidic chip to provide the rotating 
magnetic field. The field strength leads to a degree of 
saturation of 73% in the MyOneTM beads. A rotation 
frequency of 50 rpm was chosen for the whole experiment.  
For evaluation, the amount of chains (transversal width 
of one or two beads) and clusters (transversal width of three 
or more beads) passing through channel A and B was 
counted separately. Superstructures fracturing at the barrier 
were counted as flowing through both channels. The ratio of 
beads flowing through channel A and B was obtained 
through the ratio of the area of the superstructures. Flow 
velocities were evaluated by tracking of superstructures in 
the channel. 
 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The influence of the rotating bead superstructures on the 
boundary layer between the water and the FAD solution can 
be seen in the optical microscopy images displayed in 
Figure 3. The interface between the two flows is highlighted 
in red. Due to hydrodynamic interactions with the 
surrounding fluid, the rotating agglomerates create a 
transversal convective flow that enhances the mixing of the 
two parallel streams. This way, they are acting as free-
flowing magnetic microstirrers that can be easily assembled 
and disassembled on demand in real-time. 
At the separation junction, the interaction of the bead 
agglomerates with the barrier leads to a colloidal separation 
as described in Figure 1. Depending on the chosen direction 
 
Figure 3.  Microscopy images of the fluid interface at the T-junction. 
The rotation of the superstructures causes a convective flux orthogonal 
to the flow direction, thus enhancing mixing. The interface between 
the two liquids is highlighted in red. For better perceptibility, the 
contrast of the yellow FAD was increased. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Operation principle of the microfluidic gate: The rotation of 
the superstructures leads to a transversal movement of the 
agglomerates at the separation junction. The direction of the movement 
depends on the orientation of the rotation of the magnetic field. Thus, 
the particle flow can be restricted to one channel.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Microscopy image of the SU8-3025 casting mold with the 
inlet reservoirs I1 and I2, the outlet reservoir O and the bead reservoir 
B. The small image shows a magnification of the separation junction. 
95
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

of the magnetic field rotation, the particle flow can be 
restricted to the upper or lower channel. As can be seen 
from the optical microscopy images in Figure 4, even high 
bead densities can be successfully guided. Figure 5 shows a 
series of optical microscopy images of the separation 
process. Through the effect of the clockwise rotation, the 
one-(5-a) and two-(5-b) dimensional bead agglomerates are 
guided into the lower channel. Only at higher flow 
velocities above 100 µm/s, breakage of chains (5-c) or even 
clusters (5-d) occurs at the separation barrier due to high 
shear induced stresses, thus reducing the separation 
efficiency. Additionally, fragments with lateral dimensions 
smaller than the width of the diverging channels cannot be 
guided successfully, since they often passed the separation 
junction without interacting with the barrier (5-f). However, 
they do not significantly lower the separation efficiency as 
the amount of beads per fragment is insignificantly low. In 
contrast to breakage of clusters, the presence of fragments is 
visible at all flow velocities. Adjustment of the bead 
concentration and the parameters for the chain formation 
process might reduce the amount of fragments, though. 
The evaluation of the separation efficiency was 
performed for clockwise rotation. Figure 6 shows the 
fraction of chains, clusters and total amount of beads that 
was successfully guided into the lower channel B. At low 
mean flow velocities (42 and 63 µm/s) more than 90% of 
the superstructures are successfully separated. The low 
percentage of particles flowing through channel A can be 
attributed to the fragments mentioned above which do not 
interact with the separation barrier. When the flow velocity 
is increased to 120 µm/s, the overall separation yield 
slightly decreases to 89% due to the increased probability of 
chain breakage: Only 71% of the chains are guided into the 
lower channel, whereas most of the clusters (84%) remain 
stable and resist the fragmentation by shear induced stress. 
At high flow velocities of 274 µm/s, cluster breakage 
becomes more common and reduces the ratio of guided 
clusters to 61%. At these high velocities, several clusters 
pass the separation junction without performing a 180° 
rotation, so that they reach channel A without interacting 
with the barrier (5-e), thus decreasing the separation yield. 
This effect could be counteracted by increasing the rotation 
frequency of the magnetic field, though a higher rotation 
speed might increase the probability of cluster breakage. 
Still, 63% of the total amount of beads are successfully 
guided into the lower channel, showing that a significant 
separation can still be achieved at these velocities. 
To analyze the efficiency of the design, we define the 
separation efficiency ε as follows: 
ε = (x − 0.5)/0.5 
 (1) 
with x as the fraction of separated beads. Thus, ε takes 
into account that without the application of an external field, 
50% of the beads would be guided into each of the two 
diverging channels. Figure 6 shows the values of ε 
depending on the flow velocity. For velocities of up to 
120 µm/s, high efficiencies between 0.92 and 0.77 are 
obtained. Only at higher flow velocities of 274 µm/s the 
efficiency drops to 0.26. However, higher flow velocities 
mean that a larger volume and therefore a higher amount of 
beads is transported and guided per time. We therefore 
introduce the mass separation rate ξ as 
ξ = Γ·cBead·ε 
(2) 
 
Figure 5.  Optical microscopy images showing the separation of 
cluster agglomerates. Even at high local bead densities, the separation 
is efficient and no clogging of the channels is observed. 
 
Figure 4.  Even at flow velocities of 274 µm/s, chains (a) and clusters 
(b) can be guided into the lower channel by clockwise rotation of the 
magnetic field. At these flow velocities, however, chains (c) and 
clusters (d) may fracture at the separation barrier due to shear induced 
stresses. Additionally, due to the high velocity, some superstructures 
pass the separation junction without interacting with the barrier (e). At 
all flow velocities, occasional fragments (f) with lateral dimensions 
smaller than the channel diameter pass the junction without being 
guided. 
96
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

with cbead as the bead concentration and Γ as the volume 
flow rate which is given by 
 Γ = |u|·A 
(3) 
with |u| as the flow rate and A as a geometry parameter. 
Since cbead and A do not depend on the flow velocity but 
only on experimental conditions which were not changed 
during the presented experiments, we introduce the 
experimental parameter α: 
α = cBead· A 
(4) 
Figure 6 shows the progression of the quantity ξ/α, which 
takes all flow velocity dependent effects into account, with 
the flow velocity. The plot shows an increase of the device 
efficiency from 38 µm/s to 93 µm/s when increasing the flow 
velocity from 42 µm/s to 120 µm/s. A further increase of the 
velocity decreases the efficiency to a value of 72  µm/s. Thus 
we can deduce that the optimal working regime for the 
device lies around 120 µm/s for an operation frequency of 
50 rpm.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The proposed microfluidic design offers simultaneous 
enhancement of fluid mixing and highly efficient colloidal 
separation through the use of self-assembling, free-flowing 
superstructures that can be built and disassembled on a time 
scale of several seconds. The structure can be realized by 
application of an external homogeneous time-dependant field 
without the need for micro-structured components. The 
optimal working regime for the device lies around a flow 
velocity of 120 µm/s for rotation frequencies of 50 rpm. 
In future work, the presented design will be used to 
separate biomolecules from a biological sample matrix and 
localize them on the bead surface, allowing for detection 
without background interference by the matrix components. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the FOR 945 for financial support in 
the framework of project 3. Alexander Weddemann 
gratefully acknowledges the Alexander-von-Humboldt-
Foundation for financial support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Pamme, “Magnetism and microfluidics”, Lab Chip, vol. 6(1),  
2006, pp. 24-38. 
[2] E. Verpoorte, “Beads and chips: new recipes for analysis”, Lab Chip, 
vol. 3(4), 2003, pp. 60N-68N. 
[3] M. A. M Gijs, “Magnetic bead handling on-chip: new opportunities 
for analytical applications”,Microfluid. Nanofluid., vol. 1(1), 2004, 
pp. 22-40. 
[4] Z. H. Fan, S. Mangru, R. Granzow, P. Heaney, W. Ho, Q. Dong, and 
R. Kumar, “Dynamic DNA hybridization on a chip using 
paramagnetic beads”, Anal. Chem., vol. 71, 1999, pp. 4851-4859. 
[5] F. G. Pérez and M. Mascini, “Immunomagnetic separation with 
mediated flow injection analysis amperometric detection of viable 
Escherichia coli O157”, Anal. Chem., vol. 70, 1998, pp. 2380-2386. 
[6] L. E. Johansson, K. Gunnarsson, S. Bijelovic, K. Eriksson, A. Surpi, 
E. Göthelid, P. Svedlindh, and S. Oscarsson, “A magnetic microchip 
for controlled transport of attomole levels of proteins”, Lab Chip, vol. 
10, 2010, pp. 654-661. 
[7] T. Deng, G. M. Whitesides, M. Radhakrishnan, G. Zabow, and M. 
Prentiss, “Manipulation of magnetic microbeads in suspension using 
micromagnetic systems fabricated with soft lithography”, Appl. Phys. 
Lett., vol. 78 (12), 2001, pp. 1775-1777. 
[8] M. Panhorst, P. B. Kamp, G. Reiss, and H. Brückl, “Sensitive 
bondforce measurements of ligand-receptor pairs with magnetic 
beads, Biosens. Bioelectron., vol. 20(8), 2005, pp. 1685-1689. 
[9] D. L. Graham, H. A. Ferreira, and P. P. Freitas, “Magnetoresistive-
based biosensors and biochips, Trends in Biotechnology, vol. 22(9), 
2004, pp. 455-462. 
[10] V. C. Martins, J. Germano. F. A. Cardoso. J. Loureiro, S. Cardoso, L. 
Sousa, M. Piedade, L. P. Fonseca, and P. P. Freitas, “Challenges and 
trends in the development of a magnetoresistive biochip portable 
platform”, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 322, 2010, pp. 1655-1663.    
[11] C. Albon, A. Weddemann, A. Auge, K. Rott, and A. Hütten, 
„Tunneling magnetoresistance sensors for high resolutive particle 
detection“, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 95(2), 2009, 023101. 
[12] P. S. Doyle, J. Bibette, A. Bancaud, and J.-L. Viovy, “Self-assembled 
magnetic matrices for DNA separation chips”, Science, vol. 295(22), 
2002, p. 2237. 
[13] S. Melle, O. G. Calderon, M. A. Rubio, and G. G. Fuller, 
“Microstructure 
evolution 
in 
magnetorheological 
suspensions 
governed by Mason number”, Phys. Rev. E, vol. 68, 2003, 041503. 
[14] A. Weddemann, F. Wittbracht, B. Eickenberg, and A. Hütten, 
“Magnetic field induced assembly of highly ordered two-dimensional 
particle arrays”, Langmuir, vol. 26, 2010, pp. 19225-19229. 
[15] A. Weddemann, F. Wittbracht, A. Auge, and A. Hütten, “Particle 
flow control by induced dipolar interaction of superparamagnetic 
microbeads”, Microfluid. Nanofluid., vol. 10(2), 2011, pp. 459-463. 
[16] A. K. Vuppu, A. A. Garcia, and M. A. Hayes, “Video microscopy of 
dynamically aggregated paramagnetic particle chains in an applied 
rotating magnetic field, Langmuir, vol. 19, 2003, pp. 8646-8653. 
[17] S. H. Lee, D. van Noort, J. Y. Lee, B.-T. Zhang, and T. H. Park, 
“Effective mixing in a microfluidic chip using magnetic particles”, 
Lab Chip, vol. 9, 2009, pp. 479-482. 
[18] T. Sawetzki, S. Rahmouni, C. Bechinger, and D. W. M. Marr, „In situ 
assembly of linked geometrically coupled microdevices“, PNAS, vol. 
105, 2008, pp. 20141-20145. 
[19] J. Friend and L. Yeo, “Fabrication of microfluidic devices using 
polydimethylsiloxane”, Biomicrofluidics, vol. 4, 2010, 026502. 
 
Figure 6.  Evaluation of the separation performance. (a) The fraction 
of the total amount of beads and of chain/cluster superstructures 
guided into channel B. (b) Development of the separation efficiency ε 
with the mean flow velocity. (c)  Development of the quantity ξ/α with 
the mean flow velocity. The optimal working regime for the device lies 
around 120 µm/s. 
97
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

[20] G. Fonnum, C. Johannson, A. Molteberg, S. Mørup, and E. Aksnes, 
“Characterisation of Dynabeads ® by magnetization measurements 
and mossbauer spectroscopy”, J. Magn. Magn. Mat., vol. 293, 2005, 
pp. 41-47.  
98
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

