Tunable Plasmonic Nanogap Resonators 
Tiziana C. Bond, Mihail Bora, Allan S.-P. Chang,  
Center of Micron and Nano Technology 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Livermore, USA 
e-mail: bond7@llnl.gov, bora1@llnl.gov, chang@llnl.gov 
 
 
Abstract—We present a new class of plasmonic substrates 
based on two-dimensional rectangular array of nanopillars 
over very large areas (4” wafers). The gap between each pair of 
neighboring nanopillars is small enough (< 100 nm) that highly 
confined plasmonic cavity resonances are supported in 
between such pairs. The resonant structures are tunable in the 
400-800nm visible range with strong field enhancements and 
antireflective performance, up to 80% of incident light due to a 
highly efficient coupling and trapping. Because of their design 
and fabrication flexibility, these nanotemplates they can 
impact various fields, from detection and spectroscopy to 
energy harvesting to photovoltaic.  
Keywords- 
plasmonics; 
resonant 
cavity; 
tunability; 
nanolithography. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Plasmonic nanostructures are widely investigated due to 
their strong controllability potential which suite their 
exploitation in disparate fields from bio-molecular detection 
[1-3] to sub-wavelength optics [4-6] and photovoltaic 
technology [7-9]. A plethora of 2D particle geometries have 
been employed but typically offer enhancements over narrow 
wavelength and incident angle ranges [10, 11]. There are 
currently new efforts in overcoming this inherent limitation 
of plasmonic nanostructures exploring also the third 
dimension [12-15]. Here, we propose a controllable 
broadband, tunable platform in which vertical plasmon 
resonant nanocavities are arranged in uniform and dense 
arrays of coupled metallic nanowires [16]. Tuning and 
broadening of the plasmonic multiple resonances is obtained 
by controlling the geometrical dimensions of the cavity, i.e 
interpillar gaps and heights, or the optical properties of the 
environment, i.e., the dielectric constant. In particular, the 
vertical dimension dictates the total number of supported 
wavelength resonances, whereas the horizontal dimension is 
responsible for the quality factor Q of the cavities.  Using 
such knobs, UV to IR spectrum could be covered at once 
with less or more resonant plasmonic features favoring the 
conditions for either specific wavelength alignment with 
high Q as needed in spectroscopy or widely absorbing 
plasmons more critical in energy harvesting applications.  
Furthermore, because of the square lattice arrangement of the 
pillars, the platform is also polarization independent which 
can be advantageous as it reduces requirements of the 
available sources (i.e., Light Emitting Diodes or LEDs). In 
the following we will discuss about the technology providing 
high density tunable plasmonic paired nanopillars with 
excellent control of the cavity size over 4” wafers. Tuning of 
the plasmon resonance in the 400-800 nm range is 
demonstrated by controlling the geometrical dimensions of 
the cavity and the dielectric environment. The reflectivity 
and absorbance of the arrays of cavities for gold, silver and 
aluminum metals are presented. The limitations for the 
implementation 
of 
such 
a 
structure 
are 
discussed 
nevertheless showing that the averaged absorbance can be 
increased above 80%, a remarkable feature considering that 
these metals are used to fabricate highly reflective optical 
mirrors.      
The paper is structured as follows: we will provide first a 
description of the experimental work, including the 
fabrication 
details, 
the 
principle 
of 
operation, 
the 
characterization setup , along with  data derivation and 
model validation. Discussion of the results will follow. 
Finally, the conclusion and future outlook are presented.  
 
 
II. 
EXPERIMENTS 
A. Fabrication of Nanopillr Templates 
The plasmonic substrate is composed of a rectangular 
array of vertical nanopillars coated with either gold, silver or 
he fabrication steps are reported in Fig. 1 
 
  
Figure 1.  Fabrication steps details. 
The period of the array is 360 nm, chosen such that 
insignificant diffraction grating effects take place in the 
visible spectrum. The nanopillar array template is patterned 
56
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

using laser interference lithography [17] over 4” wafers that 
are coated with half-micron thick photoresist. The laser 
wavelength for the holography is 413 nm and the dose ~ 40 
mJ/cm2. The resultant photoresist structure is a periodic array 
of pillars with pitch of 360 nm and diameter ranging between 
130 - 150 nm due to source dose variation. The patterned 
photoresist acts as the etching mask in a subsequent step of 
ion beam milling which enables the transfer of the geometry 
into a silicon or fused silica substrate. Further, the structure 
is either sputtered with conformal metallic films or coated 
first with a thick layer of Al2O3 by Atomic Layer Deposition 
(ALD) followed by a subsequent step of conformal 
sputtering of thinner metal layers. In this context we will 
discuss only the results obtained with the former as it gives 
more flexibility in controlling the aspect ratio of height vs. 
gap (or diameter of the pillars) due to the different vertical 
vs. sidewall deposition rates, eventually resulting more 
amenable to achieve the desired tunability. In fact, the height 
and diameter of the pillars are determined by the etch time 
and sputtering time respectively as shown in Figs. 2a and 2b. 
Incidentally, the combined ALD/sputtering process becomes 
more appealing for applications that require much smaller 
gaps (< 10 nm) such as Surface Enhanced Raman 
Spectroscopy, as it helps in refining the dimensions at the 
atomic level [18].  Pairs of vertically aligned nanopillars 
form a metal-dielectric-metal (MDM) waveguide when the 
edge to edge separation is closer than 100 nm (Fig. 2c). 
Plasmon modes are excited by normal incident light waves in 
the transverse magnetic (TM) polarization mode as 
exemplary polarization; for the transverse electric (TE) 
results would be just the same given the lattice symmetry. 
 
B. Plasmonic Resonance Cavity Model 
The resonant modes of the cavity are formed by the 
interference of forward and backward propagating waves and 
are determined by the dispersion relation of the waveguide 
and the phase shifts at each end 
 
 
2ksph  +  φ1 +  φ2 = 2mπ , 
 (1) 
 
where ksp is the wavevector of the surface plasmon wave, h is 
the length of the cavity, φ1 and φ2, are the phase changes at 
the top and bottom boundaries and m is the resonance order. 
The dispersion relation, ksp(ω)  can be approximated with 
that of a semi-infinite planar MDM waveguide or calculated 
nuemrically. Fig. 2d shows the electric field amplitude 
profile for a resonant mode of order m = 4, as seen from 
three orthogonal cross sections. The node and anti-node 
conditions at each end are assumed to correspond to phase 
shifts of 0 (matched dielectric) and π/2 (metal interface). In 
Fig. 2e we highlight the tangential power flow for the m = 4 
mode. A net power flow occurs in the horizontal directions 
only at the rounded tapered region corresponding to a lateral 
flow convergent into the inter-wire waveguide.  The curved 
ending acts as a sub-wavelength electromagnetic antenna 
that effectively increases the absorbance cross section of the 
cavity. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Fabrication: SEMs of the vertical metallic nanopillars viewed 
from side (a) and top (b); bar = 1 µm. Simulation: (c) Unit cell of the 
rectangular array centered on the plasmon nanocavity. (d) Electric field 
amplitude in the resonator seen from front, side and top when excited by 
noramlly incident TM mode. (e) Power flow in the vertical symmetry 
planes of the cavity channeled into the inter-pillar region from the top of 
the cavity.  
 
C. Characterization and Model Validation  
The frequency response of the resonator shows strong 
absorbance peaks that correspond to excitation of high 
electric field amplitude modes. The overall absorbance can 
be increased by adjusting the length of the resonator such 
that additional higher order modes are excited. Fig. 3 
represents the simulated and experimentally measured 
reflectance of an array with 360 nm pitch made of silver 
nanopillars of 310 nm diameter and 1000 nm height. The 
electric field amplitude profile of the mode on the vertical 
symmetry axis of the unit cell is plotted as a function of 
wavelength. The plasmon cavity shows the strongest field 
enhancements for the modes that extend further into the free 
space and have a better overlap with the incident photon 
field. However, weak plasmon modes at other wavelengths, 
suggesting that stronger absorbance of the array over the 
whole spectrum can be achieved by engineering the ends. 
The directionality of the antenna is shown in Fig. 3c. 
 
Array reflectivities were calculated for nanopillar arrays 
of variable height made of gold, silver and aluminum which 
arranged in the increasing order of their bulk plasma 
frequency [19]. The gold is significant for bio-molecular 
sensing, while silver and aluminum are relevant for 
photovoltaic applications since resonances have a better 
overlap with the solar spectrum. 
 
In Fig. 4 we show the simulated reflectance spectrum of 
360 nm pitch array of vertical nanowires of diameter 310 
57
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

nm, variable height h, and capped by a hemisphere of 
diameter 310 nm. In the case of gold only a fraction of the 
visible spectrum is covered by plasmon resonances as the cut 
off frequency corresponds to an excitation wavelength of 
550 nm, while for silver and aluminum the entire visible 
spectrum is covered. As the height of the pillar is increased 
the spacing between consecutive modes is decreasing 
enabling the cavity to have a strong absorbance at more 
excitation wavelengths. The simulations for the aluminum 
structures suggest that past a certain height, an increase in 
the length of the resonator causes a decrease in the 
absorbance strength. This can be explained by the higher 
losses of aluminum combined with longer paths of the 
plasmon at the interfaces.  Alternatively, the effective length 
of the resonator can be changed by increasing the refractive 
index of the dielectric core as shown in Fig. 4g. 
 
The effectiveness of the resonant array as a broadband 
absorber was assessed by calculating the average absorbance 
of the array in the 400-800 nm spectral range as a function of 
nanopillar height (Fig. 5). A stepwise decrease in absorbance 
is observed each time an additional resonance is added to the 
reflectance spectrum of the array.  
 
The averaged absorbance becomes larger than the values 
calculated in Fig. 5 when restricted to a frequency range 
above common semiconductor bandgaps and when weighted 
by the photon energy and the solar irradiance spectrum. If 
the refractive index of the inter-pillar dielectric core is 
increased, the cutoff plasma frequency and the plasmon 
resonance locations are red shifted and the spacing between 
resonances becomes smaller as the optical length of 
resonator is increased. Based on these arguments, aluminum 
nanopillar dielectric hybrid structures have a better spectral 
coverage than any other metal considered. Silver on the other 
hand has the lowest losses in the visible and it is most 
efficient for transferring energy from the plasmon modes 
into  
 
	  
Gold 	  
plasmon	  
antenna	  
(a)	  
(b)	  
(c)	  
 
Figure 3.  (a)  Normal incidence reflectance (simulation and experiment) 
for a gold  nanocavity 1000 nm long, 60 nm wide, showing full  resonances 
of order 4, and  5. (b) Electric field amplitude of the plasmon mode in the 
center of the cavity plotted as a function of position and excitation 
wavelength. (c) Radar mapping showing directionality of the nanopillar 
antennae. 
the absorptive dielectric material. The gold nanowire arrays 
have a significant potential for biological sensing.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.   Simulations of the normal incidence reflected power for  gold 
(a), silver (b) and aluminum (c) as a function of wavelength and pillar 
height. Multiple resonances can be excited bellow the plasmon cutoff 
frequency. Experimental plots of reflectivity for flat metallic films and 
arrays of height equal to 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 2 µm for gold (d), silver (e) and 
aluminum (f). (g) red-shift effect of dielectric.  In all plots the reflectivity 
scale is 0 to 1.  
 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 
We demonstrated multiresonant plasmonic nanocavities  
in vertical metallic nanopillar arrays with strong  overlap and 
coupling between incident light and the plasmon modes. The 
absorbance of nanostructured metallic surfaces has been 
engineered to cover multiple wavelengths by increasing the 
longitudinal dimensions of the plasmon resonant nano-
cavities. For large cavity sizes for aluminum and longer for 
silver and gold, the benefit of multiple resonances is offset 
by the weaker coupling into plasmons as the round trip 
58
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

losses in the cavity become significant enough to decrease 
the electric field amplitude of the modes. Using geometry 
dependent tuning, the resonances can be further optimized 
for renewable energy applications for a better overlap with 
the absorbance of semiconductor materials. Most of the 
incident light is reflected in the red side of the spectrum, as 
the resonance spacing is increased at longer wavelengths.  
 
Finally, in terms of application, it needs to be mentioned 
that the nano-cavities are envisioned for high sensitivity 
Raman spectroscopy that requires high local electromagnetic 
fields and alignment between the plasmon resonance and 
excited and scattered light [18]. Currently, besides Surface 
Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy which relies on visible 
resonant structures, we are also extending the cavity 
resonances to IR as source and detector platforms for 
enhanced IR spectroscopy. Furthermore, the tunable 
nanocavity are of particular relevance for fabrication of 
plasmonic lasers which use surface plasmons instead of light 
to pump the lasing medium [20], which we are also currently 
embarking on. Since the device structure relies on vertical 
free standing nano-pillars the plasmonic cavity region can be 
filled with any material of choice. Therefore, in addition to 
the high confinement factors shown, the cavity plasmon 
resonance can be adjusted for maximum overlap with the 
absorbance of the active material. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Average absorbance calculated over 400-800nm range. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
The authors thank Cindy Larson and Jerry Britten for 
helping on patterning the samples, Nick Teslich and Ed 
Sedillio on performing the SEM and/or FIB.. This work was 
performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of 
Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under 
Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. LLNL- JRNL- 560591. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Hirsch, L. R., Jackson, J. B., Lee, A., Halas, N. J., and West, 
J. , Analytical Chemistry , vol. 75, Jan. 2003, , pp. 2377-2381. 
[2] Rich, R. L. and Myszka, D. G., Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology , vol. 11, Oct. 2000 , pp. 54-61. 
[3] Bora, M., Celebi, K., Zuniga, J., Watson, C., Milaninia, K. 
M., and Baldo, M. A., Optics Express,  vol. 17, Jul.  2009, pp. 
329-336. 
[4] Barnes, W. L., Dereux, A., and Ebbesen, T. W., Nature, vol. 
424, Jun. 2003 ,pp.  824-830. 
[5] Ghaemi, H. F., Thio, T., Grupp, D. E., Ebbesen, T. W. and  
Lezec, H. J., Physical Review B, vol. 58, Nov. 1998, pp. 
6779-6782. 
[6] Lezec, H. J., Degiron, A., Devaux, E., Linke, R. A., Martin-
Moreno, L., and  Garcia-Vidal, F. J.; Ebbesen, T. W., Science, 
vol. 297, May  2002, pp. 820-823. 
[7] Morfa, A. J., Rowlen, K. L., Reilly, T. H., Romero, M. J., and 
van de Lagemaat, Applied Physics Letters, vol. 92,  Aug. 
2008, pp. 013504-1-3. 
[8] Tvingstedt, K., Persson, N. K., Inganas, O., Rahachou, A.;, 
and Zozoulenko, I. V., Applied Physics Letters, vol. 91,  Mar. 
2007, pp. 123514-1-3. 
[9] Westphalen, M., Kreibig, U., Rostalski, J., Luth, H., and 
Meissner, D., Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, vol. 61, 
Jan. 2000, pp. 97-105. 
[10] Anker, J. N., et al., Nature Materials, vol. 7, Jul.. 2008, pp. 
442-453. 
[11] Halas, N.J., Nanoletters, vol. 10, Oct. 2010,  pp. 3816-3822. 
[12] Zhou, W. and Odom, T., Nature Nanotechnolgy, vol. 6, Jun. 
2011, pp. 423-427. 
[13] Zhang Z., Weber-Bargioni, A.,  Wu, S. W., Dhuey, S., 
Cabrini, S., and Schuck, P.J., Nano Letters, vol. 9,  Sept.  
2009, pp. 4505-4509. 
[14] Zhang J..Z., Optical properties and spectroscopy of 
nanomaterials, World Scientific Publishers, 2009. 
[15] Kubo, N. and Fujikawa S., Nanoletters  2011, 11, pp. 8-15. 
[16] Bora, M., et al., Nanoletters, vol. 10, Oct. 2010, pp. 2832-
2837. 
[17] Fernandez,	   A.,	   et	   al.,	   	   Journal	   of	   Vacuum	   Science	  
Technology	  B,	  vol.	  15,	  Apr.	  	  1997,	  pp.	  729-­‐735. 
[18] Chang, A. S.-P., et al., unpublished. 
[19]  Blaber, M.G, Arnold, M.D,  and Ford, M. J., Journ Physical 
Cheminstry C, vol. 113,   Dec. 2009, 3041-3046. 
[20] Bora, M., et al., unpublished. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-214-1
ICQNM 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies

