Quantum Interaction Approach in Cognition, Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics
Diederik Aerts, Sandro Sozzo
Center Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Krijgskunderstraat 33, B-1160 Brussels, Belgium
diraerts@vub.ac.be, ssozzo@vub.ac.be
Marek Czachor
Department of Physics
Politechnika Gdanska
Narutowicza 11/12, 90-952 Gdansk, Poland
mcachor@pg.gda.pl
Abstract—The mathematical formalism of quantum mechan-
ics has been successfully employed in the last years to model
situations in which the use of classical structures gives rise to
problematical situations, and where typically quantum effects,
such as contextuality and entanglement, have been recognized.
This Quantum Interaction Approach is brieﬂy reviewed in this
paper focusing, in particular, on the quantum models that have
been elaborated to describe how concepts combine in cognitive
science, and on the ensuing identiﬁcation of a quantum struc-
ture in human thought. We point out that these results provide
interesting insights toward the development of a uniﬁed theory
for meaning and knowledge formalization and representation.
Then, we analyze the technological aspects and implications
of our approach, and a particular attention is devoted to
the connections with symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence, quantum
computation and robotics.
Keywords-quantum mechanics; quantum cognition; artiﬁcial
intelligence; robotics;
I. INTRODUCTION
The use of the mathematical formalism of quantum me-
chanics as a modeling instrument in disciplines different
from physics is now a well established practice and has
historically been motivated by different reasons. Firstly, this
is due to the ﬂexibility and richness of quantum structures
(vector spaces, inner products, quantum probability, quantum
logic connectives, etc.). Secondly, there are two aspects that
are seemingly characteristic of quantum entities, i.e., contex-
tuality and entanglement, and that appear instead indepen-
dently of the microscopic nature of these entities. Thirdly,
the fact that since the ﬁfties and sixties several effects have
been recognized in a variety of areas, such as, economics,
biology, psychology ...in which the application of clas-
sical structures (set theory, classical logic, Kolmogorovian
probability, etc.) is problematical and generates paradoxes.
The Allais [1] and Ellsberg [2] paradoxes in economics, the
conjunction fallacy [3] and disjunction effect [4] in decision
theory, the representation of concepts and the formalization
of meaning in cognitive science [5], are the most important
examples of situations in which classical structures do not
provide satisfactory results, but more general structures
are needed. In particular, the impossibility of formalizing
and structuring human and artiﬁcial knowledge slackened,
notwithstanding the impressive technological success, in
the development of some applied research ﬁelds, such as
artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics.
The above difﬁculties led scholars to look for alternative
approaches. Quantum mechanics then provided a fresch
conceptual framework to address these problems in a totally
new light. Hence, a Quantum Interaction Approach was born
as an interdisciplinary perspective in which the formalism of
quantum mechanics was used to model speciﬁc situations in
domains different from the microscopic world. In particular,
the new emerging ﬁeld of Quantum Interaction focusing
on the application of quantum structures to cognition has
been named Quantum Cognition [6]. It is interesting, in
our opinion, to dwell upon the main results obtained by
the scholars involved in this Quantum Interaction Approach.
We stress, however, that the following presentation does not
pretend to be either historically complete or exhaustive of the
various subjects and approaches that have been put forward,
but it just aims to provide an overall conceptual background
for the approach on quantum cognition in which the authors
of the present article and their collaborators are themselves
intensively involved.
The ﬁrst insights came from psychology. In 1994 one
of the authors and his collaborators proved that classical
probability cannot be used to study a class of psychological
situations of decision processes, but a more general proba-
bilistic framework is needed [7]. In 2002 a contextual for-
malism generalizing quantum mechanics was worked out to
model concept combinations [8]. This SCoP formalism was
successively improved and extended to provide a solution of
the Pet-Fish problem [9], [10]. Since 2007 explicit quantum
models in Hilbert and Fock spaces have been elaborated
to describe experimental membership weights of concept
disjunctions and conjunctions [11], [12], [13], [14], [15],
[16]. These models were then applied to study the Ellsberg
paradox, the conjunction fallacy and disjunction effect in
decision theory [12], [14], [17], and a number of quantum
effects, e.g., superoposition, interference, entanglement, con-
textual emergence, have been recognized in these effects.
This fact led the authors to put forward the hypothesis
that human thought presents two intertwined modes, one
modeled by classical logic and the other mostly modeled by
quantum mechanics [14].
35
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

Concerning cognitive models of knowledge representa-
tion, it was shown that modern approaches to semantic
analysis, if reformulated as Hilbert space problems, reveal
quantum structures similar to those employed in concept
representation. In 2004 two of the authors recognized quan-
tum structures in latent semantic analysis and in distributed
representations of cognitive structures developed for the
purposes of neural networks [18].
Interesting ideas came from information retrieval. In 2003
Dominic Widdows proved that the use of quantum logic
connective for negation, i.e., orthogonality, provided a more
efﬁcient algorithm than the corresponding Boolean ‘not’
of classical logic for exploring and analyzing word and
meaning [19], [20], [21]. In 2004 Keith van Rijsbergen
claimed in his book that the Hilbert space formalism was
more effective than an unstructured vector space to supply
theoretical models in information retrieval [22]. Since then,
several quantum effects have been recognized in information
retrieval and natural language processing, e.g., superposition,
uncertainty, entanglement [23].
In 2006, Peter Bruza and his collaborators applied quan-
tum structures to model semantic spaces and cognitive
structures. More speciﬁcally, they undertook studies on the
formalization of context effects in relation to concepts [24],
and investigated the role of quantum structures in language,
i.e., the entanglement of words in human semantic space
resulting from violations of Bell’s inequalities [25], [26].
In decision making important contributions were made
by Jerome Busemeyer, Andrei Khrennikov and their col-
laborators. More speciﬁcally, in 2006 Busemeyer modeled
the game theoretic variant of the disjunction effect on a
quantum game theoretic model and used the Sch¨odinger
equation to describe the dynamics of the decision process
[27]. The proposed model is a part of a general operational
approach of comparing classical stochastic models with
quantum dynamic models, and deciding by comparison with
experimental data which of them has most predictive power
[28]. In 2008 Khrennikov presented a quantum model for
decision making: he found an algorithm to represent prob-
abilistic data by means of complex probability amplitudes,
and used the algorithm to model the Prisoners Dilemma and
the disjunction effect [29].
Quantum structures were hypothesized in the studies of
holographic models of memory, which is an old research
ﬁeld in the psychology of memory. The metaphor which
originally started this ﬁeld is holography, that is, the ob-
served fact that the human brain seems to have not really
‘places’ for different functions (holonomic brain theory)
[30]. But, holography is a ‘wave effect related to electromag-
netism’, as is well known from physics [31]. For this reason,
some authors suggested that the results obtained in these
holographic models of memory are due to an underlying
quantum structure [32], [33], [34].
We will discuss the presence of quantum structures and
their role in cognition, knowledge representation and in-
formation retrieval in a forthcoming paper [35]. In the
present paper we instead focus on the application of quantum
structures to semantic analysis, artiﬁcial intelligence and
robotics. More speciﬁcally, we summarize in Sec. II the main
results that have been obtained by one of us in quantum
cognition, including the hypothesis about the existence of
a quantum layer in human mind. In Sec. III we instead
explore how quantum structures can be successfully used
to construct models in semantic analysis and symbolic
artiﬁcial intelligence. Finally, in Sec. IV we investigate
the links between our quantum cognition approach and
quantum robotics, which is an emerging ﬁeld that connects
robot technology with quantum computation. We suggest,
in particular, that macroscopic devices can be constructed
which efﬁciently simulate quantum computers, thus avoiding
the difﬁculties arising from the utilization of microscopic
entities in quantum computation and robotics.
To conclude this section, we recall that the Quantum
Interaction Group organizes each year an international con-
ference on the Quantum Interaction Approach (see, e.g.,
[36], for the ﬁrst three editions) in which physicists, mathe-
maticians, philosophers, psychologists, computer scientists
meet to present and discuss the new results obtained in
applying quantum structures to social, cognitive, semantic
processes. We ﬁnally stress that, by the locution ‘quantum
structures’, we actually mean those structures which do not
admit a classical representation, thus requiring either the
entire quantum formalism or a generalization of it. A better
locution would be ‘quantum-like structures’. We however
prefer maintaining the former locution in this paper both
because it is widespread in the literature and to emphasize
the non-classical character of such structures.
II. QUANTUM STRUCTURE IN HUMAN THOUGHT
The proposal of using non-classical logical and probabilis-
tic structures outside physics came primarily from an accu-
rate analysis of the nature of the quantum mechanical prob-
ability model and of the difference between classical and
quantum probabilities [37], [38], [39], [40], [41], [42]. This
critical comparison led us to conclude that classical proba-
bilistic structures formalize the subjective ignorance about
what actually happens, hence they model only situations
that admit an underlying deterministic process. However, it
is well known that situations exist in quantum mechanics
which are fundamentally indeterministic, in the sense that
there is not necessarily an underlying deterministic process
independent of the context. Whenever this reasoning is ap-
plied to decision processes, one can see that human decision
models are quantum in essence, because opinions are not
always determined. This result has been shown by one of us
by working out a quantum model for the decision process
in an opinion poll [7]. But, the domain where classical
set-theoretical based structures most maniﬂestly failed was
36
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

concept theory and, speciﬁcally, the study of ‘how concepts
combine’. This failure was explicitly revealed by Hampton’s
experiments [43], [44] which measured the deviation from
classical set-theoretic membership weights of exemplars
with respect to pairs of concepts and their conjunction
or disjunction. Hampton’s investigation was motivated by
the so-called Guppy effect in concept conjunction found
by Osherson and Smith [5]. These authors considered the
concepts Pet and Fish and their conjunction Pet-Fish, and
observed that, while an exemplar such as Guppy was a very
typical example of Pet-Fish, it was neither a very typical
example of Pet nor of Fish. Therefore, the typicality of a
speciﬁc exemplar with respect to the conjunction of concepts
shows a classically unexpected behavior. Since the work of
Osherson and Smith, the problem has been referred to as the
Pet-Fish problem and the effect has been called the Guppy
effect. It can be shown that fuzzy set based theories [45],
[46], [47] cannot model this ‘typicality effect’. Hampton
identiﬁed a Guppy-like effect for the membership weights of
exemplars with respect to both the conjunction [43] and the
disjunction [44] of pairs of concepts. Several experiments
have been performed (see, e.g., [48]) and many approaches
have been propounded to provide a satisfactory mathematical
model of concept combinations, but none of them provides
a satisfactory description or explanation of such effects.
Trying to cope with these difﬁculties one of the authors has
proposed, together with some co-workers, a SCoP formalism
which is a generalization of the quantum formalism [8], [9],
[10], [49]. In the SCoP formalism each concept is associated
with well deﬁned sets of states, contexts and properties.
Concepts change continuously under the inﬂuence of a
context and this change is described by a change of the
state of the concept. For each exemplar of a concept, the
typicality varies with respect to the context that inﬂuences
it, which implies the presence of both a contextual typicality
and an applicability effect. The Pet-Fish problem is solved
in the SCoP formalism because in different combinations
the concepts are in different states. In particular, in the
combination Pet-Fish the concept Pet is in a state under
the context The Pet is a Fish. The state of Pet under the
context The Pet is a Fish has different typicalities, which
explains the guppy effect. Inspired by the SCoP formalism,
a mathematical model using the formalism of quantum
mechanics, both the quantum probability and Hilbert space
structures, has been worked out which allows one to re-
produce the experimental results obtained by Hampton on
conjunctions and disjunctions of concepts. This formulation
identiﬁes the presence of typically quantum effects in the
mechanism of combination of concepts, e.g., contextual
inﬂuence, superposition, interference and entanglement [11],
[12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [50]. Quantum models have also
been elaborated to describe the disjunction effect and the
Ellsberg paradox, which accord with the experimental data
collected in the literature [12], [14], [17].
The analysis above allowed the authors to put forward the
hypothesis that two structured and superposed layers can
be identiﬁed in human thought: a classical logical layer,
that can be modeled by using a classical Kolmogorovian
probablity framework, and a quantum conceptual layer, that
does not admit a Kolmogorovian probabilistic model. The
latter mode can instead be modeled by using the probabilistic
formalism of quantum mechanics. We stress, to conclude this
section, that the thought process in the quantum conceptual
layer is strongly inﬂuenced by the overall conceptual land-
scape, hence context effects become fundamental.
III. QUANTUM STRUCTURE IN ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE
Cognitive models of knowledge representation are rele-
vant also from a technological point of view, for the rep-
resentation of objects, categories, relations between objects,
etc., play a central role in the development of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence. In the last years techniques coming from quantum
information theory have been implemented in the studies
on semantic analysis and neural networks. In 2004 two of
the authors proved that modern approaches to quantitative
linguistics and semantic analysis, when reformulated as
Hilbert space problems, reveal formal structures that are
similar to those known in quantum mechanics and quantum
information theory, hence in the quantum models on con-
cept representation [18]. Similar situations are recurring in
distributed representation of cognitive structures developed
for the purpose of neural networks. Let us discuss two
interesting aspects of these quantum approaches.
Modern approaches to semantic analysis typically model
words and their meanings by vectors from ﬁnite-dimensional
vector spaces (see, e.g., latent semantic analysis [51]). Se-
mantic analysis is mainly based on text co-occurence ma-
trices and data-analysis technique employing singular value
decomposition. Various models of semantic analysis provide
powerful methods of determining similarity of meaning of
words and passages by analysis of large text corpora. The
procedures are fully automatic and allow to analyze texts by
computers without an involvment of any human understand-
ing. The interesting thing is that there are strong similarities
between latent semantic analysis and formal structures of
quantum information theory. Latent semantic analysis is
essentially a Hilbert space formalism. One represents words
by vectors spanning a ﬁnite-dimensional space and text pas-
sages are represented by linear combinations of such words,
with appropriate weights related to frequency of occurence
of the words in the text. Similarity of meaning is represented
by scalar products between certain word-vectors (belonging
to the so-called semantic space). In quantum information
theory words, also treated as vectors, are being processed
by quantum algorithms or encoded/decoded by means of
quantum cryptographic protocols. Although one starts to
think of quantum programming languages, the semantic
37
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

issues of quantum texts are difﬁcult to formulate. Latent
semantic analysis is in this context a natural candidate as a
starting point for “quantum linguistics”. Still, latent semantic
analysis has certain conceptual problems of its own. As
stressed by many authors, the greatest difﬁculty of this
theory is that it treats a text passage as a “bag of words”, a set
where order is irrelevant. The difﬁculty is a serious one since
it is intuitively clear that syntax is important for evaluation of
text meaning. The sentences “Mary hit John” and “John hit
Mary” cannot be distinguished by latent semantic analysis;
“Mary did hit John” and “John did not hit Mary” have
practically identical representations in this theory because
‘not’ is in latent semantic analysis a very short vector. What
latent semantic analysis can capture is that the sentences
are about violence. We think that experience from quantum
information theory may prove useful here. A basic object
in quantum information theory is not a word but a letter.
Typically one works with the binary alphabet consisting of
0 and 1 and qubits. Ordering of qubits is obtained by means
of the tensor product: we maintain that ordering of words
can be obtained in the same way.
In 1990 Smolensky [52] proposed the introduction of
tensor products of vectors to solve the so-called binding
problem, i.e., how to keep track of which features belong
to which objects in a formal connectionist model of coding.
In the linguistic framework of semantic analysis the binding
problem is equivalent to the problem of representing syntax.
More speciﬁcally, one represents an activity state of a
network by a vector (in a ﬁxed basis), then a predicate
p(a, b), such as eat(John, fish), is represented by the
vector r1⊗a+r2⊗b, where the vectors rk represent roles and
a, b are ﬁllers. A predicate is, accordingly, represented by an
entangled activity state. It is important to note that tensor
products are more ‘economic’ than Cartesian products, be-
cause of the identiﬁcations (α|ψ⟩) ⊗ |φ⟩ = |ψ⟩ ⊗ (α|φ⟩) =
α(|ψ⟩ ⊗ |φ⟩), thus Hilbert (or Fock) spaces automatically
perform a kind of dimensional reduction, which is the
main idea of both latent semantic analysis and distributed
representation. Furthermore, if one is interested in binding,
more than ordering, words, then further compression is
possible by employing bosonic or fermionic Fock spaces.
The above proposals on the advantages of using the
quantum formalism in theories as semantic analysis and
symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence ﬁnd a straightforward theoret-
ical support in our approach in cognitive science followed in
[9], [10] and summarized in Sec. II. Indeed, if the conceptual
mode of human thought has a formal quantum structure, then
it is natural to assume that the quantum formalism should
be more successfully employed in cognitive disciplines. The
same conclusion can be drawn if one assumes that the brain
is a quantum device, as done in [53]. But we stress that
such an assumption is not needed in our approach (a similar
remark will be made in Sec. IV with respect to quantum
robotics).
IV. QUANTUM STRUCTURE IN ROBOTICS
The idea of a quantum robot meant as a complex quantum
system interacting with an external environment through
quantum computers was introduced by Paul Benioff in 1998
[54]. Benioff undertook the study of quantum robots from
a physical perspective. The ﬁrst applications of Benioff’s
proposal to robot technology are due to Daoyi Dong et al.
[55]. The model of a quantum robot suggested by these au-
thors is made up of multi-quantum computing units, a quan-
tum controller/actuator and information acquisition units. A
quantum robot has also several learning control algorithms,
including quantum searching aglorithms and quantum re-
inforcement learning algorithms. The standard problems
afﬂicting classical robotics, i.e., robots’ intelligence, sensor
performance, speed of learning and decision making, are
solved by using quantum sensors, parallel computing, fast
searching and efﬁcient learning from quantum algorithms.
In particular, the authors point out the advantages in using
Grover’s search algorithm, which reduces the complexity of
the search algorithm with respect to classical robots.
We observe that the above insights and ideas rest on the
possibility of constructing real quantum computers, imple-
menting quantum operations on microscopic entities, and
thus exploiting the computational advantages that quantum
computation should guarantee over classical computation.
It is however well known that several technical difﬁcul-
ties, besides conceptual hindrances, occur whenever one
accepts to consider seriously the possibility of constructing
a concrete quantum computer. The control and manipulation
of individual quantum systems, the necessity of robustly
representing quantum information, the actual feasibility in
performing quantum algorithms, are examples of such difﬁ-
culties. Hence, also the realizability of an efﬁcient quantum
robot strongly depends on these technological obstacles.
Let us now come to our quantum cognition approach
summarized in Sec. II. Here, the fact that the formalism
of quantum mechanics can be successfully employed to
model concept representation, decision making and cognitive
processes suggests that, conversely, the processes working
in human mind have structurally a quantum nature. And
this fact does not necessarily entail the compelling require-
ment that microscopic quantum processes occur in human
mind. Indeed, following the quantum cognition approach,
the hypothesis is rather that macroscopic processes can entail
quantum structure without the necessity of the presence of
microscopic quantum processes giving rise to these macro-
scopic processes. As a consequence of this hypothesis, one
could maintain that human mind itself works as a system
which is closer to a quantum computer than it is to a classical
computer. It does not necessarily have to be equivalent
with a quantum computer – we believe it is not –, but
entailing quantum structure gives it similar advantages in
computing power than the ones that quantum computers
38
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

have over classical computers. This insight could explain,
in particular, why artiﬁcial intelligence and robotics are still
facing some fundamental problems, notwithstanding their
impressive technological success: this is due to the fact that
they use the paradigm of classical computation which is not
powerful enough to perform the operations that the human
mind is able to do. Let us ﬁnally recall that some of us have
worked out macroscopic models (connected vessels of water,
quantum machine, ...) which show a quantum behavior and
exhibit typical features of quantum mechanical entities, i.e.,
contextuality, entanglement, violation of Bell’s inequalitities,
etc. [39], [40], [41], [49]. This result is relevant in the
perspective of quantum robotics because it opens up the
possibility that the resources of quantum computation can
be sought in other types of realizations than microscopic
quantum entities and qubits. One could indeed envisage the
possibility of elaborating (eventually complex) macroscopic
devices which perform quantum algorithms, thus simulating
quantum computers and exploiting the enormous extra power
coming from quantum computation. In this way, the fore-
going problems connected with the control of microscopic
entities would be avoided and, better, the possibility of
performing quantum computation by using only classical
physics could potentially allow one to increase the resources
of quantum computation itself.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Grants G.0405.08 and
G.0234.08 of the Flemish Fund for Scientiﬁc Research.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Allais, “Le comportement de l’homme rationnel devant
le risque: Critique des postulats et axiomes de l’´Ecole
Am´ericaine,” Econometrica, vol. 21, pp. 503–546, 1953.
[2] D. Ellsberg, “Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms,” Quart.
J. Econ., vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 643–669, 1961.
[3] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Extension versus intuitive
reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in probability judgment,”
Phych. Rev., vol. 90, pp. 293–315, 1983.
[4] A. Tversky and E. Shaﬁr, “The disjunction effect in choice
under uncertainty,” Psych. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 305–309, 1992.
[5] D. N. Osherson and E. E. Smith, “On the adequacy of
prototype theory as a theory of concepts,” Cognition, vol.
9, pp. 35–58, 1981.
[6] See the recent wikipedia page on Quantum Cognition:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum cognition.
[7] D. Aerts and S. Aerts, “Applications of quantum statistics in
psychological studies of decision processes,” Found. Sci., vol.
1, pp. 85–97, 1994.
[8] L. Gabora and D. Aerts, “Contextualizing concepts using a
mathematical generalization of the quantum formalism,” J.
Exp. Theor. Art. Int., vol. 14, 327–358, 2002.
[9] D. Aerts and L. Gabora, “A theory of concepts and their
combinations I: The structure of the sets of contexts and
properties,” Kybernetes, vol. 34, pp. 167–191, 2005.
[10] D. Aerts and L. Gabora, “A theory of concepts and their
combinations II: A Hilbert space representation,” Kybernetes,
vol. 34, pp. 192–221, 2005.
[11] D. Aerts, “Quantum particles as conceptual entities. A Pos-
sible Explanatory Framework for Quantum Theory,” Found.
Sci., vol. 14, pp. 361–411, 2009.
[12] D. Aerts, “Quantum structure in cognition,” J. Math. Psych.,
vol. 53, pp. 314–348, 2009.
[13] D. Aerts, S. Aerts, and L. Gabora, “Experimental evidence for
quantum structure in cognition,” Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 5494, pp. 59–70, 2009.
[14] D. Aerts and B. D’Hooghe, “Classical logical versus quantum
conceptual thought: Examples in economy, decision theory
and concept theory,” Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 5494, pp. 128–142, 2009.
[15] D. Aerts, “Quantum interference and superposition in cogni-
tion: Development of a theory for the disjunction of concepts,”
in Worldviews, Science and Us: Bridging Knowledge and Its
Implications for Our Perspectives of the World, D. Aerts, B.
D’Hooghe, and N. Note, Eds. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc,
2011, to be published.
[16] D. Aerts, “General quantum modeling of combining concepts:
A quantum ﬁeld model in Fock space,” archive reference and
link: http://uk.arxiv.org/abs/0705.1740.
[17] D. Aerts, B. D’Hooghe, and E. Haven, “Quantum experimen-
tal data in psychology and economics,” Int. J. Theor. Phys.,
vol. 49,pp. 2971–2990, 2010.
[18] D. Aerts and M. Czachor, “Quantum aspects of semantic
analysis and symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence,” J. Phys. A-Math.
Gen., vol. 37, pp. L123–L132, 2004.
[19] D. Widdows, “Orthogonal negation in vector spaces for
modelling word-meanings and document retrieval,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2003, pp. 136–143.
[20] D. Widdows, Geometry and Meaning, CSLI Publications, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 2006.
[21] D. Widdows and S. Peters, “Word vectors and quantum logic:
Experiments with negation and disjunction,” in Mathematics
of Language 8, Indiana, IN: Bloomington, 2003, pp. 141–154.
[22] K. van Rijsbergen, The Geometry of Information Retrieval,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[23] Y. Li and H. Cunningham, “Geomteric and quantum methods
for information retrieval,” ACM Sigir Forum, vol. 42, no. 2,
pp. 22–32, 2003.
[24] P. D. Bruza and R. J. Cole, “Quantum logic of semantic space:
An explanatory investigation of context effects in practical
reasoning,” in We Will Show Them: Essays in Honour of Dob
Gabbay, S. Artemov et al., Eds., College Publications, 2005.
39
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

[25] P. D. Bruza, K. Kitto, D. McEvoy, and C. McEvoy, “En-
tangling words and meaning,” in Proceedings of the Second
Quantum Interaction Symposium, Oxford, UK, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2008, pp. 118–124.
[26] P. D. Bruza, K. Kitto, D. Nelson, and C. McEvoy, “Extracting
spooky-activation-at-a-distance from considerations of entan-
glement,” in Proceedings of QI 2009-Third International
Symposium on Quantum Interaction, P. D. Bruza, D. Sofge,
W. Lawless, C. J. van Rijsbergen, and M. Klusch, Eds., LNCS
vol. 5494, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2009, pp. 71–83.
[27] J. R. Busemeyer, Z. Wang, and J. T. Townsend, “Quantum
dynamics of human decision-making,” J. Math. Psych., vol.
50, pp. 220–241, 2006.
[28] E. M. Pothos and J. R. Busemeyer, “A quantum probabil-
ity explanation for violations of ‘rational’ decision theory,”
Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 2009.
[29] A. Y. Khrennikov and E. Haven, “Quantum mechanics and
violations of the Sure-Thing Principle: The use of probability
interference and other concepts,” J. Math. Psych., vol. 53, pp.
378–388, 2009.
[30] K. H. Pribram, Languages of the Brain: Experimental Para-
doxes and Principles in Neuropsychology, New York, NY:
Prentice Hall, 1971.
[31] D. Gabor, “Holographic model for temporal recall,” Nature,
vol. 217, 1288–1289, 1968.
[32] P. Kanerva, “Large patterns make great symbols: An example
of learning from example,” Hybrid Neural Systems, pp. 194–
203, 1998.
[33] T. Plate, ‘Holographic Reduced Representation: Distributed
Representation for Cognitive Structures, Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications, 2003.
[34] D. Aerts, M. Czachor, and B. De Moor, “Geometric analogue
of holographic reduced representation,” J. Math. Psych., Vol.
53, pp. 389–398, 2009.
[35] D. Aerts, L. Gabora, S. Sozzo, and T. Veloz, “Quantum
interaction approach in cognition, artiﬁcial intelligence and
robotics,” in Proceedings of the Fifth International Confer-
ence on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies (ICQNM
2011), Nice, France, August 21–27, 2011, accepted for pub-
lication.
[36] See
the
pages
http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/qi2007/,
http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/qi2008/
and
http://www-ags.dfki.uni-
sb.de/ klusch/qi2009/.
[37] D. Aerts, “A Possible explanation for the probabilities of
quantum mechanics,” J. Math. Phys., vol. 27, pp. 202–210,
1986.
[38] D. Aerts, “Quantum structures, separated physical entities and
probability,” Found. Phys., vol. 24, pp. 1227–1259, 1994.
[39] D. Aerts, S. Aerts, B. Coecke, B. D’Hooghe, T. Durt, and
F. Valckenborgh, “A model with varying ﬂuctuations in the
measurement context,” in New Developments on Fundamental
Problems in Quantum Physics, M. Ferrero and A. van der
Merwe, Eds. Dordrecht, The Nederlands: Springer, 1997, pp.
7–9.
[40] D. Aerts, “The hidden measurement formalism: What can be
explained and where paradoxes remain,” Int. J. Theor. Phys.,
vol. 37, pp. 291–304, 1998.
[41] D. Aerts, “Foundations of quantum physics: A general real-
istic and operational approach,” Int. J. Theor. Phys., vol. 38,
pp. 289–358, 1999.
[42] D. Aerts, “Reality and probability: Introducing a new type of
probability calculus,” in Probing the Structure of Quantum
Mechanics: Nonlinearity, Nonlocality, Probability and Ax-
iomatics, D. Aerts, M. Czachor, and T. Durt, Eds. Singapore:
World Scientiﬁc, 2002, pp. 205–229.
[43] J. A. Hampton, “Overextension of conjunctive concepts:
Evidence for a unitary model for concept typicality and class
inclusion,” J. Exp. Psych.: Lear. Mem. Cog., vol. 14, pp. 12–
32, 1988.
[44] J. A. Hampton, “Disjunction of natural concepts,” Memory &
Cognition, vol. 16, pp. 579–591, 1988.
[45] L. Zadeh, “Fuzzy sets,” Information & Control, vol. 8, pp.
338–353, 1965.
[46] L. Zadeh, “A note on prototype theory and fuzzy sets,”
Cognition, vol. 12, pp. 291–297, 1982.
[47] D. N. Osherson and E. E. Smith, “Gradedness and conceptual
combination,” Cognition, vol. 12, pp. 299–318. 1982.
[48] J. A. Hampton, “Conceptual combination,” in Knowledge,
Concepts, and Categories, K. Lamberts and D. Shanks, Eds.
Hove, UK: Psychology Press, 1997, pp. 133–159.
[49] D. Aerts, M. Czachor, and B. D’Hooghe, “Towards a quantum
evolutionary scheme: Violating Bell’s inequalities in lan-
guage,” in Evolutionary Epistemology, Language and Culture
- A Non Adaptationist Systems Theoretical Approach, N.
Gontier, J. P. Van Bendegem, and D. Aerts, Eds. Dordrecht,
The Nederlands: Springer, 2006.
[50] D. Aerts, “Interpreting quantum particles as conceptual enti-
ties,” Int. J. Theor. Phys., vol. 49, pp. 2950–2970, 2010.
[51] T. K. Landauer, P. W. Foltz, and D. Laham, “Introduction
to latent semantic analysis,” Discourse Process, vol. 25, 259,
1998.
[52] P. Smolensky, “Tensor product variable binding and the rep-
resentation of symbolic structures in connectionist systems,”
Artif. Intell., vol. 46, pp. 159, 1990.
[53] R. Penrose, The Emperor’s New Mind, Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 1990.
[54] P. Benioff, “Quantum robots and environments,” Phys. Rev.
A, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 893–904, 1998.
[55] D. Dong, C. Chen, C. Zhang, and Z. Chen, “Quantum robots:
Structure, algorithms and applications,” Robotica, vol. 24, pp.
513–521, 2006.
40
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

