Differential Optical Sensing through Coupled Micro Ring Resonators
Ali Emre Kaplan, Geatano Bellanca
Department of Engineering
University of Ferrara
Ferrara, Italy
e-mails: aliemre.kaplan@unife.it,
gaetano.bellanca@unife.it
Paolo Bassi
Department of Electrical, Electronic
and Information Engineering
University of Bologna
Bologna, Italy
e-mail: paolo.bassi@unibo.it,
Abstract—We theoretically investigate the performance of a dou-
ble micro ring resonator for integrated optical sensing applica-
tions. The transmission characteristics of the proposed device can
be driven in two distinct operations by controlling the difference
of the round-trip phase shifts of the coupled resonators. The
enhancement of the limit of detection by a factor of 5.6 compared
to a single micro ring based sensor is demonstrated. Beside the
fact that the single and double ring based schemes have the same
spectral wavelength sensitivity of 918 nm per refractive index
unit, the latter scheme also supports the intensity interrogation
which can be used for on-chip thermal noise compensation via
integrated micro heaters.
Keywords–Micro ring resonators; Optical sensing; Integrated
photonic circuits.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Integration of microﬂuidics with Photonic Integrated Cir-
cuits (PIC) promotes new emerging biosensing technologies.
Especially Silicon based on-chip sensors draw an intense inter-
est thanks to their compactness, cost effectiveness and Com-
plementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) compatible
properties. So far, various types of on-chip Si PICs, such as
Micro Ring Resonator (MRR), Mach–Zehnder interferometer,
photonic crystal and Bragg grating have been investigated for
label-free detection [1] and, among them, MRR based sensors
provide higher sensitivity and denser integration [2]. A com-
prehensive review paper about Silicon MRR based biosensors
can be found in [3]. The add-drop conﬁguration of MRR allows
a sensing application that measures the resonance wavelength
shift according to up cladding index change induced by mi-
croﬂuids [4]. Figure 1 illustrates a typical working principle of
a ring based sensing scheme. A suitable measurement setup for
such devices consists of a tunable laser source that provides
the incoming light and a spectrometer to measure the spectral
shift of resonance wavelengths after binding.
The characterization wavelength interrogation is based
on the extraction of refractive index change information via
resonant wavelength shifts induced by the interaction of ﬂuids
and the evanescent ﬁeld of a resonant cavity. The resonance
wavelength of a single ring is deﬁned as
m · λres = neffL
(1)
where L is the circumference of the ring, neff is the effective
refractive index of the resonant mode and m is an integer,
and a modiﬁcation of neff results in a variation of λres.
The amount of the wavelength shift depends on how much
ﬂowing analyte alters the effective refractive index and it can
R
λ
P
After binding
Laser
Figure 1. Schematic of a conventional micro ring resonator based biosensor.
be formulated as [5]
∆λ = ∆ncladλres
ng
(2)
where ng is the group index of the guided mode and ∆nclad
is the refractive index change of the cladding induced by the
interaction of the ﬂuids and the ring resonator. This interaction
can occur either by analyte binding or concentration change of
substances and the types of sensing are then called label-free
and bulk sensing, respectively. The MRR with high quality
factor, or Q-factor, is desirable for enhanced detection limit
of sensing applications. However, environmental and microﬂu-
idics induced thermal perturbations must be considered since
such spurious effects may signiﬁcantly affect the spectral
wavelength shift at higher Q-factor. Previously, a sensing
scheme based on cascaded MRRs has been investigated using
shared ﬂow channel above the reference and sensing rings
where two solutions ﬂow independently [6]. However, it was
found difﬁcult to control precisely the temperature and pres-
sure of each solution. Another approach uses two frequency
locked laser sources for imprinting the temperature difference
of the rings in radio-frequency domain and achieves the state
of the art sensitivity in the order of 10−8 RIU (Refractive
Index Unit) [7] but still this method suffers from lack of
thermal equilibrium of the sensor and requires more than
one laser source. The previously reported differential sensing
platforms with thermal compensation perform only wavelength
interrogation. Here, we propose an alternative scheme based
on a double ring structure that is able to also support the
intensity interrogation that can help to eliminate the need of
external thermal stabilization systems and a reference ﬂuid
ﬂow. In Figure 2, the working principle of the proposed device
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

is illustrated. Two micro rings with the radius R1 and R2 are
indirectly coupled via a central bus waveguide. When the two
rings are synchronized (θ1 = θ2), both resonators share the
same resonance wavelength and thanks to the common light
path, which is the vertical waveguide section, the switched
wavelength propagates back to the input port, as shown in
Figure 2a. In this case, the through port in the middle and
the upper and bottom drop ports have transmission dips. In
the second operational regime, each ring switches its own
resonance wavelengths to the upper and bottom drop ports,
as a result of different round-trip phase shifts (θ1 ̸= θ2). The
through port has, therefore, two transmission dips where the
resonances appear and the transmitted powers at the drop ports
increase (see Figure 2b). The phase shift difference of the two
paths can be determined by different radius of the two rings or
by effective index detuning of the one of two ring waveguides
through, e.g., thermo-optic effect, if the resonators have equal
radii.
In our theoretical work, we assume that the rings are
identical and the induced effective index change occurs in one
of the rings, while the other ring is being used as the reference
one. Since the overall output transmissions depend only on
the phase difference, we refer to this scheme as a differential
sensing scheme.
R1
R2
θ1=θ2
λ
P
λ
P
λ
P
λ
P
λ
P
(a)
R1
R2
θ1≠θ2
λ
P
λ
P
λ
P
λ
P
λ
P
(b)
Figure 2. Working principle of the coupled ring sensing scheme:
synchronous phase shift (a) and asynchronous (b) after binding.
In this work, we will theoretically discuss the performance
of the proposed sensing scheme in terms of sensitivity, Limit
of Detection (LOD) and thermal compensation by comparing
the proposed conﬁguration to the conventional single ring
results analyzed using the same design parameters, such as
coupling strength of the vertical and horizontal coupling sec-
tions, waveguide geometry and radius. The paper is organized
as follows. In Section 2, we introduce sensor parameters,
sensitivity and limit of detection. Also, we show the effect
of phase synchronization on the transmission behavior of the
sensor. Section 3 provides the results of both wavelength
and intensity interrogations and compare the results of the
differential sensing to those obtained from the single ring con-
ﬁguration. Finally, we discuss the better performance attained
by using differential sensing for practical issues, such as the
sensor calibration and thermal compensation.
II.
TRANSMISSION CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROPOSED
SENSING SCHEME
We analytically study both structures based on the Transfer
Matrix Method obtained from coupling relationships of the
resonators in the two port and three port coupler sections
[8]–[10]. The design parameters such as radii of the rings
and coupling ratios of the horizontal and vertical couplers
are inserted in the transfer matrices. The effective refractive
index neff of the Transverse Electric (TE) mode propagating
of the Silicon-On-Insulator (SOI) waveguide (480x220 nm),
are obtained through the Finite Element Method (FEM) simu-
lations [11]. In our scenario, the bottom ring is considered
as a reference and its round trip phase shift (θ2) can be
detuned by, for example, micro integrated heaters. Instead,
the phase shift of the upper sensor ring (θ1) changes due
to the presence of the specimen. Assuming that R1 = R2,
then round trip phase shifts for sensor and reference rings are
deﬁned as θ1 = neff1 · L and θ2 = neff2 · L, respectively.
A special case occurs when the rings have the same phase
shift as shown in Figure 3a. The reﬂected wavelength reaches
its maximum near critical coupling where a high extinction
ratio is present for the through port along with weak drop port
transmissions. When the effective index of the sensor ring is
changed due to the binding of analytes on the cladding, the
reference signal (green curve) remains at the same wavelength,
while the sensing wavelength (blue curve) experiences red
shift, as shown in Figure 3b. In addition, the reﬂection power
decreases dramatically.
1552
1553
1554
1555
1556
 [nm]
-30
-20
-10
0
 Transmission [dB]
1 = 2
north drop
south drop
through
reflection
(a)
1552
1553
1554
1555
1556
 [nm]
-30
-20
-10
0
 Transmission [dB]
1 
 2
(b)
Figure 3. Transmitted powers of through port (black), upper and bottom
drop ports (green and blue) and back reﬂection (red) in initial condition (a)
and sensing operation (b).
In order to evaluate pros and cons of the presented device
over the single ring scenario, we ﬁrst need to calculate its
sensitivity using the following description [3]:
S =
∆λ
∆nclad
(3)
As we analyze the device theoretically, it is convenient
to use the ∆neff instead of the ∆nclad because the rings
are identical in both single and double ring schemes. The
minimum detectable change of the nneff determines the LOD
which corresponds also to the minimum wavelength shift
∆λ. Since this sensing scheme requires a spectrum analysis,
minimum detection depends on the setup. To eliminate setup
dependency of the measurements, an intrinsic LOD (iLOD)
can be deﬁned as [3]:
iLOD = FWHM
S
(4)
meaning that the Full Width Half Maximum (FWHM) of
the resonance peak is the lower limit of the wavelength
shift needed to distinguish two successive wavelengths. S
and iLOD are used as the test parameters to investigate the
performance of the device.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

III.
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF SINGLE AND
COUPLED DOUBLE RING SENSORS
An example of wavelength shifting at the drop ports
obtained from neff detuning is illustrated in Fig 4. Both rings
have the same radius of 20µm and the coupling ratio is ﬁxed
at K = 0.1 for both single and double ring conﬁgurations.
The green curves and the blue curves in Figure 4a represent
reference and sensing signals of the double ring sensor, respec-
tively. In the double ring scheme, the sensing signal exhibits a
red-shift and an intensity increase, while the reference signal
intensity increases by maintaining the ﬁxed wavelength. On
the other hand, the single ring sensor (see Figure 4b) has
only wavelength shift with negligible peak intensity variations.
Thus, the double ring conﬁguration also allows to analyze
intensity interrogation in addition to wavelength interrogation.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Wavelength shifts induced by the change effective refractive index
of the drop ports of the double ring (a) and the single ring (b) conﬁgurations.
The comparison of the two schemes is shown in Figure 5.
According to the ∆neff, the wavelength shifts ∆λ (red lines)
linearly increase in both devices. However, the peak intensity
variation ∆P (blue curves) is available only for the double
ring sensor and it shows a rapid increase for a small range
of ∆neff, as shown in Figure 5a. On the contrary, the single
ring sensor has a very small change in peak intensities so the
∆P remains almost constant, as shown in Figure 5b. Table I
summarizes the calculated sensing parameters. The wavelength
shift sensitivity S∆λ nm/RIU (RIU:Refractive Index Unit) is
calculated from the slopes of the ∆λ and, since both devices
have identical rings, S∆λ is found to be the same (918
nm/RIU). As opposed to the single ring case, the minimum
resonance intensity sensitivity of 515 dB/RIU within the range
∆neff
= 0.001 of the double ring sensor demonstrates
that it is possible to achieve intensity interrogation for very
accurate sensing performance in a small ∆neff span. The
S∆P increases as the index change span decreases. The most
signiﬁcant difference of the sensors appears for the limit of
detection. The resonance line width determines the iLOD
such that it ensures at least 3 dB bandwidth separation of
two successive resonances. We found that the coupled double
ring sensor requires smaller effective refractive index change to
meet iLOD condition than single ring does and the detection
limit of the double ring is found to be enhanced by a factor
of 5.6 at the price of increased insertion loss of the sensor.
0     
0.0005
0.001 
0.0015
0.002 
neff [RIU]
2
4
6
8
P [dB]
Double Ring
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
 [nm]
(a)
0
0.0005
0.001
0.0015
0.002
neff [RIU]
0
P [dB]
Single Ring
0
1
2
 [nm]
(b)
Figure 5. Comparison of ∆P (blue curve) and ∆λ (red curve) with respect
to the induced ∆neff for coupled double ring (a) and single ring (b)
sensing schemes.
TABLE I. CALCULATED SENSOR PARAMETERS: SENSITIVITIES FOR
WAVELENGTH S∆λ AND INTENSITY S∆P INTERROGATIONS AND
DETECTION LIMITS.
S∆λ[nm/RIU]
S∆P [dB/RIU]
iLOD[RIU]
Single Ring
918
0.6
2.47 · 10−4
Double Ring
918
515
0.44 · 10−4
The limiting factor for the intensity sensing is based on
the convergence of the ∆P curve. For instance, when ∆neff
is equivalent to around 0.8 nm wavelength shift, the change
in the transmitted power becomes negligible. This effect can
be noticed from Figure 4a where the green curves around the
maximum transmission are very close to each other. However,
minimum detectable intensity change is limited by the power
measurement accuracy. The curve of ∆P shown in Figure 5a
can give different values of S∆P depending on the minimum
acceptable intensity interval; we ﬁxed such value at 0.1 dB
and considered that changes below this value are negligible.
Therefore, the reported S∆P in Table I is the minimum
sensitivity. The maximum intensity sensitivity can be achieved
in smallest ∆neff such that the power of peaks increases
very rapidly and reaches very high sensitivity up to 4.5 · 104
dB/RIU within the value of iLOD. Furthermore, it is possible
to enhance the intensity interrogation range by increasing
the coupling ratio, as shown in Figure 6. Stronger coupling
strength gives rise to smoother transitions over the x-axes. But,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

as a consequence of an increased coupling ratio, the FWHM
rises and results in iLOD impairment.
0     
0.0005
0.001 
0.0015
neff [RIU]
0
2
4
6
8
P [dB]
K=0.4
K=0.3
K=0.2
K=0.1
Figure 6. Effect of coupling ratio increments on the range of detectable
∆neff in the intensity interrogation scheme.
One of the main noise sources for biosensors is thermal
noise. Either environmental or resonator based self-induced
thermal noise becomes critical for very highly sensitive sen-
sors, hence the temperature of the sensor should be precisely
controlled during the measurement. This adds another difﬁ-
culty to realize reliable sensors. To overcome this issue, the
proposed differential sensing scheme based on the coupled
resonators can in fact provide an alternative approach to
compensate thermal noise effects by an initial calibration of the
reference ring phase shift by searching the local maximum of
reﬂection that guarantees single resonance wavelength. Once
two coupled rings are synchronized, which implies θ1 = θ2,
then the resulting S∆λ and S∆P can be disposed of the
thermal noise. During the sensing process, it is possible to
retrieve spurious wavelength shift by monitoring the reference
resonance wavelength. The amount of wavelength shift gives
the portion of resonance shift of the sensing wavelength caused
by thermal noises.
IV.
CONCLUSION
We proposed and theoretically studied a novel optical
biosensing scheme based on differential sensing through the
coupled micro ring resonators in SOI technology. The assess-
ment of the sensitivity and limit of detection of the proposed
device is done by comparing the results obtained from the
conventional single ring sensor, having the same technology
design parameters such as coupling ratio and radius. Sensitivity
of the wavelength interrogation is found to be identical for each
type of device, while the double ring sensor has enhanced limit
of detection by a factor of 5.6 compared to the single ring
sensor.
In addition, the presented device also supports intensity
interrogation which is not the case for single ring if only the
spectral measurement is considered. However, such interroga-
tion is found to be possible only for a very small effective
refractive index change. The way of increasing the range of
a detectable index change is reported and possible resulting
impairment on the limit of detection is described.
Thanks to the possibility of an initial calibration of the
device by monitoring the back reﬂection, differential sensing
scheme can eliminate environmental and self-induced thermal
noises. Therefore, this scheme can provide on-chip thermal
control by integrated micro resistors on the reference ring
for realizing reliable integrated biosensors and cost effective
measurements.
REFERENCES
[1]
E.
Luan,
H.
Shoman,
D.
M.
Ratner,
K.
C.
Cheung,
and
L.
Chrostowski,
“Silicon
photonic
biosensors
using
label-free
detection,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 10, 3519, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/10/3519
[retrieved:
September,
2019].
[2]
G. A. Rodriguez, S. Hu, and S. M. Weiss, “Porous silicon ring resonator
for compact, high sensitivity biosensing applications,” Opt. Express,
vol. 23, no. 6, 2015, pp. 7111–7119.
[3]
P. Steglich, M. H¨ulsemann, B. Dietzel, and A. Mai, “Optical
biosensors based on silicon-on-insulator ring resonators: A review,”
Molecules,
vol.
24,
no.
3,
519,
2019.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.mdpi.com/1420-3049/24/3/519
[retrieved:
September,
2019].
[4]
T. Taniguchi et al., “Detection of antibody-antigen reaction by silicon
nitride slot-ring biosensors using protein g,” Optics Communications,
vol. 365, 2016, pp. 16 – 23.
[5]
T. Claes et al., “Label-free biosensing with a slot-waveguide-based ring
resonator in silicon on insulator,” IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 1, no. 3,
Sep. 2009, pp. 197–204.
[6]
D. Kim et al., “On-chip integrated differential optical microring refrac-
tive index sensing platform based on a laminar ﬂow scheme,” Opt. Lett.,
vol. 40, no. 17, Sep 2015, pp. 4106–4109.
[7]
L. Stern et al., “Ultra-precise optical to radio frequency based chip-
scale refractive index and temperature sensor,” Optica, vol. 4, no. 1,
Jan 2017, pp. 1–7.
[8]
Chang-Min Kim and Young-Joon Im, “Switching operations of three-
waveguide optical switches,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quan-
tum Electronics, vol. 6, no. 1, 2000, pp. 170–174.
[9]
H. Kogelnik and R. Schmidt, “Switched directional couplers with
alternating ∆β,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics, vol. 12, no. 7,
1976, pp. 396 – 401.
[10]
A. Yariv, “Universal relations for coupling of optical power between
microresonators and dielectric waveguides,” Electronics Letters, vol. 36,
no. 4, 2000, pp. 321–322.
[11]
COMSOL Multiphysics, https://www.comsol.com [retrieved: Septem-
ber, 2019].
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

