Quantum Computing with Charge States in Silicon : Towards a Leadless Approach
Thierry Ferrus, Alessandro Rossi, Aleksey Andreev, Paul Chapman and David Arfon Williams
Hitachi Cambridge Laboratory, J J Thomson avenue, CB3 0HE, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Email: taf25@cam.ac.uk
Abstract—Coherence time and the ease of operability of
a device are well-known requirements for the realization of
individual qubits. However, the successful integration of many
devices further restricts the choices for implementation. In
this article, we describe a device in which manufacturing
considerations have been taken into account for the device
design and the choice for material, and where leadless control
of the qubit is possible.
Keywords-Quantum computing, silicon, charge qubit, quan-
tum dots
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the early development of integrated circuits in
1958, the continuous decrease in transistor size, as described
by Moore’s law [1], has been driven by the continued
demand for increasing computing power. This has been
mainly facilitated by technological advances, which allow
the incorporation of a progressively large number of smaller
transistors onto a single chip. Quantum mechanical effects
have been found to be increasingly important in the behavior
of conventional devices at the nanometer scale, and this has
led to substantial research into the quantum properties of
nanoscale objects. In addition, devices on this scale offer
the possibility of making circuits for quantum information
processing and quantum computing, a notion ﬁrst suggested
by Feymann [2].
In the past decades, many architectures have been pro-
posed as platforms for quantum computation [3] most using
an optical or a solid-state approach. All make use of quantum
bits or qubits, an analogue of the classical bit, as an essential
element of computation. Some of these realizations have
been particularly successful, such as superconductor-based
qubits with Josephson junctions, trapped ions or coher-
ent photon states. This is primarily due to the choice of
the material, the ability to perform fast measurements as
well as the simplicity of the system. However, a practi-
cal implementation for circuit applications requires high
ﬁdelity results, a good scalability, and preferably a high
compatibility with existing manufacturing techniques. This
has driven several proposals attempting to use silicon as
the basis for qubit realization, because of its compatibility
with current fabrication methods. (An example is the well-
known Kane proposal for quantum computation [4]) Silicon
has intrinsic properties such as potentially the absence of
intrinsic nuclear spins, which make it a desirable choice
for qubit as well as conventional transistor fabrication. In
semiconductor approaches, we can broadly deﬁne two qubit
types: Charge qubits, where the basis states are deﬁned by
two distinct electron distributions, and spin qubits where
the representation is in the spin orientation of electron or
nucleus.
In this article, we ﬁrst review the technological and
commercial constraints that led to our choice for employ-
ing charge qubits in an isolated silicon structure, with an
emphasis on ﬂexibility, reliability, cost and compatibility
with conventional fabrication techniques. We then deﬁne
the qubit states for that speciﬁc system and describe how
basic quantum operations could be performed under DC
voltages, in particular the initialization stage and swap
operations. Supported by recent and ongoing experimental
investigations, we ﬁnally show that speciﬁc device features
could be used for future leadless operation of the system
that would ultimately simplify scalability.
II. TECHNOLOGICAL CHOICES
Some materials that have been considered for the man-
ufacture of qubits, such as III-V compounds, possess ap-
parently signiﬁcant advantages, in particular a direct band
gap and the possibility to reduce interface scattering through
layer design [5]. However, issues such as the ﬁnite nuclear
spin, leading to spin qubit decoherence, and strong dipole
scattering from polar phonons, decohering charge qubits,
make silicon still appear a material of choice for manufac-
turing future qubit processors.
Another important consideration for future commercial-
ization is the need for high reproducibility, both in the device
fabrication and in quantum operation readouts. Devices must
have a high fabrication yield and their electronic character-
istics or behaviors must be consistently reproducible. There
are several pathways to realize a solid state qubit. One
of the more recent consists in using the spin state of a
localized electron at a donor site in silicon [6], [7], as
was suggested by Kane [4]. Although easily allowing both
charge and spin qubit manipulation, this concept is difﬁcult
to scale because of the requirement for precise single ion
positioning and the inherent donor diffusion during anneal
stages. Another option in silicon is the use of quantum
dots with dimensions of a few tens of nanometers. For
such a structure, a singly charged quantum dot pair or
double quantum dot is appropriate. Because the dimensions
lie within the range of transistor sizes that are currently
41
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

manufactured, the industrial infrastructure is already well
adapted to this future technology.
In order to realize any type of solid-state qubit, one
has to minimize sources of noise to keep a coherence
time sufﬁciently long and be able to perform a signiﬁcant
number of operations before re-initialization of the qubit
becomes necessary. Unfortunately, and despite line ﬁltering
and careful contact designs, high frequency noise can reach
the device via highly conducting paths such as gate or source
and drain leads. In addition, it is desirable to minimize the
number of leads to ease the process fabrication, especially
for 3D integration purposes as well as minimizing possible
interference effects. From this perspective, ungated devices
seem preferable, and these will be described here.
These devices consist of a double-dot charge qubit, where
the quantum states | 0⟩ and | 1⟩ are represented by two
different electron distributions between the lobes of the
device, coupled with a detector to measure the changes in
charge distribution.
In many solid-state approaches to quantum computation,
single electron transistors (SETs) have been the primary
choice for detection of charge movement at the fractional
charge level. Their design relies on the presence of two
tunnel barriers of conductance ≪ e2/h separated by a con-
ﬁned region made of a single dot. Their operation principle
is based on Coulomb blockade (CB) resulting in electrons
being blocked for transport if the electrostatic conﬁguration
is not energetically favourable for tunneling. Tunnel barriers
can be controlled by forming metal gates on top of the
structure or by patterning constrictions in the device and thus
modifying the potential barrier height between the contact
and the quantum dot. In both cases, the dot potential has to
be controlled by an additional gate. The method described
here provides the advantage of physically decoupling the
detector from its control gate by allowing a side-gate to be
patterned laterally and by etching the unnecessary material
between the gate and the dot.
One potential difﬁculty to be overcome in using doped
silicon results from the potential noise in the device itself due
to tunneling or hopping events of electrons in the vicinity
of the device. In particular, random telegraph signals are
detrimental to the measured signal quality, most especially
at low temperatures due to electron hops between donor
sites. However, such electron dynamics may be controlled by
adjusting the doping density, varying the electrostatic ﬁeld
inside the structure [8] or manipulating the trap population
by microwave measurement [9]. Following the previous dis-
cussions, the use of a doped silicon SET with constrictions
and a sidegate then seems a reasonable choice for a qubit
state detector.
The noise reduction implementations in the structure can
be carried out further by etching the material around the
qubit structure, so that direct electron transfer between
the qubit and the detector becomes prohibited. Although
SILICON
SINGLE
ELECTRON
TRANSISTOR
DOUB LE DOT
QUANTUM
COM PUTATION
Integration
Coherence time
Robustness
Sensitivity
Noise
Scalable
Qubit
operation
Figure 1.
Industrial choices for qubit structures.
necessary in order to obtain longer coherence times, this
choice makes measurement more challenging because it is
not possible directly to probe the states of the qubit, for
example, by using source and drain contacts.
In the next sections, we describe the operation of an
isolated double quantum dot (IDQD) structure and present
some speciﬁc electronic properties. In particular, we show
that strong detection of the qubit states could be obtained
using a SET (Figure 1) and that leadless qubit operation
using microwaves is conceivable.
III. PRINCIPLES AND DC QUBIT OPERATION
A. Qubit deﬁnition and initialization
Owing to the doping concentration, the size, and the
geometry of the dots, usual simulations based on capacitance
calculations are insufﬁcient fully to describe the transport
characteristics of the device [8]. Indeed, the operation of
the qubit is strongly inﬂuenced by the presence of localized
states at the edge of the structure and electron-electron
interaction within and between dots. As a consequence,
electron tunneling between dopant states may induce a
charge reorganization in the structure. The understanding of
the electronic properties of an IDQD capacitively coupled
to an SET then requires the use of multi-electron physics in
simulations.
To this end, the qubit states have to be deﬁned as an
effective charge excess in one of the two IDQD dots. An
effective charge is deﬁned by the variation in the electrostatic
potential that would be created by a single-electron tunneling
event in a metallic structure. This takes into account the
possibility for the electron to tunnel between donor sites in
the same dot as well as charge rearrangement. The initial
electron population in each dot, N1 and N2, is initially
deﬁned by the range of gate voltages used to operate the
device. We then have :
42
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

(a)
Qubit
Source
Detector
V
c
Drain
200 nm
V
g
V
t
Qubit 1
Qubit 2
(b)
Figure 2.
a) Single qubit device and its detector. Control gate are Vg for
the SET and Vc and Vt for the IDQD. b) Fabricated two qubit devices with
two SET detectors in the same conﬁguration
| 0⟩ =| N1, N2⟩
(1a)
| 1⟩ =| N1 + δ, N2 − δ⟩ with N1 + N2 = N
(1b)
Here, N is the total number of electrons in the IDQD,
excluding localized electrons at the Si-SiO2 interface and δ
the effective charge displaced. N is ﬁxed at the etching stage
in the process.
Within the proposed geometry, a single qubit structure
required two gates to be patterned. One close to SET and
one close to the IDQD. Due to capacitance coupling between
the gates, the SET and the IDQD, compensation techniques
[10] have to be implemented in order to maintain the detector
in the most sensitive region during qubit operations. Such
a structure design allows high scalability to ungated multi-
qubits (Figure 2b). However, for a single qubit test structure,
it is possible to use a third detuning gate in order to avoid
compensating voltages [8] (Figure 2a).
The initial states | 0⟩ and | 1⟩ are deﬁned by mapping the
SET current with the SET gate and the IDQD gate Vc. The
presence of a signiﬁcant shift in the CB peak position deﬁnes
the set of gate voltages (Vg0, Vc0) and (Vg1, Vc1) for which the
two states could be accessed. The magnitude of the Coulomb
peak displacement in gate voltage is dependent on the tunnel
barrier between the two IDQD dots but also on the relative
coupling strength between the SET and the two IDQD dots.
The efﬁciency in the charge detection is then enhanced if the
IDQD is oriented perpendicular to the source drain leads of
the SET because of the produced difference of sensitivity
and capacitance between the SET and the respective upper
and lower IDQD dot. This conﬁguration was chosen to this
end.
In the case of uncompensated operations, the gate voltages
are ﬁxed at the degeneracy region where the two states are
in superposition of states (V ∗
g , V ∗
c ) and the third gate deﬁnes
the | 0⟩ and | 1⟩ states (V ∗
t0, V ∗
t1) (Figure 3).
B. Quantum logic operations
Quantum logic operations are usually performed by a set
of pulses sent via the side-gate leads and describing simple
unitary operations. Such a technique has been successfully
-0.4
-0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
-2.8
-2.6
-2.4
-2.2
-2.0
-1.8
-1.6
-1.4
1
0
V
t0
*
V
t1
*
V
t
 (V)
V
c
 (V)
V
c
*
Figure 3.
Operation points for the qubit with | 0⟩ and | 0⟩ states. Colors
map the dependence of the SET current ISD on gate voltages, with high
(low) current values in red (blue).
applied in a SET coupled IDQD structure and Rabi oscil-
lations have been demonstrated [11]. Due to capacitance
coupling between the different elements of the nanostructure,
including the qubit, the detector and the various gates,
reliable operations require the use of gate compensation
technique, synchronous triggering of the gate signals and
well-controlled pulse transmission in high frequency lines.
As an alternative method to trigger and control the dis-
placement of electrons between the two IDQD dots, in the
next section we describe an experimental approach to control
a qubit using centimeter-waves with leadless coupling.
IV. LEADLESS OPERATION AND SCALING
Radio and microwave signals can be coupled to the device
either directly, via gates, or in a leadless approach by
broadcasting them using an antenna (electrical coupling) or
a coil (magnetic coupling) [12]. For the latter, the coupling
is weaker but efﬁcient matching can be obtained even at
low temperature. In previous experiments, the control signal
hν was set to be in resonance with the energy difference
between two neighboring phosphorous sites in the SET [9].
In most cases, the operating frequency was in the gigahertz
(GHz) range and electrons were able to be displaced between
the two sites. This was possible although hν ≪ kT because
of the poor electron-phonon coupling in these structures
[13]. Such a microwave-induced electron displacement can
be coherent, and control of the Rabi rate can be achieved, as
demonstrated in similar devices [14]. In these experiments,
the resonant condition was determined by a sharp increase
in the SET current due to a modiﬁcation of the tunneling
barrier proﬁle. Because the SET and the IDQD are made of
the same material, it is conceivable that speciﬁc frequencies
may address localized electrons at the phosphorous sites
in the IDQD. Although some electron hops in the IDQD
will not be detected by the SET due to their location,
43
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

away from the detector, some can induce a sufﬁciently large
effective charge displacement so that the SET could detect
them. This possibility is supported by the observation of the
effect of random telegraph signals (RTS) on the electron
population in the IDQD dots in some devices. RTS result
from random jumps of electrons between donor sites and
are generally considered as a source of electronic noise at
low temperature. If present in devices, they result in abrupt
shifts in the CB peak positions in gate voltage in single
electron transistors.
However, there is a difference depending on such events
take place in the SET or in the IDQD. For the former, the
charge occupancy in the dot is abruptly modiﬁed and leads
to a shift in all CB peak positions in gate voltage by a
same amount and independently of the IDQD conﬁguration.
However, RTS in the IDQD mostly affect the SET at the
degeneracy region. Due the dot electrical insulation, RTS in
the IDQD can only be probed indirectly by assessing their
inﬂuence on the SET conductivity.
When the qubit is set in the superposition of state
| 0⟩cos (ϕ) + | 1⟩sin (ϕ), RTS induces a phase shift close
to π/2, leading to a partial electron population inversion
in the IDQD (Figures 4 and 5). Because RTS operate in
the same way as previous microwave controlled electron
tunneling, this observation enlighten the possibility to con-
trol the qubit for speciﬁc microwave frequencies. Such an
experimental test was carried out by coupling microwave to
the device in a leadless approach that resolves the problem
of impedance matching, both in a region of qubit operability
and outside for comparison. At a frequency of 7.5775
GHz, we observe that the normal SET operation is not
affected by the microwave for any power whereas a partial
population inversion was realized when the qubit is tuned in
its operating point and the power of the microwave close
to 0 dBm (Figure 6). For this conﬁguration we did not
observe any heating effect due to the microwave absorption
nor increase in the electron temperature. These results thus
demonstrate that a suitable frequency and power level could
lead to a controlled population inversion in the qubit and so
to a phase shift.
Because the value of the frequency operating the qubit is
depending on both geometrical constraints and the quantum
dot internal structure, it is possible to modify or adjust
the frequency during the process of the device, so that
different frequencies could be associated to different qubits.
This is technologically advantageous for scalability purposes
because the difﬁculty in addressing various qubits is reduced
to the implementation of frequency multiplexing. This idea
was partly demonstrated in previous experiments [15].
V. CONCLUSION
We have presented a possible implementation of a solid-
state qubit that is compatible with current commercial fab-
rication techniques and with a potentially long decoher-
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
SET conductivity (10
-4
 e
2
/h)
V
t
 (V)
RTS
1
0
Figure 4.
SET current proﬁles along Vt for the two qubit state conﬁg-
urations. RTS events are present and induce partial population inversions
when the qubit is set in an entangled state with ϕ ∼ π/4. For Vt < −0.6V,
states are clearly projected on qubit basis states.
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
4.0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
I
SD
 (pA)
V
g
 (V)
 After RTS
 Before RTS
V
t
=0.35 V
Figure 5.
CB oscillations as a function of Vg at a ﬁxed qubit gate voltage
Vt. RTS events modify the SET current ISD level around the degeneracy
region (Vg ∼ 3.7 ± 0.1 V) whereas the other CB peaks remain unaffected.
ence time due to its isolated nature. Despite geometrical
constraints, a successful and large detection signal was
obtained and the qubit basis states were mapped in a
gate dependency diagram. We have also shown that this
speciﬁc implementation can offer the possibility for leadless
operation, especially in the microwave range, leading to
easier scalability. Finally, the choice for silicon as a base
material to realize the qubit offers the advantage of using a
similar structure in order to implement spin qubits.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by Special Coordination
Funds for Promoting Science and Technology in Japan.
44
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
∆ I
SD
 (pA)
Power (dBm)
ν = 7.5775 GHz
0
1
Figure 6.
Microwave manipulation of the qubit. ∆ISD is related to the
change in the number of electrons in the upper IDQD dot (| 0⟩ state). The
red trace shows the dependence of the SET current in a region outside the
operating point of the qubit whereas the blue trace shows a transition from
the | 0⟩ to the | 1⟩ state.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Moore, Cramming More Components onto Integrated
Circuits, Electronics Magazine, vol. 38, No. 8, 1965
[2] R. P. Feynman, Simulating physics with computers, Int. J.
Theor. Phys., vol. 21, pp. 467-488, 1982; ibid Quantum
Mechanical Computers, Optics News, Vol. 11 Issue 2, pp.11-
20, 1985
[3] W. S. Warren, The Usefulness of NMR Quantum Computing,
Science, vol 277, pp. 1688, 1997; A. Shnirman, G. Sch¨on,
and Z. Hermon, Quantum Manipulations of Small Josephson
Junctions, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol 79, pp. 2371, 1997; A. Steane,
he Ion Trap Quantum Information Processor, Appl. Phys. B.,
vol 64, pp. 623, 1997; S. Takeuchi, Experimental demonstra-
tion of a three-qubit quantum computation algorithm using
a single photon and linear optics, Phys. Rev. A, vol 62,
pp. 032301, 2000; D. Loss and D. P. DiVincenzo, Quantum
computation with quantum dots, Phys. Rev. A, vol 57, pp.
120, 1998
[4] B. E. Kane, A silicon-based nuclear spin quantum computer,
Nature, vol 393, pp 133, 1998
[5] C. C. Dean and M. Pepper, The transition from two- to one-
dimensional electronic transport in narrow silicon accumula-
tion layers, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., vol 15, pp. L1287,
1982
[6] P. T. Greenland, S. A. Lynch, A. F. G. van der Meer,
B. N. Murdin, C. R. Pidgeon, B. Redlich, N. Q. Vinh, and
G. Aeppli, Coherent Control of Rydberg States in Silicon,
Nature, vol 465, pp. 1057, 2010
[7] A. Morello, J. J. Pla, F. A. Zwanenburg, K. W. Chan, H.
Huebl, M. Mottonen, C. D. Nugroho, C. Yang, J. A. van
Donkelaar, A. D. C. Alves, D. N. Jamieson, C. C. Escott, L.
C. L. Hollenberg, R. G. Clark, and A. S. Dzurak, Single-shot
readout of an electron spin in silicon, Nature, vol 467, pp.
687, 2010
[8] T. Ferrus, A. Rossi, M. Tanner, G. Podd, P. Chapman, and
D. A. Williams, Electron dynamics in a non-metallic silicon
isolated double quantum dot capacitively coupled to a single
electron transistor, arXiv:0907.2635, 2011
[9] T. Ferrus, D. G. Hasko, Q. R. Morrissey, S. R. Burge,
E. J. Freeman, M. J. French, A. Lam, L. Creswell, R. J. Col-
lier, D. A. Williams, and G. A. D. Briggs, Cryogenic instru-
mentation for fast current measurement in a silicon single
electron transistor, J. Appl. Phys., vol 106, pp. 033705, 2009
[10] A. Rossi, T. Ferrus, G. J. Podd, and D. A. Williams, Charge
Detection in Phosphorus-doped Silicon Double Quantum
Dots, Appl. Phys. Lett., vol 97, pp. 223506, 2010
[11] J. Gorman, D. G. Hasko, and D. A. Williams, Charge-Qubit
Operation of an Isolated Double Quantum Dot, Phys. Rev.
Lett., vol 95, pp. 090502, 2005
[12] D. G. Hasko, T. Ferrus, Q. R. Morrissey, S. R. Burge,
E. J. Freeman, M. J. French, A. Lam, L. Creswell, R. J. Col-
lier, D. A. Williams, and G. A. D. Briggs, Single shot
measurement of a silicon single electron transistor , Appl.
Phys. Lett., vol 93, no 19, pp. 192116, 2008
[13] J. Ogi, T. Ferrus, T. Kodera, Y. Tsuchiya, K. Uchida,
D. A. Williams, S. Oda, and H. Mizuta, Experimental obser-
vation of enhanced electron-phonon interaction in suspended
Si double quantum dots, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., vol 49, pp.
045203, 2010
[14] A. Rossi and D. G. Hasko, Microwave-assisted transport
via localized states in degenerately doped Si single electron
transistors, J. Appl. Phys. 108, 034509, 2010
[15] M. Erfani, D. G. Hasko, A. Rossi, W. S. Cho, and J. Choi,
Microwave driven arbitrary coupling between trapped charge
resonances in a silicon single electron transistor, unpub-
lished, 2011
45
ICQNM 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Quantum, Nano and Micro Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-151-9

