High Circular Dichroism through Planar Plasmonic Metasurfaces and
Enhancement through Surface Plasmon Resonances
Badrul Alam, Vincenzo Petruzzelli
Department of Electrical and Information Engineering,
Polytechnic University of Bari
Bari, Italy
Email: Badrul.Alam@poliba.it,
Email:Vincenzo.Petruzzelli@poliba.it
Lorenzo Dominici, Francesco Todisco, Milena De
Giorgi
Institute of Nanotechnology
CNR NANOTEC,
Lecce, Italy
Email: lorenzo.dominici@gmail.com,
Email: francesco-todisco@cnr.it,
Email: milena.degiorgi@nanotec.cnr.it
Luca Maiolo
Institute for Microelectronics and Microsystems
CNR-IMM
Rome, Italy
Email: luca.maiolo@cnr.it
Andrea Veroli, Alessio Benedetti
Department of Information Engineering, Electronics and
Telecommunications,
Sapienza, University of Rome
Rome, Italy
Email: Andrea.Veroli@uniroma1.it ,
Email: Alessio.Benedetti@uniroma1.it
Giorgio Pettinari, Annamaria Gerardino
Institute for Photonics and Nanotechnologies
IFN-CNR
Rome, Italy
Email: giorgio.pettinari@cnr.it
Email: annamaria.gerardino@cnr.it
Abstract— Research on metasurfaces featuring high circular
dichroism has been very active in the last decade, because of
possible applications in various fields, such as spintronics,
polarization optics and stereochemistry. Despite literature
displaying various proposed geometries and methods, today it
is hard to define an alternative choice combining high Circular
Dichroism
(CD),
easy
realization
and
robustness
of
performance. In this work, we show the design approach and
first
experimental
demonstration
of
a
planar
plasmonic
metamaterial based on a comma-shaped geometry, which can
be used to obtain high CD. Our metasurface combines intrinsic
chirality and enhancement effects due to high field localization.
In particular, the relative correspondence between numerical
analyses and experiments shows the possibility to tune the
effects of Surface Plasmon Resonances to a certain extent. This
is equivalent to the possibility of engineering stable peak values
on specific wavelength ranges, even in the presence of
geometrical non-idealities due to fabrication. Samples were
built through standard top-down fabrication procedures,
helped by the symmetry of the extrusion. The ease in
implementation, combined with reliable performances, make
our proposed metamaterial eligible for adoption for further
research
in
high
precision
spectroscopy
and
optical
manipulation at industrial scale.
Keywords-Circular Dichroism; Metamaterials; Plasmonics;
Surface Plasmons; Microfabrication.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Chirality refers to the geometric property of a structure
lacking mirror symmetry planes. It exists in many forms in
nature, ranging from molecules to proteins and crystals. In
contrast, a structure is achiral if it is indistinguishable or
superimposable on its mirror image. Due to the interest in
chiral molecules, optical dichroism properties of natural and
artificial materials have become a hot research topic. CD of a
specific material is of interest also for other applications,
such
as
spintronics,
polarization
optics
and
negative
refractive index. It consists in the difference in optical
behavior, read as transmission or absorption, to circularly
polarized optical waves. Various conventions can be used to
quantify CD; between all those, we prefer the approach that
values
more
the
relative
relations
between
the
two
polarizations, and we put in a second order of importance the
amount of transmission (this increases the alternatives):
CD=(TR-TL)/(TR-TL);
(1)
where
TL and
TR are
left
and
right
polarization
transmission spectra, respectively.
Literature on high CD metasurfaces is rich, and various
alternatives
have
been
developed
and
experimentally
demonstrated [1]. Research can be categorized by the
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

working principles (extrinsic dichroism, intrinsic dichroism,
or enhancements by field localization), but, over time, the
main categorization discriminant has been the fabrication
method [2], because of the need to single out the most
reproducible and the best performing geometries. To the
great variety of geometries that have been demonstrated
corresponds a big variety of fabrication techniques and
approaches, both top-down and bottom-up. In general, in
quantitative terms of circular dichroism factor, the top-down
approach
is
usually
more
successful.
Notable
three
dimensional (3D) nanophotonic structures are the nano-
helices [3] built with focused-ion-beam-induced-deposition
technique or
laser
writing. Stacked planar (e.g., [2])
geometries are also present in literature, and such approach
also allows to accomplish strong chiroptical responses; all of
them can be built by combining lithography with alignment
in a layer-by-layer manner. Other than 3D and stacked 2D
structures,
a
few simple
planar
structures
have been
successful plasmonic gammadions, nanoslit pairs, split rings,
and a few others [2] can be obtained with established and
standardized fabrication techniques, although with a small
CD factor due to the fact that thickness is significantly lower
wavelength. An interesting approach is the structure obtained
by a vertical extrusion of a 2D shape, which consists in the
thick deposition of a 2D patterned geometry. With this
concept, it has been possible to increase the intrinsic
dichroism and obtain a “giant” CD in [4]. Unfortunately, the
related bandwidth is very thin and it is possible to verify that
such geometry has very feeble stability, as CD peaks may
vary in amplitude and central wavelength. Overall, between
all the options, it is hard to find one combining high CD,
reliable
performances,
reproducibility
and
accessible
fabrication. In [5], the authors present a structure featuring
high CD values, obtained by combining a high intrinsic
dichroism due to vertical extrusion with enhancements
effects due to high field localization caused by Surface
Plasmon Resonances (SPRs).
In this work, we extend the work in [5] and present the
related design approach and the first experimental results.
We have built “comma”-shaped geometries based on noble
metals (Ag and Au), after an accurate design focused on the
stability of performance. The fabrication was operated
through a top-down approach by using a single lithographic
step to imprint the geometric shapes; the thickness of the
deposited material was significant (equivalent to 1-3 tenth of
the wavelength). In line-transmission measurements helped
to study the performances. We also show that, to a certain
extent, it is possible to control the effects of SPRs, since
there is a relative convergence between numerical results and
experiments.
In Section II, the available experimental works and tools
are presented. Those represent the framework of the design
process, which is described in Section III. In Section IV, we
show and compare the numerical and experimental results
and provide related discussions. In the final section, the
conclusions are drawn.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS AND TOOLS
Before dealing with the design, we first focus on the
available experimental tools. Our goal was to define
structures that can be built with standardized techniques and
accessible tools. We thus decided to operate with a single
step of 2D lithography (more specifically, we used Electron
Beam Lithography) and lift-off process to pattern the
evaporated metals. Depending on the available instruments,
we decided the thicknesses of Ag and Au to be around 140
nm and 80 nm, respectively. As said previously, we
fabricated two classes of metamaterials; the first was made
of Ag, while the second class was made of Au, which was
selected for its chemical stability and for its potential use as
substrate for biological experiments.
Since
the
goal
was
to
simplify
the
use of our
metasurface,
we
decided
to
work
with
transmission
measurements, which allow to use setups that are easier to
integrate.
That
said,
we
still
wanted
to
show
the
performances of this structure with precision, so we used the
setup used in Figure 1a-b. Figure 2 shows a Scanning
Figure 1. a) Shows the characterization setup used for the
transmission analysis. The beam could reach areas down to 20
µm2. b) Layout of the samples, which contain various areas.
Figure 2. a) Image of an area, as seen under the microscope. b) SEM image
representing the tip view. C) SEM image showing the oblique view of nano-
commas; in particular, the curved lateral faces are visible.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Electron Microscopy (SEM) image of the Au sample whose
experimental results are shown in this work.
III.
DESIGN APPROACH FOR NANOCOMMAS
Having defined the fabrication and characterization
requirements and limits, we then proceeded to the design of
the samples. We first searched for a shape lacking sharp
edges and showing a degree of intrinsic CD; the avoidance
of edges helps to reduce the variability of performances and
eases the fabrication requirements. Between the plethora of
possible geometries, we selected those which could be
easily replicated with standard Electron Beam Lithography
(EBL) processes, and could be distributed with high density
on
a
surface.
After
some
tests
with
the
EBL,
we
heuristically chose a comma shaped geometry.
Figure 3. Example of field localization of the two types of polarization.
Those concentrate on different sections of the nanocommas, depending on
the circular polarization of the light (top is Right, bottom is Left).
The metamaterial in sample Ag was created after setting
the “commas” in “triplets”, and those were then further
inserted in triangular super-grids. The numerical methods
and the specific operations used for the design are shown in
[5], and the resulting grid cell is shown in Figure 3, along
with an example of the field localization.
The Au sample was designed with a further evolution of
the previous approach, as shown in [5]. This time, the
“comma” shape was represented with the geometrical
parameters of Archimedean spirals, and those parameters
were
weighted
with
their
estimated
variability
after
fabrication. Various numerical analyses were performed in
order to find equilibrium situations where CD peaks were
relatively constant.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
Some results from the Ag sample are shown in Figure 4.
As can be seen, even though the resulting CD is relatively
high, the amplitude varies significantly when different
surfaces are tested (the regions shown in the image represent
the tested positions). This means that there is a strong
variability of the performance, even in the presence of small
variations. Still, the central wavelength of the peaks is
conserved, and this satisfies one of the main objectives of the
design.
An extract from the first Au sample’s characterization is
shown in Figure 5. As can be seen, the peaks are stable, since
they are similar in amplitude and the peaks are around the
same central wavelength. Unfortunately, the amplitudes of
the CD peaks are lower than the expectations. This is
probably due to the fact that this sample, as shown in Figure
1c, has round lateral profile due to a non-ideality in
fabrication, while our design expected an extrusion of the
same shape. Thus, the resonance at different heights is
different, and this does not help to compose an overall strong
CD.
Figure 5. Left: Transmission of the two polarizations according to
numerical methods and experiments. Right: Circular Dichroism calculated
numerically vs. experiments
Figure 4. Top-Left: SEM image of the Ag sample’s layout Top-Right:.A
symbolic representation of the characterization on two different surfaces
in the same metamaterial area (which should have the same geometry).
Bottom-Left: Transmission of the two polarizations according to
numerical methods (dashed lines) and experiments (full lines); areas B1
and B2 are represented with indexes 1 and 2. Bottom-Right: Circular
Dichroism calculated numerically (dashed lines) vs. experiments (full
line); black lines correspond to area B1, while green lines correspond to
area B2.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

V.
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have shown that Surface Plasmon based
metamaterials may reach high levels of linear CD, if we
combine intrinsic chirality with enhancements due to
Surface Plasmon Resonances. Our structure can be obtained
with standard planar fabrication processes and involves the
vertical extrusion of a planar shape, which has soft edges.
The design process succeeded in fixing the central
wavelength, although the heuristic approach of the Ag
sample revealed a variable amplitude depending on the lit
area, while the Au sample revealed a more stable behavior,
as per design. Thus, the parametrization of the geometry and
the weighted sweep can be seen as viable strategy.
Unfortunately,
the
Au
sample
presented
here
had
a
relatively small CD, due to a limited thickness and a curved
lateral profile, as shown in oblique SEM images.
Overall,
this
class
of
metamaterials
has
shown
potentialities and deserves more attention and research. In
particular, Au samples with higher thickness values are now
under investigation. The relative correspondence between
numerical analyses and experiments shows the possibility to
further develop this design method, which consists mainly
in finding stable peaks in Surface Plasmon Resonances. The
reliability in results and the repeatability and scalability of
this metasurface makes it interesting for its adoption for
further research or industrial applications.
REFERENCES
[1]
Z. Wang, F. Cheng, T. Winsor and Y. Liu, “Optical chiral
metamaterials: a review of the fundamentals, fabrication
methods and applications”, Nanotechnology, vol. 27, pp.
412001-412021, 2016.
[2]
T. Tanaka and A. Ishikawa, “Towards three‑dimensional 
optical metamaterials”, Nano Convergence, vol. 4, is. 34,
2017.
[3]
A. Benedetti et al., “Precise detection of circular dichroism in
a
cluster
of
nano-helices
by
photoacoustic
measurementsBenedetti”, Scientific reports, vol. 7 , pp. 5257,
2017.
[4]
A. Y. Zhu et al., “Giant intrinsic chiro-opticalactivity in
planar dielectric nanostructures,” Light. Sci. & Appl., vol. 7,
pp. 17158, 2018.
[5]
A. Veroli et al., “Planar chiral plasmonic 2d metamaterial:
Design and fabrication”, AIP Conference Proceedings, vol.
2145, pp. 020015, 2019.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

