Cavity Resonator Integrated Grating Filters :
Recent Advances for Laser Wavelength Stabilization
and Enhanced Second Harmonic Generation
Antoine Monmayrant,
Olivier Gauthier-Lafaye,
St´ephane Calvez
LAAS-CNRS,
Universit´e de Toulouse, CNRS,
F-31400 Toulouse, France
email: antoine.monmayrant@laas.fr
email: olivier.gauthier-lafaye@laas.fr
email: stephane.calvez@laas.fr
Franc¸ois Renaud,
Anne-Laure Fehrembach,
Evgueni Popov
Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS
Centrale Marseille, Institut Fresnel,
F-13013 Marseille, France
email: francois.renaud@fresnel.fr
email: anne-laure.fehrembach@fresnel.fr
email: e.popov@fresnel.fr
Abstract—Cavity Resonator Integrated Grating Filters (CRIGFs)
are a peculiar mix between microcavities and Guided-Mode
Resonant Filters (GMRFs). They rely on the coupling of free-
space beams to guided and localized modes in a multilayer
structure by subwavelength gratings. They provide spectrally
selective reﬂection for tightly focussed beams, combining high
Q-factors with high angular and positioning tolerances. Recently,
their unusual properties have been harnessed to design and
demonstrate compact and robust Extended Cavity Diode Lasers
(ECDL) with single-mode and narrow-linewidth emission in the
near infrared and Extended Cavity Quantum Cascade Lasers
(ECQCL) with tunable emission in the mid-infrared. More recent
works have taken advantage of new geometries on thermo-
optic and non-linear material to demonstrate thermal tuning
and second harmonic generation at telecom wavelengths. In this
contribution, the principle and key features of CRIGFs will be
presented together with the applications listed above.
Keywords–Bragg gratings; nanophotonics; optical ﬁlters.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cavity Resonator Integrated Grating Filters (CRIGFs) have
been introduced a few years ago as small aperture spectral
ﬁlters [1]. Contrary to the Guided-Mode Resonant Filters
(GMRFs) they are derived from, they exhibit large angular
acceptance together with a ﬁltered wavelength that does not
depend on the conditions of incidence [2][3]. This opens the
way to new geometries for extended cavities to stabilize the
emitted wavelength of different kinds of lasers [4][5]. Here, we
will report on recent advances on the CRIGF-based extended
cavity diode laser and quantum cascade lasers.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
presents the main theoretical differences between CRIGFs and
the more widespread GMRFs. Section III presents the use
of CRIGFs for wavelength stabilization in extended cavities
for both diode lasers (in the near infrared) and quantum
cascade lasers (in the mid-infrared). Section IV details the
recent approaches for wavelength tuning of CRIGFs, which
are inherently ﬁxed wavelength ﬁlters. We conclude our work
in Section V.
II.
GMRFS AND CRIGFS THEORY
A. GMRFs
GMRFs are based on the coupling of guided modes and
propagating waves through Bragg gratings, usually called
Grating Couplers (GCs). As described in Figure 1 (a), GMRFs
are commonly based on a multistack layer that plays a double
role around the wavelength of interest λ0 and the angle of
incidence of interest θ0: (1) they act as an antireﬂection coating
for incoming propagating waves; (2) they contain a single-
mode planar waveguide (usually for TE guided-mode).
ΛGC
Figure 1. Principle of GMRFs: (a) base antireﬂection multistack layer; (b)
grating coupler and Fano reﬂection spectrum; (c) angular tuning of the
spectrum.
The GC is designed such that it couples the incoming
propagating waves to the guided-mode at the wavelength of
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

interest λ0 (see Figure 1 (b)). Out of resonance (i.e., away
from λ0), the reﬂectivity of the multistack is unaffected and
stays low. At resonance, the incoming wave is simultaneously
coupled into the waveguide and decoupled into the specular
direction (see Figure 1 (b)). In the specular direction, this
results in a Fano-shaped resonant spectrum that adds to the
low reﬂectivity background. As the coupling condition of the
incoming wave to the guided mode by the GC depends on the
angle (Bragg condition), the spectral response can be tuned
by changing the angle of incidence (see Figure 1 (c)), with
a quasi-linear tuning for angles away from normal incidence
(and quadratic tuning near normal incidence). The main design
parameters of the GMRF (once the multistack and thus the
waveguide are set) are the periodicity ΛGC of the GC and
its ﬁlling factor. The ﬁlling factor alters the width of the
Fano resonance: the sharpest resonances are obtained for ﬁlling
factors of 0.5 and the width of the resonance increases as we
move away from 0.5. For a given angle of incidence and a
given guided mode, the periodicity ΛGC sets the wavelength
of resonance λ0. If we neglect the chromatic dispersion of the
waveguide, λ0 scales linearly with the periodicity of the GC.
One noticeable consequence of the angular tuning is the lack of
angular tolerance of GMRFs with high-Q factors. For a high-
Q factor GMRF, the spectral Fano peak is extremely narrow,
and because of the linear angular tuning, this corresponds to a
narrow angular tolerance. As a result, a high-Q GMRF results
in a narrow spectral peak with high reﬂectivity only if (1)
the incoming beam is large enough, with a ﬂat phase-front
(i.e., really close to an ideal plane wave); (2) the GMRF is
large enough and perfectly uniform across its whole area. Any
deviation from this ideal case results in reduced performance
[6].
B. CRIGFs
CRIGFs [1] are a variation around the concept of GMRFs.
The base idea was to provide the same kind of spectral high-
Q ﬁlter, but with a smaller footprint. The base geometry is
depicted on Figure 2 (a).
LPS
ΛDBR
LDBR
ΛGC
LGC
LPS
LDBR
DBR
GC
PS
PS
DBR
Figure 2. Principle of CRIGFs: (a) Schematic view of a CRIGF (b) Typical
spectral reﬂectivity.
A small grating coupler (GC, in blue) of typically a few to
a few tens of periods ΛGC is sided by two unstructured Phase
Sections (PS, in green) and two Distributed Bragg Reﬂectors
(DBR, in red). The pair of DBRs forms a planar Fabry-P´erot
cavity that supports several modes, all localized under the
GC. By adjusting the length LP S of the phase section, one
can ensure that one of these modes is spectrally overlapped
with the Bragg resonance of the GC. When this is the case, a
beam tightly focussed to the dimension LGC of the GC, under
normal incidence, can couple to this localized mode and re-
emits along both the reﬂected and transmitted directions. As
shown in Figure 2 (b), this coupling and re-emission results
in one single Fano resonance at the wavelength of interest
λ0. Contrary to GMRFs, this spectrum is not tunable with the
angle of incidence, the spectral reﬂectivity being set once and
for all [7]. In particular, contrary to GMRFs where spectral and
angular width are totally coupled, the CRIGF spectral width
is decoupled from its angular acceptance. High-Q CRIGFs
with large angular tolerances have been demonstrated [2].
Moreover, another distinction is that neither the spectral width,
nor the spectral position of the resonance are affected by
the conditions of incidence on the CRIGF [2][3]. The only
parameter affected is the peak reﬂectivity that is maximized
when the beam is spatially overlapped with the GC and when
its size matches LGC. One can thus tailor the size LGC of the
GC at the centre of the CRIGF to match that of the targeted
focussed beam independently from the wavelength of interest
and spectral width. One particular advantage of the CRIGF is
its large tolerance [2] for both angular (several degrees) and
positional (from few µm to few 100µm) degrees of freedom.
One last property of the CRIGF that helps integrate several
CRIGFs with different reﬂected wavelengths on a same sub-
strate is that every critical dimension is directly proportional
to the GC periodicity ΛGC. Indeed, the DBR periodicity is
ΛDBR = 1/2ΛGC and the optimal PS length was found to
be LP S = 1.125ΛGC (see reference [2]). As the wavelength
of interest λ0 is proportional to the GC periodicity ΛGC,
it is straightforward to design several CRIGFs at different
wavelengths: one just needs to scale all the planar dimensions
of the CRIGF (i.e., ΛGC, ΛDBR, LP S) uniformly.
III.
CRIGFS FOR LASER WAVELENGTH STABILIZATION
A. Extended Cavity Diode Laser in the near infrared
One application of CRIGFs is the conception of minimalist
Extended Cavity Diode Lasers (ECDLs), as reported in [4].
The goal of an ECDL is to enhance the spectral purity of a
diode laser. The base principle of ECDL is two-fold: (1) the
Fabry-P´erot cavity extends the laser beyond the length of the
diode laser chip and thus decreases the spectral width of each
Fabry-P´erot mode ; (2) a spectral ﬁltering element introduced
in the cavity further reduces the spectral width and selects
one isolated mode. The ECDL is usually quite complex, tricky
to align and not robust towards misalignment and vibrations,
for two reasons. First, the ECDL contains many independent
components (gain chip, several intracavity lenses, a spectral
ﬁlter, an end reﬂector) that should all be carefully aligned. This
makes the cavity more complex: more elements in the cavity
means more elements to align and a reduction of the robustness
of the cavity as each element is a possible point of failure.
Second, most usual spectral ﬁlters with a high Q-factor (i.e.,
a low spectral width) only work efﬁciently on well collimated
beams. The highly divergent output of the diode laser gain
chip thus needs to be carefully collimated intracavity before
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

reaching the ﬁltering element (as in the Littrow conﬁguration,
for example). This geometry is particularly sensitive to angular
misalignment of the ﬁlter that hinders the optical feedback into
the gain chip.
AR
HR
(a)
CRIGF #1
CRIGF #2
CRIGF #3
CRIGF #4
CRIGF #5
(b)
(c)
Figure 3. ECDL wavelength stabilization with CRIGFs: (a) schematic of the
minimalist cavity; (b) Typical light curve; (c) Spectrum as a function of the
injected current for 5 different CRIGFs.
As shown in Figure 3 (a), a CRIGF-based ECDL can
be simpler than an usual ECDL. First, as the CRIGF acts
simultaneously as the end reﬂector and the optical ﬁlter, the
cavity only contains 3 elements: a gain chip, an imaging lens
and the CRIGF. This reduces the number of elements in the
ECDL and thus decreases the chances of failure. Second, as
the CRIGF can work with tightly focused beams, the cavity
has a so-called “cat’s-eye” geometry where the anti-reﬂection-
coated facet of the gain chip (AR) is imaged onto the CRIGF
that plays the role of a spectrally selective end reﬂector. This
geometry is more robust towards angular displacement of the
end reﬂector.
Figure 3 (b) shows a typical light curve (emitted power as
a function of the injected current in the diode laser gain chip)
for a CRIGF-based ECDL operating around 850 nm: thresholds
around 20 mA and emitted power up to 30 mW are routinely
achieved [4]. As can be seen in Figure 3 (c) that shows the
emitted spectrum of the CRIGF-based ECDL as a function
of the injected current for 5 different CRIGFs, depending on
the spectral peak reﬂectivity of the CRIGF used, the emitted
wavelength can be stabilized around any wavelength in the
spectral gain of the diode laser. From Figure 3 (c), one can
observe the detuning between the stabilization wavelength set
by the CRIGF and the spectral gain of the diode laser: the
higher the detuning, the higher the threshold. The smallest
detuning is around 850 nm (the smallest threshold).
Current works in this ﬁeld are focussing on miniaturization
of the cavity to ﬁt all components in a butterﬂy package and on
the achievement of low-linewidth emission [8] (few 100 kHz
linewidth).
B. Extended Cavity Quantum Cascade Laser in the mid-
infrared
The stabilization of laser diodes described previously can
be easily extended towards other wavelength ranges, like
the mid-infrared. Indeed, there is nothing that is wavelength
speciﬁc in the principle of CRIGFs. Provided that we ﬁnd
suitable materials (i.e., materials that we can process in a clean
room and with appropriate refractive index and low absorp-
tion), we can design and fabricate CRIGFs in any wavelength
ranges. In the mid-infrared, CRIGFs were demonstrated using
GaAs/GaAlAs material system [5]. As presented in Figure 4,
the geometry is exactly the same than in the near infrared. The
only differences are due to the different wavelength range of
operation: the gain chip is a quantum cascade gain chip, the
optics are made of ZnSe and the CRIGF is GaAs/GaAlAs.
IntraCavity Lens
Figure 4. Extended cavity quantum cascade laser.
Figure 5 shows the spectrum emitted by the cavity as a
function of the periodicity of the CRIGF used for stabilization.
Each periodicity results in a particular wavelength reﬂected
by the CRIGF. When the reﬂected wavelength is not too far
detuned from the spectral gain of the quantum cascade gain
chip (periodicity in the range [1460:1510] from red to light
blue in Figure 5), the emission is stabilized to the reﬂected
wavelength. When the detuning is too large (periodicity in
the range [1520:1560] from blue to purple in Figure 5), the
cavity emits around the maximum of the spectral gain and the
emission is not stabilized.
IV.
TUNABLE CRIGFS: SPATIAL AND THERMAL TUNING
The main advantage of the CRIGFs (the reﬂected wave-
length not depending on the conditions of incidence) is also
a main disadvantage for some applications: the CRIGF is
inherently non-tunable. Indeed, for both ECDL and ECQCL, in
addition to wavelength stabilization, wavelength tuning would
be beneﬁcial. Two approaches have been followed. The ﬁrst
one takes advantage of the 2D nature of the CRIGF. As can be
seen in Figure 2 (a), the CRIGF is invariant along the grooves
of the GC and DBRs: along this dimension, the CRIGF can
be arbitrarily long without noticeably changing the CRIGF
properties. As the spectral reﬂectivity of the CRIGF is directly
given by the planar dimensions (ΛGC, ΛDBR, LP S), one can
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

2 200
2 100
2 120
2 140
2 160
2 180
2 090
2 110
2 130
2 150
2 170
2 190
0
20
10
2
4
6
8
12
14
16
18
22
WaveNumber [1/cm]
Emitted Power [mW]
GC period (nm)
4.78
4.76
4.74
4.72
4.69
4.67
4.65
4.63
4.61
4.59
4.57
4.55
Wavelength [µm]
1460
1470
1480
1490
1500
1510
1560
1540
1530
1520
Figure 5. Wavelength stabilization of quantum cascade laser: emitted
spectrum of the ECQCL as a function of the periodicity of the CRIGF used
for stabilization.
introduce a gradient of these dimensions along the grooves of
the GC [9].
Figure 6 (a) shows the image of a fabricate CRIGF with
a gradient where the dimensions are scaled linearly along the
y-dimension (along the groove direction). The wavelength of
the spectral peak reﬂected by such a CRIGF (Figure 6 (b))
depends on the position along the y-direction. By spatially
scanning the position along this direction, one can tune the
reﬂected wavelength, the slope of the tuning depending on the
strength of the gradient applied to the dimensions (from no
gradient in red to strongest gradient in purple).
The second approach relies on thermo-optic materials. By
using a thin ﬁlm of LiNbO3 for the waveguide (that is a
strongly non-linear, electro-optic and thermo-optic material),
one can achieve tuning by altering the temperature of the
substrate. Extremely recent results on thermally tuned CRIGFs
working at telecom wavelengths [10][11] have demonstrated
movement-free tuning over 2.4 nm for a temperature change of
60◦. In addition, preliminary observation of second harmonic
generation enhancement by CRIGF in such material has been
reported[12].
V.
CONCLUSION
This contribution details the base principles of Guided
Modes Resonant Filters (GMRFs) and Cavity Resonator In-
tegrated Grating Filters (CRIGFs) and presents several appli-
cations of CRIGFs to laser wavelength stabilization. Recent
results on CRIGF wavelength tuning using spatial gradients or
thermally active materials are also discussed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
F. Renaud acknowledges PhD grant from DGA/AID. Au-
thors thankfully acknowledge the LAAS clean room team for
technical support and technological expertise provided within
the French RENATECH framework.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Kintaka et al., “Cavity-resonator-integrated guided-mode resonance
ﬁlter for aperture miniaturization,” Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 2, Jan.
2012, pp. 1444–1449.
Figure 6. CRIGF with a spatial gradient: (a) top-view of a graded CRIGF;
(b) Local spectral reﬂectivity as a function of the strength of the dimension
gradient (from no gradient in red to strongest gradient in purple).
[2]
X. Buet et al., “High angular tolerance and reﬂectivity with narrow
bandwidth cavity-resonator-integrated guided-mode resonance ﬁlter,”
Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 8, Apr. 2012, pp. 9322–9327.
[3]
N. Rassem, A.-L. Fehrembach, and E. Popov, “Waveguide mode in the
box with an extraordinary ﬂat dispersion curve,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A,
vol. 32, no. 3, Feb. 2015, pp. 420–430.
[4]
X. Buet et al., “Wavelength-stabilised external-cavity laser diode using
cavity resonator integrated guided mode ﬁlter,” Electronics Letters,
vol. 48, no. 25, Dec. 2012, pp. 1619–1621.
[5]
S. Aug´e et al., “Mid-infrared cavity resonator integrated grating ﬁlters,”
Optics Express, vol. 26, no. 21, 2018, pp. 27 014–27 020.
[6]
A.-L. Fehrembach et al., “Measurement and modeling of 2d hexagonal
resonant-grating ﬁlter performance,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, vol. 27, no. 7,
Jul. 2010, pp. 1535–1540.
[7]
R. Laberdesque et al., “High-order modes in cavity-resonator-integrated
guided-mode resonance ﬁlters (crigfs),” J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, vol. 32,
no. 11, Nov. 2015, pp. 1973–1981.
[8]
A. Monmayrant et al., “Cavity resonator integrated ﬁlter (CRIGF) based
external cavity laser in a butterﬂy package,” in 2019 21st International
Conference on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON).
IEEE, Jul.
2019.
[9]
S. Aug´e, A. Monmayrant, S. Pelloquin, J. B. Doucet, and O. Gauthier-
Lafaye, “Tunable graded cavity resonator integrated grating ﬁlters,”
Optics Express, vol. 25, no. 11, May 2017, pp. 12 415–12 420.
[10]
S. Calvez, A. Monmayrant, and O. Gauthier-Lafaye, “Lithium-niobate-
based Cavity Resonator-Integrated Guided-mode Resonance Filters,”
Jun. 2019, poster.
[11]
S. Calvez, A. Monmayrant, and O. Gauthier-Lafaye, “Towards high-
speed tuning Cavity Resonator-Integrated Guided-mode Resonance
Filters,” in EOS Topical meeting on Diffractive Optics 2019, Jena,
Germany, Sep. 2019.
[12]
F. Renaud et al., “Second-harmonic-generation enhancement in cavity
resonator integrated grating ﬁlters,” Opt. Lett., vol. 44, no. 21, Nov
2019, pp. 5198–5201.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

