Analysis, Design and Performance Evaluation of On-Chip Optical Wireless Links
Jinous Shaﬁei Dehkordi
Velio Tralli
Engineering Department
University of Ferrara
Ferrara, Italy
Email: shfjns@unife.it
velio.tralli@unife.it
Marina Barbiroli
Jacopo Nanni
Franco Fuschini
DEI - University of Bologna, Italy
Email: marina.barbiroli@unibo.it
jacopo.nanni3@unibo.it
franco.fuschini@unibo.it
Vincenzo Petruzzelli
Polytechnic of Bari
Bari, Italy
Email: vincenzo.petruzzelli
@poliba.it
Abstract—In
Network-on-Chips
(NoCs),
Optical
Wireless
(OW) interconnects have recently gained attention to overcome
the limitations of existing wired and wireless Radio Frequency
(RF) technologies, while preserving the bandwidth and delay
characteristics of optical interconnects. In this paper, we in-
vestigate the communication performance of the on-chip OW
links by considering the effects of both wireless propagation
and inter-link interference, which arises when the same optical
frequency is used for multiple transmissions in a NoC. A Ray
Tracing (RT) approach is applied to the layered structure of
the on-chip wireless channel to obtain accurate modeling of
multipath propagation. By using the Ray Tracing (RT) results,
the Bit Error Probability (BEP) is evaluated as a function of
desired and interfering signal powers, which depend on the far-
ﬁeld spatial fading conditions. The physical parameters and the
geometry of the scenario, and the impact of antenna radiation
pattern are taken into account in the evaluation. The analysis
and the results enable system designers to design and provide
efﬁcient on-chip interconnects, optimizing not only the topology
of the OW links in the NoC, but also the physical parameters
of the links, including antenna characteristics, that inﬂuence the
wireless communication.
Keywords—Optical wireless links; On-chip communications;
Performance evaluation; Ray tracing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Optical Wireless (OW) links have recently emerged as an
interconnection technology for Network-on-Chips (NoCs) [1]
[2]. The NoC technology [3] requires highly reliable commu-
nications among multiple processing cores, whereas intercon-
necting on-chip components is a long-standing problem [4][5].
The continuously growing need for low-power and high-speed
communication asks for efﬁcient on-chip interconnects. The
number of nodes in NoCs is predicted to increase signiﬁcantly
in the near future. In such networks, the traditional scaling
of metal interconnections cannot satisfy the communication
requirements due to their limitations in power consumption
and bandwidth. To overcome these problems, alternative ap-
proaches like optical interconnections using silicon photon-
ics [6][7] and wireless interconnections using Radio Frequency
(RF) technologies [8]–[11], were considered.
Optical NoCs exploit optical frequency to provide high
data rate communication, while reducing propagation losses
and delays [6][7]. However, as the number of on-chip cores
increases, the realization of optical NoCs with wired ar-
chitecture becomes very complicated, which is followed by
increasing complexity of switching and routing, and power
losses due to multiple waveguide crossings. Providing point-
to-point communication between cores and the limitations
of wired architectures to support multi-cast and broadcast
transmissions are the main challenges of such networks.
Wireless communication has gained a wide interest for
multicore system-on-chip as an efﬁcient solution to replace
long distance on-chip interconnects [9][10], thus simplifying
routing and layout complexity. Wireless on-chip communi-
cations also reduce latency and power consumption, and
improve broadcast communications in large-scale chip multi-
processors [12]. However, RF wireless communications cannot
provide the same bandwidth as optical technology, and present
signiﬁcant challenges for on-chip antenna integration [13].
OW interconnects can take advantages of both the optical
and wireless communication [1][2]. This on-chip interconnect
technology exploits broadcast and multicast transmissions at
optical frequencies with simple network architectures and
efﬁcient use of the chip area. The OW links can be realized by
coupling optical nanoantennas with optical waveguides, where
the same wavelength propagating on optical waveguides can be
used for wireless connections. Therefore, there is no need for
any electro-optical conversion and increasing power consump-
tion, and latency. Nevertheless, there are several challenges for
using OW links in NoCs that must be addressed accurately.
The OW links operating on the same wireless channel (optical
wavelength) may interfere with each other, which degrades
communication performance [14].
We aim to study the effects of both wireless propagation and
interference on the communication performance in NoCs using
OW links. The antenna radiation pattern, the geometry of the
scenario and the various parameters characterizing the layered
structure of the chip are considered. In particular, propagation
channel is characterized by using a RT method, which tracks
multipath fading in the on-chip wireless channel [15]. The Bit
Error Probability (BEP) is evaluated as a function of desired
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

RX0
TXi
x
y
di
θTi,0
θR0,i
Figure 1. Top view of a OW link.
RX0
TX0
TX1
TX2
d0
d1
d2
x
y
θT1,0
θR0,1
θT2,0
θR0,2
∆
Figure 2. Top view of multiple OW links.
and interfering signal powers, which are subject to far-ﬁeld
spatial fading. The results allow a system designer to ﬁnd
the optimal OW links conﬁguration in the NoC, such that a
speciﬁed BEP is satisﬁed for the on-chip communications.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II presents the scenario of the NoC. In Section III,
the propagation channel is modeled in the layered structure
of the chip. Section IV describes the system model and
evaluates the BEP considering both interference and noise
in the NoC. Section V provides some numerical results for
different network conﬁgurations. Finally, Section VI gives our
conclusions.
II. ON-CHIP COMMUNICATION SCENARIO
Consider a NoC, where nodes are communicating through
OW links. For each link, the source of the optical power
is an external off-chip laser coupled to an optical bus or
waveguide. Then, a Micro Ring Resonator (MRR) carries out
both electrical-to-optical conversion and digital modulation of
the optical carrier. Finally, the modulated signal is radiated
within the chip through the optical antenna. At the receiving
end of the wireless link, the optical impinging signal is seized
by the optical receiving antenna, ﬁltered by a second MRR
and converted by a photodiode into the electrical domain.
The frequency reuse concept is used to improve spectrum
efﬁciency. By reusing the same optical wavelength in multiple
links, the number of simultaneous communications will not be
limited by the number of available wavelengths. In particular,
we consider the general case where there are N + 1 wireless
links that use the same frequency and may interfere with
each other. Figure 1 shows the top view of the wireless part
of a single link, where the antenna of the probe receiver
RX0 receives the optical signal from the antenna of the i-
th transmitter TXi. The distance between the antennas is di.
In the ﬁgure, dashed lines show the antenna axes, θTi,0 is the
angle between the transmitting direction and TXi antenna axis,
and θR0,i is the angle between the receiving direction and RX0
antenna axis. Figure 2 shows a scenario with multiple links,
where the desired link is interfered by the adjacent links, i.e.,
TX1 and TX2. We use index i = 0 (TX0) for the transmitting
side of the desired link, and indexes i = 1, 2, . . ., N for the
interfering links. We assume that the transmit antenna of TX0
is located at the position (xTX0, yTX0) = (0, 0) in the horizon-
tal plane. The receive antenna of RX0 is located at distance
d0 = (x2
RX0 + y2
RX0)1/2 from TX0, and is rotated versus the
TX0 antenna. Thus, the maximum gain for transmitting and
receiving antennas in the desired link is achieved.
As long as a single link is considered, communication
errors are mainly due to the propagation conditions and to
the noise effect that inﬂuence the optical system. In contrast,
if a multi-link scenario is addressed, mutual interference can
arise between the simultaneous links, to an extent that depends
on antenna radiation patterns and reciprocal positions of the
interfering links.
III. CHANNEL MODELING
We use a 3D RT to characterize the far-ﬁeld spatial fading of
the on-chip wireless channel [15]. In particular, we refer to the
optical frequency of 193.5 THz, corresponding to wavelength
λ = 1.55 µm in vacuum. The layered structure of the chip
and the electromagnetic properties of the materials are also
considered in the analysis. Figure 3 shows the side view (in
xz plane) of each OW link in Figure 1. The transmit and
receive antennas are placed at the middle of a homogenous
SiO2 layer with the thickness hslb in the range of (4-10) µm.
The thickness of the up and down layers are denoted by hup
and hdown, respectively. Wave propagation occurs within the
SiO2 slab, which experiences reﬂections from the interfaces
with surrounding mediums, thus causing multipath effects [1]
[2][15]–[17]. The upper medium above the SiO2 layer can be
air or a different passivation material, the down layer can be
silicon or metal. By considering the chip layered structure,
multipath is fundamentally generated by multiple reﬂections
between the interfaces of different media (see Figure 3), which
can be evaluated by using the RT approach as in [1][15]. Note
that the RT modeling is particularly employed for the investi-
gation of the optical wireless channel, as geometrical optic is
expected to become more reliable as frequency increases.
In the RT simulations, both geometrical and electromagnetic
properties of the wireless links have to be taken into account.
The geometrical parameters include the SiO2 layer thickness
(hslb in Figure 3), the antenna distance from the interfaces
(z = 0 is at the middle of the SiO2 layer with the same
distances from the upper and lower interfaces) and the wireless
link length (i.e., distance between transmitting and receiving
antennas). The electromagnetic parameters include the mate-
rial refraction index of each layer of the chip (ndown, nslb and
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

RX0
TXi
SiO2
hup
hslb
hdown
x
z
Figure 3. Side view of chip layered structure.
nup). A 3D representation of the antenna radiation patterns is
also necessary for RT modeling. The assessment carried out
in this work is based on an idealized model for the antenna
radiation diagram, but any other antenna conﬁgurations can
be embedded into the RT tool. In particular, the gain of the
antenna in a given direction is determined by the following
expression.
g(α, φ) =
!
10 log10(G cos(φ)n cos(π/2 − α)n)
if |φ| < π
2
−50 dB
otherwise
(1)
where n = (100.1 GdB))/2 − 1, G is the antenna gain, α is
the elevation angle and φ the azimuth angle. Although rays in
Figure 3 lie in the vertical (xz) plane, the 3D representation of
the antenna radiation pattern is necessary, in order for the RT
simulation to be run irrespective of the antenna orientation
with respect to the propagation plane, e.g., to estimate the
power arriving from an interfering transmitter. Once the rays
have been tracked and the ﬁelds impinging on the receiver have
been computed, the overall received power can be evaluated
as illustrated in [15]. The important parameters considered for
the RT simulations are summarized in Table I.
IV. SYSTEM MODELING AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The performance of a communication link is usually charac-
terized in terms of BEP, or measured as bit error rate from an
experimental setting. For the design of networks with wireless
links, it is very important to adopt an interference-aware
framework for BEP evaluation, exploiting the analysis carried
out in [18]. Cross-link interference may occur among simul-
taneously transmitting links that use the same optical channel,
as illustrated in Section II. Within this framework, a network
designer can ﬁnd the optimal link conﬁgurations that meet
the required performance for on-chip communication. For the
performance analysis, we assume that all links use intensity
modulation On-Off Keying (OOK) with Non-Return-to-Zero
(NRZ) pulses and direct detection. If the bits of the data
sources have the same probability 1/2, the average power of the
modulated signal is one half of the power of the unmodulated
carrier, also named here as optical power. The optical power of
the received desired signal is denoted by P0, and the optical
TABLE I. RT PARAMETERS.
RT simulation parameters
hup
∞
hslb
4-10
µm
hdown
∞
d0
30-1500 µm
f
193.5 THz
ndown
3.47 (Silicon, metal otherwise)
nslb
1.44 (Silica)
nup
1 (Air)
antenna Gain
15-25 dB
power of the i-th received interfering signal, normalized to
the desired optical power, is denoted by xi = Pi/P0, with
i = 1, 2, ..., N. The received powers are functions of the
geometry of the links, the distances and the angles between the
antennas, the antenna design, the propagation characteristics
of each link. For a given transmitted optical power, PT , the
received power is given by Pi = GPiPT , where GPi is the
path gain of the channel between transmitter i and reference
receiver, which is obtained with the RT tools, as shown in
Section III.
The BEP is one of the principal metrics that allows to
describe the overall communication performance, which is
evaluated as the function of Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) and
interference powers (xi’s). In the analysis, SNR = 4 γ2, γ =
ηPDP0/(2σth) depends on the unmodulated received power,
ηPD is the responsivity of photodetector, and σth is the standard
deviation of the additive Gaussian noise at the receiver. The
dominant noise at the p-i-n receivers usually is the thermal
noise [19]. Therefore, noise variance σ2
th does not depend on
transmitted bits and is given by σ2
th = 4KTeq/(2RLT ), where
K is the Boltzman’s constant, Teq is the noise temperature of
the receiver, RL is the resistance of the receiver and T = 1/Rb
is the bit interval of data transmission with Rb the data-rate of
the links. Recall that the probability of detecting the photocur-
rent transmitting zero above the decision threshold, or detect-
ing the photocurrent transmitting one below the threshold at
the receiver is evaluated as the BEP. In particular, the BEP
is given by P b(γ, x1, ..., xI) = E{Pb|bi,φi,τi(γ, x1, ..., xN)}
through the analytical method in [18], where E{.} is the
expected value taken over the Random Variables (RVs) in the
optical wireless communication system. The RVs include the
transmitted bits bi with one-half probability of being one or
zero, the phases φi of the optical carriers at the receiver and
the time offsets τi of the asynchronous interfering links, which
are uniformly distributed on [0, 2π] and [0, T ], respectively, for
i = 1, ...N.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We examine some link scenarios by using the experimental
measurements from RT. The principal parameters are given in
Table I. In the results, the chip is assumed to be sufﬁciently
large, such that the reﬂected rays from the lateral sides in the
xy plane can be neglected. For example, consider a distance of
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

−5
−10
−15
−20
−25
−30
−35
−40
102
103
h = 4 µm
h = 6 µm
h = 8 µm
h = 10 µm
d0 [µm]
P0
[dBm]
Figure 4. Received power vs distance d0 with G = 20 dB and different values
of hslb [µm] without interfering link
Figure 5. BEP vs position of RX0 antenna in the xy plane with G = 15 dB,
hslb = 6 µm, and without interfering link.
at least 500 µm from transmit/receive antennas to the lateral
sides of the chip. Therefore, only the reﬂections from the
interfaces between the SiO2 slab, and upper and lower layers
(xz plane) contribute to the aggregate received signal. The
TX0 is located at the origin of the 3D coordinate system
(xTX0 = yTX0 = zTX0 = 0), where z = 0 at the middle of
the SiO2 slab and for all transmitters and receivers z = 0. For
all results, the average power of all the transmitted signals is
0 dBm, the data-rate is Rb = 10 Gbit/s and the parameters of
the receiver are ηPD = 0.7 A/W, Teq = 600 K, RL = 1000 Ω.
Figure 4 shows the received power P0 in dBm vs the distance
of d0 µm for the wireless link as shown in Figure 1, when the
antennas of TX0 and RX0 are aligned, i.e., θT0,0 = θT0,0 = 0.
The results are provided for the antennas with G = 20 dB
and different values of the slab layer thickness (hslb). It is
shown that by increasing the thickness, the ﬂuctuations of
the results increase and at large distances, the power level
Figure 6. BEP vs position of RX0 antenna in the xy plane with G = 20 dB,
hslb = 6 µm, and without interfering link.
Figure 7. BEP vs position of RX0 antenna in the xy plane with G = 20 dB,
hslb = 4 µm, and without interfering link.
decays slowly with higher thickness compared to the cases
with smaller thickness.
Figures 5 to 7 map the BEP over the positions of the
antenna of receiver RX0 in a two dimensional xy plane,
when the antenna of the desired transmitter TX0 is located
at the origin (x = 0, y = 0) and the interfering link is
absent. The values of the BEP are shown by colorbars. The
antenna gain is G = 15 dB with hslb = 6 µm in Figure 5,
whereas G = 20 dB, and hslb = 4 µm and 6 µm are
considered in Figures 7 and 6, respectively. The area with
Pb ≤ 10−8 can be considered as a coverage domain for the
given setting (blue domain). As shown, the coverage domain
in Figure 5 is not regular, which is due to received power
ﬂuctuations resulting from multipath propagation. The domain
is composed of a number of separated zones and the maximum
coverage distance achievable without interruptions is limited
to 40 µm. By increasing the antenna gain the coverage domain
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Figure 8. BEP vs position of TX1 antenna in the xy plane with G = 20 dB,
hslb = 4 µm, where d0 = 280 µm.
becomes larger and continuous, as shown in Figures 6 and 7.
In fact, by reducing the antenna beamwidth, also the multipath
induced power ﬂuctuations become small. The coverage is
guaranteed for a maximum distance of roughly 480 µm in
Figure 6. Received power ﬂuctuations can be further reduced
by decreasing the slab thickness, as shown in Fig 7 for hslb = 4
µm. However, the coverage distance decreases to roughly 280
µm for hslb = 4 µm. This happens because, with few multipath
components the received power decreases more rapidly at large
distances, as seen in Figure 4.
In Figures 9, 10 and 11, the BEP values are mapped over the
positions of an interfering transmitter TX1 in two dimensional
xy plane, where the antennas of TX0 and RX0 are aligned
and the distance d0 is ﬁxed to a given value. Note that d0 is
selected inside the coverage domain, as mentioned for example
in Figure 7 and Figure 6.
Figure 8 and Figure 9 examine hslb = 4 and 6 µm, respec-
tively, to provide a comparison between different values of
the slab thickness, considering G = 20 dB and d0 = 280 µm
(inside the coverage area for both cases). The red point at the
origin (x = 0, y = 0) shows the desired transmitter position.
Here, we denote the domain with Pb ≥ 10−8 (green-yellow
domain) as not allowed domain for an adjacent transmitter
that interfere with the desired link. It can be observed that
the case with h = 6 µm experiences more ﬂuctuations in the
BEP values since both the useful and interfering signals are
subject to more fading with respect to the case with hslb = 4
µm. Consider an interfering link parallel to the desired one,
i.e., x = 0, y ̸= 0 for the adjacent transmitter. In order
to maintain Pb ≤ 10−8, the adjacent transmitter cannot be
placed on the vertical dashed line, thus ∆ = |y| ≥ 74 µm. By
increasing hslb in Figure 9, ∆ decreases to 45 µm, therefore,
for parallel links increasing the thickness can reduce the reuse
distance. Consider an interfering link aligned to the desired
one, (x ̸= 0, y = 0) with a transmitter that has the same
Figure 9. BEP vs position of TX1 antenna in the xy plane with G = 20 dB,
hslb = 6 µm, where d0 = 280 µm.
Figure 10. BEP vs position of TX1 antenna in the xy plane with G = 25
dB, hslb = 6 µm, where d0 = 430 µm.
antenna axis direction as the desired transmitter. The horizontal
dashed line shows the not allowed positions for the interfering
transmitter. For the case of hslb = 4 µm, the distance between
two transmitters must be greater than 380 µm (the horizontal
line length), while for the case with hslb = 6 µm this distance
increases to 430 µm. It can be described by the fact that
the multipath component decreases for smaller h, therefore
the interference power decays more rapidly for the case with
hslb = 4 µm, as seen in Figure 4.
In Figure 10, G = 25 dB, hslb = 6 and d0 = 430 µm
are considered. In such case, despite the high value of d0
compared to Figure 9, Pb ≤ 10−8 can be satisﬁed with ∆ ≥
43 µm to positioning the adjacent transmitter for a parallel
wireless link. It can be observed that, the distance between
two horizontally aligned transmitters is increased to 1.470 mm.
In fact, by increasing the antenna gain to 25 dB, the received
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

Figure 11. BEP vs position of TX1 in the xy plane with G = 15 dB, hslb =
6 µm, where d0 = 150 µm.
power by an interfering transmitter that is aligned horizontally
to the desired transmitter decays signiﬁcantly only at a large
distance.
In Figure 11, G = 25 dB and hslb = 6 with d0 = 430 µm
are considered. In such case, the optical system is subject to
high fading, as shown in Figure 5 for the same G and hslb
without interference. Therefore, the results vs the positions of
TX1 show a marked non regularity for not allowed domain,
as well as for coverage domain in Figure 5.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
Optical wireless (OW) links as components of a network-
on-chip (NoC) have been analyzed in the presence of multipath
propagation, co-channel interference and noise. The wireless
channel has been characterized by using a RT method applied
to the on-chip scenario. The communication performance in
terms of the BEP has been evaluated accounting for the statis-
tics of random variables in the OW communication system.
The effect of antenna directivity, geometrical parameters of the
chip structure and wireless links, and the number of interfering
links on the BEP have been investigated. Different link conﬁg-
urations have been examined, and the BEP has been plotted on
grid maps with 1 µm accuracy. The analysis helps determine
supportable domains for the position of the link components,
i.e., transmit and receive antennas, such that the required BEP
is guaranteed. It has been shown that, for antennas with low
directivity, the fading in OW channels can cause discontinuity
in a supported domain. The fading is also subject to the
thickness of the SiO2 slab layer. Therefore, ﬁnding the optimal
thickness for this layer can improve considerably the on-chip
communication link performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Research activity has been supported by PRIN 2015 Project
“Wireless Networks through on-chip Optical Technology
(WiNoT)”.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Nafari, L. Feng, and J. Jornet, “On-chip wireless optical channel
modeling for massive multi-core computing architectures,” in Proc.
IEEE Wireless Commun. and Networking Conf., San Francisco, CA,
USA, Mar. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[2] G. Bellanca, G. Calo, A. E. Kaplan, P. Bassi, and V. Petruzzelli,
“Integrated Vivaldi plasmonic antenna for wireless on-chip optical
communications,” Optics Express, vol. 25, no. 14, pp. 16 214–16 227,
Jun. 2017.
[3] L. Benini and G. D. Micheli, “Networks on chips: a new SoC paradigm,”
IEEE Computer, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 70–78, Jan. 2002.
[4] J. D. Owens et al., “Research challenges for on-chip interconnection
networks,” IEEE Micro, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 96–108, Nov. 2007.
[5] J. Kim, K. Choi, and G. Loh, “Exploiting new interconnect technologies
in on-chip communication,” IEEE J. Emerg. Select. Top. Circuits Syst.,
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 124–136, Jun. 2012.
[6] A. Biberman and K. Bergman, “Optical interconnection networks for
high-performance computing systems,” Reports on Progress in Physics,
vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 046 402–046 416, Apr. 2012.
[7] S. Werner, J. Navaridas, and M. Luj´an, “A survey on optical network-on-
chip architectures,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 89:1–89:37,
Dec. 2017.
[8] M. A. I. Sikder, A. K. Kodi, M. Kennedy, S. Kaya, and A. Louri, “OWN:
Optical and wireless network-on-chip for kilo-core architectures,” in
IEEE 23rd Annu. Symp. High-Perform. Interconnects, Santa Clara, CA,
USA, Aug. 2015, pp. 44–51.
[9] D. DiTomaso et al., “A-WiNoC: Adaptive wireless network-on-chip
architecture for chip multiprocessors,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 3289–3302, Dec. 2015.
[10] M. O. Agyeman et al., “A resilient 2-D waveguide communication fabric
for hybrid wired-wireless NoC design,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 359–373, Feb. 2017.
[11] S. Abadal, A. Mestres, J. Torrellas, E. Alarcon, and A. Cabellos-
Aparicio, “Medium access control in wireless network-on-chip: A con-
text analysis,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 172–178, Jun.
2018.
[12] S. Abadal, A. Mestres, M. Nemirovsky, H. Lee, A. Gonz`alez, E. Alarc`on,
and A. Cabellos-Aparicio, “Scalability of broadcast performance in
wireless network-on-chip,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 27,
no. 12, pp. 3631–3645, Dec. 2016.
[13] J.-J. Lin, L. Gao, A. Sugavanam, X. Guo, R. Li, J. E. Brewer, and K. K.
O, “Integrated antennas on silicon substrates for communication over
free space,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 196–198,
Apr. 2004.
[14] H. K. Mondal, S. H. Gade, M. S. Shamim, S. Deb, and A. Ganguly,
“Interference-aware wireless network-on-chip architecture using direc-
tional antennas,” IEEE Trans. Multi-Scale Comput. Syst., vol. 3, no. 3,
pp. 193–205, Jul. 2017.
[15] F. Fuschini, M. Barbiroli, M. Zoli, G. Bellanca, G. Cal`o, P. Bassi, and
V. Petruzzelli, “Ray tracing modeling of electromagnetic propagation
for on-chip wireless optical communications,” J. Low Power Electron.
Appl., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 39–54, Oct. 2018.
[16] D. Matolak, S. K. A. Kodi, D. D. Tomaso, and W. R. S. Laha, “Wireless
networks-on-chips: architecture, wireless channel, and devices,” IEEE
Wirel. Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 58–65, 2012.
[17] D. Vantrease et al., “Corona: System implications of emerging nanopho-
tonic technology,” in Int. Symposium on Computer Architecture, Beijing,
China, Jun. 2008, pp. 153–164.
[18] J. Shaﬁei Dehkordi and V. Tralli, “Interference analysis for optical
wireless interconnections,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Personal, Indoor
and Mobile Radio Commun., Bologna, Italy, Sep. 2018, pp. 1–7.
[19] G. P. Agrawal, Lightwave Technology: Telecommunication Systems.
Hoboken, NJ: Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-749-8
ICQNM 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Quantum, Nano/Bio, and Micro Technologies

