Comparison of Stakeholder Identification Methods – The Effect of Practitioners 
Experience 
Markus Kelanti, Samuli Saukkonen 
Department of Information Processing Science 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
{markus.kelanti; samuli.saukkonen}@oulu.fi 
 
Abstract—Stakeholder 
analysis 
is 
an 
important 
part 
of 
Requirements Engineering activities. Since stakeholders affect, 
and can be affected by, a system under development, it is 
important to identify them. While several stakeholder analysis 
methods are available, there has been less discussion about their 
effectiveness when practitioners have different levels of work 
experience. 
This 
paper 
evaluates 
how 
the 
stakeholder 
identification method affects the amount and variation of 
stakeholders in cases where practitioners have relevant, not 
relevant or no experience at all. The research investigated this 
question by conducting a study in a university Requirements 
Engineering course comparing three different stakeholder 
identification methods where participants’ work experience was 
known. This paper discusses the results of the experiment and 
their implications. The results highlight the importance of 
relevant experience and systematic approach to stakeholder 
identification. 
Keywords-Stakeholder; Stakeholder identification. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Stakeholder analysis is considered an important part of 
Requirements Engineering (RE). Identifying different types of 
stakeholders is crucial to creating successful software projects 
and is recognised by initiatives like IEEE standard 830 [2] and 
SWEBOK [1]. While many papers emphasise the importance 
of stakeholders, the identification process itself is not as well 
defined or documented in the RE literature [5][7]. Several 
authors, e.g., Sharp et al. [5] and McManus [6], criticise the 
lack of clear and efficient methods for identifying actual 
stakeholders.  
This problem has gained some attention, and several 
concrete methods [5][6] have been developed to conduct the 
analysis, including the identification of the actual stakeholders. 
StakeNet [8], in addition to providing a stakeholder 
identification method, also studied the effectiveness of the 
method. Since the problem is gaining attention, an interesting 
question arises as to how the effectiveness of different 
stakeholder identification methods is affected by practitioners’ 
experience. In other words, what is their ability to produce a 
list or group of stakeholders if different methods are used? The 
goal of this paper is to answer the following research question: 
 
How the use of a stakeholder identification method does 
affect the effectiveness of the stakeholder identification process 
for experienced and inexperienced practitioners? 
 
In this paper, effectiveness is defined as how fast a list of 
stakeholders can be generated for a single system. The three 
methods used in this study represent three different approaches 
to stakeholder identification in order to determine whether the 
identification results are different. The following stakeholder 
identification methods were used: a systematic approach from 
Sharp et al. [5], a question-based approach method used by 
McManus [6] and a general list of possible stakeholders that 
should be considered when developing software systems, from 
Lauesen [12].  In order to answer the research question, a study 
was conducted in a university RE course. The results of the 
study were analysed to determine whether a specific method 
had any advantage. In the study, the level and quality of the 
students’ experience was controlled to determine the role of 
experience in the results.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
describes the literature regarding stakeholders and how the 
concept is generally used in RE. Section 3 describes the 
stakeholder identification methods used in this study and how 
the study was conducted. Section 4 presents and discusses the 
results. Section 5 discusses limitations and possible threats to 
the validity of the findings, and Section 6 provides a conclusion 
and future directions for research on this topic. 
II. 
LITERATURE 
The concept of the stakeholder was popularised by 
Freeman [9]. Freeman described a stakeholder as a group or an 
individual who is affected by the achievement of an 
organisation’s objectives or who can affect on them. 
Stakeholders and stakeholder analysis was first used mostly in 
management literature and practice to understand the different 
stakeholder needs in a company [10]. Eventually, the concept 
made its way to RE.  
In RE, a stakeholder can be identified as a person or a 
group who will be affected by the system either directly or 
indirectly [11]. Sometimes, there is no clear definition of a 
stakeholder; instead they are specific groups of people who 
make demands of a particular system [12]. Depending on the 
development domain and target market, common stakeholders 
include various end users, customers, engineers and managers 
[3][11]. In general, stakeholders are considered persons, 
groups, or organisations that express needs regarding a 
particular system, are affected by it, or can somehow affect it.  
The importance of stakeholders in RE is most visible in the 
elicitation process. Stakeholders are one of the main sources of 
information in the elicitation process that creates actual 
requirements. However, stakeholders often have conflicting 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
 
 
views and needs, are unable to express their needs in a detailed 
manner or they demand a solution that does not match their 
real need. Even if this makes requirements analysis a hard and 
tedious task, identifying and understanding stakeholders’ needs 
more comprehensively and reaching consensus among them 
increases the quality of the software product [3][11][12].  
Clearly, identifying stakeholders and analysing their needs 
is an important task. However, the process of stakeholder 
identification is often an ad-hoc analysis or left for the 
practitioners to figure out for themselves. The literature has 
criticised this lack of guidance for practitioners [5][6][8]. 
Stakeholder identities are either assumed to be obvious to the 
practitioners or to fit into categories too broad and generic to be 
useful. Some studies just present lists or categories of identified 
stakeholders, 
such 
as 
the 
most 
commonly 
known 
clients/customers, users and developers [3][11][12]. Other 
papers expand these lists by adding businesses, projects and 
products 
[13][14][15] 
or 
government 
agencies 
[16], 
organisations [16] and the general public [17] as stakeholders. 
Pachecho and Garcia [18] systematically surveyed the 
contemporary literature for state-of-the-art identification 
methods and concluded that the stakeholder identification 
process still lacks standards and proper guidance. 
Several authors have addressed the above criticisms by 
developing concrete methods to aid in the identification 
process. For example, Lyytinen and Hirschheim [19] provide 
some guidance in identifying stakeholders; they note that 
identification itself is far from trivial. Further, McManus [6] 
uses the question list provided by the World Bank and criticises 
the lack of exact methods to identify concrete stakeholders. 
Similarly, Sharp et al. [5] present a systematic approach for 
identifying stakeholders in the absence of a clearly defined 
identification method. The latest advances include social media 
applications like StakeNet [8], a stakeholder identification 
method based on social networks. In this method, stakeholders 
are first identified by asking a person to identify an initial set of 
stakeholders. These stakeholders are then asked to produce 
another set of stakeholders, and the pattern repeats itself until a 
stable network of interconnected stakeholders is formed.  
III. 
RESEARCH SETTING 
The experiment ran as part of an RE course at the 
University of Oulu. In order to obtain the necessary data to 
answer the research question, basic software experiment 
guidelines [20][21] were followed in designing the study. This 
section describes the stakeholder identification methods, 
research setting, execution and how the data were analysed. 
A.  Experiment setting 
The RE course is a part of the 3rd year Bachelor’s degree 
studies in Information Systems and Software Engineering (SE) 
and is compulsory for every student of the program. One topic 
in the course is stakeholder analysis as a part of RE activities. 
The experiment was designed to be the compulsory practice 
session necessary for every student to pass the course. The 
students, both Finnish and foreign, were all from the same 
university and department. The majority of the students were 
Finnish.  
To answer the research question, an experimental setup 
comparing three different stakeholder identification methods 
was conducted. Before the experiment, students completed a 
background questionnaire about their experience. This 
questionnaire asked students about their work experience, 
specifically whether the experience was generally related to 
SE, and how many total years of experience they had. 
Experience was divided into SE and other experience, since 
students might be experienced in other fields as well. This 
information was used to split the students into three different 
groups: those with experience in SE, those with no previous 
experience in SE and those who had related experience but not 
in SE. 
The scenario used in the experiment required the students 
to develop a requirements document for the new department 
timetable software named LUKKARI. The scenario stated that 
the old timetable software was unsuitable for today’s needs and 
should therefore be replaced with a new system. This scenario 
was selected and developed to ensure that each student 
understood how a timetable system works since they had been 
using one during their studies. This was also done to avoid 
situations where some students would not have a specific 
domain expertise that could affect the results. The minimum 
basic functionalities of LUKKARI allow users to: 
- 
Log in and out 
- 
Browse their own and course timetables 
- 
Create, edit and remove items to their own timetable 
- 
Access the timetable through a web browser  
- 
Add, edit and remove resources from timetable items 
In order to obtain the stakeholder data, an answer sheet was 
designed for the students, which asked them to name any 
identified stakeholder, give a short description and provide a 
rationale for why the student thinks that stakeholder is relevant. 
In addition, researchers recorded the time when the answer 
sheet was returned to calculate the amount of time used to 
identify stakeholders.  
Students were informed that their answers would not affect 
their course scores. However, they were told that they could 
use their own results when they began working with the 
Requirements Specification documents required by the course. 
This helped to remove possible pressure from the students 
while also providing an incentive to identify stakeholders.  
B. Methods Under Experiment 
The experiment was designed to present two different types 
of identification methods: McManus’s questionnaire method 
(based on World Bank’s stakeholder analysis) [6], and Sharp et 
al.’s systematic analysis [5]. It should be noted that only the 
stakeholder identification part was used from both methods. 
The control method was based on an analysis process described 
in Lauesen’s textbook [12] because it was already part of the 
course. These methods fit the restrictions of the experiment 
because all material had to be in a written format, and all 
methods had to be designed for or used in SE.  
 
1) Systematic method 
The systematic method of Sharp et al. [5] for identifying 
stakeholders uses four baseline stakeholder groups: users, 
developers, legislators and decision makers. Users are the 
people, groups or companies who interact, directly control or 
use the software. Developers have a stake in the system’s final 
requirements specification but are not themselves users. 
Legislators are, for example, government agencies, trade 
unions and legal representatives, all of which act nationally and 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
 
 
internationally, setting guidelines for operations that affect the 
product’s development or its final use. Finally, decision makers 
direct 
both 
development 
and 
user 
organisation. 
The 
identification method itself is straightforward: 
 
1. Identify all specific roles within the baseline 
stakeholder group. 
2. Identify supplier stakeholders for each baseline role. 
The supplier stakeholders provide information or 
supporting tasks for the baseline stakeholders. 
3. Identify client stakeholders for each baseline role. The 
client stakeholders process or inspect the products of 
the baseline stakeholders. 
4. Identify satellite stakeholders for each baseline role. 
The satellite stakeholders interact with the baseline 
stakeholders in a variety of ways. 
5. Repeat steps 1 to 4 for each of the stakeholder groups 
identified in steps 2 to 4. 
 
2) Questionnaire method 
The questionnaire method represents the question-based 
stakeholder identification method used by McManus [6]. 
Compared to the systematic method, the questionnaire method 
does not provide any systematic way to address stakeholder 
categories, presenting only a pre-defined list of questions that 
can reveal stakeholders. McManus uses a question list 
developed by the World Bank to identify stakeholders in pre-
defined categories. These questions are [6]: 
 
1. Who might be affected (positively or negatively) by the 
development concern to be addressed? 
2. Who are the "voiceless" for whom special efforts may 
have to be made? 
3. Who are the representatives of those likely to be 
affected? 
4. Who is responsible for what is intended? 
5. Who is likely to mobilize for or against what is 
intended? 
6. Who can make what is intended more effective 
through their participation or less effective by their 
non-participation or outright opposition? 
7. Who 
can 
contribute 
financial 
and 
technical 
resources? 
8. Whose behaviour has to change for the effort to 
succeed? 
 
3) Control method 
The control method, which is derived from the course 
textbook [12], is a simple list of very specific definitions for 
identifying stakeholders. As all the participating students are 
familiar with this list, it provides an ideal control method. In 
addition, it roughly follows the same manner of describing 
stakeholders as other undergraduate-level SE textbooks.  
The control method defined stakeholders mainly as people 
who are needed to ensure the success of a project, who can be 
[12]: 
 
1. The sponsor who pays for the product. He wants value for 
his money. 
2. Daily users from various departments. They have to live 
with the product and, without their support, there will be 
no success. 
3. Managers of the departments. They want business 
advantages from the system. 
4. The company’s customers (clients of the system). Often 
they will see changes too, and without their support there 
will be no business advantages. 
5. Business partners, for instance suppliers, carriers, and 
banks. If they will see changes, their support is essential 
too. 
6. Authorities, for instance safety inspectors, auditors, local 
government. 
7. IT people and hotline staff in case the product is to be 
developed in-house. 
8. Other people providing resources for the product. 
9. The daily users of the product at the client’s site. 
10. Managers and sponsors at the client’s site. 
11. IT people at the client’s site. 
12. Distributors and value-adders for our product. (Value 
adders – or VARs – may for instance be software houses 
that combine our product with other products or 
services.) 
13. Competitors. They are definitely influenced by the 
product, but usually in an adverse manner. If so, they will 
not be treated as stakeholders. However, in some cases 
you depend on their co-operation, for instance if you are 
going to exchange data with them electronically. These 
situations may be delicate, and your best change is to 
create a win-win situation where they benefit too. 
C. Experiment execution 
Before the actual session, students were divided into three 
groups based on their answers from the pre-questionnaire 
regarding their prior experience. The groups were balanced to 
include only students with relevant experience, students with 
no relevant experience or students with no experience at all. 
Students in these groups were then randomly assigned to one of 
the three stakeholder identification methods. Each student 
received a package containing instructions, an answer sheet 
and a description of the stakeholder identification method. 
All students were required to participate in a 2-hour 
practice session. At the beginning, students were asked to pick 
up the answer sheet with their name on it and sit down to wait 
for the session to start without looking at the papers. Students 
were given a short 15-minute introduction to the experiment 
and were allowed to ask questions and clarifications about the 
experiment. Students were told to fill in the answer sheet 
according to the instructions and return it to the researchers 
when completed. No other time limit was imposed aside from 
the maximum 2 hours reserved. 
Students were instructed to work alone, and the researchers 
supervised the session to enforce this rule. In addition, no 
computers were allowed, but only the given material and 
writing equipment. Two researchers were constantly present 
during the session to answer questions and ensure that the rules 
and instructions were followed.  
All answer sheets were returned to the researchers after 
students completed them. Each answer sheet was then 
transferred to an Excel file to conduct the analysis. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
 
 
D. Data analysis 
Before analysing the results, the data needed to be checked 
for: 
 
Possible duplicates in case the same stakeholder was 
mentioned twice in one answer sheet. Duplicates were 
simply removed. 
 
A list of stakeholders that appeared as a single 
stakeholder in the answer sheet. In this case, the 
stakeholders were marked as separate stakeholders in 
the answer sheet. 
 
Plural or single stakeholder terms. All stakeholders in 
single terms were changed to plural. 
 
All stakeholder names were in English. In case a 
name was not given in English, two researchers 
agreed on the translation that matched the original 
name as precisely as possible.  
 
Extra lines or words. Only named stakeholders were 
considered as such; all other answers were removed, 
such as ‘etc.’, ‘and so on’ and ‘…’. 
After the pre-analysis, the next step was to check how 
many unique stakeholders were identified. For this step, two 
researchers checked and compared each identified stakeholder 
against the others to determine whether they were exactly the 
same. All stakeholders were considered unique by default, and 
stakeholders were only considered the same if the name 
contained a clear typo, the stakeholder description was the 
same or it was otherwise obvious that the stakeholder itself was 
exactly the same. The most typical case was that identified 
stakeholders belonged to the same group but were 
miscategorised as a sub group or an individual stakeholder 
within the group. In this case, the stakeholders were considered 
unique.  
Finally, two researchers worked together to evaluate 
whether the identified stakeholders were relevant stakeholders 
for the LUKKARI system. The main criterion for determining 
whether a stakeholder was relevant was the rationale provided 
for each stakeholder. Stakeholders were excluded from the 
study if the rationale was not provided or if it clearly indicated 
that the stakeholder was not connected to the described 
LUKKARI system. 
Time was also measured to determine whether there was 
any significant difference in analysis time between different 
student groups or methods.  
IV. 
RESULTS  
In total, 51 students participated in the experiment and 
identified a total of 449 stakeholders, an average of 8.8 
stakeholders per student. The results are shown in Table 1. The 
control method produced a total of 128 stakeholders, averaging 
8 stakeholders per student.  
There were 54 unique stakeholders, an average of 3.4 per 
student. These results include all three groups of students and 
form the baseline performance for comparing the performance 
of the two stakeholder identification methods. Given the results 
in Table 1, both the questionnaire and systematic methods 
outperform this baseline. The questionnaire method produced a 
slightly better average when comparing identified stakeholders 
per student while the systematic method was clearly better than 
the other two. Similar results were found with the unique 
stakeholders, the questionnaire being slightly better than the 
control, while the systematic method was superior overall.  
Comparing the methods when the students were evenly 
distributed based on their experience, the questionnaire method 
was slightly better than the control method, but the systematic 
method clearly outperformed the others. The results are also 
similar with unique stakeholders, with the systematic method 
again outperforming the other two. This suggests that instead 
of relying on questions and categories, a systematic approach 
more accurately finds stakeholders and identifies unique 
stakeholders. 
Comparing 
the 
time 
spent 
identifying 
stakeholders, there is only a slight difference between the 
control and systematic methods. The questionnaire method 
took the most time of the three, so in this regard it was less 
effective. 
When experience is measured separately, the students 
without experience produced a total of 223 stakeholders, with 
an average of 8.3 stakeholders identified per student. Of all 
stakeholders, 87 were unique stakeholders, an average of 3.1 
unique stakeholders per student. This group forms the baseline 
for measuring the influence of experience. Table 1 clearly 
shows that experienced students performed better than the 
baseline in terms of the average number of stakeholders and 
unique stakeholders identified per student. The group with no 
relevant experience performed slightly poorer in regard to 
average stakeholders per student than the group with no 
experience at all. However, the totally inexperienced group 
identified more unique stakeholders. 
TABLE I.  
OVERALL RESULTS FROM THE EXPERIMENT 
 
Control method 
Questionnaire method 
Systematic method 
Students: 
16 
19 
16 
Total identified stakeholders:  
128 
165 
156 
Average per student: 
8.0 
8.7 
9.8 
Average time per stakeholder  
4 min, 44 sec 
5 min, 18 sec 
4 min, 52 sec 
Total unique stakeholders: 
54 
74 
84 
Unique stakeholders per student: 
3.4 
3.9 
5.3 
 
No experience 
Experience but not SE 
Experience from SE 
Students: 
28 
10 
13 
Total identified stakeholders:  
223 
72 
141 
Average per student: 
8.3 
7.4 
10.8 
Average time per stakeholder  
5 min, 29 sec 
5 min, 19 sec 
4 min, 1 sec 
Total unique stakeholders: 
87 
39 
81 
Unique stakeholders per student: 
3.1 
3.9 
6.2 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
 
 
The experienced group clearly outperformed the other two 
groups. Experienced students were able to find more 
stakeholders than students with no experience. The groups with 
no experience at all and without relevant experience provided 
fewer stakeholders. What was surprising, however, was that the 
group that lacked relevant experience managed to find fewer 
stakeholders than that with no experience at all. Although the 
group still came up with more unique stakeholders, their 
experience from different domains might have caused this 
interference. While this study cannot provide an answer for this 
finding, it might be useful to experiment to investigate how the 
different experience affects the identification process. Finally, 
accounting for the time spent to identify a single stakeholder, 
there was only a slight difference between those with no 
relevant experience and those with no experience at all. Those 
with experience, however, were clearly faster. These results 
indicate that experience is a key attribute for identifying unique 
stakeholders, and relevant expertise provides a clear benefit.  
TABLE II.  
 AVERAGE OF IDENTIFIED STAKEHOLDERS IN EACH METHOD 
SEPARATED BY EXPERIENCE GROUPS 
 
Control 
method 
Questionnaire 
method 
Systematic 
method 
Experienced 
8.8 
9.4 
14.6 
No relevant 
experience 
7.3 
6.8 
7.7 
No experience 
7.1 
8.3 
8.4 
 
The results were also tabulated according to the 
identification method group based on experience level, as 
shown in Table 2. While the comparison groups were clearly 
smaller, the use of a specific method still provided better 
results. The data shows that students benefitted from the 
method regardless of experience. The only difference was that 
the group with no relevant experience that specifically used the 
questionnaire method identified the least stakeholders. It 
should be noted that while the difference is not big, the group 
with no relevant experience showed the least amount of 
improvement over the other two groups. This result is 
interesting because general experience should indicate more 
information about stakeholders, whereas this experiment hints 
that specifically relevant experience matters more.  
The rate at which sets of stakeholders occurred in the 
different method and experience groups were evaluated, as 
shown in Table 3. Comparing the frequency of stakeholders 
found no clear difference between any of the groups. The main 
stakeholders each group identified were similar in kind; 
generally, the stakeholders were organisational units of the 
university, stakeholders related to the university itself and 
stakeholders related to the LUKKARI system. Mainly, the 
frequency of their appearance varied. When all stakeholders 
were ranked according to occurrence, each group received 
similar results. While some groups’ position in the list varied 
greatly, no group clearly appeared more frequently in one 
group and less in another. This indicates that identification 
method and experience did not bias students to select particular 
stakeholders that would greatly differ from other groups. 
V. 
THREATS TO THE EXPERIMENT’S VALIDITY 
Students were expected to do the work individually in order 
to test whether the method actually helps individual students 
identify stakeholders. Communication between students and 
data searches were deliberately denied to control the 
experiment. In real life, however, work is often done in teams, 
and several people can work on the same task. In addition, 
access to company resources and the Internet also provide 
resources to help the identification process. Therefore, this 
study cannot be directly compared to a real environment as 
such.  
The study did not consider how valid and important each 
stakeholder was for the system. This was intentionally 
excluded because determining validity and importance was 
beyond the scope of this study. The study concentrated only 
on determining which identification method is more likely to 
produce a larger and more accurate set of stakeholders, 
compared to working without any specific method at all.
TABLE III.  
COMMON STAKEHOLDERS 
Control method 
Count 
Questionnaire method 
Count 
Systematic method 
Count 
IT Services 
10 
Students 
10 
Students 
27 
Students 
9 
University of Oulu 
5 
Student Councilors 
15 
Teachers 
7 
Teachers 
5 
LUKKARI Developer 
12 
Student Councilors 
7 
IT Services 
5 
University of Oulu 
11 
LUKKARI Developer 
6 
Student Councilors 
5 
IT Services 
11 
University of Oulu 
5 
Lukkari Developer 
5 
Teachers 
10 
Ministry of Education 
3 
University of Oulu Management 
3 
LUKKARI Development Team 
7 
External Consults 
3 
Course Management System Developers 
2 
University of Oulu Management 
7 
Requirements Engineers 
3 
Department Managers 
2 
Project Financiers 
6 
LUKKARI Development Team 
3 
LUKKARI Administrators 
2 
Teaching Staff 
5 
No experience 
Count 
Experience but not SE 
Count 
Experience from SE 
Count 
Students 
17 
Students 
14 
Students 
15 
Student Councilors 
13 
Teachers 
9 
IT Services 
10 
IT Services 
10 
LUKKARI Developer 
7 
LUKKARI Developer 
9 
Teachers 
9 
IT Services 
6 
Student Councilors 
8 
University of Oulu 
8 
Student Councilors 
6 
University of Oulu 
8 
LUKKARI Developer 
7 
University of Oulu 
5 
IT Support 
4 
Project Financiers 
5 
University of Oulu Management 
5 
University Financiers 
4 
University Administration 
5 
LUKKARI Development Team 
5 
Teachers 
4 
Ministry of Education 
4 
LUKKARI Administrators 
4 
University of Oulu Management 
4 
LUKKARI Development Team 
4 
LUKKARI Project Managers 
3 
Teaching Staff 
3 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
 
 
No quantitative analysis was performed on the results 
due the nature of the study. The rationale behind the decision 
to use only a qualitative analysis was that the study was 
designed to be more explorative to see whether the methods 
provided clearly different results. Each answer provided by 
the students was therefore analysed separately to understand 
whether the stakeholders were the same, whether the 
stakeholder had a rationale to be a stakeholder for the 
LUKKARI system and what kind of stakeholder groups were 
formed by the different methods. Therefore, the quantitative 
analysis was used to gain an insight into whether experience 
and method had any effect. However, quantitative analysis 
could provide more insight about the results from this study. 
Based on the results of this study, a longer study with a 
larger audience should be conducted.  
The experiment was limited only to students, which 
affects the generalisation of the results. However, this 
shortcoming was addressed by pinpointing students with 
relevant experience in software engineering and classifying 
them as a separate group for analysis. Experimenting in a 
real development situation should be the next step after this 
experiment to confirm the large-scale effect of experience. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The current advances in the development of stakeholder 
identification methods are gaining more attention, and 
defined stakeholder identification methods for RE have 
already been published. While the need for these methods is 
receiving more attention, comparing their effectiveness with 
practitioners having different types of expertise is less 
studied. This paper contributes to this issue with an 
experiment in which different stakeholder identification 
methods, the systematic method of Sharp et al. [5] and the 
questionnaire method of McManus [6], are measured against 
standard RE education literature guidance [12].  
When the results from groups using either systematic or 
question-based stakeholder identification method were 
compared to a control group, both groups were able to 
identify more stakeholders than the control group. The 
results also indicate that the systematic identification method 
performed slightly better than the questionnaire. Based on 
this finding, a systematic stakeholder identification method 
provided more identified stakeholders, although a defined 
method, like a questionnaire, was found to be better than just 
a list of possible stakeholders. 
The results show that experience is an important factor in 
stakeholder identification. The main finding was that 
experienced participants were able to identify more 
stakeholders than those without relevant experience or with 
no experience at all, regardless of what identification method 
was used. In addition, those without relevant experience 
actually performed slightly worse compared to others, 
indicating that the type of experience is also relevant. Using 
a defined stakeholder identification method in this study 
clearly increased the amount of stakeholders identified by 
both experienced and non-experienced participants.  
One area for future work will be testing these methods 
with companies working with real customer projects and 
extending the experiment to determine whether identified 
stakeholders are actually important for a software product. 
Another research topic is to study how the guide helps to 
identify stakeholders and whether the efficiency of a single 
method depends on the application domain. In this regard, 
one direction is to analyse approaches like StakeNet [8], 
where several practitioners participate in the identification 
process to generate a richer set of stakeholders. 
Finally, the quality and domain of the experience itself 
should be studied. This study demonstrated an interesting 
anomaly in the results between those that were experienced 
in SE and those without relevant experience. Therefore, one 
of the future research activities should concentrate on this 
particular finding. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the ITEA2 AMALTHEA 
and Digile N4S projects for providing support for the 
research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] IEEE. Guide to the software engineering body of knowledge, 
http://www.swebok.org [retrieved: August, 2014] 
[2] IEEE. IEEE Recommended Practice for Software Requirements 
Specifications, IEEE Std. 830–1998. IEEE Press, 345 East 47th Street, 
N.J., 1998. 
[3] A. Aurum and C. Wohlin, ‘Engineering and managing software 
requirements’, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. 
[4] I. Sommerwille and P. Sawyer, ‘Requirements engineering – A good 
practice guide’, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester, West Sussex, 
1997. 
[5] H. Sharp, A. Finkelstein, and G. Galal, ‘Stakeholder identification in 
the requirements engineering process’, Tenth International Workshop 
on Database and Expert Systems Applications (DEXA 99), Aug. 
1999, pp. 387–391. 
[6] J. MacManus, ‘A stakeholder perspective within software engineering 
projects’, IEEE International Engineering Management Conference, 
Vol. 2, Oct. 2004, pp. 880–884. 
[7] C. Pacheco and I. Garcia, ‘Effectiveness of stakeholder identification 
methods in requirements elicitation: Experimental results derived 
from a methodical review’, Eighth IEEE/ACIS International 
Conference on Computer and Information Science, Jun. 2009, pp. 
939–942. 
[8] S. L. Lim, D. Quercia, and A. Finkelstein, ‘StakeNet: Using social 
networks to analyse the stakeholders of large-scale software projects’, 
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference on 
Software Engineering (ICSE’10), May. 2010, pp. 295–304. 
[9] R. E. Freeman, ‘Strategic management: A stakeholder approach’, 
Pitman, Boston, 1984. 
[10] A. P. Friedman and S. Miles, ‘Stakeholders, theory and practice’ 
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006. 
[11] I. Sommerville, ‘Software engineering, 7th ed.’, Pearson Education 
Ltd, Edinburgh Gate, Harlow, 2004. 
[12] S. Lauesen, ‘Software requirements: Styles & techniques’, Pearson 
Education, 2002. 
[13] S. Barney, A. Aurum, and C. Wohlin, ‘Quest for a silver bullet: 
Creating software product value through requirements selection’, 
Proceedings of the 32nd EUROMICRO Conference on Software 
Engineering and Advanced Applications, Aug. 2006, pp. 274–281. 
[14] S. Barney, C. Wohlin, H Ganglan, and A. Aurum, ‘Creating software 
product value in China’, IEEE Software, vol. 25, iss. 4, 2009, pp. 84–
90. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
 
 
[15] S. Barney, A. Aurum, and C. Wohlin, ‘A product management 
challenge: Creating software product value through requirements 
selection’, Journal of Systems Architecture, vol. 54, iss. 6, 2008, pp. 
576 – 593. 
[16] J. Fedorowicz, U. J. Gelinas Jr, J. L. Gogan, and C. B. Williams, 
‘Strategic alignment of participant motivations in e-government 
collaborations: The internet payment platform pilot’, Government 
Information Quarterly, vol. 26, iss. 1, Jan. 2009, pp. 51–59. 
[17] H. In and B. Boehm, ‘Using WinWin quality requirements 
management tools: A case study, Annals of Software Engineering, 
vol. 11, iss. 1, Nov. 2001, pp. 141–174. 
[18] C. Pachecho and I. Garcia, ‘A systematic literature review of 
stakeholder identification methods in requirements elicitation’, 
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 85, iss. 9, Sep. 2012, pp. 2171–
2181. 
[19] K. Lyytinen and R. Hirschheim, ‘Information systems failures - a 
survey and classification of the empirical literature’, Oxford Surveys 
in Information Technology, vol. 4, 1987, pp. 257–309. 
[20] N. Juristo and A. M. Moreno, ‘Basics of software engineering 
experimentation’, Springer Publishing Company, 2010. 
[21] C. Wohlin, P. Runeson, M. Höst, M. C. Ohlsson, B. Regnell, and A. 
Wesslén, ‘Experimentation in software engineering’, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, Norwell, 2000. 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

