Networking-based Personalized Research Environment : NePRE 
 
 
Heeseok Choi, Jiyoung Park, Hyoungseop Shim, Beomjong You 
Division of Advanced Information Convergence  
Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information 
Daejeon, South Korea 
email: {choihs, julia.park, hsshim, ybj}@kisti.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—With advancement in information technologies and 
a better mobile environment, the paradigm of service is 
shifting again from web portals to individual applications 
based on any network. On the other hand, as more investment 
is being made in R&D, the efforts to enhance R&D 
productivity are becoming important. This study proposes a 
service model of Networking-based Personalized Research 
Environment (NePRE) for developing the tool to assist 
researchers in their R&D efforts. It can be easily utilized by 
researchers in their R&D information activities. To do this, we 
compare services and tools in terms of information activities in 
R&D. And we also analyze changes of information environment 
in terms of personalization. Subsequently, we design a service 
model of NePRE. Finally, we define its key functions to assist 
researchers with respect to their six information activities in 
R&D life-cycle. 
Keywords-research support; persoanlization; R&D life-cycle. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With advancement in information technologies and a 
better mobile environment, the paradigm of service is 
shifting again from web portals to individual applications 
based on any network. On the other hand, as more 
investment is being made in R&D, efforts to enhance R&D 
productivity of researchers are becoming more important. 
Light-weight applications are already being developed and 
disseminated to assist researchers in their R&D efforts. 
Unfortunately, however, the utilized data are limited to 
overseas database with a weak linkage to domestic academic 
information resources. Furthermore, it is not still easy to 
perform information-aid R&D since users have to access 
each service individually. In addition, recent changes to 
information environment makes personalized service more 
important for convenient information usage by researchers.  
This study proposes a service model of networking-based 
personalized research environment for developing the tool to 
assist researchers in their R&D efforts. It can be easily and 
conveniently utilized by researchers in their R&D 
information activities.  
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we 
describe existing science and technology information 
services, and discuss changes in information environment. 
Section 3 introduces our design of a networking-based 
personalized research environment. Subsequently in Section 
4, we define six key informative functions to assist 
researchers in R&D. Finally in Section 5, we discuss 
conclusions and future works.  
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A. Existing Science and Technology Information Services 
 
Services and tools were already developed and being 
made good use of assisting researcher’s R&D activities. 
They provide useful information ranging from papers, 
patents or other academic information to that on projects or 
researchers. Furthermore, they also offer research support 
features through bibliographic information management. 
Representative services and tools are as follows.  
 
 
SciVal Suite [1]: This provides a critical information 
about performance and expertise to help enable 
informed decision-making and drive successful 
outcomes.  It is composed of SciVal Spotlight, 
SciVal Strata, and SciVal Experts. It helps decision 
makers responsible for research management to 
assess institutional strengths and demonstrable 
competencies within a global, scientific landscape of 
disciplines and competitor. And it helps decision 
makers to identify researcher expertise and enable 
collaboration within the organization and across 
institutions. And it also helps them to measure 
individual or team performance across a flexible 
spectrum of benchmarks and measures. 
 
Mendeley [2]: This is a reference manager and 
academic social network. It makes your own fully-
searchable library in seconds, cite as you write, and 
read and annotate your PDFs on any device. It 
manages bibliographic information, and helps 
researchers generate references when they write 
them in a paper. In addition, it helps finding 
collaborative researchers of the world, and supports 
composing community with them.  
 
RefWorks 
[3]: 
This 
is 
an 
online 
research 
management, writing and collaboration tool. It is 
designed to help researchers easily gather, manage, 
store and share all types of information, as well as 
484
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

generate citations and bibliographies. If researchers 
need to manage information for any reason whether 
it is for writing, research or collaboration, RefWorks 
is the good tool. 
 
National Digital Science Library (NDSL) [4]: This is 
an integrated science and technology information 
service including paper, patent, and research reports 
by KISTI of Korea. It provides the specialized 
search service and integrated search to 0.1 billion of 
contents. It promotes efficient access to quality 
science and technology information based on 
cooperation networks.  
 
National Science and Technology Information 
Service (NTIS) [5]: This has been built as a national 
R&D knowledge portal for providing information 
regarding national R&D projects in connection with 
each ministry and institution. In NTIS, standard 
metadata 
are 
connected 
and 
managed 
by 
systematically, which needs joint use thereof in the 
cross-ministerial 
level, for example, avoiding 
redundant similar projects in advance. Each ministry 
builds a system which supports real project 
management for the process from receiving R&D 
projects to outcome management, connects and just 
provides standard information to the NTIS. 
 
Research Information Center (RIC) [6]: This is a 
virtual research environment being jointly developed 
by the Technical Computing Group at Microsoft and 
The British Library. The purpose of the RIC is to 
support researchers in managing the increasingly 
complex range of tasks involved in carrying out 
research. Specifically, to provide structure to the 
research process, easy access to resources, guidance 
and tools to manage information assets, along with 
integrated collaboration services. 
 
ResearchGate [7]: This allows researchers around 
the world to collaborate more easily. It discovers 
scientific knowledge, and makes your research 
visible. For a common purpose of   advancing 
scientific research, it links researchers from around 
the world. It is changing how scientists share and 
advance research in digital age.  
 
Nevertheless, overseas bibliographic management tools 
lack linkages and utilization of diverse academic information 
resources, while domestic information services still remain at 
information search for R&D activities and don’t have 
sufficient means for sharing individual information resources. 
     
B. Changes in Information Environment 
 
Recent information environment can be considered in 
terms of service personalization as follows. 
 
 
Open expansion of information and data: the demand 
for publicly available information and data is 
increasing due to government’s 3.0 and activation 
policies of creative economy in Korea. Furthermore, 
there are more projects for publishing and sharing 
public data. In addition, there are an increasing 
number of data standardization as Linked Open Data  
(LOD) and LOD construction. 
 
Enhancement of personal information protection: 
people are more aware of protecting personal 
information and leakages of personal information in 
terms of the society and technology. Therefore, 
regulations and institutions are improved for 
enhancing personal information protection, and 
people involved therein have studied how to further 
enhance the technology. In particular, as the 
Personal Information Protection Act is enforced 
since 2011, collecting, using, providing, processing 
and managing personal information is strictly 
regulated to minimize personal information leakage. 
In addition, because increasing open and shared data 
contribute to combining and integrating the data to 
form information to identify personal identity, more 
efforts are required to protect personal information. 
 
Popularization of social networking service: a 
popular trend is currently to make a connection 
between online users about common subjects to 
share and use information and knowledge. Various 
social networking services and platforms, for 
example, facebook, youtube, twitter, Kakaotalk, 
LinkedIn, and ResearchGate are now used. The 
outlook is that they are connected with web portals 
or mobile services to further enhance social 
networking services. 
 
Very big contents: big data and IoT (Internet of 
Things) technology is developing fast, and services 
using them are appearing. Data are now more 
abundant and diversified than before, and non-
literature data as well as literature-centered data will 
be more importantly handled. 
 
Advances in web platform technology: as web 
technology develops, services in various formats 
have been developed and distributed, for example, 
mobile apps and web apps. In particular, web-based 
application S/W based on web standard HTML 5 is 
even more valued, that can be installed and used in 
all devices from smartphones to smart TVs where 
web browsers operate. 
 
Table 1 summarizes implications and direction toward 
good services when we look into changes of information 
environment in terms of service’s personalization. That is, 
linking opened and standardized data is more important than 
directly constructing many contents. Also personal services 
should depend on personal participation rather than 
collecting personal information. For contents curation from 
very big contents, social networking is becoming more 
important in order to utilize group intelligence. Since web 
applications are based on the web, they can be operated just 
by web browsers. That is, web applications can be easier 
than web portals for personal usage on any device. 
485
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE 1. CHANGES OF INFORMATION ENVIRONMENT 
Division 
Implication 
As-Is→To-Be 
Open 
expansion of 
information 
and data 
․useful contents are more plentiful 
and various 
․link and usage of open contents are 
possible 
․link is possible by standardized 
methods(API, LOD) 
Construction
→Link 
Enhancement 
of personal 
information 
․collection of personal information 
from web become difficult 
․construction of personal profile 
information in web is difficult 
Usage of 
personal 
information→ 
Personal 
partiipation 
Popularization 
of social 
networking 
service 
․information link is possible and 
important 
․share of information is important 
․easy collaboration 
․participation of community is 
important 
Personal 
intelligence → 
Group 
intelligence 
Very big 
contents 
․curation is important 
․topic-based information link and 
statistical analysis  are important 
․variety and instantaneity of useful 
contents 
Search → 
Analysis 
Advances in 
web platform 
technology 
․services independent from devices 
and web browsers is important 
․resources usage of cloud 
environment is important 
Web portal → 
Web 
application 
 
With open expansion of information and data, 
enhancement of personal information is a challenging status 
to the personalization of services. Fortunately, social 
networking services were already popular over the world, 
and they were enhanced to communicate and to collaborate 
each other on any subject. Therefore, social networking can 
be used to realize personalization of a service. 
 
III. 
DESIGN OF A NETWORKING-BASED PERSONALIZED 
RESEARCH ENVIRONMENT 
We first established three views of personalized research 
environment. First of all, in the function view, functions are 
defined through how information is used to retrieve, collect, 
analyze, collaborate, store and writhe outcomes - in the R&D 
process [8][9][10] from the step of ideas & planning to the 
step of outcomes. The functions can be summarized as in 
Table 2. 
Next, the contents view defines what information can be 
utilized concerning service functions required in a relevant 
R&D process. In order to satisfy the requests listed on Table 
2, it is essential to share and use information resources held 
by individual researchers in addition to domestic and 
overseas scientific technology information. Individual 
knowledge tools should allow users to utilize various 
information resources - involving domestic and overseas 
information resources and individually held one. 
TABLE 2. FUNCTION VIEW OF SERVICE 
Activities 
R&D Activities 
Function requirements 
Search 
․Identification of research 
trends, core patents 
․identification of research-
related topic and concept 
․discovery of research topic 
․store of academic search 
results 
․Categorization and 
management of searched 
results  
․Expert recommendation 
․recommendation of 
research topic 
․categorization and 
management of academic 
search results 
Collect 
․Collection of bibligraphy 
and its original literature 
․Auto-management of 
bibliographic information 
․recommendation of 
materials related to 
concerning topic  
․articles viewing based on 
bibliometric information    
Analyze 
․analysis of technology 
ripple effect 
․Statistical analysis 
․analysis of citation relation 
among technology groups 
․Technology trend, topic 
analysis 
․Data statistics 
․provision of relation map 
Collaborate 
․Researcher network 
analysis 
․Management of personal 
R&D profile 
․data share with 
collaborative researchers 
․construction and 
collaboration of 
community 
․writing memos in 
document and sharing 
them  
Store 
․store of academic 
information resources 
․ categorization and 
management of academic 
information resources 
Publish 
․Organization of research 
results 
․writing papers 
․Support writing document 
based on template 
 
Table 3 summarizes the contents that NePRE manages 
and uses for supporting researchers. 
TABLE 3. CONTENTS VIEW OF SERVICE 
Division 
Description 
External 
resources 
paper, research report, patent, fact information, R&D 
project information, standard, trend/analysis information, 
bibliographic information, organization information 
Internal 
resources 
paper, research report, patent, memos, images, personal 
profile, web resources 
 
Finally, the operation view defines how to link and take 
advantage of information resources in individual knowledge 
tools. Table 4 shows the operation view. It defines data 
486
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

categorization and relationships based on bibliographic 
information such as patent and research reports. The tools are 
designed in a structure to offer information assisting R&D 
activities and at the same time to get feedbacks of and save 
information resources created in that process. 
TABLE 4. OPERATION VIEW OF SERVICE 
Division 
Description 
Platform-
based 
Link overseas and domestic S&T information 
resources by using KISTI science and technology 
knowledge platform as hub 
Biobliometric
-based 
Categorize, store, search by using bibliographic 
information Such as paper, patent, research report 
Bi-directional 
link  
Provide, store, and manage bidirectional information 
between tool and researchers 
 
IV. 
SIX KEY FUNTIONS IN NEPRE 
 
In this paper, we present conceptual model and design 
principles on a personal research environment that can be 
easily used with installation on various device environment 
of each individual researcher in Figure 2. Researchers 
perform various R&D information activities that are ‘search’, 
‘collect’, ‘analyze’, ‘collaborate’, ‘store’, ‘publish’ in R&D 
process. 
 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual model of personalized research environment 
 
Both opened S&T information resources and researchers’ 
personal resources can be converged and used. That is, it is 
essential to integrate and use individual researcher’s 
information resources as well as Korea’s and overseas 
science and technology information resources in order to 
facilitate various information activities carried out in R&D 
by researchers. The aforementioned personal knowledge tool 
must be able to be installed and operated in various types of 
device environment preferred by each researcher [11]. In 
addition, they must be connected in a standardized manner to 
use national and overseas information resources.  
The NePRE provides a collection of functions to support 
the R&D life-cycle of researchers as follows. 
 
 
Search. The NePRE provides researchers with a 
easy access to better resources based on statistical 
analysis of citation. For example, the resources 
having many references from other resources are 
selected preferentially, or the resources strongly 
referenced by similar researchers are selected. The 
search operation executes contents curation over 
simple search via participation of other researchers. 
The contents curation finds high quality of resources 
that can be more reliable using similar researchers’ 
experience while simple search just finds the 
resources closely matched to input keyword. 
 
Collect. A number of information resources have 
been already identified due to national and 
international policy of data open. The NePRE 
provides means to gain access to and leverage 
content. The user can automatically receive updates 
from specific resources sites, using e-mail and RSS 
feeds. Good articles can be recommended or 
identified by some researchers involved to similar 
topics. This suggests that open and shared resources 
are managed centered on individual user. The 
NePRE provides a link to the content supplier’s site 
for share. The underlying content sources are defined 
as the Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Information, academic community, publishers, or 
third party. All users would have subscriptions to all 
commercial resources likely to be available.  
 
Analyze. The NePRE provides an insight about 
technologic trends, competition relationship, and 
promising technologies. The NePRE supports 
analysis of technology’s ripple effect, researcher 
network, 
convergence 
relationships 
between 
technology groups. And the NePRE helps us finding 
research topics, identify key patents, and understand 
status of technology 
development 
based 
on 
technology keywords. In addition the NePRE 
provides opinions of feasibility or necessity of any 
research. 
 
Collaborate. The NePRE is designed to make it 
easy to identify potential collaborators, create 
community, and share the results of other researcher 
like other tools [7][12]. Both national and 
international information resources are outlined and 
summarized via the participation of other researchers. 
The NePRE encourages researchers to work together 
to develop and populate their research results like 
RIC and ResearchGate. For collaborative research, 
community participation and enhancements are very 
important. Therefore, the NePRE provides means to 
encourage 
communities 
such 
as 
following 
researchers, following research, categorization for 
community customized services, sharing calendars 
per community, and personalization via a following 
function like SNS. 
 
Store. The NePRE offers an enhanced function to 
allow the researcher to save searches on cloud 
environment for seamless usage from any device. 
487
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The NePRE supports clipping or scrapping searched 
results. The cloud storage stores metadata associated 
with the documents, together with links to the full-
text where permitted. When the resources are stored 
on a cloud environment, they are automatically 
related other resources each other and identified to 
be unique. The user can also easily access to all 
resources across various kinds of devices. Each user 
accesses to individual storage on cloud environment 
via an online account. Manage information resources. 
In addition, each user accesses to the resources of 
third party or local databases.  It categorizes 
resources according to personal criteria. 
 
Publish. The NePREl supports publication life-cycle, 
from 
literature 
search 
and 
retrieval, 
papers 
annotation, and bibliography management to self –
archiving like RIC [6].  The NePRE supports making 
template-based document such as papers, patents, 
and 
research 
reports. 
The 
NePRE 
supports 
automatically managing and listing up references, 
and helps researchers finding sources of resources. 
The NePRE supports writing short memos within 
documents and it helps share them with colleagues 
or in community.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study suggests a service model of networking-based 
personalized research environment for developing personal 
knowledge tools researchers can use easily in their R&D. To 
do this, we first compared services and tools in terms of 
information activities in R&D. And we also analyzed 
changes 
of 
information 
environment 
in 
terms 
of 
personalization. In the suggested model, functions required 
for each information use type in R&D are defined. Contents 
concerned are extended and defined to integrate and use 
individual researchers’ information resources as well as 
national and overseas science and technology information 
resources. The connection focusing on personal tools, not 
web portal-centered connection, is employed, and the 
method of operation is defined to facilitate connection and 
integration of information by using bibliography information 
of various information resources. Finally, we presented the 
outlook of six key informative functions of NePRE in R&D 
life-cycle. 
In the future, we will compare NePRE to other tools 
through case study. In addition, future studies will focus on 
establishing a method of efficient connection and use of 
science and technology information resources by means of 
personal knowledge tools. It is necessary to study how to 
facilitate efficient classification and storage of individual 
researchers’ information resources, and integration with 
connected data. It is necessary to study how to design light-
weight personal knowledge tools. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Elsevier SchVal Suite, www.info.scival.com, August, 2015. 
[2] Mendeley, www.mendeley.com, August, 2015. 
[3] RefWorks, www.refworks.com, August, 2015. 
[4] NDSL, www.ndsl.kr, August, 2015. 
[5] NTIS, www.ntis.go.kr, August, 2015. 
[6] R. S. Barga, "A Virtual Research Environment (VRE) for 
Bioscience 
Researchers", 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced Engineering Computing and Applications in 
Sciences, 2007, pp.31-38. 
[7] ResearchGate, www.researchgate.net, August, 2015. 
[8] H. Kim, N. Kwon, E. Jung, J. Lee, H. Choi, “Korean 
Scientists’ R&D Life-Cycle Study”, KISTI knowledge report, 
2011. 
[9] Y. Y. Yao, “A Framework for Web-based Research Support 
Systems”, Proceedings of the 27th International Computer 
Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC),  2003, 
pp.1-6. 
[10] S. Kim and J. Yao, “Mobile Research Support Systems”, 26th 
IEEE Canadian Conference of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering (CCECE), 2013, pp.1-5. 
[11] JISC 
briefing 
paper, 
“Digital 
Information 
Seekers”, 
www.jisc.ac.kr/publications/reports/2010, August, 2015. 
[12] D. D. Roure, “myExperiment: Defining the Social Virtual 
Research Environment”, 4th IEEE International Conference on 
Science, 2008, pp.182-189. 
 
 
488
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

