Identifying Requirements for Centralized Service 
for Movement and Biodiversity Data Analysis 
Ivana Nižetić Kosović, Boris Milašinović, Krešimir Fertalj 
Department of Applied Computing 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computing, University of Zagreb 
Zagreb, Croatia 
e-mails: {ivana.nizetic, boris.milasinovic, kresimir.fertalj}@fer.hr 
 
 
 
Abstract—Positioning technology is lately widely used in many 
scientific fields to collect movement and biodiversity data for 
further analysis. That generates enormous amount of positions 
and tracking data and impose the need for developing new 
algorithms for analysis and prediction, which are managed in 
ever growing partial and incomplete software solutions. In this 
paper, we made a roadmap for development of centralized 
service-oriented software in which one could manage data 
about moving objects or plants, as well as spatial layers, 
contextual information and perform complex algorithms. We 
identified a set of interfaces for communication with users 
allowing data and algorithm manipulation. Furthermore, we 
proposed meta-model for storing data and algorithms in order 
to achieve adaptiveness and wide applicability. The proposed 
model establishes a baseline for a concrete implementation. 
Keywords-movement data; biodiversity; tracking; service-
oriented software; meta-model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Widespread use of Global Positioning System (GPS) 
devices, smart phones and wireless communication devices 
induced the expansion of research on moving objects [1]-
[3]. There is an increasing number of applications in which 
mobility plays an important role. Vehicles are monitored 
and analysed in the field of traffic management and control 
to predict driver’s intentions or traffic congestions [4]-[7]. 
Mobile users' movement is analysed to assure fast access 
point availability [8][9]. In the field of behavioural ecology, 
wild animals are tracked in order to predict their migrations 
and predator-prey behaviour [10]-[12]. There is also a 
variety of location-based services provided to smart phone 
users such as museum or touristic attractions applications 
for tourists, hospital plan information for doctors and 
nurses, hotels, location-aware games and so on. 
Ubiquitous tracking technology and various applications 
generate enormous amount of tracking data and impose the 
need for developing new algorithms for analysis and 
prediction. Furthermore, in the last decade, the need to 
enrich object’s movement data with geographical and 
semantic information is recognized since raw trajectory data 
(positions and timestamps) are not sufficient to obtain 
meaningful movement patterns [3][13][14]. Inclusion of 
heterogeneous data (contextual information, environmental 
data) makes analysis and prediction even more complex and 
the need for explanation of movement and spatial data more 
indispensable. Similar problem exists not only in the field of 
moving objects but also in some other fields like botany 
[15]. Although plants do not move, the algorithms for 
analysis and prediction are still complex and yield different 
results. 
Still, there is no unique software in which one could 
manage data about moving objects, contextual information 
and perform complex algorithms. Visualisation and 
algorithms are currently managed by partial or incomplete 
platform-dependent software which cannot fully satisfy 
researchers' needs. Moreover, existing applications are not 
adaptable to new (custom) algorithms. Furthermore, since 
mobile applications cannot perform complex calculations 
and manage voluminous data locally, the need for 
standardized service-oriented system is essential. 
These problems are further elaborated in Section II in 
order to formulate a problem followed by the identification 
of typical algorithms and their inputs and outputs. Once 
identified, it would be shown that there is a common 
intersection between inputs and outputs which can lead to a 
solution presented in the Section III. After centralized 
service-oriented solution concept description, a set of 
interfaces is enumerated, followed by the meta-model for 
storing data and algorithms. The paper ends with a 
conclusion of a presented work and future work guidelines.   
 
II. 
PROBLEM FORMULATION 
In the field of moving objects, an increasing number of 
analysis and prediction algorithms are developing: data 
mining techniques to extract behavioural patterns from 
moving objects data [16][17], clustering algorithms to detect 
important places [13][18], prediction techniques to model 
and predict moving object’s future location, such as neural 
networks, Markov models, and specific types of dynamic 
Bayesian networks, like Hidden Markov Models (HMM) or 
Kalman filter [5][19]-[22]. In recent years, considerable 
research has been devoted to mapping the flora distribution, 
spatial analysis, biodiversity analysis and prediction of 
368
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

occurrence. Bedia et al. [23] presented variety of different 
algorithms applied to a particular geographic area. However, 
it is not guaranteed that a particular algorithm can equally 
be used for different regions of the world. Although there 
are significant differences between moving objects and 
(static) plants, some similarities exist that led us to identify 
main ideas and enumerate problems in order to propose an 
integrated software solution. Table I shows representative 
categories of algorithms and their inputs and outputs with 
some examples where results depend on algorithm being 
used.   
Although 
aforementioned 
algorithms 
and 
their 
implementations are valuable, we listed their main 
drawbacks considering not only their performance accuracy 
but also their ease of use and adaptiveness. As it can be seen 
from Table I, each algorithm uses spatial data and a set of 
coordinates that represents object positions or species 
findings. Testing different algorithms is usually a work 
intensive task as algorithms use different input data format 
and produce output in different format. Moreover, findings 
data must be exported to the appropriate format prior to the 
use of an algorithm and output must be transformed back 
into user’s format repeating the similar task for many 
algorithms.  Moreover, existent software is: 
 
Partial, incomplete – e.g., ArcGIS can be used for 
calculation of probabilities distribution of species, 
Weka and IntelligentMiner for clustering or basic 
HMM modelling 
 
Local – desktop apps, rarely applets or web services 
 
Closed – with no possibility for adding/customizing 
algorithms, and inaccessible to ordinary people, e.g., 
mobile users, non-experts in certain field 
 
Too specialized – not general enough to encompass 
various needs and heterogeneous data, e.g., HMM is 
applied to many classes of moving objects but each 
model is specialized only for that class although they 
have common structure and performance 
 
Technically determined – platform limited, e.g.,  
applets require additional software installations, 
Geographic Information System (GIS) software 
requires high capacity and performance, 
 
Lack of (customized) visualisation of results 
 
Consequently, there is a need for centralized, 
interoperable, opened, adaptive (to data and to algorithms) 
and widely useful application that could be extended with 
additional algorithms and additional data necessary for a 
particular algorithm. 
 
 
TABLE I. EXAMPLES OF COMMONLY USED ALGORITHMS IN  
MOVEMENT AND BIODIVERSITY DATA ANALYSIS 
Algorithm Category 
Input 
Output 
Results depend on 
algorithm? 
Pattern discovery - 
construction 
Sets of marked sequential positions 
(positions, timestamps and 
corresponding  pattern),  
Algorithm parameters (list of 
patterns, initial probabilities)  
HMM (states, transitions, transition and 
emission probabilities) 
Yes (HMM, State-space 
model, Artificial neural 
network - ANN, ...) 
Pattern discovery - 
usage 
A set of sequential positions 
(positions and timestamps) 
A set of marked sequential positions 
(positions, timestamps and corresponding 
pattern) 
Yes (HMM, State-space 
model, ANN, ...) 
Positions clustering 
Positions 
Algorithm parameters (Eps, MinPt ) 
Sets of positions (clusters) and a set of 
noise positions 
Yes (Density-based 
spatial clustering of 
applications with noise - 
DBSCAN, …) 
Species distribution 
Spatial layers, species findings  
Matrix of species findings per spatial layer 
attribute 
No 
Species distribution 
prediction 
Spatial layers, species findings 
 
Matrix of probabilities corresponding to 
spatial shapes 
Yes (Distance alg., 
Maximum Entropy 
Modelling (MAXENT), 
Multiple Logistic 
Regression - MLR, 
ANN,...) 
Ecological profile 
Spatial layers, species findings  
Matrix of species occurrence per spatial 
layer attribute or spatial unit 
No 
Biodiversity analysis 
(alpha and research 
intensity) 
Spatial layers, species findings  
Collection of matrices (alpha and research 
intensity per layer attribute, other species 
data - ecological indices per spatial layer 
attribute, basic species data...) 
  
Extension of a spatial layer with data from 
matrices but for a unit instead of attribute 
May depend, when data 
uncertainty exists [15] 
 
Movement prediction 
Positions, spatial layers, contextual 
data 
Positions 
Yes (ANN, HMM, ...) 
 
369
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Recently, some notable ideas of centralized solutions for 
managing moving objects' data and performing algorithms 
were proposed. Xu and Guting [24] proposed a generic data 
model for moving objects that can apply in more than one 
environment and applied it to transportation model. A 
conceptual data model for representing semantic trajectories 
applied to tourism and animal movement is shown by 
Bogorny et al. [25], giving the baseline for future research 
on semantic trajectory. 
Considering wild life research there is a vision of 
centralized solution for wildlife data management in [26]. 
We have also presented a generic model and proposed the 
conceptual data model for analysis and movement 
prediction independent of application area and moving 
object type [27]. 
In [15], we proposed an object model for biodiversity 
analysis that can avoid the problem of data export.  Input 
and output are modelled using interfaces thus making the 
model available in various usage scenarios as a web service 
or a layer in an application. As it only defines structure of 
input data, the model is independent of concrete data storage 
and the service is implemented in such way that it should be 
independent from data retrieval as long as the data follows 
some biological patterns. Data retrieval is done by 
implementing proposed interfaces and merging them with 
the core service implementation service using one of 
dependency injection techniques when the service is 
exposed as a web service. 
An idea of an integrated solution is also presented by 
Ames et al. [28]. The authors have developed web services-
based software for hydrologic data discovery, download, 
visualization, and analysis using extensible plug-ins for 
searching, viewing and exporting data.  
Although from a different field of study, cited papers 
yielded an idea of using web services, data interfaces and 
plug-ins for algorithms. Using service interfaces and various 
plug-ins it would be easier to try a different type of analysis 
or analyze the same thing using different algorithms without 
need to do it manually or to convert input and output data 
between different formats. 
III. 
A PROPOSED SOLUTION 
A. Concept of centralized service-oriented solution and its 
interfaces 
Figure 1 presents a conceptual view of centralized 
service-oriented solution we propose. The application 
consists of data stored permanently or temporary on a server, 
a set of algorithms that use data to produce result to be 
returned to a user and a set of interfaces for communication 
with users allowing data and algorithm manipulation. Each 
of the arrows from the figure presents usage of an interface, 
which we would only enumerate in the paper providing input 
and output descriptively leaving format to be standardized in 
the future work. 
Positions are main input data to perform any algorithm. 
They can be collected via mobile device or uploaded using a 
personal computer but also can be stored by an on-premise 
server. As mentioned previously, one of disadvantages of 
existing software is that a user must export his/her data, 
adjust it to required formats and upload it again to a 
proprietary service/application. In the proposed system, the 
user can keep data on his/her server and enable a service on 
his/her own data server according to one of formats that 
would be proposed as a standard. Instead of concrete data, 
the user could enter service location and optional filters and 
data would be retrieved later as needed. 
Custom algorithms
Algorithms
Data
Spatial data (GIS 
layers)
Contextual data
Movement or 
positions data
Results
On-Premise Data
 
Figure 1. Concept of centralized service-oriented solution 
The same principle applies also to contextual data and 
spatial data (GIS layers). Contextual data are usually 
environmental data, data about certain object, e.g., species 
etc. These data are collected from different sources: other 
data providing services, for example weather services 
[29][30] or they could be sent by user as well (for example, 
specific layer considering certain species). Contextual data 
are not limited in scope and additional information is 
facultative or obligatory depending on an algorithm 
requirements. As shown in Table I, some of analysis depends 
on used algorithm and a particular algorithm may need some 
additional data. Therefore these data can be of any type and 
format of data that can be recognized and used by a 
particular algorithm.   
The idea is that algorithms are categorized and that there 
exists default algorithm per category but the application 
enables upload of a user’s own algorithm. A solution must 
provide an API for access to movement and spatial data and 
any custom data from an input. An algorithm should 
implement an interface from a category it belongs to. Details, 
like language, format, runtime environment, etc., are left to 
implementation phase. 
370
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The results of algorithms can further be analysed and 
deployed to the server as well. Either retrieved on a 
temporary base or stored permanently, data stored on the 
server consists of data and algorithms which are both meta-
modelled. 
Summarizing all above, the set of interfaces used in 
Figure 1 can be described as in Table II. For each category of 
data, there are three possible interfaces: for data upload, for 
setting URL of a service that host user’s data and for 
returning on-premise data once that centralized solution need 
users data. 
B. Meta-model  
To achieve adaptiveness and wide applicability, data and 
algorithms should be meta-modelled (Figure 2). Usage of a 
meta-model enables addition of algorithms, algorithms 
categories, domains and attributes that does not exist in the 
present moment but would occur in the future. Furthermore 
it enables integration of many different types of users under 
one, integrated model. 
 
1) Object and its characteristics 
Central entity of movement and biodiversity data is an 
object which represents either an animal or a plant. An object 
has recursive relationship to itself, thus allowing to model 
taxonomy (biological or zoological hierarchy of species) at 
any level - from unique instance of certain species to 
kingdom. For example, an object could be a certain animal 
(identified by name or a collar identifier), which is of species 
grey wolf (canis lupus), which is of genus canis, or it can be 
a species, e.g., abies alba, genus abies etc. Any of taxonomic 
ranks can have attributes which can comprise values from a 
certain domain. Values of defined attributes can be assigned 
to object itself. For example, species wolf can have attribute 
social order, while a particular wolf can have value of that 
attribute alpha male.  
 
2) Findings (positions) 
An object can be spotted at certain coordinate at certain 
timestamp. The attribute source represents type (source) of 
finding, for example GPS collar, terrain research, photo, 
literature citation etc. For example, a GPS collar carried by a 
wolf retrieves a recorded position of the wolf at a certain 
timestamp. Also, a researcher could see a wolf at a terrain 
and also record time and coordinates of finding. Another 
example is logging a plant’s position by a researcher at the 
terrain or entering coordinates and timestamp of the plant 
from literature or a photo taken at the terrain.  
Similarly to time and source other contextual data for a 
finding could be stored in the model. Optionally, if 
necessary, these contextual data can be related to attributes 
and domains.      
 
3) Spatial data     
Since spatial data is present in almost every kind of static 
or moving objects' positions analysis, they are meta-
modelled as well. A layer is consisted of spatial elements 
(shapes) and layer attributes. By the term layer, we mean a 
GIS layer, such as a content of ESRI shapefile [31]. The 
shapes (usually polygons) belong to a certain layer. Values 
of defined attributes, which are valid in specific period of 
time, are assigned to certain shape. A coordinate (at which 
the object is spotted) belongs to certain shapes.  
TABLE II. LIST OF INTERFACES 
Category 
Purpose(s) 
Input 
Output 
Movement 
and 
positions 
Data upload 
 
List of n-tuples containing coordinates, species or 
object identifier and identifier of additional context 
data 
 
Provides URL of a service 
hosted on a user’s server 
(on-premise data) 
URL of a service and custom data that should be send 
as-is to the service 
On-premise server produce output 
same as used for input when data 
uploaded directly 
Contextual data 
Upload of species/objects 
data 
List of n-tuples containing species/object identifier 
and additional parameters of any type (e.g., byte 
array) that must be interpreted by an algorithm 
 
Upload 
of 
contextual 
information, i.e., those that 
are related to positions 
List of n-tuples containing context identifier and 
additional parameters of any type (e.g., byte array) 
that must be interpreted by an algorithm 
 
Provides URL of a service 
hosted on a user’s server 
(on-premise data) 
URL of a service for contextual data 
On-premise server produce output 
same as used for input when data 
uploaded directly 
Spatial data (GIS 
layers) 
Data upload 
Zipped folder containing one of supported GIS 
formats (e.g., ESRI shp+dbf+shx) 
 
Provides URL of a services 
hosted on a user’s server 
(on-premise data) 
URL of a service that serves a GIS layer (e.g., WMS 
server) 
Zipped folder or WMS server 
Custom 
algorithms 
Custom algorithm upload 
Algorithm code 
 
Results 
Results of an algorithm 
 
One or more matrices that summarize 
algorithm results and optional output 
from custom algorithm that must be 
interpreted by a user 
Analysis request 
Initiate analysis 
Type of analysis, chosen algorithm, optional filter on 
context and data 
 
371
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
4) Algorithms 
 
Several classes of algorithms used in movement and 
biodiversity analysis are summarized in Table II. In each 
category, input and output types can be identified and these 
input and output parameters can be meta-modelled using 
entity Attribute thus describing interfaces for all algorithms 
in the category. In order to enable custom extension of 
parameters, the last parameter should always be in free form 
(e.g., XML or array of bytes) for custom data.   
One or more algorithms can exist for each category and 
one of them is default one for the category. An algorithm can 
have 
additional 
parameters needed 
for a 
concrete 
implementation. Each algorithm instance produces results 
using data from findings, coordinates and shapes which do 
not have to be modelled as a relation in a model, but should 
be available using some form of API in implementation. 
Results from an algorithm instance are stored according to 
output parameters attributes. 
1,N
1,N
1,1
1,N
1,1
1,1
1,N
1,N
1,N
0,N
0,N
1,N
0,N
0,N
1,1
0,N
1,1
1,N
1,N
1,N
1,1
1,1
1,1
0,N
0,N
0,N
0,N
0,N
0,N
1,1
1,N
0,N
0,N
0,N
0,N
Object
isFoundAt
Coordinate
Time
isTypeOf
Shape
Layer
Layer
Attribute
belongsTo
hasAttribute
hasValue
isWithin
Attribute
Domain
Value
Domain
hasAtrribute
isIn
contains
Period
Source
hasAttribute
Value
Algorithm
Algorithm 
Category
belongsTo
Algorithm
Instance
isInstanceOf
isDefault
hasParameters
usesForOutput
usesForInput
produceResult
hasValue
0,N
Value
Value
 
Figure 2. Meta-model for movement and biodiversity data and algorithms 
372
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The proposed solution and the designed model establish a 
baseline for a concrete implementation. To achieve 
interoperability and openness, the proposed solution should 
be exposed as (web) services with clearly defined standards 
of input/output data. Future work should be related to the 
standardization of input and output formats. Furthermore, an 
appropriate solution for writing algorithms must be identified 
(in place compilation of a code in some specific language or 
custom Domain Specific Language) and APIs for data access 
must be defined. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Dodge, R. Weibel, and A.-K. Lautensch, "Towards a 
taxonomy of movement patterns," Information Visualization, 
vol. 7, 2008, pp. 240-252 
[2] 
J. Drummond, R. Billen, E. Joao, and D. Forrest, Dynamic 
and Mobile GIS: Investigating Changes in Space and Time, 
CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Inc, 2006. 
[3] 
C. Parent, et al., "Semantic trajectories modeling and 
analysis," ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 45, 2013, pp. 1-32 
[4] 
W. Wang and G. Wets, Computational Intelligence for 
Traffic and Mobility: Atlantis Publishing Corporation, 2013. 
[5] 
C. Barrios and Y. Motai, "Improving Estimation of Vehicle's 
Trajectory Using the Latest Global Positioning System With 
Kalman 
Filtering," 
IEEE 
T. 
Instrumentation 
and 
Measurement, vol. 60,  2011, pp. 3747-3755 
[6] 
J. Krumm and E. Horvitz, "Predestination: Inferring 
Destinations from Partial Trajectories," UbiComp 2006: 
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 4206, 2006, pp. 243-260 
[7] 
J. Froehlich and J. Krumm, "Route Prediction from Trip 
Observations," presented at the Society of Automotive 
Engineers (SAE) 2008 World Congress, 2008. 
[8] 
J.-M. François, G. Leduc, and S. Martin, "Learning 
movement patterns in mobile networks: a generic method," 
presented at the European Wireless 2004, Barcelona, Spain, 
2004. 
[9] 
G. Yavas, D. Katsaros, Ö. Ulusoy, and Y. Manolopoulos, "A 
data mining approach for location prediction in mobile 
environments," Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 54, 2005, pp. 121-
146 
[10] A. Franke, T. Caelli, G. Kuzyk, and R. J. Hudson, 
"Prediction of wolf (Canis lupus) kill-sites using hidden 
Markov models," Ecological Modelling, vol. 197, Aug 10 
2006, pp. 237-246 
[11] N. F. Webb, M. Hebblewhite, and E. H. Merrill, "Statistical 
methods for identifying wolf kill sites using global 
positioning 
system 
locations," 
Journal 
of 
Wildlife 
Management, vol. 72, Apr 2008, pp. 798-807 
[12] A. D. Middleton, et al., Linking anti-predator behaviour to 
prey demography reveals limited risk effects of an actively 
hunting large carnivore, 2013, pp. 1023–1030 
[13] L. O. Alvares, et al., "A model for enriching trajectories with 
semantic geographical information," presented at the 
Proceedings of the 15th annual ACM international 
symposium on Advances in geographic information systems, 
Seattle, Washington, 2007. 
[14] B. Guc, M. May, Y. Saygin, and C. Körner, "Semantic 
Annotation of GPS Trajectories " presented at the 11th 
AGILE International Conference on Geographic Information 
Science 2008, University of Girona, Spain, 2008. 
[15] B. Milašinović, T. Nikolić, and K. Fertalj, "Biodiversity 
analysis 
supporting 
species-subspecies 
uncertainty 
in 
findings data," International journal of biology and 
biomedical engineering, vol. 7, 2013, pp. 127-134 
[16] Y. Ishikawa, Data Mining for Moving Object Databases. 
Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2010. 
[17] S. Elnekave, M. Last, and O. Maimon, "Measuring Similarity 
Between Trajectories of Mobile Objects," in Applied Pattern 
Recognition. vol. 91, H. Bunke, et al., Eds., ed: Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 101-128. 
[18] I. Nižetić Kosović, K. Fertalj, and J. Kusak, "An expert 
system 
for 
discovering 
biogeographically 
interesting 
locations from animal movement data," presented at the 
European Computing Conference, Paris, France, 2011, pp. 
348-353 
[19] S. Akoush and A. Sameh, "Movement Prediction Using 
Bayesian Learning for Neural Networks," presented at the 
International conference on Wireless communications and 
mobile computing, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, 2007, pp. 191-
196 
[20] R. Joo, S. Bertrand, J. Tam, and R. Fablet, "Hidden Markov 
Models: The Best Models for Forager Movements?," PLoS 
ONE, vol. 8 , 2013, 
[21] P. E. Smouse, et al., "Stochastic modelling of animal 
movement," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
B-Biological Sciences, vol. 365, Jul 27 2010, pp. 2201-2211 
[22] I. Nižetić, K. Fertalj, and D. Kalpić, "A Prototype for the 
Short-term Prediction of Moving Object's Movement using 
Markov Chains," presented at the 31st International 
Conference on Information Technology Interfaces, Cavtat, 
Croatia, 2009, pp. 559 - 564 
[23] J. Bedia, J. Busqué, and J. M. Gutiérrez, "Predicting plant 
species distribution across an alpine rangeland in northern 
Spain. A comparison of probabilistic methods," Applied 
Vegetation Science, vol. 14, 2011, pp. 415-432 
[24] J. Xu and R. H. Guting, "A generic data model for moving 
objects," Geoinformatica, vol. 17, 2013, pp. 125-172 
[25] V. Bogorny, C. Renso, A. R. d. Aquino, F. d. L. Siqueira, 
and L. O. Alvares, "CONSTAnT – A Conceptual Data 
Model for Semantic Trajectories of Moving Objects," 
Transactions in GIS, vol. 18, 2014, pp. 66-88 
[26] F. Urbano, et al., "Wildlife tracking data management: a new 
vision," Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B-
Biological Sciences, vol. 365, Jul 27 2010, pp. 2177-2185 
[27] I. Nižetić and K. Fertalj, "Automation of the Moving Objects 
Movement 
Prediction 
Process 
Independent 
of 
the 
Application Area," Computer Science and Information 
Systems, vol. 7, 2010, pp. 931-945 
[28] D. P. Ames, et al., "HydroDesktop: Web services-based 
software 
for 
hydrologic 
data 
discovery, 
download, 
visualization, and analysis," Environmental Modelling & 
Software, vol. 37, 2012, , pp. 146-156 
[29] M. Kanamitsu, et al., "NCEP-DEO AMIP-II Reanalysis (R-
2)," Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, vol. 
83, 2002, pp. 1631-1643 
[30] NOAA. (2011, 01.06.2011). Earth System Research 
Laboratory. Available: http://www.esrl.noaa.gov/ 
[31] ESRI. ESRI Shapefile Technical Description. An ESRI White 
Paper—July 
1998 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.esri.com/library/whitepapers/pdfs/shapefile.pdf 
2014.08.15 
 
 
 
373
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

