Effect of Data Science Teaching for Non-STEM Students
A Systematic Literature Review
Luiz Barboza
CESAR School
Recife, Brazil 50030–390
Email: lcbj@cesar.school
Erico Souza Teixeira
CESAR School
Recife, Brazil 50030–390
Email: est@cesar.school
Abstract—The evolution of computing capacity allowed specialists
in certain areas to beneﬁt from this advance, although with little
knowledge about data analysis technologies. In this way, our role
as software scientists, more than increasing computational power,
is to facilitate the access of people from other areas to these
technologies and, with this combined effort, bring more relevant
results to society. With this objective in mind, a systematic
literature review was carried out to understand if (RQ1), how
(RQ3) and why (RQ2) data science is being taught to students of
non-STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics).
The bases used in this research were ACM and IEEE, dismissing
the articles that met the exclusion criteria. These criteria were: a)
articles focused on the use of technology to improve the learning
process in general; b) articles targeting different groups than the
one prioritized here, non-STEM; c) educational improvements
obtained with different proposals other than the introduction of
data science.
Keywords–Data Science; Non-STEM; Teaching.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The popularity of data science courses has increased over
the last ﬁve years (2015 to 2020), as we can see on the graph
generated by Google Trends shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Worldwide search term, Data Science Course (source: Google
Trends)
This is true for industry and academia, particularly in
STEM courses, where this discipline has a solid base and even
a reference curriculum [1] as the main guide. On the other
hand, this type of knowledge is still not widespread in non-
STEM areas. In fact, data science applied in different domain
areas, is one of three data science pillars, as seen in Figure 2.
Bearing this in mind, a systematic review of the literature
is presented based on the current state of the art of if, how and
why data science is being offered in non-STEM courses. In
the next sections, the method for research, selection, extraction
and synthesization will be detailed to answer the three research
questions.
Figure 2. Data Science comprised of Computation, Domain Knowledge and
Math/Statistics [2]
II.
BACKGROUND
Since their emergence in the 1950s [3], machine learning
algorithms have had limited applications, as they depended
on computational power to process large volumes of data [4].
From the beginning of this century, the increase in computing
power and the demand for understanding and relating the
large mass of information available, machine learning solutions
have become more sophisticated [5] and more popular in
their use [6]. This popularization allowed machine learning
to reach an important milestone, the possibility of access for
people without speciﬁc training in science or data technology.
Today, it is possible for people from different areas, such as
Economics, Administration, Health, Philosophy, Architecture,
among others, to be able to extract information from their
data without the need for prior in-depth knowledge of data
science. Even tough, this paper focuses on non-STEM students
in general, we can consider economists as an example of it
as the background context presented as follows. Like physi-
cists, economists acquire non-experimental data generated by
processes they want to understand. The mathematician John
von Neumann deﬁned a game [7] as: 1) a list of players; 2)
a list of actions available to each player; 3) a list of how the
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

accumulated winnings for each player depend on the actions of
all players; and, 4) a time protocol that tells who chooses what
and when. This deﬁnition corresponds to what economists call
the economic system, a social understanding of who chooses
what and when.
In addition, economists would like to conduct experiments
to study how a hypothetical change in the rules of the game
or in a pattern of behavior observed by some ”players”,
for example, government regulators or a central bank, can
affect the patterns of behavior of other players. Thus, the
“structural model builders” in economics seek to infer, from
historical patterns of behavior, a set of invariant parameters for
hypothetical situations in which a government or regulatory
body follows a new set of rules. ”Structural models” look for
invariant parameters to help regulators and market designers
understand and predict data patterns in historically unprece-
dented situations.
Like physicists, economists use models and data to learn.
These models are then used to explain new data. Then, new
models are built as evolution of their predecessors. This
allows us to learn from the depressions and ﬁnancial crises
of the past. Nowadays, with big data, faster computers and
better algorithms, patterns can be seen where only noise was
previously heard.
The work presented here proposes to evaluate how the
study of data analysis, even if not in-depth, can better train
students from different non-technical areas of study, such as
Economics and Administration.
III.
REVIEW METHOD
A. Research Questions
The research questions analysed here were: RQ1) How
is knowledge in data science being taught to non-technical
target audiences, particularly economics and business students?
RQ2) What are the learning improvements that these students
are experiencing with the use of data science in different areas
of their studies? RQ3) What was the method used in teaching
data science?
B. Search Protocol
Using IEEE and ACM as the main source of research
without year of publication threshold, the work here will look
for documents related to data science knowledge that are being
introduced to either secondary or higher level education tar-
geting non-technical audiences, such as students of economics
or business administration, deﬁned by the following research
string:
(”data science”) AND (teaching OR education) AND (eco-
nomics OR administration OR humanities OR non-technical)
The protocol applied here was comprised of four steps:
1) Apply the search string: apply the string according to
the objectives; 2) Filter based on the criterion: Filter the
articles by the inclusion and exclusion criteria by analyzing
their abstracts; 3) Validate answers to the research questions:
read the selected texts, checking if they answer the research
questions. If so, extract them as a reference for the ﬁnal article
resulting from a systematic review; 4) Synthesize: apply the
thematic synthesis method in order to summarize the research
ﬁndings.
TABLE I. SELECTION PROTOCOL RESULTS
IEEE
ACM
Initial set of papers
300
130
Passed inclusion criteria
11
18
Final list of papers
3
6
After the inclusion/exclusion criteria review, the article set
was ﬁltered if it answered one of the research questions. The
results are summarized in Table I.
C. Selection
The criteria for the inclusion of the article are:
- The article should be written in the English language.
- The article should have its scope focusing on data science
studies of non-technical target audiences.
The criteria for the exclusion of the article are:
- Articles focusing on the use of technology to improve the
learning process.
- Articles targeting different groups other than the one
prioritized here, namely, non-STEM.
- Educational improvements achieved through different
proposals other than data science introduction.
- Data Science application without the explicit goal of
educational purposes.
D. Extraction
At this step of the process, speciﬁc extracts of the analysed
papers were identiﬁed as being a valid answer to any of
the three research questions. As an example, [8] could be
cited here, specially as the author starts beautifully with this
sentence: ”Because no data exists in a vacuum, each Data
Analytics major must choose an applied domain in which to
specialize. The goal of this specialization is to understand
the types of questions that data are used to answer in that
discipline, and how data are collected and interpreted in this
context. There are currently seven available domains: An-
thropology and Sociology; Biology; Economics; Philosophy;
Physics; Political Science; and Psychology”
The domains mentioned by [8] adhered to the data science
studies in different proportions, as depicted in Figure 3.
E. Synthesis
In order to answer the ﬁrst research question, the following
classiﬁcation was applied: a) school level to which it was
applied; b) location/scope; c) concepts taught; and d) target
audience. The coding applied to analyze the answers of the
second research question was: e) the achieved results; and f)
how they were measured. Finally, the last research question had
its own coding, g) the method used in teaching data science.
IV.
RESULTS
A. RQ1) The IF
In order to answer this research question, the following as-
pects were analysed: education level, location/scope, concepts
taught and target audience.
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 3. Proportion of courses applying data science on a particular study
[8]
1) School Level: Junior High School (from 5th up to 9th
graders): As seen in [9], Data Science is being taught to school
kids, from 10 up to 15 years old. ”We organized a half-day
long data science tutorial for kids in grades 5 through 9 (10-
15 years old). Our aim was to expose them to the full cycle of
a typical supervised learning approach - data collection, data
entry, data visualization, feature engineering, model building,
model testing and data permissions”. The main goal of this
experience is to expose young kids to data analysis reasoning
and to an intuitive overview of the data science process. Senior
High School (from 10th up to 12th graders): A deeper approach
can be observed in [10], in which programming (python),
data analysis and problem solving are experienced by high
school students. Serving as a bridge between programming
intuition and logic to actual imperative coding, as stated by
the author ”this course is a crucial component of the K-12
computational thinking pathways we are developing at our
school district, which take students from block-based pro-
gramming and computational thinking (elementary school) to
text-based programming and applications of computer science
(high school). Our mandatory 8th grade course serves as
a bridge between these two components”. College/University
level (undergraduate and graduate): At the college/university
level is where we can see most of data science teaching. The
most relevant aspect for the scope analysed here is if it is
being taught to non-STEM students. This particular item will
be reviewed under the target audience topic of this study.
Anyhow, this kind of practice can be observed at undergraduate
level by numerous authors [2][8][11][12][13][14]. To depict
an example of it we can cite [12] ”data analysis and visu-
alization techniques could be applied in an English literature
class in order to help students better understand contextual
information, analyze characters’ social networks, and visualize
literary techniques”. At the graduate level, we can mention the
experience reported by [15]: ”We are developing educational
materials for data science to provide broad and practical
training in data analytics non-CS students. This includes
students majoring in science and engineering who want to
acquire skills to analyze data, such as biology, chemistry, and
geosciences. This also includes students in the humanities that
would like to pursue data-driven research, such as journalism
students interested in social media analysis”.
2) Location/Scope: All the studies analysed report local-
ized experiences, in the sense that none of the studies reported
a broader experiment throughout a larger region rather than
the local institution in which the study itself was used as base
for the research. Most of the studies considered were based in
the following states of the USA [14]: California [9][12][15],
Washington DC [10] and Ohio [8]. The remaining of the
studies were performed in Europe, in the following countries:
Germany [2], Switzerland [13] and Finland [11].
3) Concepts Taught: The level of depth in which the
concepts are being taught can be categorized in the following
groups: Data Analysis, Programming, Big Data, Data Science
and Machine Learning. Data Analysis: It can be deﬁned [16]
”as a set of mathematical/statistical procedures, generally
used as computer programs, embracing elementary but par-
ticularly multidimensional statistical techniques that require
an iterative application in order to statistically process the
data and extract information from the data set. This method
involves the use of mathematical/statistical rules generally
applicable and not subject dependent as procedures for the
assessment of data and the acquisition of new information”.
With this deﬁnition in mind, some studies focused on analysing
historical data and extracting knowledge from it, such as
[2][9][11][12]. Programming: Constructing programs is recog-
nized as a complex task, as mentioned by [17] over 30 years
ago: ”All software construction involves essential tasks, the
fashioning of the complex conceptual structures that compose
the abstract software entity, and accidental tasks, the repre-
sentation of these abstract entities in programming languages
and the mapping of these onto machine languages within
space and speed constraints”. Nevertheless, it can present its
intuition and rationale, in order to encourage early logical
thinking, as [10] has been doing for high school students. Big
Data Engineering: Parallel processing of large amounts of data
has been disrupted by the iconic paper published by Google
researchers about its now open source technology, MapReduce
[18]: ”MapReduce is a programming model and an associated
implementation for processing and generating large data sets”.
This is a key concept when talking about Data Engineering,
which is also a discipline being taught as a foundation concept
of Data Science Programs, as is being done by [15]. Data
Science: According to [19], ”Data science updates the concept
of data mining in the light of the availability of big data, that
differ from data by their automatic generation through social
networks, sensors and other data generating tools. In this
sense, data science can be deﬁned extending Giudici (2003),
as an integrated process that consists of a series of activities
that go from the deﬁnition of the objectives of the analysis, to
the selection and processing of the data to be analysed, to the
statistical modelling and summary such data and, ﬁnally, to the
interpretation and evaluation of the obtained statistical mea-
sures’”.In that sense, it comprises a more complete process, in
which it processes large amounts of data in order to infer new
knowledge for the business context. According to this view,
some studies [14] offer a more complete program combining
all previous concepts. Machine Learning: It is considered a
subset of Data Science specialized in identifying patterns in
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

data as described by [20] ”knowledge discovery process as
the chain of accessing data from various sources, integrating
and maintaining data in data warehouses, extracting patterns
by machine learning methods”. Some programs cover that
important topic, including supervised, unsupervised methods
and reinforced learning, as [8][13].
4) Target Audience: The last aspect, and probably the
most important one, analysed in order to answer the research
question RQ1, is to which target audience the data science
content is being taught to, if to non-STEM or STEM only.
On this topic we can observe different areas, from liberal arts,
business and life sciences, that are being complemented with
this kind of content. In [15], Journalist students use big data to
understand social impact in a collaborative environment. [12]
reports the use of data analysis to make social civic issues more
tangible. Different areas such as: Anthropology and Sociology;
Biology; Economics; Philosophy; Physics; Political Science;
and Psychology were pointed in [8]. Besides humanities areas
mentioned before, [14] presents evidences of data science
being applied to to life science related courses, such as:
Medical Statistics; Marine biology; Biostatistics; Genomics;
Psychology; and Neuroscience. And lastly, [13] acknowledges
a wide variation of courses being supported by data science
studies: Physics; Biochemistry and physics; Environmental
sciences; Earth sciences; Statistics; Mathematics; Biomedical
engineering; Bioinformatics; Materials Architecture Manage-
ment; and Social-Political Sciences.
B. RQ2) The WHY
The aspects analysed in order to answer this research ques-
tion were the results achieved and how they were measured.
1) Results Achieved: Most of the success criteria adopted
by the analyzed studies was the feedback of the students
about the level of learning on the presented data science
content [2][9][11][12][14][15]. In particular, we could mention
[13] as an example ”The course has received so far two
ofﬁcial evaluations by the students conducted on behalf of
ETH Zurich. The general satisfaction has been 4.4/5.0 and
the lecturers’ evaluation 4.5/5.0 on the following aspects:
understandable and clear explanation of the subject, learning
goals, lecture signiﬁcance, motivation to active participation,
and material made available”. In two other cases [8][10], since
data science programs were being offered for the ﬁrst time,
what was mainly measured were the number of consecutive
offerings and the popularity that of the courses, for example
in [8]: ”Over the ﬁrst four semesters of the program, we
have offered 13 sections of Introduction to Data Analytics,
enrolling approximately 240 students in total. At the end
of the program’s second academic year (2017–2018), there
were already about 100 declared DA majors among the ﬁrst
year, sophomore, and junior classes. Overall, 37% of our
majors are women, and this percentage has been rising with
each class year. At the end of the 2018–2019 academic year,
our ﬁrst year with graduating seniors, we anticipate that
we will enroll approximately 130 total declared majors, and
that we will graduate 27”. Besides the success level, based
on student satisfaction or courses popularity, some studies
collected lessons learned and improvements to be incorporated
to the programs, as cited by [13]: ”This paper concludes that
cross-disciplinary data science education is highly challenging
and requires a very different approach in the design of study
courses than data science education exclusively for computer
scientists. However, this paper shows that cross-disciplinary
data science education is feasible and highly rewarding for
students”.
2) Measurement Techniques: The achieved results men-
tioned in the previous section were measured in different ways.
In some cases as a qualitative survey of students feedback, as
in [11]: ”According to students feedback, the courses one and
two went well. Both, the ADA as a subject, and the course
structure were thanked. Most of all, the students appreciated
the absence of a ﬁnal exam”. In some other cases, a more
quantitative approach was made, even without the concern of
being statistically validated, as in [13] and [9]. In comparison
with cases that had this level of validation, as in [10]: ”We
analyzed each construct using a repeated-measure ANOVA
with a type 2 sum of squares, using time-of-survey (pre- or
post-survey) as the within-subjects factor and gender, prior
familiarity with Python, and the trimester they took the course
in as between-subject factors. Post-hoc testing was done using
a t-test (paired when the independent variable was time-of-
survey), with the Bonferroni correction to address family-wise
error rate”. Lastly, for the course [8] that had popularity as
its main success criterion, they simply performed an accrual
offering after offering of the program.
C. RQ3) The HOW
1) Proprietary Methodologies:
Most experiences apply
proprietary methodologies [2][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15]
that are in some extent a variation of ACM Data Science
Curricula [1], which originally was designed for technical
undergraduate educational formation. As an example of a
proprietary methodology we can mention [11]: ”To achieve
a good learning atmosphere leading to effective learning, we
use pedagogic methods, such as, collaborative learning, pair
programming, and learning by doing. During the day, we
are aloud to ﬁnd something we haven’t even planned. This
approach draws us near to the ideology where data scientist
is thought as ’part analyst, part artist’”.
2) ACM Data Science Curricula: The ACM Data Science
Curricula [1], comprises the following knowledge areas:
•
Computing Fundamentals, including: Programming,
Data Structures, Algorithms, and Software Engineer-
ing
•
Data Acquirement and Governance
•
Data Management, Storage, and Retrieval
•
Data Privacy, Security, and Integrity
•
Machine Learning
•
Data Mining
•
Big Data, including: Complexity, Distributed Systems,
Parallel Computing, and High Performance Comput-
ing
•
Analysis
and
Presentation,
including:
Human-
Computer Interaction and Visualization
•
Professionalism
V.
LIMITATIONS AND THREATS TO VALIDITY
As a process to apply the techniques of a formal SLR,
it was an interesting experience. Even if it were performed
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

by applying a strict methodology, it relies only on technical
research databases, ACM and IEEE. Some domain speciﬁc
databases were used as reference, however no relevant studies
were found. In that sense, this could be a threat to the validity
of this study.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, teaching data science to different areas
of knowledge other than the technical ones (non-STEM) is
already collecting its fruits, and still has room for further
growth. It is interesting to observe how it is being applied
to different levels of students, from primary school and high
school up to undergraduate and post-graduate courses. Another
interesting point is that it is being offered to different target
audiences, from economics, to medicine, social studies and so
on. In terms of beneﬁts, it is possible to see that the level
of learning and interest on the subject are aspects that have
being monitored by the providers of such courses. Not only
that, but also the lessons learned in terms of how the teaching
methodology could improve in order to present this kind of
content to non-STEM students. Finally, the technique used to
measure those results varies from practitioner to practitioner,
ranging from no measurement at all up to statistically validated
quantitative research.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This article was produced as the ﬁnal activity of the ﬁrst
class, systematic literature review, of the doctorate program
at CESAR School. Hence, we would like to thank the course
professors, Cesar Franca and Paula Carvalho, as well as the
course coordinator, Felipe Ferraz.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Clear, A. S. Parrish, J. Impagliazzo, and M. Zhang, “Computing
Curricula
2020:
Introduction
and
Community
Engagement,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
50th
ACM
Technical
Symposium
on
Computer
Science
Education,
ser.
SIGCSE
’19.
New
York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2019, pp. 653–
654,
event-place:
Minneapolis,
MN,
USA.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3287324.3287517
[2]
J. Engel, “Statistical literacy for active citizenship: A call for data
science education,” Statistics Education Research Journal, vol. 16, no. 1,
2017, pp. 44–49.
[3]
B. G. Buchanan, “A (very) brief history of artiﬁcial intelligence,” Ai
Magazine, vol. 26, no. 4, 2005, pp. 53–53.
[4]
J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, “Mapreduce: Simpliﬁed data processing on
large clusters,” 2004.
[5]
I. Mierswa, “May 9, 2017,” library Catalog: ingomierswa.com.
[Online]. Available: https://ingomierswa.com/2017/05/09/
[6]
A. Ng, “What Artiﬁcial Intelligence Can and Can’t Do Right
Now,” Harvard Business Review, Nov. 2016, section: Analytics.
[Online]. Available: https://hbr.org/2016/11/what-artiﬁcial-intelligence-
can-and-cant-do-right-now
[7]
J. Von Neumann and O. Morgenstern, Theory of games and economic
behavior (commemorative edition).
Princeton university press, 2007.
[8]
J.
Havill,
“Embracing
the
Liberal
Arts
in
an
Interdisciplinary
Data
Analytics
Program,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
50th
ACM
Technical
Symposium
on
Computer
Science
Education,
ser.
SIGCSE
’19.
Minneapolis,
MN,
USA:
Association
for
Computing Machinery, Feb. 2019, pp. 9–14. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3287324.3287436
[9]
S. Srikant and V. Aggarwal, “Introducing Data Science to School Kids,”
in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGCSE Technical Symposium on
Computer Science Education, ser. SIGCSE ’17.
Seattle, Washington,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Mar. 2017, pp. 561–566.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3017680.3017717
[10]
“Pythons and Martians and Finches, Oh My! Lessons Learned from a
Mandatory 8th Grade Python Class | Proceedings of the 51st ACM
Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education.” [Online].
Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3328778.3366906
[11]
M.
Marttila-Kontio,
M.
Kontio,
and
V.
Hotti,
“Advanced
data
analytics education for students and companies,” in Proceedings
of the 2014 conference on Innovation & technology in computer
science education, ser. ITiCSE ’14.
Uppsala, Sweden: Association for
Computing Machinery, Jun. 2014, pp. 249–254. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2591708.2591746
[12]
S. J. Van Wart, “Computer Science Meets Social Studies: Embedding
CS in the Study of Locally Grounded Civic Issues,” in Proceedings
of the eleventh annual International Conference on International
Computing Education Research, ser. ICER ’15.
Omaha, Nebraska,
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Aug. 2015, pp. 281–282.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/2787622.2787751
[13]
E. Pournaras, “Cross-disciplinary higher education of data science -
beyond the computer science student,” Data Sci., vol. 1, 2017, pp. 101–
117.
[14]
S. Kross and P. J. Guo, “Practitioners Teaching Data Science in
Industry and Academia: Expectations, Workﬂows, and Challenges,”
in Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’19. Glasgow, Scotland Uk: Association
for Computing Machinery, May 2019, pp. 1–14. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300493
[15]
Y. Gil, “Teaching Parallelism without Programming: A Data Science
Curriculum for Non-CS Students,” in 2014 Workshop on Education for
High Performance Computing, Nov. 2014, pp. 42–48.
[16]
V. Vitali, “Formal methods for the analysis of archaeological data: Data
analysis vs expert systems,” Computer Applications and Quantitative
Methods in Archaeology, 1990, pp. 207–209.
[17]
F. P. Brooks, “No silver bullet essence and accidents of software
engineering,” Computer, vol. 20, no. 4, Apr. 1987, p. 10–19. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.1987.1663532
[18]
J.
Dean
and
S.
Ghemawat,
“MapReduce:
simpliﬁed
data
processing
on
large
clusters,”
Communications
of
the
ACM,
vol.
51,
no.
1,
Jan.
2008,
pp.
107–113.
[Online].
Available:
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1327452.1327492
[19]
P. Giudici, “Financial data science,” Statistics and Probability Letters,
vol. 136, may 2018, pp. 160–164.
[20]
G. Kauermann and T. Seidl, “Data Science: a proposal for a
curriculum,” International Journal of Data Science and Analytics,
vol.
6,
no.
3,
Nov.
2018,
pp.
195–199.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41060-018-0113-2
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

