Agile-User Experience Design: With or Without a Usability Expert in the Team?  
 
Lou Schwartz 
Public Research Centre Henri Tudor 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg 
lou.schwartz@tudor.lu 
 
Abstract— In the past decade, numerous experiments of Agile-
User Experience Design (also called Agile-UX) have been 
carried out. Through these experiments it remains unclear who 
should be in charge of the usability in an Agile-UX project 
development. After a review of the literature about the 
involvement of usability expert(s) in Agile-UX, this paper 
repeats two experiments which explore the necessity to involve 
usability experts in the team. The first experiment is based on 
the statement that developers should be able to manage the 
User-Centred Design (UCD) and conduct the related methods 
without the intervention of a usability expert, in order to 
respect agile practices. The second one is based on the 
statement that integration of a usability expert in project teams 
ensures better implementation of UCD and better results. 
Results of both experiments are discussed to validate research 
hypotheses for future work. 
Keywords- Agile-UX; team composition; use case 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Agile-UX is a project management principle for 
software development based on the Agile values and 
principles in respect to User-Centred Design (UCD) and 
supported by UCD good practices and methods. Nowadays, 
no official definition of Agile-UX exists, but a lot of 
experiments 
demonstrate 
its 
value 
[2][3][4][5][7][8] 
[9][10][12]. In the literature, Agile-UX is implemented with 
the involvement of usability expert(s) in the Agile process 
and the use of methods from UCD. But, in Agile principles, 
intervention of experts is not encouraged [5]: dissemination 
of skills is preferred to the intervention of experts. We test 
both approaches through two qualitative experiments. The 
first one fully respects the principles of Agile project 
management: developers should be able to manage 
themselves, UCD and conduct the related methods without 
the intervention of a usability expert. The second option 
integrates a usability expert in the project team to ensure 
better implementation of UCD and better results. Results of 
both experiments are discussed to elicit future research 
questions for future work. 
After a review of the literature on the involvement of 
usability experts in an Agile-UX development process in 
Section II, the paper will present two qualitative 
experiments in order to validate the relevancy of our 
hypotheses in Section III. Then the suitability of our 
hypotheses will be discussed in regard to the experiments’ 
results in Section IV. 
II. 
USABILITY EXPERT(S) INVOLVEMENT IN AGILE-UX  
Though numerous experiments of Agile-UX, the 
question of “who is in charge of UCD” often comes [2][3][4] 
[5][6][7][9][10][12]. Different options are exposed, but they 
are often the same, which we can regroup in 4 categories as 
explained below. 
A. One usability expert  
Only a couple of experiments advocate the integration of 
only one person in charge of UCD in Agile-UX ([4] project 
1 & 3, [5] project PV, [9]). Often in this case, the UCD 
designer is also the product owner (project 1[4]) or 
developer (project 3 [4]). 
B. A parallel team of several usability experts 
In most cases, a parallel team of several usability experts 
is dedicated to the project ([2][3], Project 2 [4], [6][7][12]).  
But, they organise the exchanges and work between 
developers and designers differently. In Agile methods, it is 
possible to dedicate a spike (an iteration to focus on a 
particular problem like test a new technology) to usability 
exploration. But, it is not a good solution to maintain a 
constant pace [7]. Some projects also involved occasionally 
UCD experts on some particular points (projects MG & PV 
in [5]); this is close to an organisation by spikes. But, for 
McInerney [5], it is important that the usability expert is 
available “on call” at all times, which may be impossible if 
the 
usability 
expert 
works 
on 
several 
projects 
simultaneously. Some other projects integrate usability in 
the iteration without real planning (see [P3.290] in [4]).  
Sy [12] proposed a parallel tracks organisation of work: 
designers work with one or two iterations ahead of 
developers.  To implement this proposition, several usability 
experts are needed, because of the amount of work and to 
respect best practices, which recommends that it should not 
be the same person who designs and evaluates the 
developed software. 
C. UCD expert as product owner 
In regards to the UCD expert’s responsibilities and 
product owner’s responsibilities, it is sometimes preferable 
to merge both roles (Project 1 [4], Project TB [5], for Beck 
in [6][10][12]). The product owner has the following 
responsibilities: 
 
Define the features of the product, decides on release 
date and content [11]. In this case, a UCD expert will 
be based on the gathered data of the users, on 
context and on tasks in order to define the user 
stories to develop [10]. 
 
Be responsible for the profitability of the product 
(ROI) [11]: for this, the usability expert goes by the 
359
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

context studies and the exchange with the 
organisation on the needs and the attempted 
profitability.  
 
Prioritize features according to market value [11]: 
this prioritization is done thanks to the exchanges 
with users and developers [10].  
 
Can change features and priorities every 30 days 
[11]: UCD expert accepts changes and modifies 
designs when it is necessary. He can modify user 
stories and prioritization according to new analysis.  
 
Accept or reject work results [11]: through the users’ 
tests, expert validations and participation to the 
acceptance tests writing.  
 
Negotiate with all stakeholders [10]. 
 
Communicate with the users and train the users [10]. 
Furthermore, some observations show that the product 
owner is often submerged by the marketing and sales 
concerns. He often does not have the skills to manage a 
user-centered design, and, as a consequence, he may lose 
focus on a user experience vision [10]. 
Sometimes, two product owners are appointed: one as 
the usability product owner and the other as the 
conventional product owner [10]. In this case, they 
commonly specify the needs and prioritize the work to do. 
This is an answer to some observations concluding that 
usability tasks are often not a priority because working 
software is still preferred to usable software and usable 
software is more expensive in terms of efforts and time. 
D. Team member(s) as responsible of the UCD process 
 The last possibility explored is to take on the 
responsibility of the UCD process. It is also the more closed 
one of the Agile vision: do not involve a usability expert, 
but give this responsibility to one or more team members 
(Project 3 [4] & in part Project PV [5]).  
In all these experiments, usability experts are involved in 
the Agile-UX projects. But in Agile principles, intervention 
of experts is not encouraged [5]. This can raise the following 
question: is it necessary to involve usability expert(s) in the 
team or is involving team members with some knowledge on 
usability sufficient? This is what we tested in the 
implemented experiments. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
After the literature review and several exchanges with 
Agile professionals, we focused on the question of the 
usability expert involved in the team. We propose the 
following statements to test: 
 
S1: without usability expert, if the project team has 
sensitivity and some knowledge in HCI, Agile-UX 
works. 
 
S2: with usability expert involved in the project 
team, usability of the produced product is better than 
in S1. 
 
S3: the dynamic of the project team is better when a 
usability expert is involved. 
We retrospectively and qualitatively question these 
statements through two experiments. We focus only on the 
usability of the final product, laying aside any potential cost 
overhead induced by the involvement of a UCD expert. 
A. Context of the experiments 
The method used consists of a retrospective and 
qualitative analysis of two experiments that tested two 
versions: the first, without a usability expert in the team (S1, 
S3), the second one, with one UCD expert in the team (S2, 
S3). The observations made will help us to better define the 
issues related to “who should play the role of the usability 
expert in Agile-UX?” 
Both experiments are instantiations of Agile-UX and 
aim to develop a mobile application prototype, in order to 
demonstrate the interest of mobile touch-based applications 
for construction site-related activities.  
The implemented prototype allows taking photos 
localized by Global Positioning System (GPS) on a 
construction site. The user can highlight parts of a photo 
(e.g., add an arrow to the default on a wall) and add textual 
or vocal notes about the entire photo or about the 
highlighted parts on the photo. The user can also register 
some construction sites by indicating their localisation on a 
map. Then the photos are automatically attached to a 
construction site according to their localisation. The user 
can also find his photos in his calendar since the photos are 
automatically attached to events in his Google® calendar 
based on the shooting date. Finally the user can share a set 
of photos with additional comments. 
Two phases of development were planned to experiment 
two different implementations of Agile-UX. We have 
chosen Scrum as Agile method for both. 
B. Case #1 – Agile-UX without UCD expert 
1) Statement and composition of the team: In the first 
experiment, the team was composed of a full-time 
developer, a Scrum master (part-time), and a business 
expert (part-time) who plays the role of product owner, 
researcher and architect, with knowledge of architects’ 
practices in France and Luxembourg. 
All members of the team are sensitive to and have some 
knowledge in Human Computer Interaction (HCI). We have 
voluntary not involved a usability expert to test this 
configuration, which is the more suitable with the principles 
defined in Agile. Indeed, in Agile teams, everyone should 
be able to work on each part of the software development. 
So, after a while, team members should have sufficient 
knowledge and skills to relieve other team members of their 
tasks including, in case of Agile-UX, on usability tasks. 
2) Implementation of the UCD: The first experiment 
lasted six months with iterations’ duration of one week. 
We implemented Agile-UX on 22 iterations. The 
developer implemented only three usability methods: 
wireframing, users’ tests, and satisfaction questionnaire.  
 
360
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

3) Methods used 
 
Brainstorming sessions to build the product backlog 
including business experts and technical experts 
 
Wireframing with Microsoft Power Point® 
 
Two user tests: 
o 
Real situation of use, one user, one week 
o 
6 architects, 6 scenarios, observation tests 
4) Team dynamics and satisfaction: During this 
experiment, the developer played the role of designer, 
developer and evaluator of the application. As the 
developer had to play these three roles, he had the feeling 
to progress slowly. Moreover, it is not easy to evaluate 
own work and to always question it.  
The skills in HCI of all team members allowed avoiding 
some usability mistakes. But, as the tests results showed, a 
lot of usability issues were identified by users. Regarding 
these experiment results, Agile-UX works without a 
usability expert and with a project having some sensitivity 
and knowledge in HCI. This justifies our first statement S1. 
It should be noted that the team was in constant contact 
with the product owner thanks to his presence at each 
specification meeting, each demonstration meeting, and 
during some stand up meetings. The product owner was also 
available to answer any team member’s questions.  
 
C. Case #2 - Agile-UX involving a usability expert  
1) Statement and composition of the team: During the 
second experiment, the team was composed of a full-time 
usability expert, a full-time developer, a business expert 
(part-time) as product owner, and a Scrum master (part-
time). The business expert and the Scrum master are the 
same as in the first experiment. The developer has neither 
particular sensitivity nor knowledge in HCI.  
The focus is to develop, for the same mobile application, 
interoperability aspects with a collaboration platform 
dedicated to the construction sector, photo tagging and a 
search engine based on photo metadata.  
2) Organisation 
of 
work 
and 
process: 
This 
development lasted six months with iterations’ duration of 
two weeks. The developer began one month before the 
usability expert, because of calendar constraints, to first 
work on technical requirements. For independent reasons, 
the usability expert quit the project before the end of the 
six months. We only really worked two and half months 
with the complete team. The process followed was the 
parallel tracks proposed by Sy [12].  
3) Methods used 
 
Brainstorming sessions to build the first version of the 
product backlog including business experts and 
technical experts 
 
Personas, that help to improve the product backlog 
 
Wireframing 
 
Expert review based on ergonomics criteria after each 
release 
 
User tests with four users: two who know the 
application, two novices 
 
Focus groups to evaluate wireframing. 
4) Team dynamics and satisfaction: During this 
experiment, the usability expert played the role of designer 
and evaluator of the application. The whole team had the 
feeling to quickly progress and to go deeper in the 
functionalities proposed but also in the quality of the 
application. Furthermore, more methods of UCD were 
used and they were adapted differently. The test results 
showed a lower number of usability issues identified by 
users thanks to the integration of the usability expert and 
they are less critical. That justifies our second statement 
S2: Agile-UX provides better results with the involvement 
of a usability expert. 
Moreover, we observe the natural instauration of a “pair 
designing” 
[8]: 
when 
developer 
was 
implementing 
wireframes, he sometimes asked the usability expert to join 
him and to explain and validate developed interfaces during 
the implementation; when the usability expert designed 
wireframes, she sometimes asked the developer to join her 
and to validate feasibility of wireframes during their design. 
Even if the developer had no skill in HCI at the beginning, 
he learnt the good practices throughout the project and 
quickly integrated them.  
Furthermore, the team was in constant contact with the 
product owner by his presence during the specification 
meeting 
at 
the 
beginning 
of 
the 
iterations’, 
the 
demonstration meeting at the end of the iterations’, during 
some stand up meetings and his availability throughout the 
project to answer all emerging questions.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Since the results are only based on two experiments, 
hypotheses cannot be formally validated. Then, in the 
following section, only the suitability of the hypotheses for 
future research will be discussed. 
 S1 and S2 are justified by the satisfaction of users, 
which is “correct” in the first experiment and which is better 
in the second one (see Table I and Table II).  
TABLE I.  
USERS’ TESTS RESULTS IN THE BOTH EXPERIMENTS 
 
Number of problems meet 
Use case 1 
Use case 2 
By 
importance 
of 
the 
problems  
(importance = number of 
testers who met the problem 
* 
seriousness 
of 
the 
problem) 
1 
5 
2 
2 
2 
1 
3 
3 
1 
4 
0 
1 
6 
1 
1 
8 
0 
1 
10 
1 
0 
12 
1 
0 
15 
1 
0 
20 
1 
0 
TOTAL 
15 
7 
 
361
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE II.  
USERS’ SATISFACTION RESULTS  
Percentage of users’ satisfaction 
Use case 1 
Use case 2 
Average 
75,42 % 
81.25% 
Min 
62.5 % 
75% 
Max 
90 % 
92.5% 
TABLE III.  
COMPARATIVE TABLE OF THE BOTH EXPERIMENTS 
 
Use case 1 
Use case 2 
Team 
Developer 
1 full-time 
1 full-time 
Scrum master 
1 part-time 
1 part-time 
Product owner 
1 part-time, 
business expert 
1 part-time, 
business expert 
Usability expert 
 
1 full-time 
Sensitivity to 
UCD  
All team members 
All team 
members, except 
the developer 
Organisati
on of work 
Duration 
6 months 
Expected 6 
months – in reality 
2,5 months 
Iteration 
duration 
1 week 
2 weeks 
Number of 
iterations 
22 
5 
Process 
Scrum 
Scrum + Sy’s 
parallel tracks 
UCD 
methods  
Wire framing 
Power Point® 
Paper and pen 
Balsamiq® 
Users’ tests in 
direct 
observation 
6 users, 6 
scenarios 
At every iteration 
end with 2 users 
who know the 
application and 2 
novices 
Users’ tests in 
real situation 
1 user during 1 
week 
NO 
Satisfaction 
questionnaire 
X 
X 
Personas 
NO 
X 
Expert review 
NO 
X 
Focus groups 
 
To evaluate the 
wireframes 
Other 
methods 
used 
Brainstorming 
To build the 
product backlog 
To build the 
product backlog 
Team 
dynamic 
and 
satisfaction 
Feelings of the 
team 
Slow progression 
 Quick 
progression 
 Go deeper in the 
functionalities 
proposed 
 Improve quality 
of the 
application 
Observed team 
dynamic 
 No real 
dynamic 
 Demotivation 
 Pair-designing 
 Developer 
increased his 
HCI skills 
Results 
Lot of usability 
issues but working 
software. 
Lower number of 
usability issues 
identified by users 
and they are less 
critical. 
Better users’ 
satisfaction 
And working 
software. 
 
Without involving a usability expert we observe a 
discouragement and disincentive particularly of the 
developer. On the contrary, involving a usability expert 
helps maintain a constant pace in the team ([1], principle 8). 
No difference has been observed on the constant customer 
collaboration ([1], value 3). Some best practices emerged 
like “pair-designing” and the whole team improved their 
practices and knowledge concerning HCI (see Table III for a 
resume of both experiments). This could justify our third 
statement S3: the dynamic in the project team is better with 
a usability expert involved in Agile-UX.  
However, the fact that in the first experiment, the team 
was composed of only one person (the developer) may be of 
influence. Indeed in the second experiment the team was 
composed of two persons (the usability expert and the 
developer), then the dynamic observed may be due to the 
edge effect of the number of people in the team. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
These experiments addressed two kinds of Agile-UX 
implementations. Thanks to these experiments, we can 
validate that the initial statements are justified hypotheses 
for further studies. The next step is now to define protocols 
to validate these hypotheses.  
Another possible implementation that Agile evangelists 
begin to propose is to place the usability expert as the 
product owner. Indeed, the product owner is responsible for 
the contact with users, the definition of needs and the 
validation of the work done. A priori, the usability expert 
and the product owner have part of their high level 
responsibilities which overlap. A future work will be to 
check the legitimacy of the following statement: “usability 
expert could play the role of product owner”.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author thanks members of the CRAI laboratory of 
Nancy and the project’s extended team members: Sylvain 
Kubicki, Annie Guerriero, Fabrice Absil, Marion Zéler, Luc 
Caffard, Alain Vagner and Charles Gilbertz. This paper is 
dedicated to Marion Zéler. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Alliance, "Agile manifesto", 2001, http://www. agilemanifesto.org, 
08.14.2013. 
[2] J. Armitage, "Are Agile methods good for design?", Interactions, vol. 
11, no 1, 2004, pp. 14-23.  
[3] S. Chamberlain, H. Sharp, and N. Maiden, "Towards a framework for 
integrating Agile development and user-centred design", In Extreme 
Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg , Oulu, Finland, June 2006, pp. 143-153. 
[4] J. Ferreira, J. Noble, and R. Biddle, "Agile development iterations and 
UI design", In Agile Conference (AGILE), Washington, DC, August 
2007, pp. 50-58, IEEE. 
[5] P. McInerney and F. Maurer, "UCD in Agile projects: dream team or 
odd couple?", Interactions, vol. 12, no. 6, 2005, pp. 19-23. 
[6] E. Nelson, "Extreme programming vs. interaction design", FTP 
Online, 2002. 
362
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[7] C. Nodder and J. Nielsen, "Agile usability: best practices for user 
experience on Agile development projects", Nielsen Norman Group, 
2010. 
[8] A. Nummiaho, "User-Centered Design and Extreme Programming", 
In Software Engineering Seminar, Fall 2006, pp. 1-5. 
[9] L. Schwartz, A. Vagner, S. Kubicki, and T. Altenburger, "Feedback 
on the definition and design of innovative mobile services", 
InProceedings of the 13th International Conference on Human 
Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Service, ACM, 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg, August 2011, pp. 525-528. 
[10] M. Singh, "U-SCRUM: An agile methodology for promoting 
usability", In Agile, 2008. AGILE'08, Conference, IEEE, Tonronto, 
ON, August 2011, pp. 555-560, IEEE. 
[11] J. Sutherland and K. Schwaber, Scrum, "The scrum papers: Nuts, 
bolts, and origins of an agile process", 2007. 
[12] D. Sy, "Adapting usability investigations for Agile user-centered 
design", Journal of usability Studies, vol. 2, no. 3, 2007, pp. 112-132. 
 
363
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

