Context Awareness in Learning Human Habits
Szymon Bobek
AGH University of Science and Technology
al. A. Mickiewicza 30
Krakow, Poland
Email: sbobek@agh.edu.pl
Weronika T. Adrian
AGH University of Science and Technology
al. A. Mickiewicza 30
Krakow, Poland
Email: wta@agh.edu.pl
Abstract—Mobile devices have gained steadily increasing pop-
ularity over the last few years. They collect and process various
kinds of data which can be used as rich inputs to infer user
preferences and habits. In this paper, we propose an architecture
of a mobile application that will serve as an intelligent assistant
capable of learning human habits and giving suggestions and
recommendations. The system will learn patterns in its user’s
behavior with respect to his or her location, social preferences
and activities that can be measured with a mobile phone sensors.
Data gathered by the mobile device will be used to model
daily, monthly or annual routines of the user. Based on that
model, the mobile assistant will be able to ﬁnd deviations in
an organizational rhythm of the user and perform appropriate
actions. The system will uses machine learning algorithms and
ontologies to learn and model human behavior.
Keywords-Context-awareness; machine learning; ontologies;
mobile applications.
I. INTRODUCTION
Various information and data sources can be nowadays
reached from nearly every place in the world. Internet access
is now possible through notebooks, tablets and more often –
mobile phones, which are omnipresent in human daily routine.
The last tend to play a role of all–in–one devices that serve as
phones, calendars, web browsers, GPS navigations, and social
media interfaces.
Modern mobile phones (or more commonly named: smart-
phones) can be themselves valuable data sources of human
habits with respect to:
• one’s usual location over time (for instance home, work,
cinema, etc.),
• one’s social preferences (who, where and how often the
one meets),
• one’s entertainment preferences (e.g., one more often
goes to the opera than cinema),
and combinations of the above.
Monitoring human behavior can lead to development of a
rich knowledge base, not only useful for sociologists, but also
being a great input into systems that, based on the individual
habits, will try to optimize user daily routines. Intelligent
houses [1] are one of the most popular way of implementing
ambient intelligence [2] solutions in real life. Tools monitor-
ing human social behavior [3] with smartphones show that
ubiquitous computing and machine learning techniques can
be successfully implemented on mobile platforms as real-time
hybrid systems.
One of the biggest advantage of using mobile platforms
is that a system deployed on it can accompany its user
almost everywhere. Hence, it can become a powerful source
of information about the user behavior. This paper presents an
idea of using smartphones to monitor and learn human habits
from heterogeneous sources: phone sensors (accelerometer,
Bluetooth, light sensor), GPS data or data available from
functionalities like location sharing via Facebook. Information
gathered from these sources can be treated as an input for
a system that will learn human habits and act upon this
knowledge as a intelligent mobile assistant.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we present
an overview of selected related work. The original contribution
of our approach is discussed in Section III. Section IV de-
scribes techniques that can be used for knowledge acquisition
about human behavior. The proposed method of modeling in
a way that can be used for further inference is presented
in Section V. Section VI describes challenges and main
problems faced by our approach. The paper is summarized
in Section VII.
II. RELATED WORK
Ambient intelligence applications and ubiquitous computing
are nowadays widely used in intelligent systems. Various sorts
of such systems cover different aspects of human living. One
of the most popular automation systems are intelligent houses.
Projects like CASAS [4], MavHome [5], or Intellidomo [1]
build user proﬁles based one their activity at home during a
day. Several techniques are incorporated within these projects
that are crucial in discovering human habits. They include:
• temporal reasoning for describing time dependencies be-
tween the activities,
• methods of automatically constructing universal models
by taking the output of sequential data mining algorithms
and sequential prediction algorithms,
• methods of discovering sequences of user actions in a
system based on speech recognition, and
• ontologies and production rules for describing model of
human behavior.
However, intelligent houses build human proﬁle and can
adapt to it only within a limited space. They create human
habits models using data from sensors installed within a
house. Hence, the behavior proﬁle is limited to describing user
activities inside this building.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

A different approach is represented in the SocialCircuits
platform [3]. The platform uses mobile phones to measure
social ties between individuals, and uses long- and short-term
surveys to measure the shifts in individual habits, opinions,
health, and friendships inﬂuenced by these ties.
Sociometric badge [6] has been designed to identify human
activity patterns, analyze conversational prosody features and
wirelessly communicate with radio base-stations and mobile
phones. Sensor data from the badges has been used in various
organizational contexts to automatically predict employee’s
self-assessment of job satisfaction and quality of interactions.
Reality Mining is a term coined by Eagle and Pentland [7].
The authors used mobile phone Bluetooth transceivers, phone
communication logs and cellular tower identiﬁers to identify
the social network structure, recognize social patterns in daily
user activity, infer relationships, identify socially signiﬁcant
locations and model organizational rhythms.
III. MOTIVATION
Most of the systems described in Section II monitor and
build human proﬁle based on data gathered from sources that
are highly correlated. They are limited to one domain of user
activity, like home daily routine or social activities. Moreover,
they are more concerned with monitoring human environment
than a human within the environment. Hence, it is not possible
to create a comprehensive human habits proﬁle based on a
human daily routine. The project that is the closest to the idea
that we want to incorporate in our work is described in [7].
However, the information presented by Eagle and Pentland was
not incorporated into any real-life system. In addition to this,
data gathered within the project was processed using statistical
and machine learning tools, but no formal model of the human
behavior was presented.
The original contribution of our approach consists in:
1) extending the idea presented in [7] by additional
data sources: GPS location, accelerometer sensors,
Wiﬁ/GPRS activity, and RFID sensors,
2) learning and developing a model of human behavior with
methods that allow for automated inference (formally
grounded ontologies, see Section V), and
3) implementing a system that will work in real-time as a
mobile assistant.
A system that has all the above mentioned information
at its disposal can act as an intelligent assistant, monitoring
regular behaviors of the users and recommending actions or
signaling aberrations. Such an assistant can be a helpful tool
optimizing daily routines of multi-tasking persons that interact
with technology on a daily basis. This optimization will mainly
consist in suggesting speciﬁc actions or decisions inferred
from the model of the user habits and external knowledge.
However, this is not an only possible area of application.
Equally important is enriching the quality of life for elderly
people who wish to stay mobile and independent. Nowadays,
technology services are available to and used by more and
more adults, and the number of technology-aware raisins will
increase over time. Helping them is not only an important goal,
but also a trending research ﬁeld, supported by international
funding programs such as Ambient Assisted Living. The
program is motivated by the demographic change and aging in
Europe, which implies both challenges and opportunities for
the citizens, the social and health care systems, the industry
and the EU market. Our proposal aligns with the newest
call for proposal entitled: ”ICT-based Solutions for (Self-
) Management of Daily Life Activities of Older Adults at
Home”. By encompassing other data sources into the proﬁle
modeling, we can enhance the solution to assist people also
outside their houses.
IV. SYSTEM PROPOSAL
This section is reworked to answer reviewers’ comments
We propose a mobile assistant system that will learn the
human behavior patterns, build a semantic model of them
and be able to reason over it. In particular, it will recognize
aberrations and react to them or suggest decisions based on
observations of human regular behavior. Example use cases
may include: deciding on route based on the transportation
habits and current trafﬁc, adjusting daily meetings based on
the user’s location habits, or warning users if some variances
are recorded (e.g., being late for work or forgetting shopping).
A. Proposed Architecture
The architecture of the proposed system can be observed in
Figure 1. Data Sources module is responsible for gathering:
GPS
WiFi
RFID
Accelerometers
Bluetooth
Behavior patterns 
recognition
OWL
SWRL
Reasoning
Data Sources
Model
Inference
Private
Cloud
Fig. 1.
Proposed Architecture of the Mobile Assistant System.
• GPS location over time,
• the location with respect to other devices (RFID and
Bluetooth data),
• accelerometer data determining if the user is walking,
running, or not moving at all.
Inference module performs the main learning and reasoning
tasks. In the learning phase, it identiﬁes human behavior pat-
terns, by recognizing and clustering heterogenous information
(location, time, speed etc.) The other function of the module
is inferring relations between activities and suggesting actions
to be taken. Some of the suggestions will be automatic, based
on rules deﬁned in the Model module, e.g., If it is time that
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

regularly the user is driving to work but now the user is not
moving, then play a loud alarm to wake them up. It is also
planned that the user will be able to deﬁne their own rules,
e.g., If I run for 15 minutes at a speed above average, play a
tune of... (my favourite song).
The Model module will store the model of the user proﬁle.
The model will comprise of an ontology and rules (see
Section V for more details). It initially consists of a top-
level ontology and rules deﬁned for abstract concepts. During
learning the human behavior patterns, the ontology will be
specialized and adapted to the particular user, its common
locations (e.g., home, work, park), typical intervals of time
(e.g., morning, evening, workday) and objects (persons and
devices). The abstract rules are then instantiated to work on
speciﬁc locations and time intervals characteristic for the user.
B. Learning Human Habits
The system will work in two phases: learning and acting. In
the learning phase, the data (in a form of vectors describing
different dimensions of information) will be an input for
machine learning algorithms [8] that will try discover patterns
in human daily routine. The K-Means clustering algorithm
will be implemented to identify users behavior patterns in
daily routine. After the clusters are identiﬁed, they will be
semantically annotated by a user.
The system will propose sets of initially classiﬁed data and
ask to categorize them (identify certain ranges of values).
For instance, locations can be ﬂagged as home, work, cinema
etc. Other devices recognized via Bluetooth or RFID sensors
can represent other users or objects. Time intervals can be
identiﬁed as mornings, evenings, workdays etc. Various speed
values can be assigned by user as walking, running, or driving.
The above classiﬁcation will lead to the development of a
personal ontology based on a top-level ontology. The clas-
siﬁcation will allow to build context predicates, e.g., <user,
locatedIn, park>, <user, performs, running>, based on which
the activities (e.g., shopping, driving to work, meeting friends,
relaxing) will be deﬁned (see Section V).
Once the learning phase is done, the data gathered by the
Data Sources module will be passed to the Inference module
where on-line pattern identiﬁcation will be performed and
appropriate action taken. Since the on-line classiﬁcation has
to be fast, the artiﬁcial neural network implemented on the
mobile device will be responsible for this.
The system, based on the real-life data, will predict if the
user is realizing daily routine or if there are some derogations
that should be reported. To allow this feature to work properly,
a special model of human behavior and daily habits should be
created. The proposal of this model is sketched in Section V.
V. KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION
Data gathered by sensors can be uniformly represented
using a graph model. Persons recognized via Bluetooth and
objects identiﬁed with RFID can be uniquely represented as
named nodes in the graph. This approach partially realizes the
Internet of Things [9] idea in blending the borders between the
real world and the virtual model. Accelerometer data will serve
to calibrate the ranges for concepts such as running, walking or
driving and GPS coordinates will be aggregated and named as
locations (home, work, grocery store etc.). Multiple relations
will combine into a semantic network representing the user
behaviors and habits. The information will be represented with
RDF [10], a ﬂexible and universal Semantic Web [11] lan-
guage that will allow the representation all of the information
in a standardized way.
In order to enable automatic reasoning, formalization of the
representation is needed. In our approach, we have adopted the
top-level ontology for smart environments introduced by Ye
et al. in [12]. The authors have identiﬁed common semantics
for several domains (time, location, speed etc.) and their
shared relations, such as: ﬁner-grained, equal to, conﬂicting
or overlapping. Consequently, this top-level ontology provides
”generic rules to facilitate pervasive tasks including detecting
inconsistency of information, generating new knowledge such
as new activities for different applications and new relation-
ships between concepts, contexts, and activities” [12].
The chosen ontology provides a framework for several di-
mensions of information. Therefore, it is suitable for modeling
human habits proﬁles in various locations and time intervals.
Each dimension of information contains a set of irreducible
grounded values (e.g., GPS coordinates, second). Over the
ranges of grounded values, abstract values are identiﬁed.
These are mappings to a set of grounded values and are done
by semantic tagging by user over preliminary classiﬁed data
(see Section IV). Abstract values deﬁne the ranges of grounded
values and allow to create user-speciﬁc subclasses (e.g., park,
morning) of the top-level classes like location or time.
Abstract values serve to build the context predicates
e.g., <user, locatedIn, park>, <user, performs, running>,
which, in turn, are used to deﬁne activities (e.g., shop-
ping, driving to work, meeting friends, relaxing). Activi-
ties are deﬁned by a conjunction of context predicates, e.g.
<user, locatedIn, park> ∧ <user, performs,
running>
∧
<sensor, time, 7:00>⇒<user,
engagesIn, ’’jogging’’> (see [12] for more details).
The rules which govern the logic of the application will
operate on the activities and timestamps and will activate
certain actions or recommendations.
Using a formally-grounded ontology in the system allows
for automated logical inference over the model, which is
developed based on data gathered in the application. Intended
modeling language is OWL [13]. The initial model has been
prototyped in OWL and SWRL [14], because this is the
modeling language of the Ontonym ontologies [15].
VI. CHALLENGES AND PROBLEMS
There are several challenges and problems to be considered.
One of the main problems is the privacy issue. Users may
not want to have information about their location stored on a
global server. A separate system called private cloud has to be
developed, that would allow users to store private data on their
computers, and share it only with selected users. The idea of
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

the private cloud combines two paradigms of storing data: 1)
privacy and 2) distribution of data. The ﬁrst aspect puts stress
on the conﬁdentiality of data: only the owner of the data and
authorized users have access to the data. The second aspect
touches the problem of accessability of data. If data has to
be accessible for many mobile users, the most efﬁcient way
is to store it in the distributed environment called cloud. That
comes with the privacy issues that leads to the conclusion that
safety and distribution is very challenging combination that
is out of the scope of this work. Another problem is battery
cost. The software that would use data from several sensors
and process it in a real time will be very power-consuming.
Installed on a mobile phone, this may cause the battery to
run out very quickly. Another type of challenges is related to
users with high entropy of their daily routine. For example,
a person who works as a taxi driver probably will not have
an usual location that can be tagged as for instance work.
Those problems and challenges will have to be addressed in
later work in order to ensure the software works correctly and
efﬁciently.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Mobile devices have gained steadily increasing popularity
over the last few years. They collect and process various
kinds of data from registering calls and storing messages to
logging GPS locations and receiving data from other devices
via wireless protocols. These collections of data can be used
as rich inputs to infer user preferences and habits. In this
paper, we presented a proposal of an architecture of a mobile
application that will serve as an intelligent assistant capable of
learning human habits and giving suggestions and recommen-
dations. Several techniques are planned to be implemented
in the project, including machine learning algorithms for
patterns recognition in human daily routine and ontologies
for modeling human behavior. The system can not only be
dedicated to people who would like to optimize their daily
routine, but also for those who need care and attention during
a day. The system can work as an artiﬁcial assistant for older
people, or as health care tool that will help monitoring and
reporting patients behavior.
For future work, we plan to adapt the semantic knowledge-
based wiki environment Loki to allow the user to monitor and
conﬁgure their semantic proﬁle [16]. Using visual methods
for designing rules [17], the user will be able to deﬁne
their own actions to be taken in case of a variance in their
behavior. Enriching the functionality by allowing collaboration
among users [18] will open up possibilities of e.g., organizing
meetings and adjusting behavior proﬁles of several people.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The paper is supported by the AGH University of Science
and Technology Grant 11.11.120.859.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Lozano-Tello and V. Botn-Fernndez, “Analysis of sequential events
for the recognition of human behavior patterns in home automation
systems,” in Distributed Computing and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ser.
Advances in Intelligent and Soft Computing, S. Omatu, J. F. De Paz San-
tana, S. R. Gonzlez, J. M. Molina, A. M. Bernardos, and J. M. C.
Rodrguez, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2012, vol. 151, pp. 511–
518.
[2] B. Epstein, “Ambient intelligence sources,” http://www.epstein.org/
brian/ambient intelligence.htm, [retrieved: September, 2012].
[3] I. Chronis, A. Madan, and A. S. Pentland, “Socialcircuits: the art of
using mobile phones for modeling personal interactions,” in Proceedings
of the ICMI-MLMI ’09 Workshop on Multimodal Sensor-Based Systems
and Mobile Phones for Social Computing, ser. ICMI-MLMI ’09.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 1:1–1:4.
[4] P. A. Valiente-Rocha and A. L. Tello, “Ontology and swrl-based learning
model for home automation controlling.” in ISAmI, ser. Advances in Soft
Computing, J. C. Augusto, J. M. Corchado, P. Novais, and C. Analide,
Eds., vol. 72.
Springer, 2010, pp. 79–86.
[5] G. M. Youngblood, D. J. Cook, and L. B. Holder, “Managing adaptive
versatile environments,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 1, no. 4,
pp. 373–403, 2005.
[6] D. O. Olgun, B. N. Waber, T. Kim, A. Mohan, K. Ara, and A. Pentland,
“Sensible organizations: Technology and methodology for automatically
measuring organizational behavior,” IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SYS-
TEMS, MAN, AND CYBERNETICS-PART B: CYBERNETICS, pp. 43–
55, 2009.
[7] N. Eagle and A. (Sandy) Pentland, “Reality mining: sensing complex
social systems,” Personal Ubiquitous Comput., vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 255–
268, Mar. 2006.
[8] C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning (Information
Science and Statistics). Secaucus, NJ, USA: Springer-Verlag New York,
Inc., 2006.
[9] K. Ashton, “That ’Internet of Things’ Thing,” http://www.rﬁdjournal.
com/article/view/4986, [retrieved: September, 2012].
[10] E. Miller and F. Manola, “RDF primer,” W3C, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[11] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The Semantic Web,”
Scientiﬁc American, May 2001.
[12] J. Ye, G. Stevenson, and S. Dobson, “A top-level ontology for smart
environments,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 7, no. 3, pp.
359 – 378, 2011, knowledge-Driven Activity Recognition in Intelligent
Environments.
[13] F. van Harmelen and D. L. McGuinness, “OWL Web Ontology Language
overview,” W3C, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[14] I. Horrocks, P. F. Patel-Schneider, H. Boley, S. Tabet, B. Grosof, and
M. Dean, “SWRL: A semantic web rule language combining OWL and
RuleML, W3C member submission 21 may 2004,” W3C, Tech. Rep.,
2004.
[15] G. Stevenson, S. Knox, S. Dobson, and P. Nixon, “Ontonym: a collection
of upper ontologies for developing pervasive systems,” in Proceedings
of the 1st Workshop on Context, Information and Ontologies, ser. CIAO
’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 9:1–9:8.
[16] W. T. Adrian, S. Bobek, G. J. Nalepa, K. Kaczor, and K. Kluza, “How to
reason by HeaRT in a semantic knowledge-based wiki,” in Proceedings
of the 23rd IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, ICTAI 2011, Boca Raton, Florida, USA, November 2011,
pp. 438–441.
[17] A. Ligeza and G. J. Nalepa, “A study of methodological issues
in design and development of rule-based systems: proposal of a
new approach,” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and
Knowledge Discovery, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 117–137, 2011. [Online].
Available: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/widm.11/pdf
[18] G. J. Nalepa, “Collective knowledge engineering with semantic wikis,”
Journal of Universal Computer Science, vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1006–1023,
2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.jucs.org/jucs 16 7/collective
knowledge engineering with
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

