Human Computer Interaction Teaching Method to Encourage Creativity
Deller James Ferreira
Informatics Institute 
Federal University of Goiás
Goiânia, Brazil
deller@inf.ufg.br
Abstract—Scarce  attention  has  been  given  to  Human 
Computer Interaction teaching methods to promote creativity 
and  innovation.  Standard  approaches  to  teaching  interface 
design  include  the  use  of  design  aids  such  as  usability 
guidelines, interaction design patterns and anti-patterns. These 
approaches do not, however, encourage creativity  properly. 
Interaction  design  space  is
 usually  limitedly  and 
unsystematically  explored  during  student  designs.  In  this 
paper,  we  propose  a  pedagogical  framework  for  design 
exercises  for  use  in  the  teaching  of  Human  Computer 
Interaction and present some examples of its usage. The use of 
the   pedagogical  framework  makes  it  possible  to  teachers 
create significant Human Computer Interaction experiences to 
students,  fostering  them  to  activate  mental  processes 
underlying creativity.
Keywords-creativity;  human  computer  interaction; 
collaborative learning
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
New information technologies have revolutionized the 
way  people  work,  study,  socialize,  access  and  transmit 
information, have fun, communicate and access services. 
This fact calls attention to the problems caused by software 
with  poor  user  interfaces,  making  computer  science 
researches and software developers very aware of Human 
Computer  Interaction  (HCI)  as  a  driving  force  within 
software development practice and usability as an essential 
aspect of HCI.
A bad user interface for a Website or desktop application 
has a huge social cost. A badly designed user interface can 
detrimentally influence millions of people and consequently 
cause users to make expensive errors [1].  Although today 
there  are  lots  of  good  solutions  that  can  be  reused  by 
developers, many user interfaces are bad designed. That 
leads us to believe that one possible reason of the problems 
of  HCI  is  an  absence of  appropriate  and  efficacious 
education. Undeniably, an effective way to improve HCI is 
by improving HCI education.  Questions about education 
and understanding HCI must be addressed in the academic 
or research literature about this subject.
Indeed, computer science research has wide interest in 
effective teaching methods for the discipline.  The field of 
HCI recognizes a more or less standard process of how to 
teach and practice interaction design, that is summarized the 
following phases: problem definition, user study, iterative 
prototyping,  and  evaluation  [2].  This  point  of  view  is 
adopted in HCI as an engineering discipline. In reflecting on 
key objectives of engineering, primary concerns are with 
efficiency and reliability.
 In an engineering approach of HCI, practitioners must 
be  able  to  build  interfaces  quickly  and  consistently. 
Engineering  as  a  discipline  that  seeks  procedures  to 
systematize  and  operationalize best  practices,  allowing 
others  to  create  usable  interfaces  and  lending analytical 
structures  to  guide  analysis  within  diverse  contexts  [1]. 
Teaching engineering practices involve the engagement of 
HCI students in  problem-solving by using procedures and 
analytical  methods.
 Software  engineering,  computer 
science,  and  information  systems  students  are  taught 
structured methods to analyse, decompose, and to develop 
systems.  Such structures  can  hinder  creativity,  which  is 
generally a much less structured activity. 
User-centered design approaches do not necessarily lead 
to good designs either [3]. User-centered design helps the 
designer focus on the user and the context of their work. 
Creative and innovative solutions require an extra effort, 
which the designer  must then build upon to deliberately and 
consciously to devise them. 
As  a  result  from  engineering  emphasis,  most  HCI 
courses have a significant focus on teaching the students to 
evaluate interfaces usability. This  sparked  the advent of a 
new industry in usability evaluation services [3]. Despite 
much more research is still needed for methods that improve 
usability, we believe that another very important problem is 
a lack of methods for inventing better solutions and designs 
in IHC. If there are better solutions in the first place, there 
will be a lesser need to make tests and redesigns to software 
that has been delivered. 
Creativity needs to be more valued in HCI. Researchers 
in HCI education must investigate more what is involved in 
inventing creative solutions, and therefore, how we might be 
able to teach this to the students. They should adapt and 
repurpose existing tools and methods, and orchestrate them 
in a way that would boost creativity, in order to scaffold 
students  to  gain  the  insights  that  can  lead  to  creative 
solutions.
472
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The challenge for educators then is to move from these 
highly organized structures, to organized, but yet creative, 
structures  that  can  facilitate  creative  invention  [4].  To 
achieve this aim, teachers needs to understand the nature of 
creativity and inventiveness and therefore how it can be 
fostered  in the light of  HCI context, without disregarding 
the systemic HCI methods available for the search of well-
crafted designs.
In  this  paper  we  propose  a  framework  for  design 
exercises  for  use  in  the  teaching  of  HCI  aiming  at 
positioning  teachers  and  students  with  regards  to  both 
adaptive  and  innovative  creativity.  The  use  of  the 
pedagogical framework elaborated in this research makes 
possible to teachers create significant HCI experiences to 
students,  allowing  them  to  activate  mental  processes 
underlying  to  both  innovative  and  adaptive  creativity. 
Innovative  creativity  is  related  to  the  original, 
transformational, and expressive, while adaptive creativity 
linked to logical, adequate, and well-crafted solutions. 
First, in section II, we present a framework for design 
exercises in HCI. In section III, we discuss the application 
of  the  framework  in  HCI  teaching.  In  section  IV,  we 
describe a preliminary case study that was conducted during 
one semester of an HCI course. In section V, we present and 
discuss some preliminary results. Finally, in section VI we 
describe  further investigations concerning the framework 
presented.
II.
FRAMEWORK FOR DESIGN EXERCISES IN HCI
Collaborative learning is the pedagogical  method that 
provides  the  fundamentals  for  the  proposed  framework. 
Collaborative learning has been proved efficacious when the 
teacher helps the students to develop the collective ability to 
use dialogs for learning, fostering productive interactions 
during  argumentation  in  instructional  settings.  Discourse 
must be facilitated aiming creative and innovative processes 
and products. 
This work  introduces a framework to nourish creative 
discussions during collaborative problem solving in HCI. We 
consider here that invention occurs at different levels of 
innovation. The framework contains seven collaborative and 
creative  dimensions.  The  dimensions  are:  immersing, 
unpacking  opportunities,  exploring  complementary  paths, 
overcoming
 
boundaries,
 
expanding,
 
discovering 
unpredictable  places  and  developing. Each  dimension 
contains dialogic processes. Dialogic processes are dialogs 
aligned with mental creative processes associated to both 
adaptive and innovative creativity. Dialogic processes afford 
ideas build upon other ideas while people collaborate. Here 
we say that the students widen the design space when a new 
idea emerges and that they deepen the design space when an 
idea  is  evolved.  Following,  we  present  the  dialogic 
framework dimensions.
A.
Dimension 1. Immersing in the Design Space
Students  can  widen  the  design  space  while  discuss 
having in mind search information having an objective in 
mind and search information for inspiration, detect relevant 
and irrelevant information, recognize familiar information 
and cope  with new information, reapply techniques and 
adapt  techniques,  experience  having  an  open  mind  and 
experience having an objective, state goals and brainstorm, 
adapt  hypothesis  and  make  conjectures,  are  aware  of 
generalities and specificities, and  explore similarities and 
differences of problems.
According  to  Jonassen  [5],  when  students  scrutinize 
similar problems for their structures, they gain more robust 
conceptual  knowledge  about  the  problems,  constructing 
stronger problem schema. This dimension concerns with the 
enhancement  of  the  analogical  thinking.  Analogical 
reasoning involves the transfer of solutions from previously 
known problems to novel ones and the ability to abstract 
similarities and apply previous productive experiences to 
new situations. This dimension is also concerned with the 
search for information. To be successful at discovery and 
innovation students should be aware of previous and related 
work and should be aware of principles and techniques to be 
applied in the development of their work. The more diverse 
your knowledge, the more interesting the interconnections. 
B.
Dimension 2. Unpacking Opportunities of the Design 
Space
Students  can  deepen  the  design  space  when  discuss 
while collaboratively look for attributes and relationships 
among concepts and new ideas, and try to organize the 
information,  recognize  dependence  and  independence 
relations, necessary and sufficient conditions, causes and 
effects, similarities and differences,  correspondences  and 
oppositions, class inclusion and exclusion, associations and 
dissociations, hierarchy ascendant and descendant relations, 
order and disorder, abstract and concrete features, potential 
and  non-potential  uses/functions,  examples  and  counter-
examples,  and  make  an  interplay  between  concrete  and 
abstract features.
Guilford advocates that elaboration and fluency are two 
fundamental  components of the creative process  [6].  This 
dimension  embraces  the  divergent  thinking  abilities 
elaboration and fluency. The teacher can boost the students´ 
improvement of these abilities to explicit what is already 
there but hidden and also to deal with the who, what, why, 
and how elements of solution ideas. 
C.
Dimension 3.  Exploring Complementary Paths in the 
Design Space
This dimension involves complementarities. Here, 
we elaborate dialogic processes based on Ponty´s [7] notion 
of “chiasm”. In Ponty´s notion of “chiasm,” two concepts 
emerge as complementary ways of referring to an idea. For 
example, both sides, figure and ground, depend upon each 
other and can reverse around each other. This divergence is 
considered  to  be  a  necessary  and  constitutive  factor  in 
allowing subjectivity to be possible at all. However,  he 
suggests that rather than involving a simple dualism, the 
divergence between touching and being touched, or between 
the sentient and the sensible, mind and body, subject and 
object,  self  and  other  also  allows  for  the possibility of 
473
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

overlapping and encroachment between these two terms. 
For all dialogic process we address its complementary to 
address more possibilities of exploration of an idea and to 
achieve better awareness of students. The teacher is also 
called  to  elaborate  the  students´  tasks  based  on 
complementary concepts.
D.
Dimension 4.  Overcoming Boundaries of the Design 
Space
Students can widen the design space while discuss and 
jointly situate ideas in a bigger, smaller or different context, 
performing contextual shifting, search for relationships with 
“neighbour” ideas outside a given context, deals with scope 
and  limitations, and  deals  with constraints  relaxation or 
imposition. 
Generating alternative designs is an essential aspect of 
the interaction design process [2]. Considering alternatives 
and thinking about different perspectives can provide the 
designer with considerable insight into the problem space. 
Considering alternatives is important to “think out of the 
box”.  Students as future designers and software developers 
must be trained to consider alternatives. 
E.
Dimension 5. Expanding the Design Space
The  students  can  widen  the  design  space  making 
together  recombination  and  combination  of  similar  or 
distinct  concepts  and  ideas,  building  on  other´s  ideas, 
decomposing  and  composing  ideas,  re-thinking  their 
previous ideas, and rebutting ideas. The students also try to 
make combinations of possible disparate or unconnected 
ideas. They derive new knowledge on the basis of a lack of 
similarity between two or more past constructs or elements 
from domains which are far apart. 
This  dimension  entangles  constructive  interactions 
among  students  related  to  innovative  construction  of  a 
complex  system  of  ideas.  The  main  premise  in  this 
dimension is that unexpected and new arrangements and 
other´s interpretation trigger new interpretations and ideas. 
Previous  opinions  and  concepts  are  co-constructed  and 
students´  understandings  expanded.  Students  integrate 
answers from many places in diverse ways, in a process of 
transcending  and  exchanging  different  perspectives  and 
constructing new ideas. 
Here,  it  is  evoked  Dewey´s  notion  of  transactional 
inquiry to elaborate the creativity concept in a dialogic way. 
Dewey defined inquiry as a set of operations by which an 
indeterminate situation is rendered determinate [8]. When 
participants engage in inquiry together, new meanings are 
created as a co-production. For Dewey, the term transaction 
emphasizes the transformational aspects of interaction [9]. 
A mutual exchange is a transaction whenever a response to 
another’s act involves contemporaneous response to a thing 
as entering into other’s behaviour, and this upon both sides.
F.
Dimension 6. Discovering Unpredictable Places in the 
Design Space
Students can widen the design space, when they have the 
opportunity to explore a bad idea. They do not only reflect 
about  positive  impacts,  relevant  implications  or  good 
features, but also reflect upon why a failure occurred, about 
negative impacts, features and implications, why an idea did 
not have impact, and problems created. They do not just 
eliminate the wrong paths, but reflect and take advantage of 
it.  Students turn ideas and concepts in new interpretations, 
also thinking about misconceptions. 
This dimension capitalizes on often way in which bad 
ideas  become  beneficial  detours  to  good  ideas.  The 
exploration of good ideas allows a local exploration of the 
design space, which leaves unexplored large areas of this 
space [10]. The exploration of bad ideas pulls the students to 
new unpredictable  places, facilitating a movement to far 
away places, which thus allows students to overcome the 
limitation of exploration that good ideas entail.
G.
Dimension 7. Developing the Design Space
Students  can  deepen  and  widen  the  design  space 
evaluating,  comparing,  selecting  concepts  and  ideas, 
considering  different  alternatives,  pointing  positive  and 
negative outcomes based in criteria application, starting a 
search for a more adequate cognitive perspective, reasoning 
process  aiming  to  resolve  conflict  and  uncertainty, 
identifying best solutions, and removing inconsistencies.
This dimension encompasses the evaluation, critics, and 
bringing together of ideas.  By means of evaluations of 
ideas  students are  able  to  carry  out  decision-making 
processes based on criteria application and improve ideas 
considering its bad features. One important aspect of this 
dimension  is  that  when  students  evaluate  and  critique 
different perspectives and ideas they must be confronted 
with uncertainty and conceptual conflict. Both are states of 
disequilibrium that activate a process of conflict resolution 
and a quest for certainty [8]. Besides, interaction criticism is 
a design practice that enables design practitioners to engage 
with  the  aesthetics  of  interaction,  helping  practitioners 
cultivate more sensitive and insightful critical reactions to 
designs and exemplars [11].
III.
APPLYING THE FRAMEWORK IN HCI TEACHING
According to Preece et al. [2] interaction design is about 
designing interactive products to support people in their 
everyday  working  lives  and  interactive  experiences  that 
enhance and extend the way people communicate, interact 
and  work.  Interface  design  comprises  determining  how 
content is organized and presented, choosing appropriate 
design metaphors and affordances, and providing effective 
interaction and techniques. 
However, teaching students how to develop interactive 
experiences is not an easy task. There are a myriad  of 
aspects involved that should be considered. It is not an easy 
task  to  create  a  meaningful  experience  for  others.  The 
474
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

students must first understand your audience, their needs, 
abilities,  interests,  and  expectations,  and  then  have  the 
ability to conceptualize and refine effective solutions. The 
same apply to teaching students to be creative and allowing 
them to experience such skills. 
Teaching  attention  is  mainly  focussed  on  usability 
principles  and  guidelines,  but  although  principles  and 
guidelines are extremely important, they are not the only 
aspect to be considered. Principles and guidelines do not 
suggest  solutions,  although  they  can  be  used  to  guide 
design. Principles and guidelines of usability provide clues 
to the designer about what to do but not about how to do.
Patterns  are  increasingly  being  used  in  software 
engineering education. Many pattern  libraries  have been 
published  [12][13]  and  more  are  appearing  every  year. 
Alexander introduced the notion of patterns [14]. A pattern 
focuses on the relationship between problem, solution and 
context. The solution can be realized in different ways but 
has  an  invariant  core,  which  captures  all  the  possible 
solutions  to  the  problem  given.  Solutions  described  in 
patterns are proved to work in practice, they are a proven 
solution for a common user interface or usability problem 
that  occurs  in  a  specific  context  of  work.  Patterns 
communicate insights into design problems capturing the 
essence of problems and designs in a compact form. They 
describe the problem in depth, the rationale for the solution, 
how to apply the solution and some of the trade-offs in 
applying the solution [15].
Some research shows that the use of interaction patterns 
is successful [16]. It was shown that designers who made 
more use of the available interaction patterns were able to 
produce better results than those not using the patterns. 
Anti-patterns are also used to convey the knowledge in HCI. 
An anti-pattern is a solution that seems like a good idea, but 
backfires badly when applied, and can cause an interface to 
fail.  Anti-patterns are literature written in pattern form to 
encode practices that do not work or that are destructive.
Guidelines, patterns, and anti-patterns exist to capture 
experts’ expertise and to communicate knowledge.  Design 
guidelines and patterns can be used to help the interface 
design, being used to aid the production of usable design 
solutions. These design aids however, encourage and foster 
creativity or the generation of new metaphors or alternative 
designs in a limited way. 
A trade-off exists between enforcing the use of standard 
design  guidelines  or  patterns  and  encouraging  the 
development  of  creative  design  solutions.  This  paper 
explores  the  possibilities  for  developing  a  combined 
approach  to  teaching  creative  interface  design.  This 
approach proposes the combined use of guidelines, patterns, 
and anti-patterns and the proposed framework with the aim 
to produce usable and creative design solutions. Following 
we  provide  some  possible  instructional  uses  of  this 
integrated approach.
A.
Examples of Tasks in View of the Framework 
Example 1. This task is based on Dimension 1. In this 
task, the teacher establishes an HCI subject and patterns 
related to the chosen subject. Afterwards, the teacher uses 
the dialogic processes from the Dimension 1 to scaffold 
students’ collaborative activities and dialogues to promote 
knowledge  creation.  This  task  focuses  on  Websites 
navigation and the discussion is centered on the fat menu 
pattern [12]. 
Considering the dialogic process “Search information 
having  an  objective  in  mind”  and  “Specification”,  the 
teacher asks students to search Websites to discuss different 
adaptations of the Fat menu pattern. Also, the teacher ask 
the students to discuss if the Websites found are strongly 
related to the problem described in the pattern. The problem 
is:  the  designer  deals  with  many  categories,  possibly a 
hierarchy with three or more levels.
Having  in  mind  the  dialogic  processes  “Recognize 
familiar information” and “Generalization”, the teacher asks 
the students to discuss trying to figure out what kind of 
Websites  is  best  designed  by  fat  menus  based  on  the 
examples  provided  in  the  pattern  description  and  the 
Websites found.
Paying  attention  to  the  dialogic  process  “Adapt 
techniques”, the teacher asks the students to jointly choose a 
Website to adapt the Fat menu pattern, regarding that users 
must  focus  their  attention  on  the  available  navigation 
options with no distractions. The teacher asks the students to 
discuss ways to use headers, dividers, white space, and how 
to take advantage of horizontal space. Also, the teacher asks 
the students to discuss the uniformity and regularity of the 
pattern adaptation, designing to fit well into colour scheme 
and other aspects on the page.
Regarding the dialogic processes  “Make conjectures” 
and “Search information for inspiration”, the teacher asks 
students to discuss the viability to include graphics elements 
in the fat menu pattern adaptation.  The student can look at 
similar systems or look at very different systems.
Example  2.  The  teacher  asks  the  students  to  make 
connections  between  the  Fat  menu  pattern  and  other 
patterns,  between  Fat  menu  pattern  and  guidelines,  and 
among  elements  and  other  patterns  inside  the  pattern. 
Questions formulated by the teacher are used to lead the 
discussions.  The  questions  are  based  on  the  dialogic 
processes from Dimension 2 “Recognizing associations”, 
“Being  aware  of  concrete  and  abstract  features”, 
“Recognizing  order”,  “Recognizing  class  inclusion  and 
exclusion”,  “Recognizing  dissociations”,  “Exploring 
differences  and  similarities”,  and  “Recognizing 
associations”. 
1.
The  Fat  menu  pattern  can  include  others  to 
complete him?
2.
There must be order inside the Fat menu pattern?
3.
How can be organized the categorizations inside 
Fat menu pattern?
4.
How can be managed the vertical  separation of 
categories in the Fat menu pattern?
5.
How are the differences and similarities between 
Fat menu pattern and Menu page pattern [12]?
475
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

6.
Using the Fat menu pattern the user enters directly 
in the content. This feature can be associated to a 
guideline?
7.
Using  the  Fat  menu  pattern  the  information  is 
hidden until the user looks for it. This feature can 
be associated to a guideline?
Example 3. In this task, the teacher takes into account 
Dimensions 3 and 7. In view of Dimension 3, students are 
supposed to explore complementary paths and in light of 
Dimension 7 students are supposed to criticize and build on 
other’s ideas.
The dialogic processes from Dimension 7 considered in 
this task were:  “Point  negative  and  positive  outcomes”, 
“Compare ideas”, and  “Select concepts and ideas”.
The  teacher  chooses  three  Websites  and  asks  the 
students to point in each Website positive and negative 
outcomes of the following Website complementary features 
and to justify their answers. The complementary features to 
be considered by the students are:
1.
Visibility and constraint;
2.
Delimiters and white spaces;
3.
Figure and background;
4.
Good and bad usage of a metaphor;
5.
Simplicity and complexity of the information;
6.
Breadth and depth in navigation.
Afterwards, the teacher asks the students to compare and 
select the best Website designs.
     Example 4. This task pays attention to Dimensions 1, 2, 
4 and 5. In this example, the teacher follows the steps:
1.
Choose a Web or desktop interface;
2.
Ask the students to discuss while collaboratively 
decompose the interface, detecting the patterns used in its 
design;
3.
Change the application context;
4.
Ask the students to discuss while collaboratively 
integrate, adapt, and elaborate the patterns to create a new 
design in the new application context.
5.
The  dialogic  processes  took  into  account  were 
“Decompose ideas”, “Combine ideas”, and  “Recombine 
ideas”  from  Dimension 5;  “Perform  contextual  shifting” 
from Dimension 4; “Elaborate an idea” from Dimension 2, 
and  “Adapt techniques” from Dimension 1.
    Example 5: In this task is regarded Dimension 6. Here, 
the teacher utilizes anti-patterns to provide opportunities for 
students  to  explore  a  bad  design  in  order  to  better 
understand good designs. Anti-patterns capture poor or sub-
optimal software development practices. So, the students 
have the opportunity to analyse why an apparently good 
idea did not have a positive impact and also to investigate 
how they can provide an alternative for a poor design. First, 
the  teacher  presents  a  set  of  anti-patterns,  each  one 
possessing  a  bad  characteristic,  such  as:  external 
inconsistency,  internal  inconsistency,  dialog  box  without 
cancel button, go overboard in selection during data entry, 
badly designed affordances, badly designed metaphors, and 
complex or extremely deep navigation. Second, the teacher 
asks the students  to discuss about what is bad concerning 
the anti-pattern, why this feature is illogical, inadequate, and 
ill-crafted, if there is a good design possessing this feature, 
if so what is the difference, and if there is a situation where 
it could be considered well-crafted.
IV. PRELIMINARY CASE STUDY DESCRIPTION
A  preliminary case  study was conducted  during  one 
semester of an HCI course. One class containing forty-eight 
under graduate students from software engineering course 
was subdivided in 8 (eight) groups, each group containing 6 
(six)  students.  The  students  were  analyzed  considering 
interaction and participation patterns in online discussion 
forums in Moodle Platform. There were assigned 7 (seven) 
collaborative tasks to the students. The tasks are described 
following.
Task 1. The students were asked to analyze 16 (sixteen) 
Websites, considering good and bad usages of affordances 
and metaphors. The students were also invited to evaluate 
and critique other students’ ideas.
Task 2. The students were asked to analyze 7 (seven) 
Websites,  considering  usability  guidelines.  The  students 
were also invited to  evaluate and critique other students’ 
ideas.
Task 3. First, each group must choose a good and bad 
Website.  Second,  the  groups  must  justify  your  choices, 
taking into account  good and bad usages of affordances, 
good and bad usages metaphors, and usability guidelines. 
Task 4. The teacher presented usability guidelines and 
interaction patterns for mobile applications. The students 
were asked to create a mobile version for a given Website, 
obeying the usability guidelines and performing patterns 
adaptations and combinations. 
Task 5.  Make  a collaborative  paper  interrelating the 
usability guidelines presented.  Discuss in  your   group 
forum. 
Task  6.  Criticize the Website of  the  Institute  of 
Informatics. Discuss in your  group forum. 
Task 7. Make a re-design of the Institute of Informatics’ 
Website. Consider the interaction patterns presented and 
discuted in class.
Interaction  and  participation  patterns  were  analyzed 
based on Newman, Webb and Cochrane’s adapted model 
[17] described in 10 categories. This model was chosen 
because it covers key aspects of the proposed framework. 
The  framework  application  aims  profitable  students’ 
interactions that result in a deeper and wider design space. 
Following  we  describe  Newman,  Webb  and  Cochrane’s 
adapted model.
Category 1. Relevance: Relevant states or diversions.
Category 2. Importance: Important points and issues or 
unimportant points and trivial issues.
Category 3. Novelty, new info, ideas, and solutions: 
New problem related information or repeating what has 
been said.
Category 4. Bringing outside knowledge or experience 
to bear on problem: Drawing on personal experience or 
sticking to prejudice or assumptions.
476
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Category 5. Ambiguities; clarified or confused: Clear 
statements or confused statements.
Category 6. Linking ideas, interpretation: Linking facts, 
ideas and notions or repeating information without making 
inferences or offering an interpretation.
Category 7. Justification: Providing proof or examples 
or irrelevant or obscuring questions or examples.
Category 8. Critical assessment: Critical assessment or 
evaluation of own or others’ contribution or uncritical ac­
ceptance or unreasoned rejection.
Category 9. Practical utility (grounding): Relate possible 
solutions to familiar situation or discuss in a vacuum.
Category 10. Width of understanding (complete picture): 
Widen discussion or narrow discussion.
V. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Successful  interactions  require  broad  and  active  stu­
dents’ participation. The total number of students’ posts was 
773. So, there was a substantial participation of the students.
Considering Category 8, the results indicated that online 
interactions were cohesive. The students engaged critically 
or constructively in other students’ ideas in 50% of the 
posts.  They asked and clarified doubts in 40% of the posts 
and acted solo in 10% of the posts.
Regarding Category 9, the students used the guidelines 
as criteria to judge what is good and bad. In Task 1 the stu­
dents did not know how to judge what was a good or bad 
usage. In tasks 2, 3, and 6, the students justified their ideas 
by means of the guidelines. 
Considering  Category  5,  6  and  task  5,  each  group 
provided a distinct integration scheme for the guidelines. 
Each group had a different interpretation. However, they 
provided  designs  as  examples  for  their  connections.   It 
proofs that IHC is a complex and ill-structured subject. The 
teacher should had confronted the different schemes and 
promoted discussions involving the whole class in order to 
converge to a solution. 
Taking into account Categories 1, 2, and 7, there was 
70% of relevant posts and 30% of diversions. Also, in the 
relevant posts, were discussed important points and issues. 
Regarding Category 4, task 4 was successfully and eas­
ily performed by the students. Due to the fact that the great 
majority of students possessed i-phones or android interface 
mobile phones, the students could draw on personal experi­
ence to design the mobile interface. 
Considering Category 3 and Task 7 the students success­
fully adapted and combined interaction patterns, being able 
to apply previous information to solve a problem during the 
Website re-design.
Taking into account Category 10, there were widen dis­
cussions, containing many different points and aspects being 
analyzed.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The  main  contribution  of  this  paper  is  a  novel 
framework to boost creativity in interaction design.  The 
framework provides a structure for the elaboration of design 
exercises. Teaching interaction design is approached under a 
dialogic  point  of  view  taking  advantage  of  dialogic 
processes.  Dialogic processes are mapped in creative ways 
of thinking, so they serve to scaffold students to productive 
discussions.  Dialogic  processes  are  underneath  creative 
dimensions that reveal forms of interaction design space 
exploration. The proposed framework provides broad and 
systematic  interaction  design  space  exploration  and  is 
theoretically  supported  by  collaborative  learning,  many 
researches  that  address  idea  generation  and  researches 
involving interaction design space exploration. 
The preliminary  results  indicated  that  the  proposed 
framework has a great potential to help teachers to mediate 
students’  creativity,  through  facilitating  students’ 
involvement  in  productive  discussions,  which  in  turn 
increases the quality of the design process. Students benefits 
from activating creative mental process during interaction 
design discussions and performing a better exploration of 
design space both in breadth and in depth, while teachers 
benefits from many strategies to elaborate design exercises 
involving usability guidelines, interaction design patterns 
and anti-patterns in order to boost discussions.
 To ensure that the framework combined to usability 
guidelines, interaction design patterns and anti-patterns can 
indeed provide an effective connected approach to teaching 
HCI,  we  intend  to  further  investigate  its  application  as 
future work. 
For at least four semesters of an  HCI undergraduate 
course,  there  will  be  one  class  taught 
 considering 
collaborative  learning,  but  not  the  dialogic  framework 
(control  group)  and another  one  taught by the proposed 
method  (treatment  group).  Students  performance  will  be 
investigated  by discourse analysis in order to check if there 
is knowledge co-construction and advancement as well as 
the achievement of a deeper and wider knowledge in the 
collaborative settings. The discourse analysis will focus on 
analysis of interaction and participation Patterns [18].  We 
will also analyze and compare the students´ designs  by 
means of an instrument to measure Website creativity [19] 
and  indicators of creativity in solutions [20].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This  work  is  supported  by  FAPEG  -  Fundação  de 
Amparo à Pesquisa - Goiás - Brazil.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Thimbleby, “Teaching and Learning HCI”, Proceedings 
HCI  International,  Part  I,  Universal  Access,  HCII  2009, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, edited by C. Stephanidis, 
San Diego, Springer Verlag, 2009, pp. 625–635.
[2]
J. Preece, Y.  Rogers, and H.  Sharp,  Interaction Design: 
Beyond Human- Computer Interaction. 2nd Edition. New 
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2007. 
[3]   W. Wong, P. Kotzé, J. Read, L. Bannon, and E. Hvannberg, 
From inventivity in Limerick to creativity in Aveiro: Lessons 
learnt, in: Creativity and HCI: From Experience to Design in 
Education - Selected Contributions from HCIEd 2007 (this 
book),  edited by P. Kotzé, W. Wong, J. Jorge, A. Dix, and 
P.A. Silva, IFIP Series, Springer, 2008, pp. 19-29. 
477
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[4]
P. Kotzé and P. Purgathofer,   “Designing Design Exercises – 
from Theory to Creativity and Real-world Use”, HCIEd 2009. 
Aveiro, Portugal, 2009, pp. 29 – 30.
[5]
D. H. Jonassen, “Research Issues in problem Solving”,  The 
11th International Conference on Education Research New 
Educational Paradigm for Learning and Instruction, 2010.
[6]
J. P. Guilford, The nature of human intelligence. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1967.
[7]
M.  Ponty,  The  Visible  and  the  Invisible. Evanston: 
Northwestern U Press, 1968, pp. 267.
[8]
J. Dewey, The Quest for Certainty: A Study of the Relation of 
Knowledge  and  Action.  London:  George  Allen  e  Unwin, 
1929.
[9]
J. Dewey, Logic: The theory of inquiry, in J. A. Boydston 
(Ed.) John Dewey: The Later Works, 1925-1953, Volume 12, 
Southern Illinois University Press, Carbondale, IL, 1938, pp. 
1-5.
[10] A. Dix, T. Ormerod, B. Twidale, B. Michael, C. Sas, A. P. G. 
Silva,  L.  McKnight,  “Why  Bad  Ideas  are  a  Good  Idea”, 
Proceedings of the HCI Educators' Workshop HCIEd.2006-1 
Inventivity: Teaching theory, design and innovation in HCI, 
2006, pp. 24-28.
[11] J. Bardzell,  “Interaction Criticism: An Introduction to the 
Practice”, Interacting with Computers, 2011, pp. 604-621.
[12] J. Tidwell, Designing Interfaces. 2nd Edition.  O’Reilly, 2010.
[13] V. Welie, Patterns of Interaction Design. 
http://www.welie.com/. [retrieved: January, 2012]. 
[14] C.  Alexander,  A  Pattern  Language:  Towns,  Buildings, 
Construction.  Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  1977,  pp. 
1216.
[15] W. J. Brown and R. C. Malveau, Architectures. Anti-patterns: 
Refactoring Software and Projects in Crisis. John Wiley and 
Sons, 1998.
[16] S.  R.  Schach,  Object-oriented  and  Classical  Software 
Engineering.  New  York:  McGraw  Hill  Higher  Education, 
2005.
[17] C. C. Sing and M. S. Khine, An Analysis of Interaction and 
Participation  Patterns  in  Online  Community.  Educational 
Technology & Society, 2006, pp. 250-261.
[18] C. C. Sing and M. S. Khine, “An Analysis of Interaction and 
Participation  Patterns  in  Online  Community”,  Educational 
Technology & Society, 2006, pp. 250-261.
[19] D.  Cropley  and  A.  Cropley,  “Recognizing  and  Fostering 
Creativity in Technological Design Education”, International 
Journal of Design and Education, 2010, pp. 345-358.
[20] L. Zeng, G. Salvendy, and M. Zhang, “Factor Structure of 
Website Creativity”,  Computers in Human Behavior, 2009, 
pp. 568-577.
478
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

