Building a Service Manager For a Smart City Archicture 
Towards a service manager in an interoperable environment 
Gutemberg Rodrigues Costa Cavalcante1, Felipe Silva Ferraz1,2, Guilherme Luiz Mario de Medeiros1  
 
1CESAR  
Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems 
Recife, Brazil 
gutembergrcc@gmail.com 
fsf@cesar.org.br 
guicaraciolo@gmail.com 
 
2Informatics Center 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
Recife, Brazil 
fsf3@cin.ufpe.br 
 
Abstract - Cities are becoming more and more populous 
and complex, and this growth is forcing them to better 
administer their management services. As a result of this 
growth, and of technological advances, cities are investing 
in technology so as to become smarter, thereby obtaining 
quicker results. This technological scenario has not only 
produced benefits for cities but also fragilities in them. 
Since the services that a city offers are vital and some of 
these require confidentiality, the focus has shifted to 
information security. To ensure their information is 
covered, cities need specific technologies, such as City 
Security Layer (CSL), in order to solve security problems 
arising. This paper focuses on constructing a module that 
complements CLS. This module is responsible for 
managing the services available in a network controlled by 
CSL. 
Keywords- security; smart city; architecture; services. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Cities are constantly growing. Nam et al. [1] assert that 
they are becoming more and more populous and complex. 
According to Dirks et al. [2], in the 20th century, less than 20 
cities around the globe had more than one million citizens. 
Today, this number has risen to 450 cities. Given this 
demographic growth, cities are encountering new series of 
risks, concerns and problems. According to Nam et al. [1], the 
main problems will be: a deterioration in the quality of the air, 
in traffic flows and an increase in economic risks, such as 
greater unemployment and the challenge of ensuring the best 
use of communication technologies so that it is possible to 
offer citizens an infrastructure that will become more and 
more prosperous [3][4]. 
With regard to the prosperity of cities, according to Sen et 
al. [5], this could be achieved when the ways that people think 
about health, security and economic issues are as important as 
their thinking on tackling uncontrolled urban development. 
According to Dirks et al. [2], to attend to these matters, the 
main services that cities offer should become interconnected, 
thus enabling new intelligence levels to be attained and, 
therefore, able to meet their own demands and those of their 
citizens.  
In these cities, what is perceived is not only population 
growth, but also, as Dirks et al. [2] point out, such cities 
undergo a rise in their economic and technological activities.  
On the other hand,  for Sen et al. [5], it is important to state 
that revolutionary change in communications is imminent. 
Such breakthroughs are becoming a reality and arise out of the 
services being created in cities.  
Moreover, according to Sen et al. [5], the option to create 
services forces and makes software programs even smarter 
and more and more connected, to such an extent that they can 
exchange information, thus allowing new solutions to be 
created. The vision for smart cities is to see them as 
interconnected urban areas [6][7], which are sustainable and 
efficient, since all city services are crafted and maintained by 
focusing on their sharing data with each other. Therefore, it is 
possible for cities to gather information and take decisions 
more quickly and reliably. This integration of and between 
city services is not only a source of benefits, but it also is an 
imminent point of problems or vulnerabilities when 
information security is taken into account [8]. This is why 
Bartoli et al. [8] affirms that one of the biggest challenges 
when developing smart cities is related to the security of 
systems. 
According to Bartoli et al. [8], Information Security 
should not only deal with deliberate attacks, such as those by 
disgruntled  employees or for the purposes of industrial 
espionage, but also vulnerabilities such as that from a 
malicious entity that has penetrated a network [5][8], and thus 
has access to how software and data are controlled and, 
therefore, it can  modify and damage the entire system. 
This study was prompted after noting the lack of research 
studies on information security concepts with regard to the 
peculiarities of urban environments or smart cities. Among the 
few published papers, CSL stands out in the management of 
identifiers of entities but there remains the need to extend this 
solution to include the register of services that a smart city will 
consist of.  
This article is organized as follows: Section 2 addresses 
how to define a smart city and the different services it may 
offer. Section 3 defines the security challenges that smart 
cities need to face up to. Section 4 discusses the CSL security 
layer, how it is structured, and what challenges it tries to 
overcome. Section 5 describes the Service Manager as a 
solution for managing services of a smart city. Section 6 sets 
out a validation of the Service Manager module with the CSL 
layer. Finally, some conclusions are drawn and suggestions 
made for future research studies in Section 7. 
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

II. SMART CITY AND SERVICE DISTRIBUTION 
According to Dirks et al. [2], rapid growth in population 
creates a new set of challenges for the infrastructure services 
of cities while, at the same time, creating new economic 
opportunities and social benefits. 
Washburn et al. [9] is of the opinion that as people migrate 
to urban areas, resources become limited and badly managed. 
As a result of this, Dirks et al. [2] point out that problems will 
arise to do with high costs of living. For example, as to fresh 
water, it is expected that it will increase 25% in price by the 
mid-2030s. The high cost of living in some cities can already 
be observed in terms of people looking to the private sector 
due to the lack of some basic provisions in health and 
education services by government. 
For Dirks et al. [2], cities that are already facing these 
challenges need to act by making using of new technologies 
so as to transform  their systems and, in so doing, they will 
be better able to manage their resources and thus become 
more competitive. In order to achieve this, Ferraz et al. [7] 
and Kanter et al. [10] state that, when the tools and services 
of cities are integrated into a network, they will contribute to 
higher efficiency, since they will be able to use an enormous 
range of information, thereby enabling them to be creative 
and to make assertive decisions that are well-founded. 
A city has different systems and distributed services. What 
we understand as services and systems is the combination of 
the complete range of resources for a specific function. Such 
services may be represented as being part of a set, which 
according to Ferraz et al. [7] can be separated and organized 
into several categories: education, public safety, transport, 
energy and water, health and governmental bodies. 
According to Dirks et al. [2], we should note that what 
these services comprise, may vary from city to city, and in the 
number of citizens, since each city has its own characteristics, 
but nevertheless within the groups presented and defined. 
Dirks et al. [2] and Ferraz et al. [7], go on to state and 
demonstrate that the effectiveness and efficiency of these 
services will determine how successful the city that provides 
them will be. In the next section, each category of service in a 
smart city will be analyzed. 
A. Types of Service 
A city can offer different types of services. According to 
Ferraz et al. [7], services can be in the following areas: 
education, public safety, forms of transport, government 
services, health, energy and water. 
Education: This represents the services that are directly and 
indirectly related to all educational services, such as, for 
example, setting standards for student’s grades or educational 
shills. 
Public Safety: This represents the services that help cities to 
respond quickly responds to emergencies, thus guaranteeing 
safety in a city. With the help of these services, for example, 
we are able to identify the rate of theft in certain areas. 
Transport: Transport services include the state of roads, 
seaports, and airports. For example, controlling the volume 
and flow of traffic on city roads.  
Government: This represents each system which works 
within governmental frameworks. For example, the control 
of a city’s budget and expenditure. 
Health: This represents services that help improve public 
health. By using these services, users will be able to have a 
shared medical record, that is always available, and which 
will lead to quicker and more precise diagnoses. 
The smart integration of those services in a smart city will 
not only deliver benefits. One example is the evolution of the 
health services, where paramedics or even patients can be 
advised at a distance how to store and apply drugs. For 
Verbauwhede [11], this evolution will only be possible when 
there are strong privacy and user authentication policies. This 
privacy and authentication can be supplied by providing 
artefacts with protocols and cryptographed application 
software, as will be seen in the following section. 
III. SECURITY IN SMART CITIES 
According to Bodei et al. [12], studies showed the need 
for a new set of research studies focusing on improving 
information security, when dealing with smart cities [5][8]. 
In the midst of the problems related to information 
security, a subset of security questions is present in the 
backdrop to smart cities, amongst which worthy of special 
mention are access to information, tracking items of 
information and citizens, loss of data and unauthorized access 
to datacenters.  
The issues above are dealt with in a broader study 
undertaken by Ferraz et al. [7], and are presented here as a 
way to illustrate points that smart cities will need to address. 
These three issues are discussed in the following 
subsections. 
1) Issues related to access to information 
The interaction between software and the network 
involves data sharing. According to Sen et al. [5], this 
interaction can represent a threat since the data from different 
entities can become accessible. The traffic of packets from a 
device to the network, and from the network to other devices 
is a concern, since these packets can be intercepted when they 
are being transferred. 
2) Issues related to data tracking 
One important characteristic in an interconnected 
environment is the fact that a set of information used by one 
system cannot be traced back to the originator of the data. 
This kind of problem can destroy the anonymity that the 
services supply.  
3) Issue related to entity tracking related issues 
Each smart city may have many distributed sensors to 
capture data and facilitate the integration of systems. For Sen 
262
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

et al. [5], information from these sensors must not be used to 
track entities. More information can be found in [13][14]. 
All problems here described are related to access and 
security matters. For Bartoli et al. [8], an alternative for 
solving some of those problems is by using key management. 
This means providing secure management of data encryption. 
The author states such management will ensure users are 
authenticated and authorized. According to Bartoli et al. [8] 
and Li et al. [15], for effective protection in a smart city, a 
series of security related problems needs to be addressed, and 
a predefined plan or goal should be adhered to.  
What this consists of will be discussed in the next section. 
Similar solutions will be analyzed and a new layer will be put 
forward that aims to solve the problem of controlling entities 
and ensuring authenticity in smart cities. 
IV. CSL 
This section will discuss the CSL approach, as a solution 
to identity security in a smart city. In the first topic, a brief 
description of the problem will be given. The second topic 
will present similar solutions and the third and final topic will 
discuss the CSL. 
A. Problem 
In Section 2, the concept of a smart city was described as 
comprising different services. Given the growing number of 
such services and related entities, the complexity of security 
problems has also kept growing. 
Among the problems detected, attention is drawn to the 
situation when the information service requests the service 
provider to supply it with confidential personal information 
on third parties. 
According to Ferraz et al. [14], exchanging information 
via a network is considered to be unreliable because messages 
are subject to losses and interception when they are 
transmitted, as set out under security in Section 3. In short, 
the problem identified is based on guaranteeing the 
anonymity of an entity within the environment of a smart city. 
There are already some solutions on the market that   
address these problems but none of them focuses on smart 
cities, as will be shown in the next topic. 
B. Similar solutions 
Some of the problems mentioned in Section 3 can be 
mitigated by some of the existing security solutions. 
According to Ferraz et al. [17] approaches such as using Open 
Authorization 
(OAuth), 
Security 
Assertion 
Markup 
Language (SAML) and OpenID may help the process of 
giving cover to some security flaws. 
OAuth (Open Authorization), according to Yang et al. 
[18], is an authentication protocol used for storing secure 
data, whereby the owner of the storage does not need to 
provide his access credentials. The Security Assertion 
Markup Language (SAML), according to Saklikar et al. [19], 
is an XML-based framework for exchanging authentications, 
authorizations and data. By using SAML, a relationship of 
trust between entities in a network environment can be 
created. On the other hand, OpenID is an open technology in 
which, according to Ferraz et al. [17], users are identified by 
a URL. In systems using OpenID, users do not need to create 
a new account to access them. Users only need to be 
authenticated by an identity provider.  
For Ferraz et al. [17], solutions like OpenID, SAML and 
OAuth, are fundamental to ensure users’ security. However, 
these protocols cannot cover all existing security problems. 
Most of these concerns are related to the fact those solutions 
are focused on authentication and authorization, which, in an 
environment full of sensitive data, is not sufficient. CSL arose 
with a view to having a solution for dealing with anonymity 
between entities in a smart city and will be described in the 
next topic. 
C. CSL Solution 
CSL represents a layer that should be placed on the 
external border of a service, or a set of services, in smart 
cities.  
According to Ferraz et al. [20], the  main objective of CSL 
is to be the layer responsible for modifying the identifiers of 
services when messages are exchanged. The new identifier 
will be generated based on combining the previous identifier 
with the service to be accessed.  
For Ferraz et al. [20], by means of this process, it is 
possible to ensure that an entity keeps itself anonymous 
within the entire smart city environment, even when this 
entity accesses multiple services, since the creation of the 
identifier consists of  combining two other identifiers. The 
final access identifier will be different for each of the 
services. 
By using CSL, it is expected that there will be an increase 
in security, since there will now be a layer which will provide 
a unique identifier for each service. With this approach, the 
real identity of the entity is preserved. On the other hand, 
Ferraz et al. [20] stresses that CSL does not provide resources 
to ensure authentication and authorization, which OAuth, 
SAML and OpenID do. Therefore, making use of an extra 
layer or solution to address vulnerabilities on this matter is 
required. 
Despite the limitations mentioned, the security problems 
shown in Section 3 are partially covered by CSL. Table 1 
illustrates the coverage of each item.  
TABLE I.  
CSL COVERAGE 
Risks 
Coverage 
1. 
Data Access 
 
2. 
Data tracking 
 
3. 
Entity tracking 
 
According to Ferraz et al. [20], if any packets shared 
between entities which go through CSL are intercepted, it 
will be hard to identify and understand who is who, since the 
interceptor will not know what the identifiers of these entities 
are. This covers the first issue, described in Section 3. 
263
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

When there is anonymity of the entities during 
communication, the second issue is covered as well, since the 
difficulty of identifying which information is associated with 
which entity makes it hard to map the relationships. This 
characteristic also covers the third issue, since the entities are 
isolated. 
The proposed approach has presented an efficient solution 
for some of the issues mentioned. Also, another set of issues 
is partially addressed by City Security Layer (CSL). 
During the development of CSL, as presented in The First 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advances 
and 
Trends in Software Engineering in Barcelona – Spain, the 
need for a service manager to manage connected services was 
raised. The next section describes the specification and 
definition of that component. 
V. 
SERVICE MANAGER 
After having understood the CSL, it is seen that there is a 
demand for the Service Manager module. The module is 
integrated above the security solution by orchestrating the 
management of services. This section will detail the module 
by describing its architecture and its functionalities. 
A. Motivation 
The Service Manager is a module for managing and 
controlling services that are present in a smart city. This 
module is characterized as a plug-in which, when added to 
the CSL, will be responsible for controlling its services. 
The need to have the service manager arises because the 
CSL need to know all the services that can communicate with 
each other in a smart city. The need for registering services is 
met by obtaining and filling in the CSL hash table so that 
organizations know who is available for them to 
communicate with. 
Figure 1 shows two levels of security depth where the 
CSL and Service Manager are present. 
 
CSL
Service Manager
OpenID
SAML
OAuth
Authentication / Authorization
Identity
 
Figure 1.  
Summary of the ideal security environment 
OAuth, SAML and OpenID appear as similar solutions 
that are on the same level of security of the CSL. After the two 
levels of security, there are network protocols that helped 
complement the solution. 
B. API 
The API provided by the Service Manager consists of the 
entry points provided by the CSL. These are: 
Registration of Services: This allows the insertion of 
services that are part of the interoperable systems and 
solutions of a city. For registration, the service information 
that needs to be sent includes: name, description, public 
identifier and the URL address. On entering the service, 
negotiable validations are made to avoid replication of the 
same services and mandatory data. If the registration of the 
service satisfies the validation, the service is registered and 
returned to whoever requested the registration. 
Alterations of Services: Editing information of the 
registered services. The alteration is carried out with 
validations to avoid the inconsistency in the data of the 
service. This precaution is taken because some data of the 
service comprise the Table of identifiers that the CSL uses to 
route information to the services. 
Removal of Services: Exclusion of services that do not 
take part in the environment of the city. This is only authorized 
if the service has not taken part in any interaction in the city, 
otherwise it should be disabled. 
Listing of Services: Listing the information that make up 
the services, such as: name, description, address of the service 
and public id. The service assembles a dynamic table of the 
services apt to play a part in an interaction in the city. 
Loading of Services: The function guarantees the 
possibility of migrations of the services from a city to the CSL. 
To load the services, a file in text format will be requested, in 
which a standard must be respected: {name, description, 
public id, URL address}, {name, description, public id, URL} 
... When the file is loaded, the services present in it will be 
inserted if they respect the inclusion rules. 
Address Resolver: This provides the URL address of the 
service being requested to in order to send on the piece of data 
of whoever asked for it to the party requested. 
  C. Look and Feel 
Figure 2 shows the main screen responsible for 
maintenance services. On this screen, the user can manage 
each service used by the CSL. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Main screen maintenance services 
       Figure 3 presents the screen related to editing a registered 
service. 
 
Figure 3.  Editing registered Services 
      These two screens refer to the core parts of service 
management. They also they play an important role in the 
general functionality of CSL. 
264
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

D. The Workflow of Service Manager 
The workflow between CSL and the Service Manager is 
described in Figure 2: 
 
 
Figure 4.  Sequence diagram with the workflow between CSL and Service 
Manager 
Description: 
1. A service is registered on Service Manager; 
1.1. The Service Manager returns the identifier to the 
new service; 
2. This identifier will be used for future requisitions; 
3. CSL, by using the identifier of the required service, 
makes requests to the Service Manager at the URL 
for this service. 
4. The entity will keep on requesting service 
information by sending messages through CSL. 
 
E. Technologies Used 
The programming language in which the solution was 
structured was Java. The choice was based on the fact that the 
CSL was originally built with it, thus facilitating its 
integration and because it has a large number of communities 
which aim to facilitate development work by constructing 
frameworks [21]. 
In the presentation layer of the Service Manager, Java 
Server Faces (JSF) version 2.2 was used. JSF is a technology 
which permits Java for Web applications to be created using 
ready-made visual components so that the developer only has 
to be concerned about its use [22]. Together with the JSF, 
Primefaces was adopted. According to [23], this extension of 
the JSF stands out due to its simplicity, performance and 
template options. 
The other technologies used in the CSL were not altered 
so that the solution of the manager does not have an impact on 
the existing security layer. For transactional control, the CLS 
uses the Spring framework [24] which besides assisting 
communication with the other layers aims to remove the 
dependencies between entities with the injection of 
dependency. In the data layer, use is made of the JPA 
framework [25] which will orchestrate the transactions with 
the database and avoid code repetition when dealing with the 
persistence of data. The view of the layers can be seen below 
in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5.  Technologies used 
The Java programming language contributed to the 
creation of a modular environment and with independent 
layers, whereby one layer provides a service to the one above 
it. The CSL provides basic services to the Service Manager, 
and delegates responsibility for validation, treatment and 
manipulation of services. 
The JSF helped in dealing with requests for 
communication with the service layer of the CSL and dealing 
with events. Primefaces was used to provide graphical 
interface components, such as templates, buttons, and 
dynamic tables. 
VI. VALIDATION 
The validation process will evaluate the Service Manager 
incorporated into the CSL. To do so, it will count the time 
spent on including, excluding, and requesting services on 
CSL, with and without using this management module. By 
using this measure, a stress test will be exclusively used to 
validate performance. 
A. The infrastructure for measurement 
The validation environment was executed on an Intel Core 
I5 computer, with 8GB memory RAM, which uses the 
Windows 8 operating system. 
B. Unity and count tool 
The unit of measurement was milliseconds (ms). To draw 
up the validation test for inclusions in, exclusions from and 
requests to the CSL, the JMeter tool was used, which is a free, 
open source tool by the Apache Foundation and used to test 
the performance of software applications.  
The metrics defined is a time-count of conducting 1000 
samples of including, excluding, and consulting services. 
This activity will consider the presence, or absence, of the 
Service Manager, and will record a comparison of time-
counts before and after using the manager in the CSL 
solution. 
cmp SM - SCSL
«component»
JPA
«component»
Spring
«component»
JSF / Primefaces
265
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

C. Results and Analysis 
The results obtained after applying the metrics of the 
previous topic are shown in Tables II and III. 
TABLE II.  
VALIDATION RESULT 
 
Median 
Operation 
With 
Service Manager 
without 
Service Manager 
Include 
4.000 
3.850 
Remove 
2.9000 
2.500 
Query 
3.800 
3.600 
TABLE III.  
VALIDATION RESULT IN PERCENTAGE 
Operation 
Percentage Increase 
Include 
3.75 % 
Remove 
13.79% 
Query 
5.26% 
 
As seen in the above tables, the addition of the Service 
Manager, even when there is an interface and control layer 
did not cause a significant increase in the basic operations of 
addition, deletion and consultation of services.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
Cities grow constantly. This is caused by people migrating 
to urban areas, or the growth of their own populations. This 
growth is forcing cities to organize themselves better and 
continuously, since people are demanding even more 
resources and consuming even more services. It is also 
obliging cities to invest in information technologies, and to 
start to become smarter. The new technologies are helping 
cities to obtain faster results and to attend to the demands of 
their citizens. 
By using these technologies, cities are starting to be called 
smart cities. Nevertheless, this new technological scenario has 
led to such cities having to face a set of fragilities. For 
example, since the services that cities provide are extremely 
vital, and some of these may require data to remain 
confidential, the new focus is now on security in the smart 
city.  
Nowadays, there is a set of solutions that partially covers 
these fragilities, as seen in this study, namely OAuth, SAML 
and OpenID. Even though these solutions are focused on 
authentication and authorization, throughout this article, it 
was demonstrated that the issue of identity control in the smart 
city has not been adequately addressed. It was as a solution for 
this identity issue that CSL was conceived as a layer that 
would be responsible for ensuring anonymous communication 
between entities and services, thereby covering some of the 
security problems of smart cities. 
As a way of complementing CSL, this article puts forward 
a structure for creating a service manager. As demonstrated, 
CSL needs to know all the services that will be available for 
communication purposes in a smart city, since CSL needs to 
maintain a table of identifiers. 
 Because of these needs, a service management module 
was developed for CSL. To validate this module, a scenario 
was built in which to test the performance of including, listing, 
excluding services and requesting these services, with and 
without this new module. 
On analyzing the results, it was shown that adding a new 
module to compare the time spent on each type of operation 
leads to barely increasing the time spent on management, thus 
showing this new module when plugged in to CSL is viable. 
For future studies, more research on CSL will be needed 
as CSL evolves, since its current scope only contemplates a 
small set of security concerns. In addition, a future study 
should contemplate using CSL with the service manager 
module in a more complex smart city, to enable further 
validations and metrics.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Conceptualizing smart city with 
dimensions of technology, people, and institutions,” Proc. 12th 
Annu. Int. Digit. Gov. Res. Conf. Digit. Gov. Innov. Challenging 
Times - dg.o ’11, 2011, p. 282. 
[2] S. Dirks and M. Keeling, “A vision of smarter cities: How cities 
can lead the way into a prosperous and sustainable future,” IBM Inst. 
Bus. Value. June, 2009. 
[3] F. Duarte, “Smart Cities: technological innovation in urban 
areas”, São Paulo em Perspect., vol. 19, 2005, pp. 122–131. 
[4] J. Shapiro, “Smart cities: quality of life, productivity, and the 
growth effects of human capital,” Rev. Econ. Stat., vol. v88(2,May), 
2006, pp. 324–335. 
[5] M. Sen, A. Dutt, S. Agarwal, and A. Nath, “Issues of Privacy 
and Security in the Role of Software in Smart Cities,” 2013 Int. 
Conf. Commun. Syst. Netw. Technol., 2013, pp. 518–523. 
[6] Global Electronics Industry, “The IBM vision of a smarter home 
enabled by cloud technology,” 2010, p. 16. 
[7] F. Ferraz, C. Sampaio, and C. Ferraz, “Towards a Smart City 
Security Model Exploring Smart Cities Elements Based on 
Nowadays Solutions,” ICSEA 2013, 2013, pp. 546–550. 
[8] A. Bartoli, M. Soriano, J. Hernandez-Serrano, M. Dohler, A. 
Kountouris, D. Barthel, Security and Privacy in your Smart City , in 
Proceedings of Barcelona Smart Cities Congress 2011, 29-2 
December 2011, Barcelona (Spain). 
 [9] D. Washburn, U. Sindhu, and S. Balaouras, “Helping CIOs 
Understand ‘Smart City’ Initiatives,” Forrester, 2009. 
[10] R. M. Kanter and S. S. Litow, “Informed and Interconnected : 
A Manifesto for Smarter Cities Informed and Interconnected : A 
Manifesto for Smarter Cities,” Working Paper 09-141, Havard 
Business School, 2009. 
[11] I. Verbauwhede, “Efficient and secure hardware, for 
cryptographic algorithms on embedded devices,” 2012, pp. 1–4. 
[12] C. Bodei, P. Degano, and G. L. Ferrari, “Formalising security 
in ubiquitous and cloud scenarios,” In Proc. 11th IFIP TC 8 
International Conference on Computer Information Systems and 
Industrial Management, 2012, pp. 1-29. 
[13] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. G. Ferraz, “More Than Meets the Eye In 
Smart City Information Security: Exploring security issues far 
beyond privacy concerns,” in IEEE computer science, UFirst-UIC 
2014, 2014, pp. 677-685. 
[14] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. G. Ferraz, “Smart City Security Issues: 
Depicting Information Security Issues in the Role of an Urban 
Environment,” in 2014 IEEE/ACM 7th International Conference on 
Utility and Cloud Computing, 2014, pp. 842–847. 
266
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[15] W. Li, J. Chao, and Z. Ping, “Security Structure Study of City 
Management Platform Based on Cloud Computing under the 
Conception of Smart City,” 2012 Fourth Int. Conf. Multimed. Inf. 
Netw. Secur., 2013, pp. 91–94. 
[16] F. J. L. Ribeiro, J. C. R. Lopes, and A. C. P. Pedroza, “Analysis 
of security processes in mobile third generation systems,”  I Escola 
Regional de Redes de Computadores, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 
September 2003. 
[17] F. S. Ferraz, C. Candido, B. Sampaio, C. André, and G. Ferraz, 
“Information Security in Smart Cities Using OpenID , SAML and 
OAuth to increase security in urban environment,” SOFTENG 
2015  First Int. Conf. Adv. Trends Softw. Eng., 2015, pp. 7–13. 
[18] F. Yang and S. Manoharan, “A security analysis of the OAuth 
protocol,” IEEE Pacific RIM Conf. Commun. Comput. Signal 
Process. - Proc., 2013, pp. 271–276. 
[19] S. Saklikar, S. Saklikar, S. Saha, and S. Saha, “Next steps for 
security assertion markup language (saml),” Proc. 2007 ACM 
Work. Secur. web Serv., 2007, p. 65. 
[20] F. S. Ferraz, C. Candido, B. Sampaio, C. André, and G. Ferraz, 
“Towards A Smart-City Security Architecture Proposal and 
Analysis of Impact of Major Smart-City Security Issues,” 
SOFTENG 2015  First Int. Conf. Adv. Trends Softw. Eng., 2015, 
pp. 108–114.  
[21] 
“Java.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://java.com/pt_BR/about/whatis_java.jsp. [Accessed: 20-Oct-
2015]. 
[22] 
“JavaServer 
Faces.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://docs.oracle.com/javaee/5/tutorial/doc/bnaph.html. 
[Accessed: 28-Oct-2015]. 
[23] 
“Primafaces.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.primefaces.org/whyprimefaces. [Accessed: 28-Oct-
2015]. 
[24] 
“Spring 
Framework.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://projects.spring.io/spring-framework/. [Accessed: 02-Mar-
2015]. 
[25] “JPA - Java Persistence API.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javaee/tech/persistence-
jsp-. [Accessed: 30-Apr-2015]. 
 
267
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

