A Framework with Agile Practices for Implementation of Project Portfolio 
Management Process 
 
Lílian Santos Ferreira da Silva, Sandro Ronaldo Bezerra Oliveira 
Graduate Program in Computer Science 
Federal University of Pará 
Belém, Pará, Brazil 
e-mail:lilianferreira.ti@gmail.com, srbo@ufpa.br 
 
Abstract—There has been an increase in the importance of 
portfolio management process since its inclusion in quality 
models and standards. This is shown by the growing number 
of organizations that are attempting to implement this process 
effectively and efficiently. This research seeks to assist in the 
implementation of portfolio management in small and 
medium-sized companies, by reducing the difficulties and 
excessive documentation required in traditional processes. 
This involved carrying out a mapping between the framework 
for the portfolio management process and the agile practices 
that were carried out. The result was a set of guidelines that 
defined how to implement this process framework with agile 
practices that could be employed for interaction between 
people. 
Keywords-software quality; process improvement; portfolio 
management; agile practices. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Quality is defined by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) 9000:2000 as “the degree to which a 
set of inherent characteristics fulfills the requirements” [1]. 
On the other hand, ISO 10006 adopts a slightly different 
approach from the previous standard. It states that the scope 
of quality is the responsibility of management and requires 
the commitment of everyone involved in the project. 
Finally, the Project Management Body of Knowledge 
(PMBOK) defines quality in a similar way to the ISO 
9000:2000. According to the Project Management Institute 
(PMI), “a project with quality is completed in accordance 
with the requirements, specifications and suitability for use” 
[2]. It is noteworthy that the aim of these and other concepts 
of quality is to meet customer requirements and 
expectations. However, it should be remembered that 
quality is not only linked to the product but also the process; 
metrics are defined to ensure the processes comply with 
applicable quality standards. 
In the area of process quality, there have been some 
improvements in the projects. With regard to software 
development in particular, there is the Brazilian Software 
Process Improvement Program (MPS.BR), which is based 
on the concepts of process maturity and capability. This was 
set up for the evaluation and improvement of quality and 
productivity in software and related services. The MPS.BR 
has maturity levels ranging from A (optimization) to G 
(partially managed). 
This 
project 
focuses 
on 
the 
project 
portfolio 
management process that is at the maturity level F 
(Managed) of the respective model. The aim of the process 
is to “initiate and maintain projects that are necessary, 
sufficient and sustainable in order to meet the strategic 
objectives of the organization” [3]. 
The portfolio management area has become increasingly 
important, and is included in several other models, such as: 
(i) 
Project 
Portfolio 
Management 
Maturity 
Model 
(PPMMM) [4], (ii) Portfolio, Programme and Project 
Management Maturity Model (P3M3) [5], (iii) Programme, 
and Portfolio Management Maturity Model (P2M3) [6], (iv) 
Standard 
for 
PMI 
Portfolio 
Management 
[7], 
(v) 
Organizational Project Management Maturity Model 
(OPM3) [8], (vi) ISO 12207:2008 [9], and (vii) MPS.BR 
[3]. As a result of this diversity, software organizations have 
struggled to implement an efficient portfolio management. 
Since 1996, the Association for Promotion of Brazilian 
Software Excellence (SOFTEX) has carried out initiatives 
to support the development, promotion and development of 
the Brazilian Software and IT Services, one of the largest in 
the world, and renowned for its creativity, competence and 
source of talent. SOFTEX has been designated by the 
Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI) to 
act as the program manager for the Brazilian Promotion of 
Software Excellence Program. This program benefits more 
than 2000 companies around the country through a network 
of 20 regional agents. It is a system ensures that assistance 
is provided to SOFTEX through the operational and 
financial training of associated companies by a broad and 
solid joint partner in the private, government and academic 
sectors. 
According to the website of SOFTEX [10], from 2013 
to 2015, there were 286 official assessments of MPS.BR 
nationwide. Of these, only 10 were held in the North of 
Brazil, and only 5 included the maturity level F, which is in 
the project portfolio management process. This shows a low 
adherence level to maturity models for software process in 
small and medium-sized companies located in the region. 
On the basis of these data, it is clear that of small and 
medium-sized companies have difficulty in implementing a 
portfolio management process by following the guidelines 
and practices described in the MPS.BR model. Thus, the 
goal of this work is to propose a flexible approach to 
portfolio management, which involves holding faster and 
more dynamic meetings that are mainly concerned with the 
interaction and commitment of those involved in the 
process. The project portfolio management process was 
chosen because according to Pinto et al. [11], its objectives 
are to optimize the portfolios of organizations and link 
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

projects to strategies. In other words, it is an essential 
process for successful businesses, because it is aligned to 
the organizational strategy, business, mission and values. 
The Agile Manifesto is a set of practices that aims to 
guide the actions of agile teams, by keeping them focused 
on what really adds value to both the project and the client. 
Based on 12 principles, this manifesto is used as a guide for 
the agile activities of the projects teams, to maximize 
results. Its principles are as follows: value, flexibility, 
frequency, unity, motivation, communication, functionality, 
sustainability, review strategies, simplicity, organization 
and self-assessment. In general, the manifesto values are: its 
ability to allow people to interact with processes and tools, 
its working software for comprehensive documentation, 
customer collaboration in negotiating contracts, and its 
ability to respond to change by following a plan. On this 
basis, it was decided to work with agile methods, so that the 
project portfolio management process could be more 
interactive, and allow the staff to be more involved with the 
process. This was a means of ensuring faster and tangible 
results, and the team itself encouraged to execute the 
defined process. This required employing the process 
framework proposed in [12]. Thus, it was possible to carry 
out a mapping between this framework and the agile 
practices of the software project development and 
management. The agile methods used in the  mapping were: 
Scrum, eXtreme Programming (XP) and Adaptive Software 
Development (ASD). 
This paper is structured in the following way: Section 2 
examines the related work and outlines the background of 
this work. Section 3 describes the approach that is adopted 
to implement the project portfolio management with agile 
practices. Section 4 analyzes the expected results of this 
research, and Section 5 concludes the study with some final 
considerations. 
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
This section provides an overview of the project 
portfolio management in MR-MPS-SW and some related 
works. 
A. Project Portfolio Management in MR-MPS-SW 
 The importance of project portfolio management (GPP) 
for decision-making is underlined by the inclusion of this 
process in ISO / IEC 12207:2008 [9] and MPS.BR [10], 
which is particularly designed for the software lifecycle. 
Together with the reference model for software included 
in MPS.BR, which is called the Reference Model for the 
Software Process Improvement (MR-MPS-SW), the project 
portfolio management process has two goals: selecting the 
projects that will be carried out, and monitoring / evaluating 
these projects to ensure that they remain viable and adhere 
to the criteria for which they were approved. In addition, it 
is essential to “initiate and maintain projects that are 
necessary, sufficient and sustainable in order to meet the 
strategic objectives of the organization” [3]. 
This process has obtained investment and the 
appropriate organizational resources and has the authority to 
carry out the selected projects. It performs a continuous 
assessment of the projects to determine whether they justify 
continued investment, or should be redirected [10]. To 
achieve these goals, the process assumes there will be eight 
expected results: 
• 
GPP1 – The business opportunities, needs and 
investment are identified, qualified, prioritized and 
selected by objective criteria with regard to the 
strategic objectives of the organization, 
• 
GPP2 – The resources and budgets for each project 
are identified and allocated, 
• 
GPP3 - The responsibilities and authority for 
managing the projects are set out, 
• 
GPP4 - The portfolio is monitored with regard to 
the criteria, which were used for prioritization, 
• 
GPP5 - Actions to correct deviations in the portfolio 
and to prevent the detected problems from recurring 
are fully established, implemented and monitored, 
• 
GPP6 - Conflicts over resources between projects 
are handled and solved, in accordance with the 
criteria used for prioritization, 
• 
GPP7 – The projects that meet the requirements are 
kept together with the agreements that led to their 
approval and those that do not meet the 
requirements are redirected or canceled, 
• 
GPP8 - The situation with regard to the project 
portfolio is communicated to the stakeholders, at 
defined intervals or whenever the portfolio is 
changed. 
B. Related Work 
While carrying out this research a non-systematic 
literature review was conducted to find previous studies that 
have related themes to this work but none was found that 
discusses the question of whether practices by agile 
methods can be employed to implement portfolio 
management. However, these studies were analyzed to 
determine what support can be given by this research to the 
implementation of portfolio management. 
The main work, which was used as a reference-point for 
this research, was [12], which defined a process framework 
for software project portfolio management in accordance 
with 
the 
guidelines 
provided 
by 
the 
MPS.BR 
Implementation Guide, the ISO / IEC 12207 and the 
standard for PMI Portfolio Management. In addition, the 
author supplements this framework with recommendations 
drawn from the used models and technical literature 
regarding approaches to the implementation of their 
activities and tasks. 
Another work related to this area is the paper [13], 
which proposes RisAgi, an agile methodology that supports 
risk management in software development projects; in the 
context of the processes, PMBOK is included in the area of 
risk assessment. Some of the activities within the portfolio 
management include the identification and analysis of 
portfolio risks. Thus, this approach was adopted to support 
the implementation of these practices. 
Another work that was analyzed and that makes a 
contribution to the subject of this research is the work 
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

presented in [14]. This paper based on the development of 
new products and in the case of software engineering 
literature, a case study that took place in three companies. 
This adopts an approach to the implementation of portfolio 
management in small product-oriented software companies, 
which involves analyzing their early experiences. 
The approach integrates the basic assets of portfolio 
management, such as strategic alignment, portfolio 
balancing and  “to go or not” decisions, in accordance with 
the pace of modern software development in small 
companies. This work was very useful because it showed 
the reality of that happens in small companies, which is the 
focus of this work. 
Finally we studied the work of Sbrocco and Macedo 
[15], which carries out a comparative study of features, 
applications and examples of the main paradigms, such as 
Scrum, XP, Feature Driven Development (FDD), ASD and 
Crystal methodologies, among other agile methods. This 
work provided a macro view of the most widely used 
current agile methods, to ensure that the best practices were 
chosen to assist in the implementation of agile portfolio 
management in small companies. 
One of the weaknesses of these studies is that they fail 
to deal with the project portfolio management in an 
integrated way or consider the benefits offered by agile 
methods. They do not demonstrate how agile principles can 
be applied within the portfolio management in a way that 
can facilitate the implementation of the process in 
organizations. 
On the positive side, the analysis of these works was 
used to support the construction of a solid knowledge base 
for this study. First, the portfolio management process was 
well understood, and then the agile methods were studied; a 
relationship was forged between them, resulting in the 
achievement of the goal of this research, which is to 
propose an agile portfolio management. 
III. AN APPROACH TO THE  IMPLEMENTATION OF PORTFOLIO 
MANAGEMENT BY MEANS OF AGILE PRACTICES 
In the context of agile methods, several models have 
been proposed, but the ones that will be used in this work 
are as follows: XP, ASD and Scrum [16]. These methods 
were chosen because their practices are compatible with the 
activities of project portfolio management. 
The XP is one of the best known and most widely used 
methods. It discusses iterative development and customer 
engagement at extreme levels. It advocates a number of 
good practices, such as the use of metaphors that have the 
power to convey complex ideas simply and clearly. In 
addition, it includes ideas of refactoring, release delivery, 
pair programming and the use of stories that are small cards 
where the customer writes the features that are required by 
the system. 
Another agile method used in this work was Scrum [16], 
which is also widely used in organizations that employ agile 
project management. In general, Scrum has three main parts 
in its model: roles, events and artifacts. It also has the 
following events: sprint, sprint planning meeting, daily 
meeting, sprint meeting and sprint retrospective and review 
meeting [17]. 
Each Sprint is divided into phases that use roles, events 
and artifacts to reach their ultimate goal, which was set for 
the customer. 
Finally, ASD practices were used, which are concerned 
with communication. Sprint also uses the code review to 
improve its quality and make more progress in learning. In 
addition, preliminary workshops are run to raise the high-
level requirements for the project; these requirements are 
outlined in detail along with the iterations. 
A. A Workflow for the Portfolio Management 
 A portfolio management framework was used for this 
project as proposed in [12]; the main phases of this are 
described in Fig. 1. 
Figure 1.    A Macro-workflow for the Portfolio Management 
The process framework includes activities, tasks and 
recommendations to define a process for software project 
portfolio 
management 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
recommendations of the Project Portfolio Management 
process of ISO / IEC 12207 and the expected results of the 
Project Portfolio Management process included in the MR-
MPS-SW model. The framework is divided into phases, 
activities and tasks, which are defined as a set of good 
practices, and are arranged in a flowchart as proposed in 
Fig.1. The following phases are defined: 
• 
Planning: this is the stage for defining the 
guidelines of the project portfolio management 
process. It consists of the “Plan Portfolio 
Management” activity. Within this activity, the 
procedures and techniques used within the portfolio 
management process were defined, and range from 
using boards to defining the categories of the 
projects and the organization has resources, 
• 
Identification and Selection of Candidates 
Projects: the purpose of this phase is to attract new 
project opportunities for the “pre-selection” of 
projects with greater strategic potential for the 
organization. It consists of the “Identify New 
Proposals” and “Analyze Candidate Projects” 
activities. In this phase, projects are categorized, 
evaluated and selected. The projects are written on 
cards and placed in the CANVAS, 
• 
Portfolio Selection: this phase includes the project 
portfolio composition stage, which makes use of the 
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

information from the “Identification and Selection 
of Candidates Projects” and “Monitoring the 
Portfolio Project” phases. It consists of the 
“Composing a Portfolio Project”. The activity of 
composing the portfolio project includes the 
following: prioritization and portfolio balancing, 
identification of expected results, identification and 
analysis of portfolio risks, approval of the portfolio 
and starting projects, 
• 
Monitoring the Portfolio: this phase is carried out 
constantly and involves monitoring the portfolio; in 
addition, it produces some information about the 
situation of the portfolio and its components for 
decision-making, balancing and the allocation of 
organizational 
resources. 
It 
involves 
the 
“Monitoring Portfolio” activity. In this activity, the 
burndown and burnup chart tools monitor the 
performance, by means of assessment indicators 
such as: risk probability, delivery, costs and 
development work. 
B. An Agile Approach 
The proposal of a framework for agile project portfolio 
management was based on the results obtained by mapping 
the 5 activities identified in the macro workflow and the 
agile practices that can be used in these activities. This 
required checking the compatibility of the agile practices for 
all the activities present in the macro workflow - a total of 
34 tasks for the project portfolio management. Some of the 
agile practices that can be used in each activity of the macro 
workflow are outlined in the subsection below. 
1) Activity 1: Planning and Portfolio Management 
In this activity, employed practices are that used in 
Scrum method; for example, the Planning Meeting used in 
Scrum. A preliminary workshop is run, which employs the 
ASD method to identify organizational goals and plan the 
portfolio management. 
2) Activity 2: Identifying New Proposals 
In this activity an example of agile practice that can be 
applied is derived from the Scrum and XP. The practice of 
writing “User Stories” is similar, because it was adopted in 
this approach to write projects on cards and to compose the 
portfolio. The stories and features are written with the aid of 
these methods. 
3) Activity 3: Analysis of Candidate Projects 
In this activity the Scrum practice of “Meeting the 
Product Owner” was used, as it will make it possible to 
evaluate the projects written on cards that will be carried out 
along with the portfolio management. 
4) Activity 4: Composing the Project Portfolio 
A technique was employed for carrying out this activity  
that involved writing “user stories” in Scrum. This practice 
was used to prioritize the projects and select the projects 
that make up the company’s portfolio. 
In addition to this practice, the “Review Meeting” will 
also be adopted. In Scrum, this meeting is held for the 
approval of each sprint (iteration) that is completed in the 
projects. In this research it can be adapted so that not only 
the modules can be approved but also the portfolio as a 
whole.  
Finally, the “Retrospective Meeting” practice in Scrum 
is used to record the lessons learned when developing the 
portfolio, and showing the strengths, weaknesses and 
improvements needed for the project portfolio. 
5) Activity5: Monitoring the Portfolio 
 The practice of using the Burndown chart is 
recommended for monitoring the portfolio and tracking the 
progress of the projects. The graph shows that there was a 
deviation from the plan and this deviation can be detected in 
the practice of the “Daily Meeting”. If any deviation from 
the plan is found, the “treatment actions” are turned into 
cards and are estimated like the others. The portfolio 
performance can be reported by images from the burndown 
chart or photos of periods in the project task board. 
C. The Evaluation of the Approach 
The evaluation of this work was initially carried out to 
check whether the activities that form the project portfolio 
management framework are compatible with the agile 
practices. This involved sending an expert in Software 
Quality and Process Improvement areas to obtain feedback 
about its evaluation and to give opinions or make 
suggestions about improvements. 
After the improvements have been made in the mapping 
on the basis of the appraiser’s experience, a set of 
guidelines was prepared on how to implement the 
improvements with agile practices was drawn up. The 
artifacts, events and roles were defined. As a result, the 
process of agile project portfolio management in an 
organization could be implemented and a case study will be 
conducted to determine its effectiveness and efficiency. 
This case study is underway in a Brazilian software 
development organization, and some metrics are being 
collected to assess how far these goals have been achieved. 
In the case study, we have already identified some factors 
such as the need to adjust the order of some of the 
framework activities to provide more mobility for the 
Process Portfolio Management. In addition, it is clear that 
there are benefits in using cards and putting a list of the 
activities carried out on the wall, to provide more 
transparency to the process. 
IV. EXPECTED RESULTS 
This paper sets out a model of project portfolio 
management to support small and medium-sized companies. 
By means of this model, we intend to offer a new 
alternative 
for 
organizations 
interested 
in 
process 
improvement or looking for an official evaluation of 
MPS.BR that can speed up and reduce the costs and time 
needed for process implementation. 
At the end of this work, we hope to make a contribution 
to this area of studies by means of the following: (1) a 
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

mapping of project portfolio management practices 
underpinned by a framework based on models of quality 
standards and agile practices, (2) a proposal on how to 
implement the framework activities in an agile way, and (3) 
suggestions about the events, artifacts and roles involved in 
this process. 
The main distinguishing feature of this work is to 
propose a solution for the agile portfolio management based 
on the activities of a Brazilian region characterized by a 
limited adoption of quality models. Thus, the work provides 
knowledge and resources to help improve the local software 
process and also other small and medium-sized companies 
not located in this Brazilian region. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This study shows the importance of improving the 
process quality within organizations and how the portfolio 
management process has gained prominence in terms of 
quality models and standards. 
 A mapping of the portfolio management framework 
based on the expected results of the MR-MPS-SW and agile 
practices that are most widely used was carried out to assist 
organizations to implement this process. In addition to this 
mapping, a set of guidelines was recommended on how to 
implement all the agile portfolio management processes. 
Future work in this research area could involve carrying 
out an experiment through the use of an agile framework in 
a case study. This could be conducted in a software 
development organization to make comparisons about the 
situation of this organization before and after the 
implementation of the practices. This will be evaluate by us 
together with the members of the organization to ensure the 
necessary improvements are made in the framework so that 
it can be adapted to real situations faced by the 
organization. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Dean of Research 
and Postgraduate Studies at the Federal University of Pará 
(PROPESP/UFPA) by the Qualified Publication Support 
Program (PAPQ) for the financial support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ABNT – Associação Brasileira de Normas Técnicas, “NBR ISO 
9000:2000 – Quality Management Systems – Fundamentals and 
Vocabulary”, Rio de Janeiro: ABNT, Brazil, 2000. 
[2] PMI - Project Management Institute, “A Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge - PMBOK™”, Syba: PMI 
Publishing Division, 2008, Available: www.pmi.org, retrieved: July 
2016. 
[3] SOFTEX –Associação para a Promoção da Excelêcia do Software 
Brasileiro, “MPS.BR – Software General Guide MPS: 2016”, Brazil, 
2016, Available: www.softex.br, retrieved: July 2016. 
[4] J. S. Pennypacker, “Project Portfolio Management Maturity Model”, 
Center for Business Practices, Havertown, Pennsylvania, USA, 2005. 
[5] OGC - Office of Government Commerce, “Portfolio, Programme and 
Project Management Maturity Model”, Office of Government 
Commerce, London, UK, 2006. 
[6] Gartner, “Programme and Portfolio Management Maturity Model”, 
Gartner RAS Core Research Note G00141742, 2007. 
[7] PMI - Project Management Institute, “The Standard for Portfolio 
Management”, Syba: PMI Publishing Division, 2008, Available: 
www.pmi.org, retrieved: July 2016. 
[8] PMI 
- 
Project 
Management 
Institute, 
“Organizational 
ProjectManagement Maturity Model  – OPM3”, Second Edition, Syba: 
PMI Publishing Division, 2008, Available: www.pmi.org, retrieved: 
July 2016. 
[9] ABNT – Associação Brasileira de Normas Técnicas, “NBR ISO/IEC 
12207:2009 – Software Systems Engineering – Software Life Cycle 
Processes”, Rio de Janeiro: ABNT, Brazil, 2009. 
[10] SOFTEX – Associação para Promoção da Excelência do Software 
Brasileiro, “MPS.BR – General Guide Software: 2012”, Brazil, 2012. 
[11] J. K. Pinto, D. I. Cleland, and D. P. Slevin, “The Frontiers of Project 
Management Research”, Philadelphia: Project Management Institute, 
2003. 
[12] M. Souza, “A process framework for software Project portfolio 
management based on quality standards”, Dssertação de Mestrado, 
PPGCC/UFPA, Brazil, 2013. 
[13] J. B. M. C. Neto, K. B. C. Santos, P. V. R. Cardoso, and S. R. B. 
Oliveira, “RisAgi: An Agile Methodology for Risk Management in 
Software Development Projects”, Trabalho de Especialização em 
Gerência de Projetos, PPGCC/UFPA, Brazil, 2013. 
[14] J. Vähäniitty and K. Rautiainen, “Towards an Approach for Managing 
the Development Portfolio in Small Product-Oriented Software 
Companies”, Software Business and Engineering Institute, Helsinki 
University of Technology, Finland, 2005. 
[15] J. H. T. C. Sbrocco and P. C. Macedo, “Agile–Software Engineering 
under measure”, Brazil, 2012. 
[16] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, “The Scrum Guide”, 2013, Available: 
http://www.scrumguides.org, retrieved: July 2016. 
[17] S. R. Kennety, “Essential Scrum: A Practical Guide to The Most 
Popular Agile Process”, Addison-Wesley, 2012. 
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

