Gamifying and Conveying Software Engineering Concepts  
for Secondary Education: An Edutainment Approach
Roy Oberhauser 
Computer Science Dept. 
Aalen University 
Aalen, Germany 
roy.oberhauser@hs-aalen.de 
 
 
Abstract—Because of its abstract nature, software engineering 
faces image, perception, and awareness challenges that affect 
its ability to attract sufficient secondary school age students to 
its higher education programs. This paper presents an 
edutainment approach called Software Engineering for 
Secondary Education (SWE4SE), which combines short 
informational videos and a variety of simple digital games to 
convey certain SE concepts in an entertaining way. Our 
realization mapped various SE concepts to seven digital games, 
and results from an evaluation with secondary students 
showed that a significant improvement in the perception, 
attractiveness, and understanding of SE can be achieved within 
just an hour of play. Thus, we suggest that such an 
edutainment approach is economical, effective, and efficient 
for reaching and presenting SE within secondary school 
classrooms. 
Keywords-software 
engineering 
education; 
software 
engineering games; game-based learning; digital games. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The demand for software engineers appears insatiable, 
and computer science (CS) faculties and the software 
engineering (SE) discipline appear to be steadily challenged 
in attracting and supplying sufficient students to fulfill the 
demand. While it may appear to each higher education 
institution and country to be a local or regional problem, the 
challenge may indeed be more common and broader in 
nature. For example, in the United States in 2005, after a 
boom beginning around 2000, a 60% decrease over 4 years 
in the number of freshmen specifying CS as a major was 
observed [1]. And US bachelor degrees in CS in 2011 were 
roughly equivalent to that seen in 1986 both in total number 
(~42,000) and as a percentage of 23 year olds (~1%) [2]. As 
another example, Germany also observed a negative trend 
from a record number of CS students in 2000, and one 2009 
news article [3] blamed the negative image of CS among the 
young generation. While the number of starting CS 
undergrads in Germany has since increased, roughly 33,000 
software developer positions remain unfilled in 2014 [4]. In 
addition, the forecast demographic effects in certain 
industrial countries imply a smaller younger population 
available to attract, reducing the overall supply and thus 
increasing the competition between disciplines to attract 
students and workers. It is thus a critical and continual 
worldwide issue to attract young women and men to SE. 
Concerning SE's image, according to D. Parnas [5] there 
is apparently confusion in higher education institutions as to 
the difference between CS and SE, and we assert this affects 
secondary education as well. The CS equivalent term in 
Germany, informatics, is much more publically known and 
marketed as a discipline or field of study than is SE. Thus, 
SE programs struggle in the overall competition between 
disciplines to attract secondary students for this critical area 
to society, since SE must first raise awareness about its field. 
The concepts inherent in SE, as exemplified in the 
SWEBOK [6], tend themselves to be abstract and to deal 
with abstractions. Thus, they are difficult to convey, 
especially to secondary school students who have not 
significantly dealt with such abstractions, and cannot thus 
practically imagine what they mean. Furthermore, secondary 
school teachers and institutions are challenged in teaching 
CS, and have likely themselves not been introduced to SE. 
Learning is a fundamental motivation for all game-
playing, as game designer C. Crawford [7] once stated. With 
this in mind, this paper contributes an SE edutainment 
approach we call SWE4SE for gamifying and conveying SE 
concepts with secondary school students as the target 
audience. It describes the principles in the solution concept 
and example mappings of SWEBOK concepts onto 
relatively simple digital games, demonstrating its viability, 
and the evaluation with secondary students showed that 
combining short informational videos and a variety of simple 
digital games can be economical, effective, and efficient for 
improving SE awareness, perception, and  attractiveness. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II describes 
related work. Section III describes the SWE4SE solution 
principles, our game design, and the incorporated SE 
concepts. Section IV describes our realization. Section V 
details the evaluation, followed by a conclusion.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Serious games [8] have an explicit educational focus and 
tend to simulate real-world situations with intended 
audiences beyond secondary education. [9] performed a 
literature search of games-based learning in SE and "found a 
significant dearth of empirical research to support this 
approach." They examine issues in teaching the abstract and 
complex domain of requirements collection and analysis and, 
more generally, SE. Using a constructivism paradigm, the 
role-playing client-server-based SDSim game has a team 
manage and deliver multiple SE projects. The systematic 
432
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

survey on SE games by [10] analyzed 36 papers, all of which 
had targeted undergraduate or graduates. Regarding 
secondary education, whereas initiatives for teaching 
programming are more common, conveying SE concepts in 
general and gamifying SE has not hitherto been extensively 
studied, nor has the educational value of explicitly "non-
serious" (or fun) games for this population stratum.  
Concerning the perception and attractiveness of CS 
among secondary students, the study by [11] of 836 High 
School students from 9 schools in 2 US states concluded that 
the vast majority of High School students had no idea what 
CS is or what CS majors learn. This conclusion can most 
likely be transposed to the lesser known discipline of SE. 
In contrast, SWE4SE is targeted not towards higher 
education, but rather secondary school students with an 
explicit non-serious game approach. Our results compare 
with [11], but go further in showing that an edutainment 
approach can improve the perception and attractiveness of 
SE. Compared to other learning game approaches, it 
explicitly makes the tradeoff to value entertainment more 
and education less in order to retain student engagement and 
enjoyment. It also explicitly includes short informational and 
entertaining video sequences to enhance the experience 
beyond gaming alone. 
III. 
SOLUTION 
SWE4SE consists of a hybrid mix of short informational 
and entertaining videos and a variety of relatively simple 
digital games. Our solution is necessarily based on certain 
assumptions and constraints. For instance, we assumed that 
the players may not only be playing in a compulsory 
classroom setting, but may play voluntarily on their own 
time, meaning that they could choose to stop playing if it 
becomes boring or frustrating and discard the game for some 
more interesting game. Thus, the edutainment is considered 
to be "competing" with available pure entertainment options. 
However, we expect that the game may be promoted to 
secondary school teachers where they would introduce 
students to the game, meaning that our concept must not 
necessarily compete solely with commercial products and 
other entertainment. We also assumed that the motivational 
factors for students in the SWE4SE are curiosity, 
exploration, discovering different games, and finding fun 
areas. 
A. Solution Design Principles 
Web-browser Principle (P:Web): To broadly reach the 
target audience (secondary students ages 12-18), we chose to 
focus our initial design and implementation on a web-based 
game solution and avoid the installation of components on 
game or various OS platforms. This constrains the available 
game options, but increases the reachable population. 
Engagement / Enjoyment Principle (P:En): We want to 
keep the students engaged and to emotionally enjoy the 
experience. To reduce the likelihood of a player 
discontinuing due to lack of fun, we chose to value and 
prioritize the fun aspect more than pushing the learning of 
SE educational concepts. We are thus aware of the fact that 
less of the SE material may be conveyed and retained, but by 
retaining engagement over a longer timeframe, further 
possibilities for SE concept conveyance result. 
Game Reuse Principle (P:GR): Leverage known games 
and game concepts (repurposing) when possible, such as 
those in [12]. Players may thus already know the basics of 
how the original game works - reducing the time to become 
proficient, and they may find the new twist involving SE 
concepts interesting. Also, more time and cognitive capacity 
may be available for the mapping of SE concepts to the game 
elements when compared with completely unfamiliar games.  
Simple Game Principle (P:SG): Utilize relatively simple 
games when not utilizing already known games (cp. P:GR). 
This reduces the overall effort required to acquire game 
proficiency and to acquire the SE concepts. 
SE Concept Reinforcement via Game Action Principle 
(P:GA): during the games, immediate feedback messages 
that reinforce game associations to SE concepts are given, 
e.g., "Correct, the quality was OK" or "Oops, the component 
was released with quality defects" for a software quality 
assurance (SQA) game. This makes it more transparent how 
choices and actions are reflected in SE concepts. 
B. Edutainment Elements and SE Concept Mappings 
We believe that certain aspects of SE cannot be conveyed 
well solely with games and should thus be supplemented.  
Text components: a brief amount of onscreen text was 
used to introduce the topic area, relevant SE concepts, and 
the game objective and major game elements. Such a short 
text that can be clicked away does not overly interfere with 
the experience, and can be read or skimmed rather quickly. 
Using these, later bonus-level text questions can reference 
some prior text or video as a way to verify comprehension.  
Video components: a short 5-minute informational video 
described how prevalent code is, society's dependence on 
software, and how important software development and 
software engineers are. The ability to include relevant 
videos, and the ability for users to explore and discover such 
videos, adds to the "adventure". 
Game components: Various concepts from SWEBOK 
were chosen, with the selection subjectively constrained by 
our project resources, technical and game engine constraints, 
and how well a concept might map to a game concept.  The 
selection, mapping, and prioritization of what to realize was 
subjectively reflected and decided on as a team, which is 
summarized in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
SE CONCEPT TO GAME MAPPING 
SE Concept 
Analogous 
Common Game  
SWE4SE  
Game Variant 
1) Processes 
Pac-Man 
ProcMan 
2) Quality assurance 
Pinball 
Q-Check 
3) Requirements 
Tower Defense 
ReqAbdeck 
4) Testing 
Angry birds 
Angry Nerds 
5) Construction 
Angry birds 
Reverse Angry Nerds 
6) Defect remediation 
Space invaders 
Bug Invaders 
7) Project management 
Maze 
Path Management 
 
The mapping should be interpreted as exploratory and 
not prescriptive; our intention here is rather to demonstrate 
the possibilities available in such an edutainment approach.    
433
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

IV. 
REALIZATION 
Scirra Construct 2 was used to develop the games. 
Layouts and Event sheets were used, and each game object 
type is given properties with certain states and behavior. 
Sounds and music were integrated. The web browser 
requires HTML5 and Javascript support. Text components 
were initially German, but could be readily internationalized. 
For brevity, details on how points are earned, bonus levels, 
speed changes, or lives lost in each game are omitted. 
A. Conveying SE Concepts in the Various Games  
For each SE concept below, how the analogous common 
game was mapped to corresponding primary game goals is 
described and depicted. 
1) SE Processes: to convey an engineering process, we 
chose to introduce sequential activities common to many 
engineering processes. Based on the waterfall process, these 
were Analysis, Design, Implementation, Testing, and 
Operations (ADITO, or equivalently AEITB in German). 
We also provided a test-driven development (TDD) variant 
where the Testing occurs before Implementation (ADTIO).  
ProcMan: this game is analogous to the well-known 
Pac-Man game (see Figure 1), with a twist that, whereas in 
PacMan one got points by traveling everywhere in the maze 
in any order, the goal here for the player is to follow a given 
SE process sequence by making ProcMan consume the 
distributed letters in the given order while avoiding ghosts.  
 
Figure 1. ProcMan game conveys SE processes (screenshot). 
2) Software quality assurance: SQA differs on the type 
of software component being inspected (e.g., GUI, database, 
business logic). Quality awareness and attention to detail 
matter, and the appropriate QA tools and testing procedures 
must be chosen. 
Q-Check: this game is loosely analogous to pinball (see 
Figure 2). Software components (SoCos) portrayed as 
colored shapes spin and drop into a funnel, while a cannon 
(blue on the left) automatically shoots them individually after 
a certain time transpires (indicated via a decreasing green bar 
on the cannon). The player's goal is to select the process 
(tunnel on the right) that matches the SoCo type currently in 
the cannon based on both color and shape, or reject it for 
rework (yellow) if it is defective, improving the future error 
rate.  
 
Figure 2. Q-Check game conveys SE quality assurance (screenshot). 
3) Software requirements: this concerns itself with the 
SE concept of requirements coverage, for instance not 
overlooking a requirement, determining which requirements 
to fulfill how and when (different requirement types need 
different specialized competencies), which requirements to 
jettison (e.g., due to insufficient business value). 
ReqAbdeck: (Abdeckung in German means "coverage") 
this game is analogous to the popular game Tower Defense 
(see Figure 3), whereby here waves of "reqs" (requirements 
as colored triangles) flow from left to right, and towers in 
various colors that cover (fire) only at their requirement 
color must be dragged to the appropriate vicinity before the 
"reqs" reach the gate. The towers disappear after a short time 
indicated on their border. Thus, one is not covering critical 
requirements in time with the matching implementation, 
ignoring or forgetting a requirement, or not dropping via a 
gate those requirements without business value (denoted by 
black circles). One example action message here is "Great, 
requirement was covered by a suitable realization. 
 
Figure 3. ReqAbdeck conveys SE requirement coverage (screenshot). 
434
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

4) Software testing: the focus here is determining where 
to test to find deficiencies in some software construct.   
Angry Nerds: this game is loosely analogous to the 
popular game Angry Birds (see Figure 4). For various 
reasons we chose to depict hardware-like testing here of 
children's blocks, since it was not obvious to us how to 
convey code-based testing in an obvious manner without 
necessitating extra explanations. The player's goal in this 
case is to test a given construct of slabs surrounding PCs by 
determining where and how hard to throw a mouse at it to 
knock it completely over. They realize that multiple tests are 
necessary to discover its weaknesses. 
 
Figure 4. AngryNerds conveys SE testing (screenshot). 
5) Software construction: the point here is to engineer 
or build the software such that it exhibits resiliency.   
Reverse Angry Nerds: this is a bonus level of the 
previous game, and reverses the role as shown in see Figure 
5, having the player now try to build a resilient construct by 
dragging and placing slabs in such a way that it withstands 
the automated testing (cannonball shot at it).    
 
Figure 5. Reverse AngryNerds game conveys SE construction (screenshot).   
6) Software defect remediation: the learning focus is 
that different defect types require different remediation 
techniques and countermeasures applied accurately. 
Bug Invaders: in this game, analogous to space invaders,  
a matching remediation technique (ammunition color in the 
lower shooter) and firing accuracy are needed to destroy 
exactly that specific bug type that drops down before it 
creates project damage (see Figure 6). 
7)  Software project management: here we convey that 
multiple choices towards optimizing project costs exist. 
With appropriate planning, the project goal can be reached 
with the allotted resources, while unexpected problems can 
be overcome but cost unplanned resources. 
Path Management: in this game a player must manage a 
starting budget in points efficiently (see Figure 7). From the 
project start (green triangle) a path selection is made to take 
it to the end (red circle). Red blocks depict possible steps, 
blue steps the currently available choices, and green the 
current position. Each step costs 100 points, while randomly 
generated problems (black circles) add to the planned costs.     
 
Figure 6. Bug Invaders convey SE defect remediation (screenshot).  
 
Figure 7. Path Management conveys SE project management (screenshot). 
B. Realization of SE Exploration Concept  
To tie it all together, the realization includes a SE 
universe to navigate to and discover various SE planets. 
Figure 8 shows the spaceship navigating in two dimensions. 
A shield level, reduced when colliding with asteroids, is 
shown as a colored line next to the ship. The game ends 
when the shields are lost or on collision with the sun. The 
bottom right of the screen shows a navigation map with the 
location of all planets (red first, green when visited, and 
violet for the home planet, and the spaceship as an arrow.  
When arriving at a planet (Figure 9), a short text about 
SE concepts that relates to the game is shown, which when 
understood, can later be used to answer bonus questions at a 
gate. The portal to the game is shown on the left. The brown 
gate and fence shows a darkened advanced level area only 
accessible by successfully passing a gate requiring that SE 
challenge questions be answered correctly. This then enables 
passage and undarkens the upper bonus region top.  
435
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 8. Spaceship navigating the SE universe (screenshot). 
 
Figure 9. Example of a uniquely named SE game planet (screenshot). 
On the home planet, a TV tower shows the video. 
The realization is economical in that it can be widely 
distributed (P:Web) without client installation costs or large 
cloud server investments (it runs locally in the browser). 
V. 
EVALUATION 
The convenience sampling technique [13], common in 
educational settings, was selected to evaluate our SE 
edutainment approach due to various constraints otherwise 
inhibiting direct access to a larger random population sample 
of the target population stratum. These constraints include 
logistical and marketing effort and budget, privacy issues, 
and acquiring parental consent for school age children.  
Setting: Two teachers gave us access to 20 students in 
informatics interest groups for 90 minutes at two different 
public university preparatory (secondary) schools in the local 
region. Setting A using an alpha version of the software 
tested with a group of 8 males, and a later setting B using a 
beta version in a different city with 6 females and 6 males 
students. Figure 10 shows the age and gender distribution, 
and Figure 11 indicates their current game usage frequency. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
15
16
17
18
Number of students
Age
females
males
 
Figure 10. Student age and gender distribution. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Very
frequently
Frequently
Sometimes
Hardly
Never
Number of students
Game usage
females
males
 
Figure 11. Prior game usage frequency distribution. 
Questionnaire: While we considered utilizing the GEQ 
[14], it appeared more appropriate for more immersive 
games. Hence, due to the player ages, the limited time they 
had for playing multiple different short games (7 games in 
one hour), and the limited time, attention, and incentives for 
filling out pre- and post-questionnaires (10 minutes 
respectively), only a few questions about their state before 
and after with regard to negative or positive affect were 
included. They were asked but not compelled to answer all 
questions, so some fields were left blank by some students, 
which could be interpreted to mean they did not understand 
the question, did not know how to answer, or did not care to 
answer the question. Blank answers were thus omitted.   
Session: The empirical evaluation consisted of 90-minute 
sessions held in two different settings A and B. The first 5 
minutes consisted of a short introduction as to the purpose of 
our visit and what to expect, involving no teaching. Students 
were then given 10 minutes to fill out anonymous printed 
questionnaires in German that provided us with initial basic 
data. When all were done, they began their one-hour 
edutainment experience. In the 10 minutes directly 
thereafter, monitors were turned off and they completed the 
second part of their questionnaire, which focused on their 
experience and understanding, after which we held a 5-
minute group feedback session.  
Results: We observed that all students were engaged with 
the software for the entire hour and appeared to enjoy the 
experience (P:En), and occasionally interacted excitedly 
with fellow students. Below is our analysis of the 
questionnaire results. Unless otherwise indicated, averages 
were based on a scale of 1 to 5 (1 being very good, 5 bad): 
• 
Overall experience: 2.1 (good); relates to P:En 
• 
Game enjoyment: 2.0 (good); relates to P:En 
• 
Helpful conveying several SE concepts via different 
games: yes (17), no (1); relates to P:SG and P:GR 
436
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

• 
Success rate in correctly recalling the SE concepts 
associated with each named game (open answers): 
62%; relates to P:GA and Text components. Note 
that the game names in the questions could serve as 
a hint, but these did not include the complete and 
explicit SE concept nor was the game accessible.  
Video: 
• 
Watched the video attentively: yes (20) 
• 
Video and its quality (good/bad): good (20) 
• 
Video length 5 minutes: keep (19), lengthen (1) 
Table II shows the change in perception, attractiveness, 
and understanding of SE after the experience. 
TABLE II.  
CHANGE IN SE PERCEPTIONS 
Change in responses 
Before 
After 
Improvement 
Importance of SE for societya 
1.7 
1.2 
33% 
Attractiveness of SE as a personal 
career pathb 
3.3 
2.7 
16% 
Ability to define what SE isc  
2.9 
2.3 
20% 
a. Scale of 1 to 3 (1=very important, 3=not important); 2 wrote "don't know" in the prequestionnaire. 
b. Scale of 1 to 5 (1=very attractive, 5=not attractive) 
c. Answer graded (1 excellent, 2 very good, 3 satisfactory, 4 sufficient) for B group only. 
As to interpreting the results, a convenience sample can 
obviously contain a number of biases, including under- or 
overrepresentation. Our supervision of the evaluation process 
and physically observing that the software was actually used 
for an hour by each of the students separately, and that each 
questionnaire was individually filled out, removed certain 
other kinds of threats to validity. 
The evaluation showed the effectiveness of the approach: 
because students in this age group had previous familiarity 
with gaming, they had no difficulty rapidly discovering and 
playing the games intuitively without training or help, they 
understood the intended mapping of SE concepts onto game 
elements, 
and 
the 
perception, 
attractiveness, 
and 
understanding of SE improved significantly without 
discernable gender differences. It was efficient in achieving 
these effects in the relatively short span of an hour of usage.  
In summary, an edutainment approach with short videos, 
short text components, and a variety of simple games 
appears promising for effectively and efficiently improving 
the awareness about and image SE, at least for our target 
population stratum.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We described SWE4SE, an edutainment approach for 
gamifying and conveying software engineering concepts to 
secondary school students. Various principles used of the 
edutainment approach were elucidated, and it was shown 
how various SE concepts could be mapped and realized with 
various digital game concepts and elements. The evaluation 
showed that an edutainment approach, combining short 
videos and text elements, and a variety of simple digital 
games, can be promising for improving SE awareness in our 
target population stratum. Since this target age group is 
already familiar with gaming and utilizes gaming relatively 
frequently, the approach appears reasonable for reaching a 
larger populace.  
A challenge remains in making secondary students aware 
of the availability the edutainment and motivating them to 
utilize it on a direct or individual basis. While social 
networks appear feasible for raising awareness, in the face of 
the abundance of entertainment and game options available, 
we believe that the most promising approach will likely be 
informational publicity campaigns towards informatics 
teachers in secondary schools where groups (i.e., interest 
groups or classrooms) utilize the software together in a 
structured setting. 
Future work will include public access on the university 
website, enabling integrated data collection and web 
analytics to provide further insights into how users became 
aware of the edutainment, which games were utilized for 
how long, the number of return visitors, and the inclusion of 
online surveys. Additionally, the SE pool of questions will 
be 
expanded 
and 
question 
and 
answer 
placement 
randomized. A point and badge ranking of top players may 
provide a separate incentive and motivation for certain player 
types. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author thanks Carsten Lecon, Christian Wilhelm, 
Flamur Kastrati, and Lisa Philipp for their assistance with the 
concepts, realization, and graphics. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Vegso, "Interest in CS as a Major Drops Among Incoming 
Freshmen," Computing Research News, vol. 17, no.3, 2005. 
[2] B. Schmidt, http://benschmidt.org/Degrees/ 2015.07.04 
[3] U. Hanselmann, "Die große Kraft," Engl: "The major force", 
Die Zeit, No. 22, 2009. http://www.zeit.de/2009/22/C-
Faecherportraet-Informatik/komplettansicht 2015.07.04,  
[4] Bitkom, "In Deutschland fehlen 41.000 IT-Experten," 2014. 
https://www.bitkom.org/Presse/Presseinformation/Pressemitte
ilung_1704.html 2015.07.10 
[5] D. Parnas, "Software engineering programs are not computer 
science programs," Software, IEEE, 16(6), pp. 19-30, 1999. 
[6] P. Bourque and R. Fairley, "Guide to the Software 
Engineering Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK (R)): Version 
3.0," IEEE Computer Society Press, 2014.. 
[7] C. Crawford, "The art of computer game design," McGraw-
Hill/Osborne Media, 1984. 
[8] C. Abt, "Serious Games," The Viking Press, 1970. 
[9] T. Connolly, M. Stansfield, and T. Hainey, "An application of 
games-based learning within software engineering," British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 38(3), pp. 416-428, 2007. 
[10] C. Caulfield, J. Xia, D. Veal, and S. Maj, "A systematic 
survey of games used for software engineering education," 
Modern Applied Science, 5(6), 28-43, 2011. 
[11] L. Carter, "Why students with an apparent aptitude for 
computer science don't choose to major in computer science," 
SIGCSE Bulletin, ACM, vol. 38, no. 1, Mar. 2006, pp. 27-31. 
[12] S. Kent. "The Ultimate History of Video Games," Three 
Rivers Press, 2001. 
[13] L. Given (Ed.),  "The Sage encyclopedia of qualitative 
research methods," Sage Publications, 2008.   
[14] W. IJsselsteijn, K. Poels, and Y. De Kort, "The Game 
Experience Questionnaire: Development of a self-report 
measure to assess player experiences of digital games," TU 
Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, 2008. 
437
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

