Process Improvement and Knowledge Sharing in Small Software Companies:  
A Case Study
Minna Kivihalme, Anne Valsta, Raine Kauppinen 
HAAGA-HELIA 
Ratapihantie 13 
FIN-00520 Helsinki, FINLAND 
{minna.kivihalme, anne.valsta, raine.kauppinen}@haaga-helia.fi 
 
 
Abstract — Process improvement, knowledge sharing and 
management are challenging issues for small software 
companies. In this article, the experiences of three small 
software 
business 
organizations, 
one 
research 
and 
development (R&D) -project team in hotel business using 
Taimi-tool [16][26] to support process improvement and 
knowledge sharing were studied and analyzed with grounded 
theory. The findings of the case study show that systematic 
process improvement is not very familiar to small software 
companies. Modeling and writing down processes are 
considered old-fashioned, too strict and rules given from 
above. Process improvement does not fit in to the self-image of 
an innovative, agile and flexible software company. However, 
for the R&D-project team, Taimi-tool gave good insights for 
modeling processes and finding the best ways to improve 
them. This implies that the problems are not with the tool, but 
rather with the small software business organizational culture 
towards process improvement and knowledge sharing. There 
is a clear need for collaboration with research and 
development in the field of workplace learning and 
competence development in small business working life and 
vocationally oriented educational institutions. 
Keywords-process; project; knowledge sharing; education 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Small organizations as well as the larger ones need 
software process modeling, development and improvement. 
However, traditional models and frameworks, such as 
CMMI or SPICE are often much too complicated and 
rigorous to be used in small software business. During the 
earlier study done at HAAGA-HELIA University of 
Applied Sciences, it was found that in process modeling and 
process improvement for small businesses the key purpose 
is to encourage and develop the organizational and 
individual knowledge [16]. In addition, the need for a tool 
supporting an agile process development in the small 
companies was identified. Based on these findings, a 
prototype of Taimi-tool was introduced. 
Taimi-tool is designed to support communication and 
sharing of best practices which can be found in any 
company during an excellent project or lessons learned from 
a troublesome project. These experiences remain literally 
unique unless they are shared between colleagues. An 
excellent project is worth modeling and should be 
distributed as best practices or as a model, and as widely as 
possible. In the next section the research approach and 
methods are described. In the third section Taimi-tool is 
introduced. The fourth section presents the current state of 
art of relevant related work. In the fifth section case study 
companies are introduced briefly and finally findings, 
conclusions and future work end the paper.  
II. 
RESEARCH APPROACH AND METHODS 
In this research the aim was to understand and specify 
the relations between software process improvement and 
knowledge sharing in small software companies.  The 
approach is qualitative and the methods used to analyze data 
are based on grounded theory [9]. The research questions 
are: 
1) 
How important systematic process improvement is 
for small software businesses?  How do small 
software businesses share knowledge internally 
and externally?   
2) 
What kind of a connection there is between process 
improvement and knowledge sharing in small 
software organization? 
3) 
What kind of issues the small software businesses 
have faced in integrating knowledge sharing and 
management to normal daily-routines? Could a 
tool like Taimi be helpful in these situations?  
 
The hypothesis based on the previous study [16] is that 
the small organizations will benefit using a process 
modeling tool like Taimi. It will make their work more 
systematic and at the same time it allows them to be flexible 
and even more agile in their daily work. Process 
improvement is not only for those who fancy processes. 
Taimi will encourage everyone in the organization to 
participate process improvement achievements.   
The data collection was done using case-study approach 
[28] during eight months in 2010. To start the research 
group organized workshops in every case study company. 
These workshops were documented as group interviews. In 
every workshop there were at least two company 
representatives and two members of the research team. 
Different roles like management and leadership roles, 
project management and project team member roles were 
involved.  During the workshops, Taimi-tool was introduced 
and a brochure and guidelines of use were given to the case 
study companies. After the workshops, each company could 
447
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

either install Taimi to their own server by downloading the 
software from Internet or they could use the service hosted 
by the research team during the experiment.  Research team 
named a specific contact person for every company to help 
with the details.  After few months, the date was fixed for 
the final interviews. Everyone involved in the workshops 
were interviewed except one process developer who was 
retired. These interviews were semi-structured, recorded and 
transcript personal interviews. 
During the months between the workshops and final 
interviews, the research team noticed that it seemed as if the 
companies were not experimenting much with Taimi. This 
was later confirmed in the interviews. Because of this, an 
R&D-project team in hotel business was added as a case 
study company. The R&D-project team had started a project 
a bit earlier. After they were contacted and introduced to 
Taimi and this case study they wanted to test Taimi in their 
project. The research group thought this was a good way to 
evaluate the suitability of Taimi for a different type of 
processes and organizations. A workshop was arranged with 
the project team giving them the necessary material and 
information. 
III. 
TAIMI – A MODELLING APPLICATION 
Taimi is an open source web application used via a web 
browser such as Firefox or Internet Explorer. Taimi [26] is 
developed using Ruby on Rails [22] and it runs on a 
standard web application server such as Apache Tomcat 
[27]. In Taimi, each process model and project is visualized 
as a matrix containing phases and tasks to be stored in the 
database (MySQL). The phases of a process model or a 
project can be named and colored as the user wants (see 
Figure 1). The task boxes get a color code based on the 
phase they belong into, so it is easy to read the matrix. 
Tasks can be copied to another process model or project, 
even several times in the same one if necessary. It is also 
possible to add attachments and comments to the tasks. 
In Taimi, a task in a process model can be seen as a best 
practice with supporting templates or other guidance. The 
tasks can be completed with as specific or general 
descriptions as needed for the common benefit of the 
organization. The users of a process model can comment on 
their experiences related to the model as well as suggest 
improvements to the model immediately when an issue 
arises during a project. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Adding a new phase into a process model  
 
In Taimi, a process model can be copied into a project 
and vice versa. After that, the new project is a look-alike 
copy of the original process model. Tasks that are not part 
of the new project can be erased. It is also possible to add 
and edit new tasks (see Figure 2) to the project or copy tasks 
from other projects or process models. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. An added task in a process  
 
It is possible to estimate the amount of the work needed 
to complete a task and define start and end dates for each 
task. When a task in a project is completed, it can be marked 
as done. Thus, the progress of the project can be monitored 
visually (see Figure 3). 
The information gained in a project is immediately 
visible throughout the organization and to the relevant 
interest groups since a project manager is able to share the 
project with the necessary interest groups. The members of 
these groups can also comment on the tasks in the project 
and add attachment files to them as seen in Figure 2. In this 
way, Taimi can be used as a collaborative platform 
supporting the evolution of process models and projects in 
an agile way based on the shared lessons learned in different 
projects. 
 
 
448
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

 
 
Figure 3. A project with two completed tasks  
 
IV. 
RELATED WORK 
Software process improvement (SPI) is closely related to 
the 
knowledge 
management 
(KM) 
strategy 
of 
an 
organization [18]. Especially in IDEAL [8], CMM [17] and 
SPICE [23] the focus is in achieving a certain level of 
maturity.  The knowledge management strategy should vary 
according 
to 
the 
maturity 
level 
[18]. 
Knowledge 
management strategy can be viewed from two different 
levels: 1) based on coding [11][25] and 2) tactical level [20] 
According to Dixon [7] there are five different types of 
knowledge transfer: serial transfer, near transfer, far 
transfer, strategical transfer and expert transfer. In order to 
succeed in knowledge transfer and knowledge management, 
an organization needs to define what activities and 
operations it will have and choose its knowledge 
management strategy accordingly [18].  
Sulayman and Mendes [24] have studied the small and 
medium 
sized 
organizations 
specialized 
in 
web 
technologies. They found that issues in SPI, which were 
important to the success in business operations, were very 
closely related to the knowledge management strategy of the 
company as well. According to the survey made for 
software developers about the web 2.0 tools, those tools 
have already changed the way software developers 
communicate with each other, for example, about testing, 
marketing and developing [1]. Cockburn has indentified 
term ‘osmotic communication’ in his book about agile 
software development and emphasized its meaning to 
software engineering especially in the agile development 
[3]. It is very common to see SPI as a mean to achieve better 
quality with less cost. SPI can also be seen as a way of 
rationalizing the activities in an organization. It is very 
important that an organization is able to handle uncertainty 
and instability because “Chaos is often a sign that the 
implementation process is on its way and that you are about 
to receive valuable information helping you succeed” [2].  
It is important to recognize the need for improvement 
when the company management anticipates the future. 
When the company is in its peak condition, the work is 
often very ambitious, even aggressive and the need for 
change can easily be left unnoticed [10]. Company after 
company has seen its management fixing pieces instead of 
redesigning the processes applied to get the work done 
[5][10].  
In a study [4] made in Ireland, the target was to figure 
out why small companies are reluctant to use known best 
practices in their activities. It was found that process 
improvement is considered to be so expensive investment 
that small companies do not see or do not want to see it as a 
profitable effort [4]. The small software companies have 
easily adapted principles of lean thinking and the question 
often raised by them is whether the customer is willing to 
pay for this kind of work or not.  This is a potential conflict, 
because there is evidence of customers wanting to see proof 
of quality and stable working habits within the small and 
especially young companies [16].   
The study in Ireland also showed that start-up companies 
saw the formal SPI as an obstacle to creativity, innovation 
and flexibility.  From their viewpoint, SPI was not about 
improving the process, but instead a set of strict instructions 
forcing them to follow the given process and blocking 
creativity and flexibility. Also, it was found out that the 
educational background, experience and know-how of the 
technical management had a lot of influence on the 
willingness to commit to the best practices.  
A similar study [19] was made in Vietnam focusing on 
the obstacles of applying process models and SPI.  In that 
study it was found that depending on the size of the 
company the issues were emphasized differently. For the 
small organizations, the most important issue was the lack 
of resources. In the bigger organizations, in addition to the 
previous issue, the lack of communication, the commitment 
of the management and timetable pressure were identified. 
These findings were compared to the research made in the 
UK where the timetable pressure was identified as the key 
issue. The conclusion was that while in Vietnam, the lack of 
resources meant that the process improvement was not 
really happening, in the UK it was, but there still were 
problems related to the resources in the form of timetable 
pressure. In addition, the staff in Vietnam was quite young 
compared to the staff in the UK. The conclusion was that 
young inexperienced managers did not see process 
improvement so important that they would have allocated 
resources for such initiatives. [19]  
In a Finnish study [15] about the agile future 
organization, it was found that organization needs versatile 
talented people and that the agility needs to be part of the 
business operation strategy as well. The software 
development alone cannot be agile if the business around it 
is not. In addition, an agile process framework is needed for 
teams to be able to tailor their process for the particular 
situation [15]. 
In a study [21] of project managers’ knowledge transfer 
made in the USA, it was found that inexperienced project 
managers relied more on social networks in order to get the 
knowledge they were looking for than their more 
experienced colleges who used more formal knowledge 
sources. The conclusion of this study [21] was that 
inexperienced project managers were sensitive or even timid 
to search and ask information from knowledge management 
449
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

systems used in their company. According to the study 
social norms and organizational culture either encourages IT 
project manager to share their knowledge or inhibit it.  
Wiki technology has been found to be very powerful 
technique to transfer knowledge to large groups of people in 
ad-hoc and other dynamic situations [12]. But there is a lot 
more than just ad-hoc and other dynamic situations in 
knowledge transfer and knowledge management. Davidson 
and Rowe [6] defined different levels of knowledge 
management. At the first level, the team learns from the 
previous project and answers to questionnaire to find out the 
lessons learned. This information is delivered to the second 
level, where it will be analyzed and passed on to the next 
level, which is a strategic level. It is obvious that this formal 
knowledge management will benefit from a suitable 
supporting tool and, in most cases, this process needs a 
knowledge manager to handle the tool and process [6].  
V. 
CASE STUDY COMPANIES 
The companies participating in the case study are small 
or medium sized Finnish software engineering companies 
(companies A-C, see Table 1) and a hotel entrepreneur 
(company D).  
 
Table 1. Some business features in 2009-2010 
 
A.  Company A 
Company A is a Finnish software engineering company 
creating applications ranging from intranets to business 
intelligence and social services. Their emphasis is on the 
lean philosophy – removing waste and concentrating only 
on producing something useful and having a strong focus on 
usability at the same time. This company has been growing 
quite fast. The atmosphere of the company is very informal 
and free-minded. The slogan for this company could be 
“Things can always be done better”. The company recruits 
people having the attitude of wanting to give his or her best 
as an individual and as a team member.  
 
B.  Company B 
Company B is a Finnish software engineering company 
specializing in tailor-made customer-specific software 
projects, consulting, maintenance and support for large 
information systems. Processes are quite a new concept to 
the company B. The management has mainly focused on 
creating innovative environment for people to work in. 
Company B views process models from the standard point 
of view: as a way to implement company strategy. 
However, company B sees processes and modeling very 
situational.  
 
 
C.  Company C 
Company C is a Finnish software consulting company 
specialized in software quality. The aim of the company C is 
to assist their customers to ensure the quality of their IT 
systems. Because of their service strategy, the process meta 
models (CMMI, SPICE) are well known and those models 
are used to improve customers’ processes. 
 
D.  Company D 
Company D was not a partner at the beginning of the 
research study and it differs from the previous ones. 
Company D was actually one team from HAAGA-HELIA’s 
R&D-project team for developing processes for hospitality 
and hotel business.  
VI. 
FINDINGS 
Systematic process improvement was not very familiar 
to the companies in this case study. This is the case even in 
the company having more than 100 employees. Instead, 
knowledge management and knowledge transfer are very 
much appreciated. However, they are on the level of near 
transfer [7] and not on strategic level.  Modeling and writing 
down processes are considered old-fashioned, too strict and 
as rules given from above. Process improvement does not fit 
into the image of an innovative, agile and flexible company. 
According to Mark Kennaley the word process is not valued 
in the agile approach [14]. Instead of process Kennaley 
recommends ‘standard work’ in the meaning of how daily 
work is performed and described.  
Process and creativity are seen as opposites and 
companies want to emphasis creativity, passion for work 
and freedom to be creative. Similar results were found in the 
research conducted in Ireland [4]. The daily work is seen too 
artistic to be modeled as a process. Still, knowledge transfer 
and knowledge management are highly appreciated and 
there are lots of different unsystematic methods for 
transferring knowledge within the company and via 
networks. These methods are not treated as processes even 
though they might be seen that way. Nevertheless the 
atmosphere of knowledge sharing is very free and open. The 
organizational culture in these case study companies 
encourages project managers to share their knowledge. The 
same results were also found in the study made in the USA 
[21].  
In every interview we made, one common denominator 
was found; at a certain point people do not have the time to 
do anything in addition to the deliverable result. The deeper 
you dig into the world of project managers the more you 
sense that it is hard to invent the wheel all over again. 
Project managers eventually see the pattern, but they do not 
have time or resources to make the pattern visible even if 
they would like to. The results of the research in Vietnam 
support this as well [19]. Project managers are bound very 
tightly to the ongoing project. They would like to have more 
guidance, methods and help instead of being forced to 
invent the wheel again. However, the management and 
leaders in the small companies think that there are many 
ways and opportunities to transfer knowledge, for example, 
‘brown bag sessions’, ‘company Fridays’ and study or 
learning groups. All these methods are actually methods for 
near transfer and only they work if face-to-face methods are 
available. But, these methods are unavailable if you cannot 
be present, for example, if you are working in the customer 
Company 
Personnel 
Turnover, MEUR 
Established 
A 
110 
7.7  
2000 
B 
50 
4.5 
2005 
C 
60 
5 
2002 
450
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

premises and the customer will not allow collaboration 
within the company’s social network. This was the case for 
one of the project managers working at customer premises. 
Companies use and have been using all sorts of tools to 
communicate such as discussion forums, wikis, social 
networks and network drives, but they also feel that the 
information gets buried into these systems. Major 
disadvantage for these tools is the fact that you need the 
time to gain all the visible or hidden information and time is 
a scarce resource in the small or medium enterprise (SME).  
Four groups were identified using the open coding of 
grounded theory: knowledge management and transfer, 
creativity, process and process improvement and lack of 
time. In axial coding, the relationships among these 
concepts are identified. These relations are illustrated in 
Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4. Creativity, process, knowledge and time in a SME 
 
The SME’s see knowledge management and transfer 
worth chasing for while processes and especially process 
improvement is something SME’s are not so keen on doing.  
One of the managers said, “We should forget analyzing and 
think about what to do next, because analyzing doesn’t 
really create anything. Process is something given from 
above “.   
Processes were even seen as an obstacle to creativity. 
When the creativity is high, processes are low. Negative 
correlation between process and creativity is illustrated by 
letter b) in the Figure 4.  Another manager said, “The work 
we do for our customers is very creative: people get familiar 
with things and tell about them, so it is very informal. We 
have not defined our process, and we are talking about our 
work as artistic work.”  
Knowledge transfer and management are directly 
comparable to creativity in SME’s self-image. The positive 
correlation between knowledge and creativity illustrated by 
letter c) is seen in the Figure 4.  One of the project managers 
said, “We are encouraged to teach each other. We should 
give small sessions out of our own interest and will. These 
demo days have been ok. It has been possible to go deeper 
into some interesting subject area”.  
According to Sulayman and Mendes [24] and 
Mathiassen 
and 
Pourkomeylian 
[18] 
knowledge 
management and transfer are closely related to processes 
and their improvement. For the companies in this study this 
was not the case. In these companies the knowledge transfer 
happens ad-hoc without visible processes involved. This 
relationship is illustrated by letter a) in the Figure 4. One of 
the managers said, “We try to give people as much freedom 
as possible and encourage them to use their creativity and 
passion. That’s how we create self-organized workplace and 
knowledge sharing”. By this the manager revealed in fact 
that there was not a process involved in knowledge sharing. 
These findings show that SME’s are not ready for a tool 
like Taimi. There were some positive signs especially from 
the project managers’ point of view: they would have 
appreciated this kind of a tool if they would have had time 
to take a bit deeper look at it. This also means that they 
would have liked to concentrate on the process, process 
improvement and knowledge sharing as well. One of the 
project managers said, “I don’t need any new features for 
Taimi. The matrix is just great. The main features of Taimi 
are really good. And we could have used Taimi for real as a 
tool between project managers and company management, 
but the lack of time was my problem”.  According to 
Davidson and Rowe [6] companies would benefit from a 
suitable tool to support the knowledge management and 
transfer as well as knowledge manager to handle the tool 
and process.  
The project managers in the case study companies were 
too busy in their ongoing project to be able to take a wider 
perspective to their work. They needed the support from 
their superiors, which they did not get this time. One of the 
project managers said, “I would have liked to test the tool, 
but in the company there were others who didn’t want to test 
it or they wanted to have free hands and not to use any tool 
at all. The decision was made by management to not to trial 
the tool”.  
In the Figure 4 the letter d) illustrating the lack of time 
has connections to all the other themes. The lack of time 
rounds up to the fact of project managers wanting to have 
the support from their superior even in the atmosphere of 
informal and innovative company.  One of the project 
manager said, “There could be concrete recommendation 
what tool to use in projects. Now everybody is using the 
tools they want and you have to compare the plusses and 
minuses of the product by yourself. If there were some 
guidance, it would be nice.  Face-to-face meetings are of 
course nice. A tool, project database or something would be 
a good bonus for later use or reference.” By this the project 
manager meant that, for some of the staff, it would be 
helpful and timesaving to have a process and a supporting 
tool for the process and knowledge sharing.  
Findings from the company D differ from the rest of the 
case study companies. Taimi got good feedback from the 
company D. The idea of user interface as a process matrix, 
the idea of being able to link different information to tasks 
and being able to change the process easily and quickly if 
necessary were appreciated by the company D. The tool 
gave good insight to process modeling and finding the best 
ways of improving the process in the hotel involved in the 
R&D-project team. Company D wanted to start using Taimi, 
but they were somewhat worried about the continuity of 
Taimi’s future. These findings about the tool and the idea 
behind it are promising.   
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The conclusion of this study is that process improvement 
is on very early stage in the small and medium sized 
software engineering companies. Modeling processes is on 
learning phase and it is not yet something that is seen 
important and necessary. There is always something more 
important to be done. Also, the lack of time and resources 
does not promise more process improvement to happen in 
451
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

the near future. Sharing knowledge happens ad-hoc or in a 
project between its members.  
A new tool or method needs to be learnt first and it takes 
time. And spare time is something the small companies do 
not have. Internal improvement gets left behind. Outside 
stimulator or supporter, research time and money is needed 
to get the internal improvement on the road. The first step is 
always the hardest. Next steps are easier to take. A 
comprehensive tool would help sharing and transferring 
knowledge wider in a company. 
How could we support SME? According to Illeris [13] 
radical changes and development have been taking place in 
recent years concerning work-based and work-related 
learning and competence development. Globalization, the 
knowledge society and human competence are becoming an 
increasingly decisive resource of competition. Illeris notes 
vary of general qualifications with terms such as 
organizational 
learning, 
experimental 
learning 
and 
spirituality at work.  According to Illeris even professionals 
find it difficult to negotiate these areas, not to speak of small 
companies with no time and no particular educational 
function. The situation is different in educational 
institutions, where time is available and whose function is 
vocational education. The lesson learned from this study is 
that there is a need for much tighter collaboration with 
research and development in the field of workplace learning 
and competence development in working life with small 
software development companies and vocationally oriented 
educational institutions. 
During the curricula, students should be adapted to 
operate with a shared tools and knowledge ware. The young 
professionals need good understanding and skills on 
processes and methodologies. Further research is needed to 
study 
the 
attitudes 
of 
students 
choosing 
software 
development as their area of expertise and how these 
attitudes reflect to their future career as professional 
software specialists. Another, maybe more important, 
question is what are the mechanisms, including teaching 
methods, especially in vocationally-oriented education to 
promote the internal process improvement both in business 
processes, entrepreneurship and software processes as a part 
of workplace learning and competence development.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Black,  S. and Jacobs, J. 2010. Using Web 2.0 to Improve 
Software Quality, Web2SE’10, May 4, Cape Town, South 
Africa. 
[2] Börjesson, A. and Mathiassen, L. 2004. Successful Process 
Implementation, IEEE Software, July/August, pp. 36-44. 
[3] Cockburn, A. 2007. Agile Software Development, The 
Cooperative Game, Second Edition. 
[4] Coleman, G. and O’Connor, R. 2008. Investigating software 
process in practice: A grounded theory perspective. The 
Journal of Systems and Software Vol. 81,  pp. 772-784. 
[5] Dangle, K.,  Larsen, P., Shaw, M. and Zelkowitz, M. 2005. 
Software Process Improvement in Small Organizations: A 
Case study. IEEE Software, June, pp. 68-75. 
[6] Davidson, P. and Rowe, J. 2009.  Systematising knowledge 
management in projects. International Journal of Managing 
Projects in Business, Vol 2, No 4, pp. 561-576. 
[7] Dixon, N. 2000. Common Knowledge, How Companies 
Thrive by Sharing What They Know? 
[8] McFeeley, B. 1996.  IDEAL: a user’s guide for software 
process improvement. The software Engineering Institute, 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, Handbook 
CMU/SEI-96-HB-001. 
[9] Glaser, B.G. 1992.  Basics of grounded theory analysis: 
Emergence vs. forcing. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press. 
[10] Hammer, M. and Champy, J. 1993. Reengineering the 
Corporation. A Manifesto for Business Revolution. 
[11] Hansen, T., Morten,  N. and Tierney, T. 1999. What’s your 
strategy form managing knowledge? Harvard Business 
Review, pp. 106-116. 
[12] Hester, A.J. 2010.  Increasing Collaborative Knowledge 
Management in Your Organization: Characteristics of Wiki 
Technology and Wiki Users. SIGMIS-CPR’10, May, pp. 
113-143. 
[13] Illeris, K. 2003. Workplace learning and learning theory. 
Journal of Workplace Learning, April, pp. 167-178. 
[14] Kennaley, 
M, 
2010. 
SDLC 
3.0. 
Beyond 
a 
Tacit 
Understanding of Agile, Towards the Next Generation of 
Software Engineering. Fourth Medium Press. 
[15] Kettunen, P. and Laanti, M. 2007. Combining Agile 
Software Projects and large-scale Organizational Agility, 
Software Process Improvement and Practice, July, pp. 183-
193. 
[16] Kivihalme, M. and Valsta A. 2010. Improving Software 
Development Processes in Small Companies: A Case Study. 
In Proceedings of the IASTED International Conference on 
Software Engineering (Innsbruck, Austria, February 16 – 18, 
2010) SE 2010. ACTA Press. 
[17] Laryd, A. and Orci, T. 2000.  Dynamic CMM for Small 
organizations. http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary? 
doi=10.1.1.37.5555 [ref. Apr/2011].  
[18] Mathiassen, L. and  Pourkomeylian, P. 2003. Managing 
knowledge in a software organization. Journal of Knowledge 
Management, May, pp. 63-80. 
[19] Niazi, M., Ali Babar, N. and Katugampola, M. 2008. 
Demotivators of Software Process Improvements: An 
Empirical Investigation. Software Process Improvement and 
Practice, March, pp. 331-347. 
[20] Nokana, I. and Takeutchi, H. 1995. The knowledge-Creating 
Company, Oxford University Press. 
[21] Petter, S. and Randolph, A.B. 2009. Developing Soft Skills 
to Manage User Expectations in IT Projects: Knowledge 
Reuse Among IT Project Managers. Project Management 
Journal, Dec, pp. 45-59.  
[22] Ruby On Rails. http://www.rubyonrail.org [ref. Apr/2011]. 
[23] SPICE, 2007. Software Process Improvement and Capability 
dEter-mination, ISO 15504, http://www.sqi.gu.edu.au/spice 
[ref. Apr/2011]. 
[24]  Sulayman, M. and Mendes, E. 2010. Quantitative 
Assessments 
of 
Key 
Success 
Factors 
in 
Software 
Improvement for Small and Medium Web Companies. 
SAC’10, March 22-26, Sierre, Switcherland. 
[25] Swan, J., Newell, S.,  Scarbrough, H. and Hislop. D. 1999. 
Knowledge management and innovation: network and 
networking. Journal of Knowledge Management, Vol 3 No. 
3, pp. 262-275. 
[26] Taimi, process and project management tool, 2010.    
http://www.taimimap.fi/sivut/material.html [ref. Apr/2011].  
[27] Tomcat. http://tomcat.apache.org [ref. Apr/2011]. 
[28] Yin, R.K. 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 
Third  Edition. 
 
452
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

