Statistical Processing of Delay Time of Public Secondary Traffic 
 and its Application to the Operation Plan 
Rupali Bhattacherjee†, Toshihiko Sasama†‡, Takao Kawamura†‡ and Kazunori Sugahara†‡ 
†Graduate School of Sustainability Science, Tottori University 
‡Cross-informatics Research Center, Tottori University 
4-101 Tottori City, Tottori 680-8552, Japan 
email: †m19j4063h@edu.tottori-u.ac.jp,       ‡{sasama,  kawamura, sugahara}@tottori-u.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— We have developed and maintained a system called 
“Busnet” with the aim of contributing to improve the 
convenience of using public transportation from the standpoint 
of information engineering. The Busnet is a system that enables 
route search as its basic function and has a function as a bus 
location system that shows the position of the running bus. In 
this paper, we report on a system that grasps the bus operation 
status by statistically processing the bus location system's log 
data of the Busnet combining with the weather conditions such 
as snowfall. 
Keywords-Busnet; Location log data; Statistical processing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the declining birthrate and aging 
population in Japan have become a social problem. In 
addition, depopulation of local cities is a major issue in close 
connection with the declining birthrate and aging population. 
Furthermore, the increase in the number of elderly people 
living alone is also a problem. These problems are urgent 
issues for local cities to take measures, and they become a 
major issue related to the survival of the local city itself. 
Therefore, although various measures have been taken in 
local cities, the present situation is that the results have not 
been achieved easily. 
Tottori prefecture, where we live, locates in the Chugoku 
region of the western end of Honshu, Japan. It is a local city 
located about a couple of hours away by railroad from Osaka, 
the second largest city in Japan, and is one of the most 
decentralized prefectures. 
In Tottori prefecture, we are actively working on various 
problems that occur with depopulation. Maintenance of 
public second transportation, such as route buses is one of 
the serious problems for such local cities. As depopulation 
progresses, the number of public transportation users 
decreases, and it makes difficult to maintain the number of 
routes and the busses. When the number of busses decreases, 
convenience for users decreases. This causes a continuous 
decrease in the number of users. Therefore, the prefecture 
provides many subsidies to bus operators and manages to 
maintain them, but it is financially difficult. 
The development of motorization, such as private cars, 
can be cited as a cause of the decrease of the number of 
public transportation users. However, traffic accidents 
caused by elderly people driving cars have not decreased. It 
is difficult to think of a society that relies on the driving of its 
own private car, especially in a single living family. From 
this point of view, we believe that public transportation 
maintenance by local government such as prefectures and 
cities is essential to the functioning of an aging society. 
II. 
BUSNET SYSTEM 
As a member of a university located in Tottori Prefecture, 
we have developed and maintained a system called “Busnet” 
with the aim of contributing to the maintenance of such 
public transportation from the standpoint of information 
engineering. The Busnet is a system that uses route search as 
its basic function and has a function as a bus location system 
that shows the current locations of the running buses. Several 
systems have been developed so far for bus and railway 
route search systems, and many systems are available even 
today. However, the Busnet system has various functions 
based on the characteristics of the route bus and are used by 
many general users. The biggest feature of Busnet is not to 
show the transfer between bus stops, but to give a route using 
public transport between the departure point and the 
destination point including walking route. Bus location 
function is also one of the biggest features of Busnet. To 
realize the bus location function, about 300 smart phones are 
equipped in all buses, and by using their GPS functions the 
location data of current buses are transferred into a server 
computer. The bus position information stored on the server 
will be used for various purposes as log data of location 
system. In this paper, based on these log data, we analyze 
travel situations of the route buses in the past and constructed 
a system to estimate the future travel situations depending on 
weather information. 
 
III. 
LOG DATA ANALYSIS OF BUSNET SYSTEM 
About 300 smartphones are equipped in all local busses 
to realize the bus location function in the Busnet and transmit 
their current positions about every 20 seconds. On the server, 
location information of latitude and longitude of all bus stops, 
route information of each bus, operation timetable, etc., are 
stored. From the location information sent from each bus and 
the data on the server, it is possible to know which bus has 
passed through which bus stop, or the delay status of each 
bus. 
There are 315 bus routes data and 8178 bus stops data 
stored on the Busnet server, and the log data recorded in one 
day is about 130 Mbytes. In addition, it is necessary to 
respond to changes in bus service routes and changes in bus 
stops locations for update of the schedule several times each 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

year. This paper is based on three years of data, about 150 
Gbytes. 
The operation status of the buses is determined by 
obtaining the delay time at the bus stop of each bus. Since 
travel data from the bus is sent about every 20 seconds, these 
are not always sent from the bus stop locations. For this 
reason, data pairs before and after the actual bus stop are 
extracted from the log data, and the passage time at the bus 
stop position is calculated by linear interpolation from the 
transmission time and the latitude / longitude value. By 
comparing this value with the operation timetable on the 
server, the delay status of each bus can be determined. 
Figures 1 and 2 show examples of the delay situation 
obtained by using proposed system. Figure 1 shows the delay 
situation of the all bus stops in the prefecture at 10:00 am on 
November 23, 2016 and Figure 2 shows the situation on 
February 10, 2017. In these figures, the bus delay time at 
each bus stop is indicated by a colored circle. It is green 
when the delay time is short and red when it is long, i.e., 
more than 30-minutes delay. Although Figure 1 shows the 
delay situation in the absence of snow even in winter, it can 
be seen that green circles are displayed at almost all location. 
On the other hand, in Figure 2, it can be seen that there are 
several delays mainly at bus stops in the mountains area due 
to snow. The delay time at each bus stop at a certain time 
indicates the delay time of the bus that passed immediately 
before the specified time. Considering the bus stops included 
in many bus routes, the delay time differs depending on the 
travel route of the passed bus. That is, the bus traveling in the 
urban area does not have a large delay time, but in the case 
of a bus traveling in the mountain area, the delay time tends 
to be long. In this system, in consideration of these, it is 
devised so that not only specification of date and time but 
also specification of bus route etc., can be considered to 
obtain past delay situation.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper reports the construction of a system that 
calculates the delay time of a route bus in a specific time 
zone at a specific bus stop based on data from the past three 
years. By using the results obtained by the proposed method 
together with weather information and learning by various 
AI methods, it is possible to estimate the delay information 
of the future bus. Predicting bus delays based on the weather 
at that time provides useful information to the users. In 
addition, indicating how much delay has occurred in which 
regional bus route during snowfall based on past results is 
important information for route managers such as prefecture 
road staffs and bus companies. This will give useful 
information in deciding which road to manage intensively. 
Acknowledgment 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Numbers JP17K01256, JP17K06600. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Nihon Trip LLP, Busnet. [Online]. Available from:  
http://ikisaki.jp, 2006 [retrieved: 10, 2019] 
[2] H. Shibata, M. Ito, T. Kawamura, and K. Sugahara, “Promotion 
of the Use of Public Transport with Social Media on a Mobile 
Application,” Proceedings of the 10th Asia Pacific 
Conference on Conputer Human Interaction (APCHI 2012), 
pp. 743-744, 2013. 
 
 
Figure 1. Bus delay on November 23, 2016 (Not in snow season) 
 
 
Figure 2. Bus delay on February 10, 2017 (Snowfall time) 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

