An Analysis of Seven Concepts and Design Flaws in Identity Management Systems 
 
 
João José Calixto 
Cesar.edu 
CESAR – Center for Advanced Studies and Systems 
Recife, Brazil 
e-mail:calixtounicap@gmail.com 
 
 
Felipe Silva Ferraz 
Informatics Center 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
Recife, Brazil 
e-mail:fsf3@cin.ufpe.br 
 
 
Abstract –Identity management uses models to accredit, 
manage and use digital identities. These models connect 
isolated islands of authentication and authorization systems in 
a federated system. However flaws in the design and concept of 
these models, such as identity theft and even users’ lack of 
confidence in truly using these models, can lead systems that 
use its benefits to being non-successful on the market. This 
article presents an analysis of seven design and concept flaws 
of the identity management model of the main tools on the 
market, including Security Assertion Markup Language 
(SAML), OpenID, Microsoft CardSpace and an academic 
framework 
called 
Inter-Cloud 
Identity 
Management 
(ICEMAN). 
Keywords-Identity Management; flaws; Identity; design; 
Security. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The huge transformation that cloud computing prompted 
within the IT industry made software development as a 
service more attractive [1]. This large-scale paradigm cut 
out  the need for large investments [2]. The transparency of 
the services provided by the cloud is a key point of this 
supply-side paradigm [3].  
Cloud computing combines virtualization and service-
oriented architecture (SOA) in order to provide shared 
services with regard to computing, data storage, software, 
applications or for a business [4][5]. However, the resource 
capacity of a single cloud is finite, so cloud computing has 
been migrating to a perspective of InterClouds, namely an 
environment in which several clouds can be configured that 
can communicate with each other and share data and 
services. 
There are identification mechanisms for each service 
hosted in cloud computing environments and these make 
use of solutions for user authentication. However, this 
approach leads to user fatigue as users must memorize 
logins and passwords [6]. A study in 2007 on password 
habits showed that typical web users have on average 27 
accounts that require a password, and they type eight 
passwords per day [7]. Therefore this results in users 
registering similar or even identical logins and passwords 
for different types of services [7]–[9]. Another problem 
associated with user authentication and identification is the 
disclosure of users’ personal information after they are 
successfully identified in a service. 
In this scenario, the identity management (IdM) is 
needed to mitigate and resolve some of these issues. IdM is 
a set of technologies and processes that enable computer 
systems to distribute identity information and delegate tasks 
by using one or more domains with more security [4][10]. 
Identity management in cloud computing environments is 
primarily 
responsible 
for 
authenticating 
users 
and 
supporting access based on his/her attributes. IdM for 
InterClouds can be represented by a single authentication 
system can be deployed in heterogeneous clouds [11]. 
Identity management systems are complex and offer all 
parties involved, powerful features so as to facilitate the 
mechanism for identities, credentials, personal information, 
and to present such information to third parties. These 
systems can bring about potential failures [12].  
This article studies major flaws in the concept, usability 
and design of the most popularly successful identity 
management systems on the market, namely OpenID [13], 
Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) [14], 
Microsoft CardSpace InfoCards [15] and an academic 
framework 
called 
Inter-Cloud 
Identity 
Management 
(ICEMAN)  [16]. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a 
short overview of identity management. Section 3 describes 
the seven flaws of design in identity management systems, 
while Section 4 discusses the identity models themselves 
and their flaws are the topic of Section 5. Finally, in Section 
6, conclusions are drawn and recommendations outlined. 
II. 
IDENTITY MANAGEMENT 
An identity is defined by an entity or group of entities (a 
person, computer, organization, etc.) represented solely 
within a specific scope. Yet much can be derived from the 
definition. Which are entities and how each identity be 
uniquely identified? Entities may be objects, or, as in most 
cases a personal identity.  
In each context we have different attributes that make up 
the identity of how we ourselves are identified. What 
identifies us are the attributes we possess. Different 
attributes of identity lead to different entities being 
identified. In such contexts, we can assume an identity, such 
as a driver's license number coupled with an the 2-letter 
code of a Brazilian state. Another simple example is our 
national, Brazilian ID, which has a numeric record and a 
349
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

fingerprint. All these identities cited are merely a set of 
attributes that if not inserted in a context and certified lose 
their objective, which is assertively to identify the user who 
gives such information is who that user purports to be. In 
this scenario, we can perform an analogy with our digital 
identities, which consist of identifying attributes such as 
login and password, which, if not inserted in the correct 
context, are not valid. 
Identity management, or IdM, consists of the process 
and all technologies associated with this to accredit, 
manage, and use digital identities [17]. In the most common 
models for an identity management, three parties are 
highlighted: users, identity providers (IdP) and relying 
Parties (RP) [4][ 18]. 
There are centralized identity models, ie where there is 
only one authority as IdP that performs authentication and 
authorization actions and there are also decentralized 
models, which have more than one IdP [19]. Some examples 
of decentralized identity management systems are the 
OpenID, SAML and Microsoft CardSpace. In this article, 
we will focus on non-centralized identity management 
systems because they do not require a previous relationship 
between RP and IdP. 
III. 
SEVEN FLAWS OF CONCEPT AND DESIGN 
To be successful in the market, identity management 
systems must win the trust of users and RPs. For this to 
occur, the systems must improve security, simplify the 
control of the flow of personal information, and most 
important of all, simplify process for authenticating, 
identifying and checking credentials. The seven failures 
presented below are topics that should be addressed so that 
the public absorbs the use of identity management systems 
to a greater extent [12]. 
 
A. Identity management is not the main goal 
 A user simply wants to utilize the functionality of 
his/her website. Identity management systems should aim to 
facilitate those tasks by including features such as security 
and privacy, but these features that are aggregated with an 
IdP are considered secondary. Usually functions that offer 
long-term gain are less valued [20]. Some identity 
management systems offer time saving features, such as 
automated form-filling, simplification such as single sign-
on, or high-value reputation, all of which can be leveraged 
across many sites. However, these benefits are often 
perceived as “secondary” [20]. 
 
B. Users follow the path of least resistance 
The key to maximizing the direct cost is to construct 
systems that are easily adopted. This includes processes of 
authentication and interface with the password, which 
should become easier compared to current standards. When 
the technology interferes with desired activities, users tend 
to create shortcuts to circumvent the security embedded in 
the process [21][22]. For the success of identity 
management systems to be successful, users should find 
them easy, accurate and safe to use them and configure 
them. 
C. 
Cognitive Scalability is as equally important as 
technical scalability 
Today users undergo so-called password fatigue. They 
have approximately 25 accounts and they can type 8 
passwords a day [7]. To avoid burdening their memory in 
this way, users generally choose the same logins and similar 
passwords for various accounts they use [23]. Focusing on 
cognitive scalability is one of the keys to success. Designing 
the application only by thinking of one IdP should be 
avoided. Instead, the designer should analyze the system as 
a whole. 
D. 
The user's consent may lead to maximum 
disclosure of information  
Many 
identity 
management 
schemes 
describe 
themselves user-centric, whereby users or customers have to 
give their consent so that certain transactions may occur 
[24]. However, surveys show that when warning messages 
are displayed consecutively to users, they only read them 
only superficially and move quickly on so as to achieve 
their goals, thus jeopardizing their privacy and possibly 
disclosing unnecessary information to third parties [25]–
[27]. 
An identity management system should provide the uses 
with more control of the data that they are disclosing, 
without overloading them and even less without doing so in 
an uncontrolled way. 
 
E. There is a need for mutual authentication (not just user 
authentication)  
Many identity management models focus mainly on 
authenticating the user [12]. These types of models can be 
susceptible to phishing attacks [22]. With software support, 
attackers can easily simulate the interface of a web site, put 
in sections that require authentication and steal the user’s 
credentials [28]. 
In this scenario, what is needed is to authenticate both 
the RP and the IdP, thereby performing a mutual 
authentication. This indicates that possibly the conduct of 
spoofing and phishing attacks can be hampered. 
 
F. RPs want to control the user’s experience  
In general, for the purposes of monitoring or tracking of 
users’ activities RPs tend to want to control the actions that 
users perform. However, when an identity management 
system is used, these steps can be lost and there can be a 
marked difference between the RP layout and that of the 
IdP. 
To make this transition smooth, it is possible to use the 
IdP before entering the RP layout, thus hiding that there is 
communication between the RP and the Idp. The Verisign's 
OpenID Seatbelt use this strategy. 
 
 
350
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

G. Trust must be earned   
The decision on to whom users may entrust sensitive 
data is an extremely difficult one. Various models lead to 
different authentication requirements and assignments of 
responsibility. Even the IdP of large corporations may 
contain vulnerabilities or may be poorly implemented. 
There are differing privacy policies and business models. 
No organization can guarantee a completely secure system. 
Systems designers should have their applications evaluated 
by specialized security companies before launching systems 
on the market. 
IV. 
IDENTITY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
This section gives a general description of the main flow 
of 
authenticating 
the 
identity 
management 
systems 
examined in the article. 
A. SAML 
SAML is an XML-based framework for representing 
and exchanging of security information [29]. The use of 
SAML for an identity management system follows a flow 
that differs from the current identification process based on 
login and password. An RP that groups several services 
wants the user of each service offered to be identified and 
authorized. Therefore, the RP must have an IdP and from 
that moment on, all users must register and identify 
themselves to that IdP.  
 
 
Figure 1. Authentication-flow with SAML. 
 
The IdP will consult a database containing information 
about the user and will return a SAML token that represents 
the user identified. This token have the user’s attributes such 
as his/her age, gender and name [30]. Figure 1 illustrates the 
authentication flow with SAML.             
 
B. OpenId 
Also based on the Single Sign On (SSO) is the OpenId 
identity management model [31]. In this model the RP must 
rely on information from the OpenId provider (OP), the IdPs 
of the OpenId. Each identifier is represented by a URL, 
which is unique to each OP so as to reduce collisions 
between identical URLs [32]. The base authentication flow 
in the OpenId has the following steps: 
1. The user wants to login with RP and inserts his/her 
OpenID identifier. 
2. Using information contained in the handle the RP 
discovers the OP of the Original. 
3. RP connects to the OP using a secret shared 
between the two parties. 
4. RP redirects the user to the OP, which checks its 
information and redirects to the RP. 
5. The user cross-checks information shared with the 
OP in step 3 with data that the user obtains after 
step 4. 
Figure 2 illustrates the base authentication flow of OpenID. 
 
Figure 2. Base authentication flow of OpenId. 
C. Microsoft Card Space 
Microsoft CardSpace (formerly known as InfoCard) was 
built to give users a conscious digital identity [33]. Since 
CardSpace is an XML-based framework, CardSpace plug-
ins for browsers other than Microsoft Internet Explorer can 
also be developed, such as the Firefox Plug-in [34]. The 
framework is based on the identification process users  
experience in the real world when using physical 
identification cards CardSpace uses collections of cards, 
presented in software, which has a similar design to that of a 
portfolio called identity selector [5]. Each card represents an 
identity. When an SP searches for an identity the user 
chooses which card he/she will use from the identity 
selector [35]. When the SP requires an attribute of the 
identity, a set of data corresponding to the user's choice is 
sent to the SP [33]. 
 
Figure 3.  CardSpace Flow. 
 
Figure 3 provides a simplified sketch of the CardSpace 
framework. In step 1, de the CardSpace enables the user 
agent or the Service Requestor. In step 2, using a public key 
the RP identifies itself. After recognizing that the RP is 
CardSpace- enabled, the CardSpace Enable User Agent 
(CEUA) retrieves the RP security policy in step 3. In step 4, 
351
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

the CEUA matches the RP’s security policy with the 
InfoCards that the user has. The user performs an 
authentication process with the IdP in step 5. If the 
authentication process succeeds, step 6 takes place, in which 
the CEUA asks the IdP to provide a security token that 
holds an assertion of the truth of the claims listed within the 
selected InfoCard. Finally, the CEUA forwards the security 
token to the RP in step 7, and, if the RP verifies it 
successfully, the service will be granted in step 8 [34]. 
D.  ICEMAN 
ICEMAN differs from the traditional approach, which 
has only one IdP for an SP or RP, which is an unreal 
environment in interclouds. This academic framework 
proposes a more suitable scheme for interclouds. ICEMAN 
provides a high interoperability mechanism between any 
pattern of identity thus facilitating the management of the 
life flow of the authentication [12]. However, this 
architecture is still being developed, thus preventing further 
analysis of the seven failures. Nevertheless, the ICEMAN 
model for identity management was included in the article 
as it has a mechanism that can come to add more than one 
identification and authorization model. Such an approach 
may ultimately unite existing models, which may be able to 
mitigate weaknesses and strengthen strong points [16]. 
V. 
IDENTIFYING FAULTS IN IDENTITY 
MANAGEMENT MODELS 
We have chosen four Identity Management Systems for 
our analysis and seven de design flaws which either have 
dominant positions in Identity Management scenarios or 
introduced a novel concept which is worth exploring. 
1. Identity management is not the main goal:  
The MS CardSpace model was considered to have the 
first flaw since it adds a new software to the user's standard 
way to access information and services. Microsoft has 
discontinued their CardSpace project. However, we have 
opted to include it into our analysis because of its 
fundamentally novel concept of how Identity is presented. 
2. Users follow the path of least resistance: 
It was considered that all models display some difficulty 
when it comes to installing and configuring them for use. 
The very concept of the SAMU follows an alternative flow 
that does not allow the user to follow the path of least 
resistance.  
3. Cognitive Scalability is as equally important as 
technical scalability: 
Cognitive scalability in all but the ICEMAN is adequate. 
The ICEMAN is a framework for better integration of 
identity management in InterClouds. The scalability of 
technical cognition scalability does not follow the average 
of the other models presented. 
4. The user's consent may lead to maximum 
disclosure of information: 
On the consent of the information to be passed to the 
user MS CardSpace user is well ahead. However, it is 
important to emphasize that the type of approach to 
maintain management of cards can be stressful for users and 
can generate a new kind of dissatisfaction with the tool. In 
the case of SAML, in the basic flow of authentication there 
is nowhere that will say what information can be accessed 
by the service. 
5. There is a need for mutual authentication (not 
just user authentication): 
There is the possibility of phishing and spoofing in the 
identity models. Therefore, it was considered that all 
configuration management models contain such flaws, 
which leads the parties involved to add other security 
mechanisms to mitigate these vulnerabilities [35]. 
6. RPs want to control the user’s experience: 
No model analyzed initially presents monitoring of the 
user’s actions on the site and the transition between the 
layout of authentication between IdP and the Client is not 
specified in any model. Thus, it was assumed that all flows 
present this flaw. 
7. Trust must be earned: 
On models with greater maturity and interaction with the 
market, it has been identified that users place greater trust in 
these. It was considered that the ICEMAN has such a flaw. 
However, according to research carried out on regular 
Internet users, it was shown that there is still no confidence 
in service providers that use MS CardSpace [34]. 
Table 1 illustrates the results of a comparison between flaws 
and models. 
 
TABLE I. RESULTS OF A COMPARISON BETWEEN MODELS AND FLAWS. 
 
Flaw 
MS Card 
OpenId 
SAML 
ICEMAN 
1 
 
X 
X 
partial 
2 
partial 
 
 
 
3 
X 
X 
X 
 
4 
partial 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
7 
 
X 
X 
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Identity management systems are not just systems for 
authenticating and authorizing identities but are also a set of 
methods and procedures that can contribute to greater user 
immersion within a system which uses, for example, the 
single sign on. However, some identity management 
systems failed at least partly because they ignored the topics 
discussed in this paper.  
An overview was given of the most popular identity 
management systems in the market, namely: OpenId, MS 
CardSpace, SAML and an academic framework called 
ICEMAN. Seven flaws in the concept and design of identity 
management in these systems were analyzed. The flaws 
352
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

found in the models were compared in a critical analysis of 
the study of their concept study and how the user can 
achieve greater reliance on the technology, and the identity 
management process. 
In this article, problems to do with the lack of control in 
the process of identifying and authorizing users were listed, 
in addition to flaws in the concept of identity management 
systems. The study found that the lack of commitment to 
dealing with the flaws can result in large projects being 
poorly received by the current market. Strategies to mitigate 
and solve the problems discussed in the article were also 
discussed. 
Finally, we intend to examine flaws in identity 
management in greater depth in future studies, which will 
focus on aspects of privacy, availability and integrity. We 
would also like to add new systems to the market and to put 
forward new academic frameworks. 
 
      REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Acquisti and J. Grossklags, “Privacy and 
rationality in individual decision making,” IEEE 
Secur. Priv. Mag., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 26–33, Jan. 
2005. 
[2] 
G. Pallis, “Cloud computing: The new frontier of 
internet computing,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 
14, no. 5. pp. 70–73, 2010. 
[3] 
A. Gopalakrishnan, “Cloud Computing Identity 
Management Online security concerns are on the 
rise and what cloud needs now,” vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 
45–55, 2009. 
[4] 
D. Núñez, I. Agudo, P. Drogkaris, and S. Gritzalis, 
“Identity Management Challenges for Intercloud,” 
pp. 198–204. 
[5] 
E. Maler and D. Reed, “The venn of identity: 
Options 
and 
issues 
in 
federated 
identity 
management,” IEEE Secur. Priv., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 
16–23, 2008. 
[6] 
“Password 
fatigue 
- 
Wikipedia, 
the 
free 
encyclopedia.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Password_fatigue. 
[Accessed: 12-Oct-2015]. 
[7] 
F. , N. , and H. Shannon. "Technology Corner: 
Brute Force Password Generation--Basic Iterative 
and Recursive Algorithms." Journal of Digital 
Forensics, Security and Law 6.3 (2011): 79-86. 
[8] 
S. Gaw and E. W. Felten, “Password management 
strategies for online accounts,” in Proceedings of 
the second symposium on Usable privacy and 
security - SOUPS ’06, 2006, p. 44. 
[9] 
R. Chow, Ori Eisen, et al. "The future of 
authentication." IEEE Security & Privacy 1 (2012): 
22-27. 
[10] 
E. Maler and D. Reed. "The venn of identity: 
Options 
and 
issues 
in 
federated 
identity 
management." IEEE Security & Privacy 2 (2008): 
16-23. 
[11] 
A. Celesti, F. Tusa, M. Villari, and A. Puliafito, 
“Security 
and 
Cloud 
Computing: 
InterCloud 
Identity Management Infrastructure,” 2010 19th 
IEEE Int. Work. Enabling Technol. Infrastructures 
Collab. Enterp., pp. 263–265, 2010. 
[12] 
R. Dhamija and L. Dusseault, “The seven flaws of 
identity 
management: 
Usability 
and 
security 
challenges,” IEEE Secur. Priv., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 24–
29, 2008. 
[13] 
“Final: OpenID Authentication 2.0 - Final.” 
[Online]. Available: http://openid.net/specs/openid-
authentication-2_0.html. [Accessed: 12-Oct-2015]. 
[14] 
“XACML SAML Profile Version 2.0.” [Online]. 
Available: http://docs.oasis-open.org/xacml/xacml-
saml-profile/v2.0/xacml-saml-profile-v2.0.html. 
[Accessed: 06-Nov-2015]. 
[15] 
K. Cameron and J. Michael. "Design rationale 
behind 
the 
identity 
metasystem 
architecture." ISSE/SECURE 
2007 
Securing 
Electronic Business Processes. Vieweg, 2007. 117-
129. 
[16] 
G Dreo,  M Golling, et al. "ICEMAN: An 
architecture for secure federated inter-cloud identity 
management." Integrated Network Management (IM 
2013), 2013 IFIP/IEEE International Symposium 
on. IEEE, 2013. 
[17] 
G. Alpár and J. H. Johanneke, “The Identity Crisis 
Security , Privacy and Usability Issues in Identity 
Management,” pp. 1–15, 2011. 
[18] 
D. 
W. 
Chadwick, 
“Federated 
Identity 
Management,” vol. 5705, pp. 96–120, 2009. 
[19] 
S. Dongwan , A. Gail-Joon and S. Prasad, “Ensuring 
information 
assurance 
in 
federated 
identity 
management,” in IEEE International Conference on 
Performance, Computing, and Communications, 
2004, 2004, pp. 821–826. 
[20] 
A. Acquisti and J. Grossklags, “Privacy and 
rationality in individual decision making,” IEEE 
353
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Secur. Priv. Mag., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 26–33, Jan. 
2005. 
[21] 
A. Adams and M. A. Sasse, “Users are not the 
enemy,” Commun. ACM, vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 40–
46, Dec. 1999. 
[22] 
U. C. Berkeley, “Why Phishing Works,” 2006. 
[23] 
B. M. Gross and E. F. Churchill, “Addressing 
Constraints: Multiple Usernames, Task Spillage and 
Notions of Identity,” in CHI ’07 extended abstracts 
on Human factors in computing systems, 2007, pp. 
2393–2398. 
[24] 
A. Cavoukian, “7 Laws of Identity - The Case for 
Privacy-Embedded Laws of Identity in the Digital 
Age,” Technology, no. 30 January 2008, p. 24, 
2006. 
[25] 
N. Good, R. Dhamija, J. Grossklags, D. Thaw, S. 
Aronowitz, D. Mulligan, J. Konstan, and S. Hall, 
“Stopping Spyware at the Gate : A User Study of 
Privacy , Notice and Spyware Definition of 
Spyware,” pp. 1–10. 
[26] 
J. Grossklags and N. S. Good, “Empirical Studies 
on Software Notices to Inform Policy Makers and 
Usability Designers,” in Financial Cryptography 
and Data Security, 2008, pp. 341–355. 
[27] 
D. A. Norman, “Design rules based on analyses of 
human error,” Commun. ACM, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 
254–258, Apr. 1983. 
[28] 
S. E. Schechter, R. Dhamija, A. Ozment, and I. 
Fischer, “The Emperor’s New Security Indicators,” 
2007 IEEE Symp. Secur. Priv. (SP ’07), 2007. 
[29] 
A. Armando, R. Carbone, L. Compagna, J. Cuellar, 
and L. Tobarra, “Formal Analysis of SAML 2.0 
Web Browser Single Sign-on: Breaking the SAML-
based Single Sign-on for Google Apps,” Proc. 6th 
ACM Work. Form. Methods Secur. Eng., pp. 1–10, 
2008. 
[30] 
P. Arias Cabarcos, F. Almenarez Mendoza, A. 
Marin-Lopez, and D. Diaz-Sanchez, “Enabling 
SAML 
for 
Dynamic 
Identity 
Federation 
Management,” Wirel. Mob. Networking, Proc., vol. 
308, pp. 173–184, 2009. 
[31] 
“Pros and Cons of OpenID - O’Reilly Radar.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://radar.oreilly.com/2007/02/pros-and-cons-of-
openid.html. [Accessed: 08-Nov-2014]. 
[32] 
“What is OpenID?.” [Online]. 
Availablehttps://openid.net/get-an-openid/what-is-
openid. [Accessed: 05-Nov-2015]. 
[33] 
S. Gajek, J. Schwenk, M. Steiner, and C. Xuan, 
“Risks of the cardspace protocol,” in Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture 
Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in 
Bioinformatics), 2009, vol. 5735 LNCS, pp. 278–
293. 
[34] 
W. A. Alrodhan and C. J. Mitchell, “Addressing 
privacy issues in CardSpace,” in Third International 
Symposium on Information Assurance and Security, 
2007, pp. 285–291. 
[35] 
V. 
Bertocci 
et 
al.,Understanding 
Windows 
CardSpace An Introduction to the Concepts and 
Challenges 
of 
Digital 
Identities 
Technical 
Reviewers.   
 
354
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

