Towards a Smart Car Seat Design for Drowsiness Detection Based on Pressure Distribution
of the Driver’s Body
Ines Teyeb, Olfa Jemai, Mourad Zaied and Chokri Ben Amar
REGIM-Lab: REsearch Groups in Intelligent Machines University of Sfax
Sfax, Tunisia
Email:ines.teyeb.tn@ieee.org, olfa.jemai@ieee.org, mourad.zaied@ieee.org, chokri.benamar@ieee.org
Abstract—Driver fatigue is a serious problem causing thousands
of road accidents each year. The major challenge in the ﬁeld of
accident avoidance systems is the development of technologies for
detecting or preventing drowsiness at the wheel. In this paper,
we present a novel approach for fatigue estimation based on
the design of an intelligent seat able to anticipate driver fatigue
through analysis of driver’s body pressure distribution.
Keywords–Fatigue;
Vigilance;
Body
pressure;
Drowsiness;
Smart seat.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Fatigue and sleepiness during driving are considered as
a dangerous phase that threatens road safety. The decreased
level of alertness, generated by involuntary transition from
wakefulness to sleep is responsible for a high number of
accidents.
Among the factors that promote accident risk, we mention
drowsiness at the wheel due to the lack of sleep, driving for
long journeys and night driving. Hence, the need of a reliable
driver drowsiness detection system, which can alert drivers
before a mishap happens.
In literature, diverse approches have been used to develop
monitoring systems. The ﬁrst category is based on physio-
logical studies like eyelid closure, electrooculogram (EOG),
cerebral, muscular and cardiovascular activity [1].
The second category is the vehicle oriented approach based
on driver performance and unusual behavior of the vehicle.
Its principle is to analyze variations in the steering wheel
movements, in the lateral position of the vehicle and in the
velocity [2]. The last category contains algorithms based on
analysis of visual signs. Here, the symptoms of sleepiness
are legible through the driver’s face appearance and eyes/head
activity. For this approach, many types of cameras have been
cited in the litterature. As an example, we cite visible spectrum
camera [3], IR camera [4] and stereo camera [5].
In this paper, we introduce a new drowsiness detection
system based on one of the physical concepts related to
the driver’s body which is the distribution of the pressure
on the seat and its variation in time. Our contribution is to
invent a smart seat for vigilance monitoring in order to detect
fatigue and biomechanical distraction via recognition of sitting
position by analysis of the driver’s body pressure distribution
on the seat.
The plan of the paper is organized as follows: Section
II presents some models of intelligent car seat for fatigue
detection. Section III describes our proposed approach for
intelligent seat design. Section IV ends with a conclusion and
discussion of possible perspectives.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Among the examples of smart seat whose purpose is fatigue
detection, we cite the Hearken project (Heart And Respiration
In-Car Embedded Nonintrusive Sensor). It is developed by
researchers from the Institute of Biomechanics of Valencia
(IBV, Spain) [6]. The seat can calculate heart rate and breathing
rate of the driver [7]. The solution proposed in this project to
address the stated need is a nonintrusive sensing system of
driver’s heart and respiration embedded in the seat cover and
the safety belt of a car. It will detect the mechanical effect of
heart and respiration activity, ﬁlter and cancel the noise and
artefacts expected in a moving vehicle( vibration and body
movements), and calculate the relevant parameters [8]. To do
this, the seat and the seat belt are equipped with invisible
sensors . They are integrated in the seat cover. Besides, there
is the Ford Biometric Seat which takes into account the vital
functions of the driver and the ambient temperature of the
vehicle. It is able to assess the driver’s breathing rate. It include
a seatbelt that integrates piezoelectric ﬁlm for monitoring
breathing patterns. There are also two conductive sensors
located on both sides of the steering wheel that measures the
heart rate and stress level of the driver. There are also two
infrared sensors on the steering wheel’s faade, likewise on the
area where the conductive sensors are located. These infrared
sensors measure the temperature of both sides of the face and
as well as both hands [9]. In addition, there is the Nottingham
Trent project(University’s Advanced Textile Research Group
at Plessey). This seat project attempts to wake the driver up
if he starts to fall asleep at the wheel. It is based on an
Electrocardiogram (ECG) sensor system stitched into a car
seat that measures the driver’s heartbeats. If this starts to slow
down, signifying sleep, an alert will be sent to the driver in
order to wake him up [10].
Companies such as Daimler or Volkswagen are working
on similar ideas that use sensor within the steering wheel
or cameras. We notice that the common point between these
systems is that they are all based on the analysis of the vital
aspects of the driver (heart rate and respiration rate). They are
different from our approach which will be detailed in the next
section.
As a ﬁrst impression, we tried to invent an independent
fatigue detection mechanism of the vital aspects of the driver
already mentioned, such as body temperature, heart rate, etc)
to avoid the risk of confusion with the vibration of the car
despite the accuracy of the sensors because this project is still
in the testing phase. We think that other than the vibration of
the car, there are the environmental impacts such as climate
change (rain, wind,etc.), that may inﬂuence the performance of
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

sensors accuracy (in case of violent wind). The friction of the
wind on the car can change the values given by the sensors.
III.
PROPOSED APPROACH
Fatigue is a gradual decline in physical and mental alertness
that may lead to drowsiness and sleep. Driver fatigue is
characterized by various indices such as ﬁxed eyes, heavy
eyelids, back pain, leg numbness and incessant need to fre-
quently change the position, etc. These indices are considered
as relevant signs that highlight the state of fatigue by many
organizations of driving and road safety associations such
as ECF (French driving school) [11] which is a member of
IFSEN (International Federation of Networks of Education for
Security) [12].
In our project, we are interested in exploiting the growing
need for position change caused by fatigue or drowsiness
during driving as it is indicated in Fig. 1:
Non vigilant driver
Vigilance position
Yawned driver
Figure 1. Examples of vigilant positions and fatigue ones
At the start of driving, the driver is usually vigilant. It
adapts the good driving position (reference position). There
should be no space between the seat and the driver’s body. It
must be ”stuck” at the seat. However, he can’t save this ideal
driving position especially during long journeys and in special
daytimes which promote fatigue and sleepiness [13].
The aim is to detect the fatigue and drowsiness state
by analysis of pressure distribution change of the driver’s
body exerted on the seat. This change depends on the sitting
position. It can be analyzed through a mesh of pressure sensors
covering the seat surface. Fig. 2 mentions an illustration of this
mesh of sensors.
Sensor pressure
Figure 2. Mesh of pressure sensors
A. Interesting Seat Parts of Pressure Analysis
The most informative parts where the pressure change is
more signiﬁcant are the back cushion and the head support as
indicated in Fig. 3. Indeed, our analysis is based on the ’all
Sensor pressure
measurement
Head support
Back cushion
Seat cushion
Armrest
Figure 3. Different parts of the seat car
or nothing’ rule (two states: zero pressure and high pressure)
whose principle will be detailed in the next sections.
In the seat cushion, approximately there is only one state of
pressure level (high value) because the weight of the driver’s
body is concentrated on this part whatever her position or her
tilt’s degree.
Regarding the efﬁciency of the pressure distribution on the
armrest, it depends on the behavior of the driver(If he uses the
armrest in case of right inclination or not).
By using speciﬁc embedded sensors, we can measure
changes in driver’s position during high activity and over long
periods of time by analyzing the pressure changes over time.
B. Algorithm of Pressure Distribution Analysis
As we have already said, we will install a mesh of pressure
sensors on the seat.
Pressure sonsor
In normal sitting position
[value,x, y]
Figure 4. Reference sitting position
Each sensor is characterized by a speciﬁc address (x and y
coordinates) and a value of force pressure as it is described
in Fig. 4. The pressure is a fundamental physical concept.
It can be seen as strength relative to the surface to which it
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

applies. In mechanical ﬁeld, pressure is deﬁned locally from
the component of the force normal to the surface on which
it is exercised. If we consider an elementary surface dS with
normal ⃗n, undergoing a force ⃗F, then the pressure p is deﬁned
by:
P = F/S
(1)
with
•
F: applied force in newtons
•
S: application surface in cm2
1) Body’s pressure variation on different vigilance state
Fig. 5, mentions examples of the pressure distribution of
driver’s possible sitting position. Other than the change of
Medium pressure
(reference)
High pressure
Low pressure
(P1)
(P2)
(P3)
(P4)
Figure 5. Examples of pressure distribution of some seating position
the seating position, this system allows us to recognize the
driver’s sitting position whether it is correct driving posture
or not. For example, we notice for (P1) that the pressure
distribution is approximately balanced on the seat’s back
cushion. For (P2), the left side is characterized by a high
pressure value compared to that of the normal position, here
the driver is moved more to the left side. The right part is
characterized by a low pressure that may become null.
2) Right inclination
Fig. 6 indicates an example of pressure change in the case of
right inclination.
After a tilt, there are areas in the seat where the value of the
pressure becomes null because of the gap between some areas
of the driver’s body and the seat (there is no physical contact).
We consider these notations as it is mentioned in the previous
ﬁgure.
•
black color: sensor with zero pressure
•
yellow
color:
sensor
with
medium
pressure
(≤reference pressure)
•
red color: sensor with high excess (>reference pres-
sure)
As it is clear in the ﬁgure above, the pressure values vanish
gradually from left to right by increasing the inclination degree.
The black color dominates the left half of the sensor mesh but
the right half is characterized by the dominance of red color
(C)
(d)
Figure 6. Cases of right inclination
(excessive pressure) because the body’s weight is focused in
this area. The recognition of inclination direction and degree
may be known by analyzing the line sensor which represents
the distance between the shoulders of the driver as it is
explained in Fig. 7 : This ﬁgure shows the line of sensors
d1
d2
d1
d2
d1
d2
d1
d2
(c)
(d)
Figure 7. Characteristic distances of right inclination
at the shoulders of the cases (c)and (d) of the Fig. 6 and other
intermediate states.
•
d1: distance between the vertical central dorsal axis
and the farthest pressure sensor with high pressure in
the right part
•
d2 = distance between the vertical central dorsal axis
and the nearest sensor with zero pressure in the left
part
When d1 is bigger and d2 is smaller, the inclination degree
increases
3) Left inclination
Fig. 8 mentions an example of body pressure distribution on
the case of left inclination
In this case, the pressure values vanish gradually from right
to left by increasing the inclination degree. This idea is
perceptible at the surface which is the shoulder area, as it is
indicated in Fig. 9.
Here, the meaning of the distances d1 and d2 which is different
from that in the case of right inclination
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

(e)
(f)
Figure 8. Cases of left inclination
d1
d2
d2
d1
d1
d2
(e)
(f)
Figure 9. Characteristic distances of left inclination
•
d1 = distance between the vertical central dorsal axis
and the nearest sensor with zero pressure in the right
part
•
d2 = distance between the vertical central dorsal axis
and the farthest sensor with high pressure in the left
part
4) Forward inclination
in Fig. 10, we cite an example for forward inclination
By increasing the inclination level (by moving from state g to
h), the surface area with zero pressure becomes larger.
The following ﬁgure shows the distribution of pressure
on the central column of the dorsal axis in various levels of
inclination (cases (g) and (h) of ﬁgure 10 and another state).
This idea is explained in Fig. 11.
•
d3: distance between the center of the dorsal axis
(horizontal axis) and the nearest zero pressure sensor
(in the upper half of the back cushion)
•
d4:
distance
between
the
center
of
the
dorsal
axis(horizontal axis) and the nearest non-zero pressure
sensor(in the bottom half of the back cushion)
We note when d3 is smaller and d4 is bigger, the inclination
degree increases.
Also, we note that in the head support there is no pressure
(since no physical contact on this part in a forward inclination
state). However, in a backward inclination case, it is possible
(g)
(h)
Non zero pressure
Zero pressure
Figure 10. Cases of forward inclination
d3
d4
d3
d4
d3
d4
Figure 11. Characteristic distances of forward inclination
that the pressure value at the head support increases compared
to the normal state (reference position).
Fig. 12 shows different positions of the driver with or
without contact with the head support.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Figure 12. Head support in different driver positions
For example in image (1) which represents the reference
position (vigilant state), the pressure distribution is balanced
on the head support. However, in image(2), which shows a
state of right inclination, there is a partial contact between the
head and the head support. So approximately the left half of
head support is characterized by zero pressure and the right
half part is characterized by high pressure. For the rest of cases
(4,5,6), we note that there is no contact at all with the head
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

support.
The pressure distribution at this seat component differs
according to the seat’s dimensions and the driver’s size.
C. Characteristics of the smart seat
1) Automatic activation
The system is activated automatically, as soon as the driver
sits on the seat, the system loads to deﬁne the study area as it
is indicated in Fig. 13.
2) Optimized system for pressure analysis
(1)
(2)
(1) Weight sensing driver
(2)
activation of pressure distribution
system analysis
Figure 13. Automatic activation of the smart seat
We propose to add other algorithms that aim to optimize the
data processing time (and thus the system response time) by
the adaptation of analysis sensor surface which depends on the
size of the driver. As soon as he sits on the seat, the system
loads to deﬁne the study area according to the dorsal driver as
it is mentioned in Fig. 14.
Driver 1
Driver 2
Optimized surface for pressure analysis
Figure 14. Illustration of the optimized system
D. Evaluation
A data collection is conducted in order to investigate
whether different sitting position can be detected via analysis
of body pressure distribution of the back of the driving seat.
With a sheet sensors installed on the back of the driving
simulator, pressure distribution is measured continuously in
time, in which the pressure distribution can represent drivers
posture. Four persons particpated in this study.
At this stage, three types of the actions were distinguished:
•
Moving to the forward direction
•
Moving to the left direction
•
Moving to the right direction
The participant received ﬁve runs for data collection. The
number of movements in a run differed from run to run
depending on the sequence of the movements. The minimum
was 8 and the maximum was 15 movements in each run.
The correct rate of movement detection was 100% for each
driver (in general without specifying the movement direction).
This is done via a comparison between the pressure distri-
bution of the reference position and other postions over time.
If there is a change of the pressure’s value of any other sitting
position compared to the values of the reference position, we
said that there is a driver movement.
In the following table (Table 1), we mean by RN the real
number of a deﬁned sitting position and GN mentions the
generated number of recognized posture made by the smart
seat in the test phase.
TABLE I. RESULT OF SITTING POSITION RECOGNITION FOR
DIFFERENT MOVEMENT DIRECTION
Driver 1
Driver 2
Driver 3
Driver 4
Right movement
RN
25
30
16
40
RG
20
27
11
35
Left movement
RN
40
20
14
27
RG
37
14
13
26
Forward movement
RN
19
36
15
20
RG
17
34
14
19
The global recognition rate of different sitting position is
mentioned in Fig. 15.
Figure 15. Global recognition rate of different sittig position
We aim to maximize the types of movements that can be
recognized by the seat by adding other sitting positions to the
three postures already mentioned.
E. Discussion
This approach allows us to detect the inclination’s direction
and degree of the driver in real time by comparing the distances
d1 with d2 and d3 with d4. Thus comparison between the
number of active sensors (non-zero pressure) with those at
zero pressure).
Also, seeing that fatigue is characterized by incessant need
of position change, we can calculate the frequency of position
change which is equal to the number of inclinations times in
a given time interval.
To differentiate the change in normal position (slight incli-
nation) to those which denote fatigue or drowsiness, we must
add the constraints of threshold and time which is the subject
of our next work. If a speciﬁc threshold is reached (which is
ﬁxed experimentally and by medical experts), a timer will be
triggered to calculate the inclination duration.
Added to that, in a previous work we have developed a
drowsiness detection system based on a video approach by
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

calculating eye closure duration using a classiﬁcation system
of eyes states based wavelets networks [14]-[18] and we
have another system of vigilance measurement based on head
posture estimation.
So it is possible to design a multi-parameter system based
on pressure distribution,eyes blinking analysis and head posi-
tion recognition [19].
The different sitting positions mentioned in the paper are
just examples of the most common cases of drivers in general.
Of course there are various other positions, but the principle is
to follow the variation of the pressure distribution by analyzing
the variation in the behavior of the sensors relative to the
central axis of the seat. So, whatever the obtained position, its
recognition takes place by applying the same principle. May
be there are positions where there is a risk of recognition
confusion, but we aim to generalize our approach on the
maximum seating positions even with different degree of
accuracy.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
We propose a new method for fatigue estimation based on
a design of a smart seat car using pressure sensors to analyse
the pressure distribution of the driver’s body in the time. Our
method is different to those already cited in section II which
exploit vital aspects of the driver, such as heart and breathing
rate. Here, we exploit a physical concept which is the pressure
force. The objective of this seat is to monitor driver’s vigilance
via sitting position recognition.
We aim to develop a multi-parameter vigilance monitoring
system by combinig the previous systems already cited in the
dicsussuion section.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial sup-
port of this work by grants from General Direction of Scientiﬁc
Research (DGRST), Tunisia, under the ARUB program.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Oron-Gilad, A. Ronen, and D. Shinar, cAlertness maintaining tasks
(amts) while driving, Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 40, no. 3,
2008, pp. 851-860.
[2]
J.H. Yang et al, Detection of driver fatigue caused by sleep deprivation,
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol. 39, pp. 694-
705, 2009.
[3]
T. D’Orazio, M. Leo, C. Guaragnella, and A. Distante, A visual approach
for driver inattention detection, Pattern Recogn., vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 2341-
2355, 2007.
[4]
J. Heinzmann, D. Tate, and R. Scott, Using technology to eliminate
drowsy driving, SPE International Conference on Health, Safety, and
Environment in Oil and Gas Exploration and Production, pp. 15-17, 2008.
[5]
Smart eye, http://www.smarteye.se [retrievd:05,2016]
[6]
http://www.itemas.org/en/who-we-are/non-medical-
centers/itcns/instituto-de-biomecanica-de-valencia-ibv/c/show/
[retrievd:07,2016]
[7]
J. Solaza, H. de Rosarioa, P. Gameirob, and D. Bandec, Drowsiness
and Fatigue Sensing System Based on Driver’s Physiological Signals,
Transport Research Arena, Paris, 2014.
[8]
http://harken.ibv.org/index.php/about [retrievd:06,2016]
[9]
http://www.biometricupdate.com/201208/ford-demonstrates-its-
biometric-car-seat [retrievd:06,2016]
[10]
Fabric based sensors to prevent drivers falling asleep at the wheel, July
2014, Nottingham.
[11]
http://www.ecf.asso.fr/ [retrievd:05,2016]
[12]
http://ifsen.org/ [retrievd:05,2016]
[13]
Fatigue, Sleepiness, and Performance in Simulated Versus Real Driving
Conditions SLEEP, Vol. 28, No. 12, 2005
[14]
I. Teyeb, O.Jemai,T. Bouchrika, and C. Ben Amar, Detecting Driver
Drowsiness Using Eyes Recognition System Based on Wavelet Network,
5th International Conference on Web and Information Technologies
(ICWIT’13) proceedings, pp. 245-254,2013, may 09-12 Hammamet,
Tunisia.
[15]
I. Teyeb, O. Jemai, T. Bouchrika, and C. Ben Amar, A Novel Approach
for Drowsy Driver Detection Using Eyes Recognition System Based on
Wavelet Network. IJES: International Journal of Recent Contributions
from Engineering, Science & IT, Vol. 1(1), pp. 46-52,2013.
[16]
I. Teyeb, O. Jemai, M. Zaied and C. Ben Amar, A Novel Approach
for Drowsy Driver Detection Using Head Posture Estimation and Eyes
Recognition System Based on Wavelet Network, In The Fifth Interna-
tional Conference on Information, Intelligence, Systems and Applications
(IISA 2014) proceedings, DOI: 10.1109/IISA.2014.6878809, pp. 379-
384,2014, July 07-09, Chania, Greece.
[17]
I. Teyeb, O. Jemai, M. Zaied, and C. Ben Amar, A multi level
system design for vigilance measurement based on head posture es-
timation and eyes blinking, Proc. SPIE 9875, Eighth International
Conference on Machine Vision (ICMV 2015), 98751P (December 8,
2015);doi:10.1117/12.2229616; http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.222966
[18]
I. Teyeb, O. Jemai, M. Zaied, and C. Ben Amar, A Drowsy Driver
Detection System Based on a New Method of Head Posture Estimation,
The 15th International Conference on Intelligent Data Engineering and
Automated Learning (IDEAL 2014) proceedings, Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, Volume 8669, pp. 362369 ,2014, Salamanca, Espagne,
Septembre 10-12.
[19]
I. Teyeb, O. Jemai, M. Zaied and C. Ben Amar, ”Vigilance Measurement
System Through Analysis of Visual and Emotional Drivers Signs Using
Wavelet Networks”, Proc. of The 15th International Conference on
Intelligent Systems Design and Applications (ISDA 2015), pp. 140-
147,2015,Dcembre 14-16, Marrakech, Maroc.
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

