Business Intelligence Based Tool Development 
 
Libni Almeida Neves 
Visual Display Manaus 
SIDIA 
Manaus, Amazonas 
libni.neves@sidia.com 
Eric Ferraz 
Visual Display Manaus 
SIDIA 
Manaus, Amazonas 
eric.ferraz@samsung.com
 
 
Abstract 
— 
Software 
applications, 
technologies 
and 
methodologies that perform data analysis describes the domain 
of Business Intelligence (BI), which is defined as a set of 
strategies that involves data analysis and decision-making 
processes. In this way, it aims to create an environment where 
the company can easily find, evaluate, collaborate, understand 
and act from high value information. BI collaborates with 
increasing employee awareness of the company, enabling 
process disclosure, feedback collection and organizational data 
capture to be presented to decision makers a harmonized way. 
This project addresses the study of BI for a tool development 
to assist in analyzing data at a mobile device factory in its 
handset return control. The methodology used in this work 
was an exploratory study to collect the requirements for the 
development of the tool, in which it was developed and 
presented to the users. The tool was well accepted and meets 
the main needs for process analysis, however to be more 
comprehensive, new features will be added so that the system 
provides maturity for decision making and contributes to the 
process and its medium and long term strategies. 
Keywords-business intelligence; tool; development. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, companies daily generate and process a large 
volume of data from a variety of business activities and 
processes, including procurement, manufacturing, retail, 
marketing, sales, and distribution. This data is often 
processed by a wide range of applications on the computer 
and has a significant importance for business entities for 
effective and efficient decision making. However, the main 
disadvantage is that they often suffer from the lack of 
reliable, accurate and timely information to have a 
meaningful purpose for decision makers.  
The value of information grows exponentially with the 
addition of each domain of data, information or knowledge 
properly integrated with it. The raw data cannot provide 
relevant and up-to-date information about company 
performance to their managers. For competitive companies 
that want to be ahead of the competition there is a critical 
need for up-to-date decision-making information and to 
optimize critical business processes [1]. 
Business Intelligence (BI) is a system that integrates 
multiple sources of information to define strategies of 
differentiation and performance of the company. The use of 
information should help organizations understand their 
strategies and allow the monitoring of organizational 
objectives throughout the planning horizon [2]. BI is an 
information technology that aims to centralize multiple 
sources of information, using large amounts of data, stored in 
systems for managing databases with flexibility in access and 
structuring of information [3]. Business is a set of activities 
that lead to a goal and intelligence is the ability to understand 
the 
relationships 
between 
the 
facts 
and 
use 
that 
understanding as a guide that guides the actions towards a 
desired goal [5]. 
BI applications provide reports to decision makers who 
want to perform more in-depth strategic analysis from huge 
amounts of data that have expanded over a wide range of 
time, from various applications and productions [4]. 
Another aspect to be considered in relation to BI relates 
to the use of its tools and processes in the most different 
fields. In the modern competitive environment, analyzing 
data and predicting market trends in order to improve 
organizational performance is an essential business activity 
that requires companies in general, and among them retailers, 
to process and analyze large quantities of data and turn them 
into profits [6]. 
The present work seeks to develop a BI tool to collect 
data, allow analysis and help in decision making in a mobile 
device manufacturing company, which has a process of 
monitoring the return of defective devices to the factory.  
This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 the 
proposed method is presented; Section 3 introduces the tool; 
The partial results are described in Section 4. Finally, the 
conclusions are summarized in Section 5. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY  
For this research, the following steps were executed 
(Figure 1): 
1. Parallel review of the literature with the exploratory 
study to collect the requirements for the software. 
2. Development of the initial proposal. 
3. Verify if tool is satisfactory to accomplish deployment. 
 
Figure 1. Methodology Overview. 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

In order to better understand the need to develop the tool, 
an exploratory study about defective device was carried out 
in the Quality Department of a mobile device factory. Then, 
it was noticed that every month there are a massive data 
accumulation generated by manually data comparisons 
carried out during the management of the return process of 
defective devices in which it starts from the exit of the 
products of the store until the return to factory. The data is 
analyzed through spreadsheets and manually through paid 
software.  
 In addition, other characteristics relevant to the 
collection of requirements were identified, which allowed the 
modeling of the software. It was observed that it is important 
to display the main information of the data, such as: 
• 
Regions with higher rate of return; 
• 
Classification of models with higher defect rate; 
• 
Store classification; 
• 
Classification of defects. 
III. 
INITIAL PROPOSAL 
For the development of the tool, visits were made to the 
company, 
when 
information 
was 
collected 
through 
interviews on the return process of the mobile devices, 
number of devices, time to return to the factory and 
periodicity in evaluating the data. During one of the visits, it 
was noticed that due to the accumulation of data, the person 
in charge of analyzing the data and generating reports spends 
a lot of time and effort to do this because they do it 
manually, and a management dashboard can be looked at as 
an executive tool whose sole purpose it to make information 
easier to read. 
In the planning stage of this software, it was possible to 
determine the scope of work required and the best 
technologies for the development, to identify possible 
technical problems and to find solutions for them. For the 
development of this software was used Python and IDE 
PyCharm, consuming the Pandas library. This technology 
was selected due the consideration of the license and 
information sharing restrictions.  
 
 
 
Figure. 2. Software Interface. 
 
The tool has an interface in which the first step is the 
insertion of the worksheet (Figure 2). It must have the 
Comma-Separated Values (CSV) extension. The software 
reads the worksheet and displays the labels (the names of the 
first row), so the user selects the data to generate graphs 
(Figure 3). 
The application sums up the values that have the most 
occurrences and displays the top five data (using Pandas 
library). These requirements were collected due to the need 
of the quality department as a strategy to analyze the 
quantity of devices. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Graphs Generated by the Tool. 
 
IV. 
PARTIAL RESULTS 
The proposal was presented to the quality team and 
follows the main requirements to display graphs quickly and 
intuitively with predefined data. The software reads raw data 
and provides fields for the user to select information, making 
the tool customizable as needed. Previously, the data analyst 
needed to view the entire spreadsheet to collect the data. It 
has been set to display four different graphics with different 
colors and captions. Up to this work stage, the tool provides 
the sum of the data because the quality team needs to 
manage the total quantity. However, some improvements 
have been suggested, such as the customization of the 
graphics in which the user can choose the type of graph to be 
displayed. Another suggestion was to relate the columns; for 
example, select which models had the most defects and in 
which city. Another enhancement option was to add average 
calculation, display the top five values and the bottom five. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This work presented a tool designed to assist in data 
analysis in the Quality Department of a mobile device 
factory, thus providing the most relevant defect information. 
It also provides organized and personalized reading and 
visualization of data in graphical format optimizing 
information visualization and replacing manual analysis.  
For the next stage of this work, new functionalities will be 
developed an exploratory and applicability study of the tool 
in other departments or different areas. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. E. Sveiby, The new organizational wealth: Managing & measuring 
knowledge-based assets. Berrett-Koehler Publishers, 1997. 
[2] C. Barbieri, Introdução ao Conceito de BI. _. Business Intelligence. 
BI–Business Intelligence Modelagem & Tecnologia. Rio de Janeiro: 
Axcel Books do Brasil Editora, 2001. 
[3] R. A. Khan, and S. M. K Quadri. Business intelligence: an integrated 
approach. Business Intelligence Journal, v. 5, n. 1, 2012. 
[4] K. C. Laudon, and J. P. Laudon, Sistemas de informação gerenciais. 
11ed. São Paulo. Pearson Education do Brasil, 2014. 
[5] H. P. Luhn, A business intelligence system. IBM Journal of research 
and development, 2(4), pp. 314-319, 1958. 
[6] B.S Sahay and J. Ranjan. Real time Business Intelligence in supply 
chain analytics. Information Management & Computer Security, 2008.
 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

