Using Expert Systems for Coaching and Mentoring ICT Project Managers 
 
Robert T. Hans 
Department of Software Engineering 
Tshwane University of Technology 
Pretoria, South Africa 
hansr@tut.ac.za 
Ernest Mnkandla 
School of Computing  
University of South Africa  
Florida, South Africa 
mnkane@unisa.ac.za
 
 
Abstract— Several risks, dynamics and challenges, 
including lack of skilled and experienced personnel, mobility 
associated with project management experts  and tough 
economic conditions are just some of many issues that 
information 
and 
communications 
technology 
(ICT) 
organizations in the 21st century have to deal with. 
Furthermore, these organizations are under constant pressure 
to improve project success rate which are unacceptably very 
low. Project managers who are ineffective in project leadership 
due to poor project skills pose a serious risk to project success.  
Some research studies indicate that the demand for ICT 
project managers with proper knowledge and expertise is ever 
increasing and the supply is nowhere near close in meeting the 
demand. As part of providing a solution to the abovementioned 
challenges and help equip ICT project managers with correct 
skills through mentoring and coaching, this research study is 
proposing the use of expert systems (ES). This proposal is a 
response to calls that have been made by other studies in 
project management that new approaches of developing 
project managers must be pursued. The use of expert systems 
to equip ICT project managers with the right skills and 
expertise will help advance and improve their software project 
management expertise. Just like ‘intelligent organizations’ that 
use expert systems to improve their decision-making processes 
in order to advance business efficiency and competitiveness so 
should expert systems be used to coach and mentor less 
experienced project managers. This research paper argues that 
the use of ES for coaching and mentoring yield many benefits 
for organizations. 
 
Keywords- expert system; intelligence system; project 
managers; coaching; mentoring; skills. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Several risks, dynamics and challenges, such as, lack of 
skilled and experienced personnel, volatility of human 
experts [1] and tough economic conditions create a challenge 
for many information and communications technology (ICT) 
organizations in the 21st century. These ICT organizations 
are under constant pressure to improve project success rate 
through, amongst other things, the use of experienced project 
managers who have great influence on project success [2] to 
run their projects. These are some of the challenges that 
organizations in the ICT sector have to contend with in their 
quest to deliver value to both stakeholders and shareholders. 
According to Schwalbe [3] the project management 
framework consists of nine knowledge areas, which describe 
the key competencies that project managers should possess 
in all the nine knowledge areas in order to deliver on 
projects’ mandates. However, a study by Hans et al. [4] 
shows that ICT project managers in South Africa lack some 
key project management competencies, and these include 
problem-solving and leadership expertise. Project managers 
who are ineffective in project leadership due to poor project 
skills pose a serious risk to project success [5][6]. Project 
managers may lack appropriate expertise due to a number of 
reasons. They may lack skills because of not being properly 
trained or mentored and were just appointed based on their 
previous excellent performance in their former positions. 
The above-mentioned challenges make it necessary for 
ICT organizations to rethink their business practices of 
training and mentoring their project managers. Moreover, 
talent development for project and program managers 
remains a top concern in organizations. This comes as no 
surprise given that research studies indicate that experience 
and project management expertise are key in delivering 
successful projects [3][7][8]. Metaxiotis [9] indicates that the 
demand for ICT project managers with proper knowledge 
and expertise is ever increasing and its supply is nowhere 
near close in meeting the demand. As part of providing a 
solution in equipping ICT project managers with appropriate 
skills through mentoring and coaching, this research study is 
proposing the use of expert systems. The proposed solution 
will result in project managers improving their software 
project management expertise. The use of the proposed ES 
would further address the skewed supply-demand ratio of 
knowledge-based resources – the supply of skilled project 
managers will be improved. It will also enable the training of 
project managers in the real-world project environment as 
requested by Ramazani et al. [10]. The use of the proposed 
ES will also relieve project management experts from the 
duties of mentoring and coaching which they sometimes do 
reluctantly [11]. Ramazani et al. [10] are calling for fresh 
approaches in the development of project managers, and this 
paper’s proposal intends to fill that gap by proposing a new 
approach in training, coaching, mentoring and development 
of project managers through the use of expert systems. Even 
though expert systems have been used in other areas of the 
project management discipline, to the best knowledge of the 
authors of this paper expert systems have not been used for 
the development of project managers. Therefore, this 
research paper proposes a novel approach to use expert 
systems to provide the above mentioned services and thus 
address the challenges which are plaguing the project 
management discipline. 
The remainder of this research paper proceeds as follows. 
Section II presents a research methodology used in this 
447
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

study. Section III discusses expert systems and their 
application. Section IV presents a discussion on using expert 
systems for coaching and mentoring ICT project managers. 
Sections V presents the architectural structure of the 
proposed ES, while Section VI discusses value add which is 
derived from using expert systems for such initiatives. 
Finally, conclusions, limitations of this research study, and 
directions for future studies are presented. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY USED 
As pointed out previously, ICT project managers in 
South 
Africa 
lack 
some 
key 
project 
management 
competencies. This is a research problem which this study 
seeks to address. A research question which will assist in 
finding a suitable solution to the abovementioned problem is 
the following: 
Can expert systems be used for equipping ICT project 
managers with appropriate skills? 
An approach used by this research study to answer the 
abovementioned research question is through the exploration 
of relevant literature with the aim of establishing similar 
cases where expert systems have been successfully used. 
There is therefore neither data collection nor data analysis 
performed in this research study. 
III. 
EXPERT SYSTEMS: THEORY AND PRACTICE 
Organizations are continuously searching for innovative 
methods of reducing costs, improving decision making 
processes and automating or simplifying routine tasks.  
Therefore, organizational survival depends on finding ways 
and practices of adapting to the continuous changing 
competitive environment. Expert systems (ES) or intelligent 
systems are one type of IT tools that organizations turned to 
for addressing such challenges [12]. Avram [13] defines 
expert systems as:  
“Systems that use knowledge-based techniques to 
support human decision-making, learning and action.” 
ES contains knowledge and experience of experts in a 
specific domain that anyone can use in solving problems 
[14]. Expert systems are a branch or subset of artificial 
intelligence [15][16]. Intelligent systems are considered 
‘intelligent’ because they can solve a problem in a way 
similar to a human expert [17]. 
Expert systems have found application in a wide range 
of fields, such as manufacturing, business, finance, airline, 
law, computer science, geology, education, mathematics and 
medicine [16][18][19][20]. With each field, expert systems 
have been used to solve different range of problems. For 
example, some companies have implemented expert systems 
to assist in performance appraisal processes [21]. Others 
have used artificial intelligent systems for tutoring 
undergraduate auditing and engineering students at various 
universities [22]. Jenicke [17] cites three business 
organizations, namely, Digital Equipment Corporation, 
General Electric and Coopers & Lybrand that have 
developed and are using expert systems in their respective 
business domains. Digital Equipment Corporation uses its 
expert system called XCON [23] for configuring VAX 
systems which handle customer orders. XCON has resulted 
in an improved customer order processing for the company. 
General Electric uses an expect system called DELTA for 
diagnosing and repairing the company’s diesel-electric 
vehicles which are used for railroad maintenance [17]. On 
the other hand, Coopers & Lybrand uses its expert system 
called ExpertTAX [17] for providing expert advice to the 
organization’s accountants so that they may in turn respond 
intelligently to clients’ tax related questions. The system 
acts as an intelligent advisor to the company’s employees 
who seek its guidance for decision making. ExpertTAX 
stores the expertise of the company’s experienced 
accountants in its knowledge base component. Metaxiotis 
[9] also makes mention of organizations, such as Singular 
and the Portuguese Railways that have successfully 
implemented expert systems in their business operations. 
The discussion above illustrates that an ES may be used to 
position an organization in a better strategic position in the 
marketplace. 
The literature has many research studies which cite the 
usefulness of expert systems in assisting in decision making. 
Expert systems may also play an important role in retaining 
competitive project management knowledge which may be 
transferred to less experienced project managers. This 
assertion is also supported by Jenicke [17] who states that 
expert systems are suitable for dissemination of knowledge 
and expertise within their areas of application. The use of 
intelligent systems for coaching and mentoring purposes has 
become imperative because the supply of experienced 
project managers with correct expertise is in short supply 
[24] and some project managers lack some key project 
management competencies. The use of expert systems for 
equipping ICT project managers with appropriate skills 
would help improve the supply of project managers with the 
right skills set. Moreover, this proposal is also in line with 
what other previous studies have established in terms of 
using computer-based training for enriching employees, as 
well as learners with much needed knowledge [5][22].  
The proposed approach in developing ICT project 
managers is in accordance with the Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge [25] framework for 
managing project human resources. The PMBOK Guide 
(2012:105) states: 
“Individual development (managerial and technical) is 
the foundation necessary to develop the team.” 
 Such development includes enhancing skills, knowledge 
and capabilities of team members through, for example, 
computer-based training [25]. Furthermore, according to the 
PMBOK Guide (2012) one of the primary functions of a 
project management office (PMO) is to ensure coaching, 
training and mentoring of project managers. This research 
paper is therefore in direct support of PMO functions.  
Notwithstanding the differences in the role that a project 
manager plays under PRINCE2 and PMBOK [26] a project 
manager is still a key project stakeholder whose primary 
responsibility is to steer a project to success. Such an 
expectation therefore requires that a project manager be 
properly skilled and this is the aim of this research study. 
448
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

IV. 
USING EXPERT SYSTEMS TO COACH AND MENTOR 
ICT PROJECT MANAGERS 
The failure rate of projects is still unacceptably high and 
several studies have highlighted these cases of failed 
projects. On the other hand, Schwalbe [3] indicates that 97% 
of successful projects were carried out by experienced 
project managers who have correct project management 
skills. However, as mentioned above the sad part is that 
such project managers are in short supply [24] and 
therefore, these findings further back the call made by this 
paper for the use of expert systems to improve the situation.  
It was mentioned above that expert systems have been 
used for tutoring students and therefore, using them for 
mentoring and coaching project managers would not be a 
wrong concept. Expert systems may either use rule-based 
(theory-based) or case-based (experienced-based) form of 
reasoning in solving problems [22]. Expert systems which 
make use of both rule-based and case-based techniques 
would prove useful in training ICT project managers. This 
assertion is based on the fact that people solve problems by 
either using prior cases or rules depending on the task being 
solved [22].  
The use of ES for coaching and mentoring initiatives 
would be beneficial to an organization and to the mentored 
individuals in many ways. Firstly, it would ensure that 
valuable expert knowledge is kept and preserved in the 
knowledge base of an expert system for future use.  Such 
practical real-world knowledge from experts provides 
aspiring ICT project managers with valuable learning 
experiences [27]. In the case of project management, such 
knowledge would pertain to project areas, such as [3][28]: 
 
knowledge in performing trade-off amongst project 
triple constraint [3],  
 
knowledge in project risk management,  
 
knowledge in scope management, as well as  
 
knowledge in other areas that pertain to the eleven 
knowledge areas of project management [28]. 
Furthermore, the knowledge base of the ES would also 
include expert knowledge in project management areas in 
which South African project managers were found to be 
lacking key expertise as identified by Hans et al. [4].  
The lack of project management expertise by project 
managers in the abovementioned areas [5] have contributed 
to the failure of ICT projects [29]. For, instance, a study by 
Standish Group [30] indicates that less than a third of 
projects finish on time and within budget. This indicates that 
project managers have problems in dealing with two of the 
three project constraints. Another study by Ibbs et al. [28] 
shows that organizations in the ICT industry are struggling in 
managing project risks. Although this has been a well-known 
problem, little has been done by organizations to address it 
[3]. Therefore, the use of an expert system for mentoring and 
coaching project managers in this knowledge area will go a 
long way in addressing this issue. Project scope management 
is another key area that needs project managers to pay 
attention to. Schwalbe [3] indicates that proper project scope 
management is a contributing factor to project success. The 
discussion above justifies the inclusion of project knowledge 
on the stipulated areas above in the knowledge base of the 
ES expert system. 
Secondly, once the desired knowledge has been kept in 
the ES knowledge base it can then be used to train, coach 
and mentor both inexperienced and aspiring project 
managers that an organization wants to groom. When an 
inexperienced project manager uses an expert system, he/she 
is able to learn (infer) how the system arrived at a particular 
correct decision. Through such interactions with an ES, a 
project manager is able to gain valuable real-world 
knowledge and experience. Furthermore, such knowledge 
transfer forms part of organizational culture transfer to ‘new’ 
project managers. The initiative of using ES to train, coach 
and mentor novice project managers would be playing a 
critical and imperative role of grooming new project 
managers in-house and thus ensuring and perpetuating 
consistency in the way an organization manages its projects. 
Previous research studies show that organizations which 
groom project managers internally are amongst those that 
run successful projects [3]. Therefore, expert systems would 
be playing a role of transferring knowledge and the problem-
solving strategies of experts to less experienced project 
managers [22]. 
V. 
ARCHITECTURE OF THE PROPOSED EXPERT SYSTEM 
According to Metaxiotis [9] and Jenicke [17], expert 
systems have the following three basic main components:  
 
Knowledge base – The knowledge base contains the 
knowledge needed for solving a specific problem. In 
order for ES to solve human problems, human expert 
knowledge should be captured in a knowledge base 
[16].  In this case an ICT expert project manager’s 
knowledge will be captured into the knowledge base of 
the proposed ES. The previous section mentioned 
some project management knowledge that should form 
part of this component.  The knowledge base may be 
in various forms, such as, facts, theories, heuristics or 
relationships. Typically, the knowledge base is 
implemented in IF-THEN rules [16]. The development 
of this component of an expert system is the most 
challenging one [14]. 
 
Inference engine – This component takes the input 
that has been entered by the user through user interface 
and then manipulates knowledge base using the 
inference 
control 
procedure 
[17]. 
The 
control 
procedure determines the order in which the 
knowledge base will be searched [9]. It may start with 
a set of conditions and then establish a conclusion or it 
may start with a conclusion and then search the 
knowledge base for conditions that meet the 
conclusion [9][16][17].  
 
User interface – Through this component a novice 
project manager is able to interact with the expert 
system. He/she is able to ask the ES to test some 
conclusions or enter information which the system will 
use to find conclusions related to the entered 
449
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

information [16]. In return, the expert system is able to 
present its results and possibly prompt the user for 
additional information via the same user interface. An 
expert project manager also uses this user interface to 
capture project management knowledge into the 
knowledge base.  
Figure 1 depicts the components of the architecture of 
the proposed expert system, as discussed above. 
VI. 
THE VALUE OF USING ES TO COACH AND MENTOR 
ICT PROJECT MANAGERS 
Information technology has become an indispensable 
factor for every organization [31].  ES as an integral part of 
IT provides an organization with an excellent opportunity of 
managing knowledge in project management and also of 
enabling knowledge transfer to inexperienced project 
managers. Metaxiotis [9] stresses the importance of using 
information technology by organizations in order to gain a 
competitive advantage. Therefore, an organization can 
obtain a competitive advantage from the use of ES through 
knowledge retention (knowledge captured in ES) and 
knowledge transfer (through using ES to coach and mentor 
inexperienced project managers). A number of authors have 
noted some benefits of using expert systems for training 
human resources, and such benefits include:  
 
Continuous availability of services – services 
provided by expert systems are always available 
anywhere, unlike when such services are offered by a 
human expert which might not be available or their 
availability may be confined to a specific location [16]. 
 
 
 
Costs savings. The maintenance of human expert 
knowledge through the conventional way (for 
example, training a new project manager) may be more 
expensive. Therefore, the use of ES for training, 
mentoring and coaching would result in costs savings 
for organizations, a view also supported by both [17] 
and [24]. The usage of ES reduces the training and 
knowledge transfer cycle amongst staff members [9]. 
 
Consistency - expert systems apply reasoning 
consistently without any biasness unlike human 
beings. This would ensure that consistency is 
‘transferred’ to mentored managers. That is, ES 
teaches 
project 
managers 
consistency 
in 
their 
reasoning process [9]. 
 
Keeping lessons learned and updating knowledge 
base – with case-based expert systems current 
decisions and incidents may be stored for statistical 
and future case-based reasoning [14]. 
 
Actively creating intellectual capital – the use of ES 
creates organizational knowledge which will enable 
the business to compete effectively. It facilitates the 
continuous training of new project managers for an 
organization. This contributes to the continuous 
availability of human resource reserves [32]. 
 
Promoting a learning culture in an organization 
and empowering project managers – by adopting ES 
an organization does not only remain in the cycle of 
knowledge creation and knowledge sharing [17][32] 
but also becomes a learning organization and at the 
same 
time 
empowering 
its 
project 
managers.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. An architecture of the proposed expert system (adapted from [9][17]) 
Seek advice 
Conclusion  
Knowledge base                  
(Facts, Experience, Opinions, 
Heuristics) 
Inference engine                     
(Reasoning mechanism) 
User interface                             
(Consultation, Feedback/Advice, 
Conclusions) 
External interfaces          
(Databases, and other 
external programs) 
Transfer of 
knowledge 
Storing    
knowledge 
Request 
data 
Find conclusion 
based on the query 
Data 
Query 
data 
Solution / 
Advice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Novice Project 
manager 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ICT Project 
expert 
450
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Enabling on the job training (OJT) – On the job 
training is very important for producing highly 
competent employees [33] and would be employees. In 
a 
competitive 
business 
environment 
where 
organization cannot afford to send away employees for 
training or they may have no capacity to provide such 
training [34], the usage of expert systems for training 
purposes enables such organizations to kill two birds 
with one stone – allows companies to be productive 
and also enables them to equip employees with much 
needed skills. 
 
Provide learning anywhere and anytime – ES enable 
any employee to learn anytime, and anywhere [35]. 
The use of expert systems further ensures efficient 
transfer of knowledge without costing an organization too 
much money and time. It also offers trainees a hands-on 
experience rather than being passive learners. This kind of 
training is consistent and repeatable, and these are the 
elements which are missing with training offered by human 
agents. 
Over and above of the benefits mentioned on the usage 
of expert systems, herewith below are some of the specific 
benefits that accrue from the implementation of the 
proposed expert system for mentoring and coaching ICT 
project managers: 
 
Improvement of project management efficiency. 
Given the short supply of ICT project managers with 
appropriate and much needed project management 
skills [9][34], the proposed ES will not only ensure 
continuous supply of such managers but will also 
contribute to the better management of ICT projects. 
The proposed ES will focus on equipping project 
managers with the identified lacking skills which 
include problem-solving expertise, critical thinking, 
leadership, tools expertise, etc. [4][10]. In other words, 
the proposed ES will be aimed at mentoring and 
coaching ICT project managers on the identified 
critical skills gaps in project management. 
 
Meeting both the ‘demand and supply sides’ of 
knowledgeable ICT project managers - It was 
indicated earlier in this paper that currently there is a 
skewed supply-demand ratio of knowledgeable ICT 
project managers. The use of the proposed ES will 
seek to balance this unfavorable supply-demand ratio. 
 
Facilitation 
of 
sharing 
of 
specific 
project 
management know-how – Captured ICT expert 
know-how will be transferred through the proposed ES 
to new or novice project managers. As indicated before 
in this paper such project management knowledge is 
critical to project success and project managers with 
such knowledge are in short supply and thus the use of 
the proposed ES for addressing this will be a welcome 
relief. 
 
Equipping project managers in the real-world 
context – Project managers will learn project 
management skills in the real world, as the expert 
system will be based on real life experiences of project 
management experts. A study by Ramazani et al. [10] 
highlights the need to train project managers in the 
environment and context they are likely to encounter at 
work. 
 
Assists in overcoming some of the barriers 
encountered by conventional knowledge sharing – 
There are various barriers to knowledge sharing, 
including lack of socialization among staff members 
within organizations. Such a barrier inhibits transfer of 
tacit knowledge between staff members, however the 
use of the proposed ES would overcome such barriers 
as knowledge would be residing in the ES system. 
Furthermore, the use of the proposed ES to part 
knowledge to new project managers lessens the approach of 
learning through trial and error that project managers are 
sometimes subjected to. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
If organizations hope to address the plight of ICT 
projects’ poor track record and the lack of skilled project 
managers, then they need to change their development 
strategies of project managers. These sentiments have been 
echoed by [10] who state that new approaches are needed in 
developing project managers. According to Kilkelly [24], 
“Project management is complex, and so to create good 
  
project managers and, subsequently, sound projects, it is 
 critical to get the development right”. 
The use of the proposed expert system for training, 
mentoring and coaching new inexperienced ICT project 
managers is one way of getting the development strategy 
right as well as proposing a new way of training project 
managers as called by Ramazani et al. [10]. The usage of an 
expert system enables organizations to promote and 
maintain excellence through knowledge management, 
coaching and mentoring of their future project managers 
with the aim of creating a better future for the stakeholders. 
The discussion presented above has attempted to answer 
the question of whether expert systems can be used to equip 
ICT project managers with much needed skills in project 
management. This research paper has argued that the use of 
expert systems for coaching and mentoring new and novice 
ICT project managers yields many benefits for ICT 
organizations, with the main benefit being the enablement of 
the transference of much needed project management know-
how between expert and novice project managers.  
This research paper is part of the PhD research work of 
the first author, where he intends to develop real-time 
interactive project management intelligence (PMInt) tool 
which is modelled after business intelligent tools [36]. Once 
the PMInt tool has been developed, it will then be tested for 
its effectiveness in improving decision making.  
The usefulness of the proposed expert system for 
coaching 
and 
mentoring 
novice 
information 
and 
communications technology project managers needs to be 
tested. The first challenge though is getting participation of 
ICT project management experts when the proposed expert 
system is developed. The experts might view the system as 
meant to replace them [37] and this may lead to their lack of 
participation in the development of the system. Secondly, 
451
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

the complexity and exorbitant costs associated with the 
development of expert systems [11] might be a challenge for 
some organizations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Kutti, B. Garner, and A. Ghosal, "Modelling expert 
resource management systems", Kybernetes, vol. 28, issue 4, 
1999, pp. 385-406. 
[2] C. Standing, A. Guilfoyle, C. Lin, and P. E. D. Love, “The 
attribution of success and failure in IT projects”, Industrial 
Management & Data Systems, vol. 1061, issue 8, 2006, pp. 
1148 – 1165. 
[3] K. Schwalbe, Information Technology Project Management, 
6th ed., USA: Thomson Course Technology, 2011. 
[4] R.T. Hans and P.M.D. Rwelamila, “Knowledge Base of 
Project Managers in the South African ICT Sector”, 
Computer Science and Information Technology, vol 2, vol. 1, 
January, 2012, pp. 455-478. 
[5] L.A. Kappelman, R. Mckeeman, and L Zhang, “Early 
warning signs of IT project failure: The dominant dozen”, 
EDPACS, ABI/INOFRM Global, vol. 35, issue 1, 2007, pp. 
1-10. 
[6] L. Tichy, and T Bascom, “The Business End of IT project 
failure”, Mortgage Banking, ABI/INOFRM Global, vol. 68, 
issue 6, 2008, pp. 28-35. 
[7] B. Little, “The principles of successful project management”, 
Human Resource Management International Digest, vol. 19, 
issue 7, 2011, pp. 36-39. 
[8] J. Johnson, K.D. Boucher, K. Connors, and J. Robinson, 
“Collaboration: Development & Management”, Software 
Magazine – February/March, pp. 1-9, 2001. 
[9] K. Metaxiotis, “Leveraging expert systems technology to 
improve service industry”, European Business Review, vol. 
17, issue 3, 2005, pp. 232-241. 
[10] J. Ramazani and G. Jergeas, “Project managers and the 
journey from good to great: The benefits of investing in 
project 
management 
training 
and 
education”,         
International 
Journal 
of 
Project 
Management, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijproman.2014.03.012, article in 
press. 
[11] K. Annaiahshetty and N. Prasad, “Expert System for Multiple 
Domain Experts Knowledge Acquisition in Software Design 
and 
Development”, 15th 
International Conference 
on 
Computer Modelling and Simulation, 2013, pp. 196-201. 
[12] T.A. Byrd, F. Shieh, and T.E. Marshall, “The development 
and implications of the COMMU expert system”, Industrial 
Management & Data Systems, vol. 96, issue 3, 1996, pp. 11-
16. 
[13] G. Avram, “Empirical Study on Knowledge Based Systems”, 
Electronic Journal of Information Systems Evaluation, vol. 8, 
issue 1, 2005, pp. 11-20. 
[14] M.A. Mach and A. M. Salem, “Intelligence Techniques for 
business intelligence in healthcare”, IEEE Computer Society, 
10th International Conference Intelligent Systems Design and 
Applications, 2010, pp.  545-550. 
[15] B.L. Raggad and M.L. Gargano, “Expert System: defection 
and perfection”, Logistics Information Management, vol. 12, 
issue 5, 1999, pp. 395 – 406. 
[16] I.M. Shaluf and F. Ahamadun, “Technological emergencies 
expert 
systems 
(TEES)”. 
Disaster 
Prevention 
and 
Management, vol. 15, issue 3, 2006, pp. 414 -424. 
[17] L.O. Jenicke, “The Expert Systems as a Decision Support 
Tool”, American Journal of Business, vol. 3, issue 1, 1998, 
pp. 47-52. 
[18] E.T. Lee, “Intelligent factories using fuzzy expert systems”.  
Kybernetes MCB University Press. vol. 25, issue 3, 1996, pp. 
51-55. 
[19] D. Corney, “Food bytes: intelligent systems in the food 
industry”, British Food Journal, vol. 104, issue 10, 2002, pp.  
787-805. 
[20] H. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Ding, and Y. Qiu, "Fault diagnosis expert 
system for modern commercial aircraft”, Aircraft Engineering 
and Aerospace Technology, vol. 76, issue 4, 2004, pp. 398-
403. 
[21] M.G. 
Martinsons, 
“Human 
Resource 
Management 
Applications 
Knowledge-based 
Systems”, 
International 
Journal of Information Management, vol. 17, issue 1, 1997, 
pp. 35-53. 
[22] N. Wongpinunwatana, C. Ferguson, and P. Bowen, “An 
experimental investigation of the effects of artificial 
intelligence systems on the training of novice auditors” 
Managerial Auditing Journal, vol. 15, issue 6, 2000, pp. 306-
318. 
[23] J. Liebowitz, "Knowledge-based/expert systems technology in 
life support systems", Kybernetes, vol. 26, issue 5, 1997, pp. 
555 – 573. 
[24] E. Kilkelly, “Blended learning: pathways to effective project 
management”, Development and learning in organizations, 
vol. 23, issue 1, 2009, pp. 19-21. 
[25] Project Management Institute, A Guide to the Project 
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide), 5th ed., 
2012. 
[26] R.M. Wideman, “Comparing PRINCE2 with PMBoK®”, 
AEW Services, 2002, pp. 1-11. 
[27] J.B. Arbaug, “Introduction: Project Management Education: 
Emerging Tools, Techniques, and Topics”, Academy of 
Management Learning & Education, vol. 6, issue 4, 2007, pp. 
568-569. 
[28] C. W. Ibbs and Y. H. Kwak, “Assessing Project Management 
Maturity”, Project Management Journal, vol. 31, issue 1, 
2000, pp. 32 - 43. 
[29] L. Tichy, and T. Bascom, “The Business End of IT Project 
Failure”, Mortgage Banking, pp. 28, 2008. 
[30] Standish Group, “Chaos Report”, West Yarmouth, MA: The 
Standish Group International Inc, 2004. 
[31] S. Indrajani and Y. Lisanti, “Business Intelligence Design on 
The Company”, IEEE Computer Society, Fourth International 
Conference 
on 
e-Education, 
Entertainment 
and 
e-
Management, 2011, pp.  307-310. 
[32] D.P. Nawinna, “Fostering Business Intelligence in Banks 
through Knowledge Management: A case of Sri Lanka”, 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Business 
Management & Information Systems, 2012, pp. 377-385. 
[33] T. Nakamura, Y. Kitaura, H. Maruyama, and A. Takashima, 
“Analysis of Learners’ Behavior in Role-play Training for 
Project Management Education”, Ninth IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, 2009, pp. 
144-146. 
[34] Y. Tachikawa, H. Maruyama, T. Nakamura, and A. 
Takashima, “A Method for Evaluating Project Management 
Competency Acquired from Role-Play Training”, IEEE 
Global Engineering Education Conference, 2013, pp. 162-
170. 
[35] Z. Chunua, “E-Learning: The New Approach for Knowledge 
Management (KM)”, International Conference on Computer 
Science and Software Engineering, 2008, pp. 291-294. 
[36] R.T. 
Hans 
and 
E. 
Mnkandla, 
“Modeling 
Software 
Engineering Projects as a Business”, IEEE AFRICON 2013 
Conference, 2013, pp. 1172-1176. 
[37] T.A. Byrd, “Expert systems implementation: interviews with 
knowledge engineers”, Industrial Management & Data 
Systems, vol. 95, issue 10, 1995, pp. 3-7. 
 
 
 
452
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

