 
 
Do Agile Principles and Practices Support the Well-being at Work of Agile Team 
Members? 
 
Marja Känsälä and Seppo Tuomivaara 
Innovations, Management and Knowledge Creation 
Finnish Institute of Occupational Health 
Topeliuksenkatu 41 a A, 00250 Helsinki, Finland 
marja.kansala@ttl.fi; seppo.tuomivaara@ttl.fi 
 
 
Abstract—In this work-in-progress paper, a preliminary 
review on the literature of the connections between agile 
methods and well-being at work is done. The viewpoint of well-
being at work is important when considering agile software 
methodologies and techniques. A stage for an empirical 
research setting on these issues is also set. The research setting 
targets to inspecting how applying agile practices are 
experienced and features of agile methods that enhance and 
challenge well-being at work, i.e., what kind of implications 
agile methods are perceived to have for well-being at work. 
Well-being at work is studied from three different points of 
view: avoiding excessive strain, feeling of autonomous and 
meaningful work, and development and change at work. A 
holistic measure of well-being at work, applying agile practices 
and managerial implications will be developed further in the 
empirical research. 
Keywords: agile methods; teamwork; well-being; change 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One rationale behind agile methods is the need to 
increase the quality of systems development projects. 
Typical problems relate to timetable, budget, customer 
needs 
and 
market 
demands, 
communication 
and 
cooperation, and the level of competence. The problems 
also include different practices of the customer and the 
developer team, e.g., following waterfall methods vs. agile 
practices. The software crisis has meant fundamental need 
for a new paradigm: the need to respond to constant changes 
[1]. The newest solution to this has been agile methods. 
Agile methodologies and practices emerged as an explicit 
attempt to more formally embrace higher rates of 
requirements change [27]. From the developers' point of 
view agility means the ability to act according to changing 
customer needs and continuous change. It enables the 
project to advance systematically even when stable and 
perfect product planning cannot be done at the beginning of 
the project. This aims at higher quality and customer 
satisfaction. 
Technological solutions do not solve all the problems 
related to software development. So, it makes sense to 
explore other factors related to quality, like project 
management and organizing of work. Despite agile methods 
are widespread there has been relatively little scientific 
research on their application and organizational gains 
[4][17]. Agile methods have often been studied from the 
point of view of system productivity and efficiency, but 
well-being at work has not been studied that much 
systematically. Agile principles hold many promises in 
relation to well-being at work in theory but there has been 
little scientific research on how they are applied in practice 
[16][22]. There has been research on, e.g., around agile 
methods and teamwork aspect, though. Indeed, in their 
systematic review Dybå and Dingsøyr [8] found human and 
social factors as one thematic group of agile literature. 
 The objective of this preliminary literature review is to 
inspect the connections between agile work practices and 
well-being at work and based on this provides a case 
research setting. Through this research setting a model for 
adopting practices that enhance the well-being at work in 
agile environment can be developed. The questions of this 
preliminary literature review are: 1) Do agile working 
practices support the well-being of agile team members and 
if so, how; and 2) What kind of challenges agile practices 
bring to maintaining well-being at work and sustainable 
productive work.  
Next, in Section 2 A., our view of agile methods is 
presented. After that, in Sections 2 B and 2 C., the frame of 
well-being at work in planning and implementation phases of 
agile practices is presented. In Section 3, the case research 
setting is presented and in Section 4, the future work is 
described. 
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
A. Agile Principles and Practices 
Four agile values have been stated in the Manifesto for 
Agile Software Development [29]. The most important one 
related to the well-being at work is valuing individuals and 
interaction over processes and tools. Principles behind the 
Agile Manifesto include the values broken down to 12 [30]. 
Of these principles the most important ones in relation to 
well-being at work are: 1) Build projects around motivated 
individuals, give them the environment and support they 
need and trust them to get the work done; 2) Promote 
sustainable pace: be able to maintain a constant pace 
indefinitely; 3) Best results emerge from self-organized 
teams; and 4) Teams reflect regularly when and how to 
improve. Self-organizing teams on one hand require and on 
the other produce motivated personnel.  
364
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
The agile principles have been implemented through 
different practices. It is the way agile practices are applied 
that determines whether they are beneficial or harmful to 
well-being at work. Porchen [12] states that opportunities of 
agile methods have been in focus, but now, the view is 
shifting to risks. 
In the Shine Technologies’ survey [24], “people over 
processes” was the most liked feature of agile processes and 
“lack of authority” one of the least liked. According to 
Smith and Oltmann [25] the environment for flexibility 
requires putting the people and team first: the right people, 
commitment and dedication and adequate authority. Within 
Crystal people, interaction, community, skills, talents, and 
communication are considered as most important [27]. 
Also, for example XP states its own values (e.g., 
communication, feedback, courage and respect) and 
principles (e.g., embracing change). Courage may mean, 
e.g., the development team’s courage to resist pressure to 
make 
unrealistic 
commitments 
[27]. 
Informal 
communication channels in agile methods include co-
located teams, pair programming and daily stand-ups [7]. 
XP promotes teamwork by the fundamental that all software 
is produced in pairs, two programmers at one screen [3]. 
The goal is also not to force team members to specialize – 
every XP programmer participates in all of activities. Also, 
differences exist, e.g., Scrum prescribes cross-functional 
teams while Kanban allows specialist teams [12].  
When applying agile methodology there are two main 
changing forces: continuous development of agile team’s 
work processes and introducing agile to the organization. 
When considering the inception of agile methods it is 
important for managers to understand the factors that affect 
the adoption and its consequences to well-being at work. 
Also, in the operation phase it is important to know how to 
promote their use in a way that supports well-being at work. 
B. Well-being at Work when Using Agile 
Agile principles promote well-being in theory and it is 
commonly believed they increase the well-being of the 
developers. Agile methods hold many promises in relation 
to well-being at work, for example human centricity, 
interaction, and steady workload. However, they may also 
implicate strain, such as lack of recovery time and unfit 
management culture. Customer-drive, continuous reacting, 
changing goals, flexibility, culture change and new practices 
challenge well-being and expose to strain. In this paper, we 
understand well-being at work through three viewpoints 
defined by Gerlander and Launis [9]: avoiding excessive 
strain at work, feeling of autonomous and meaningful work, 
and change and development in work. Related ways of 
understanding well-being at work that have been studied 
within software engineering include motivation, job 
satisfaction, and employee retention, for example.  
Avoiding excessive strain is one aspect of well-being at 
work. It means a balance between one’s tasks and 
capabilities, work that matches the capabilities both 
qualitatively (not too challenging or too easy) and 
quantitatively (not too much or too little work) [11]. The 
balance theory evaluates the potential positive and negative 
impacts that could alter the balance of work system 
elements and result in stress load experienced by agile teams 
[28]. For example, when operating with XP practices, like 
40-hour work weeks, it enables teams to work and maintain 
a sustainable pace [14]. Working overtime for a short time is 
accepted, but productivity collapses if teams work overtime 
for long periods. XP teams do not work excessive overtime 
for long periods of time [27]. 
Mann and Maurer’s [15] results indicate that after the 
introduction of a Scrum process into an existing software 
development 
organization 
the 
amount 
of 
overtime 
decreased. This allows the developers to work at a more 
sustainable pace. Risks of agile methods still include self-
intensification, overworking oneself and the threat to work-
life balance [20], even though agile methods explicitly try to 
avoid them. There is evidence that balancing resources and 
workload (optimal resource allocation) is a labor-intensive 
and error-prone task [26]. Sherehiy [23] also found that a 
combination of job demands and job uncertainty have a 
significant effect on workforce agility. She suggests that a 
high level of uncertainty may increase perceived job 
demands and impede adaptivity at work.   
The second core aspect of well-being at work is the 
subjective experience of meaningfulness and autonomy of 
work [cf. 2]. Within this aspect the focus is on the individual 
experiences and feelings of work, work practices and 
community. According to Mah and  Lunt [12] creating 
quality with clean code means taking pride in what you do, 
without compromising one’s professionalism. Sherehiy’s 
[23] results revealed that the autonomy at work is one of the 
most important predictors of workforce agility, as well as 
well-being. 
C. Considering of Well-being at Work when Planning to 
Implement Agile 
Work organization is a main factor to anticipate 
meaningfulness and autonomy: governing practices (e.g., 
objectives, purposes, meanings), coordination procedures 
(e.g., 
work 
distribution 
methods, 
processes), 
and 
surveillance routines (e.g., monitoring rituals, standards) [6]. 
Sherehiy [23] suggests that if the management implements 
agile strategies in a way that positively affects job 
autonomy, job uncertainty, and employees' collaboration, it 
is more likely that employees will be able to perform a job 
in an adaptive and flexible way. Also, Maruping, Venkatesh 
and Agarwal [17] argue that the most effective control 
models are those that provide teams with autonomy in 
determining the methods for achieving project objectives. 
It has also been shown that agile team could attain its 
flexible way of working only with the autonomy of the 
team. That bundles up agile way of working and well-being 
at work. For example, in a study of video game 
programming, agile project practices were found to be more 
365
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
empowering and flexible than other management methods 
emphasizing more management control [6]. In a related 
study, when shifting over to more centralized control of 
projects in a corporate R&D function of an IT company, 
engineers generally reacted to the attempted introduction of 
a new regime by increasingly presenting themselves as 
distinct from management [10]. Developers may sometimes 
view using of agile processes as an attempt to micromanage 
[6]. The risks of agile methods include ignoring self-
determination, 
rigid 
organizational 
structures 
and 
possibilities of selection and control [20]. 
The third aspect of well-being at work considered is the 
development and change of work. Developing capabilities 
are essential in becoming agile [13]. Qualitative changes at 
work and in its environment occur faster and faster, non-
stop and take place simultaneously. The challenges to well-
being at work emerge as discontinuous work flow and 
unexpected interruptions [19].  
Mayfield [18] found that in the transition to an agile 
development methodology there was an initial period of 
decision uncertainty and anxiety but that it was only 
temporary. Since agile adoption involves a significant 
process and organizational change, it is critical to success to 
focus initially on the human and cultural issues involved 
[21]. Boisnier and Chatman [5] propose that organizations 
may still benefit from simultaneously managing strong, 
stable cultures while maintaining the flexibility and 
adaptability necessary to survive the ebbs and flows of 
turbulent environments. When introducing agile methods, 
management practices and tools, motivated business 
experts, and common methods of managing change are 
needed in order to realize change and avoid the chaos 
caused by unpredictability and complexity [1]. 
Briand and Hodgson [6] identify agile methods as 
flexible, empowering and post-bureaucratic and non-
hierarchical – as an attempt to mitigate the formal 
inflexibility of traditional project management to fit the 
demands of software creation. Agility literature emphasizes 
the importance of the development of a flexible, adaptable 
and highly knowledgeable workforce that is able to deal 
with unexpected and uncertain situations [23]. Teams 
operating within the context of agile are characterized as 
multifunctional, dynamic, and cooperative [28]. 
III. 
RESEARCH SETTING 
In this section, a case research setting – planned for 
studying the connections between agile methods and well-
being at work – is presented. The research targets are the 
experiences of the reality of agile practices and their 
perceived implications for well-being at work. The topic is 
analyzed through the following questions: 1) How do agile 
working practices in project management advance well-
being at work? Do agile management principles support the 
well-being of agile team members? 2) What kind of 
challenges agile practices bring to maintaining well-being at 
work and sustainable productive work? The objective is to 
analyze the connection between agile work practices and 
well-being at work, and based on this analysis provide a 
model for adopting practices that enhance the well-being at 
work in product and service development. 
Our preliminary hypotheses are, that when the agile 
practices are applied correctly: 1) they help to keep work 
strain steady during a working period (e.g., sprint), 2), they 
maintain and promote meaningfulness and autonomy of 
work and 3) they diminish discontinuity and interruptions at 
work and make development of work more fluent and 
natural part of work.  
Factors of agile methods that produce and challenge well-
being at work of the team are studied in three case 
companies. The research methods include a web based 
survey of well-being at work, physiological stress indicators 
and interviews of team members and supervisors. The 
outcomes of the research are the perceptions of applying 
agile and evidence based new knowledge with objective 
established methods. 
With a web based survey agile methods of software 
development 
are 
explored 
through 
team 
members' 
experiences. Well-being is studied with established 
measures and taking advantage of existing well-being and 
agile surveys. By physiological stress measurements stress 
levels felt during the agile projects can be measured. In 
interviews of team members there are questions of applying 
agile practices, perceived well-being at work in general, 
experiences of well-being at work when applying agile 
practices, and expectations and needs to develop of agile 
practices.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
 Through the methods described a holistic measure of 
well-being at work, applying agile methods, and managerial 
implications will be developed. The development of these 
issues takes use of a literature review, collection existing 
measures and results from the case study. In the future, the 
validation of the holistic measure also needs a wider 
statistical background from different kinds of agile teams. 
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This WIP paper is a part of Agile and Lean Product 
Development Methods for Embedded ICT Systems project 
(2012–2014), funded by TEKES – the Finnish Funding 
Agency for Technology and Innovation. Partners of the 
project are: BA Group, Ericsson, Finnish Institute of 
Occupational Health, FiSMA, Lindorff Finland, Neoxen 
Systems, Nextfour Group, Nordic ID and University of 
Turku. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Abrahamsson, Agile software development introduction: 
Introduction, current status & future. Jyväskylä, Finland: VTT 
Electronics, 2005. 
[2] A. Antonovsky, Unraveling the mystery of health? How 
people manage stress and stay well. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass Publishers, 1987. 
366
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
[3] K. Beck, Extreme programming explained. Boston: Addison-
Wesley, 1999. 
[4] M. S. Bird, “Utilizing agile software development as an 
effective and efficient process to reduce development time 
and maintain quality software delivery,” Dissertation 
Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and 
Engineering, vol. 71, no. 5–B, 2010, 3329. 
[5] A. Boisnier and J. A. Chatman, “The role of subcultures in 
agile organizations,” in Leading and managing people in the 
dynamic organization, R. D. Day, R. S. Peterson, and E. A. 
Mannix, Eds. Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlaum Associates 
Publishers, 2003, pp. 87–112. 
[6] L. Briand and D.E Hodgson, “Management of creative 
projects or creative project management? Agile projects as 
micro-emancipation,” Paper presented at the 7th international 
Critical Management Studies Conference, Naples, Italy, July 
2011. 
[7] A. Cockburn, “Agile software development joins the "would-
be" crowd,” Cutter IT Journal, vol. 15, no. 1, 2002, pp. 6–12. 
[8] T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review,” Information and 
Software Technology, vol. 50, no. 9–10, 2008, pp. 833–859. 
[9] E.-M. 
Gerlander 
and 
K. 
Launis, 
“Työhyvinvoinnin 
tarkasteluikkunat,” Työelämän tutkimus, vol. 5, no. 3, 2007, 
pp. 202–212. 
[10] P. Gleadle, D. E. Hodgson, and S. Storey, “Project managing 
R&D engineers: Assent and recalcitrance,” Paper presented at 
the 
7th 
International 
Critical 
Management 
Studies 
Conference, Naples, Italy, July 2011. 
[11] R. A. Karasek, “Job demand, job decision latitude, and mental 
strain: Implications for job redesign,” Administrative Science 
Quarterly, vol. 24, 1979, pp. 285–309. 
[12] H. Kniberg, Kanban and Scrum – Making the most of both, 
2009 http://www.crisp.se/file-uploads/Kanban-vs-Scrum.pdf, 
20.8.2013 
[13] V. P Kochikar and M. P. Ravindra, “Developing the 
capability to be agile,” Organization Development Journal, 
vol. 25, no. 4, 2007, pp. 127–134. 
[14] M. Mah and M. Lunt, How agile projects measure up, and 
what this means to you, The Cutter Consortium Executive 
Report, 2009. 
[15] C. Mann and M. Maurer, “A case study on the impact of 
Scrum on overtime and customer satisfaction,” Proc. The 
Agile Development Conference (ADC ’05), July 2005, pp. 
70–79, doi: 10.1109/ADC.2005.1 
[16] A. Marchenko and P. Abrahamsson, “Scrum in a multiproject 
environment: An ethnographically-inspired case study on the 
adoption challenges,” Proc. AGILE '08 Conference, Aug. 
2008, pp. 15–26, doi: 10.1109/Agile.2008.77  
[17] L. M. Maruping, V. Venkatesh, and R. Agarwal, “A control 
theory perspective on agile methodology use and changing 
user requirements,” Information Systems Research, vol. 20, 
no. 3, 2009, pp. 377–399. 
[18] K. M. Mayfield, “Project managers' experience and 
description of decision uncertainty associated with the agile 
software development methodology: A phenomenological 
study,” Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The 
Sciences and Engineering, vol. 71 (12–B), 2011, 7772. 
[19] J. Mäkitalo, Work-related well-being in the transformation of 
nursing home work. Oulu, Finland: University of Oulu, D 
837, 2005. 
[20] S. Porschen, “Management of the informal by cooperative 
transfer of experience,” in Innovation management by 
promoting the informal: Artistic, experience-based, playful, F. 
Böhle, M. Bürgermeister, and S. Porschen, Eds. Dordrecht: 
Springer, 2012, pp. 105–142. 
[21] QSMA, The agile impact report. Proven performance metrics 
from the agile enterprise, A report from QSMA Associates, 
2008. 
[22] O. Salo and P. Abrahamsson, Agile methods in European 
embedded software development organisations: A survey on 
the actual use and usefulness of Extreme Programming and 
Scrum. Oulu, Finland: VTT Tech. Res. Centre of Finland, vol.  
2, no. 1, 2006, pp. 58–64, doi: 10.1049/iet-sen:20070038 
[23] B. Sherehiy, “Relationships between agility strategy, work 
organization and workforce agility,” Dissertation, Kentucky, 
University of Louisville, 2008 http://louisville.edu/speed/ 
industrial/academics/Bohdana%20Dissertation.pdf  20.8.2013 
[24] Shine 
Technology's 
Agile 
Adoption 
Survey, 
2003 
http://www.shinetech.com/agile_survey_results.jsp 20.8.2013 
[25] P. G. Smith and J. Oltmann, “Flexible project management: 
extending agile projects beyond software projects,” Proc. PMI 
Global Congress, Oct. 2010, http://strategy2market.com/ 
Preston-Smith/Articles/PMI/Flexible-Project-Management-
Congress.pdf 20.8.2013 
[26] Á. Szöke, “Decision Support for Iteration Scheduling in Agile 
Environments,” Lecture Notes in Business Information 
Processing, vol. 32, 2009, pp. 156–170. 
[27] L. Williams, A Survey of Agile Development Methodologies, 
2007 http://agile.csc.ncsu.edu/SEMaterials/AgileMethods.pdf 
20.8.2013 
[28] C. A. Yauch, “Team-based work and work system balance in 
the context of agile manufacturing,” Applied Ergonomics, 
vol. 38, no. 1, 2007, pp. 19–27.  
[29] www.agilemanifesto.org Manifesto for Agile Software 
Development, 20.8.2013. 
[30] www.agilemanifesto.org/principles.html Principles behind the 
Agile Manifesto, 20.8.2013. 
 
367
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

