Web-Based Focus Groups for Requirements Elicitation 
 
Carla Farinha 
IST / Opensoft, S.A. 
Lisboa, Portugal 
carla.farinha@opensoft.pt 
Miguel Mira da Silva 
IST / INOV 
Lisboa, Portugal 
mms@ist.utl.pt
 
 
Abstract—Requirements determine how an Information 
System should operate. Requirements Engineering errors 
become failure reasons of the Information System. In this 
paper we propose a Web-based focus group method to 
overcome many problems of the requirements elicitation 
activity. Collaboration is promoted in discussions involving all 
stakeholders to achieve consensual decisions. The proposal was 
evaluated with two real-world experiments the results of which 
reveal 
the 
potential 
of 
the 
method. 
The 
successful 
implementation of the proposed method can avoid many 
limitations of the requirements elicitation traditional methods, 
such as misunderstandings between stakeholders and analysts. 
Keywords: 
Requirements 
Elicitation; 
Focus 
Groups; 
Collaboration Tools 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Requirements are the heart of Information Systems 
Development since the earliest days of computing [1] 
because they determine how the system will operate [2], [3], 
[4]. Nevertheless, errors on the elicitation activity still 
represent major causes for the failure of these systems [5]. 
Requirements elicitation is influenced by many factors, 
including contextual, human, economic, and educational 
factors. It is also constrained by issues such as the specific 
process and project, the difficulties in communication and 
understanding between stakeholders and analysts, the quality 
of identified requirements, stakeholders’ conflicts, and the 
experience and practice of the analyst [4].  Moreover, 
stakeholders should identify real needs but they may not 
know what they need and analysts may not understand 
business concepts [6], [7], [8]. Errors made at this activity 
cost around 80-100 times more if discovered at the 
implementation stage [1] and are very hard to fix [9].  
The social nature of Requirements Elicitation has been 
leading to the usage of social sciences approaches [4], 
including ethnography [10], [11] interviews [3], [12] or 
group work [13-17].  
We propose a web-based Focus Groups method to 
overcome major problems of Requirements Elicitation [15]. 
Requirements are discussed between all stakeholders that 
want to contribute with ideas. The goal is to find a global 
overview of real needs and to negotiate incoming conflicts. 
Finally, identified needs are resumed in a report according to 
their relevance. Our proposal was evaluated with Action 
Research with a real problematic situation, developing skills 
of organizational members to overcome that situation, and 
adding scientific knowledge [18, 19]. 
We present recent trends of requirements elicitation 
methods and relate collaboration tools in Section 2. Section 3 
describes our proposal and research, including our 
experiments. Finally, Section 4 discusses concluding 
remarks and future research work. 
II. 
REQUIREMENTS ELICITATION  
Requirements Elicitation is a critical activity of the 
Requirements Engineering process [4, 20] for many reasons. 
First, the activity relies on a complex and error-prone 
communication between stakeholders and analysts. Second, 
stakeholders are not always clear about what they want or 
need. Finally, analysts may not understand the business 
concepts [1, 7, 8].  
The communication 
nature of the Requirements 
Elicitation activity and its social context is incontestable [6, 
8, 12]. As such, methods for this activity are deriving from 
social sciences’ methods [4].  
A. Methods from Social Sciences  
Zowghi and Coulin [4] surveyed aspects of techniques, 
approaches and tools for requirements elicitation and 
aggregated them in 8 groups that cover the whole spectrum. 
The 
groups 
that 
actively 
involve 
stakeholders 
are 
ethnography, interview and group work, considered as 
alternative to each other.  
Ethnography is the observation of people in their natural 
environment 
[10, 
11]. 
Crabtree, 
Nichols, 
O’Brien, 
Rouncefield and Twidale [11]  studied this method and 
reveal limitations, including risk of incorrect interpretation 
[10], impossibility of identifying new requirements [20] or 
difficulty of generalizing results. Sommerville [21] says that 
ethnography is incomplete, being useful as a complement. 
Interviewing is an informal interaction where analysts 
gather requirements asking questions about the system in use 
and the system to be [4, 9, 21]. Davey and Cope [3] studied 
interviews as best practice for requirements elicitation but 
they admit that more research is needed about the nature of 
conversations in the field to bring successful results. Goguen 
and 
Linde 
[12] 
evaluated 
techniques 
for 
eliciting 
requirements, including interviews, and concluded that this 
method is limited by the stimulus-response interaction and 
by the need of participants to share basic concepts and 
methods. Sommerville [21] states that interviewing is 
unsuitable to identify organizational requirements and 
constraints, but could be used as complementary method. 
504
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

Group work, such as brainstorming, joint application 
development, creativity workshops or focus groups, gathers 
stakeholders to collaborate reaching solutions about an 
identified problematic situation. Typical limitations of group 
work are dominant participants, biased opinions, high 
logistic costs and gathering stakeholders [4, 22].  
Concluding, ethnography is incomplete on covering the 
fundamental types of activities of requirements elicitation 
and has relevant limitations. As for group work and 
interviews, the group work have many advantages since they 
can obtain a more complete overview of the system, richer 
information and resolution of conflicts through stakeholders’ 
discussions rather than with individual interviews [4]. 
B. Group Work Methods 
There are many group work methods, including 
brainstorming and workshops, which includes JAD, 
creativity workshops and focus groups.  
Brainstorming joins stakeholders in informal discussions 
to rapidly generate ideas without focusing on any one. It is 
used to develop the preliminary mission statement for the 
project but not to explore requirements [4].   
Joint Application Development (JAD) discussions focus 
needs of business and users rather than technical issues to 
make decisions. JAD differs from brainstorms since main 
goals of the system are already established before the 
discussion [4]. Davidson [14] studied 3 organizations using 
JAD and concluded that, although there are improvements in 
systems development, JAD is difficult to sustain in practice. 
Coughlan [2] also presented studies of JAD in practice, 
demonstrating that JAD forces a rigid user-designer 
interaction, is weak at acquiring knowledge and complicated 
to use in practice.  
Creativity workshops encourage creative thinking to 
discover and invent system requirements [23]. Maiden and 
Robertson [23] used creativity workshops to discover 
stakeholder and system requirements, concluding that the 
overall process was successful but not all of the workshop 
sessions. 
Focus Groups are discussion groups facilitated by a 
specialist that follows a guide to orientate the discussion 
around key questions [24, 25]. The preparation of the method 
requires defining groups (size and composition) and 
procedures (number of sessions and moderator guide). This 
method differs from other group-based methods because of 
the group special characteristics: homogeneous and focused 
on key topics to collect inductive and natural information 
[24]. Engelbrektssonn, Yesil and Karlsson [17] studied 
methodological 
considerations 
with 
focus 
groups, 
concluding that an efficient choice of participants and 
mediating tools are also important to enhance the 
requirements elicitation activity. Farinha and Mira da Silva 
[16] applied Focus Groups in real-world experiments to 
better elicit requirements of information systems, concluding 
that stakeholders discuss different perspectives about the 
system as a whole and collaborate to formalize the 
requirements according to their needs but dominant users 
and analysis costs were serious limitations. Kasirun and 
Salim [26] evaluated a requirement elicitation tool based on 
a forum that employed Focus Groups, demonstrating that a 
web-based tool supports shared involvement and eases 
requirements elicitation but further research is needed to 
prove results.  
Many researchers have been studying requirements 
elicitation 
problem 
using 
social 
sciences’ 
methods, 
particularly group work. However, the problem still exists 
and much more empirical work is needed [2, 3]. 
C. Collaboration Tools to Elicit Requirements 
The intense communication of requirements elicitation 
[7, 22], demands a high level of collaboration [27]. However, 
it is difficult to gather stakeholders at the same time and 
place [1, 9, 28]. This is why collaboration tools have been 
applied to requirements elicitation [4, 27].  
Collaboration tools allow the cooperation of all 
stakeholders in several phases of the software process, 
including in requirements engineering. Choosing one of the 
wide range of collaboration tools demands defining types of 
tasks to accomplish, making an inventory of the existing 
software and hardware infrastructures and knowing the 
experience and capabilities of the team [27]. 
Herbsleb [29] studied a desired global development 
considering coordination as a key. He considered challenges 
in several areas, including eliciting and communicating 
requirements, concluding that is needed a systematic 
understanding of what drives the need to coordinate and 
effective mechanisms for bringing. 
Whitehead [27] studied goals of collaboration in software 
engineering and existing collaboration tools, particularly 
web-based tools. He realized that there is no integrated web-
based environment to cover the entire development lifecycle. 
He also concluded that is important to understand the 
collaborative nature of software engineering combined with 
low costs of high capabilities of communication platforms to 
improve collaboration in the creation of software artifacts. 
III. 
PROPOSAL 
In this paper we propose to address requirements 
elicitation problems, including difficulties on gathering 
stakeholders, misunderstandings between stakeholders and 
analysts, quality of identified requirements and stakeholders’ 
conflicts. In order to do so, our key concerns were allowing 
an asynchronous and distributed communication; avoiding 
interpretation of results by analysts; inviting all stakeholders 
to contribute with their ideas; and obtaining agreement of all 
stakeholders about the identified needs.  
To accomplish these challenges, we propose an effective 
requirements elicitation method, based on a collaboration 
tool that integrates the Focus Group method. Before using 
the method, boundaries of the system and key discussion 
topics must be defined by project managers. Finally, a report 
with the results must be delivered to project managers.  
Although many proposals of collaboration tools with 
focus groups exist, we introduce distinctive features. One of 
the most important features is opening the discussion to all 
stakeholders, allowing the input of all necessary parts of the 
problem. We also added a voting system, which is not 
usually applied to focus groups. We compared a focus group 
505
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

with anonymous contributions versus a focus group with 
identified contributions. Finally, we evaluated our proposal 
in a real environment. 
In order to be successful, we assume that all stakeholders 
are interested in the Information System and want to 
contribute with ideas. We also assume that questions to 
discuss are defined by client project managers that know the 
limits of their desired solution.  Finally, we believe that 
stakeholders actually take advantage of the asynchronous 
communication, which allows thinking on the problem, 
understanding other perspectives and generate new ideas to 
contribute again. 
Our requirement elicitation method demands defining 
limits and goals with project managers conduct the focus 
group and resume results. We propose the following steps: 
1) Define scope and questions 
2) Prepare the focus group in a collaboration tool 
configuring desired properties (anonymity, navigation, etc.) 
3) Conduct the focus group  
4) Report results 
A. Define scope and questions 
This step intends to define limits of the desired solution 
and key questions to address in the focus group. Analysts 
have to meet with project managers to define these limits and 
the questions they find important to discuss. 
B. Prepare the focus group 
The focus group must be configured in a collaboration 
tool according to desired and adequate features.  For 
example, shall the participants be identified or anonymous? 
Is there a navigation rule to answer the questions? How shall 
participants give their contributions?  
In this experiment, we compared two approaches: 
1) Comment-oriented forum, based on comments.  
2) Vote-oriented forum, based on comments and votes. 
 
The comment-oriented forum was configured in a self-
hosted blogging tool. Each page had a question where 
stakeholders could comment. Following the orientations of a 
regular focus group moderator guide, these pages had a 
sequential order. Participants were advised to navigate and 
comment according to that order in the first time but they 
could freely navigate and comment any page. Opening and 
ending questions were excluded because they wouldn’t make 
sense in an online method. Anonymity was integrated in this 
forum so that stakeholders could freely express opinions. 
The vote-oriented forum was configured in a question & 
answer tool. Only key questions from a regular focus group 
were initially introduced to reduce the extensiveness of the 
time spent to answer. Participants could comment questions 
and others’ ideas vote on posted ideas and introduce new 
questions. No navigation recommendations were provided. 
Anonymity wasn’t integrated in this approach.  
C. Conduct the focus group 
The administration of the forums had to moderate the 
discussions. This moderation required to follow comments 
and, if needed, delete comments, encourage discussions or 
probe for more information. 
When conflicts of interests rise and it is impossible to 
satisfy different identified needs, participants shall be 
advised to resolve the disagreement. Whether they all agree 
with a solution becomes irrelevant after all because the most 
voted need is chosen. 
D. Report Results 
In order to avoid interpretation of results, analysts shall 
list identified needs and organize in a descending order. This 
order must be according to the number of positive comments 
asking for the need or to the positive votes.  
IV. 
EVALUATION 
Our proposal was evaluated on an enterprise of 
technological solutions, mainly e-government solutions. 
There are 60 employees that are from 23 to 40 years old and, 
the majority, are IT savvy. 
The desired Information System was an in-house 
Information System to manage activities. The enterprise had 
an old solution that was outdated and not aligned with 
current needs. The modules they wanted to improve were 
time reporting, project management and financials.  
Both forums defined in subsection B of the proposal were 
evaluated for a period of time. The comment-oriented forum 
was applied to discuss the time reporting module while the 
vote-oriented forum was applied to discuss the other two 
modules. Table I resumes the features of these forums. 
TABLE I.  
FEATURES OF THE FORUMS 
Forum 
Comment-
Oriented 
Vote-Oriented 
Module 
Feature 
Time Reporting 
Project 
Management 
Financials 
Participation 
Comments 
Comments 
and Votes 
Comments 
and Votes 
Period 
20 days 
20 days 
20 days 
Initial 
Questions 
8 
3 
3 
Sequential 
Navigation 
Yes 
No 
No 
Anonymity 
Yes 
No 
No 
 
All employees have to report time and, as such, 
stakeholders of the time reporting module are all of the 
employees. As with project management and financials 
modules, only project managers and directors have to 
coordinate these activities. As a result, only the 14 
employees that are project managers and directors were 
invited to discuss these two modules.  
V. 
RESULTS 
The main results are presented in Table II. The comment-
oriented forum obtained around 10.25 comments per 
discussion topic and 15 identified needs. Anonymous 
comments made it impossible to measure the average 
comments per user and no vote system was integrated. Some 
506
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

participants posted figures and graphics as examples of their 
perspectives. 
The vote-oriented forum obtained, per discussion topic, 
around 18 comments in the project management module 
discussion and 11.30 comments in the financials module 
discussion. No other discussion topics were introduced by 
the participants. The average comments per user were 4.79 in 
the project management module discussion and 1.36 in the 
financials module discussion. The vote system verified 
around 7.14 votes per user. Finally, 33 needs were identified 
for the project management module and 11 needs for the 
financials module.  
TABLE II.  
MEASURED INDICATORS 
Forum 
Comment-
Oriented 
Vote-Oriented 
Module 
Characteristic 
Time Reporting 
Project 
Management 
Financials 
Comments per 
topic 
10.25 
18 
11.30 
Comments per 
user 
- 
4.79 
1.36 
Votes per user 
- 
7.14 
Identified 
Needs 
15 
33 
11 
 
The number of comments during the discussion period 
was also measured. Figure 1 shows that the comment-
oriented forum had a regular participation over time. 
However, the vote-oriented forum had a higher participation 
on the last days of the discussion, particularly in the last 
three days. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Participation during the Discussion Period. 
The resolution of conflicts was performed by participants 
themselves. When conflicts of interests rose and it was 
impossible to satisfy different identified needs, participants 
were advised to resolve the disagreement. The discussion 
with all stakeholders allowed them to understand the other 
perspective. More support and justifications were given to 
one of the perspectives and the most approved was finally 
agreed.  
After closing the discussion period, employees were 
asked about their participation, including reasons that lead 
them to participate or not. The received feedback involved 
30% of the participants invited to the comment-oriented 
forum and 50% of the participants invited to the vote-
oriented forum. The results are presented in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
FEEDBACK 
Type 
Feedback  
Nonparticipation 
Reasons 
No ideas, lack of time to participate and recent 
employees with no experience 
Positive Aspects  
Extensive to all employees, anonymity, simple 
participation rules, structured discussion  and 
open comments about discussion topics 
Improvements  
Present just key discussion topics, give rewards 
to participants, support the vote system to avoid 
repeating ideas, suppress suggested answers, no 
anonymity to avoid unreasonable censures 
 
No transcriptions of the discussion were needed since it 
was already written. Identified needs were resumed in a 
descending order and included in a report delivered to 
project managers. Priorities were defined according to the 
number of references in the comment-oriented forum and to 
the number of votes in the vote-oriented forum 
VI. 
LEARNING 
Stakeholders’ feedback confirms that this initiative was 
considered useful so that they could express their opinions.  
Results show a higher participation rate in the vote-
oriented forum although this forum involved only 14 
stakeholders. Votes also counted as participations, which 
may explain this result. Typically, people avoid spending 
time on writing or exposing detailed ideas and the 
participants’ final feedback for the voting system highlights 
this fact. It is easier to vote than to write comments.  
Although we verified a higher participation rate in the 
vote-oriented forum, we consider that both forums had a fair 
participation rate. The contributions were rich, since they 
were always justified and, some included uploads of hand-
made 
illustrations 
to 
explain 
and 
substantiate 
the 
participant’s idea. As such, the comments were not only 
quantitatively but also qualitatively meaningful. 
The asynchronous communication aspect of this tool 
allowed participants to express perspectives along time 
whenever they could. Also, the online tool allowed users to 
contribute with their ideas from wherever they were.  
We also verified that users of both forums did not answer 
to all of the discussion topics. The topics with high 
discussion rates were key discussion topics in the comment-
oriented forum and difficulties questions to judge the 
existing modules in the vote-oriented forum. This not only 
reveals that stakeholders prefer to directly answer key 
questions, but also that people are critical since there were 
more criticisms than comments about positive aspects or new 
ideas. Criticisms are also useful to understand what is wrong 
and should be improved.  
The identified needs were mostly technical requests. For 
example, users wrote that the existing modules are too slow, 
that some buttons should be available, that certain 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
Time Reporting
Project Management
Financials
Days
#
 
507
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

information is needed or that a particular navigation would 
be better than the existing one. This can easily be explained 
by the participants’ profiles: almost all participants are 
computer engineers and, as such, they understand the 
problems behind the existing modules and tend to express 
technical opinions. This is clear since the comments of less 
technical users were also less technical. 
Anonymity promoted free answers in the one hand, but it 
lead to less participation and conflicts in the other hand. 
Anonymity brought unexpected criticisms that otherwise 
could not have been revealed. These criticisms also brought 
conflicting perspectives that were discussed, always reaching 
consensus. However, the forum without anonymity had more 
comments per user indicating a commitment sense of 
identified users. The lack of conflicts may mean that users 
agreed to each other or that they did not feel free to disagree. 
Some participants believe that anonymity allows free 
expression of ideas without fear of consequences while 
others think that anonymity brings unreasonable criticisms.  
Figure 1 shows that the comment-oriented forum had 
more regular participation than the vote-oriented one, which 
had more participation at the end of the period. This fact may 
be explained because votes also count as participation and at 
the end of the period there were more comments to vote. 
Actually, this voting system helps users not to repeat ideas 
and to prioritize needs. It is also possible to vote when 
comments are available, incrementing the participation rate. 
Most important, suggested needs were integrated in a 
new version of the time reporting module and the overall 
feedback of stakeholders was positive. Moreover, they use 
the module more frequently, with fewer problems and 
without spending much time. These results prove that our 
method helps overcoming limitations, such as difficulties in 
communication and understanding between stakeholders and 
analysts, quality of identified requirements, stakeholders’ 
conflicts, and the experience and practice of the analyst. 
Also, this method overcomes well know problems of group 
work methods, including dominant users with no limitations 
of time for each participant; gathering stakeholders at the 
same time and place with an online tool; generalization of 
results with the involvement of all stakeholders; and 
simplification of the analysis since no transcriptions or 
interpretations are needed. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Stakeholders approved the initiative of freely expressing 
ideas in a simple and structured online forum. They prefer 
the voting system than repeating others’ ideas and the 
discussion of key questions than starting with trivial and 
irrelevant discussion topics. Anonymity on the one hand 
helps users to make more censorious comments but, on the 
other hand, seems to take out the participation commitment 
and to discourage the disagreement of ideas. As such, some 
participants would prefer anonymity while others think that 
comments should be identified to avoid unreasonable and 
thoughtless criticism. We conclude that this proposal 
allowed quickly eliciting needs from all stakeholders.  
After implementing the suggested needs for the time 
reporting module, the results prove that the method was a 
success. Stakeholders are pleased with the new system and 
report their time more frequently, without mistakes or 
complaints. As such, we can conclude that the proposed 
method was a success. 
Our method seems more effective over existing methods 
with our new features. The most significant feature is 
opening the discussion to all stakeholders. With this features, 
we wanted to ensure that inputs of important requirements 
would not be forgotten. Also, our proposal added a voting 
system and compared the anonymity aspect in two different 
approaches. This is also an unusual configuration of 
collaborative tools, particularly those who integrate focus 
groups as an elicitation method. These features bring 
effectiveness to the method by allowing a richer overview of 
the system with inputs of everyone, ordered needs with 
priorities given by participants and free expression with the 
anonymous approach or commitment sense with the 
approach with identified participants. 
The major concerns we wanted to address, allowing an 
asynchronous and distributed communication; avoiding 
interpretation of results by analysts; inviting all stakeholders 
to contribute with their ideas; and obtaining agreement of all 
stakeholders about the identified needs, were met. As such, 
the problems we identified to resolve were actually 
addressed. 
This paper proves that a collaboration tool based on focus 
groups allows eliciting requirements more quickly than the 
regular focus group of our previous experiment. This fact is 
easily understood since our previous effort required weeks to 
schedule a meeting with key stakeholders at the same time 
and place and more weeks to analyze results, transcribing the 
sessions and examining the information.  
This paper also proves that a collaboration tool 
overcomes many problems of regular focus groups and 
elicitation methods. For example, communication between 
stakeholders and analysts is eased with this tool. Quality of 
identified requirements is higher since discussion provides 
richer information. Stakeholders’ conflicts may be resolved 
in discussion with other participants. Dominant users are no 
longer a problem since time spent with the contribution of a 
participant does not steal time of another participant. 
Gathering stakeholders at the same time and place is no 
longer a problem as well.  
Note that the demonstrated improvements are not meant 
to apply in general domains but in the maintenance/evolution 
of an existing Information System. 
More research work is needed to confirm these results in 
other projects. The feedback of stakeholders also suggests 
other aspects to include in a future research. First, rewards to 
participants should be given to encourage participation. 
Second, only key discussion topics should be initially 
provided but allowing to add new discussion topics. Third, 
the voting system should always be present. Fourth, 
suggested answers should be removed so that users do not 
feel biased to answer.  
 
 
 
508
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the participants in the presented 
experiment as well as the managers of the organization 
which made the experiment possible. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
D. Avison and G. Fitzgerald, 
Information systems 
development: methodologies, techniques and tools. New 
York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2006. 
[2] 
J. Coughlan and R. Marcredie, "Effective communication in 
requirements elicitation: a comparison of methodologies," 
Requirements Engineering, vol. 7, pp. 47-60, 2002. 
[3] 
B. Davey and C. Cope, "Requirements elicitation - what's 
missing?," in Issues in Informing Science and Information 
Technology. vol. 5, 2008, pp. 543-551  
[4] 
D. Zowghi and C. Coulin, "Requirements Elicitation A 
Survey of Techniques, Approaches and Tools," in 
Engineering and Managing Software Requirements, A. 
Aurum and C. Wohlin, Eds. Berlin: Springer, 2005. 
[5] 
T. S. Group, "The Chaos Report,"  2009. 
[6] 
A. Al-Rawas and S. Easterbrook, "Communication problems 
in requirements engineering: a field study," in First 
Westminster Conference on Professional Awareness in 
Software Engineering London, 1996. 
[7] 
J. F. M. Burg, Linguistic instruments in requirements 
engineering. Amsterdam: IOS Press, 1997. 
[8] 
B. Nuseibeh and S. Easterbrook, "Requirements engineering: 
a roadmap," in Conference on The Future of Software 
Engineering 2000, 2000, pp. 35-46. 
[9] 
R. Hossenlopp and K. B. Hass, Unearthing business 
requirements: elicitation tools and techniques. Vienna: 
Management Concepts, 2007. 
[10] A. Crabtree, "Ethnography in participatory design," in 1998 
Participatory Design Conference Seattle, 1998, pp. 93-105. 
[11] A. Crabtree, D. M. Nichols, J. O’Brien, M. Rouncefield, and 
M. 
B. 
Twidale, 
"Ethnomethodologically-informed 
ethnography and information system design," Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, vol. 51, pp. 666-
682, 2000. 
[12] J. A. Goguen and C. Linde, "Techniques for Requirements 
Elicitation," in Requirements Engineering, S. Fickas and A. 
Finkelstein, Eds.: IEEE Computer Society, 1993, pp. 152-
164. 
[13] W. S. Davis and D. C. Yen, "Joint application design 
(JAD)," in The Information System Consultant's Handbook: 
CRC Press, 1998. 
[14] E. J. Davidson, "Joint Application Design (JAD) in practice," 
Journal of Systems & Software, vol. 45, pp. 215-223, 1999. 
[15] E. W. Duggan and C. S. Thachenkary, "Supporting the JAD 
facilitator with the nominal group technique," Journal of 
Organizational and End User Computing, 2004. 
[16] C. Farinha and M. M. d. Silva, "Focus Groups for eliciting 
requirements in information systems development," in 14th 
UK Academy for Information Systems, 2009, p. 20. 
[17] P. Engelbrektsson, Ö. Yesil, and I. C. M. Karlsson, "Eliciting 
customer requirements in Focus Group interviews: can 
efficiency be increased?," in 7th International Product 
Development Management Conference Belgium, 2000. 
[18] J. Bhattacharjya and J. Venable, "An Action Research 
Approach to Strategic Information Systems Planning in a 
Non-profit Organization," in 3rd International Conference 
on Qualitative Research in IT and IT in Qualitative Research 
Brisbane, Australia, 2006. 
[19] D. Coghlan and T. Brannick, Doing Action Research in your 
own organization, 3 ed. Los Angeles: SAGE Publications 
Ltd, 2009. 
[20] M. Sadiq, M. Shahid, and S. Ahmad, "Adding thread during 
software 
requirements 
elicitation 
and 
prioritization," 
International Journal of Computer Applications, vol. 1, 
2010. 
[21] I. Sommerville, Software engineering, 6 ed. Harlow, 
England: Pearson Education, 2001. 
[22] J. L. Maté and A. Silva, Requirements engineering for 
sociotechnical systems. Hershey, USA: Idea Group Inc (IGI), 
2005. 
[23] N. Maiden and S. Robertson, "Integrating creativity into 
requirements processes: experiences with an air traffic 
management 
system," 
in 
13th 
IEEE 
International 
Conference on Requirements Engineering Paris, 2005, pp. 
105 -114. 
[24] R. A. Krueger and M. A. Casey, Focus groups: a practical 
guide for applied research. California: SAGE, 2000. 
[25] J. Kitzinger, "The methodology of Focus Groups: the 
importance of interaction between research participants," 
Sociology of Health & Illness, vol. 16, pp. 103-121, 1994. 
[26] Z. M. Kasirun and S. S. Salim, "Supporting collaborative 
requirements elicitation using Focus Group discussion," 
International Journal of Software Engineering and its 
Applications, vol. 3, 2009. 
[27] J. Whitehead, "Collaboration in software engineering: a 
roadmap," in Future of Software Engineering, 2007. FOSE 
'07, Minneapolis, 2007. 
[28] D. Apshvalka, D. Donina, and M. Kirikova, "Understanding 
the Problems of Requirements Elicitation Process - A Human 
Perspective," 
in 
Information 
systems 
development: 
challenges in practice, theory, and education. vol. 1, C. 
Barry, K. Conboy, M. Lang, G. Wojtowski, and W. 
Wojtowski, Eds. New York, NY: Springer, 2008, p. 600. 
[29] J. D. Herbsleb, "Global software engineering: the future of 
socio-technical coordination," in Future of Software 
Engineering, 2007. FOSE '07, Minneapolis, 2007, pp. 188-
198. 
 
509
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

