Evaluation of the Applicability of CM3: Emergency Problem Management within 
the Industry  
 
Mira Kajko-Mattsson 
ICT, KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
Kista, Sweden 
mekm2@kth.se 
Joakim Snygg, Emil Hammargren 
DSV, Stockholm University 
Kista, Sweden 
snygg@dsv.su.se, emil-ham@dsv.su.se
 
 
Abstract— Software has become one of the main villains of 
many organizational problems, emergencies and crises. 
Despite this, there is only one process model defining how to 
manage emergency software problems. It is CM3: Emergency 
Problem Management. In this paper, we evaluate the 
applicability of the CM3: Emergency Problem Management 
model within five companies. Our results show that the model 
correctly manages the real-life emergency and crisis situations 
that are dependent on malfunctioning software. This 
evaluation shows that all the five companies have emergency 
processes that reflect CM3 model’s architecture, however, to 
different degrees. Additionally all the five companies have also 
designated roles that act as focal points of information and 
decision making during emergencies. Finally, only one 
company has identified the organizations and systems, which 
should be affected by the emergency process  
Keywords-Problem management; operational levels; task 
force team; software maintenance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
More and more of the emergencies and crises 
encountered today get generated due to malfunctioning 
software [1][6]. Many times, their underlying software 
problems may be of unpredictable and uncertain dimensions 
[16]. Being of high severity, they may threaten to harm the 
organizations’ businesses and survival, their stakeholders, or 
the general public [8][10]. For this reason, software 
organizations must be well prepared for protecting 
themselves against all types of crises and emergencies by 
creating a well-defined emergency and crisis management 
process. It is only then they may guard themselves against 
all kinds of unexpected financial, political, legal, media and 
governmental impact and consequences. [7][9][11] 
Emergency problem management is recognized as an 
important maintenance activity type by the International 
Software Engineering Standard - ISO/IEC 14764 [15]. 
Despite this, there are no process models providing 
guidelines for how to manage unexpected emergency and 
crisis problems. To our knowledge, there is only one model 
dedicated to software emergencies and crises today. It 
is CM3: Emergency Problem Management [4][5]. CM3 
stands for Corrective Maintenance Management Model. 
 
TABLE I.  
THE FIVE COMPANIES 
Company 
Nr of Employees 
Nr of IT 
Employees 
Domain 
SAS 
> 12 000 
   150 
Aviation 
Northern Finance 
> 15 000 
>   100 
Finance 
Bank and Loans  
> 15 000 
   700 
Finance 
Good Things 
> 25 000 
   500 
Retail 
Gladstone 
   1 000 
 1 000 
Gaming 
 
CM3: Emergency Problem Management was initially 
designed at Scandinavian Airline Systems (SAS) [4][5]. 
Hence, it reflected the status of SAS emergency process 
model. In this, paper, we study five industrial emergency 
processes with the purpose of evaluating CM3: Emergency 
Problem Management and further extend it with more 
process elements. The five companies are SAS, Northern 
Finance, Loans and Bank, Good Things and Gladstone. 
Except for SAS, the companies have requested to stay 
anonymous. Hence, we use their fictitious names. The 
companies are briefly presented in Table I. 
Scandinavian Airlines (SAS) is an aviation company 
member and cofounder of the Star Alliance. SAS is the 
ninth-largest airline in Europe.  
Northern Finance operates within the financial sector. 
They are a worldwide finance company with offices from 
Asia to North America. However, their main business 
market is located in Europe. The company provides 
products and services in the financial sector such as trading, 
management and insurances. 
Bank & Loan ltd. works within the financial sector and 
offers retail banking, asset management and financial 
services. They have offices in Asia, Europe, and North 
America, but their main business is in Scandinavia.  
Good Thing Sales is one of the largest retail companies 
in Scandinavia with more than 1500 retail stores. Finally, 
Gladstone Gamer is one of the largest online gaming 
companies in the world. However, compared to the other 
companies in the study, this company is the youngest. Most 
of the employees are concerned with different aspects of IT. 
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section II 
presents our research method. Section III presents the 
extended version of CM3: Emergency Problem Management 
Section IV describes how it matches the industrial 
emergency processes, and finally, Section V makes 
conclusions and suggestions for future work. 
 
485
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 1. CM3: Emergency Problem Management  
 
II. 
METHOD 
Our journey towards evaluating CM3: Emergency 
Problem 
Management 
consisted 
of 
many 
stages. 
Unfortunately, due to space restrictions, we cannot report on 
them all. Our reader may however, follow them by studying 
our former publications that describe the initial model design 
[4][5][12][13][14].  
In general, our work consisted of four major stages: (1) 
design of the initial version of CM3: Emergency Problem 
Management, (2) evaluation of the model in the context of 
one financial company, (3) extension of the model, and 
finally, (4) model evaluation within five companies. 
In the first stage, we developed the initial version of 
CM3: Emergency Problem Management within SAS [4][5]. 
This version is demarcated by the grey shaded area in Fig. 1. 
It is a better structured reflection of SAS emergency process 
model. Its main mission is to manage emergency software 
problems as encountered in SAS flight booking systems. 
When designing it, we had many unstructured and frequent 
interviews and discussions with SAS emergency process 
owner and emergency process executors. As a next step, we 
compared the model to an emergency process model within 
Northern Finance [12]. We chose this company mainly due 
to two reasons: (1) its application domain differed from the 
application domain at SAS and, therefore it provided a good 
platform for studying the applicability of the model in a 
different context, (2) emergencies in the financial sector 
were highly time dependent where the business stake was 
very high and where crisis had a substantial ripple effect on 
other sectors of the national economy [10]. 
During the study of Northern Finance emergency 
process, we interviewed Information Officer, Incident 
Handler, Information Security Manager, and Emergency 
Escalation Partner in a series of consecutive interviews 
using four different questionnaires. All of them were very 
comprehensive, semi-structured and open-ended. Altogether, 
they consisted of 300 main questions and additional 60 
follow-up questions [13]. 
After having studied the emergency process at Northern 
Finance, we compared it to CM3: Emergency Problem 
Management, which we then extended with several process 
components. In Fig. 1, they constitute the components that 
are not part of the grey-shaded area. They mainly concern 
addition of Pre-Alert phase, Operational Level 4 for 
managing crisis (see Fig. 1). When evaluating the model, we 
used a semi-structured and open-ended questionnaire 
consisting of 106 questions. On comparison with the 
questionnaires used in the second stage, the questionnaire in 
this stage was more of a comparative character whereas the 
former ones were more of an explorative type. 
The comparison was made within five companies. Two 
of these were the companies that contributed to the creation 
and extension of CM3: Emergency Problem Management. 
These were SAS and Northern Finance. Three other 
organizations were new organizations. These were Loans 
and Bank, Good Things, and Gladstone. 
Regarding the roles interviewed, at SAS and Northern 
Finance, we interviewed the same roles anew. Regarding the 
remaining organizations, we interviewed different roles. At 
Loans & Bank, we interviewed their Production Group 
Leader, a role in charge of task force teams. At Good Things, 
we interviewed their Program Manager, the head of IT 
security responsible for their incident management process 
and their contingency management. Finally, at Gladstone, 
we interviewed a shift leader, a role responsible for 
coordinating and resolving the emergency situations. 
III. 
CM3: EMERGENCY PROBLEM MANAGEMENT MODEL 
CM3: Emergency Problem Management consists of six 
process components. They are (1) identification of the  
486
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE II.  
EMERGENCY PROCESS ROLES 
  
Added stands for roles introduced to cm3 after this study 
 
organisations/departments/teams involved in the emergency 
process, (2) products to be managed by the emergency 
process, (3) roles involved in conducting the emergency 
activities, (4) the focal point of contact through which one 
communicates all emergency problems, (5) the emergency 
process and its phases, and (6) operational levels required for 
handling the emergency process. Although most of these 
constituents are present in any process model, their presence 
is extremely important within the emergency process. 
Inefficiencies in any of them may substantially affect the 
process results. In this section, we present each process 
component and the questions that have been asked for 
inquiring about their credibility and usefulness within the 
five companies studied. The questions are presented in Table 
III.  
A. Identification of Organization  
Some software systems may be integrated with many 
systems that are many times evolved and maintained by 
several organisations. Hence, the first step when defining an 
emergency process should be to identify all the organisations 
involved in emergency situations. 
To solve the problem efficiently, the collaborating 
companies must organize themselves and agree on and create 
a common emergency process model. For this reason, as 
indicated by Questions 18-29, we inquired about whether the 
companies studied involved other organizations in their 
respective emergency processes, and if so, whether they have 
agreed on a common emergency problem management 
process model. 
B. Identification of the Product and Service Scope 
Not all products and services are critical to business or 
safety. Therefore, as a next step, the organisations should 
identify the products and services to be encompassed by the 
emergency process. These products and services are usually 
safety-critical and business-critical systems. 
In addition to this, the organisations should define a pertinent 
scale for recording the severity levels of the problems 
encountered and determine which severity levels should be 
covered by the emergency process. If the process covers 
several severity levels, then one should define priorities for 
each level and specify in what way the management of the 
problems with different severity levels varies. Defining 
severity and priority should aid organizations in taking quick 
and appropriate measures preventing serious ripple effects 
and emergency escalations. 
Using Questions 15-17 in Table III, we have inquired 
whether the organizations have identified the scope of 
products and services to be covered by the emergency 
process. We have also asked whether they have defined 
severity and priority values for these products and services. 
C. Designation of Roles 
Designation of roles is especially important in emergency 
and crisis situations where conflicts of authorities, clashes 
over 
organizational 
domains, 
and 
organizational 
jurisdictional differences are common [4]. 
As shown in Table II, CM3: Emergency Problem 
Management identifies two groups of roles: permanent and 
temporary. By permanent roles, we mean the roles 
exclusively dedicated to manage the emergency situations. 
They are: Emergency Administrator, Emergency Process 
Manager, Task Force Leader, Task Force Team, and Crisis 
Team. By temporary roles, we mean the roles temporarily 
involved in the emergency process. They are Support 
Personnel, System Users, System Managers, Temporary 
Task Force Group Members, Temporary Crisis Management 
Group Members and other roles which are either responsible 
for the problematic system or are users of the system. Due to 
space restrictions, we cannot describe these roles in greater 
detail. We only list them and their main responsibilities in 
Table II. Interested readers are however most welcome to 
study them in [4][5][12][13][14]. 
487
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

When evaluating our model, we inquired about whether 
the companies studied used permanent and temporary roles 
within their emergency processes. We then went through 
CM3‘s role list as presented in Table II and found out 
whether they were applicable within the organizations 
studied. At this step, we used Questions 73-82 in Table III. 
D. Point of Contact 
During 
emergencies, 
information 
flow 
increases 
drastically. If not properly managed, it may cause loss of or 
it may delay the delivery of important information thus 
substantially intensifying the problem at hand and leading to 
a worsened situation [9][10]. For this reason, organizations 
should identify ways for how the emergency problems 
should 
be 
reported 
and 
communicated 
within 
the 
organization. 
An emergency problem may be encountered in various 
ways by various roles such as end users, system managers, 
external organisations, or other. Each serious problem should 
be immediately reported to the relevant group which 
constitutes a focal point of contact. One should also specify 
the group’s availability, both within and outside the office 
hours. In CM3, such a point of contact is provided by 
Operational Level 1 conducted by the Emergency 
Administrator role (see OL 1 in Fig. 1). Please observe that 
Operational Levels are not the same as Support Line Levels 
within industry. For more information about Support Line 
Levels, we welcome the reader to study [3]. 
Regarding the component Point of Contact, we used 
Questions 83-87 for inquiring whether the organizations 
studied have defined a focal point of contact for all their 
emergency problems and whether they have defined its 
availability. 
E. Process Phases 
As outlined in the upper part of Fig. 1, the emergency 
process consists of three main phases. These are (1) Pre-
Alert Phase, (2) Alert Phases, and (3) Post-Alert Phases. 
Below, we briefly describe them. 
During the Pre-Alert phase – Emergency Preparation, 
the organizations prepare for various unforeseen emergency 
situations by defining or improving the emergency process, 
by regularly practicing it and by creating various actions and 
contingency plans [11]. During the Alert phase, the 
organizations attend to the encountered emergency problems. 
To effectively manage them, CM3 distinguishes between four 
alert phases. 
As soon as Support Personnel on Support Line 1 gets a 
report on a serious problem, they are obliged to escalate it to 
the focal point of contact which is Emergency Administrator 
on Operational Level 1 (see Fig. 1). At this moment, the 
problem and the process trades into the Alert Level 1 – 
Normal Operation phase. This phase only lasts for a 
predetermined period of time. Here, the Emergency 
Administrator collects all the information about the problem, 
monitors user reactions, evaluates problem severity and 
disseminates information to all the parties concerned. 
After some predetermined period of time, the problem 
gets escalated to the next alert phase, Alert Level 2 –
Increased Attention. It is now the Emergency Manager who 
becomes the owner of the problem. Together with one or 
several System Managers, he evaluates and implements 
possible workarounds, if any. The Emergency Manager acts 
as a focal point of decision.  
After yet some predetermined period of time, the 
problem gets escalated to the Alert Level 3 - Emergency 
Situation phase. Now, the Task Force Leader is in charge of 
the emergency situation. His first action is to establish the 
Task Force Team who commonly tries to resolve the 
emergency problem. Finally, in cases when the problem 
threatens the organization’s business and survival, the 
organization steps into the highest emergency level, which is 
Alert Level 4 – Crisis Situation. In this phase, the whole 
organization stands on toes including business managers and 
upper-level managers.  
After the problem is resolved, the organization steps into 
the Post-Alert phases. Here, CM3 distinguishes between two 
post-alert phases. These are Post-Alert - Emergency Closure 
and Post-Alert – Emergency Follow-Up. The Post 
Emergency – Emergency Closure phase is mainly executed 
by the Task Force Leader who writes a report on the 
problem and distributes it to all the parties concerned. The 
Post-Alert – Emergency Follow-Up phase, on the other hand, 
is conducted by the Task Force Leader who together with 
the Emergency Manager investigates the problem with the 
purpose of finding root causes underlying the problem. 
These causes provide an important feedback to process and 
product improvement.  
When interviewing the companies, using Questions 30-
52, we inquired whether they have defined pre-alert, alert 
and post-alert phases, what they do within these phases and 
what roles they involve.  
F. Operational Levels 
The whole emergency process is conducted on four 
operational levels (see OLs in Fig. 1). The operational levels 
are only defined within the context of emergency and crisis 
management. They do not overlap with any other 
organizational levels, such as for instance, Support Line 
levels [3]. However, they may strongly co-operate with 
them.  
The designation of operational levels is very important. 
The process execution is strongly dependent not only on the 
emergency phase the process is in but also on the operational 
level performing it. As summarized in Fig. 1, each group of 
roles has clearly defined responsibilities for each phase and 
operational level.  
1) 
Operational Level 1:  
The Operational Level 1 is mainly conducted by the 
Emergency Administrator. It is involved in six process 
phases, the Pre-Alert phase, the four Alert phases and one 
Post-Alert phase – Emergency Closure (see Fig. 1). During 
the Pre-Alert phase, the individuals possessing the role of the 
Emergency Administrator exercise the emergency process 
and provide feedback for its improvement. 
488
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE III.  
EVALUATION QUESTIONAIRE 
General questions 
Q1: Name: Title: Department: 
Q2: What is your job description and 
how long have you worked within the 
company and with similar tasks, 
concerning the emergency process? 
Q3: Company name:  Business field: 
Q4: Nr. of employees… In total: 
Within the IT-department, Definitions 
and scope of the emergency process 
Q5: Does your company determine the 
severity of incidents? 
Q6: If yes, describe which 
Q7:  Does your company use priority 
codes on problems/incidents? 
Q8: If yes, describe which 
Q9: Does your company differentiate 
between software incidents and other 
incidents such as hardware and/or 
infrastructure related? 
Q10: If yes, describe which 
Q11: Does your company use a 
structured Crisis Management process at 
major disasters (such as fires etc)  
Q12: If so can such processes be 
triggered by software incidents? 
Q13: Can software incidents be of 
business critical magnitude? 
Q14: Can software incidents be of a 
crisis magnitude?  
Q31: Which roles are active during 
emergency initiation in the Normal 
Operation Phase and what are their 
responsibilities? 
Q32: Who is the problem owner during 
emergency initiation in the Normal 
Operation Phase and what are his/hers 
responsibilities? 
Q33: Are there any time frames 
associated with the Normal Operation 
phase? e.g.  
1) Time limits before it are allowed to 
alter the system? 2) Time limits within 
where information must be sent out? 3) 
Other time limits or regulations?
Operational levels 1: 
Q53: Do you have operational levels? 
Q54: How many Operational levels do 
you have? 
Q55: What is their overall function? 
Q56: Operational level 1: 
Q57: Which are the responsibilities of 
this operational level?  
Q58: What activities do occur at this 
level? 
Q59: Which roles are active in this level? 
Q60: What activities are these roles 
involved in during Normal Operation? 
Q85: Which are the target groups? 
Q86: Are structured information 
channels set up (or already existent) 
during an emergency? 
Q87: What are they? 
Measurement Methods (and 
analysis) 
Q88: Does your company measure the 
emergency process? 
Q89: Exactly what do they measure? 
Q90: What do you use it for? 
Preparations and process 
improvement 
Q91: Does your company practice to 
resolve emergency incidents (aka 
scenario-based training)? 
Q92: Does your company perform 
process reviews concerning 
emergencies?   (e.g.: Review Document 
Sittings.) 
Q93: Does your company have technical 
oriented training activities concerning 
emergencies? 
(e.g. contingency testing where the 
primary site is taken down and a 
secondary are used instead) 
Q94: Does your company use any other 
form of training concerning 
emergencies? 
Q95: Are there any analyses of the root 
causes of the emergency problem? (i.e. 
site-specific notes) 
Q96: Is there any feedback to such 
analysis? 
Q97: If yes, describe who 
Q98: Are processes and the methods of 
working evaluated or analyzed? 
Q99: If yes, describe which 
Q100: Are there any couplings back to 
the process from such analysis? 
(e.g. lessons learned) 
Q101: If yes, describe which 
Operational level 2: 
Q61: Which are the responsibilities of 
this operational level?  
Q62: What activities do occur at this 
level? 
Q63: Which roles are active in this level? 
Q64: What activities are these roles 
involved in during Normal Operation? 
Increased Attention Phase: 
Q34: Which activities are performed 
during the Increased Attention Phase? 
Q35: Which roles are active during the 
Increased Attention Phase and what are 
their responsibilities? 
Q36: Who is the problem owner during 
the Increased Attention Phase and what 
are his/hers responsibilities? 
Q37: Are there any time frames 
associated with the Increased Attention 
phase? 
Operational level 3: 
Q65: Which are the responsibilities of 
this operational level?  
Q66: What activities do occur at this 
level? 
Q67: Which roles are active in this level? 
Q68: What activities are these roles 
involved in during Normal Operation? 
Emergency Situation Phase: 
Q38: Which activities are performed 
during the Emergency Situation Phase? 
Q39: Which roles are active during the 
Emergency Situation Phase and what are 
their responsibilities? 
Q40: Who is the problem owner during 
the Emergency Situation Phase and what 
are his/hers responsibilities? 
Q41: Are there any time frames 
associated with the Emergency Situation 
phase? 
Operational level 4: 
Q69: Which are the responsibilities of 
this operational level?  
Q70: What activities do occur at this 
level? 
Q71: Which roles are active in this level? 
Q72: What activities are these roles 
involved in during Normal Operation? 
Product and Service scope 
Q15: Does your company have specific 
products, services or systems that 
especially initiate the emergency 
process? 
Q16: If yes, describe if there are subsets 
and what is included in these subsets and 
why? 
Q17: If yes, what is not included in these 
subsets and why? 
Roles: 
Q73: How many permanent roles are 
involved within the emergency process? 
Q74: How many temporary roles are 
involved within the emergency process? 
Q75: Does the following roles participate 
in the emergency process: 
Q76: • System owner/manager? Where 
do they reside? Temporary/permanent? 
Activities during normal operation? 
Q77: • System specialist? Where do they 
reside? Temporary/permanent? 
Activities during normal operation? 
Q78: • Business manager? Where do 
they reside? Temporary/permanent? 
Activities during normal operation? 
Q79: • Business specialists? Where do 
they reside? Temporary /permanent? 
Activities during normal operation? 
Q80: • Support personnel? Where do 
they reside? Temporary/permanent? 
Activities during normal operation? 
Q81: • Programmers? Where do they 
reside? Temporary/permanent? 
Activities during normal operation? 
Q82 • [Other roles]? Where do they 
reside? Temporary/permanent? Activities 
during normal operation? 
Emergency Closure Phase: 
Q42: Which activities are performed 
during the Emergency Closure Phase? 
Q43: Which roles are active during the 
Emergency Closure Phase and what are 
their responsibilities? 
Q44: Who is the problem owner during 
the Emergency Closure Phase and what 
are his/hers responsibilities? 
Q45: Are there any time frames 
associated with the Emergency Closure 
phase? 
Organizational structure: 
Q18: Are there other organizations 
involved in the emergency problem 
process? 
(External maintenance or development 
organizations as well as suppliers and 
important customer that may be affected) 
Q19: If yes, describe which: 
Q20: Have you agreed with these 
organizations on a common emergency 
problem management process? 
Q21: Are there differences in the 
emergency problem process depending 
on time of day (as in or out of office 
hours, different contact areas) 
Q22: If yes, describe which: 
Q23: Do you use task forces on different 
levels during emergency situations? 
Q24: If so what is it called? 
Q25: Are there any other groups of 
interest in this context? 
Q26: Can you be exposed to several 
emergency situations simultaneously? 
Q27: If so, how is this coordinated? 
Q28: Are parallel solutions suggestions 
developed? 
Q29: If so; who decides on the solution 
to be implemented? 
Artifacts 
Q102: Does your company use artifacts 
for providing and managing the 
execution of the emergency process 
workflows? (e.g. checklists and case 
management tools to support workflows 
according to processes) 
Q103: Does your company use artifacts 
for operational management of a certain 
domain or aspect of one?   
(e.g. Configuration Management 
databases, monitoring system, diagnosis 
tools).  
Q104: Does your company use artifacts 
for contingency and recovery of business 
critical system? 
(e.g. double systems to reduce impact 
and RAID and Back-Up solutions to 
improve  system recovery) 
Q105: Do these tools support the 
company´s working processes?  
(e g adjusted for ITIL) 
Emergency Follow-Up Phase: 
Q46: Which activities are performed 
during the Emergency Follow-Up Phase? 
Q47: Which roles are active during the 
Emergency Follow-Up Phase and what 
are their responsibilities? 
Q48: Who is the problem owner during 
the Emergency Follow-Up Phase and 
what are his/hers responsibilities? 
Q49: Are there any time frames 
associated with the Emergency Closure 
phase? 
Preparations Phase: 
Q50: Which activities are performed 
during emergency preparations? 
Q51: Which roles are active during the 
emergency preparations and what are 
their responsibilities? 
Q52: Are there any time frames 
associated with the emergency 
preparations? 
Extra: 
Q106: Are there any other 
qualitative measurements used? (show the 
paper with qualitative crisis measures) 
Information flow / Point of 
contacts 
Q83: Which focal point(s) are serious 
emergency problems reported to? 
Q84: How is information disseminated? 
Normal Operation phase 
Q30: Which activities are performed 
during emergency initiation in the 
Normal Operation Phase? 
 
489
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The responsibilities of the Emergency Administrator role 
vary during the Alert phases. In the first Alert phase, they 
own the problem. Here, they confirm the problem, establish 
an internal emergency log, record relevant information in it, 
and distribute it to all the parties concerned. The information 
basically specifies the problem, its occurrence, its cause, 
expected impact, and other relevant data. 
During the remaining Alert phases, the Emergency 
Administrator continues administrating the problem, and 
informing all the parties concerned about the status of the 
problem. However, he no longer owns the problem. Finally, 
in the Post-Alert phases, the Emergency Administrator 
records all the problem information and informs all the 
parties concerned about its resolution. 
The Operational Level 2 is conducted by mainly two 
roles: Emergency Manager and System Manager(s). The 
Emergency Manager has many responsibilities. One of them 
is to support the Emergency Administrator in all the 
emergency situations. He also coordinates workarounds 
received from the System Manager(s). The responsibility of 
the System Manager(s), on the other hand, is (1) to be 
available to the Emergency Administrator and the 
Emergency Manager, (2) to provide them with the necessary 
information and (3) to attend to the tasks requested by them. 
2) Operational Level 2 
The Emergency Manager and System Manager(s) start 
having duties on Alert Level 2. During the Increased 
Attention phase, the Emergency Manager becomes the 
problem owner. However, he is continuously supported by 
the Emergency Administrator with various administrative 
tasks. He also involves System Manager(s) responsible for 
the systems or system parts that got affected by the problem, 
creates workarounds in cooperation with the System 
Manager(s), and distributes information to the relevant 
management. 
During the remaining alert phases, the Emergency 
Manager gets rid of his problem ownership. He now 
supports the Task Force Team with various tasks. 
During the Post-Alert phases, the Emergency Manager 
continues to support the Task Force Team. He also evaluates 
the emergency process, makes suggestions for improving it 
and realizes them, if deemed relevant and necessary. 
3) Operational Level 3 
The Operational Level 3 is mainly conducted by the Task 
Force Leader and Task Force Team. The roles and number 
of participants in the team varies depending on problem type. 
If, for instance, three systems are involved, then it 
automatically implies that three System Managers and their 
teams are involved. 
The responsibilities of the Task Force Leader role start 
during the Alert 3 phase. The Task Force Leader establishes 
a Task Force Team and ensures that the team is in place. 
Afterwards, the course of actions varies depending on the 
problem. However, the Task Force Leader acts as a focal 
point of entry for all the management contacts, ensures that 
all parties concerned are informed, leads the Task Force 
Team, co-ordinates the emergency activities, initiates 
activities leading to the reduction of user impact, makes sure 
that the initiated activities are taken according to the defined 
procedures, and initiates workaround’s or other problem 
solutions.  
After the problem has been resolved, the Task Force 
Leader produces a report containing (1) time when the 
problem first occurred, (2) description of what happened and 
why, (3) description of the impact, (4) measures taken to 
limit the impact, (5) time stamp when the problem got 
resolved, (6) description of the measures taken in order to 
resolve the problem, (7) status of the emergency procedures 
used, (8) action list for changes to the emergency procedures, 
and (9) suggestions for how to prevent similar situations. 
During the Post-Emergency – Follow-Up phase, the Task 
Force Leader makes additional investigations of the problem 
and its causes together with the Emergency Manager. If the 
emergency problem is followed by a planned and scheduled 
problem resolution, then they should monitor its resolution. 
In this phase, the Task Force Leader has regular 
meetings with the relevant roles and organisations or 
departments during which they follow up all problems of 
high severity. The goal is to find ways to avoid future 
emergency situations. Hence, a vital task of this phase is to 
specify measures to prevent the problems from occurring. 
These measures should be recorded and delivered to the 
process improvement process. 
4) Operational Level 4 
The Operational Level 4 is only active in clear crisis 
situations. Crisis is an extraordinary situation that needs 
involvement from top management whose responsibility is to 
evaluate business threats and make important decisions on 
finances, personnel and other resources. It is led by Crisis 
Management Group and it is supported by Task Force Team. 
The roles and number of its participants varies depending on 
the crisis type. 
During the interviews, using Questions 53-72, we 
inquired whether the organizations studied have defined their 
correspondences to CM3 Operational Levels, what roles are 
involved in these levels and what their responsibilities are. 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF THE CM3: EMERGENCY PROBLEM 
MANAGEMENT MODEL  
In this section, we present the evaluation results of CM3: 
Emergency Problem Management within the companies 
studied. When doing it, we follow the order of process 
components as defined in Section III. 
A. Identification of Organisations 
All the five companies have defined an emergency 
problem management process. However, only four of them 
need to involve external organizations in their emergency 
situations. All four of them have agreed on an emergency 
problem management process model to be commonly run by 
all the parties involved. 
B. Identification of the Product and Service Scope 
Only one organization identifies products and services 
that undergo an emergency process. It is SAS. SAS does it 
indirectly by classifying systems according to how soon they 
should be recovered. In the remaining companies, the 
products and services are too tightly coupled to one another 
490
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

implying that a problem in one system might lead to a 
substantial ripple effect within the whole organization or 
even several organizations. Hence, all the products and 
services undergo an emergency process. The process gets 
enacted on the basis of an emergency case, its context, 
severity value and a number of the affected functions or 
customers. 
All the organizations studied have defined severity and 
priority (urgency) values for their products and services. An 
example of how one organization formally calculates 
severity levels is illustrated in [12]. One of the organizations 
studied, however, does not have any formal definition of 
severity and priority. Being within online gaming industry, 
their severity is informally estimated by counting the number 
of the affected users. 
Except for SAS, when enacting their emergency 
processes, the organizations mainly follow the urgency value 
and the number of the reported incidents for the emergency 
problem or the problem severity. 
C. Emergency Management Roles 
All the companies studied have defined both permanent 
and temporary roles. Regarding the permanent roles, all the 
companies 
have 
the 
equivalences 
of 
Emergency 
Administrator, Emergency Manager and Task Force Leader. 
However, their naming strongly differs. The role of 
Emergency Administrator is, for instance, mainly conducted 
by support personnel in two organizations. Other role names 
corresponding to Emergency Administrator are Operation 
Manager and Operator at a control department. 
Regarding the role of Emergency Manager, we have 
found out that all the companies use the Emergency Manager 
role to different degrees; from providing assistance 
concerning problem escalation to being very active in 
supporting the emergency resolution process and to 
providing quality assurance to the Task Force Leader. 
Regarding the role of Task Force Leader, all the five 
companies use this role as a single point of decision in the 
Emergency Situation phase. The role is primarily responsible 
for getting the impacted systems’ functionality up and 
running and he has the authority to assign resources, if 
needed. 
Four 
out 
of 
five 
organizations 
involve 
Crisis 
Management Group. The group is a meeting board 
responsible for the overall IT and business coordination and 
management. It deals with all crises related issues. It decides 
when to declare disaster and when to start acting according 
to the contingency plans. 
Finally, our study has revealed the need for two 
additional 
however 
very 
important 
roles, 
Crisis 
Communicator and Crisis Security Manager. These roles are 
implemented in four of the five organizations studied. The 
responsibility of the Crisis Communicator is to manage 
communication on emergency problems between the 
organization and the public. The responsibility of the Crisis 
Security Manager, on the other hand, is to monitor, handle 
and coordinate staff and all types of security related issues, 
and to arrange proper protection 
All the companies studied use temporary roles in their 
emergency processes, such as Support Personnel, System 
Manager and Developer / Maintainer. Regarding Support 
Personnel, they all have its corresponding role supporting 
the customers in their daily operation. It is this role that may 
overlap or may be merged with the role of the Emergency 
Administrator. 
D. Focal Point of Contact 
All the companies studied have an appointed role, or a 
group of roles, that act as a focal point of contact for all the 
emergencies. The roles involved vary. At SAS, for instance, 
Operational Level 1 corresponds to the first point of contact 
during office hours. After a serious problem gets reported to 
Support Line 1 [3], it automatically gets escalated to 
Operational Level 1. Outside office hours, however, the 
problem gets reported to Support Line 1 belonging to an 
outsourced organization. This organization, in turn, contacts 
Operational Level 1 in cases when they deem that the 
reported problem is serious. Regarding the remaining 
organizations, the Emergency Operator at Operational Level 
1 corresponds to Support Line 1 being on duty around the 
clock [3]. 
E. Process Phases 
Due to the fact that the organizations studied have not 
had any emergency standard to follow, they have defined 
their emergency processes on their own. For this reason, 
their models differ. Still, however, we could identify many 
common parts. 
1) Pre-Alert Phase 
All the organizations studied prepare themselves for 
various emergency and crisis situations. Hence, they have a 
phase corresponding to CM3‘s Pre-Alert Emergency 
Preparation phase. During this phase, they mainly review 
the emergency process and its supporting documents. Four 
out of five companies even conduct sporadic scenario-based 
training several times a year. 
Different roles are responsible for the pre-alert 
emergency process within the organizations studied. They 
are Contingency Manager and various other industrial 
correspondences to CM3 Emergency Manager. 
2) Alert Phases 
Reporting on serious problems/incidents to Support Line 
1 enacts the first emergency phase, Alert Level 1 – Normal 
Situation, in four of the organizations studied. At SAS, 
however, the problems get immediately escalated from 
Support Line 1 to Operational Level 1, which, in turn, 
initiates the emergency process.  
As mentioned in Section 4.3, only SAS has explicitly 
identified the Emergency Administrator role. In the other 
companies, the role of the Emergency Administrator is 
performed by other roles, such as support personnel or other 
administrative or technical roles. 
In four out of five companies, the problem gets escalated 
to the next phase, the Alert Level 2 – Increased Attention 
phase. In these companies, the problem is now owned by the 
role corresponding to the Emergency Manager who tries to 
find a workaround and makes preparations for the next alert 
491
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

phase. In the fifth company, Good Things, severe problems 
are directly escalated from Support Line 1 to their 
correspondence to CM3’s Task Force Team which they call 
24/7 Group. 
All the companies studied have a phase corresponding to 
the Emergency Situation phase during which the Task Force 
Leader coordinates the resolution process. In three out of 
five companies, the first task of this role is to form a Task 
Force Team. In the other two companies, the Task Force 
Leader assigns the emergency task to one or several 
departments. 
Regarding the Alert Level 4 – Crisis Situation phase, it is 
practiced in four out of five companies studied. Here, all 
business related decisions are made by the Crisis 
Management Group. This phase is triggered only in very 
critical business cases. The fifth company, which is a 
relatively young company, does not practice crisis 
management process yet. 
Our study has revealed that the involvement of Crisis 
Management Group is immensely important in making 
critical decisions. Their decisions may override the decisions 
of Task Force Group, even in cases when IT solutions are 
more optimal than the business ones. Usually, this happens 
when safety or business gains are more prioritized than 
anything else. Scenario describing such cases is provided in 
[12][13].  
Regarding the CM3’s suggestion for determining time 
period for each alert phase, only SAS does so. The other 
companies continuously monitor the problem during the 
early alert phases and escalate it to higher alert phases only if 
the problem and its impact intensify.  
3) Post-Alert Phases 
Only two companies have explicitly defined a 
correspondence to the CM3 Post-Alert Emergency Closure 
phase, which is conducted by the Task Force Leader. Just as 
in CM3, the Task Force Leader is responsible for the follow 
up of the emergency cases. In the other three companies, the 
ownership of this phase is assigned to an Emergency 
Manager or Root Cause Analyst. 
Irrespective of who owns the phase, all the companies 
studied finalize their emergency processes by having a 
meeting during which the problem is officially closed. In 
addition, three of them write and disseminate a final report 
on the problem and its solution. 
Regarding the Emergency Follow-up phase, in four 
companies, this step is conducted by the Task Force Leader 
alone or in collaboration with other roles such as Emergency 
Manager or Task Force Team Members. However, the tasks 
defined for this phase are not always realized. Both root 
cause analysis and process improvement may be conducted 
on an ad hoc basis or they may not be conducted at all. 
4) Operational Levels 
Only one company has explicitly defined the operational 
levels as defined in CM3. It is SAS. Regarding the remaining 
companies, they have done it implicitly. They follow similar 
levels; however, they do not call them operational levels.  
All but one organization have correspondences to four 
operational levels. Regarding the fifth organization, as has 
already been mentioned, this organization is young. It has 
not yet managed to implement the Crisis Situation phase. 
Hence, it does not have any correspondence to Operational 
Level 4.  
The scenario of defining operational levels looks as 
follows 
in 
the 
organizations 
studied. 
At 
their 
correspondences to Operational Level 1, support personnel, 
customer 
service 
representatives, 
or 
Emergency 
Administrator are the main actors. They are problem owners 
in the initial emergency phases, which they then hand over to 
the roles on the next operational level.  
The main actors at the industrial correspondences to 
Operational Level 2 are the IT Support Coordinator, General 
Escalation Point (GEP), Emergency Escalation Partner and 
Emergency Manager (at SAS). All these roles have the 
responsibilities corresponding to those of CM3’s Emergency 
Manager 
All the organizations studied involve correspondences to 
CM3’s Task Force Teams on Operational Level 3. Three of 
them actually use the same name. In one company Task 
Force Leader was called Incident Handler. Only two 
companies use different names such as 24/7 Group and Shift 
Leader. 
Regarding the industrial correspondences to Operational 
Level 4, as mentioned earlier, only four organizations have 
implemented it in their process models. They use the same 
role names as in CM3. One company, however, calls the 
CM3’s correspondence to Crisis Manager as Critical 
Situation Manager (CSM). 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Due to the fact that the software community lacks a 
common emergency maintenance process model, many 
organizations have defined their own local emergency 
process models. In this paper, we have studied five industrial 
emergency maintenance processes with the purpose of 
evaluating the applicability of CM3: Emergency Problem 
Management within five companies. The companies running 
these processes differ in size, industrial domains and process 
maturity. Despite this, with the use of an open-ended 
questionnaire and CM3: Emergency Problem Management, 
we could identify their common parts and directly map them 
on CM3: Emergency Problem Management. Here, the CM3 
model has acted both as a helpful tool for evaluating 
industrial emergency process models as well as an excellent 
tool for evaluating itself and its structure. It has helped us to 
find many commonalities on how to meet emergency 
situations and it has helped us to identify some minor 
differences among the processes studied. Below, we briefly 
list our findings, comment on them and comment on how 
they contributed to enhance the quality of CM3: Emergency 
Problem Management.  
All the organizations studied have defined an emergency 
problem management process to be either used locally for 
managing their internal emergencies or as a common process 
to be used together with their partners. Hence, they constitute 
an appropriate forum for evaluating CM3: Emergency 
Problem Management.  
 
Not all the organizations identify the scope of their 
product and service portfolios that might be subdue 
492
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

to emergency problem management. A strong 
coupling among the systems and magnitude of the 
potential ripple effect makes four out of five 
organizations be very sensitive to all types of 
emergency problems in all their systems. Hence, we 
conclude that the design of products and services in 
these companies is not amenable for defining and 
enacting the emergency process. The organizations 
must be on a constant alert about all types of 
incidents that are encountered in all their products 
and services. This is not an effective way of 
managing organizational resources. As a remedy, we 
suggest that the organizations studied make effort in 
decoupling their critical systems so that the 
emergency process may be isolated to a specific 
system or even system part.  
 
Despite process differences in the organizations 
studied, all the organizations have defined software 
emergency process models that consist of pre-alert, 
alert and post-alert phases and that include activities 
and responsibilities that are organized in a similar 
manner as CM3’s operational levels. [4][5][12][14] 
However, the number and names of their alert 
phases may vary. The pre-alert and alert activities 
are actively conducted whereas the post-alert 
activities such as collecting lessons learned were 
sparse, and were usually only conducted in an ad 
hoc manner. While studying the stages, we realized 
that the pre-alert stage of CM3: Emergency Problem 
Management needs to be explored more in depth.  
 
Two of the companies have defined an additional 
emergency operational level, the level dealing with 
crisis management. The other companies had a crisis 
management processes, but this process was not 
aligned 
with 
the 
emergency 
process. 
Crisis 
management is used only in cases when a software 
problem jeopardizes human life and/or company’s 
financial position or survival. For this reason, we 
have 
enhanced 
CM3: 
Emergency 
Problem 
Management with a crisis phase, Crisis Situation, on 
top of the emergency phase and added an additional 
operational level, Operational Level 4, the level only 
dealing with crisis management. 
 
Involving crisis management is more common in 
financial and aviation sectors than in other sectors. 
Still, however, the organizations studied have not 
been able to optimally integrate crisis management 
process with software problem management process. 
By not having an integrated crisis management 
process, a set of issues is raised when the two 
processes work side by side: (1) how to deal with 
single point of decision and (2) how to deal with a 
focal point of information during high priority 
emergency situations. At the moment of writing this 
paper, SAS is in the process of connecting the 
emergency incident process with the business crisis 
management process. 
 
All of the companies have implicitly defined actions 
to meet a software emergency situation, and these 
actions were conducted by a number of predefined 
emergency roles. These roles are either temporary or 
permanent emergency maintenance roles. However, 
four out of five have a clearly defined crisis 
management group. In our study, we have identified 
new roles such as Crisis Management Group, Crisis 
Manager, Crisis Communicator, and Crisis Security 
Manager. All these roles have been added to the 
CM3 model due to its extension with an additional 
alert phase, Crisis Situation, and an additional 
operational level, Operational Level 4.  
 
All the companies had also identified focal points for 
the information flow to and from the emergency 
team. In all cases, it is support personnel that accepts 
emergency problem reports and either continues 
managing them or hands them over to CM3’s 
correspondence to Emergency Administrator.  
 
Regarding CM3’s suggestion for determining time 
period for each alert phase, only SAS does so. They 
do so because they have specified rules for how 
soon their systems should be up and running. The 
other companies continuously monitor the problem 
during the early alert phases and escalate it to higher 
alert phases only if the problems and their impact 
intensify. This is because not all problems are 
directly recognized as very serious and urgent. To 
make our model adaptable to this new finding, we 
change the escalation rules from only time-
dependent to both time and impact dependent.  
 
Most of the companies conduct post-alert phases 
mainly on an ad hoc basis. Reasons are many. One 
of them is the fact that the organizations do not 
designate enough resources for this important phase. 
Another reason is the fact that the report on the 
emergency problem and measures is disseminated 
too late. Its receivers lose interest in taking any 
measures whatsoever due to new problems that they 
have to deal with instead. 
 
Only 
one 
company 
has 
explicitly 
defined 
operational levels. The other companies have 
implemented operational levels implicitly by 
defining operational responsibilities and tasks and 
making sure that they do not overlap across the 
roles involved in emergencies.  
Our evaluation study was huge. Hence, we could not 
present all our findings. We only had to concentrate on the 
most important ones. Using them as a basis, we may claim 
that CM3: Emergency Problem Management is applicable 
within the industry. There are many commonalities between 
CM3: Emergency Problem Management and the industrial 
emergency process models studied. We believe that our work 
on CM3: Emergency Problem Management shows evidence 
for the presence of software emergency processes and the 
need for a standard that can aid practitioners in setting up 
and evaluating their local processes.  
Our work on CM3 is still in an early stage. Due to the fact 
that the emergency process is very comprehensive and 
complex, more studies are needed to fully evaluate the 
493
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

model. In brief, the following research action points need to 
be considered:  
 
The pre-alert phase needs to be further 
investigated. Two actions are proposed: 1) to 
survey training and education efforts, and 2) to 
explore how lessons learned from previous 
incidents can be used as feedback into the 
emergency maintenance process.  
 
Evaluate 
CM3: 
Emergency 
Problem 
Management within other industrial sectors such 
as, for instance, health care and e-government. 
Due to their nature, potential emergencies can 
be disastrous in these fields. 
 
Coupling 
CM3: 
Emergency 
Problem 
Management with crisis management. Several 
issues are of interest such as mapping a single 
point of technical decisions from the emergency 
process onto a single point of organizational 
decisions from the crisis management and vice 
versa and define enterprise-wide agreements on 
when to declare a crisis situation.  
 
Integrate 
CM3: 
Emergency 
Problem 
Management with the development phases of 
the software lifecycle, identify how they impact 
each other and clarify borders between software 
emergency maintenance and other processes 
such as risk management, scheduled problem 
management and the like.  
Despite many action points required for evaluating the 
model, we strongly believe that CM3: Emergency Problem 
Management already provides solid guidance for software 
organizations in their attempts to define and improve their 
emergency software maintenance process models.  
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Brown and D. Patterson, "Embracing failure: A case for 
Recovery-Oriented Computing (ROC)". In Proceedings of the 
2001 High Performance Transaction Processing Symposium, 
2001, pp. 3-8. 
[2] M. Kajko-Mattsson, “Motivating the Corrective Maintenance 
Maturity Model (CM3)”, In Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE 
International Conference on Engineering of Complex 
Computer Systems, IEEE, 2001, pp. 112-117. 
[3] M. Kajko-Mattsson, Corrective Maintenance Maturity Model: 
Problem Management, PhD thesis, ISBN Nr 91-7265-311-6, 
ISSN 1101-8526, ISRN SU-KTH/DSV/R--01/15, Department 
of Computer and Systems Sciences (DSV), Stockholm 
University and Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), 2001. 
[4] M. Kajko-Mattsson, C. Nielsen, P. Winther, B. Vang and A. 
Petersen, "An Outline of CM3: Emergency Problem 
Management," In Proceedings of EUROMICRO Conference 
on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications, 2005, 
pp. 292-303. 
[5] M. Kajko-Mattsson, C. Nielsen, P. Winther, B. Vang and A. 
Petersen, 2006. "Eliciting CM3: Emergency Problem 
Management at Scandinavian Airline Systems", Journal of 
Research and Practice in Information Technology, 2006, vol. 
38, no. 4, pp. 303-316. 
[6] D. L. Parnas, A. J. van Schouwen and S. P. Kwan, 
"Evaluation of Safety-Critical Software" Communications of 
the ACM, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 636-648, June 1990, 
doi:10.1145/78973.78974 
[7] T.C. Pauchant, and R. Douville, 1993. "Recent research in 
Crisis Management: a study of 24 authors’ publications from 
1986 to 1991", Organization & Environment, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 
43-66, Jan 1993, doi: 10.1177/108602669300700104.  
[8] C. M. Pearson and J. A. Clair, "Reframing Crisis 
Management", Academy of Management Review, vol. 23, no. 
4, pp. 59-76. Academy of Management, 1998, doi: 
10.5465/AMR.1998.192960. 
[9] E.L. Quarantelli, "Disaster Crisis Management: A summary 
of research findings", Journal of Management studies, vol. 25, 
no. 4, pp. 373-384, 1988. ISSN: 0022-2380 
[10] A. Reilly, "Preparing for the worst: the process of effective 
crisis management" in Organization Environment, vol. 7, no. 
2, pp. 115-143, Jan 1993, doi:10.1177/108602669300700204.  
[11] D. Smith, "Beyond contingency planning: towards a model of 
crisis management", Industrial Crisis Quarterly, vol. 4, pp. 
263-275, Jan 1990, doi:10.1177/108602669000400402. 
[12] J. Snygg, M. Kajko-Mattsson, and E. Hammargren, 
Comparing two software emergency process models. In: 2012 
International Conference on Software and System Process 
(ICSSP). Zürich: IEEE Conference Publications, 2012 
pp.150-159 
[13] J. Snygg and E. Hammargren, 2010. “Handling Crisis Within 
CM3: Emergency Management Process” master thesis, Dept. 
of 
Computer 
and 
Systems 
Sciences., 
Stockholm 
University/Royal institute of Technology., 2010. 
[14] M. Kajko-Mattsson, J. Snygg, and E. Hammargren, CM3: 
Emergency problem management - A scenario-based 
evaluation. In: Information Science and Digital Content 
Technology (ICIDT), 2012 8th International Conference on 
Jeju Island, Korea (South): IEEE, 2012, pp.379-386 
[15] ISO/IEC 
14764., 
(IEEE, 
std 
14764-2006). 
Software 
Engineering-Software Life Cycle Process-Maintenance, The 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., 2006. 
[16] M. Kajko-Mattsson, Common Concept Apparatus within 
Corrective Software Maintenance, Proceedings, International 
Conference on Software Maintenance, IEEE Computer 
Society Press: Los Alamitos, CA, Sep 1999, ISBN: 0-7695-
0016-1, pp. 287-297.  
 
494
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

