 Success Factors Leading to the Sustainability of Software Process 
Improvement Efforts  
Natalja Nikitina, Mira Kajko-Mattsson  
School of Information and Communication Technology  
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
Stockholm, Sweden 
nikitina@kth.se, mekm2@kth.se  
 
Abstract— Despite the fact that many software organizations 
put a lot of effort into software process improvement, they 
still do not always succeed in sustaining the improvement 
results. We believe that this is due to the fact that current 
software process improvement frameworks and/or models 
do not provide any aid in form of a list of success factors that 
primarily contribute to the sustainability of SPI efforts. In 
this paper, we compile thirty two SPI success factors as 
elicited in theoretical and empirical studies. Our primary 
goal is to aid software companies in defining, planning, 
monitoring and improving their SPI efforts. Our secondary 
goal is to create a basis for identifying SPI health attributes 
which, in turn, would allow software companies to determine 
the health of their SPI projects. (Abstract) 
Keywords-SPI project health, lessons (key words) 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Current Software Process Improvement (SPI) process 
frameworks and/or models do not always provide clear 
evidence about the long-term health of the SPI projects and 
the sustainability of their results. With this we mean that 
successful SPI implementations do not always guarantee 
long lasting results [1]. Although the immediate SPI 
positive results may be clearly tangible, this does not 
imply that they will sustain in the long-run [2]. 
The problem of sustaining the SPI results has been 
widely recognized and suggestions for solving it have been 
made by some maturity models and development methods 
[3], [4]. The suggestions usually incorporate process 
improvement 
activities 
into 
software 
development 
processes. Still, however, they do not cover exhaustive list 
of attributes aiding software organizations in evaluating 
the success of their SPI projects, and thereby, aiding them 
in sustaining the SPI results in the long-run. 
Sustainability of the SPI efforts is very important. Lack 
of it means that the organizations quickly go back to the 
old pre-SPI process state and its problems, and thereby 
make the SPI efforts a waste of time and resources. For 
this not to happen, organizations should not only 
implement SPI activities and check their immediate 
results. They should also plan, monitor and control the 
long-term progress of their SPI efforts and the processes 
undergoing SPI. For that, they need to identify the success 
factors aiding them in sustaining their SPI results. 
Today, there are many SPI models and frameworks, 
development methods and experience reports dealing with 
SPI. They either suggest different ways of improving 
processes or they report on the SPI results. Many of them 
delineate SPI from their own perspectives, in which, they 
may suggest or report on the SPI success factors that are 
limited to and/or relevant in their own contexts. This, in 
turn, implies that overall knowledge of the SPI 
sustainability factors is provided by different authors and, 
thereby, scattered in many different sources. To the 
knowledge of the authors of this paper, however, no one 
has tried to gather them and put them into an overall list of 
SPI sustainability success factors. 
In this paper, we elicit thirty two SPI success factors 
that primarily contribute to the sustainability of SPI efforts. 
We do it in two ways, via a literature study and via 
interviews. Our primary goal is to aid software companies 
in defining, planning, monitoring and improving their SPI 
efforts, and sustain its results. Our secondary goal is to 
create a basis for identifying SPI health attributes which, in 
turn, would allow software companies to determine the 
health of their SPI projects.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents background of the field. Section III 
describes the method used during this study. Section IV 
lists and provides descriptions of thirty two SPI 
sustainability success factors. Finally, Section V presents 
final remarks and suggests future work. 
II. BACKGROUND  
There is a large amount of software maturity models 
that have been designed to help software organizations 
implement SPI activities. The best known ones are CMMI 
and SPICE [3], [4]. 
CMM Integration (CMMI) framework provides 
guidance for improving software organization’s processes 
in a structured and well planned manner. It helps assess 
organizational maturity or process area capability, 
establish priorities for improvement, and implement these 
improvements [3]. CMMI best practices are organized into 
25 process areas, which have two different representations: 
continuous, labeled by standardized “capability levels”, 
and staged, labeled by tailored “maturity levels”.  
SPICE maturity model, also known as ISO 15504, has 
similar structure to CMMI. It consists of capability levels, 
which, in turn, consist of process attributes, and further, of 
generic practices. SPICE model provides tools for 
standardized process assessment and suggestions for 
defining process maturity.  
Even though many software organizations are using 
maturity models for process improvements, there are still 
many organizations that are not willing to follow formal 
maturity models [5]. The reasons are many. Some of them 
are: (1) the organizations are too small, (2) process 
certification is too costly, (3) the organizations do not have 
time for it, or (4) the organizations use other SPI methods 
[5]. Smaller organizations are often using ad-hoc SPI 
methods, or, they transition from one development method 
to another without proper planning or preparation [6].  
581
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

III. METHOD  
In this section, we present our research method. We 
first present research steps in Section III.A. We then 
describe the questionnaire used in one of the steps of this 
study in Section III.B. Finally, we describe the validity of 
our results in Section III.C. 
A. Research Steps 
Our research consisted of the three following steps: (1) 
Literature Study, (2) Empirical Study, and (3) Data 
Analysis. During the first two steps, we elicited 
sustainability success factors, first by reviewing literature 
and then by interviewing software practitioners. These two 
steps were conducted independently. This implies that the 
results of the first step did not constitute input to the 
second step, and vice versa. In the third step, we combined 
and analyzed the results as achieved in the first two 
independently done steps. Below, we briefly describe the 
three steps.  
1) 
Literature Study 
During the literature study, we reviewed more than 45 
publications dealing with SPI projects. These were mainly 
experience reports and case studies that had been retrieved 
from IEEE, ACM, Springer, John Wiley and Sons, and 
other publishers. Out of them, we chose 25 empirical 
reports describing conditions contributing to or subtracting 
from the success of SPI projects [1], [2], [7-29]. Our goal 
was to elicit factors that contributed to the sustainability of 
SPI efforts, as defined by literature.  
The majority of the publications studied mainly 
reported on the empirical process improvement projects. 
They did not focus on outlining the conditions contributing 
to the success of SPI efforts. However, some of the 
conditions could be indirectly recognized out of their 
contexts and results. Only three publications provided 
direct and explicit feedback on critical SPI success factors. 
These were [7], [8], [9].  
During the literature study, we elicited critical factors 
influencing SPI for both successful SPI initiation and 
implementation, and successful preservation of its results. 
This step resulted in a preliminary list of SPI sustainability 
success factors. Having this list as a basis, we reviewed the 
publications anew, now with the purpose of studying their 
direct and indirect descriptions, their contexts, and 
identifying their impact on the sustainability of the SPI 
efforts. This step resulted in 28 SPI success factors. 
2) 
Empirical study 
During the empirical study, we interviewed 40 
software engineers who had been involved in or who had 
been affected by SPI projects. Among the interviewees, 
there were twenty two software developers, ten testers, 
seven development managers and one SPI manager. They 
came 
from 
eight 
different 
middle 
size 
software 
organizations, located in Vietnam (18 participants), 
Sweden (18 participants), Bangladesh (2 participants), 
China (1 participant) and Island (1 participant). 
Each interviewee was interviewed only once, in a tête à 
tête manner. Some of the interviews were recorded, while 
others were not. The ones that had not been recorded were 
the interviewees from Vietnam. On purpose, we chose not 
to record them because we believed that due to cultural 
reasons, the interviewees might feel hampered in providing 
honest   answers.   However,   the   interview  results  were  
TABLE I.  
INTERVIEW QUESTIONNAIRE  
1. Are you aware that the information you provide will be 
kept confidential? 
2. Have you been involved in process improvement or 
process transition before? To what extent? 
a. If yes, have the results of the process improvements 
been lasting?  
i. If yes, why do you think the results have been 
lasting?  
ii. If no, why do you think the results have not been 
lasting?  
3. 
What factors contribute to the process improvement 
sustainability? Please list them and motivate your 
answers. 
4. 
What factors prevent the process improvement 
sustainability? Please list them and motivate your 
answers. 
5. 
What are your suggestions for keeping the process 
improvement results lasting/sustainable? Please list 
them and motivate your answers. 
documented directly after each interview. The interviews 
lasted for forty minutes per interview in average. They had 
resulted in 24 SPI sustainability factors in total, out of 
which 20 overlapped with the factors as identified in the 
literature studied, and four constituted new SPI success 
factors that had not been identified in the literature.  
3) 
Data analysis  
During the Data Analysis step, we analyzed the results 
of the literature study, transcribed the interviews that had 
been recorded, and analyzed the empirical data using the 
hermeneutics approach. Here, we identified and analyzed 
the sustainability factors as elicited in both studies. Finally, 
we identified common and overlapping sustainability 
factors, combined them and created a list of SPI 
sustainability success factors. It is this list that constitutes 
the body of this paper and a basis for the future creation of 
the SPI health attributes.  
B. Questionnaire 
For this study, we used semi-structured interviews, 
based on a questionnaire presented in Table 1. The semi-
structure implies that the interview structure was flexible, 
allowing new questions to be asked depending on the 
answers of the interviewee.  
As shown in Table 1, the interviews were aimed at 
identifying both the success and failure factors. They 
consisted of the following groups of questions: (1) the 
reasons for why SPI efforts have been lasting, (2) the 
reasons for why SPI efforts have not been lasting, (3) 
factors contributing to the SPI sustainability, (4) factors 
preventing the SPI sustainability, and finally, (5) 
suggestions for how to keep the SPI efforts sustainable.  
C. Validity   
All the qualitative research methods, encounter validity 
threats [30]. Those threats concern construct validity, 
internal validity, external validity, and conclusion validity. 
Construct validity refers to the degree to which 
inference can be made from the operational definition of a 
variable to the theoretical constructs [31]. The main threat 
to construct validity is to guarantee that the right measures 
have been chosen for the study. Here, the risk was that we 
might use wrong measures, and as a result, that we might 
misinterpret the SPI sustainability success factors. To 
minimize this threat, we conducted both theoretical and 
582
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

empirical studies. Moreover, we employed the multiple 
sources of data during the empirical study by interviewing 
different roles in eight different organizations. 
Internal validity refers to the degree of inferences of 
the cause-effect or causal relationships in the study [31]. 
The main thread to internal validity for the literature study 
was the fact that we might misinterpret the conclusions 
presented in the literature or use too few literature sources. 
Therefore, in this study, we first made a comprehensive 
search in various scientific sources out of which we 
extracted 25 experience reports. The main threat to internal 
validity for the empirical study was that the interviewees 
might have misunderstood the impacts on the SPI 
sustainability. To minimize this threat, we used various 
roles involved in SPI in different software organizations.                                                                                                                                  
External validity refers to the degree of whenever the 
sample findings can be generalized [31]. The main external 
validity threat to our empirical study was the fact that the 
SPI sustainability factors that had been identified during 
the interviews were based on the experiences of only 40 
individuals and eight software organizations. However, we 
believe that the findings and conclusions of this study can 
still be found useful for many other software companies 
planning to conduct SPI and wishing to sustain its results.  
Conclusion validity refers to the degree to which the 
conclusions are based on the correct interpretation of the 
relationships of the data [31]. The conclusion validity 
threat to our study was that the conclusions would not be 
related to the data. To minimize the threat, we based our 
conclusions on the multiple data sources such as literature 
and interviews.  
IV. SPI SUSTAINABILITY FACTORS   
In this section, we present the SPI success factors that 
have been elicited both during the literature and empirical 
studies. All the SPI success factors identified in the 
literature study have direct or indirect impact on the 
sustainability of the SPI efforts. Therefore, when 
describing them, we state their relationship with the SPI 
sustainability wherever relevant. 
During the literature study, we have identified 28 SPI 
success factors, out of which 20 factors overlapped with 
the factors that have been elicited during the empirical 
study. The interviews have additionally resulted in four 
new SPI sustainability factors.  
Just 
because 
these 
two 
studies 
were 
done 
independently, they had led to two groups of SPI success 
factors: (1) the ones that are common to the two studies, 
and, (2) the ones that have been elicited within one type of 
a study but not within the other. When describing them in 
this section, we clearly identify their sources. Additionally, 
we list them and their sources in Table 2. 
TABLE II.  
COMPILED LIST OF SPI SUSTAINABILITY SUCCESS FACTORS 
  
Cluster 
SPI sustainability factor 
Source 
  
Cluster 
SPI sustainability factor 
Source 
Human factors 
Education  
Stakeholders are trained and mentored 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Organizational  
factors (2) 
Alignment 
SPI is aligned with business goals 
Lit.  
Stakeholders have a common understanding 
of the process undergoing change 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
SPI is aligned with organizational policies 
and strategies  
Lit.  
SPI 
campaign 
Stakeholders are encouraged to support SPI 
Emp. 
SPI methods are tailored to specific 
organizational contexts and needs 
Lit. & 
Emp 
SPI activities are accepted 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Implementation factors  
Knowledge 
Technical staff participates in SPI 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Commit-
ment and 
support 
Management is committed to and 
continuously supports the SPI process 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Technical staff and SPI leaders possess 
experience and expertise in SPI 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Technical staff is committed to the SPI 
process 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
SPI method is well defined 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Communi-
cation 
Stakeholders are aware of the complexity, 
challenges and benefits of SPI 
Lit. 
Preparation 
and planning 
Mechanisms for stabilizing the process are 
planned and prepared 
Lit. 
Stakeholders have realistic expectations  
Emp.  
SPI goals and objectives are clear and 
realistic 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Information about SPI activities and its 
results is disseminated 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Management 
SPI leaders do not blame staff for their 
mistakes 
Lit.  
SPI 
drivers 
Technical staff owns the process 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Process standards are defined and enforced 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
External SPI leaders are trusted and 
respected 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Internal SPI leaders are designated 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
SPI projects are effectively managed 
Lit.  
Rewards   
Newly introduced processes give positive 
results 
Emp.  
SPI activities are prioritized 
Lit. 
Stakeholders involved are rewarded for 
successful SPI activities 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Process 
review and 
measure-
ment 
Software process is monitored and measured 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
Organizational 
factors (1) 
Resources  
Time and resources are dedicated to SPI  
Lit. & 
Emp.  
SPI responsibilities are clearly specified 
and compensated 
Lit. 
Software process and its efficiency is 
continuously reviewed 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
People turnover is low  
Emp. 
Continuous 
SPI  
Mechanisms for continuous process tuning 
are in place 
Lit. & 
Emp. 
 
583
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

Many different roles are involved in process improvement. 
Their naming and responsibilities vary in different 
literature and industrial contexts. For this reason, we 
identify and define the following roles involved in SPI:  
• Stakeholder: a person or a group that is involved 
in or affected by SPI.  
• Development team: a group of developers and/or 
testers that work together on development of the 
software product.  
• Technical staff: a group consisting of developers, 
testers and other roles involved in executing the 
process undergoing the improvement. They are the 
“doers”, and therefore, they get affected by the process 
change the most. 
• External SPI leader: a person or a group that is in 
charge of the overall SPI process. He/she initiates the 
improvement projects, requests resources, encourages 
local 
improvement 
efforts 
and 
establishes 
communication channels between different groups. 
External SPI leader is not the doer in the process to be 
improved. For this reason, he/she is seen as an external 
and independent role. 
• Internal SPI leader: a person or a group within 
the development team who is responsible for 
supporting and following the SPI strategy on a local 
level. 
To facilitate our presentation, we group the elicited SPI 
sustainability success factors into three categories as 
defined in [10]. These are human factors, organizational 
factors and implementation factors.  
A. Human factors   
We have identified fourteen different human SPI 
sustainability success factors. Human factors deal with 
human behavior and reactions in the SPI context.  
1) 
Stakeholders are trained and mentored 
Process improvement often implies changes to the 
process or introduction of new techniques and practices. 
Hence, as pointed out in the literature studied, the 
development team needs to be trained in them in order to 
fully understand their role in the process change. They 
need to be prepared for the process improvement and 
understand the reasons behind each suggested change. 
Otherwise, they would less likely follow the new process 
[11]. For this reason, staff training and mentoring in the 
new process, new techniques and practices are needed not 
only for implementing process changes but also for 
sustaining their results. In organizations or cultures where 
knowledge of the process is low, the training in the process 
is even more important [32].   
The need for training and mentoring of the SPI 
stakeholders was also raised during the interviews. 
According to our interviewees, all the company employees 
need to have necessary training in the new method in order 
to be able to follow it properly and dedicatedly. Moreover, 
the internal SPI leaders and team members responsible for 
improvement activities have to be coached on how to 
implement improvements and how to follow the new 
process. According to our interviewees continuous 
mentoring and training increases the credibility of strategic 
SPI decisions and contributes to building trust in those 
decisions and in the new process.  
2) 
Stakeholders have a common understanding of the 
process undergoing change 
The process cannot be efficiently improved unless it is 
properly understood. According to the literature studied, 
the technical staff and management have to reach 
consensus on the status of the current process, its problems 
and possible solutions, as well as the organization’s vision 
and the improvement goals [9]. Common understanding of 
the current and new process, suggested changes and its 
potential benefits are important to increase support for 
process improvement among all the stakeholders involved.  
Our empirical study has led to the same conclusion. 
According to our interviewees, technical staff should 
understand the reasons behind process changes, since it is 
mainly the technical staff, who have to change the 
previous habits and adapt to a new way of working. Our 
interviewees have also pointed out that common 
understanding of the new process, SPI activities and its 
potential benefits strongly contribute to the increase of 
commitment and motivation towards SPI.  
3) 
Stakeholders are encouraged to support SPI  
Commitment to and support of SPI by all the 
stakeholders is a great asset to help successful SPI 
implementation and to decrease inertia to change. 
Therefore, according to the interview results, all the 
stakeholders need to be continuously encouraged to 
support SPI, and to show interest in the process 
improvement activities. 
4) 
SPI activities are accepted 
Changes to the process may affect daily work of many 
employees. Therefore, according to the literature studied, it 
is important that all the members of the technical staff 
agree and accept future changes to the process [10], [23]. 
This can decrease inertia to change. Acceptance of process 
changes can be encouraged by high involvement of the 
technical staff in the SPI activities.  
Our interviews have also led to the same success 
factor. According to our interviewees, if all the personnel 
accept the newly changed process, then there is a greater 
opportunity that the changed process will be sustained. 
Mutual acceptance of the changed process and process 
improvement activities is a key to sustain the results 
achieved by the SPI.  
5) 
Management is committed to and continuously 
supports the SPI process 
To provide long-term sustainable results, software 
improvement requires continuous investment in time, 
resources and effort. This, in turn, requires that 
management is strongly committed to and continuously 
supports the SPI efforts [9], [10], [12], [13], [33]. 
According to the literature studied, the strong management 
commitment helps retain high priority of the SPI projects 
and the continuous management support helps assure 
continuous supply of the required resources [9], [10], [12], 
[13]. It is especially important in the initial SPI phases 
during which the cost of SPI activities is higher than 
initially expected and planned [7].  
Even our interviewees have stated that SPI projects 
need commitment and support of top management for 
investment in time and resources in order to achieve 
sustainable results.  
584
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

6) 
Technical staff is committed to the SPI process  
Acceptance of SPI activities is a critical success factor 
when starting SPI projects. However, according to the 
literature studied, it needs to be complemented with the 
commitment 
of 
the 
technical 
staff. 
Management 
commitment to SPI projects has already been listed as a 
significant success factor to SPI projects. However, 
commitment of technical staff is just as important [14-17], 
[33]. Together with the increased motivation and 
engagement, the commitment of the technical staff can 
become a driving wheel of process improvement [2]. 
Committed staff takes responsibility and ownership of the 
process and keeps process in a healthy state [2].  
Commitment of the technical staff has also been 
elicited during our interviews. Our interviewees have 
stated that, if the company personnel does not commit to 
the process changes, it will most likely go back to the pre-
SPI process state. 
7) 
Stakeholders are aware of complexity, challenges 
and benefits of SPI 
Since SPI requires continuous effort and often brings 
mainly long term results, it is important that everybody 
involved in it is aware of its complexity, challenges and 
future benefits. Hence, according to the literature studied, 
organizations must make sure that all the stakeholders 
involved are aware of them. This can be realized via 
education and training. Raising awareness of SPI and 
effective communication of its complexity, challenges and 
benefits strongly affects the success of the SPI projects 
[16-22].  
8) 
Stakeholders have realistic expectations     
Our interviews have indicated that in order to be 
satisfied with SPI and its results, the employees affected 
by SPI should have realistic expectations. Otherwise, the 
stakeholders would get disappointed with SPI and would 
not continue with it, even though SPI brought positive 
results.   
9) 
Information about SPI activities and its results is 
disseminated 
SPI projects bring many changes to the process and 
daily routines. These changes have to be communicated to 
all the stakeholders that can be directly or indirectly 
impacted by the changes.  
According to the literature studied, insufficient 
communication of the SPI changes may lead to lack of 
transparency of the SPI projects, confused personnel and 
poor 
quality 
process. 
Team 
collaboration 
and 
communication, on the other hand, may help the staff 
members to exchange knowledge and experience during 
the improvement project and contribute to coherent 
organizational culture [9].  
The need for communicating on the SPI activities and 
their results has also been raised by our interviews. 
According to them, sufficient communication positively 
impacts motivation in SPI and acceptance of the new 
process changes.   
10) Technical staff owns the SPI process  
Disregarding the reasons behind the SPI projects, the 
new process has to be accepted and followed by the team. 
According to the literature studied, it is important that not 
only external and internal SPI leaders but also all the 
technical staff members take on the ownership of the 
process to be improved. The members should take the 
responsibility for tailoring the process and for continuously 
improving it. It is only in this way they will feel more 
affiliated with the process and more responsible for future 
process improvements. This, in turn, will lead to a built-in, 
self-driven continuous process improvement process, 
which, in turn, will strongly contribute to the sustainability 
of the SPI results [12].  
Our interviewees have also stated that the success of 
SPI projects is strongly related to process ownership. 
According to them, not only management and SPI leaders 
should own the process, but also all the technical staff 
members. They should not only be responsible for the SPI 
process but also for its progress.  
11) External SPI leaders are trusted and respected  
According to the literature studied, the level of 
experience, commitment and engagement of the external 
SPI leaders can determine the success of the SPI projects 
[7-10]. However, as [7], [8] claim, the authority and 
respect paid to the external SPI leaders is as important. 
Even if the SPI leaders are in a privileged position, it still 
does not imply that they have high enough authority, trust 
and respect among the technical staff members. If so, then 
their ideas may not be supported and successfully 
transmitted to the process change [7-10]. Trust and respect 
may only be gained via personal qualities such as honesty, 
credibility, reliability, experience and reputation.  
Trust and respect of the external SPI leaders was also 
raised 
during 
the 
interviews. 
According 
to 
our 
interviewees, to make the SPI results last, there should be 
an external SPI leader, a person or a group of people who 
have knowledge of SPI and who take on the responsibility 
of driving it.  
12) Internal SPI leaders are designated 
According to the literature studied, the internal SPI 
leaders are recognized as important SPI actors since they 
take on immediate responsibility for leading and 
supporting continuous process improvement [9], [12-14]. 
By possessing knowledge of the process, they are able to 
adapt the improvement suggestions to the different needs 
of development teams, projects and cultures. They help 
SPI activities get started and their engagement aids in 
winning support of their team members [13].  
The importance of designating internal SPI leaders was 
also recognized during the interviews. According to our 
interviewees, the involvement of the internal SPI leaders 
helps spread commitment to the process and create strong 
process ownership. Internal leadership creates continuous 
control that the process is followed in a correct way and 
that its stakeholders are engaged in SPI. 
13) Newly introduced processes give positive results  
As mentioned before, the results of the SPI activities 
should be disseminated to all the stakeholders. However, 
as discovered during the interviews, just the dissemination 
of the results of SPI is not enough. The results achieved by 
the early SPI effort should be positive and should speak for 
themself. Positive results of the newly introduced process 
encourages and motivates stakeholders to continue with 
the SPI activities and changes the opinions of those who 
did not support it from the very beginning.  
14) Stakeholders involved are rewarded for successful 
SPI activities 
The importance of rewards for SPI success has been 
mentioned in some of the studied literature sources [20]. 
585
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

Our interviews have also shown that in order to keep 
constant stakeholder commitment to and engagement in 
SPI, the stakeholders should celebrate the SPI success. 
Rewards for the improved process contribute to the 
increase of motivation and engagement in future SPI 
activities.  
B. Organizational factors    
We 
have 
elicited 
six 
organizational 
factors. 
Organizational factors are critical success aspects that are 
outside the scope of SPI. Those are related to the 
organizational structures and politics as well as cultural 
issues [10]. Still, however, they have a substantial impact 
on SPI sustainability. 
1) 
Time and resources are dedicated to SPI  
According to the literature studied, SPI projects need to 
have dedicated time and resources. As many as 72% of SPI 
improvement projects have suffered from lack of resources 
and constant time pressure [7], [11], [18], [21]. SPI 
projects cannot run on their own. Investment in time and 
people has been recognized not only for starting and 
implementing the SPI projects but also for sustaining the 
achieved results [7], [8], [10], [14], [18-20], [24].  
Our interviewees were of the same opinion. According 
to them, process related problems often start when no one 
is responsible for the process.  
2) 
SPI responsibilities are clearly specified and 
compensated 
According to the literature studied, people involved in 
SPI should have clear responsibilities and compensation 
for their effort [7], [8]. If they are assigned to SPI related 
tasks, they should be relieved from other tasks. Time 
dedicated to the SPI activities should be compensated in 
the same manner as other work. Otherwise, the SPI 
activities will be done in a rush, they may be neglected, 
they may be delayed or they may even be forgotten.   
3) 
People turnover is low    
According to our interviewees, high people turnover 
can become a significant barrier to the sustainability of the 
SPI efforts. When the key employees leave the company, 
so does the knowledge of the process and SPI. With high 
people turnover, more effort needs to be spent on the 
education and training of the new hires.  
4) 
SPI is aligned with business goals 
The goals of SPI projects should not only go in line 
with the standardization of process and quality standards, 
but also with business goals. According to the literature 
studied, alignment of SPI goals with the organizational 
business goals contributes to the better management of, 
commitment to and support of the SPI projects [10], [14], 
[15], [25], [26].  
5) 
SPI is aligned with organizational policies and 
strategies 
Improvement projects often conflict with the existing 
organizational policies by requiring changes to routines 
and processes that are common to the whole organization. 
Therefore, as stated in the literature studied, organizational 
policies have to be aligned with the SPI goals and vice 
versa. In cases when organizations do not have any 
policies, they have to establish ones and make the process 
standardization and improvement coherent with them. 
Lack of organizational policies to support process changes 
can potentially become a big barrier for a successful 
process improvement [7], [11], [14], [21].  
6) 
SPI methods are tailored to specific organizational 
contexts and needs 
Each organization is different with respect to its 
structure, culture and policies. For this reason, as stated in 
the literature studied, SPI initiatives should consider the 
contextual specifics of the organizational culture, product 
characteristics, customer availability and people influenced 
by the process. The adaptation of process improvement 
methods to specific organizational contexts and needs 
helps address individual problems and contributes to 
sustainable SPI efforts [9-10].   
The interviews have led to the similar conclusion. 
According to our interviewees, if the SPI is not aligned 
with the organizational needs, or if it does not fit the 
established organizational and national culture, then it is 
more difficult to win people’s support and commitment. 
Moreover, the people would resist the process changes and 
the results achieved by SPI would be easily lost. 
C. Implementation factors 
We have elicited twelve implementation factors. The 
implementation factors are related to the execution of the 
SPI projects.  
1) 
Technical staff participates in SPI  
Technical staff constitutes an important process 
knowledge and experience asset [9]. By knowing all the 
nooks and crannies of the process, they may provide useful 
feedback on the suggested SPI changes [23]. For this 
reason, it is important that they are involved in identifying 
process pains and in suggesting solutions for them [9], 
[10], [18-20], [25], [26].  
The literature findings show that the involvement and 
participation of the technical staff reduce resistance to 
change, and thereby, strongly impacts the SPI success [9], 
[10], [14]. By being involved in the SPI activities, the 
technical staff members feel more motivated to adhere to 
the process changes, and therefore, they are more likely to 
accept them [9], [10]. Technical staff involvement was 
found especially important in immature organizations [19].  
Our interviews have also led to the same conclusion. 
According to our interviewees, the involvement of the 
technical staff contributes to the alignment of SPI methods 
to the organizational needs. It also decreases inertia to 
change and increases motivation, and thereby, significantly 
affects the sustainability of the SPI efforts. 
2) 
Technical staff and SPI leaders possess experience 
and expertise in SPI  
Process improvement implies changes to the deeply 
ingrained organizational culture, habits, working patterns 
and manners that have been developed throughout a long 
time. To change them is very difficult. However, according 
to the literature studied, it is easier to change them if the 
stakeholders involved possess enough knowledge and 
experience in implementing software process improvement 
changes. If there is lack of such knowledge and 
experience, then there is a risk of using unsuitable SPI 
strategy and of having poor SPI execution, which could 
potentially fail the SPI projects [11], [12], [18-20], [34]. 
Few of our interviews have also mentioned the 
importance of knowledge in SPI by all the stakeholders 
involved.   
586
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

3) 
SPI method is well defined 
Software process improvement is a complex and time 
consuming process. Following a well defined and 
structured SPI implementation method strongly contributes 
to its success [12], [19], [20]. According to the literature 
studied, the SPI method should be suitable to the 
organization, its size and goals.  
Our interviews have also led to the same success 
factor, highlighting the importance of accessible and 
updated process documentation.  
4) 
Mechanisms for stabilizing the process are 
planned and prepared  
To prevent losing the immediate advantage of process 
improvement efforts, it is important to stabilize the 
changed process. According to the literature studied, this 
can be done by providing a comprehensive support to 
those responsible for the process and by encouraging staff 
to practice new procedures [9]. All the roles responsible 
for the SPI projects should influence the process 
stabilization by continuously reaffirming commitment to 
change, communicating progress of improvements, and by 
providing continuous feedback and motivation [9]. 
5) 
SPI goals and objectives are clear and realistic 
SPI projects should have clearly specified goals and 
objectives. Our literature study shows that clear, realistic 
and well communicated SPI goals contribute to the good 
understanding of the SPI process and assurance that they 
are well understood across all the organizational levels [8]. 
Realistic SPI goals lead to realistic expectations and 
aid in maintaining high motivation for and support of the 
SPI activities. Unrealistic, too ambitious or unreachable 
objectives, on the other hand, may jeopardize the SPI 
projects, by decreasing employees’ engagement and 
motivation even in projects with positive results [7], [14]. 
Our interviews have led to the similar conclusion. 
6) 
SPI leaders do not blame staff for their mistakes 
During the SPI projects, the weaknesses and problems 
of the current process are continuously identified and 
improvements are suggested. Since the problems and 
negative issues of the process are continuously discussed, 
it is important not to start blame games [11].  
According to the literature studied, blaming people for 
mistakes can only lead to frustration and inertia to process 
change [11], [24]. One should focus on process’s 
weaknesses rather than on people’s mistakes [24]. One 
should also encourage initiative, innovation, creativity and 
openness. Without it, employees cannot share valuable 
ideas, and thereby, contribute to process improvement 
[24].  
7) 
Process standards are defined and enforced 
When 
the 
stakeholders 
lack 
dedication 
and 
commitment to the new process, people are tempted not to 
follow the process standards, unless there is a strong 
control mechanism in place [6]. Even when properly 
trained, the staff may not follow the newly introduced 
process. Therefore, as stated in the literature studied, in 
order to guarantee that the process is dedicatedly followed 
by all the stakeholders, it should be enforced and 
controlled by the SPI managers [6]. 
Our interviews have led to the similar conclusion. The 
interviewees have also suggested that the employees that 
are not following the new process procedures correctly 
should be informed and consequently corrected.  
8) 
SPI projects are effectively managed 
Management of the SPI projects involves a wide range 
of activities such as planning for change, identifying actors 
involved, ensuring the level of understanding of process 
changes, monitoring the status of SPI, evaluating the 
progress, and the like. It needs to be performed in an 
effective and professional manner [21]. According to the 
literature studied, without project management, SPI 
projects are doomed to fail and may lead to chaos [9]. 
9) 
SPI activities are prioritized  
At the beginning of the SPI projects, companies can be 
overwhelmed with the amount of suggestions for the 
improvements. Such being a case, as stated in the literature 
studied, it is important not to do too many changes at ones. 
Instead, companies should prioritize the SPI suggestions 
and, focus on one or few improvements at a time [13], 
[14]. 
This 
leads 
to 
easier 
and 
more 
efficient 
implementation, control, measurement, and thereby, to 
more sustainable results.  
10) Software process is monitored and measured  
Continuous process monitoring and measurement 
indicates whether the SPI activities are effective or not, 
and allows to provide early feedback on the sustainability 
of the SPI efforts. Hence, as stated in the literature studied, 
it is important to evaluate and measure the process on a 
continuous basis to reinsure its purpose and to increase the 
engagement of the SPI supporters. Measured and 
acknowledged process improvements will positively affect 
team morale and motivation [12], [13], [25], [26]. Our 
interviews have also stated that measurement and 
evaluation of the SPI results can positively impact the 
engagement in and motivation for future SPI. 
11) Software process and its efficiency is continuously 
reviewed 
To achieve continuous process improvements, the SPI 
process and its efficiency should be reflected on and 
evaluated on a continuous basis. As stated in the literature 
studied, process reviews, such as retrospectives, allow 
learning from previous experience and from experimenting 
with the process, which, in turn, contributes to a self-
driven continuous process improvement, and thereby, to 
the long lasting SPI results [25], [26].  
Our interviews have led to the similar conclusion. 
According to our interviewees, process reviews help to 
identify problems in the current process and to 
acknowledge benefits achieved by SPI. This, in turn, 
significantly contributes to the sustainability of the 
achieved results. 
12) Mechanisms for continuous process tuning are in 
place   
Software organizations have dynamic and continuously 
changing structures. Organizational culture, availability of 
the customer and background of the employees are always 
changing. Hence, a static process that is not improving or 
adapting to the changing organizational needs is failed to 
decay [6]. Without frequent reviews and changes to the 
process, it will soon outdate. Therefore, it is important to 
have mechanisms for continuous process tuning and 
improvements in place [6]. This was also concluded during 
our interviews. 
587
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

V. FINAL REMARKS 
In this paper, we have presented thirty two success 
factors influencing the sustainability of SPI efforts. We 
have elicited them in two independently conducted studies, 
the literature and empirical studies.  
Initially, we grouped our sustainability factors into 
three clusters: human, organizational and implementation. 
When analyzing them, however, we could further group 
them into thirteen additional sub-clusters. As shown in 
Table 2, those are: (1) Education, (2) SPI campaign, (3) 
Commitment and support, (4) Communication, (5) SPI 
drivers, (6) Rewards, (7) Resources, (8) Alignment, (9) 
Knowledge, 
(10) 
Preparation 
and 
planning, 
(11) 
Management, (12) Process review and measurement, and 
(13) Continuous process improvement. 
The SPI sustainability success factors presented in this 
paper constitute the body of the knowledge of the software 
engineering community as elicited in the current software 
engineering literature and in the industry. They may 
already be used by software development organizations 
when implementing and managing their SPI projects.  
We strongly believe that it is not enough to just define 
SPI 
process 
frameworks 
and/or 
models. 
Process 
frameworks/models do not always provide clear evidence 
about the health of the SPI projects. For this reason, we 
plan to continue studying and analyzing the SPI 
sustainability success factors presented in this paper. Our 
future goal is to create a basis for supplementing currently 
defined SPI frameworks and/or models with a checklist of 
health attributes allowing software companies to define, 
monitor, control and improve their SPI processes, and 
thereby, allowing them to achieve long-term sustainable 
results.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. S. Chakravorty, “Where Process Improvement Projects Go 
wrong,” Wall Street J., 2010.   
[2] 
N. Nikitina and M. Kajko-Mattsson, “Developer-Driven Big Bang 
Process Transition from Scrum to Kanban,” Proc. 2011 
International Conference on on Software and Systems Process 
(ICSSP 2011), ACM, 2011. 
[3] 
CMMI Product Team, Capability Maturity Model Integration 
(CMMI), Version 1.1. Pittsburgh, USA: Software Engineering 
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 2002. 
[4] 
K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, Agile Software Development with 
SCRUM, Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[5] 
M. Staples, M. Niazi, R. Jeffery, A. Abrahams, P. Byatt, et. al., 
“Why organization do not want to adopt CMMI,” J. of Syst. and 
Softw., vol. 80, 2007, pp.883–895. 
[6] 
S. Zahran, Software Process Improvement: Practical Guidelines for 
business success, Addison Wesley, 1998.  
[7] 
D. Goldenson and D. Herbsleb, After the Appraisal: A systematic 
Survey of Process Improvements, its Benefits, and Success Factors 
that influence Success. Technical report, SEI, 1995.  
[8] 
K. El Emam and P. Fusaro, B. Smith, “Success factors and barriers 
for software process improvement,” 1999. In: C. Tully, R. 
Messnarz, (Eds), Better Software Practice For Business Benefit: 
Principles and Experience. In: IEEE Computer Society Press, 
Silver Spring, MD. 
[9] 
D. Stelzer and W. Mellis, “Success Factors of Organizational 
Change in Software Process Improvements,” J. Softw. Process 
Improve. Pract., 1998, pp. 227-250.   
[10] T. Hall, A. Rainer and N. Badoo, “Implementing Software Process 
Improvement: An Empirical Study,” J. Softw. Process Improve. 
Pract., vol. 7, 2002, pp. 3–15. 
[11] S. Beecham, T. Hall and A. Rainer, “Software Process 
Improvement Problems in Twelve Software Companies: An 
Empirical Analysis,” Emp. Softw. Eng., vol. 8, 2003, pp.7–42. 
[12] A. Rainer and T. Hall, “Key success factors for implementing 
software process improvement: a maturity-based analysis,” J. Syst. 
Softw., vol. 62, 2002, pp. 71–84. 
[13] D. Paulish and A. D. Carleton, “Case Studies of Software Process 
Improvement Measurement,” IEEE Computer, vol. 27: 9, 1994, pp. 
50 - 57. 
[14] M. Nazir, R.. Ahmad and N. H. Hassan, “Resistance factors in the 
Implementation of Software Process Improvement Project in 
Malaysia,” J. of Comp. Science, vol. 4: 3, 2008, pp. 211-219. 
[15] K. C. Dangle, P. Larsen, M. Shaw and M. V. Zelcovitz, “Software 
Process Improvesmnt in Small ogranizations: A case study,”  IEEE 
Software, vol.22:6, 2005, pp. 68-75. 
[16] G. Santos, M. Montoni, J. Vasconcellos, S. Figuerido, R. Cabral, 
et. al., “Implementing Software Process Improvements Initiatives 
in Small and Medium-Size Enterprises in Brazil,” Proc. QUATIC, 
2007, pp.187-196.  
[17] S. B. Basri and R. V. O’Connor, “Organizational Commitment 
Towards Software Process Improvement: An Irish Software VSEs 
Case Study,” Proc. ITSIM'10, IEEE, 2010, pp.1456-1461. 
[18] M. Niazi, D. Wilson and D. Zowdhi, “A framework for assisting 
the 
design 
of 
effective 
software 
process 
improvement 
implementation strategies,”J. of Syst. and Softw., vol. 78, 2005, pp. 
204–222. 
[19] M. Niazi, D. Wilson and D. Zowdhi, “Implementing software 
process improvement initiatives: An Empirical study,” Proc. 
PROFES 2006, 2006 , pp. 222 – 233. 
[20] M. Niazi, D. Wilson and D. Zowghi, “Critical Success Factors for 
Software Process Improvement Implementation: An Empirical 
Study,” J. Softw. Process Improve. Pract., vol. 11, 2006, pp. 193–
211. 
[21] M. Niazi, M. Ali Babar and J. M. Verner, “Software Process 
Improvement Barriers: A cross-cultural comparison,” J. Infor. and 
Softw. Techn., vol. 52: 11, 2010. 
[22] T. Varkoi, “Management of Continuos Software Process 
Improvement,” Proc. 2002 IEMC, 2002, pp. 334-337. 
[23] A. Sweeney and D. W. Bustard, “Software Process Improvement: 
making it happen in practice,” Soft. Qual. J., vol. 6, 1997.  
[24] B. Curtis and M. Paulk, “Createing a software process 
improvement program,” Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd, vol. 35: 6/7, 
1993.  
[25] T. Dyba, “An instrument for measuring the key factors of success 
in Software Process Improvement,” J. Emp. Softw. Eng., vol. 5, 
2000, pp. 357–390. 
[26] T. Dyba, “An empirical investigation of the key factor for success 
in software process improvements,” J. Trans. on Soft. Eng.,vol 31:  
5, 2005.  
[27] I. Aaen, J. Arent, L. Mathissen and O. Ngwenyama, “A conceptual 
MAP of Software Process Improvement,” Scandinavian J. of Infor. 
Syst., vol. 13, 2001.  
[28] T. Galinac, “Empirical Evaluation of selected best practices in 
implementation of software process improvements,”J. Infor. Soft. 
Techn., vol. 51, 2009, pp. 1351–1364. 
[29] F. Ekdahl and S. Larsson, “Experience Report: Using Internal 
CMMI Appraisals to Institutionalize Software Development 
Performance Improvement”, Proc. EuroMicro 2006, 2006.  
[30] M. D. Myers, Qualitative Research in Business & Management, 
Sage publications, London, 2009. 
[31] T. William, Research Methods: The Concise Knowledge Base, 
Cornell University, 2005. 
[32] M. Niazi, M. A. Babar and J. V. Verner, “Software process 
improvement barriers: cultural comparism,” J. Infor. Soft. Techn., 
vol. 52, 2010, pp. 1204–1216. 
[33] P. Abrahamsson and N. Iivari, “Commitment in Software Process 
Improvement--In Search of the Process,” Proc. HICSS 2002, 2002.  
[34] N. Nikitina and M. Kajko-Mattsson, “Historical Perspective of 
Two Process Transitions,” Proc. 2009 International Conference on 
Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2009), IEEE, 2009. 
588
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

