Spider-DAR: A Tool to Support the Implementation of Decision Analysis and 
Resolution Process based on CMMI-DEV and MR-MPS-SW Models 
 
Luiz Otávio Danin de Lima, Sandro Ronaldo 
Bezerra Oliveira 
Graduate Program in Computer Science 
Federal University of Pará 
Belém, Pará, Brazil 
e-mail:otaviodanin@gmail.com, srbo@ufpa.br 
 
Bleno Wilson Franklin Vale da Silva, Géssica 
Pinheiro da Silva, Iuri Igonez Silva Raiol 
Faculty of Computing 
Federal University of Pará 
Belém, Pará, Brazil 
e-mail:{blenofvale, gesspinhero, iuriraiol}@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a software tool called Spider-
DAR, which is a desktop solution that operates in a client-
server system and seeks to help the implementation of decision 
analysis and resolution process in adherence to CMMI-DEV 
(Capability Maturity Model Integration for Development) 
model. This involves the following: laying down the guidelines 
for decision analysis and the evaluation criteria, identifying 
alternative solutions, selecting evaluation methods, evaluating 
alternatives and selecting solutions. The software conforms to 
all the specific practices of the DAR (Decision Analysis and 
Resolution) process area included in CMMI-DEV. We expect 
that this tool will be readily adopted by software organizations 
because it is based on models and standards that are generally 
accepted. Furthermore, this tool adopts free (non-proprietary) 
technologies as a means of reducing costs. This tool was used in 
a software company that implemented its processes on the 
basis of CMMI-DEV Maturity Level 3, and the employees of 
this company evaluated its efficiency and effectiveness. 
 
Keywords-software engineering; software quality; decision 
analysis and resolution; process improvement; software tool. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Within the domain of the knowledge and information 
society and the administrative scope of Information Systems 
(IS), there have been a number of significant changes in the 
social, technical and business domains. According to Evans 
et al. [1], the competition and cooperation that accompany 
the different stages of production have led to a growing 
trend: a desire to enhance it by automating the manual 
process and to make future improvements in a general way. 
Thus, in software engineering, as in several areas of 
knowledge, special skills are required to analyze different 
decisions made throughout the IS development and 
evolution process. 
It is essential to analyze key issues, such as types of 
technology, the selection of personnel, and the acquisition 
of resources or tools, the value of which can be 
substantiated by means of a systematic process, so that 
rational choices can be made about what should be required 
from products or services. As defined in the Capability 
Maturity Model Integration for Development (CMMI-DEV) 
[2] the decision analysis establishes guidelines to determine 
which issues should be the objects of a formal evaluation 
process on the basis of defined criteria. This process 
involves adopting a structured approach to evaluate 
alternative solutions. Thus, the most appropriate choice 
about the real circumstances of a project or organization, 
significantly affects all the stages of its lifecycle. The 
decision-making processes and systems are of crucial 
importance to improve the efficiency, quality and cost / 
benefit ratio of the organizations. 
Moreover, it is also worth underlining that the decision-
making support is a new paradigm for organizations that 
seek to introduce continuous learning in all the processes 
carried out by its various sectors, because, according to 
Association for Promotion of Brazilian Software Excellence 
(SOFTEX) [3]: 
• 
It facilitates the structuring of problems within a 
specific research study, 
• 
It leads to an understanding of the information 
required to make effective decisions, 
• 
It provides access to data, which would not 
otherwise be available or would be difficult to 
obtain, 
• 
It generates and assesses alternative solutions, 
• 
It prioritizes alternatives through explicit models, 
• 
It prioritizes alternatives through a method that is 
supported by a formal and objective process and 
thus avoids making poor choices that are entirely 
based on subjective factors. 
In this way, the Decision Management (GDE) process is 
included in the Brazilian Reference Model of Process 
Improvement for Software (MR-MPS-SW) [4] and the 
Decision Analysis and Resolution (DAR) process area is 
included in the CMMI-DEV [2] model. According to 
Pizzoleto [5], this makes it possible to generate indicators 
and form perspectives that can supplement and facilitate a 
better way of undertaking an activity; this involves setting 
these components within these improvement programs. 
Thus, this paper is driven by a desire to assist in defining 
and deploying a decision management strategy in 
organizations involved in software development. Moreover, 
it is guided by the essential activities and tasks, which are 
the expected results and specific practices included in the 
processes of these quality models that support the decision-
making. 
The area of decision-making for software development 
companies is very important, because today, most of these 
companies create spreadsheets to implement the practices 
included in the quality models. However, this does not 
allow the history of the company’s decision-making to be 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

maintained and does not assist any formal evaluation of the 
problem that needs to be analyzed. For this reason, the 
development of a systematic tool, which centralizes the 
information obtained during the formal evaluation process, 
might benefit the future decision-making that is based on an   
analysis of the historical background; it might also guide the 
implementation of the decision management process in a 
systemic way. 
Hence, the aim of this paper is to adopt an approach 
(workflow and tool) for the Decision Analysis and 
Resolution process area that is aligned with CMMI-DEV 
and MR-MPS-SW quality models. This approach is based 
on the specification and implementation of tools, which 
consist of: (1) a process workflow that takes account of the 
constant assets in quality models, and (2) a systemic 
support, with a free tool, to carry out activities defined in 
the workflow. On the basis of this approach, it is expected 
that it will be possible to simplify the implementation of the 
decision analysis and resolution process in organizations 
seeking 
the 
improvement, 
standardization 
and 
institutionalization of their development process, with an 
emphasis on the application of resources in software 
projects. This tool is based on free standards and 
technologies and is the outcome of research on the Software 
Process 
Improvement: 
Development 
and 
Research 
(SPIDER) project [6], carried out at the Federal University 
of Pará. 
Following this introduction, Section II discusses the 
stages of the decision analysis and resolution stages in 
software process, and also reviews some related works in 
the literature. Section III outlines the approach adopted for 
the decision analysis and resolution, and the tool that 
supports its implementation. Section IV conducts an 
analysis of the application tool in industry and its adherence 
to the CMMI-DEV and MR-MPS-SW models. Section V 
examines the results obtained in this research study in both 
the academic world and industry. Finally, Section VI 
summarizes the conclusions. 
II.   BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS 
This section provides an overview of the concepts of 
decision-making in the CMMI-DEV model and some 
related works. 
A. Concepts and Definitions 
A decision-making system is not just a sequence of 
instructions, but rather an organized team of people and set 
of procedures, software, information databases and devices 
used to support specific decisions that are made to tackle a 
problem. In a review of decision-making, Keeney [7] 
defines it in technical terms as reflecting different levels of 
a philosophy or methodology, that are articulated by a set of 
auxiliary axioms, that can be employed to address the 
complexity of the problems during the decision-making. 
Decisions can be classified in terms of the time it takes 
to make them. They can be divided into two basic types: 
scheduled and unscheduled. Scheduled decisions are routine 
and repetitive, and the organization usually finds specific 
ways to deal with them. Unscheduled decisions are usually 
made once, which means they are generally less structured 
than the scheduled ones. 
A model of the decision-making process that is 
recommended for management use includes the following: 
(1) identifying an existing problem, (2) listing possible 
alternative ways to solve the problem, (3) selecting the most 
promising alternatives and implementing the one that is 
chosen, (4) obtaining feedback to find out if the 
implemented alternative is able to solve the identified 
problem. However, this means that it is impossible for 
people who make decisions to know exactly what the future 
implications of implementing an alternative might be. This 
is because the dynamics of organizations and their 
environments are constantly changing and the future 
implications of the decisions that are implemented are not 
entirely predictable. 
The quality models that guide this paper have equivalent 
processes that are the driving-force behind the review and 
support the decision management. Both models (CMMI-
DEV and MR-MPS-SW) include specific practices and 
show the results of decision analysis and resolution. In a 
similar way, they employ objective criteria to explore, the 
resolutions of problems related to the decision-making, and 
these can be employed for the evaluation of alternative 
solutions, by means of a formal process. Table I shows the 
correspondence between the assets of both models (CMMI-
DEV and MR-MPS-SW) with regard to their specific 
practices or expected results [4]. 
TABLE I.  
THE CORRESPONDENCE OF PRACTICES AND EXPECTED 
RESULTS IN THE  CMMI-DEV AND MR-MPS-SW MODELS 
Specific Practices of DAR 
process area - CMMI-DEV 
Expected Results of GDE 
process - MR-MPS.BR 
SP 1.1 Establish Guidelines for 
Decision Analysis 
GDE1 - Organizational Guidelines 
to decisions management are 
established and maintained 
- 
GDE2 - The problem or issue is 
defined as the object of a formal 
process of decision-making 
SP 1.2 Establish Evaluation 
Criteria 
GDE3 - Criteria for the assessment 
of the alternative solutions are 
established and maintained in 
order of importance, so that the 
most important criteria exert more 
influence on the assessment 
SP 1.3 Identifiy Alternative 
Solutions 
GDE4 - Acceptable alternative 
solutions to the problem or issue 
are identified 
SP 1.4 Select Evaluation 
Methods 
GDE5 - The evaluation methods 
of the alternatives solutions are 
selected in accordance with their 
application viability 
SP 1.5 Evaluate Alternative 
Solutions 
GDE6 - Alternative solutions are 
evaluated by means of the criteria 
and established methods 
SP 1.6 Select Solutions 
GDE7 - Decisions are made on the 
basis of an evaluation of the 
alternatives based on the 
evaluation criteria that are laid 
down 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

B. Related Works  
Assistance in defining a strategy and implementing a 
decision 
management 
in 
software 
development 
organizations is provided by the CMMI-DEV and MR-
MPS-SW Implementation Guides where activities and key 
tasks are described, together with the expected results and 
specific practices that are included in the process to support 
decision-making. However, despite the availability of these 
guides, most organizations that attempt to deploy an 
analytical decision-making process experience obstacles, 
which prevent or delay their implementation. Among the 
main difficulties that have been encountered periodically, is 
the problem of defining a non-intrusive strategy, i.e. 
ensuring that it does not have an impact on people’s daily 
activities in the organizational unit and can easily be 
integrated with other processes. As well as this, there is the 
question of choosing appropriate tools to support and 
facilitate the use of the practices required by a Decision 
Management process. Thus, the choice of tools to be 
adopted can be regarded as a crucial factor in employing a 
defined strategy that can implement the decision support in 
organizations. 
Thus, the choice of free software tools is justified by the 
economic self-sufficiency and freedom that a certain 
product in this category can give. According to Campos [8] 
one of the freedoms provided is that it improves the 
software so that it can be used in either a personal or public 
way in organizations. However, on the basis of research 
carried out in the specialized literature, no free and 
completed tools were found that support and facilitate the 
decision management, and have an adherence to the MR-
MPS-SW and the CMMI-DEV models. The tools and 
models researched do not have the characteristics 
mentioned, although they were of significance in the area of 
decision management, (whether academic or marketing). 
These tools are discussed below. 
The DPMTool [9] supports decision management in 
software projects, in the domain of global development. 
Thus, the description of this tool states that it allows the 
creation, storage, recovery and transmission of decisions 
made by a software design, and performed in a distributed 
way. In addition, the tool allows the project managers to 
control the information about software projects, since the 
value and importance of project development is that it also 
provides techniques that can allow the decision-making 
carried out in previous projects to be re-used for new 
projects, which have similar features. 
The main purpose of this tool is that it allows 
information from previous decisions to be used again; to 
support the decision-making in future projects. However, 
there is no evidence that this information is, in fact, useful. 
In addition, the management of roles or the way criteria is 
laid down is not clear in the DPMTool, or even if there is a 
systematic process involved. Hence, the reuse of knowledge 
for project management is something that is not trivial, and 
it is being used by distributed teams in an even more 
challenging way. However, understanding and carrying out 
project management, in an efficient way, has become the 
greatest challenge for distributed teams. 
It is known that the information sharing is restricted to 
certain professionals (e.g. managers). Likewise, in this kind 
of work, i.e. in a single project that is undertaken by many 
professionals (managers) spread around the globe, only a 
few of them will obtain crucial information for the correct 
decision-making, and most of those who take part in 
projects, will not necessarily know all the solutions adopted 
by the other participants in the same project. In addition, 
from the standpoint of decision-making, this kind of work 
does not seems to be as productive, as a continuous process 
in which the team reaches an agreement, about what criteria 
should be employed and the alternative solutions that can be 
found. 
Another study on simulation models [10] describes the 
results of a project, which aimed at investigating specific 
aspects of decision-making in personnel management, 
which involved software projects and development teams 
and took account of dynamic variables, such as stress, 
conflicts, motivation and performance. The simulation was 
adopted that employs system dynamics models as a 
powerful technique to deal with the problem. In this study, 
decision-making is regarded as a means of giving support to 
personnel management through an evaluation model applied 
to other useful projects. However, it includes features that 
allow a high degree of subjectivity in personnel 
management. Moreover, the project can even be influenced 
by other variables that are not taken into account - for 
instance, the variable about motivation is not included in the 
survey. In the decision management processes governed by 
the CMMI-DEV and MR-MPS-SW models, it seeks to 
reduce subjectivity to a minimum in the process so that the 
decision-making is not biased. 
From the works reviewed, it is clear that the authors 
were 
not 
concerned 
about 
implementing 
decision 
management in a systematic way. They did not adopt the 
traditional practices set out in the quality models that guide 
the 
implementation 
of 
a 
decision-making 
process. 
Moreover, they have failed to design support tools that 
could adopt all the concepts and fundamental principles of a 
formal evaluation. It was also noted that the works did not 
apply the evaluations obtained from their approaches to the 
academic world or industry; nor did they provide an 
analysis of the efficiency and effectiveness of the solutions 
that support decision-making. 
III. A  TOOL THAT SUPPORTS DECISION ANALYSIS AND 
RESOLUTION 
The support concept adopted in this paper defines a set 
of technologies that can be integrated to assist in the 
decision analysis and resolution process. This domain 
includes the following: tools, techniques, procedures, 
processes, roles, methodologies, frameworks, languages, 
standards, patterns, and so on. 
A. The Spider-DAR Workflow 
The aim of this section is to describe the Spider-DAR 
workflow for the Decision Analysis and Resolution process. 
The workflow can be split into seven tasks that cover all the 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

requirements and expected results from MR-MPS-SW [4] 
and specific practices from CMMI-DEV [2]. Fig. 1 
illustrates the process workflow. 
 
Figure 1.    A Flowchart for Decision Analysis and Resolution 
The first task consists of defining the guidelines for the 
decision analysis process, and basically involves setting out 
institutional guidelines for formally selecting the problem to 
be solved. According to Table I, this task involves DAR SP 
1.1 in CMMI-DEV and GDE1 in MR-MPS-SW. 
Following this, the second task of the main process is 
the formal definition of the problem or issue to be solved, 
which can enable an objective analysis of the problem to be 
conducted. This task is required for the GDE2 in MR-MPS-
SW. 
After the two tasks have been carried out, the next one 
takes place after the problem definition. It consists of the 
definition and prioritization of all the listed criteria for the 
problem, so that they can be evaluated later. The SP 1.2 in 
CMMI-DEV and the GDE3 in MR-MPS-SW are attained 
on completion of the third task. 
The fourth task is carried out after all the possible 
criteria needed to evaluate the problem have been defined 
and involves examining all the possible alternative means of 
solving it. Furthermore, this task requires discussing all the 
possible alternatives and, additionally, it is necessary to 
assess the risks associated with the alternative solutions for 
future evaluations. Thus, this task covers the SP 1.3 in 
CMMI-DEV and the GDE4 in MR-MPS-SW. 
With the aid of both the criteria and alternative 
solutions, the next task is to define the methods for 
evaluating the alternative solutions, and select which 
method is more appropriate for evaluating each alternative. 
This task covers the SP 1.4 in CMMI-DEV and the GDE5 
in MR-MPS-SW. 
The alternative evaluation process is the core of the 
DAR process. The aim of this task is to make an evaluation 
of all the alternative solutions by using all the defined 
criteria in the process; the selected method is then employed 
to rank the best solutions to the problem. This phase 
involves analysis, discussion and a review. Thus, the SP 1.5 
in CMMI-DEV and the GDE6 in MR-MPS-SW are covered 
in this process. 
The final task involves choosing the most appropriate 
solution for the problem or issue being analysed, and hence, 
registering and documenting all the experiences for future 
usage. This task covers the SP.1.6 in CMMI-DEV and the 
GDE7 in MR-MPS-SW. 
B. The Spider-DAR Tool 
The Spider-DAR is a General Public License (GPL) tool 
that is specifically concerned with Decision Management, 
and adhering to the good practices recommended by the 
CMMI-DEV 
and 
the 
MR-MPS-SW 
models. 
The 
requirements that guided the development of the tool were 
extracted from the workflow presented in this paper. 
This tool was developed as a desktop environment using 
Java and was based on the use of free technologies, such as 
Netbeans 8.0.2 IDE, MySQL 6.3 DBMS and the iText, a 
library for creating and manipulating PDF files. 
The architecture of Spider-DAR was based in the three-
layer model called Model-View-Controller (MVC). Thus, 
the actions that occurred are managed by controllers, which 
make the intermediation between the interface with the user 
and the entities modeled in the database. The main benefit 
of its use is its ease of maintenance and the fact that any 
new components that might arise can be added, like a 
change of interfaces or the native database. 
The development team had a standardized method to 
facilitate the encoding system, as well as to optimize 
computing resources. The FACADE and SINGLETON [11] 
design patterns were also used for uncoupling the business 
layer from the persistence layer and thus, providing a better 
management of the instantiated objects. The architecture is 
visualized in Fig. 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.    The Architectural Components of Spider-DAR 
The Spider-DAR tool was designed for use in 
organizations and academic environments, to support 
multiusers. Each unit of the organization has an area in the 
tool to register and evaluate problems. The tool allows the 
storage of a Decision Management Guide in a text format, 
and also attaches an existing document, for future searches. 
The Decision Management Guide is used to define how a 
process should be implemented within the organization. The 
centralization of information streamlines the planning and 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

monitoring, and reduces the effort required for the 
execution of the project. 
The tool allows the registering of problems that will be 
objects of the decision-making process, and also the 
allocation of participants for its execution. Each participant 
has a profile that determines which modules of the tool the 
participant has access to. Fig. 3 shows the details of the 
problems to be registered. 
 
Figure 3.    Motivation and objectives of a problem registered in spider-
DAR 
After the problem has been defined, it is permissible to 
define alternative solutions and the features that will be 
applied to evaluate the viability of these alternatives. The 
tool also allows the evaluation criteria in each problem, to 
be defined; these are variables that will influence the choice 
of alternative solutions. 
The Spider-DAR has a module to evaluate the 
alternatives, as shown in the Fig. 4. The rate of satisfaction 
is calculated in accordance with the established criteria and, 
a ranking is generated in a visual way to determine which 
alternative is the best for the resolution of the problem. The 
tool just indicates which alternative is more viable, 
however, and because of the peculiarities of each problem, 
the decision-making is the responsibility of the user. 
 
Figure 4.    Evaluation of alternatives solutions in Spider-DAR tool 
 During the management process or after it has been 
completed, the tool can at any moment allow, the user to 
generate a report in a PDF file with all the entries of the 
data tools. Thus, after the end of the decision management 
process, a generated report will contain the data of the 
Problem, Alternatives Solutions, Evaluation Criteria, 
Evaluation and Decision, and this will facilitate the analysis 
of the whole process until the result has been obtained. 
IV.    SOFTWARE TOOL EVALUATION  
This section describes the tool evaluation in the software 
industry and their adherence to CMMI-DEV. 
A. Application in the Software Industry 
The tool was used during the implementation of CMMI-
DEV Maturity Level 3 in a software development 
organization in Brazil, called EMPREL, in 2015 and 2016, 
and supports constant practices in the Decision Analysis 
and Resolution (DAR) process area. The organization was 
assessed at this level and obtained a certificate issued by the 
CMMI Institute. 
The tool’s users reported that its use made it possible for 
the organization to carry out a historic decision-making in 
all the software development projects. It also undertook a 
mapping of the problems and decision-making to facilitate 
the knowledge management, and thus provide a more 
efficient 
and 
effective 
means 
of 
managing 
the 
implementation of the DAR process area. 
The EMPREL employees evaluated the Spider-DAR 
tool as efficient and effective to support for decision 
management. The main obtained results were:  
• 
The use of the tool allows a decentralization of 
employees responsibilities during the execution of 
tool features, because all employees can perform 
together the formal evaluation process, 
• 
Because the workflow implemented in the tool 
presents sequenced activities and tasks, this tool 
allows a systematic implementation of the Decision 
Analysis and Resolution process, 
• 
The continuous maintenance of the historical basis 
in the tool allows the analysis of information 
generated from a problem or issue resolution during 
the decision-making of another problem or issue; 
• 
By execution of features the tool facilitates the 
structuring of problems or issues, leads to an 
understanding of the information required to make 
effective decisions, generates and assesses solutions 
and prioritizes alternatives through a method that is 
supported by a formal and objective process. 
The official CMMI assessment confirmed that the use of 
the tool had been successful. It should be emphasized that 
this company was chosen because it meant that the authors 
of this paper were able to conduct the implementation of the 
organizational process improvement program in its 
organizational units. 
B. Adherence to CMMI-DEV 
The Adherence concept analysis of the proposed tool is 
conducted through the mapping of the features outlined in 
Section III with the specific practices (SP) contained in the 
DAR process area in CMMI-DEV and the expected results 
(ER) in the GDE process included in MR-MPS-SW. 
Specific practice can be defined as “the description of an 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

activity that is considered important in achieving the 
associated specific goal, i.e. it describes the activities that 
are expected to result in the achievement of the specific 
goals of the CMMI process area” [2] and expected results is 
“an observable result anticipated from the successful 
performance of the process” [12]. The description of the 
specific practices and the expected results were shown in 
Table I. This analysis can be observed in Table II. 
TABLE II. 
ADHERENCE BETWEEN THE SPIDER-DAR FEATURES 
TO CMMI-DEV AND MR-MPS-SW  
SP 
ER 
RequiredTasks 
Tool Features 
SP1.1 
GDE1 
• Set out a formal decision 
guide, 
• Evaluate the questions of 
high to medium impact risk 
for the organization. 
Definition of 
Guidelines for 
Decision 
Analysis 
- 
GDE2 
• Definition of the problem or 
issue which will be the object 
of a formal decision-making 
process, 
• Definition of the scope of the 
problem or issue. 
Problem 
Definition 
 
SP1.2  
 
GDE3 
• Define the criteria for the 
evaluation of alternative 
solutions, 
• Define the range and scale for 
ranking the evaluation 
criteria, 
• Rank the evaluation criteria. 
Establish the 
Criteria for 
Evaluation 
 
SP1.3 
 
GDE4 
• Identify alternative solutions. 
Identification of 
Alternative 
Solutions 
SP1.4 
GDE5 
• Select evaluation methods 
based on their ability to focus 
on the issues and problems 
that are not being influenced 
by them, 
• Determine the measures 
needed to support the 
evaluation method. 
Selection of 
Evaluation 
Methods 
SP1.5 
GDE6 
• Evaluate alternative solutions 
proposed using the evaluation 
criteria established and the 
methods selected, 
• Obtain and record the results 
of the evaluation. 
Evaluation of 
Alternatives 
SP1.6 
GDE7 
• Recommended solutions to 
address significant issues, 
• Register and communicate 
the results and rationale for 
the recommended solution to 
the appropriate stakeholders. 
Decision-
making 
To view the details of each of the recommendations of 
the specific practices and expected results listed in the first 
and second columns of Table II, it is necessary to consult 
the official guides of the CMMI-DEV [2] and MR-MPS-
SW [4]. 
V.   OBTAINED RESULTS 
This section describes the results of this work that were 
obtained for the academic world and industry. 
A. The Academic World  
This research study included two graduate students and 
two undergraduates who are studying this subject and 
monitoring process improvement in a software development 
organization as research assistants. The research can be 
characterized as a subproject of the SPIDER Project, and 
was accepted for the 2011/2012 cycle of the PBQP-SW 
(Brazilian Program of Software Quality and Productivity). 
The Workflow and the Tool were the subject of a master’s 
dissertation that was defended at the Federal University of 
Pará (Graduate Program in Computer Science). Thus, a 
workflow process and a tool to support the decision 
management were obtained, and an investigation was 
conducted to verify how these results (described in Section 
IV) could be implemented in a software company. 
In academic world, the tool presented in this paper can 
help with the teaching of decision analysis and resolution 
because it has a systematic step by step of the activities that 
compose this knowledge area. This tool can also be used to 
simulate the learning of implementation of process 
improvement program through the use of concepts of 
decision analysis and resolution. Students involved in this 
work have been trained in the area of decision analysis and 
resolution through this tool and today they help the software 
companies in the implementation of good practices included 
in this area and in the quality models. 
B. In Industry 
The authors used the technology described in this paper 
for consultation projects related to process improvement. 
First, the tool was used by software development 
organizations that are partners of the SPIDER project, such 
as the EMPREL, which is located in Recife city. Basically, 
the tool assisted in the different stages of the decision 
analysis and resolution by defining and monitoring the 
projects. On the other hand, the activities of the Workflow 
are widely adopted in the implementation of Maturity Level 
3 of CMMI-DEV in organizations in which the authors act 
as consultants, located at Porto Digital (Recife city) and 
Farol Digital (João Pessoa city). 
The tool helped efficiently and effectively the Emprel 
reach the CMMI-DEV Maturity Level 3 because it has a 
workflow that meets all specific practices included in the 
decision analysis and resolution process area. Thus, the 
strenghts for the Emprel employees were: 
• 
The employees perform a formal evaluation of the 
problems or issues through the tool’s features, 
performing together this evaluation because they do 
not work with spreadsheets that were under the 
control of a single person. Thus, the employees feel 
part of decision-making, 
• 
Through the information maintained in the tool 
database and used to obtain the results in previous 
decisions, the employees can identify insights that 
can help in current decisions. It can help in the 
knowledge management, 
• 
The employees know which information should be 
filled to the implementation of a formal evaluation 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

because the tool displays all the fields required for 
this one. Thus, the decision process becomes less 
complex, 
• 
The final decisions of the employees are founded on 
a formal method that prioritizes the alternatives 
according to the evaluation criteria. Thus, it makes 
the evaluation more formal and objective. 
VI.    CONCLUSION 
The development of the decision analysis and resolution 
tool is intended to support the activities about decision 
analysis and resolution in software process which are based 
on the good practices defined by the quality models and 
standards. Hence, the Spider-DAR systemic approach is 
designed to facilitate the adoption of these models and 
standards by the software development organizations that 
use this tool.  
In the face of many possible systemic and business 
solutions, our approach addresses the challenge of 
becoming a solution that can be employed in multiple 
scenaries. It is not linked to commercial interests, and is a 
viable candidate for consideration when compared with the   
private solutions that are marketed. 
Of the lessons learned from this project, we would like 
to list the following: the importance of systematic processes 
for the implementation of a decision-making process, and 
the development of a support tool for this process. The main 
challenge of this work was to implement the results in a 
software company that is keen to adopt good practices 
within a quality model. 
It should be noted, as a strong point of this research 
project, that the tool is opensource, and can thus enable the 
academic community and / or industry to contribute to the 
development and evolution of this solution. The use of the 
tool is also of value since it helps the software organization 
to achieve more satisfactory levels of discipline through the 
combination of techniques and methods that assist in the 
decision analysis and resolution of its processes. 
As a future study, that is already in development, we are 
seeking to integrate this tool with other tools available in 
the SPIDER project by focusing on a joint venture which 
involves the implementation of the other process areas 
included in CMMI-DEV and MR-MPS-SW, such as risk 
management, project planning, configuration management, 
and product and process quality assurance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank Coordination for the 
Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES) for 
granting a Master’s degree scholarship to the Postgraduate 
Program in Computer Science at the Federal University of 
Pará (PPGCC/UFPA). We are also grateful to the 
Institutional Scientific Initiation Scholarship Program 
(PIBIC-UFPA) 
for 
granting 
a 
scientific 
initiation 
scholarship. Both programs are sponsored by the Brazilian 
Government. The authors would also like to thank the Dean 
of Research and Postgraduate Studies at the Federal 
University of Pará (PROPESP/UFPA) for providing 
financial support through the Qualified Publication Support 
Program (PAPQ). This subproject is part of the SPIDER 
Project 
(www.spider.ufpa.br), 
institutionalized 
at 
the 
Federal University of Pará. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. S. Evans, A. Hagiu, and R. Schmalensee, 2006, “Invisible Engines: 
How Software Platforms Drive Innovation and Transform Industries”, 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2006. 
[2] SEI – Software Engineering Institute, “CMMI for Development – V 
1.3”, 2010, Available: http://www.sei.cmu.edu/reports/10tr033.pdf. 
Retrieved: march, 2016. 
[3] SOFTEX – Associação para Promoção da Excelência do Software 
Brasileiro “Implementation guide Level C of MR-MPS-SW”, 2015, 
Available: www.softex.br/mpsbr.Retrieved: march, 2016. 
[4] SOFTEX – Associação para Promoção da Excelência do Software 
Brasileiro, “General Guide of MPS Software: 2012”, 2012, Available: 
http://www.softex.br/mpsbr.Retrieved: march, 2016. 
[5] A. V. Pizzoleto, “Business Ontology of the reference Model Mps for 
software (Mr-Mps-Sw) with focus on G E FLevels”, Dissertação de 
Mestrado, São José do Rio Preto - Universidade Estadual Paulista, 
2013. 
[6] S. Oliveira, M. Souza, W. Lira, E. Yoshidome, and J. Furtado, “A 
System Solution Proposal of a Free Software Tools SUITE to Support 
the Implementation of MPS.BR Model”, Revista do Programa 
Brasileiro de Qualidade e Produtividade em Software, pp. 103-107, 
2011. 
[7] R. L. Keeney, “Decision Analysis: An Overview”, Operations 
Research, Vol. 30, N. 5, 1982, pp. 803-838. 
[8] A. Campos, “What is Free Software”, BR-LINUX, 2006, Available: 
http://br-linux.org/linux/faq-softwarelivre. Retrieved: april, 2016. 
[9] P. J. Garrido, A. Vizcaino, J. Andrada, M. J. Monasor, and M. Piattini, 
“DPMTool: a tool for decisions management in distributed software 
projects”, in: Proceedings in the 7th International Conference on 
Global Software Engineering, ICGSE, Workshops, Porto Alegre, 
Brazil, 27–30, 2012. 
[10] S. D. Costa, J. L. Braga, L. A. Abrantes, and B. G. Ambrósio, 
“Suppport in decision making in people management software process 
based on simulation models”, RESI: Revista Eletrônica de Sistemas de 
Informação, v. 12, p. 1-27, 2013. 
[11] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, “Design Patterns: 
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software”, Bookman, 2010. 
[12] ISO/IEC – the International Organization for Standardization / 
International 
ElectrotechnicalComission, 
“ISO/IEC 
15504-1: 
Information Technology - Process Assessment - Part 1: Concepts and 
Vocabulary”, Geneve, 2004. 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

