Redefining KPIs with Information Flow Visualisation – Practitioners’ View 
 
Jarkko Hyysalo, Markus Kelanti and Jouni Markkula 
M3S Research Unit, Faculty of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: {jarkko.hyysalo, markus.kelanti, jouni.markkula}@oulu.fi 
 
Abstract—We investigate Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) 
in a large and multi-national telecommunication company and 
discover needs and requirements for understanding, analysing 
and using KPIs from practitioner’s perspective. Utilising an 
action research approach, we identified the existing challenges 
with KPIs in a large-scale software-intensive systems 
development in a global setting. Our study revealed several 
issues with organisations KPIs, e.g., measuring the wrong 
things or not basing the measurements on reliable data. Based 
on the identified issues, a visualisation and modelling approach 
was introduced to reform the KPI representation and 
formulation to improve understanding and communicating 
KPIs, as well as their use in decision-making. We suggest that 
KPI information flow visualisation with appropriate tool 
support allows redefining usable, valid and reliable KPIs. The 
problem is addressed with a simple solution that is easily 
adopted and taken into use at all levels of an organisation. 
Keywords—key performance indicators; KPIs; modelling; 
visualisation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Managing the development of software systems requires 
careful 
attention. 
Companies 
operate 
in 
turbulent 
environment with fierce competition and tight time-to-
market 
requirements 
[1], 
where 
knowledge 
of 
the 
performance of the development process, in addition to 
understanding the system and its development is necessary 
[2]. Companies use Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) to 
provide this vital information. KPIs are used to measure, for 
example, the quality of the product, the features developed, 
the resources spent in the development and the value 
delivered to customers. KPIs provide a way to evaluate and 
improve the product and the process.  
There is evident value in defining KPIs for the company. 
However, it is challenging to formulate KPIs so that they 
provide useful, valid and reliable information, and many 
organisations struggle to measure their projects, products and 
units [3]. Thus, our research question: “How to easily 
formulate KPIs so that they effectively and reliably measure 
the product development process performance?”  
In this paper, we report an action research study, 
conducted within a large telecommunications company. The 
study revealed critical practical challenges in defining and 
using KPIs in organisation. For solving the challenges, the 
visualisation of the KPI information flow was found to be 
essential to provide a better understanding of the process. An 
approach and supporting tools were developed for the 
modelling and visualisation of the KPI information flow. 
Supporting the developers’ understanding about the KPI 
formulation process resulted in KPIs that provide more real 
value for the organisation, and thus improve the KPI process. 
Visualisation and supporting tools provided means also to 
understand and communicate KPIs.  
The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 
discusses the related works, Section 3 presents the research 
approach, Section 4 presents the action research intervention 
and its results, Section 5 discusses the findings of the 
empirical work, and Section 6 concludes this work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
KPIs provide many kinds of information about the 
development, thus, it is important to select KPIs according to 
organisation’s 
strategy 
and 
objectives 
[4][5]. 
Deep 
understanding of the software development process is 
needed—providing the understanding of the “why”, “what” 
and “how”, defining also the motivations and rationales for 
activities and flows [6]. Different stakeholders have different 
views of and needs for the process [6]: Process performers 
often focus on the “hows”, process managers on the “whats”, 
and process engineers on the “whys”. Thus, different views 
are necessary, and KPIs address different needs. Our focus is 
on how KPIs are used and defined, as well as understanding 
KPIs and recognising stakeholders’ views. 
A. Formulating KPIs 
Production of good KPI values starts from the reliable 
source data, but in practice it is hard to collect consistent and 
comparable data. Further challenge is to decide upon the 
importance of individual performance measures for decision-
makers and prioritisation is a challenge as well. There are 
approaches that guide KPI work and measure organisational 
performance; some of them are shortly introduced next. 
del-Rey-Chamorro et al. [4] presents a framework for 
creating KPIs for knowledge management solutions, with 
eight steps to create KPIs from the strategic level business 
plan all the way to operational level measurable KPIs 
utilising templates for KPI formulation and how to bridge the 
strategic level and operational level. The aim is to evaluate 
the effectiveness of knowledge management solutions. 
Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) constructs a 
pairwise comparison between different KPIs and their 
hierarchies to evaluate and prioritise them based on SMART 
(Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Realistic, Time-sensitive) 
goal setting [5]. The focus is the prioritisation of KPIs to find 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

the most relevant KPIs for the organisation [5]. However, it 
does not consider how KPIs should be formulated.  
Balanced Scorecard [7] measures the organisational 
performance and aims at transforming the vision and strategy 
into concrete objectives, aligning departments and units 
towards common goals, etc. Yet, the following shortcomings 
are 
identified: 
Inaccurate 
and 
subjective 
measures, 
communication is not participative (only top-down), and 
inappropriate benchmarks are used for evaluation [8]. 
ISO standards provide guidelines as well. ISO 9001:2015 
specifies requirements for a quality management system. It 
does not specifically mention “KPIs” but requires metrics to 
measure the system to ensure: a) the ability to consistently 
provide products and services that meet customer and 
applicable statutory and regulatory requirements, and b) aims 
to enhance customer satisfaction through the effective 
application 
of 
the 
system, 
including 
processes 
for 
improvement of the system and the assurance of conformity 
to the customer and applicable statutory and regulatory 
requirements [9]. ISO quality management principles 
[10][11] 
aims 
for 
customer 
focus, 
leadership, 
the 
involvement of people, process approach, system approach 
to management, continual improvement, factual approach to 
decision 
making, 
and 
mutually 
beneficial 
supplier 
relationship. 
However, several challenges are identified in current 
ways for defining KPIs and ensuring that they are based on 
valid data [12]-[15]: Selecting and defining KPIs is not easy. 
KPIs are often defined in siloed terms instead of considering 
the whole organisation, e.g., they only focus on financial 
aspects and may lack the other aspects like manufacturing. 
Accurate calculations are hard to create and they easily 
measure something else than the intended objective. It is 
difficult to have metrics reflecting strategic drivers and be in 
line with the organisation’s visions and goals. KPIs must also 
be aligned through the whole organisation and every level of 
work, from visions and goals to actual implementation. 
Local optimisation should be avoided, and short-term and 
long-term goals should be balanced. There are nuances and 
unforeseeable variables that affect the measures. Finally, 
KPIs must be put in practice in order to see how they impact 
the performance and behaviour, and they should be adjusted 
accordingly. Hence, continuous refining is necessary. 
To address the identified issues, improvements are 
necessary. Properly selected and measured KPIs help 
decision-making, but getting the measures right requires 
considerable effort [16]-[18]: Even though the measures are 
classified into different categories, they are often correlated 
due to the inherent internal relations of different processes in 
the supply chain. Complex dependencies, changing goals and 
tight deadlines make organisations prone to making rushed 
decisions. Thus, it is important to have a simple way to 
identify and analyse the KPI data flows and relationships in 
order to avoid flawed decisions. Due to the complicated 
relationships, dependencies and conflicts, modelling the 
relationships is proposed and quick feedback loops are 
suggested. Furthermore, the goals and KPIs should be 
adjusted when they are no longer realistic.  
In a nutshell, KPIs should be based on data that is 
available and measurable, and KPIs should provide relevant 
information. Effective performance measurement system 
“should provide timely, accurate feedback on the efficiency 
and effectiveness of operations” [19]. Measurements are also 
necessary for process improvement purposes—if it can’t be 
measured it can’t be improved [20].  
B. KPI Visualisation 
It is important to understand how to present the 
measurements and act accordingly. Visualisation helps 
ensuring that the actions are taken and transparency is 
achieved [21]. Benefits of KPI visualisation are many: 
Visualisation is an important factor in thought and 
communication [22]; Information visualisation and graphical 
representation help in complex cognitive tasks [23]; 
Information visualisation supports comprehension and data 
analysis [24], especially for non-technical users [12]; 
Visualisation enables smarter decisions and improved 
productivity [12]; Groups supported by visualisation achieve 
better productivity, the better quality of outcome and greater 
knowledge gains than groups without such support [24]. 
Often KPIs and different measures are correlated and 
create a complex network of interdependencies [18], thus, 
understanding the results and the process of formulating 
KPIs is challenging. Visualisation enables the analysis of 
activities, the flows (i.e., inputs and outputs), dependencies, 
and the contexts [25]. It can also be used to visualise the 
components where KPIs are built from, decomposing the 
higher level KPIs into lower-level components in order to 
trace the sources of problems [26]. Visualising the process 
can be done in several ways with different levels of 
formalism and detail (cf. [27][28]). Finding the correct level 
depends on the purpose.  
There are examples to KPI visualisation, like del-Río-
Ortega et al. [29], who propose an XML-based way for a 
graphical or a template-based textual notation for business 
processes. To help selecting the visualisation approach, 
Staron et al. [30] provide a model based on seven 
dimensions: type of reporting, data acquisition method, type 
of stakeholders, method of delivery, frequency of updates, 
aim of the information, and length of data processing flow. 
However, formal visualisation and modelling approaches can 
be cumbersome and “too heavy”, e.g., for persons who are 
not familiar with process modelling concepts [25]. Thus, 
their benefits are lost. Instead, a simpler approach is 
proposed. Presenting detailed processes as higher-level 
entities makes the visualisations more comprehensible, and 
multiple views or representations for managing the 
complexity is suggested [25]. Rationale and justification for 
processes and activities must also be presented as those 
express why the work is needed. Rationale and reason tell 
what is meant to be accomplished and why [31][32]. 
III. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
The case company was chosen as it could provide data 
related to the research question. The case organisation is one 
of the largest data networking and telecommunication 
technology providers in the world in its field. The 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

organisation is distributed across the globe, operating in over 
100 countries, with over 50000 employees globally. The case 
organisation uses both traditional and agile development 
methods, depending on the product and development teams. 
The role of KPIs in the company is to evaluate the 
performance and ability to meet the organisational goals of 
every product line. A number of factors make KPI design 
and calculation complex, like: a) vast number of product 
lines operating under different organisational units, b) 
different processes used by development teams, c) different 
data formats for work items, d) knowledge and data are 
distributed over several systems, e) several persons are 
required to handle knowledge and data, and f) copying of 
data from one format to another and one system to another.  
To monitor their product development process, the case 
company utilised metrics that measure the process on 
different levels. Data was collected and analysed from 
various stakeholders to synthesise KPIs and analyse those 
with the aim to get an accurate picture on product 
development. The data was provided and calculated by 
multiple units, a part of the work was done manually and 
partly assisted by tools. The company was interested to 
minimise manual data collection and work and improve the 
tools, as well as the accuracy of the KPI process. In order to 
reach these goals, the company needed a method for 
collecting and structuring information to describe the current 
KPI process from multiple perspectives. It was seen that an 
action research intervention is needed to analyse the problem 
and provide improvements. A typical action research cycle is 
shown in Figure 1. The research started with a pre-study to 
familiarise the topic and understand the state of the practice.  
 
Pre-study 
Evaluating 
Action 
planning 
Specifying 
learning 
Action 
taking 
Diagnosing 
 
Figure 1.  Research process [33]. 
Experts and managers from different levels of the 
organisation were interviewed. Eight production lines were 
involved with at least one production line manager from each 
attended the modelling session. In each modelling session, 
the product line manager was assisted with engineer working 
in the production line who could provide technical details 
when needed. The persons attending the modelling session 
were senior engineers or managers, each at least ten years of 
working in the company. Hence, the results represent the 
experiences in the case organisation.  
In each iteration, the results of the previous iteration were 
presented first, i.e., the visualisation of the KPI process. In 
the diagnosing phase, the learnings were diagnosed to 
commence the action planning. This was done in co-
operation with the company. Based on the diagnosis, actions 
were defined and then carried out. Actions were conducted 
by implementing a construct and applying it in its intended 
settings, thus, providing empirical evidence of its use. The 
action taking phase lasted over two months to ensure the 
agreed actions were implemented. Then, the results were 
evaluated and discussed in a workshop. Based on the 
evaluation and workshop, the learning was specified.  
The action research cycle was repeated four times during 
the study consisting of a total of 30 modelling sessions with 
20 stakeholders and 5 analysis workshops. In the modelling 
session, each participant’s viewpoint to the process was 
modelled and visualised by the researchers, who asked the 
developers and experts to present the process from their own 
perspective. The participants were asked to think out loud so 
that the researchers could understand what they were 
thinking of. Questions were also asked to elaborate things 
when necessary. These sessions were also recorded for later 
use. Researchers made notes and observed the use of the 
construct. After each evaluation phase, experiences were 
discussed in a meeting. Gathered feedback, observed 
challenges and identified issues in the construct were 
documented. The researchers and the case company 
representatives also held regular meetings to review the 
results and decide on further actions. These actions provided 
rich data for analysis and for specifying learning.  
Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) was selected as a basis 
for our modelling approach. SSM, a problem structuring 
method popularised by Checkland [34], was applied in the 
study for structuring KPIs and the KPI process. SSM was 
chosen because it is an efficient way to understand and 
address the complex situations, especially when there is no 
clear problem definition, and it is also useful for information 
visualisation, to show flows, bottlenecks, inconsistencies and 
contradictions. It also supports information discovery and 
decision-making, and it frees cognitive resources that can be 
used for, e.g., solving development problems [22][35]. 
Figure 2 presents the basic elements of our approach.  
 
 
 
 
Stakeholder 2 
 
 
 
Stakeholder 1 
Description 
of an activity 
Description 
of an activity 
 
 
 
 
Stakeholder 3 
The KPI 
value 
Description of an 
activity using the 
previous values 
Description of 
resulting value from 
the previous activity 
Description of 
resulting value from 
the previous activity 
 
Figure 2.  Basic structure of a KPI. 
In this approach, practitioners simply model the values 
and activities from their perspective, regardless of whether 
the activity or data matches the documented KPI 
descriptions. It gives the building blocks utilising existing 
UML notations. Enabling users to construct representations 
from their perspective and viewpoint is important, as it helps 
them to come up with solutions to problem issues, and 
enables them to know what to do next [4].  
IV. 
RESEARCH EXECUTION 
The action research intervention consisted of pre-study 
and four action research cycles. In the pre-study, existing 
company documentation defining their KPI structure, 
visualisation and implementation was analysed. The 
provided information described the intent of each KPI and 
how those should be formulated. In addition, the company 
provided a list of persons and organisational units that were 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

involved in the KPI process, including also description how 
they provided or processed KPI information in the process. 
In addition, related research was also analysed.  
A. First Action Research Cycle 
DIAGNOSING: The pre-study revealed that the system 
was more complex than the company documentation 
indicated. The process included hundreds of stakeholders 
and multiple variations of the data items. Based on the pre-
study, it became necessary to study the overall information 
flow and stakeholder involvement to determine how the 
actual system providing the KPIs was structured. 
ACTION PLANNING AND TAKING: The plan was to 
start the KPI system modelling with the pre-study 
information to formulate a proper soft system model based 
on SSM. UML flowchart approach and SSM [34] were used 
to create a KPI soft system model.  
EVALUATION AND LEARNING: At the end of the 
first cycle, the resulting model was evaluated in a workshop 
with the company representatives. The participants agreed 
that the model allowed examining KPIs in more detail, 
which showed that the company documentation did not 
represent the real KPI behaviour or process. The lack of 
information about how the data is obtained, undocumented 
sources, how data is created and how data is used in the 
decision-making demonstrated that KPIs did not present 
accurate information or what KPIs were intended to present. 
Moreover, a simple collapse/expand feature was requested 
from the tool hiding the complexity or bringing out the 
details when needed. Participants agreed that this kind of 
feature would improve visualisation and understanding. 
Finally, a decision was made to include the stakeholders of 
KPI modelling in the next research cycle to provide the 
information missing from the model. 
B. Second Action Research Cycle 
DIAGNOSING: At the previous cycle, the soft system 
model of the KPI process showed that there was missing 
information and dead ends not documented in the official 
documentation. This indicated that there are information only 
known by involved stakeholders and they should be 
contacted to provide the missing information.  
ACTION PLANNING AND TAKING: The plan was to 
involve the stakeholders to add the missing information to 
the model. The stakeholders who would know how data 
items were created or what information was used to create 
them were invited to a modelling session, where the 
information provided by the stakeholder was added to the 
soft system model created in the previous research cycle. 
Each modelling session continued updating the same KPI 
soft system model created in the first cycle. After the 
sessions, a workshop was organised to evaluate, correct and 
analyse the KPI soft system model. 
EVALUATION AND LEARNING: The new version of 
the soft system model was discussed with company 
representatives in a workshop. Based on the analysis of the 
soft system model, workshop participants thought that the 
visualisation was complex. They suggested that using 
stakeholder viewpoints allowed adjusting abstraction levels 
to manage the complexity. With viewpoints, they were able 
to examine selected parts of the process and keep the 
visualisation comprehensible. The feedback for the soft 
system model indicated that it allowed stakeholders to 
understand how KPIs were constructed and the model 
offered enough information to interpret KPIs correctly. 
According to the participants and the analysis in the 
workshop, both the UML visualisation and SSM principles 
created a KPI model that was easy to interpret, translated 
concepts from one domain to another in a meaningful way 
and allowed the evaluation of KPIs. Finally, the participants 
considered it necessary to adjust the way the model was 
created to support simpler notation and logic to allow users 
with varying experience to contribute. They thought that the 
current approach was labour intensive and required deep 
knowledge of modelling and SSM methodology, which was 
seen as hindrance as it required an expert to help. 
C. Third Action Research Cycle 
DIAGNOSING: The ability to understand how KPIs 
actually work was very important for the company personnel 
as the KPIs did not work as intended and they did not 
provide the correct information. The modelling of the KPI 
process needed to continue to provide a better big picture. 
However, the process needed to be simplified, allowing 
anyone to understand it and input his or her own viewpoints 
without the help of the researcher or an expert.  
ACTION PLANNING AND TAKING: The existing KPI 
soft system model was transformed to a digital format 
utilising Microsoft’s Visio tool, allowing anyone to access 
the model at any time. In addition, the participating 
stakeholders, developers and managers were taught the 
modelling method so that they could add their own 
viewpoints. Teaching the approach also allowed the 
researchers to develop it further and make it easier to 
understand and learn. In addition, modelling sessions were 
continued with those stakeholders who preferred to work 
with the researchers instead of doing the modelling alone. 
EVALUATION AND LEARNING: At the end of the 
cycle, a workshop was held to discuss the results with all 
company stakeholders involved in the cycle. Based on the 
discussion and analysis of the new version of the KPI soft 
system model, it was quickly noticed that the selected 
visualisation approach was approved and the process 
representation it provided was very informative and usable. 
The KPI soft system model provided a shared understanding 
about the process and work activities regardless of the 
expertise or work position. It was easy to discuss the 
specifics of the process with the representation as a reference 
point, where each participant could pinpoint the activity or 
information flow they were interested in.  
Further, the findings from second research cycle were re-
examined, as more data was available from different teams 
and product lines. The model started to show its efficiency, 
as it confirmed that the data that the organisation bases its 
KPI measurements is not sufficient and that lead to situation 
where KPIs were not indicating the measurements that they 
were intended to do. For example, two different 
organisational units could get different figures based on their 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

source information or interpretation during the data handling. 
Another concrete example was that the calculation of 
delivered backlog items didn’t take into account the size of 
the items or items finalised by collaborators, thus, resulting 
in skewed efficiency measures. Finally, simplifying the 
modelling process was seen as a way to speed up the 
modelling process and to help others to understand the 
modelling process and the modelling language [cf. 36]. This 
also allowed persons with no prior knowledge on UML to 
understand process and contribute. 
D. Fourth Action Research Cycle 
DIAGNOSING: Diagnosis of the previous action 
research cycle called for an analysis of KPIs and presentation 
on how they can be re-constructed as meaningful KPIs that 
accurately reflect the development process. Furthermore, 
additional focus was needed on KPI visualisation due the 
growing amount of information in a single model. A proper 
system visualisation was required from different stakeholder 
perspectives in order to effectively communicate the KPIs to 
different levels of management, developers and support staff.  
ACTION PLANNING AND ACTION TAKING: Based 
on the diagnosis, this action research cycle was focused on 
analysing which KPIs the company would benefit on 
utilising, and use that information to propose how the 
previously modified KPIs should be constructed. In order to 
do so, in addition to the existing model, a new KPI soft 
system model was created to represent the meaningful and 
accurate KPIs perceived by company management. In 
addition, special attention was given to the viewpoints to 
make the visualisation easier to read. The analysis and 
modelling were done in separate sessions with management 
stakeholders, similarly to previous research cycles. After a 
selection of 8 KPIs was fully remodelled, they were 
compared to the original KPI soft system model to show the 
current implementation and how the KPIs should be changed 
to match the desired situation. 
EVALUATION AND LEARNING: After the action 
planning and taking, a workshop was held with all 
participants. Based on the workshop discussions, it was clear 
that the stakeholders preferred this approach as it provided 
the following benefits: 1) It allowed stakeholders to see the 
current situation and what should be made to the existing 
KPI system to have meaningful KPIs. 2) The model showed 
the disparities between stakeholder viewpoints that weren’t 
visible before and the visualisation enabled effective 
communication on disparities. 3) The resulting model 
allowed practitioners to re-evaluate their current process and 
data in order to determine the best course of action. 4) The 
model was easy to comprehend and it provided reliable 
results that were accurately reflecting the state of the process. 
The fourth action research cycle was the final iteration, as 
the results were satisfying for both researchers and case 
organisation. The resulting model worked as the description 
of KPIs and allowed to construct, analyse and describe KPIs 
with a single model. The participants also agreed that the 
measures could now be relied upon, and the KPIs showed 
effectively what they were supposed to show. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Our action research intervention revealed several issues 
with the organisations KPIs and KPI formulation process. 
The company’s process provided KPIs that did not fulfil 
their intended purpose. There was a clear need to understand 
the process better—to know more about the reasons KPIs 
were used for and from what source data the analyses were 
done from. This called for modelling the KPI information 
flows from stakeholders’ perspectives that contribute to or 
calculate any KPI data. The focus was to provide visualised 
and accurate KPIs. Table 1 summarises our findings.  
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF THE MAIN FINDINGS 
Finding 
Implication 
Describing KPI as an information flow allowed 
stakeholders to comprehend the actual meaning 
of KPI versus what was described in the official 
documentation. 
- Modelling, visualisation and constant analyses are necessary to find out the relevant KPIs and to keep 
the KPI process up to date.  
- Modelling and visualisation enables to see where the data originates and how it is manipulated. 
- Modelling and visualisation enables simplification.  
- Modelling and visualisation enables the evaluation of the validity of the data and whether KPIs perform 
as intended. 
Visualising the KPI information flow eased 
communication between stakeholders with 
different backgrounds. 
- Visualising the workflow improves the coordination and understanding of others work.  
- Modelling and visualisation enables more accurate analyses, reveals bottlenecks and problem areas, and 
finally makes possible process improvement activities.  
- Visualisation improves understanding and communication. 
Showing different stakeholder viewpoints as a 
part of the information flow allowed 
comprehension of KPI, data items and 
complexity of the implementation in different 
parts of the organisation. 
- Viewpoints can be used to adjust the abstraction levels and to manage the complexity.  
- Hiding and expanding parts simplifies the presentation. 
- Viewpoints allows for focusing on the matter at hand.  
- Modelling tools should provide viewpoints functionality. 
Allowing stakeholders to see their viewpoints and 
modify them motivated stakeholders to 
participate and extend the model further. 
- Understanding the process for KPIs is paramount for motivation. 
- Modelling KPIs reveals information on how the data is obtained and created, and how it is used in the 
decision-making. 
- Showing the viewpoints help understanding and agreeing upon the perspectives (e.g., quality vs. 
efficiency). 
With the proposed approach the KPI information 
flow model became both the actual description 
and formulation of a KPI. 
- Stakeholders should be involved in the modelling.  
- Accurate and reliable source data is required for meaningful KPIs. 
- Measurements and comparisons over the product lines can be achieved. 
 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Utilizing common UML-tools (e.g., Visio) and the 
modelling method presented in [36] as our tools we could 
provide 
the 
visualisations. 
With 
the 
help 
of 
the 
visualisations, the case organisation personnel understood 
better KPIs and how they were formulated, and they noticed 
serious flaws. KPIs were neither reliable nor commensurable 
between different units or product lines, e.g., there was 
inconsistency with measurements, as management focused 
on effectiveness and engineers focused on quality. In sum, 
visualisation made the organisation rethink their KPIs and 
how they are formulated.  
Visualisation revealed that the source data was different 
than originally understood by those who formulate KPIs, 
providing different results than what originally was intended, 
and hence decisions were made based on flawed KPIs. 
Furthermore, KPIs were not immediately available, 
instead data was gathered once a month and KPIs were then 
calculated, KPI data was different between product 
lines/units, and KPI process had unnecessary workload and 
loops. One of the key findings was that the changes to the 
existing process did only change the local processes and 
work; it did not guarantee that KPIs were changed 
elsewhere. It was realised that in order to properly formulate 
KPIs, the whole KPI process and its information flows 
should be analysed, not just the data sources. Based on our 
study, we propose that KPI visualisation as a flow is 
necessary for recognising who is contributing and what data 
is used in that contribution. It also helps to see if KPIs 
provided by different teams are commensurable.  
The study showed that KPIs were found problematic, as 
they are often taken for granted and the way that KPIs are 
implemented is not visible for stakeholders. It is seldom 
considered where KPIs come from and what they are 
representing. It is necessary to think carefully what 
calculations are useful and whether those calculations reveal 
the issues they are meant to.  
Figure 3 below presents a KPI example that shows the 
average development hours of two different products. In this 
example, two teams work for product A and input their 
working hours directly to Jira for each feature. For product 
B, the product owner estimates the working hours spent on 
each feature based on team members compiled a list of 
features. The example presents a visualised KPI that informs 
what is the source data used to calculate the KPI and how it 
is formed. With proper tool support, the data and activity 
elements can be made to represent real data. Essentially, the 
visualisation allows stakeholders to identify and ask the 
questions that matter in regards to validity, representation 
and usage of a KPI. With a systematic analysis, we found the 
issues with KPIs and KPI formulation process. Modelling 
and visualisation enabled the stakeholders to understand the 
KPI process better and it made the stakeholders think about 
the relevant data and information concerning KPIs.  
With our approach, a soft system model could be built 
systematically. The model showed where the data originated 
and how it was manipulated throughout the process. Thus, 
validating the usefulness of our approach to modelling of 
KPI information flows. We believe that our approach would 
be fit for other cases also, however that still requires further 
validation. Due to improved understanding, modelling and 
visualisation was found useful as a process improvement 
tool: It allowed the identification of problems in the process, 
and unnecessary activities could be identified and the process 
could be streamlined accordingly. Coordination of activities 
was also improved.  
Our modelling and visualisation approach addresses 
several needs and is generic enough to be used in various 
situations and purposes. Our approach is suitable for 
visualising and analysing the activities and information 
flows, and showing the dependencies. Moreover, it was 
easily adopted and personnel committed to use it. Presenting 
the KPI process as a graphical model provided better 
understanding for developers and experts, and it also 
improved communication and helped to analyse the work. It 
motivated the personnel and they came up with new ideas to 
further improve their work, work practices and processes. 
Visualisation was also found to be useful in pinpointing the 
bottlenecks and problem areas.  
 
Product owner adds 
both averages together 
and divide them by two 
and creates a diagram 
presentation 
Diagram: Overall average 
hours spent per feature on 
product 
Jira Database: 
Feature data 
Number: Average 
hours spent per 
feature on product 
B 
Excel sheet: 
Previous 
estimations 
Software team B 
members input feature 
data into Jira 
Product B’s owner 
provides average hours 
spent per feature 
Excel sheet: Average 
hours spent per 
feature on product B 
Software team 
member creates a 
completed feature list 
Excel sheet: List of 
completed features 
Product B’s owner estimates 
the average hours spent by his 
team per feature based on 
previous estimations 
Number: Average 
hours spent per 
feature on product 
A 
Product A’s owner provides 
average hours spent per 
feature by team A based on 
software teams’ data in Jira 
Software team A leader inputs 
feature data into Jira 
 
Figure 3.  Example KPI formulation for a system. 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Being able to construct representations also improve the 
readability 
of 
visualisations 
[37]. 
Our 
approach 
complements, e.g., the dashboard selection model by Staron 
et al. [30] and ways to elicit information by Staron et al. [38], 
which is more based on a set of questions, and it can also be 
used as a simple visualisation mechanism on top of other 
established approaches, such as Balanced Scorecards by 
Kaplan and Norton [7]. The findings are also in line with 
Staron [3], stressing the importance of completeness, 
reliability and early warning signs. 
A. Validity of the Study 
The reliability of the data and results was ensured via 
rigorous research protocol with peer reviews by researchers 
and company representatives. The action research cycles 
were documented throughout the research. The modelling 
sessions were recorded and transcribed by the researchers.  
The way the action research was implemented introduces 
a danger of positive bias within researchers and company 
participants—due to the constant communication and 
interventions; the company participants could be positively 
biased, producing only positive results. However, having 
many different viewpoints presented in the workshops and 
modelling sessions addressed this issue. Also, agreement 
over clear roles and rigorous research methods helped 
participants remain neutral observers. 
This study was conducted within a large ICT 
organization that utilizes product line based development, 
hence limiting the generalizability of the results. In order to 
make wider conclusions more domains, smaller companies 
and different production models should be studied.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents an action research study with the aim 
to understand organization’s KPI process and to formulate a 
meaningful set of KPIs. Several issues in the case 
organisation were identified during the study, with the most 
significant being that the original KPIs didn’t measure what 
they were intended to measure. KPIs were not giving the 
right information; they were not well defined and were not 
based on complete and reliable information. When the 
information was not correct, it caused harm as the decision-
making was relying on false data.  
Modelling and visualisation was used to understand, 
analyse and to model the KPI process. Using simple 
visualisation mechanisms to model and represent the KPI 
process helped in understanding the purposes and needs of 
measurements, as well as the source data and its handling 
during the KPI process. Modelling and visualisation also 
clearly revealed the different stakeholders that participated in 
the KPI process, and further improved understanding and 
communication between the stakeholders; especially non-
technical 
persons’ 
understanding 
was 
improved 
considerably.  
The improved KPI process and well-defined KPIs, in 
turn, lead to more effective decision-making, as the 
measurements were more accurate, reliable and descriptive. 
Also, different units and product lines could be compared 
when the measurements were commensurable.  
Study showed that the KPI information flow should be 
carefully analysed and KPIs should be based on real needs 
and real measurable values. To address our research 
question, KPIs should be formulated in a way that provides 
real results. For this purpose, the proposed modelling and 
visualisation approach is a very useful tool. It allows for 
redefining usable, valid and reliable KPIs so that KPIs and 
the whole KPI process, with all the interdependencies, can be 
well understood and analysed. It is also important that the 
whole product development process is analysed, not just the 
data sources for KPIs. Analysing the process provides an 
understanding how KPIs are build from the original data, 
what the measurements really indicate and how they can be 
used to understand and improve the development process. 
Constant follow up and process refining is also an integral 
part of the process, which helps to keep the KPI process 
always up to date.  
Our approach solves many issues related to KPIs and it is 
useful especially when there are several teams working on 
their tasks and the overall picture may be hard to see. Our 
approach concretises abstract work and defines the 
relationships of activities associated to it. It provides 
graphical presentations that are accessible and easy to use for 
understanding, analysing, communicating and improving 
processes. The resulting model can be used for presenting the 
actors, activities and information flows, and describing their 
logical order and dependencies. Graphical models and 
modelling helps in understanding the complex problems by 
enabling breaking those down to understandable entities. 
This work benefits both research and industry. Research 
benefits from new knowledge and the experiences from the 
industry 
to 
expand 
the 
knowledge 
base. 
Industry 
practitioners can adopt a simple modelling and visualisation 
approach to improve their KPI process. We propose simple 
modelling and visualisation as a recommended practice in 
formulating KPIs, especially in sociotechnical systems, 
where persons are in interaction with technology. The 
solution is simple on purpose. The problems are common in 
industry and, e.g., in the case organisation the heavy weight 
solutions have not been useful – they have not been well 
embraced. However, simple and intuitive solutions are more 
easily taken into use also at the lower levels of an 
organisation. 
Topics for further studies were also identified, including 
confirming the results in other domains to improve the 
generalizability. Furthermore, the question about how to help 
organisations to act upon KPIs and implement the changes 
still remains. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Helo, “Managing Agility and Productivity in the 
Electronics Industry,” Industrial Management & Data 
Systems 104(7), pp. 567–577, 2004. 
[2] J. Froehlich and P. Dourish, “Unifying artifacts and activities 
in a visual tool for distributed software development teams,” 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software 
Engineering, pp. 387–396. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los 
Alamitos, CA, 2004. 
[3] M. Staron, “Critical role of measures in decision processes: 
Managerial and technical measures in the context of large 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

software development organizations,” Information and 
Software Technology, 54(8), pp. 887–899, 2012. 
[4] F. M. del-Rey-Chamorro, R. Roy, B. van Wegen, and A. 
Steele, ”A framework to create key performance indicators 
for knowledge management solutions,” Journal of Knowledge 
management 7(2), pp. 46–62, 2003. 
[5] A. Shahin and M. A. Mahbod, “Prioritization of key 
performance indicators: An integration of analytical hierarchy 
process 
and 
goal 
setting,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Productivity and Performance Management 56(3), pp. 226–
240, 2007. 
[6] E. S. Yu and J. Mylopoulos, “Understanding “why” in 
software 
process 
modelling, 
analysis, 
and 
design,” 
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Software 
Engineering, pp. 159–168. IEEE Computer Society Press, Los 
Alamitos, CA, 1994. 
[7] R. Kaplan and D. Norton, “The Balanced Scorecard-Measures 
that Drive Performance,” Harvard Business Review, 70(1), 
pp. 71–79, 1992. 
[8] M. A. Malina and  F. H. Selto, “Communicating and 
controlling strategy: an empirical study of the effectiveness of 
the balanced scorecard,” Journal of management accounting 
research 13(1), pp. 47–90, 2001. 
[9] ISO 9001:2015 Quality Management Systems–Requirements. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/62085.html 
2018.08.01 
[10] ISO 9000:2015 Quality Management Systems–Fundamentals 
and 
Vocabulary. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/45481.html 2018.08.01 
[11] ISO 
9004:2018 
Quality 
management–Quality 
of 
an 
organization–Guidance 
to 
achieve 
sustained 
success. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/70397.html 
2018.08.01 
[12] D. Stodder, “Data visualization and discovery for better 
business decisions,” TDWI Best Practices Report. The Data 
Warehouse Institute, Renton, WA, 2013. 
[13] K. Bauer, “KPIs - The metrics that drive performance 
management,” DM Review 14(9), 63, 2004. 
[14] M. Resinas et al., “KPIshare: A Collaborative Space for BPM 
Practitioners for Full Definitions and Discussions on Process 
KPIs,” In BPM (Demos), pp. 61–65, 2014. 
[15] W. W. Eckerson, “Creating Effective KPIs,” Information 
Management 16(6), p. 15, 2006. 
[16] A. del-Río-Ortega et al., “Enriching decision making with 
data-based thresholds of process-related KPIs,” International 
Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering, 
pp. 193–209. Springer, Cham, 2017. 
[17] J. Cai, X. Liu, Z. Xiao, and J. Liu, “Improving supply chain 
performance management: A systematic approach to 
analyzing iterative KPI accomplishment,” Decision Support 
Systems 46(2), pp. 512–521, 2009. 
[18] E. R. Randall, B. J. Condry, M. Trompet, and S. K. Campus, 
“International 
bus 
system 
benchmarking: 
Performance 
measurement development, challenges, and lessons learned,” 
86th Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board, 
Washington, D.C, pp. 1–12, 2007. 
[19] R. S. Kaplan, “New systems for measurement and control,” 
The Engineering Economist 36(3), pp. 201–218, 1991. 
[20] H. J. Harrington, “Improving business processes,” The TQM 
Magazine 3(1), pp. 39–44, 1991. 
[21] W. W. Eckerson, “Performance dashboards: measuring, 
monitoring, and managing your business,” John Wiley & 
Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey 2010. 
[22] J. B. Ellis, S. Wahid, C. Danis, and W. A. Kellogg, “Task and 
social visualization in software development: evaluation of a 
prototype,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 577–586. ACM New 
York, NY, 2007. 
[23] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, “Readings 
in information visualization: Using vision to think,” Morgan 
Kaufman, San Francisco, CA, 1999. 
[24] S. Brescianti and M. J. Eppler, “The Benefits of Synchronous 
Collaborative Information Visualization: Evidence from an 
Experimental 
Evaluation,” 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Visualization and Computer Graphics 15(6), pp. 1073–1080, 
2009. 
[25] L. Scott, L. Carvalho, R. Jeffery, and J. D’Ambra, “An 
evaluation of the spearmint approach to software process 
modelling,” European Workshop on Software Process 
Technology, pp. 77–89. Springer, Berlin, 2001. 
[26] W. W. Eckerson, “Performance management strategies,” 
Business Intelligence Journal 14(1), pp. 24–27, 2009. 
[27] R. S. Aguilar-Saven, “Business process modelling: Review 
and 
framework,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Production 
Economics 90(2), pp. 129–149, 2004. 
[28] K. Schneider, K. Stapel, and E. Knauss, “Beyond documents: 
visualizing informal communication,” Proceedings of the 
third International Workshop on Requirements Engineering 
Visualization, pp. 31–40. IEEE, 2008. 
[29] A. del-Río-Ortega, C. Cabanillas, M. Resinas, and A. Ruiz-
Cortés, “PPINOT tool suite: a performance management 
solution for process-oriented organisations,” International 
Conference on Service-Oriented Computing, pp. 675–678. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. 
[30] M .Staron, K. Niesel, and W. Meding, “Selecting the Right 
Visualization 
of 
Indicators 
and 
Measures–Dashboard 
Selection Model,” International Workshop on Software 
Measurement, 
pp. 
130–143. 
Springer 
International 
Publishing, Switzerland, 2015. 
[31] M. Kelanti, J. Hyysalo, P. Kuvaja, M. Oivo, and A. Välimäki, 
“A Case Study of Requirements Management: Toward 
Transparency 
in 
Requirements 
Management 
Tools,“ 
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on 
Software Engineering Advances, pp. 597–604. Curran 
Associates, Inc., Red Hook, NY, 2013.  
[32] J. Hyysalo, M. Kelanti, J. Lehto, P Kuvaja, and M. Oivo, 
“Software development as a decision-oriented process,” 
Proceedings of the International Conference of Software 
Business, pp. 132–147. Springer, Cham, 2014. 
[33] G. Susman and R. Evered, “An Assessment of the Scientific 
Merits of Action Research,” Administrative Science Quarterly 
23(4), pp. 582–603, 1978. 
[34] P. B. Checkland, “Systems Thinking, Systems Practice,” John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester, 1981. 
[35] Y. Rogers, H. Brignull, and M. Scaife, “Designing Dynamic 
Interactive Visualisations to Support Collaboration and 
Cognition,“ Sixth International Conference on Information 
Visualisation, pp. 39–48. IEEE, London, 2002. 
[36] M. Kelanti et al., “Soft System Stakeholder Analysis 
Methodology,” Proceedings of the Tenth International 
Conference on Software Engineering Advances, pp. 122–130. 
Associates, Inc., Red Hook, NY, 2015. 
[37] A. Dix and G. Ellis, “Starting simple - adding value to static 
visualisation through simple interaction,” Proceedings of the 
working conference on Advanced visual interfaces, pp. 124–
134. ACM New York, NY, 1998.   
[38] M. Staron, W. Meding, G. Karlsson, and C. Nilsson, 
“Developing measurement systems: an industrial case study,” 
Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research 
and Practice, 23(2), pp. 89–107, 2011. 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

