Offensive and Defensive Perspectives in Additive Manufacturing Security
Rohith Yanambaka Venkata, Nathaniel Brown, Daniel Ting and Krishna Kavi
Center for Agile & Adaptive Additive Manufacturing (CAAAM)
and Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
University of North Texas
Denton, Texas
USA
Email: {ry0080, nathanielbrown, danielting}@my.unt.edu and krishna.kavi@unt.edu
Abstract—Additive Manufacturing (AM) is transforming the
manufacturing industry by reducing prototyping time and easing
the production of complex parts. Notably, use of AM has gained
traction in the medical and aerospace ﬁelds, and is rapidly
increasing in usage in traditional industry. However, AM’s cyber-
physical nature opens systems up to vulnerabilities that can result
in both cyber and physical damage. In this paper, we document
and categorize the state of the art in Additive Manufacturing
security research in three ways - by using Microsoft’s Spooﬁng,
Tampering, Repudiation, Information Disclosure, Denial of Ser-
vice and Elevation of Privilege (STRIDE) threat model, by the
intent of the attacker, and by the overall purpose of the published
works. We also provide a list of security recommendations for AM
that could aid in the design of secure AM systems. We hope our
approach will enable an understanding of AM security from both
the attacker’s and defender’s perspective, and serve as a survey
of relevant research in the ﬁeld, and stimulate more research into
securing AM systems.
Keywords–additive manufacturing; cybersecurity; threat model-
ing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Advanced manufacturing is a key component in what is
called Industry 4.0 - manufacturing relying on sophisticated
technologies including networked sensors and actuators, cyber
technologies and machine learning to make processes ﬂexible,
agile and cost-effective. However, the reliance on these in-
terconnected yet emerging technologies make these processes
prone to cybersecurity attacks. In this paper, we will provide a
high-level, concise but comprehensive survey of the currently
known vulnerabilities with manufacturing, focusing on AM in
particular, and suggested best practices for mitigating cyber
attacks. First, we will brieﬂy describe AM processes.
AM can produce a component in a layer-wise fashion rather
than starting with a block of material and removing material
using milling, cutting, or lathing processes (referred here
as Subtractive Manufacturing, or SM). In this way, additive
processes are not constrained in the same way as subtractive
processes, meaning that the manufacturing envelope is opened
very wide to produce technically or ﬁnancially infeasible
components due to such challenges as shape complexities, cost,
new material combinations, etc. Relevant examples of AM
include surgical joint replacement components (such as tita-
nium hip or knee replacements), components whose traditional
manufacturing methods would be cost or time prohibitive [1],
or components for which the original tooling (such as the
dies for forging) no longer exists (such as various components
replaced on aging aircraft systems expected to continue serving
for many years into the future [2]). Using this manufacturing
method allows mass customization while simultaneously de-
centralizing the manufacturing and distribution process. Under-
lining mass customization, three-dimensional (3-D) printing is
being developed to fabricate highly dose-speciﬁc medication.
In 2015, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
approved the ﬁrst 3-D printed drug available in the United
States — Levetiracetam (Spirtam - Aprecia), which is used to
treat partial onset, myoclonic, and primary generalized tonic-
clonic seizures in patients with epilepsy [3]. There have even
been efforts to design and print medical equipment from simple
face masks to complex ventilators [4] following the shortage
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Presently, there are many types of AM that vary based on
cost, material system, manufacturing method, user capabilities,
and characteristics of the desired ﬁnal component. The most
common forms of AM/3-D printing are - Vat Photopolymer-
ization, Material Extrusion, Material Jetting and Powder Bed
Fusion [1].
The AM process is a complex interaction of automated
and manual workﬂows with numerous dependencies - both
informational and physical. Additionally, AM my be provided
as a service which would include several actors, software appli-
cations, sensors, actuation mechanisms and logistical activities.
Not all of these entities may reside within a service provider’s
controlled environment. This cyber-physical nature of Additive
Manufacturing processes leaves systems vulnerable to a certain
array of unique attacks, including:
•
Side-channel attacks that steal valuable intellectual
property by listening to an AM system’s sounds during
product synthesis and running the data through a
machine-learning model [5].
•
Attacks that target the design stage to create fatal
deﬁciencies (like voids) in key parts of synthesized
products [6].
•
Attacks that alter printing orientation to decrease end
products’ tensile strength [7].
•
Attacks that target insecure methods of transferring
stereolithographic (STL) ﬁles, such as via USB sticks
[8].
•
Attacks that exploit vulnerabilities in the code and
programming languages that control AM systems; [9].
•
Attacks that target AM quality-assurance techniques
to ensure low product quality [10].
Our goal in this paper is to provide a high-level, concise
but comprehensive survey of the current state of the art in
security for AM; ﬁrst from the attacker’s point of view, then
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

from the defender’s, using Microsoft’s STRIDE security model
to reason about security.
The structure of the remainder of the article is as follows.
Section II describes related work and how we sourced the
material for our research. Section III describes Microsoft’s
STRIDE threat model and its unique advantages when analyz-
ing AM security. Section IV describes the intents of attackers
seeking to exploit vulnerabilities in AM systems. Section V
lists security recommendations for AM systems taken from
recommendations for similar systems by the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST). Finally, Section VI
provides conclusions about this work and future extensions.
II.
RELATED WORK
There have been a number of practical attacks speciﬁc to
3D printing executed in a lab setting. Works that we will touch
upon include Sturm et al. [11], Zeltmann et al. [7], and Moore
et al. [12]. These papers demonstrate one speciﬁc or narrow
range of attacks.
Other papers introduce frameworks to reason about threats
in this newly emerging domain of cybersecurity. Zhang &
Padmanabhan [13] proposed ﬁve categories of risk and applied
them to six separate stages in the manufacturing pipeline.
Yampolskiy et al. [14] discussed multiple taxonomies over
the different elements that can be attacked, how they can be
attacked, and consequences of an attack. Glavach et al. [8]
describe protocols and security recommendations for proper
AM system operation.
Table I groups papers into three categories - papers that
present or analyze a speciﬁc attack, those that propose a
security design framework and those that propose/perform risk
assessment on cyber attack(s).
In this paper, we organize vulnerabilities that affect Addi-
tive Manufacturing systems using the STRIDE threat model,
consolidate and catalog research articles to provide an insight
into the perspective of an adversary, and identify potential
mitigation techniques.
These articles come from a mix of independent research,
conferences, and journals focusing on AM or general man-
ufacturing security, and were sourced from searching online
databases for research on AM security, as well as from
references from other papers. Since AM security is a relatively
new ﬁeld, most of the research we have compiled is recent.
To reiterate, we aim not to propose a new offensive or
defensive strategy, but to unify these works under a common
theme, the STRIDE model.
III.
STRIDE MODEL
Most software systems today face a variety of cyber threats.
The threat landscape is constantly evolving with the advances
in technology. Malware that exploits software vulnerabilities
grew 151% in the second quarter of 2018 [15]. Threats can
originate from within or outside an organization and lead to
devastating consequences. To prevent threats from wreaking
havoc, system administrators/designers use threat modeling to
proﬁle the security posture of a system.
Threat modeling must be performed early in the develop-
ment cycle to successfully identify and remedy vulnerabilities.
Incorporating threat modeling into the design process of a
system will lead to proactive architectural decisions that reduce
threats from the start. Cyber physical systems in general, and
Additive Manufacturing systems in particular, conﬂate soft-
ware technology with physical infrastructure, which introduces
a unique challenge of multiple stakeholders being involved
in the system design process. Performing threat modeling
on a cyber physical system from the perspective of multiple
stakeholders is essential in identifying and eliminating threats
across a wide spectrum of threat types.
Some of the popular threat models are:
•
PASTA : The Process for Attack Simulation and
Threat Analysis (PASTA) is a risk-centric threat model
developed in 2012 [16]. PASTA brings business ob-
jectives and technical requirements together. It utilizes
several design and elicitation tools at various stages
of design and approaches threat-modeling from a
strategic level by involving key decision makers and
requiring input from operations, governance, architec-
ture and development. PASTA employs an attacker-
centric perspective to produce an asset-centric output
in the form of threat enumeration and scoring [16].
•
LINDDUN : The Linkability, Identiﬁability, Non-
repudiation, Detectability, Disclosure of information,
Unawareness, Non-compliance (LINDDUN) frame-
work focuses primarily on privacy concerns and is
used for data security [16]. The frameworks involves
constantly iterating over data elements and analyzing
them from the perspective of threat categories. The
design involves identifying a threat’s applicability to
the system and building threat trees [16].
•
Attack Trees : Using trees to model attacks on a
system is an old and widely used technique. The trees
are diagrams where the root represents the goal of an
adversary and the leaves represent ways to achieve that
goal. Each goal is represented by a separate tree. For
complex systems, the number of attack trees may be
too large to provide valuable and actionable insights
into the security posture of the system.
The STRIDE threat model was invented in 1999 and
adopted by Microsoft in 2002 [16]. This model identiﬁes six
main types of threats:
•
Spooﬁng : Claiming a false identify in order to gain
unauthorized access to resources. This type of threat
violates the authenticity requirement of a system.
Examples of this threat include spooﬁng the identity of
a user by brute-forcing user credentials and phishing.
•
Tampering : Malicious modiﬁcation of data or pro-
cesses. This modiﬁcation may occur on data in transit,
data at rest or on processes. This type of threat violates
the integrity requirement of a system. Examples in-
clude SQL injection attacks and code-injection attacks.
•
Repudiation : Falsely denying the occurrence of an
action or event. Typical repudiation attacks involve
a user denying performing a destructive action such
as deleting records from a database and attackers
truncating log ﬁles to remove all traces of a system
breach.
•
Information disclosure : Refers to data leaks or
breaches. Perhaps, the most common type of threat to-
day, information disclosure violates the conﬁdentiality
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

requirement of a system. Eavesdropping, data snifﬁng,
unauthorized access to a database are all examples of
information disclosure attacks.
•
Denial of Service : Disruption of a service or network
resource. This prevents legitimate users from access-
ing the desired network service. This type of attack
violates the availability requirement of a system. Typ-
ical examples include inundating a network service
with multiple requests, using up available space on a
shared hard drive, etc.
•
Elevation of Privilege : Unauthorized access to sys-
tem resources by violating the authorization require-
ment of a system. A typical example would be a
user gaining root privileges on a system using buffer
overﬂow.
We chose STRIDE model for this article because it is the
most mature threat model [16]. It provides a balance between
risk-assessment, security and privacy, which is vital when
modeling complex cyber physical systems. While the other
threat models discussed above have useful characteristics in
cyber-only systems, we feel that STRIDE is the most well
understood and widely used for cyber physical systems. Table
II classiﬁes research articles into the constituent attack types
of the STRIDE model based on the type and nature of threats
described in the articles.
IV.
INTENT OF THE ATTACKER
There are a number of articles focusing on the intent of a
possible attacker. Graves et al. [21] propose a framework for
the analysis of attacks on or with AM systems. The authors
describe the attack targets as the intersection of the effects the
attacks would have with the adversarial goals and objectives.
The three major threat categories they identiﬁed are technical
data theft, AM sabotage, and illegal part manufacturing. Table
III summarizes research articles into three categories based on
the intent or objective of an attacker.
A. Technical Data Theft
Technical data theft is the unauthorized use of Intellectual
Property (IP). To an attacker, IP can be the most lucrative
target because it forms the basis of an organization’s com-
petitive advantage. Stealing IP from an AM system is not so
different from other manufacturing systems. However, security
in AM systems may be less developed than that in traditional
manufacturing, giving an attacker the edge.
AM is very new compared to traditional manufacturing
methods that have been extensively tested in the ﬁeld. An
attacker can exploit zero-day ﬂaws in AM systems that would
likely have been patched long ago in a SM system. Do, Martini,
and Choo [23] demonstrated several severe security oversights
in MakerBot consumer 3D printers: print jobs are transmitted
and stored unencrypted, allowing anyone on the same network
to steal the model. Even worse, although the printer authen-
ticates a computer over Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure
(HTTPS), it does not properly check the legitimacy of the
certiﬁcate used, allowing them to do an Address Resolution
Protocol (ARP) poisoning attack and perform privileged ac-
tions on the printer.
Furthermore, AM exhibits unique properties that enable all
kinds of attacks. One such property that an attacker could
choose to exploit is the fact that 3D printers use a small
set of primitive operations that make consistent acoustic and
magnetic emissions. Song et al. [24] were able to conduct a
side-channel attack using an ordinary smartphone’s sensors.
By training a support vector machine to convert sensor data
into G-code, they could accurately reconstruct the shape of a
design being printed by the widely-used Ultimaker 2 Go.
B. AM Sabotage
AM sabotage most commonly exhibits itself in the ma-
nipulation of an AM system to degrade the quality of the
manufactured part, though it may also refer to damage done
to the AM system itself or its surroundings. The bulk of
research done about security challenges in AM fall under this
category, as the unique properties of AM open up even more
possibilities. One attack unique to AM is the insertion of voids
in the middle of a product. Sturm et al. [11] discuss such an
attack and show that doing so causes a noticeable degradation
in strength while slipping undetected by human operators.
Belikovetsky et al. [6] applied this attack to a real-life
scenario from start to ﬁnish. Exploiting a patched WinRAR
vulnerability on an out-of-date test machine, they inserted
gaps inside drone propellers that broke apart in ﬂight. The
test machine was intentionally left unpatched, but the main
takeaway is that once an attacker gains access to an AM
system, they have a wider range of opportunities to sabotage
manufactured parts. For example, the previous attack required
inﬁltrating the STL ﬁle. But if the attacker gains access to
the printer’s controls, they can choose to alter the orientation
that the part is printed in, which also somewhat unintuitively
turns out to impact strength as well, as Zeltmann et al. [7]
demonstrate.
C. Illegal Part Manufacturing
Illegal part manufacturing is the creation of products pro-
hibited by law. Unlike the other two intentions mentioned
above, which consider an attack by an external actor on the
end user, illegal part manufacturing is not an attack in the
traditional sense. However, it is still an important considera-
tion, more for the printer manufacturer than the end user. As
with all technologies with potential for danger, the thin balance
between liberty and safety ought to be explored. There are
currently little published works that describe scenarios where
such attacks were conducted.
V.
SECURITY RECOMMENDATIONS
Although currently there are no speciﬁc recommendations
for AM systems, guidance is available from NIST for industrial
control systems (ICS) and general manufacturing processes.
We believe ICS recommendations found in [27] contain many
valuable recommendations due to the shared security concerns
of AM and ICS systems. Additionally, [28], which is primarily
distributed for Federal Information Systems, contains many
recommendations relevant to the security of Additive Manu-
facturing systems due to information systems’ reliance on a
consistent ﬂow information and the relevance of many of the
paper’s recommendations to general manufacturing security.
Where applicable, recommendation names and descriptions
have been paraphrased to contain speciﬁc terms that ﬁt the
context of AM.
This section is a compilation from three major papers and
technical articles from the National Institute of Standards and
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE I. CATEGORIZATION OF PAPERS BY PURPOSE
Analyzing a speciﬁc attack: Papers with
the primary purpose of presenting and ana-
lyzing a speciﬁc AM attack.
Belikovetsky et al. [6] demonstrate an attack in which a largely undetectable void is added to an AM drone part, causing a disastrous
loss of structural integrity. Moore et al. [12] demonstrate an attack on AM quality via malicious printer ﬁrmware. Sturm et al. [11]
examine potential attack vectors along the AM process chain, and present security recommendations for preventing and detecting
attacks. Al Faruque et al. [5] demonstrate an attack that derives the intellectual property of an AM-constructed object by listening
on the sounds produced by the construction process and running them through a machine-learning model.
Proposing a security framework: Papers
with the primary purpose of presenting a
new or modiﬁed security framework for the
beneﬁt of AM cybersecurity.
Hutchins et al. [17] establish a framework that identiﬁes speciﬁc vulnerabilities within a manufacturing supply chain. Padmanabhan
and Zhang [13] review cybersecurity risk and mitigation strategies in AM, and propose a framework to ”detect threats and assess
vulnerabilities in the AM process.” They also suggest a new encryption technique to help secure the AM process. Yampolskiy et al.
[18] propose a new model for outsourcing Additive Layer Manufacturing (ALM) based manufacturing. Vincent et al. [19] propose
an approach to detect attacks in cyber-physical manufacturing systems through the use of structural health monitoring techniques.
Risk Assessment/Analyzing Multiple At-
tacks: Papers that analyze a variety of at-
tacks on AM or the potential attack vectors
of Additive Manufacturing systems.
Prinsloo et al. [20] explore cybersecurity risks associated with the transition to Industry 4.0 and address relevant countermeasures.
Yampolskiy et al. [14] analyze attacks that can cause AM machines to exhibit weaponized effects. Zeltmann et al. [7] provide a brief
overview of AM security risks and evaluate risks posed by two classes of modiﬁcations to the AM process that ”are representative
of the challenges that are unique to AM.” Glavach et al. [8] ”address cybersecurity threats to the Direct Digital Manufacturing
(DDM) community.” Graves et al. [21] assess AM from three security awareness perspectives: ”exposure to an attack, evaluation
of the system, and potential liability for a successful attack.” Slaughter et al. [10] identify techniques used to ensure bad quality in
metal AM through malicious manipulating an infrared thermography quality assurance device. Straub [22] discusses attacks on the
3D printing process that involve changes in printing orientation, and proposes an imaging-based solution to combat the problem.
TABLE II. A STRIDE ASSESSMENT OF ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING
Threat type
Papers
Spooﬁng
An attacker may spoof a printer or computer’s identity to intercept 3D models [23] or as part of a larger attack to take control of and sabotage
an AM system [6].
Tampering
Assuming access was gained through another attack, an adversary may choose a number of ways to sabotage the system, including, but not
limited to, inserting invisible voids [11], altering print settings [7], and/or installing malicious ﬁrmware [12].
Repudiation
Repudiation is a generally overlooked threat in AM security articles. Considering secure logging is not a built-in standard in 3D printers, an
attacker would simply need to target the tracing capabilities of the surrounding infrastructure.
Information Disclosure
Traditional malware could be deployed to steal the 3D model, which can exist in many forms and place [11]. There also exists side-channel
attacks that listen to the predictable acoustic and magnetic emissions of a printer to reconstruct IP with a machine learning model [5] [24].
Denial of Service
One who has gained control of a poorly designed 3D printer may hypothetically manipulate its operating parameters e.g. the electron/laser
beam or source material to inﬂict irreversible damage upon itself.
Elevation of Privilege
Privilege escalation is used as a stepping stone to launch further attacks [6]. However, it is not even needed for some AM systems that perform
incorrect authentication or none at all [23].
TABLE III. CATEGORIZATION OF ATTACKS BY INTENT
Adversary’s intent
Papers
Technical data theft
Al Faruque et al. [5] describe a novel side-channel attack in which a machine learning model is used to derive an object’s geometry by
analyzing the noise created by a Fused Deposition Modeling (FDM) 3D printer. Yampolskiy et al. [18] emphasize how there are many places
along the AM supply chain in which IP can be stolen, and offer a unique outsourcing model to help secure the process. Campbell and
Ivanova [25] describe the potential for AM to increase the ease of violating patents and producing patented products.
AM sabotage
Sturm et al. [11] describe the ease of creating voids in products fabricated by AM to sabotage their mechanical strength. Zeltmann et al.
[7] describe how embedded defects and altered printing orientation can negatively affect a printed object’s integrity as well. Belikovetsky et
al. [6] and Vincent et al. [19] demonstrate the consequences of these attacks by testing sabotaged parts on real-life equipment. Moore et al.
[12] takes another route and sabotages the printer ﬁrmware, replacing it with a malicious version that can corrupt the print jobs as they are
received.
Illegal part manufacturing
Kietzmann et al. [26] describe the potential for AM to catalyze the creation of fake medical products and drugs.
Campbell and Ivanova [25] describe the potential of bad actors to manufacture illegal gun parts through AM.
Technology (NIST) regarding security practices to counteract
malicious attacks in the cyber and cyber-physical domains.
The recommendations come from NIST’s Guide to Industrial
Control Systems (ICS) Security [27], Security and Privacy
Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations
[28], and Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cy-
bersecurity [29]. We organized these recommendations along
STRIDE threat model, describing how to mitigate the different
threat types.
A. Spooﬁng and Repudiation
•
Identity Management, Authentication and Access
Control: Access to physical and logical assets and
associated facilities is limited to authorized users,
processes, and devices, and is managed consistent with
the assessed risk of unauthorized access to authorized
activities and transactions.
•
Security Monitoring: The system and assets are
monitored to identify cybersecurity events and verify
the effectiveness of protective measures. This includes
monitoring for unauthorized personnel, connections,
devices and software.
•
Access Enforcement: The system enforces approved
authorizations for logical access to information and
system resources in accordance with applicable access
control policies.
•
Remote Access: The organization establishes usage
restrictions,
conﬁguration/connection
requirements,
and implementation guidance for each type of remote
access allowed, and authorizes remote access to the
system prior to allowing such connections.
•
Least Functionality: The organization conﬁgures the
system to provide only essential capabilities; and
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

prohibits or restricts the use of prohibited or restricted
functions, ports, protocols, and/or services.
•
Device Authentication: The system uniquely iden-
tiﬁes and authenticates devices before establishing a
connection.
•
Adaptive Identiﬁcation and Authentication The or-
ganization requires that individuals accessing the sys-
tem employ supplemental authentication techniques or
mechanisms under circumstances or situations deter-
mined to need the extra security.
•
Physical Access Authorizations: The organization
develops, approves, and maintains a list of individuals
with authorized access to the location of the system
and issues authorization credentials for such access.
•
Developer Security Architecture and Design: The
organization requires the developer of the system,
system component, or system service to produce a
design speciﬁcation and security architecture that:
◦
Is consistent with and supportive of the orga-
nization’s security architecture which is estab-
lished within and is an integrated part of the
organization’s enterprise architecture;
◦
Accurately and completely describes the re-
quired security functionality, and the allocation
of security controls among physical and logical
components; and
◦
Expresses how individual security functions,
mechanisms, and services work together to
provide required security capabilities and a
uniﬁed approach to protection.
•
Boundary Protection: The system connects to exter-
nal networks or other systems only through managed
interfaces consisting of boundary protection devices
arranged in accordance with an organizational security
architecture.
•
Network Disconnect: The system terminates the
network connection associated with a communica-
tions session at the end of the session or after an
organization-determined time period of inactivity.
•
Session Authenticity: The system protects the authen-
ticity of the communications sessions.
•
Information System Monitoring: The organization
◦
Monitors the system to detect:
Attacks and indicators of potential attacks
in accordance with organization-deﬁned
monitoring objectives; and
Unauthorized local, network, and remote
connections.
◦
Identiﬁes unauthorized use of the system
through relevant techniques and methods;
◦
Deploys monitoring devices:
Strategically within the system to collect
essential information; and
At ad hoc locations within the system
to track speciﬁc types of transactions of
interest to the organization; and
◦
Protects information obtained from intrusion-
monitoring tools from unauthorized access,
modiﬁcation, and deletion.
•
Firewalls: The organization deploys appropriate ﬁre-
wall policies at pertinent locations to avoid unautho-
rized access to systems and resources.
•
Repudiation: The information system protects against
an
individual
(or
process
acting
on
behalf
of
an individual) falsely denying having performed
organization-deﬁned actions to be covered by non-
repudiation, which may include creating information,
sending and receiving messages, or approving infor-
mation.
B. Tampering, Denial of Service and Elevation of Privilege
•
Risk Assessment: The organization understands the
cybersecurity risk to organizational operations (includ-
ing mission, functions, image, or reputation), organi-
zational assets, and individuals.
•
Anomalies and Events: Anomalous activity is de-
tected and the potential impact of events is understood.
◦
Detected events are analyzed to understand
attack targets and methods;
◦
Event data are collected and correlated from
multiple sources and sensors; and
◦
The impact of events is determined.
•
Security Continuous Monitoring: The system and its
assets are monitored to identify cybersecurity events
and verify the effectiveness of protective measures.
◦
The network is monitored to detect potential
cybersecurity events;
◦
The physical environment is monitored to de-
tect potential cybersecurity events;
◦
Personnel activity is monitored to detect po-
tential cybersecurity events;
◦
Malicious code is detected;
◦
Unauthorized mobile code is detected;
◦
External service provider activity is monitored
to detect cybersecurity events; and
◦
Vulnerability scans are performed.
•
Detection Processes: Detection processes and proce-
dures are maintained and tested to ensure awareness
of anomalous events.
•
Continuous Monitoring: The organization develops
a continuous monitoring strategy and implements a
continuous monitoring program that includes:
◦
Establishment of metrics to be monitored.
◦
Ongoing
security
status
monitoring
of
organization-deﬁned
metrics
in
accordance
with the organizational continuous monitoring
strategy.
•
Software Usage Restrictions: The organization uses
software and associated documentation in accordance
with contract agreements and copyright laws, and
tracks the use of software and associated documenta-
tion protected by quantity licenses to control copying
and distribution.
•
User-Installed Software: The organization estab-
lishes policies governing the installation of software
by users and enforces software installation policies
through organization-deﬁned methods.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

•
Incident Monitoring: The organization tracks and
documents security incidents impacting the system.
•
Risk Assessment: The organization conducts an as-
sessment of risk, including the likelihood and mag-
nitude of harm, from the unauthorized access, use,
disclosure, disruption, modiﬁcation, or destruction of
the system and the information it processes, stores, or
transmits.
•
Vulnerability Scanning: The organization:
◦
Scans for vulnerabilities in the system and
hosted
applications
and
when
new
vul-
nerabilities
potentially
affecting
the
sys-
tem/applications are identiﬁed and reported;
◦
Employs vulnerability scanning tools and tech-
niques that facilitate interoperability among
tools and automate parts of the vulnerability
management process by using standards for:
Enumerating platforms, software ﬂaws,
and improper conﬁgurations;
Formatting checklists and test procedures;
and
Measuring vulnerability impact.
◦
Analyzes vulnerability scan reports and results
from security control assessments; and
◦
Remediates legitimate vulnerabilities in accor-
dance with an organizational assessment of
risk.
•
Supply Chain Protection: The organization pro-
tects against supply chain threats to the system,
system component, or system service by employing
organization-deﬁned security safeguards as part of a
comprehensive, defense-in-breadth information secu-
rity strategy.
•
Criticality Analysis: The organization identiﬁes crit-
ical system components and functions by performing
a criticality analysis.
•
Tamper Resistance and Detection: The organization
implements a tamper protection program for the sys-
tem, system component, or system service.
•
Customized Development of Critical Components:
The organization re-implements or custom develops
system components deemed critical enough by the
organization to take such measures.
•
Application Partitioning: The system separates user
functionality (including user interface services) from
system management functionality.
•
Security Function Isolation: The system isolates
security functions from nonsecurity functions.
•
Trusted Path: The system establishes a trusted com-
munications path between the user and organization-
deﬁned security functions to include at a minimum,
system authentication and re-authentication.
•
Protection
of
Information
at
Rest:
The
sys-
tem protects the conﬁdentiality and/or integrity of
organization-deﬁned information at rest.
•
Malicious Code Protection: The organization:
◦
Employs malicious code protection mecha-
nisms at system entry and exit points to detect
and eradicate malicious code;
◦
Updates malicious code protection mecha-
nisms whenever new releases are available in
accordance with organizational conﬁguration
management policy and procedures;
◦
Conﬁgures malicious code protection mecha-
nisms to:
Perform periodic scans of the system at
a deﬁned frequency and real-time scans
of ﬁles from external sources at speciﬁed
endpoints and/or entry and exit points as
the ﬁles are downloaded, opened, or ex-
ecuted in accordance with organizational
security policy; and
◦
Addresses the receipt of false positives during
malicious code detection and eradication and
the resulting potential impact on the availabil-
ity of the system.
•
Software, Firmware, and Information Integrity:
The organization employs integrity veriﬁcation tools
to detect unauthorized changes to organization-deﬁned
software, ﬁrmware, and information.
•
Information Input Validation: The system checks
the validity of organization-deﬁned information inputs.
•
Error Handling: The system
◦
Generates error messages that provide infor-
mation necessary for corrective actions without
revealing information that could be exploited
by adversaries; and
◦
Reveals error messages only to trusted person-
nel or roles.
•
Memory
Protection:
The
system
implements
organization-deﬁned security safeguards to protect its
memory from unauthorized code execution.
•
Denial of Service Protection: The system protects
against or limits the effects of denial of service attacks
by employing aforementioned organization-deﬁned se-
curity safeguards.
C. Information Disclosure
•
Governance: The policies, procedures, and processes
to manage and monitor the organization’s regulatory,
legal, risk, environmental, and operational require-
ments are understood and inform the management of
cybersecurity risk.
•
Data Security: Information and records (data) are
managed consistent with the organization’s risk strat-
egy to protect the conﬁdentiality, integrity, and avail-
ability of information.
•
Information Protection Processes and Procedures:
Security policies (that address purpose, scope, roles,
responsibilities, management commitment, and co-
ordination among organizational entities), processes,
and procedures are maintained and used to manage
protection of systems and assets.
•
Component Authenticity: The organization develops
and implements anti-counterfeit policy and procedures
that include the means to detect and prevents counter-
feit components from entering the system.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

•
Information in Shared Resources: The system pre-
vents unauthorized and unintended information trans-
fer via shared system resources.
•
Transmission Conﬁdentiality and Integrity: The
system protects the conﬁdentiality and/or integrity of
transmitted information.
•
Wireless Link Protection: The system protects exter-
nal and internal wireless links from designated types
of signal parameter attacks or references to sources
for such attacks.
•
Boundary Protection: Boundary protection devices
are implemented to control the ﬂow of information be-
tween interconnected security domains to protect the
system against malicious cyber adversaries and non-
malicious errors and incidents...Boundary protection
devices determine whether data transfer is permitted,
often by examining the data or associated metadata.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Additive Manufacturing is a technology with enormous
potential. However, this makes it easy to rush things to market
without taking due consideration of security implications. And
because AM is still a developing area of research, it is a
challenge to properly secure systems against the expanded
variety of things that could go wrong. In this paper, we
considered the mind of the opposition by analyzing the intent
of the attacker and discussing many possible ways for an
attacker to achieve their goal. Furthermore, we categorized
these attacks into the STRIDE model and compiled a number
of steps that one could take to secure each category. Since AM
is a developing area of research, there are still a number of
questions that should be further explored:
A. Exactly how much work have manufacturers of consumer
and industrial AM devices put into securing their systems?
Do, Martini, and Choo [23] have shown an instance where
a 3D printer manufacturer neglected fundamental security
practices. However, this is just a single case in a consumer
printer. Although we believe this may be an expected symptom
of the emerging nature of AM, we do not have enough data
to conclude if this is an isolated incident or a widespread
concern, and how much worse, if at all, it is than in traditional
manufacturing.
B. Are there any additional properties unique to AM that an
attacker could exploit?
A key beneﬁt of AM is that it gives manufacturers more
ﬂexibility, but at the same time gives malicious actors more
opportunities to attack. We covered several such attacks that
are only possible or simpliﬁed on AM, such as those given by
[11] and [7]. We anticipate that a motivated adversary will ﬁnd
even more ways to cleverly exploit AM’s advantages. More
work can be done to explore other attacks and raise awareness
among AM users.
C. What steps, if any, should be taken to prevent the use of
3D printers for potential harm, such as illegal part manufac-
turing?
We have so far exclusively focused on securing 3D printers
so that the user is protected from any malicious actions by
outside actors. Graves et al. [21] make the case for considering
securing 3D printers so that the outside community environ-
ment is protected from destructive uses of this technology.
Regardless, we hope this paper provides a useful, under-
standable overview of AM security from all sides and concrete
ideas for what next steps can be taken.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the infrastructure
and support of Center for Agile & Adaptive and Additive
Manufacturing funded through State of Texas Appropriation
(#190405-105-805008-220).
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Thomas, “Costs, beneﬁts, and adoption of additive manufacturing:
a supply chain perspective,” The International Journal of Advanced
Manufacturing Technology, vol. 85, no. 5, 2016, pp. 1857–1876.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-015-7973-6
[2]
P. O, “3-d printing is changing the way air force ﬁxes its ag-
ing planes,” URL: https://www.military.com/defensetech/2017/05/02/3-
d-printing-is-changing-way-air-force-ﬁxes-its-aging-planes [accessed :
2020-05-21].
[3]
J. Kite-Powell, “Fda approved 3d printed drug available in the
us,” URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/jenniferhicks/2016/03/22/fda-
approved-3d-printed-drug-available-in-the-us [accessed: 2020-06-02].
[4]
R. Tino, R. Moore, S. Antoline, P. Ravi, N. Wake, C. Ionita, J. Morris,
S. Decker, A. Sheikh, F. Rybicki, and L. Chepelev, “Covid-19 and the
role of 3d printing in medicine,” 3D Printing in Medicine, vol. 6, 12
2020.
[5]
M.
A.
Al
Faruque,
S.
R.
Chhetri,
A.
Canedo,
and
J.
Wan,
“Acoustic side-channel attacks on additive manufacturing systems,”
in
2016
ACM/IEEE
7th
International
Conference
on
Cyber-
Physical Systems (ICCPS).
IEEE, Apr 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCPS.2016.7479068
[6]
S.
Belikovetsky,
M.
Yampolskiy,
J.
Toh,
and
Y.
Elovici,
“dr0wned
-
cyber-physical
attack
with
additive
manufactur-
ing,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1609.00133,
2016.
[Online].
Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1609.00133
[7]
S. Zeltmann, N. Gupta, N. G. Tsoutsos, M. Maniatakos, J. Rajendran,
and R. Karri, “Manufacturing and security challenges in 3d printing,”
JOM, vol. 68, 2016, pp. 1872–1881.
[8]
D. Glavach, J. LaSalle-DeSantis, and S. Zimmerman, Applying and
Assessing Cybersecurity Controls for Direct Digital Manufacturing
(DDM) Systems.
Springer International Publishing, 2017, p. 173–194.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-50660-9 7
[9]
S.
Moore,
P.
Armstrong,
T.
McDonald,
and
M.
Yampolskiy,
“Vulnerability analysis of desktop 3d printer software,” in 2016
Resilience Week (RWS).
IEEE, Aug 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/RWEEK.2016.7573305
[10]
A. Slaughter, M. Yampolskiy, M. Matthews, W. E. King, G. Guss,
and Y. Elovici, “How to ensure bad quality in metal additive
manufacturing,” in Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Availability, Reliability and Security - ARES ’17.
ACM Press,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3098954.3107011
[11]
L. Sturm, C. Williams, J. Camelio, J. White, and R. Parker, “Cyber-
physical vulnerabilities in additive manufacturing systems: A case study
attack on the .stl ﬁle with human subjects,” Journal of Manufacturing
Systems,
vol.
44,
Jul
2017,
p.
154–164.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278612517300961
[12]
S. Moore, W. Glisson, and M. Yampolskiy, “Implications of malicious
3d printer ﬁrmware.”
Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences, 01 2017, pp. 6089–6098.
[13]
A. Padmanabhan and J. Zhang, “Cybersecurity risks and mitigation
strategies in additive manufacturing,” Progress in Additive Manufac-
turing, vol. 3, no. 1-2, 2018, pp. 87–93.
[14]
M.
Yampolskiy,
A.
Skjellum,
M.
Kretzschmar,
R.
A.
Overfelt,
K.
R.
Sloan,
and
A.
Yasinsac,
“Using
3d
printers
as
weapons,”
International
Journal
of
Critical
Infrastructure
Protection,
vol.
14,
2016,
pp.
58
–
71.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1874548215300330
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[15]
W. Ashford, “WannaCry and NotPetya inspiring new attacks,” URL:
https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252449265/WannaCry-and-
NotPetya-inspiring-new-attacks [accessed: 2020-05-21].
[16]
N. Shevchenko, “Threat Modeling: 12 Available Methods,” URL:
https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/sei blog/2018/12/threat-modeling-12-
available-methods.html [accessed: 2020-05-24].
[17]
M.
J.
Hutchins,
R.
Bhinge,
M.
K.
Micali,
S.
L.
Robinson,
J. W. Sutherland, and D. Dornfeld, “Framework for identifying
cybersecurity
risks
in
manufacturing,”
Procedia
Manufacturing,
vol. 1, 2015, pp. 47 – 63, 43rd North American Manufacturing
Research
Conference,
NAMRC
43,
8-12
June
2015,
UNC
Charlotte,
North
Carolina,
United
States.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2351978915010604
[18]
M.
Yampolskiy,
T.
R.
Andel,
J.
T.
McDonald,
W.
B.
Glisson,
and
A.
Yasinsac,
“Intellectual
property
protection
in
additive layer manufacturing: Requirements for secure outsourcing,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
4th
Program
Protection
and
Reverse
Engineering Workshop, ser. PPREW-4.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/2689702.2689709
[19]
H. Vincent, L. Wells, P. Tarazaga, and J. Camelio, “Trojan detection
and side-channel analyses for cyber-security in cyber-physical manu-
facturing systems,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 1, 2015, p. 77–85.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2015.09.065
[20]
J. Prinsloo, S. Sinha, and B. von Solms, “A review of industry
4.0
manufacturing
process
security
risks,”
Applied
Sciences,
vol.
9,
no.
23,
Nov
2019,
p.
5105.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app9235105
[21]
L. M. G. Graves, J. Lubell, W. King, and M. Yampolskiy, “Characteristic
aspects of additive manufacturing security from security awareness
perspectives,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, 2019, pp. 103 833–103 853.
[22]
J. Straub, “Identifying positioning-based attacks against 3D printed
objects and the 3D printing process,” in Pattern Recognition and
Tracking XXVIII, M. S. Alam, Ed., vol. 10203, International Society
for Optics and Photonics.
SPIE, 2017, pp. 22 – 34. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2264671
[23]
Q. Do, B. Martini, and K.-K. R. Choo, “A data exﬁltration and remote
exploitation attack on consumer 3d printers,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. 11, no. 10, 2016, pp. 2174–
2186.
[24]
C. Song, F. Lin, Z. Ba, K. Ren, C. Zhou, and W. Xu, “My smartphone
knows what you print: Exploring smartphone-based side-channel attacks
against 3d printers,” in Proceedings of the 2016 ACM SIGSAC Confer-
ence on Computer and Communications Security, 2016, pp. 895–907.
[25]
T. A. Campbell and O. S. Ivanova, “Additive manufacturing as
a disruptive technology: Implications of three-dimensional printing,”
Technology & Innovation, vol. 15, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 67–79. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.3727/194982413x13608676060655
[26]
J. Kietzmann, L. Pitt, and P. Berthon, “Disruptions, decisions, and
destinations: Enter the age of 3-d printing and additive manufacturing,”
Business Horizons, vol. 58, no. 2, 2015, pp. 209 – 215, eMERGING
ISSUES
IN
CRISIS
MANAGEMENT.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0007681314001608
[27]
K. Stouffer, V. Pillitteri, S. Lightman, M. Abrams, and A. Hahn,
“Guide to industrial control systems (ICS) security,” Tech. Rep., Jun.
2015. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/nist.sp.800-82r2
[28]
J. T. Force and T. Initiative, “Security and privacy controls for federal
information systems and organizations,” Tech. Rep. 53, Apr. 2013.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.6028/nist.sp.800-53r4
[29]
Critical
Infrastructure
Cybersecurity,
“Framework
for
improving
critical
infrastructure
cybersecurity,”
URL:
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/CSWP/NIST.CSWP.04162018.pdf
[accessed: 2020-06-18].
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

