Offline and Online Active Learning: Lessons in Teaching  
Software Engineering to Multicultural Groups 
 
Simona Vasilache 
Faculty of Engineering, Information and Systems 
University of Tsukuba 
Tsukuba, Japan 
e-mail: simona@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—The past two years have seen a huge increase in 
university courses offered online, due to the impact of the Covid-
19 pandemic. At the same time, as the active learning approach 
is one of the most pursued approaches in teaching engineering 
disciplines, new strategies of implementing it online had to be 
pursued. Whereas the benefits of active learning have often been 
highlighted, the question arises whether the (sudden) transition 
to online teaching can remain successful in its pursuit of active 
learning, especially in multicultural groups. This short paper 
will be based on the experience of teaching an undergraduate 
software engineering course to a multicultural group of 
students. It will describe the active learning strategies employed 
during offline classes and will highlight the changes made once 
the course was suddenly switched to an online format, providing 
important lessons for software engineering instructors.  
Keywords-software engineering; active learning; culturally-
responsive teaching; multicultural students. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Software engineering has always been considered a 
discipline necessitating a hands-on approach. The concept of 
active learning is often applied in teaching this discipline, as a 
means to impart to students the practicalities of developing a 
software application. Researchers agree that projects using 
“active methodologies” help students to “develop deeper 
knowledge and apply it in a practical way according to a work 
plan” [1]. A lot has been said about active learning and its 
benefits in the past few years. During traditional “passive” 
classes, students listen to experts who impart their knowledge 
[2]. When active learning is used, students “must do more than 
just listen: they must read, write, discuss, or be engaged in 
solving problems” [3], engaging in analysis, synthesis, and 
evaluation” [3].  
The 2020 Covid-19 pandemic forced many academic 
institutions to move their courses to an online format; this 
sudden shift, taking place with no preparation, was termed 
Emergency Remote Teaching (ERT) [9]. As the name 
suggests, this was different than the well-established online 
class teaching method, which took years of work and gradual 
improvements until it reached a well-established teaching 
format. Its purpose - as a response to crisis - was to provide 
temporary access to instruction quickly and reliably [9].  
Whereas implementing active learning has its own predefined 
challenges, the sudden move to ERT brought with it its own 
set of challenges. This short paper will highlight some of these 
challenges, along with lessons learned in teaching software 
engineering to a multicultural group of students at a national 
university in Japan, during an introductory level course. The 
structure of the paper is as follows: Section II describes the 
details of the course, whereas Section III shows how active 
learning was implemented; Section IV provides conclusions 
and directions for future work. 
 
II. 
COURSE DESCRIPTION 
A. Basic Course Description 
This paper highlights the experiences of teaching an 
introductory software engineering course at the University of 
Tsukuba in Japan. The course is offered as an elective for 
master’s students in the computer science department, which 
covers the majority of the class participants. Every year, 
however, a number between 2 and 5 students belonging to 
other departments enroll in this course, as well. Stretching 
over 10 weeks and awarding two credits upon completion, the 
course introduces basic principles, methodologies, theories 
and notations used by software engineers during various 
phases of software development. The language of instruction 
is English, and the class participants are a mixture of local 
Japanese students and international students enrolled in 
graduate school at the university.  
B. Format and Number Changes 
This course has been offered since 2016 and its need 
emerged from the necessity of providing more graduate 
school courses in English. Figure 1 illustrates the changes in 
numbers and format, along with a brief overview of the style 
and type of activities used during classes.   
For the first 4 years (until 2019), the course was provided 
in the classical face-to-face format. It started with 15 students 
in its first year, followed by 26, 35 and 66 students enrolled in 
subsequent years, respectively. With the sudden change in 
online format, or to be more precise, ERT format (due to the 
Covid-19 pandemic), the number reduced to 35 students in 
2020, followed by an increase to 53 students in 2021. At the 
time of writing this paper, the current 2022 edition of the 
course is taking place online, with 66 participants. Whereas 
the previous two years were held in the ERT format, a third 
year can already be considered beyond ERT.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
Figure 1.  Software engineering course format over the years 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTING ACTIVE LEARNING 
A. Active Learning in Face-to-face Settings 
In its first four years, the course was held in the classical 
face-to-face format. In its first edition, 15 students enrolled in 
the class. Such a low number of participants allowed rather 
easy interactions between the instructor and the students. 
However, the novelty of the course, along with the 
inexperience of the instructor at the time did not facilitate 
implementing active learning on a large scale. The simple 
method of constantly asking students to answer various 
questions in class was, however, implemented. Although it 
was observed that the international students (making up most 
of the class, i.e., 9 out of the total of 15 students) were more 
active in answering the questions and generally interacting 
with the teacher, efforts were made to involve the Japanese 
students, as well. It is important to mention that, at the time, 
lectures in Japanese classroom generally meant passive 
participation of students: the teacher would stand in front of 
the classroom and teach while students simply listened. This 
is still often the case in many Japanese classrooms and the root 
causes stem form cultural characteristics. There is ample 
research on this topic (e.g., [4]), but it is essential to emphasize 
that things are slowly, but steadily improving: more and more 
(higher and even secondary education) institutions in Japan 
encourage active participation of students in class and active 
learning in general. 
In the subsequent two years, flipped classroom was 
attempted (one time each year, experimentally), in order to 
observe its impact on overall class performance. At the end of 
the course, a questionnaire was administered and the students 
were asked about their preference for different class styles: 
lecture style, discussion style, combination (of lecture and 
discussions) and flipped. As shown in our previous work [5], 
the experimental flipped classroom was the least popular with 
the students. However, it was perceived as both more 
challenging and more enjoyable ([5]). 
 At the same time, class activities were introduced, along 
with the creation of mini-teams which were given tasks to 
solve during classes. Our previous works ([6] and [7]) show 
how collaborative learning was used and the lessons learned 
during this time. In 2019, with 66 students enrolled, a micro-
project was introduced, along with an increase in class 
activities (often more than one within one class). The feedback 
gathered from the students at the end of the class, as well as 
through questionnaires administered by the instructor, showed 
that the course in 2019 was quite successful. As one student 
stated, “the lecturer changed the students’ silence into 
discussion and projects”. This implies that the course was 
successful in persuading the students more inclined to be 
silent in class to participate more. Furthermore, some students 
believe that they learned things that could prove useful not 
only in software engineering, but in other fields, as well (to 
quote one other student, “the principles that I learned in the 
class changed the way I approach problem solving in 
general”).   
Overall, as active learning was implemented on an 
increasingly larger scale, the instructor felt that every year 
more progress was being made. However, as described in the 
next section, the course format in 2020 suffered a major 
change. 
B. Online Active Learning 
As explained earlier, the Covid-19 pandemic brought with 
it a sudden transition to online teaching all over the world, at 
various levels of education. According to Whittle at al., the 
focus was shifted towards “the method of delivering 
instruction rather than the learning goals” [8] and this made 
implementing active learning more challenging. In the 
software engineering class, in the spring of 2020, the number 
of enrolled students was almost half that of the previous year 
(34 students, as opposed to 66 in 2019). In the author’s 
opinion, this was brought upon by the uncertainties regarding 
the online environment, along with the (too optimistic, as it 
turned out) expectation of return to a face-to-face format in 
the near future. (This would have meant that the students 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

could enroll in the class later, once the class returned to the 
regular format.) Furthermore, the number of students 
dropping the class in the first couple of weeks was more than 
10 (in our university, the students have around two weeks to 
decide the classes they register for, allowing them some time 
to observe, before making a decision). As discussed in [7], 
these students felt that combining the difficulties of sudden 
online learning with the requirement of being active 
participants (in a multicultural class) represented a hurdle 
impossible to overcome.   
This was the first year when active learning was 
attempting during online, ERT-style classes. The classes were 
held online, synchronously, using MSTeams [10] and Zoom 
[11]. All class materials were placed on manaba (which is the 
learning management system employed by our university 
[12]). Several international students were still abroad at the 
beginning of the course (they could not arrive in time or were 
not allowed to enter Japan, due to the pandemic restrictions).  
In order to accommodate the time differences and different 
locations, the classes were also available on demand: each 
lecture was recorded, and the recordings were placed on 
MSStream [13] (with links to them placed in manaba). At the 
end of the course, the instructor administered a questionnaire, 
to find out the students’ opinions and perceptions regarding 
online classes, active learning and specifics of the course they 
had just taken (the results were summarized in our previous 
work in [6]).  
The teacher continued to make efforts to involve all 
students in the learning process. Although conversations 
online were more difficult to implement than in a classroom, 
the instructor asked questions and attempted to engage all 
students in the discussions. Each class started with a “light” 
topic for discussion, usually a piece of technology-related 
news, which acted as a warm-up activity.  
Various class activities were adapted to an online format. 
Instead of teams created in a classroom, organized by desks, 
the instructor created breakout rooms in Zoom; each such 
room acted as a group, and they held discussions and 
performed various tasks given in class. 
Dealing with a multicultural classroom (with 6 Japanese 
students and 28 from 4 other countries) meant that cultural 
differences had a strong impact on discussions. Often the same 
students responded to questions every time in the main 
meeting. However, within the breakout rooms, it was easier to 
involve the less communicative (or less confident) students. 
The most obvious reason is the number of peers present: 
breakout rooms consisted of only 5-7 students (as opposed to 
over 30 in the main meeting), which made it easier to 
overcome the lack of confidence, particularly with regard to 
language skills (English was not the mother tongue for most 
students). Most students agreed that active participation in an 
online setting may be more difficult, as can be seen from the 
following two responses.  
- “I feel like when classes are held online, people will be 
very hesitant to participate unless they are picked on 
directly.” 
- “I think the online environment keeps many people silent, 
or because they don’t speak and no one can see so they keep 
silent. Such discussions are not very effective and there will 
be problems in the allocation of discussion time.” 
However, one participant expressed a different opinion, 
stating that asynchronous work allows different modalities of 
work: 
- “I think that online classes can result in *more* 
discussion than face-to-face classes because students can 
work asynchronously and in different modalities. I don’t need 
to see someone or hear them to discuss, there are other ways 
of communication.” 
Moreover, when questioned about the class activities, 
about 90% of the students stated that they found them useful 
(a lot or in a moderate amount), whereas about 80% found 
them enjoyable (a lot or in a moderate amount).  
As mentioned earlier, when it comes to group tasks, the 
implementation was adapted to the online format. Not all 
activities could be carried out online, thus some of them had 
to be completely eliminated (e.g., the agile game “paper 
airplanes” [14]). The most challenging part proved to be 
collaborating to perform a task and express the results in 
writing. At first, a generic request was made by the instructor 
in each breakout room, for one student to share their document 
(which could be in various formats), listen to the other group 
members’ opinions and take notes (draw diagrams, write text, 
etc.). Often, no student was willing to take the initiative, to 
guide the discussions or to share their own screen. In later 
classes, the instructor designated a student to be the “sharing” 
member, and this proved to be a more effective strategy of 
involving students.  
Overall, despite the initial worries that the classes would 
be less interactive than usual, the instructor believes that 
active learning was implemented to an acceptable level, 
considering the circumstances. The following year saw the 
software engineering class held online again. 
In 2021, a number of 53 students enrolled in the class - an 
increase from the first online class. Taking into account the 
fact that students often consult with their seniors on which 
classes to enroll in, a larger number of students might hint to 
the impression that the online edition was rather successful 
and the students this year were encouraged to take it. Not only 
more international students enrolled (37, from 9 different 
countries), but the number of Japanese students increased, as 
well (from 6 to 16 participants).   
The format used was very similar to the one from the 
previous year: classes were held online, synchronously, they 
were recorded and made available offline for the students. By 
now, the instructor had a better idea of what could work in an 
online setting, and she organized even more class activities. 
At the suggestion of one of the students, an online document 
was shared, with sections available for each group in the 
breakout room. This way anyone could edit the document, and 
anyone could see what other groups are working on. 
As usual, the instructor gathered feedback from the 
students with regard to the current class. At this point, 40% of 
the students stated that they preferred online classes, whereas 
almost 25% preferred face-to-face classes. Interestingly, 30% 
of the students responded that this depends on the class they 
are taking. One participant stated that “No matter what kind 
of classroom form, the activity of the classroom is very 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

important.”. Another student responded with “I think "Class 
Activity" are interesting. But I am Japanese and not good at 
English. If I could speak English very well, I would have been 
able to participate more actively.”. Moreover, “The class with 
discussion activity should be Face-to-Face.” and “Face-to-
face classes are more interactive and engaging”, supporting 
the idea that class activities may be perceived as more 
successful in a classroom setting.  
The participants were asked which format they consider 
more successful for class activities/discussions. About 43% 
considered that they are more successful if held face-to-face, 
approx. 27% stated that they are about the same, and just over 
13% believed that they are more successful if online (the 
remaining ~17% responded that they do not know).  
When asked to compare online classes with face-to-face 
classes in terms of cultural differences, almost 49% of the 
students considered that cultural differences are more visible 
in face-to-face classrooms and about 15% thought that they 
are more visible in online classes. 20% of the students found 
no difference between the two (with the remaining 16% 
stating that they do not know). Last, but not least, the students 
were asked whether they find the class activities 
useful/valuable on one hand and enjoyable on the other hand. 
The results are summarized in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
CLASS ACTIVITIES: ENJOYABLE VS. VALUABLE/USEFUL 
 
A lot 
Moderately 
A little 
Not at 
all 
Enjoyable 
24.44% 
53.33% 
20.00% 
2.22% 
Valuable/useful 
32.11% 
60.00% 
8.89% 
0% 
 
We can observe that more than three quarters of the 
students find these activities enjoyable and more than 90% 
find them valuable (either a lot or moderately). These results 
show us that, despite the cultural differences and the 
difficulties inherent to online environments, the students 
generally found the active learning implementation not only 
useful, but also rather enjoyable. The instructor’s observations 
are in line with these results: based on the impressions 
gathered in class, she felt that the course was successful and 
that the activities and discussions played an important role in 
this success. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper described the experiences of teaching an 
introductory software engineering course to a group of 
multicultural students. It highlighted the approaches used by 
the class instructor to implement active learning, both in the 
face-to-face format and the online setting. Based on the 
instructor’s observations and the feedback obtained from the 
students, it was concluded that active learning could 
successfully be carried out, despite the challenges brought 
upon by the sudden switch to an online format. In future work, 
the instructor plans to gather comprehensive feedback from 
the students and incorporate all the lessons learned in the 
previous years, to be prepared for implementing this course in 
either format necessary.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] V. M. F. Fonseca and J. Gomez, “Applying active 
methodologies for teaching software engineering in computer 
engineering”, IEEE Revista Iberoamericana de Tecnologias 
del Aprendizaje, vol. 12, no. 4, pp.182-190, 2017. 
[2] S. Sandrone, G. Scott, W. J. Anderson, and K. Musunuru, 
“Active learning-based STEM education for in-person and 
online learning”, Cell, vol. 184, no. 6, pp.1409-1414, 2021. 
[3] C. C. Bonwell and J. A. Eison, “Active Learning: Creating 
Excitement in the Classroom”, 1991 ASHE-ERIC Higher 
Education Reports. ERIC Clearinghouse on Higher Education, 
The George Washington University, 1991. 
[4] H. Mercier, M. Deguchi, J. B. Van der Henst, and H. Yama, 
“The benefits of argumentation are cross-culturally robust: The 
case of Japan”, Thinking & Reasoning, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 
2016. 
[5] S. Vasilache, “From an International Classroom to a 
Distributed Work Environment: Student Perspectives on 
Global Software Engineering”,  Proceedings of International 
Conference on Teaching and Learning for Engineering (TALE 
2018), Dec. 2018, pp. 825-828. 
[6] S. 
Vasilache, 
“Suddenly 
Online: 
Active 
Learning 
Implementation Strategies During Remote Teaching of a 
Software Engineering Course”, In: Auer M.E., Hortsch H., 
Michler O., Köhler T. (eds) Mobility for Smart Cities and 
Regional Development - Challenges for Higher Education, ICL 
2021, Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, vol 389. 
Springer, Cham, pp. 395-402, 2021. 
[7] S. Vasilache, “A Taste of Distributed Work Environments: 
Emergency 
Remote 
Teaching 
and 
Global 
Software 
Engineering”, In: Stephanidis C., Antona M., Ntoa S. (eds) 
HCI International 2021 - Posters. HCII 2021, Communications 
in Computer and Information Science, vol 1421, Springer, 
Cham, pp. 624-628, 2021. 
[8] C. Whittle, S. Tiwari, S. Yan, and J. Williams, “Emergency 
remote teaching environment: a conceptual framework for 
responsive online teaching in crises”, Information and 
Learning Sciences, 2020. 
[9] C. Hodges, S. Moore, B. Lockee, T. Trust, and A. Bond, “The 
difference between emergency remote teaching and online 
learning”, Educause review, 27, pp. 1-12, 2020. 
[10] Microsoft 
Teams 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-teams/group-
chat-software 2022.07.31 
[11] Zoom: Zoom Meetings & Chat [Online]. Available from: 
https://zoom.us/meetings 2022.07.31 
[12] Manaba [Online]. Available from: https://manaba.jp/products/ 
2022.07.31 
[13] Microsoft 
Stream 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/microsoft-
stream 2022.07.31 
[14] Ben Willmott, “The Agile Paper Airplane Game”. [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.ppm.academy/post/the-agile-
paper-airplane-game 2022.07.31
 
 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

