Australia’s National Transition Strategy: first stage implementation report  
 
Justin Brown 
School of Computer & Security 
Science 
Edith Cowan University 
Perth, Western Australia 
j.brown@ecu.edu.au 
Scott hollier 
School of Computer & Security 
Science 
Edith Cowan University 
Perth, Western Australia 
j.hollier@ecu.edu.au  
 
 
Vivienne Conway 
School of Computer & Security 
Science 
Edith Cowan University 
Perth, Western Australia 
v.conway@ecu.edu.au
 
 
Abstract—In June 2010 the Australian government introduced 
the National Transition Strategy (NTS), a mandatory 
requirement that all government websites in Australia would 
adhere to WCAG 2.0 Level A by the end of 2012 and AA by 
the end of 2014[1].  With the first deadline now past and many 
government websites remaining inaccessible, the failure of the 
NTS to date has raised questions in regards to its interagency 
support, community support and appropriateness of the NTS 
model.  This paper explores the issues around the lack of NTS 
uptake to date: the choice of model, its implementation, and 
the lessons learnt and the likelihood of ultimate success as the 
2014 deadline approaches 
Keywords- Australia, government policy, web accessibility, 
WCAG 2.0, conformance 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The introduction of the World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C) Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 1.0 
in 1999 was widely acknowledged as a significant step 
forward in the provision of online information to people with 
disabilities.  While many countries adopted the guidelines 
into their policy and legislative frameworks, Australia took a 
more ad-hoc approach.  With the release of WCAG 2.0 in 
December 2008 [2], Australia initially appeared to miss the 
importance of the web standard, with no significant changes 
to its web accessibility processes. However this changed 
significantly in 2010 when the Australian Government 
Information Management Office (AGIMO) released its 
National Transition Strategy, promising to make all Federal 
government websites WCAG 2.0 Level A compliant by the 
end of 2012, and Level AA by the end of 2014.  State 
governments and territories within Australia also made 
similar commitments.  
While the announcement was met with praise for the 
government’s approach to establishing a mandatory 
requirement on accessibility, the shift towards a uniform 
availability of accessible government information remained 
elusive.  With the first deadline now past, it is important to 
reflect on the true impact of the NTS.   In order to do so, it is 
first necessary to address the historical context of 
accessibility in Australia, the promise of the NTS, it’s 
approach compared with that of other countries and evaluate 
high usage government websites to determine the likelihood 
of the second NTS milestone being achieved. 
This paper reports in part on an ongoing research project 
which is following the NTS through its implementation 
phase, the issues that led to the perception of failure thus far, 
the methods used in testing various websites to confirm 
WCAG compliance and key insights as to how web 
accessibility in Australia can be progressed despite the 
concerns over the current approach.. 
II. 
THE PATH TO A NATIONAL APPROACH 
The primary catalyst for web accessibility being viewed 
as an important issue was the applicability of the Australian 
Disability Discrimination Act (DDA) [3] of 1992 as 
highlighted in the Maguire v Sydney Organising Committee 
for the Olympic Games (SOCOG) case.  The case revolved 
around a legally blind man named Bruce Maguire who 
required ticketing and race information for the Sydney 2000 
Olympic Games. Part of his complaint was that the 
information available on the official Olympic Games website 
was inaccessible, primarily due to the use of images without 
text descriptions.   After taking all the arguments into 
consideration, the Australian Human Rights Commission 
(HREOC) came to the conclusion that SOCOG had 
“…engaged in conduct that is unlawful under section 24 of 
the DDA…”. [4]. 
As a result of the Maguire v SOCOG ruling, government 
policy began to acknowledge and incorporate the WCAG 
standard with brief references to the accessibility of online 
information requirements in the Federal Government 
Commonwealth Disability Strategy [5], but with most web 
accessibility policies being state-based, ad-hoc and largely 
implemented in a reactionary manner when issues in a 
particular website were raised [6].   However, the 
incremental acknowledgement of the importance around web 
accessibility and the release of WCAG 2.0 raised the 
possibility a specific strategy may be launched, with a 
number of speakers discussing the merits of a WCAG 2.0 
strategy at the 2009 Gov 2.0 Roundtable on Accessibility for 
People with Disabilities [7].  The strategy was foreshadowed 
616
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

in an announcement in a media release by the Hon Lindsay 
Tanner MP in February 2010 that “Australians with 
disabilities will soon find it easier to access government 
information online” [8] with WCAG 2.0 selected as the 
policy requirements and that all government websites would 
be completed by 2015 [8]. 
III. 
THE NATIONAL TRANSITION STRATEGY (NTS) 
The NTS was formally released on 30 June 2010 and 
declared to be a mandatory requirement and a formal 
endorsement of the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(WCAG) version 2.0 for all government websites, 
superseding any policy that was previously based on WCAG 
1.0.   The formal release clarified the target dates by stating 
that all government websites must "…meet WCAG 2.0 
Level A by December 2012…" and that all agencies were 
required to "…conform to WCAG 2.0 Level AA standard by 
December 2014" [9]. 
The introduction of the NTS heralded a significant shift 
in the implementation of web accessibility in Australia.  The 
Government's Chief Information Officer, Ann Steward stated 
that the NTS "…sets a course for improved web services, 
paving the way for a more accessible and usable web 
environment that will more fully engage with, and allow 
participation from, all people within our society" [10].  The 
primary reasons as to why it was believed the NTS would 
make such a significant improvement to participation for 
people with disabilities was due to the NTS being the first 
time in Australia that a specific deadline had been set to 
implement web accessibility at a national level, that a formal 
strategy had been created and that WCAG 2.0 was 
acknowledged as the official Australian web accessibility 
standard. 
The work plan for the NTS implementation was based on 
a three-phased approach:  
 
Phase 1: Preparation - July 2010 to December 2010 
Phase 2: Transition - January 2011 to December 2011 
Phase 3: Implementation - Complete by December 2012  
                     and December 2014 
The first phase was for government agencies to take 
stock of their own websites, perform a conformance check, 
assess the website infrastructure, and assess their ability and 
risk in creating an accessible website.  Phase 2 was designed 
to focus on accessibility training, procurement reviews and 
infrastructure 
upgrades, 
while 
Phase 
3 
was 
the 
implementation phase for accessible websites.   The 
effectiveness of this approach hinged largely on the federal 
government agencies being subject to the Financial 
Management and Accountability Act [11], AGIMO will 
provide a reporting system, while agencies (those subject to 
Commonwealth Authorities and Companies Act) opting-in to 
the strategy are encouraged to report. The primary resource 
commitment given under the NTS is through the Web Guide 
[12] website with other resources to be created over time 
with the support of states and territories [1]. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION PHASE OUTCOMES THUS FAR 
Phase three of the NTS required implementation of the 
strategy in two parts, the first being the attainment of WCAG 
2.0 Level A by the end of 2012 and then Level AA by the 
end of 2014.  The initial research detailed in this paper 
indicates that the first stage of Phase three has not seen the 
NTS meet all of its accessibility goals. 
The testing methodology included manual expert 
evaluation together with the use of three automated 
assessment tools, SortSite by PowerMapper [13], the Web 
Accessibility Toolbar (WAT) by the Paciello Group [14], 
and the WAVE extension for Mozilla Firefox by WebAIM 
[7].  SortSite was used to sample 2000 pages per site, while 
both the WAT and WAVE tools were used in conjunction 
with the manual expert assessments.  The manual evaluation 
included 5 pages per site, typically being the homepage, 
contact us page, media pages and any pages featuring 
primary site information.  It should be noted that there is 
some discrepancy between the manual testing and the 
automated testing results.  The manual testing involved the 5 
pages as stated and evaluated these pages against all WCAG 
2.0 criteria.  The automated testing while scheduled to check 
2000 pages is unable, due to the nature and limitations of 
automated testing, to test more than about 35% of the 
guidelines effectively [5]. The automated tools were also 
used to test the 5 pages tested manually to verify and cross-
check results. 
Table 1 lists the largest of Australia’s federal government 
websites and their level of conformance to the first stage of 
the NTS implementation phase (as of end 2012). 
 
TABLE 1: WCAG 2 LEVEL A CONFORMANCE FOR AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL 
GOVERNMENT AGENCY WEBSITES 
Organization 
WCAG 2.0 Level A 
Pass 
Prime Minister's home page 
No 
Australian Government entry page 
No 
Department of Health & Aging 
No 
Australian Government Information 
Management Office (AGIMO) 
Yes 
Centrelink (now in Human Services) 
No 
Department of Education, Employment 
and Workplace Relations 
yes (borderline) 
Department of Immigration and 
Citizenship 
no 
Department of Infrastructure and 
Transport 
Yes (borderline) 
Australian Human Rights Commission 
No 
Australian Taxation Office 
No 
Employment services 
No 
Australian Job Search  
No (borderline) 
ABC Television (principally funded by 
federal government) 
No 
SBS Television (principally funded by 
federal government) 
No 
617
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Medicare (now in Human Services) 
No 
Department of Finance (replacing 
AGIMO) 
Yes 
Department of Human Services (new site 
encompassing Centrelink, Medicare & 
Child Support) 
No 
Department of the Attorney-General 
No 
Department of Families, Housing, 
Community Services and Indigenous 
Affairs 
Yes 
Department of Broadband, 
Communications and the Digital 
Economy 
No 
 
Table 1 shows that only three sites actually passed the 
manual testing unequivocally, which is to be expected given 
that two of those websites belonged to the Australian 
Government Information Management Office, the owner of 
the NTS.  The Department of Finance site is directly linked 
to AGIMO so is essentially run under the same structure. 
The third site which met WCAG 2.0 in the manual testing is 
that of the Department of Families, Housing Community 
Services and Indigenous Affairs which is one of the agencies 
in the reference group which was established to monitor 
progress.  It is interesting to note that the Attorney-General’s 
Department, and Department of Broadband are also in that 
reference group but whose websites did not pass WCAG 2.0 
according to our testing.  Two other departments have been 
defined as passing (with a borderline qualifier) as they had 
one or two issues which while a breach of the Level A 
guidelines, did not impact on site usability.  One other site 
was a borderline fail, with some small issues that did impact 
on usability but would require minimal adjustments to 
achieve Level A.  The organizations in Table 1 represent 
only a small selection of all the organizations which come 
under the mandate of the NTS on a national scale, however 
these are the mainline federal organizations and those which 
provide the most relevant test case for the NTS thus far.  
Mostly, they have the biggest budgets, the most staff and are 
the organizations that provide services and oversight to other 
federal and state entities. 
While Table 1 provides a pass/fail evaluation for the 
websites examined according to WCAG 2.0, it should be 
kept in mind that this does not take into account the severity 
of the issues located, their frequency, or an analysis of the 
impact barrier upon people with disabilities.   However, the 
NTS requires compliance with WCAG 2.0 to Level A by this 
time and does not allow for these additional criteria. Space 
restrictions within this paper mean the presentation of deeper 
analysis of automated and manual assessments is not 
possible here, though future publications of this research 
project will present such detail 
V. 
DRIVERS FOR LEVEL A FAILURE 
Looking at these representative Australian government 
agencies, what are some of the issues that have impacted on 
the lack of success of the NTS in the first part of it’s 
implementation phase?  Whilst this paper is not looking to 
cast a final judgment on the evolving NTS implementation, it 
does appear that whilst the NTS has lofty goals, it is lacking 
in specific details in terms of how to actually put web 
accessibility into practice, and how to assess it afterwards. 
A. ASSIGNMENT OF RESPONSIBILITY 
Perhaps one of the most glaring omissions in the NTS 
mandate is that of assignment of responsibility for 
implementation of each of the phases.  The NTS 
documentation only ever refers to ‘the Agency’ or ‘an 
Agency’ but never to a specific role within these agencies, 
such as Chief Information Officer (CIO) or Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO).  In comparison, the Canadian government’s 
Standard on Web Accessibility names Senior Department 
Officials (SDO’s) and CIO’s [15] as being responsible for 
the implementation of their accessibility implementation.  
Under the U.S. Section 508, which links accessibility to 
government procurement, Chief Acquisition Officers and 
Chief Information Officers [16] are amongst those named as 
roles responsible for applying the requirements of the 
policy. 
Information 
obtained 
from 
Australian 
federal 
government agencies in September 2011 as part of this 
research indicates that all of the agencies in this group have 
an individual who has responsibility for the accessibility of 
the website.  However this does not explain the actual 
portion of a person’s workload directly related to website 
accessibility.  Survey data infers that the responsibility is 
often a small part of an incumbent’s overall employment 
duties. Further information obtained in November 2012 
shows that the number of agencies which have staff 
dedicated to the accessibility function has declined to the 
extent that one of the agencies identifies as not having 
anyone in the role and another is unsure.  Whilst it might be 
'everyone’s' task to see that accessibility is applied at all 
levels of an organization, surely a senior role (ie CIO) needs 
to be named as being ultimately responsible [17]. 
One agency expressed the opinion that the website 
accessibility compliance is not the responsibility of just one 
individual but is built into the requirements, development 
and review process.  As stated above when discussing roles, 
this may account for some confusion as to responsibility.  If 
everyone is jointly responsible, then who is accountable 
when a website fails compliance? 
While it would appear that Federal government agencies 
are working on improving the accessibility of their websites, 
it is apparent that there is much work still remaining.  Some 
agencies have commented that they are aware they have not 
met the WCAG 2.0 A compliance deadline of December 31, 
2012 deadline, but have decided just to continue to work 
toward WCAG 2.0 AA by December 2014.  Due to the 
proximity of that deadline, it leads to the question of what, 
if anything will happen if they also fail to meet that 
timeline. 
Some agencies state they are planning re-development of 
their website and that this re-development will address 
accessibility concerns. This would reinforce the common 
618
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

feeling in web development circles that it is easier and more 
cost-effective to re-design a website keeping accessibility in 
mind than to retrofit an existing site. 
B. AUDITING METHODS AND TOOLS 
The NTS documentation seems unclear in Phase three, 
Implementation, as to whether all sites need to be assessed 
upon reaching the 2012 deadline for single A compliance 
and then again in 2014 for double A compliance.  The NTS 
Work Plan site [18] would seem to indicate that final 
compliance reports are to be completed at the end of the 
2014 period.  It seems that a compliance report at the end of 
2012 would have provided agencies and the government as 
a whole with a useful 'dry run' of the final report due in 
2014, perhaps highlighting issues in audit processes, 
methods and tools.  The issue of auditing methods and tools 
is also a critical one, in that the NTS does not specify any 
particular method or tool beyond stating that "AGIMO will 
investigate whole-of-government automated conformance 
testing tools. It must be borne in mind, however, that 
automated testing tools can only interpret a limited range of 
criteria [5], which means that human judgment will also be 
needed in carrying out the tests. This will require staff 
skilled in web accessibility who can understand and apply 
the guidelines" [18].The Australian government's Web 
Guide is a little more specific in that it specifies that it is 
acceptable for most sites to test approximately 10% of their 
site (in terms of pages) and the sorts of items which should 
be tested, including home pages, contact details, feedback 
forms, search forms, online media and complete end-to-end 
process [19].  The Web Accessibility National Transition 
Strategy: Work Plan site appears to contradict this figure, 
stating that agencies "must ensure each web page meets 
WCAG 2.0 conformance requirements" [18].  Does this 
imply each page of those selected for assessment (say 10% 
of the site) or all pages in the site?  It is this type of 
ambiguity, along with the somewhat loose language of the 
NTS and Web Guide documentation that allows for liberal 
interpretations of how agencies may perform their 
conformance reports.  Terms such as 'At the very least', 'It is 
generally acceptable', 'Agencies may like to consider' and 
'agencies are encouraged to complete' provide wriggle room 
for those agencies looking to take a minimalist approach to 
their accessibility commitments, at least in the short term.  
Whilst it may be expected that most agencies will do their 
best to implement the tenets of the NTS, the language of the 
documentation does not commit them to achieving the 
outcome but rather attempting to do so. 
Survey results obtained from agencies about how they 
evaluate their websites provides further evidence about the 
confusion in evaluation and reporting.  Some agencies have 
daily conformance checks for all new material, others state 
that they do not do any internal or external evaluation of the 
bnwebsite, with the rest falling somewhere in between. 
C. INABILITY TO ENFORCE COMPLIANCE 
Perhaps the most obvious issue with the NTS as it 
currently stands is its lack of enforceability.  None of the 
NTS related documentation suggests any kind of penalty or 
censure for government web sites that do not achieve 
WCAG 2.0 AA compliance by the end of 2014. The 
Australia government's Web Guide indicates that once a 
federal site passes all the WCAG 2.0 AA success criteria it 
may use statements of conformance indicating they have 
met the 'five conformance statements of the WCAG 2.0'.  
Sites may also apply statements of 'partial conformance', 
such as where the site is heavily dependent on 3rd party 
providers who are not controlled by the agency or who do 
not come under the remit of the NTS.  The final statement of 
the Web Guide in terms of conformance is that "where 
possible, agencies should aim to address accessibility issues 
as they occur" [19]. 
As far as available NTS documentation stands as of 
early 2013, the reward for an organization meeting NTS 
requirements is the ability to make statements of full or 
partial conformance against the NTS on their website.  The 
apparent penalty for non-conformance is NOT being able to 
make such public statements.  Whilst most federal agencies 
would relish the social capital and sense of achievement that 
would come from attaining NTS compliance, how this 
would be weighed against the time, money and ongoing 
effort such compliance would take remains to be seen [20]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has demonstrated that there are some key 
issues relating to Australia's National Transition Strategy 
that need to be addressed in order for people with 
disabilities to effectively use government websites. While 
the NTS has completed the first of two stages in its 
Implementation phase, an evaluation of essential federal 
sites within Australia has shown that, while the NTS has 
had a positive impact in progressing some accessibility 
awareness, it has yet to gain widespread traction within the 
government's web space.   While it is commendable that 
Australia has taken a national approach in making 
government 
websites 
accessible 
and 
set 
specific 
accessibility targets unlike some other comparable countries 
[21]. However, the poor results of the first stage of the NTS 
implementation is largely attributable to a lack of resourcing  
and the need for a greater focus on consistent methods and 
toolsets [22]. 
The NTS provides the Australian government and the 
Australian population with the opportunity to proactively 
deal with the issue of equality of access for all things web.  
If this opportunity is squandered, digital citizens will 
continue to pursue their right to access online content and 
services through litigation and human rights avenues.  
Hopefully, the NTS and more than a decade of technical and 
policy development will obviate the need for further 
Maguire like cases to achieve web accessibility in Australia 
 
619
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

REFERENCES 
 
[1] [1] Australian Government Information Management Office 
(AGIMO) Australian Government web accessibility national 
transition strategy. City, 2010. 
[2] [2] W3C Web Content Advisory Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. 
W3C, City, 2008. 
[3] [3] Australian Human Rights Commission D.D.A. guide: who 
does the D.D.A. protect? Australian Human Rights 
Commission, City. 
[4] [4] W3C Web content accessibility guidelines (WCAG) 2.0. 
City, 2008. 
[5] [5] Vigo, M., Brown, J. and Conway, V. Benchmarkng web 
accessibility evaluation tools: measuring the harm of sole 
reliance on automated tests. In Proceedings of the W4A 2013 
colocated with 22nd International World Wide Web 
Conference (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, May 13-15, 2013, 2013). 
ACM, 
[insert 
City 
of 
Publication],[insert 
2013 
of 
Publication].  
[6] [6] Australian Government Web Guide: Accessibility. City, 
2011. 
[7] [7] WebAIM WAVE Toolbar 1.1.6. City. 
[8] [8] Tanner, L. H. M. and Shorten, B. H. M. Dealing with 
government online to become easier for Australians with 
disabilities. Minister for Finance and Deregulation and 
Parliamentary 
Secretary 
for 
Disabilities, 
Australian 
Government, City, 2010. 
[9] [9] Government, A. Web Guide : Accessibility. City, 2011. 
[10] [10] Australia, M. A. Top 12 of 2012 #3 - The National 
Transition Strategy. Media Access Australia, City, 2012. 
[11] [11] Deregulation, D. o. F. a. Financial Management and 
Accountability Act 1997 (FMA Act) Agencies. Department of 
Finance and Deregulation, City, 2012. 
[12] [12] Government, A. Web Guide. City, 2013. 
[13] [13] Powermapper software SortSite-Professional Edition. 
City, 2010. 
[14] [14] Paciello Group Web Accessibility Toolbar for IE, 2012. 
Paciello Group, City, 2012. 
[15] [15] Secretariat, T. B. o. C. Standard on Web Accessibility. 
City, 2011. 
[16] [16] Administration, U. S. G. S. GSA Agency Roles and 
Responsibilities. City, 2012. 
[17] [17] Bakhsh, M. and Mehmood, A. Web Accessibility for 
Disabled: A Case Study of Government Websites in Pakistan. 
In Proceedings of the Frontiers of Information Technology 
(FIT), 2012 10th International Conference on (17-19 Dec, 
2012), 
[insert 
City 
of 
Publication],[insert 
2012 
of 
Publication].  
[18] [18] Deregulation, D. o. F. a. Web Accessibility National 
Transition Strategy : Work Plan. City, 2010. 
[19] [19] Government, A. Accessibility Conformance Testing. 
City, 2010. 
[20] [20] Leitner, M. L., Hartjes, R. and Strauss, C. Web 
Accessibility Issues for the Distributed and Interworked 
Enterprise Portals. In Proceedings of the Parallel Processing 
Workshops, 2009. ICPPW '09. International Conference on. 
(Sept, 2009, 2009), [insert City of Publication],[insert 2009 of 
Publication].  
[21] [21] Independent Hospital Pricing Authority. City, 2012. 
[22] [22] Perrenoud, C. and Phan, K. Emergence of web 
technology: An implementation of web accessibility design in 
organizations. In Proceedings of the Technology Management 
for Emerging Technologies (PICMET), 2012 Proceedings of 
PICMET '12 (July 29 - Aug 2., 2012), [insert City of 
Publication],[insert 
2012 
of 
Publication].
 
 
 
620
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

