Implementing Service Design Methods and Tools into Software Development 
A case study: Service Design sprint 
 
Jemina Luodemäki, Jouni Similä, Hannu Salmela 
Department of Management and Entrepreneurship 
Turku School of Economics, University of Turku 
Turku, Finland 
Email: jemina.m.luodemaki@utu.fi, jouni.simila@utu.fi, hannu.salmela@utu.fi 
 
 
Abstract— Service Design is a comprehensive and collaborative 
design approach for creating value for all stakeholders. Service 
Design includes several methods and tools for the improvement 
of a new or an existing service. The implementation of Service 
Design into software development has been only partially 
studied. Likewise, research regarding the benefits and 
challenges concerning the utilization of Service Design precisely 
in software development is rather deficient. The aim of this 
study was to experiment applying Service Design methods and 
tools into software development through a pilot project carried 
out in a Finnish software development company. This research 
presents possible benefits and challenges that implementing 
Service Design into software development may have. In 
addition, critical factors to be considered while implementing 
Service Design are proposed. 
Keywords-service design; agile software development; SaaS; 
design sprint. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
     Nowadays, all companies are involved in the software 
business either directly or indirectly. Software affects all 
industries and can be seen as the main driver for innovation 
[1]. Software development teams often experience pressure 
to keep up with the dynamic business environment and 
continuously changing customer requirements. The success 
of a product or service is determined by the created customer 
value and therefore software development teams constantly 
aim to create and develop innovative features to provide 
added value for the customer [2]. Customer participation and 
active involvement throughout the software development 
process are key factors to ensure focusing on the correct 
matters and consequently creating customer satisfaction. 
However, there are often several layers of people and 
processes between the end-users and the software 
development team, which complicates the user involvement. 
Service Design offers methods to bridge the gap between 
developers and users [3]. 
     Service Design is a comprehensive and collaborative 
design approach for creating value for all stakeholders. In 
Service Design the creation of value is not limited to the end-
user or customer but includes creating added value 
throughout the process. Therefore, Service Design can be 
utilized for Business-to-Business (B2B), as well as for 
internal services or public services [4]. Service Design 
includes several methods and tools for the improvement of a 
new or an existing service. Service Design has been studied 
widely in the field of creating new products and services [5] 
[6]. The implementation of Service Design into software 
development has been only partially studied. Likewise, 
research regarding the benefits and challenges concerning the 
utilization of Service Design precisely in software 
development is rather deficient.  
      The aim of this research was to experiment applying 
Service Design methods and tools into software development 
through a pilot project carried out in a small Finnish software 
development company, referred to as Company X. The 
company follows the principles of agile software 
development and provides Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) for 
human resource management. This research presents possible 
benefits and challenges that implementing Service Design 
into software development may have. In addition, critical 
factors to be considered while implementing Service Design 
are proposed. The field of research is relevant, because 
Service Design has been a ponderable subject during the past 
years, but it has not yet been studied as widely in software 
development as in many other fields. 
    The main research questions are: 
RQ1: How can Service Design methods and tools be 
implemented into internal processes in B2B software 
development? 
RQ2: What are the benefits, challenges and critical factors 
when implementing Service Design methods and tools into 
software development? 
    The key findings of this research consist of suggested 
factors to be considered while implementing Service Design 
into internal processes in B2B software development and an 
aggregation of the benefits, challenges and critical factors of 
implementing Service Design into software development. 
     The paper is initiated with Section 1 including the 
introduction. This is followed by Section 2, which describes 
background and related work around the subject. In Section 
3 the empirical research design is presented, and this is 
followed by Section 4 and the introduction to the actual case 
study: the Service Design sprint. In Section 5 results and 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

discussion are presented. Lastly, Section 6 combines the 
conclusions of the research. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
A. Service Design 
     In this research, Service Design means a holistic and 
collaborative approach to create value for the service user as 
well as the service provider [7]. The Service Design approach 
includes multiple tools and methods for different phases of 
the 
development 
process 
to 
enable 
comprehensive 
understanding of user emotions and motivations for all 
stakeholders [8]. In the context of this research Service 
Design has an outside-in aspect on the development of 
services and the emphasis is especially on applying different 
design methods and techniques to the design process of 
services [9]. Service Design combines different methods and 
approaches that have been utilized before [10]. 
     Service Design highlights the fact that value is co-created 
between the customer and the service provider. This is not 
similarly emphasized in other design approaches like 
participatory design [11] or digital interaction design [12]. 
Even though, the term “service” is common in both of the 
above-mentioned, the center of attention does not exceed the 
customer experience beyond the user experience or use 
experience outside of the service touchpoints. In a way, 
Service Design has been able to revive other design 
approaches [13]. 
B. Implementing Service Design 
     In order to successfully implement Service Design 
methods and tools to the software development processes of a 
company, it is crucial to recognize all the people involved in 
the required changes, both internally and externally. The 
implementation of Service Design may require change 
management. Junginger & Sangiorgi [14] present a 
framework for the link between organizational change and 
Service Design based on their findings in their research. They 
found four similarities in their case studies regarding the link 
between organizational change and Service Design.  
     Firstly, Service Design often begins at the organizational 
periphery, which means that the marginal location where 
Service Design work is first started might limit the 
interference in the daily operations. Secondly, building trust 
relationships for change between the Service Design team and 
stakeholders was recognized as a similarity. A collaborative, 
flexible and transparent approach as well as generating 
interest were in a key role when building trust relationships. 
The third similarity was developing transformative insights 
into the values, norms, assumptions and behaviors of the 
organization in order to build trust, stimulate interest and co-
create a new vision. Lastly, pilot projects as a seed for change 
were recognized in both case studies. Pilot projects can have 
an essential role in opening the way for transformative 
changes as they can help designers make behavioral values, 
norms and patterns tangible.  
    As a conclusion from the framework research Junginger 
and Sangiorgi [14] state that Service Design is still an 
emergent discipline based mainly on informal and tacit 
knowledge. Applying this framework into a wide range of 
contexts is suggested as a future research focus in the paper. 
This research puts the theoretical framework by Junginger and 
Sangiorgi [14] into context and further studies how it can be 
utilized in B2B software development. 
C. Service Design and agile software development 
     This research has a focus on how agile software 
development affects the implementation of Service Design 
methods. Therefore, the principles of agile software 
development will be compared to the principles of Service 
Design and similarities and differences will be pointed out. 
Following agile methods in software development means the 
ability to adapt to change. Environments and requirements 
change continuously, and agile methods aim to respond to the 
changes by being iterative, incremental and cooperative [15]. 
Agile methods are people-centric and strive to recognize the 
value that proficient people and their relationships bring to 
software development. Improving customer satisfaction 
through cooperation and involving customers and other 
important stakeholders are also in a key role while following 
agile methods. The organizations ability to emphasize 
learning, self-organization and teamwork has a notable 
impact on the created value [16]. 
     Customer involvement is one of the key benefits that 
adopting agile methods brings. Satisfaction with the product 
has increased among both customers and developers after 
following agile software development methods [17]. 
Building successful software products and services requires 
understanding customers’ requirements and involving them 
throughout the development process. Customer involvement 
refers to different ways of active participation by the 
customer or the end-user in the software development process 
with different interactive techniques [18]. 
     Customer collaboration is a key principle also in Service 
Design. The new principles of Service Design by Stickdorn 
et al. [4] include human-centered and collaborative as key 
aspects when applying Service Design. Involving customers 
to the design process can be carried out by organizing 
workshops with the customers and utilizing different design 
tasks and tools like prototyping in the workshops. Service 
Design approaches based on collaborative workshops have 
enabled applying Service Design as an abbreviated, but 
efficient design sprint as a pre-development phase in agile 
software development [3]. 
     Applying Service Design methods into an agile Scrum 
process as sprints may support the service provider to 
recognize the correct small tasks for delivering a better 
Minimum Viable Product (MVP) for the customer [3]. This 
again enhances the basic principles of agile software 
development as early and frequent deliveries are emphasized 
in several definitions of agile software development [19]. 
Table 1 presents principles of agile software development 
and Service Design that have the most resemblance. 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE I.  
RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN AGILE AND SERVICE DESIGN 
PRINCIPLES 
Agile principle 
Definition 
Service 
Design 
principle 
Definition 
Collaboration 
Business 
people should 
work with 
developers 
throughout the 
project on a 
daily basis. 
Collaborative 
Stakeholders 
from different 
backgrounds 
should be 
involved 
throughout the 
service design 
sprocess. 
Motivated 
individuals, 
good 
environment, 
support & trust 
Projects 
should be 
built in a 
supporting 
environment 
and around 
motivated  
individuals. 
Human-
centered 
Highlights the  
importance of 
involving all 
the people 
affected by 
the service. 
Customer 
satisfaction, 
continuous 
delivery, value 
Satisfying the 
customer 
with early 
and 
continuous 
delivery of 
valuable  
software. 
Holistic 
Services 
should 
address the 
needs of all 
stakeholders 
across the  
business. 
Sustainability, 
people 
Promoting 
sustainable  
development. 
Sponsors, 
developers 
and users 
should 
maintain an  
ongoing pace. 
Iterative 
An 
experimental,  
adaptable and 
continual 
approach, 
iterating  
towards 
implemen-
tation. 
Adaptability, 
competitiveness 
Taking 
changing  
requirements 
into  
account. 
Sequential 
Taking 
interrelated  
actions into 
account. 
 
     The principles of Agile and Service Design have 
similarities, which can support applying Service Design 
methods into the software development process of an 
organization following agile methods. Both principles 
highlight the importance of collaboration between different 
stakeholders, involving all relevant people as well as 
sustainable and iterative development. These similarities can 
create synergistic effects when following both agile and 
Service Design principles. However, Service Design and 
agility have also slight differences, for example when 
considering the focus of the approaches in a bigger picture. 
Even though both approaches are user-centric agile has more 
focus on early delivery of valuable software to the customer, 
whereas Service Design highlights understanding the services 
from the customer perspective, but also the importance of 
creating value through the entire development process for all 
stakeholders. 
     On the other hand, when comparing Service Design to 
traditional software development models, such as the 
waterfall model, the benefits of Service Design stand out more 
clearly. In the waterfall model progress is seen flowing 
steadily downwards like a waterfall and changes during the 
design phase should be avoided. It is a linear model, where 
each step of the process is frozen before moving on to the next 
one, and changes to the requirements will not be considered in 
later phases [20]. These are opposite to many Service Design 
principles such as continuous iteration, adaptiveness and 
involving stakeholders throughout the design process. 
III. 
EMPIRICAL RESEARCH DESIGN 
     The research was composed with an action research 
approach, which included several data collection methods. 
Action research is a methodology that aims to support 
organizational learning to develop practical outcomes. In the 
end of the 1990’s the importance and popularity of action 
research in information systems increased notably. One basic 
principle in action research is that the best way of studying 
complex social processes is changing these processes and 
observing the results and effects of the implemented changes 
[21]. 
     Frequently, action research uses several different methods 
for the collection of data. Using multiple methods like analysis 
of relevant documents, in depth interviews and participative 
socio-technical design concurrently is encouraged. Similar 
methods are also utilized in Service Design and therefore the 
two approaches support each other. Service Design tools and 
methods are in line with qualitative research methods as both 
are holistic processes that require participation in a real-life 
setting. As action research focuses on organizational learning 
through problem solving together with Service Design tools 
and methods it can provide a comprehensive way of collecting 
data [22]. The data was mainly collected through a focus 
group interview, semi-structured interviews, a questionnaire 
survey and the actual case study: The Service Design sprint. 
Due to the global pandemic regarding Covid-19 the Service 
Design sprint had to be held remotely, contrary to the original 
plan. The remote implementation brought its own challenges 
to the planning phase, but also enhanced the efficiency of the 
workshops held during the sprint. 
The trustworthiness of this research will be evaluated 
through four aspects: credibility, transferability, dependability 
and conformability [23]. In doing so, it should be taken into 
account that the researcher is part of the organization where 
the case study was carried out. The role of the researcher in 
the Service Design sprint was the role of a project manager. 
The researcher was responsible of the process in its entirety, 
including the scope, budget, deadlines and reporting. This 
may affect the objectiveness of the results to some point, but 
precautions were taken to ensure the objectiveness. The 
researcher did not facilitate or lead the sessions and 
workshops during the actual case study to ensure as objective 
results as possible and to make sure that the workshops were 
not even accidentally directed to a desired direction from the 
researcher point of view. 
     The credibility of this research is desirable as the empirical 
material is rather inclusive and based on the empirical results 
another person could end up with the same findings and 
conclusions. The transferability of the research is reliable as 
the research is grounded on similar previous research. The 
results are examined in comparison to the findings of these 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

previous studies, and similar findings from previous research 
are presented. Dependability is ensured by following a logical 
research process and carefully documenting each phase of the 
process. In addition, the conformability of the research is 
ensured by presenting logical links between the results and 
conclusions. 
IV. 
THE SERVICE DESIGN SPRINT 
     The structure of the Service Design sprint was combined 
from different approaches and frameworks and further 
modified to best fit the needs of Company X. The structure 
of the Service Design sprint was mainly formed based on the 
idea of the Design Sprint developed at Google Ventures, the 
Double Diamond model [24] designed by the Design Council 
and the three-day Service Design session presented by 
Stickdorn [4]. The final version of the Service Design sprint 
held in Company X was basically a combination of an 
internal design sprint and a co-creative workshop with the 
customers. The sprint was held as a pre-development phase 
of the agile software development process. 
     As discovered by Junginger & Sangiorgi [14] pilot 
projects can have an essential role in successful 
organizational change. Stickdorn et al. [4] also propose 
starting with small Service Design projects as these can be 
used to modify the Service Design process as well as the 
company’s structures and culture. Therefore, a pilot project 
was carried out in Company X, to demonstrate and explore 
the benefits, challenges and critical factors that applying 
Service Design has in software development. 
     Service Design has not been applied to internal processes 
in Company X before this case. However, several different 
design methods such as user stories and prototyping have 
been utilized in the software development process already 
previously. Thus, it was also mutually agreed in Company X 
that the company would benefit more of examining the use of 
the Service Design methods and tools during the research and 
ideation phase, than in the prototyping and implementation 
phase. Hence, the Service Design sprint will focus on the first 
diamond of the Double Diamond model, which includes the 
phases discover and define. 
     The selected Service Design methods and tools for the 
remote implementation of the Service Design sprint include 
the following methods and tools: desk research, semi-
structured interviews, developing key insights, mapping key 
findings, 5 x Why’s?, voting and prioritization methods, 
“How might we..?” questions, brainwriting, brainstorming, 
mindmapping, feature planning, mapping features, idea 
portfolio, personas, user stories, wireframing, prototyping, 
warm-ups as check-in methods, feeling canvases as check-out 
methods and compiling research reports. The methods and 
tools were utilized during pre-sprint research, the actual three-
day Service Design sprint and post-sprint debriefing.  
     See Figure 1 for the structure of the remote version of the 
Service Design sprint. The Service Design sprint was 
experimented as a pre-development phase of the agile 
software development process of Company X. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
     The results of the action research cycle are compared to 
previous research on the field. The findings of this research 
support some of the previous findings, but also differences 
and additional factors were identified during this research. 
 
Figure 1. Structure of the remote Service Design sprint 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The key findings and the discussion with previous research 
will be presented under three aspects based on the benefits, 
challenges and critical factors of implementing Service 
Design into software development. Each subchapter will be 
approached with the support of a table to present the key 
findings regarding the aspect in question. 
A. Identified benefits 
     The benefits of Service Design that have been identified 
in previous literature regarding software development [2] 
include 
improved 
communication, 
instant 
feedback, 
increased motivation and innovation, mindset change, 
learning 
and 
decision 
making, 
identification 
and 
prioritization of features or potential market segments and 
value creation. The research done by Sauvola et al. [3] 
focused on experimenting the prototyping methods of 
Service Design whereas this research had the focus on 
research and ideation methods. However, several similar 
benefits that Sauvola et al. [3] have identified previously can 
be recognized based on this research. For example, improved 
internal motivation, delivering added value to the customer 
and improving the understanding of the customer and typical 
use cases of the software were identified based on the 
empirical research and are reminiscent to the benefits 
identified by Sauvola et al. [3].  Based on this research, the 
identified benefits that implementing Service Design can 
bring for software development are listed outright in Table 2 
below. 
TABLE II.  
IDENTIFIED BENEFITS 
Key findings 
– benefits 
Provided empirical  
support 
Related findings  
in previous studies 
Improved internal  
motivation 
Focus group interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018) 
Improved 
understanding of the 
customer and typical 
use cases of the 
software 
Focus group interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018), 
Furrer et al. (2018) 
Identifying the 
actual needs and 
challenges of the 
customer 
Focus group interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018), 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018) 
Efficient resource  
allocation 
Focus group interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018), 
García et al. 
(2013), 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018) 
Delivering added 
value to the 
customer 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018), 
Furrer et al. (2016) 
Improved customer  
satisfaction 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Participant observation, 
Questionnaire survey 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018), 
Furrer et al. (2018) 
B. Identified challenges 
     The identified challenges of Sauvola et al. [2] differ partly 
with the ones identified during this research. This may be due 
to the difference between the utilized Service Design methods. 
However, one similar challenge was discovered in this 
research regarding the finding of Sauvola et al. [2] concerning 
stakeholder availability. In this research, the related identified 
challenges are commitment, selling Service Design as a 
concept to the customers and involving the relevant people to 
the process. Moreover, another discovered challenge of this 
research is that prototyping methods are difficult to execute in 
a workshop context remotely. In further iterations, as 
prototyping methods are also experimented within the 
workshops, the findings can be more profoundly compared to 
the previous findings of Sauvola et al. [2]. The possible 
challenges outright identified during this research, and that 
can be faced while implementing Service Design to software 
development, are listed in Table 3. 
TABLE III.  
IDENTIFIED CHALLENGES 
Key findings 
– challenges 
Provided empirical  
support 
Related findings  
in previous studies 
Lack of time 
Focus group 
interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018) 
Commitment 
Focus group 
interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018), 
Junginger & 
Sangiorgi (2009) 
Internal assumptions 
Focus group 
interview, 
Participant 
observation, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
Junginger & 
Sangiorgi (2009) 
Selling Service Design 
as a concept to the  
customers 
Focus group 
interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018) 
Involving the relevant  
people to the process 
Focus group 
interview, 
Participant 
observation, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018), 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018) 
Prototyping methods 
in remote  
workshops 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
 
Implementing  
Service Design as  
an ongoing activity 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
Junginger & 
Sangiorgi (2009) 
C. Identified critical factors 
     The most important critical factor when implementing 
Service Design to an organization can be perceived as 
carrying out a pilot project. In order to achieve the above-
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

mentioned benefits and avoid recognized challenges, this 
research suggests taking into account the following critical 
factors when implementing Service Design into an 
organization. The critical factors are proposed to be 
considered when planning and executing a pilot project for 
implementing Service Design to an organization. The critical 
factors identified by this research are listed in Table 4. 
TABLE IV.  
IDENTIFIED CRITICAL FACTORS 
Key findings 
– critical factors 
Provided empirical  
support 
Related findings  
in previous studies 
Pilot project 
Focus group 
interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
Junginger & 
Sangiorgi (2009), 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018) 
Encompassing  
and detailed  
preparation 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
Sauvola et al. 
(2018) 
Discovering  
suitable  
Service Design  
methods and tools 
Focus group 
interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018) 
Scoping the sprint  
challenge 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Questionnaire survey 
 
Focusing on  
appropriate  
challenges 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
 
Finding a “light-
weight” solution 
Focus group 
interview, 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018) 
Providing concrete 
results and findings 
Case: Service Design 
sprint, Questionnaire 
survey 
Stickdorn et al. 
(2018) 
Taking into account 
the possible impacts of 
a remote  
implementation 
 
Case: Service Design 
sprint 
 
 
     The findings of the empirical research of this study 
support the above-mentioned critical factors. Similar factors 
have been highlighted in previous literature [4][14] regarding 
Service Design as well. However, this research presents the 
critical findings in respect of software development and 
hence supports the corresponding findings of Sauvola et al. 
[2]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
     The first research question “How can Service Design 
methods and tools be implemented into internal processes in 
B2B software development?” was addressed by mapping out 
a suitable way of experimenting the implementation of 
Service Design to the case company. The research question 
was first approached with the focus group interview in order 
to acquire understanding of the assumptions and knowledge 
that the employees of Company X had related to Service 
Design. The results of the focus group interview disclosed 
that employees of Company X saw potential benefits 
regarding Service Design such as improving internal 
motivation and understanding the customer more profoundly. 
However, employees were simultaneously concerned of the 
lack of time and commitment regarding both internal and 
external stakeholders. The factors that were highlighted in the 
focus group interview were taken into account while planning 
the pilot project for implementing Service Design methods 
and tools in Company X. 
     The Service Design sprint was created based on the 
knowledge gained from previous literature as well as utilizing 
the know-how of the employees of Company X. On the 
grounds of the research process it was discovered that 
implementing Service Design methods and tools into internal 
processes requires Service Design to be considered as an 
ongoing activity in the organization. This means that in order 
to embed Service Design to the organization permanently 
further Service Design iterations are required. The Service 
Design activities should be continuously improved and 
modified if needed to achieve even better results.  
     It can be stated that a carefully planned pilot project is in 
a key role when implementing Service Design into B2B 
software development. Regarding the second research 
question it can be concluded that Service Design can be 
implemented to B2B software development through a pilot 
project, for example a Service Design sprint, which involves 
both internal and external stakeholders. Moreover, it was 
experimented that a compact Service Design sprint can be 
used as a pre-development phase in agile software 
development. In addition, to be able to carry out a successful 
Service Design pilot project it is crucial to communicate the 
objectives of the pilot project as well as the results and 
findings to all stakeholders. 
     The second research question “What are the benefits, 
challenges and critical factors when implementing Service 
Design methods and tools into software development?” was 
first addressed through the focus group interview by initially 
mapping out the benefits, challenges and critical factors that 
employees of Company X saw possible regarding the 
implementation of Service Design. These findings were then 
taken into account while planning action and creating the 
pilot project which was based on the three-day Service 
Design sprint. Lastly, the final results of the pilot project were 
mirrored and compared to the previous findings of the focus 
group interview while evaluating and specifying learning. 
     Regarding the second research question it can be 
concluded that the possible benefits of Service Design in 
software development include improved internal motivation, 
improving understanding of the customer and typical use 
cases of the software, identifying the actual needs and 
challenges of the customer, efficient resource allocation, 
delivering added value to the customer and improved 
customer satisfaction. Furthermore, achieving all these 
benefits while utilizing Service Design can simultaneously 
assist the organization in finding a common language 
between different teams and stakeholders. On the other hand, 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

the possible challenges that may be faced when implementing 
Service Design in software development are related with the 
lack of time and commitment, internal assumptions, selling 
Service Design as a concept to the customer, involving the 
relevant people to the process, prototyping methods in remote 
workshops and implementing Service Design as an ongoing 
activity. 
     Related to the identified benefits and challenges it can be 
further concluded that the motivation or reason behind the 
above-mentioned factors often depends on the stakeholder in 
question. For example, the lack of time for Service Design 
activities from the developers point of view may be related to 
the pressure of delivering new features promptly, whereas 
from the customers point of view this may be due to the fact 
that they might need a permission for participating to a 
Service Design sprint from their superiors, who might not 
realize the value of Service Design activities with the service 
provider. In order to truly understand the motivations behind 
the identified benefits and challenges, further research about 
the background of different stakeholders may be required. 
The findings could then be advisable to consider while 
planning the pilot project for implementing Service Design. 
     This research proposes that by taking into account the 
following critical factors when implementing Service Design 
into software development the above-mentioned challenges 
are more likely to be overcome and consequently the above-
mentioned benefits are more likely to be achieved. The 
critical factors when implementing Service Design are 
composed on the pilot project carried out in Company X. The 
key critical factor identified by this research is starting the 
implementation of Service Design through a pilot project. 
Other critical factors identified are suggested to be 
considered while planning and executing the Service Design 
pilot project in question. The critical factors regarding the 
pilot project consist of detailed and encompassing planning, 
discovering suitable Service Design methods and tools, 
scoping the sprint challenge, focusing on appropriate 
challenges, finding a lightweight solution and providing 
concrete results and findings.  
     In addition, this research demonstrated that carrying out a 
design sprint remotely is possible and profitable. While 
planning a remote implementation of Service Design the 
remote aspect should be consciously investigated as working 
remotely may bring its own challenges to the implementation. 
     The limitations of this research include that the research 
was carried out in a single case company, which means that 
the results may differ in distinct circumstances. Therefore, 
generalizations based on the results of this research are 
limited. Albeit, the results provide an approach for 
implementing Service Design to software development, the 
sprint was just one way of carrying out a pilot project. 
Different approaches may be discovered more suitable and 
functional 
in 
other 
organizations. 
Therefore, 
each 
organization should discover the best practices for 
embedding Service Design in the organization in question. 
     For future studies, this research suggests validating the 
Service Design sprint model. It can be stated that the Service 
Design sprint model presented in this research requires 
further iterations before it can be considered practical. For 
example, experimenting the Service Design sprint as the first 
phase in agile software development could be further studied. 
The way Service Design and agile software development may 
be able to complete one another is worth examination in 
practice. In addition, evaluation of combining a design sprint 
and a co-creation workshop would be interesting. An 
interesting similar approach combining design thinking, lean 
startup and agile development is provided by Flores et al. 
[25]. 
     Another topical subject of research would be comparing 
the results of traditionally held workshops to the remote 
workshops. The remote working aspect is truly actual 
considering the current situation globally. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. Elbert, “Looking into the future,” IEEE Software, Vol. 
32(6), pp. 92–97, 2015. 
[2] T. Sauvola, M. Kelanti, J. Hyysalo, P. Kuvaja, and K. 
Liukkunen, "Continuous Improvement and Validation with 
Customer Touchpoint Model in Software Development," 
CSEA 2018: The Thirteenth International Conference on 
Software Engineering Advances, pp. 52–60, 2018. 
[3] T. Sauvola, S. Rontti, L. Laivamaa, M. Oivo, and P. Kuvaja,  
“Integrating Service Design Prototyping into Software 
Development,” ICSEA 2016: The Eleventh International 
Conference on Software Engineering Advances, pp. 325–332, 
2016. 
[4] M. Stickdorn, M. E. Hormess, A. Lawrence, and J. Schneider, 
“This Is Service Design Doing: Applying Service Design 
Thinking in the Real World”. O'Reilly Media, England, 2018. 
[5] P. Arslan, “Applications of service design in the software 
industry,” In: Miettinen, S. (edit.) An Introduction to Industrial 
Service Design, pp. 25-34. Routledge. New York, 2017. 
[6] R. Garcia, “Creating and Marketing New Products and 
Services,” CRC Press. Boca Raton, 2014. 
[7] Service 
Design 
Network. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.service-design-network.org/about-service-
design, [retrieved: 8, 2020.] 
[8] S. Miettinen, S. Rontti, and J. Jeminen, “Co-Prototyping 
Emotional Value,” 19th DMI: Academic Design Management 
Conference Design Management in an Era of Disruption, pp. 
1–19, 2014. 
[9] R. Alves and N. J. Nunes, “Towards a taxonomy of service 
design methods and tools,” Lecture Notes in Business 
Information Processing 2013, Vol.143, pp. 215–229, 2013. 
[10] E. Yu and D. Sangiorgi, “Service Design as an Approach to 
Implement the Value Cocreation Perspective in New Service 
Development,” Journal of Service Research 2018, Vol. 21(1), 
pp. 40–58, 2018. 
[11] F. Kensing, “Methods and Practices in Participatory Design,” 
ITU Press, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2003. 
[12] D. Saffer, “Designing for Interaction,” New Riders Press. 
ISBN 0-321-43206-1, 2006. 
[13] S. Holmlid, “Participative, co-operative, emancipatory: From 
participatory design to service design. DeThinking Service 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

ReThinking Design,” First Nordic Conference on Service 
Design and Service Innovation, pp. 105–118, 2009. 
[14] S. Junginger and D. Sangiorgi, “Service design and 
organisational change: Bridging the gap between rigor and 
relevance,” International Association of Societies of Design 
Research, pp. 4339–4348, 2009. 
[15] J. Chaves and S. de Freitas, “A Systematic Literature Review 
for Service-Oriented Architecture and Agile Development,” 
ICCSA 2019: Computational Science and Its Applications – 
ICCSA 2019, pp. 120–135, 2019. 
[16] S. Nerur and V. Balijepally, “Theoretical reflections on agile 
development methodologies,” Communications of the ACM— 
Emergency Response Information Systems: Emerging Trends 
and Technologies, Vol. 50(3), pp. 79–83, 2007. 
[17] T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review,” Information and Software 
Technology, Vol. 50, pp. 833–859, 2008. 
[18] S.G. Yaman et al. “Customer Involvement in Continuous 
Deployment: A Systematic Literature Review,” In: Daneva M., 
Pastor O. (eds) Requirements Engineering: Foundation for 
Software Quality. REFSQ 2016. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, Vol. 9619, pp. 249–265, 2016. 
[19] M. Laanti, J. Similä, and P. Abrahamsson, “Definitions of 
Agile Software Development and Agility,” Communications in 
Computer and Information Science, Vol. 364, pp. 247–258, 
2013. 
[20] S. Balaji and MS. Murugaiyan, “Waterfall vs. V-Model vs. 
Agile: A comparative study on SDLC,” International Journal 
of Information Technology and Business Management, Vol. 2 
(1), pp. 26–30, 2012. 
[21] R. Baskerville, “Investigating Information Systems with 
Action Research,” Communication of the Association for 
Information Systems, Vol. 2, Article 19, pp. 2-32, 1999. 
[22] H. Madden and A.T. Walter, “Using an Action Research 
Approach to Embed Service Design in a Higher Education 
Institution,” Swedish Design Research Journal, pp. 40-50, 
2016. 
[23] P. Eriksson and A. Kovalainen, “Qualitative Methods in 
Business 
Research. 
Introducing 
Qualitative 
Methods: Qualitative methods in business research.” SAGE 
Publications Ltd. pp. 194–209, 2011. 
[24] M. E. Porter “The Competitive Advantage of Nations,” New 
York: Free Press, 1990. 
[25] M. Flores et al. “How Can Hackathons Accelerate Corporate 
Innovation?,” In: Moon I., Lee G., Park J., Kiritsis D., von 
Cieminski G. (eds) Advances in Production Management 
Systems. Production Management for Data-Driven, Intelligent, 
Collaborative, and Sustainable Manufacturing. APMS 2018. 
IFIP 
Advances 
in 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology, vol 535. Springer, Cham, 2018. 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

