Using a Combined Approach of Software
Engineering and XR Engineering to Create Virtual
Job Onboarding Environment: A Case Study
Marko J¨antti
Centre for Measurement and Information Systems
Kajaani University of Applied Sciences
Ketunpolku 1, 87100 Kajaani, Finland
Email: marko.jantti@cemis.ﬁ
Abstract—Digital transformation projects, such as creating
virtual collaboration spaces with Extended Reality (XR), require
new types of skills and knowledge from software engineers. While
fundamental elements of software engineering and managing
software projects are still useful, there are many new aspects
that software engineers need to manage in Extended Reality
(XR) projects. In this paper, we present results of a case study
focusing on creating a virtual job onboarding environment for
a Finnish forest machine operator. The content that was se-
lected for the virtual onboarding space included company-related
material for increasing awareness of green transition, such as
recycling waste resulted by forest logging operations and training
mandatory issues on occupational safety. The research problem
presented in this study focuses on how software engineering
and XR engineering can be used together to create virtual
job onboarding spaces. Differences between traditional software
engineering and XR engineering are also addressed. This study
contributes towards practical implementation of commercial and
open source resources for building a virtual job onboarding
environment, through the combination of software engineering
and XR engineering processes. We argue that this combined
approach offers a good choice for managing the development
of virtual spaces.
Keywords—Digital transformation; Software Engineering; job
onboarding; virtual collaboration space; Extended Reality (XR).
I.
INTRODUCTION
Digital transformation is changing the way how organiza-
tions are training their employees, partners and end-users. An
increasing number of training events is organized in virtual
learning platforms instead of traditional classrooms. The job
onboarding is a business process where quality of training
and introduction plays a critical role. Through the process,
organization aims at transforming job candidates into top-
performing employees It is a process that also directly affects
employee satisfaction and employee productivity.
Unfortunately, many organizations fail in making the job
onboarding process employee-friendly. According to Sibisi and
Kappers [1], poor onboarding may result in lower conﬁdence
among employees in their new roles, worsened levels of
engagement, and an increased risk to quit job and start working
for a competitor. Caruzzi [2] reveals that organizations with a
standardized onboarding process experience 62 % greater new
hire productivity and 50 % greater new hire retention.
Virtual reality has been widely used by various domains.
Military domain has been the forerunner in applying virtual re-
ality (VR) technologies. The military has used VR for various
military tasks such as simulating combat ﬁrst-aid and surgical
procedures to correct battleﬁeld injuries [3]; team training,
battleﬁeld review and tactics development [4]; and providing
Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy (VRET) for veterans with
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder [5].
Additionally, virtual reality provides new opportunities for
increasing safety awareness in industrial sites such as factories
and mines. Bell and Fogler [6] have applied VR to chemical
engineering education, for example, demonstrating the conse-
quences of not following proper lab safety procedures. Liang et
al. [7] have developed a VR-based interactive game for safety
trainings in underground mines. Moreover, many companies
started their virtual reality journey because of COVID 19
health measures. Boyd et al. [8] report ﬁndings on using virtual
reality for minimizing the spread of Covid-19 on construction
sites.
In this study, we focus on virtual onboarding spaces and
instead of VR and use a broader term Extended Reality
(XR) instead of VR. Extended reality consists of three main
elements: Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR), and
Mixed Reality (MR). Development of XR spaces and appli-
cations (we call this process XR engineering) requires new
types of skills and knowledge from software engineers. While
fundamental elements of software engineering and managing
software projects are still useful, there are many new aspects
software engineers need to manage in Extended Reality (XR)
projects.
In the IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering
[9], software engineering is deﬁned as the application of a
systematic, disciplined, quantiﬁable approach to the devel-
opment, operation, and maintenance of software. In XR en-
gineering, development, operation and maintenance activities
aim typically at producing and maintaining either games or
virtual spaces. From this paper, game development is excluded.
Software engineering lifecycle activities can also be a target
where XR can be used. Elliott et al. [10] have studied the
beneﬁts of using virtual reality for live coding and code
reviews. Virtual reality environments have also been used for
collaborative software modeling [11].
According to Sommerville [12], a system is a purposeful
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

collection of interrelated components of different kinds that
work together to deliver a set of services to the system owner
and its users. An XR-based system is typically produced by us-
ing game engine software (Unity, Blender, or similar) or cloud-
based services (e.g. Amazon Sumerian, Google ARCore) and
used by end-users through virtual reality glasses or XR-enabled
web browsers. WebXR is an open standard which allows VR
apps to run directly from web browsers. WebXR Device API
removes interoperability problems because it brings AR and
VR capabilities to the web [13] and a user can thus avoid
downloading heavy installatioin packages.
In this paper, the goal is to answer the research problem:
How software engineering and XR engineering can be used
together to create virtual job onboarding spaces? The main
contribution of this paper is to show ﬁndings of a case study
where we trialled and implemented both commercial and
open source instances of a virtual job onboarding environment
by using a combination of software engineering and XR
engineering methods. The case study was performed by a
Finnish digital innovation hub. The case organization is a forest
machine operator company located in Eastern Finland Nurmes.
The study was implemented in October 2021 - May 2022.
In Section 2, research methodology of the study is pre-
sented. In Section 3, case study results are presented. Section 4
is the analysis and ﬁnally, the conclusions are given in Section
5.
II.
RESEARCH PROBLEM & METHODOLOGY
According to Yin [14], a case study is an empirical inquiry
that investigates a contemporary phenomenon in depth and
within its real-life context especially when the bondaries
between phenomenon and context are not clearly evident.
The case study research method was selected to study and
increase understanding of a real-life phenomenon: improve-
ment of job onboarding. The context for the research is also
interesting. We got access to a Finnish forest machine operator
company through EU-funded digital experiment. This was a
new type of case organization for us. For the case organization,
job onboarding was a high priority improvement target.
The research problem of this study is: How software
engineering and XR engineering can be used together to create
virtual job onboarding spaces? The research problem was
divided into the following research questions: 1) How software
engineering and XR engineering ﬁt together in creating virtual
job onboarding environment and how they differ from each
other? 2) How employees express beneﬁts of virtual job
onboarding? 3) What types of challenges may exist in creating
virtual job onboarding environments?
A. Case Organization
Motoajo is a family company, whose experience in forestry
contracting begun in the 50’s. As a result of organized devel-
opment and patient growth, the company (an SME) offers job
for 70 workers. The company’s ofﬁce is located in Nurmes,
Eastern Finland, where the company also mainly operates.
While loggin and transporting roundwood and coppice, Mo-
toajo always pays attention to the nature and operates by all
means to protect it. The company’s vehicles are modern and
made according to current emission standards. With harvesters
the company follows the Measuring Instruments Act with
random sampling of tree trunks. All the vehicles are equipped
with loader scales. Motoajo’s aim is to work cost-effective and
on schedule with professional staff and modern vehicles also
in challenging environments, not forgetting safety at work.
Motoajo’s personnel consists of trained and experienced
professionals. Drivers’ workmanship is constantly improved
by taking part to courses of quality, environmental and work
safety. Motoajo Oy has a comprehensive spare part stock and
a service with professionals and vehicles. Through the experi-
ment, Motoajo seeks solutions organizing delivery of forestry
liquids to remote locations as well as innovative methods to
carry out job introduction to new forestry employees. The
company consumes annually around million litres of fuel and
huge amount of forest machine supplies. Job onboarding is
important for Motoajo from following reasons: First, it is an
effective way to increase productivity of employees. Second,
it is directly linked to occupational safety. Job onboarding
ensures that employees are aware of issues affecting their job
safety and are able to perform their work activities both safely
and effectively. The existing way to conduct job onboarding
is baically based on personal job introduction performed by a
senior employee. New employees shall receive access to job
introduction (general overview of the organization, organiza-
tional policies, occupational safety, maintenance of machines
etc.) material in Google Forms.
B. Data Collection Methods
The data collection for the study was performed by Arctic
Data Intelligence Digital Innovation Hub. The goal of AIKA
Digital Innovation Hub is to act as a one-stop shop that helps
companies of Kainuu region in tackling digital challenges
(especially AI, HPC, data analytics and digital transformation).
Case study evidence was collected during Green and Digital
Forest Service Management experiment from multiple sources:
•
Documentation: Quality manual, experiment hand
book, 3D model import guidelines document
•
Archival records: Job onboarding material in Google
forms, video scenarios from a foreman
•
Interviews/discussions: Focused interview with CEO
(February 9th, 2022, 30 min), discussions with virtual
space providers
•
Participative observation: ﬁeld visits in Motoajo’s stor-
age, participation in digital experiment work meet-
ings, Towards digital and sustainable forestry webinar
(Youtube)
•
Direct observations: Observations during the ﬁeld visit
in logging destination, how a forest machine driver
operates in the forest, how fuel container has been
placed on the logging site.
•
Physical artefacts: Matterport 3D models, plastic IBC
containers, recycling containers
C. Data Analysis
The case material was analyzed by a within case analysis
technique [15] by using researcher and method triangulation
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[16]. The research team consisted of Digital Innovation Hub
employees and external consult of Motoajo. The digital exper-
iment progress was reported to the case organization systemat-
ically and frequently and communicated also to non-academic
audience such as stakeholders of the digital innovation hub.
A qualitative content analysis technique was applied for case
study material.
III.
RESULTS OF THE STUDY: DESIGN AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF A VIRTUAL JOB ONBOARDING
ENVIRONMENT
Next, we describe the activities of design, implementation
and testing/evaluation regarding the virtual job onboarding
environment.
A. Service Design
The service design phase started with a ﬁeld visit to the
Motoajo’s storage in Nurmes, Eastern Finland. The case orga-
nization’s representatives indicated the need to address green
transition and recycling of forestry waste in job onboarding
material. There was a need to increase awareness of staff
how to sort different types of forestry waste (chainsaw bars,
lubricant tubes, oil ﬁlters), to show location of various pieces
of equipment, what type of protection is required while dealing
with the fungicide, and what an employee should do to prevent
fuel leaks while operating in the forest with a forest machine
(how to position fuel container safely in the ground). The
following list of design and implementation issues was created
in the design phase:
•
Implementation of IoT based monitoring system for
forestry liquids including Tekelek tank level sensors
that were installed into plastic IBC containers contain-
ing marking dye and Adblue (Diesel Exhaust Fluid)
•
Development of mobile app (managing reﬁlling pro-
cess, monitoring liquid levels, alerts on critical levels),
two phase authentication possible / Google authenti-
cator
•
Creating ﬁrst draft of the virtual job introduction
environment by using 360 viewer Lapentor
•
Creating 3D models of the storage
•
Recording videos for hotspots both in logging desti-
nation and in storage (video material how to recycle
waste such as oil canisters and metal waster coming
from logging operations and how to position fuel
containers safely in the forest).
•
Organizing dissemination activities: two webinars
(Digital Afternoon, Towards Green and Digital Forest
Service Management) and creation of online articles
•
Exploring opportunities for further exploitation of
experiment results
For project dissemination purposes, we organized an inter-
view with CEO of the case organization. The CEO highlighted
the importance of job onboarding for organizational productiv-
ity. Additionally, we conducted 2 webinars where a foreman
of the case organization communicated the beneﬁts of job
Fig. 1.
A virtual job onboarding environment in Lapentor
onboarding. Next, a summary of the interview and discussions
is provided (narratives related to job onboarding).
•
”We have been thinking forest machine -related job
onboarding. The forest side is even more important for
productivity than recycling-related job onboarding.”
•
”This job onboarding system could be sold to any
other domain, not only for forest domain.”
•
”It would ge great if a new employee would watch the
job onboarding video material during the ﬁrst working
days. Then, he/she would be much more prepared for
work tasks.”
•
”An employee can watch videos and repeat them as
many times as needed.”
•
”Job onboarding needs to be well documented. It gives
as a lot of credibility.”
•
”We have several remote storage areas. We have
improved monitoring of liquid containers and job
onboarding of new employees. Previously, we have
provided personal job onboarding. However, if the new
employee is going to work in Vehmersalmi, it’s a long
way to travel there to take care of job onboarding.”
B. Service Implementation
The prototype of virtual job introduction was created by
using open source 360 virtual tour service Lapentor (see Figure
1). Video content was captured by using mobile phone and was
later uploaded to Vimeo video sharing platfrom and embedded
to Lapentor hotspots. These videos dealt with several work
scenarios, such as sorting metal waste, sorting oil canisters,
placing a warning sign for a logging site, operating safely with
liquids and maintenance of a fuel pump.
In the next phase, we decided to study whether it would be
possible to create a virtual collaboration space where a trainee
and trainer could meet. For this purpose, we contacted a VR
specialist in Kajaani University of Applied Sciences that had
a long experience in creating virtual spaces and capturing 3D
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Fig. 2.
A virtual job onboarding environment in Matterport: how to recycle
chainsaw bars
models with Matterport cameras. Figure 2 shows our virtual
storage in Matterport environment.
We needed to purchase server space for Matterport 3D
models because we did not want to make the 3D models of
the storage publicly available. The following step was to start
the bidding process for purchasing the virtual collaboration
space. We decided to use Glue Collaboration as a platform
to our virtual collaboration space because they seemed to
have a clear process and guidelines how to import custom
3D models (a document showing requirements for importing
3D models). However, they stated that importing custom 3D
models requires some manual work effort (around 1 working
day) from them. The bidding also involved Glue licences
for 2 persons. After we had started bidding process, we
observed that we should had been more careful in describing
3D rendering requirements to Invitation for Tenders (lightning,
objects we wanted to have in the storage). The third party
consultant of the virtual collaboration space provider stated
that point cloud needs 3D rendering. Luckily, one of the 3D
experts of our own organization’s VR laboratory was available
and took care of 3D rendering.
C. Testing and Evaluating the Service
One of the interesting aspects we planned to have in our
virtual job onboarding environment was a digital twin of an
IBC container that would have provided a realistic real time
data on the liquid levels. This required a signiﬁcant amount of
work effort such as purchasing, installing, conﬁguring sensors,
setting up IoT dashboards, creating a mobile app for retrieving
data on container reﬁlling events and events when forest ma-
chine drivers pick up liquids from the container. Development
of real time liquids monitoring system and integrating data to
the job onboarding system required more software engineering
expertise than XR engineering. Here we applied traditional
software engineering activities, such as sofware test cases.
The virtual job onboarding system was presented to the
case organization multiple times. In trialling the system, a
foreman of the case organization used both laptop and also
Oculus Quest 2 VR glasses. As a feedback, they stated that
most likely the organization’s employees would use the open
source version of the job onboarding system (Lapentor) from
their laptops or mobile phones. Lapentor is a cost-effective
solution for job onboarding and it is easy to add new job
onboarding content (hotspots) to the system. New employees
can see the realistic view on the storage including waste
containers and can click the hotspots in the virtual storage
to access the video material. The job onboarding material is
available 24/7 for employees and there is no need to purchase
expensive XR equipment. As part of the evaluatioin, the CEO
of the case organization mentioned that the usage of the
system could be extended to the optimizing settings of forest
machines. The system was considered very easy-to-use. The
drawback of the Lapentor system is that it is not a virtual
collaboration environment. If a trainee and a trainer like would
like to meet in the storage, they need to access a virtual
collaboration space, such as Glue or Mozilla Hubs.
IV.
ANALYSIS
The data analysis was performed by using qualitative anal-
ysis technique for the case study data. The goal of the analysis
was to compare software engineering and XR engineering with
7 patterns. Thus, our analysis technique can be considered as
pattern matching. Regarding the ﬁrst research question, we
identifed both differences and similarities (Table I) between
software engineering (software development with Java as an
example) and Extended Reality (XR) engineering.
TABLE I.
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING VS XR ENGINEERING
Topic
Soft Engineering
XR Engineering
Focus
Code and data
Media and content
Files
.java, .class, .jar, .dll
.fbx, .stl, .gltf, .obj
SDKs
Java SDK
XR SDK for each VR headset
Skills
Coding, UI, bus. logic, data
Coding, UX, 3D model., rendering
Dev types
Web dev, mobile dev
Web dev, mobile dev, game dev
Reqs
Non-func., func, data
File reqs for 3D models
Navigation
Menus
Teleporting, hotspots, ﬂoorplan
Comput.
CPU
GPU
Project mgmt
Agile, increment,, waterfall
Agile
According to our case study ﬁndings, XR engineering
focuses on dealing with media ﬁles and game engines requiring
knowhow on 3D modeling, compatibility of media ﬁles, 3D
rendering such as conﬁguring lightining to virtual spaces and
visualizing the storage. One of the issues we learnt during
the study was that XR SDKs (for example, Oculus SDK for
Windows) vary between VR headsets. While Java developers
could enjoy a pretty good interoperability of Java SDK, XR
developers need to struggle with headset-speciﬁc requirements
if they want to test and release their own XR apps. However,
in our case study, we did not have to deal with device SDKs
because we decided to use existing well-tested virtual tour and
virtual space platforms. Rendering scenes in Lapentor is done
with krpano software that enables showing panoramic images
on the web.
While three architectural layers (user interface UI, business
logic BL, data layer) act as a basis of design and development
in software engineering, XR engineering focuses on designing
interactions and may involve head tracking, motion tracking,
hand tracking and eye tracking. These are quite standard
interaction design elements for game developers but a new
world for a typical software engineer.
Navigation within the virtual space is very different com-
pared to the navigation within a web-based system. Virtual
spaces enable teleporting users between virtual rooms. Both in
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Matterport and Lapentor, content for end-users can be added
through hotspots (in Matterport these are called Mattertags).
Matterport also produces a ﬂoorplan view that helps end-users
navigating to the desired room easier. While performance of
traditional software systems depends on computing nodes, XR
developers typically utilize Graphics Processing Units (GPUs).
By using GPUs models can be rendered much quicker than by
using Computing Processing Units (CPUs).
Regarding project management approach, both software
engineers and XR engineers are using agile approaches or
some kind of modiﬁcation of them. Software engineers used
to utilize waterfall lifecycle model, incremental models such
as Rational Uniﬁed Process RUP [17] decades ago. However,
agile project management is nowadays a mainstream choice.
We did one observation on strict ﬁle requirements for 3D mod-
els that do not exist in typical software engineering projects.
Our XR engineer understood ﬁle requirements immediately
but researchers with some SE background were not in their
comfort zone while reading the 3D model import guidelines.
In order to increase the system quality, we decided to create
test cases (typical artifacts in software development) for IoT
based container monitoring system that we aimed to link to
the virtual job onboarding system as a digital twin of the
container. These test cases revealed some interesting defects
that were later communicated to system developers. With
no doubt, software engineering has more rigorous approach
for ensuring software quality than XR engineering. Software
testing knowhow would be very useful also for XR engineers
to ensure that interactions and hotspots become thoroughly
tested. Therefore, we propose a combined approach of software
engineering and XR engineering for producing high-quality
XR spaces.
Table II shows the analysis of the second research question:
How employees express the beneﬁts of virtual job onboarding.
The source of the evidence is indicated in the ﬁrst column.
TABLE II.
BENEFITS
Source
Issue
INT
Enables repeated playing of onboarding content
INT
Prepares staff better for their job tasks
DIS
Saves travelling costs and time
DIS
Compliance with regulations
DIS
Eliminates unnecessary waste sorting
PO
Increases productivity
PO
Enables importing custom 3D models
PO
Collaboration in virtual space
It was interesting to follow the discussion and analyze the
narratives of interviews and webinars to capture expressions
for beneﬁts of virtual onboarding. The case organization’s
management emphasized the productivity and preparedness of
the staff for job activities. The middle management of the
case organization highlighted cost savings and time savings
and transition to a different model of job onboarding (from
personal job onboarding to more scalable job onboarding).
During the study, our research team observed that forest
machine drivers need to update their skills and knowledge
continously to be able to operate the forest machine. Forest
machine drivers need to be aware of the procedures, rules
and regulations set by the forest certiﬁcates (FSC, PEFC) and
contractors.
The last research question focused on the challenges in
creating virtual job onboarding spaces. The following list
contains a summary of identiﬁed challenges.
•
Deciding which 360 platform or virtual collaboration
platform could be best for our purposes (possibility to
import custom 3D models, import custom 3D assets,
quality of avatars, number of existing interactions,
price of licences, cross-device usage).
•
Planning the bidding process for virtual spaces is
difﬁcult. How to set a quality criteria and describe it
in Invitation for Tenders? XR-engineers are needed to
answer the questions from potential service providers.
•
Making a plan on 3D rendering. Which textures /
objects should be included? What is the quality of
lightning? In our case, we had very limited time and
a large storage space and we prioritized that waste
containers are of high priority.
•
Conducting video shootings and 3D model creation
in winter conditions. Arctic conditions (-25 celsius
outside, -5 to -10 celsius inside the storage) caused
challenges for battery duration of cameras.
•
Creating digital twin and integrating it to the virtual
job onboarding system. Unfortunately, we were not
able to bring real time sensor data to our virtual job
onboarding environment. Very likely this challenge
was related to API/integration limitations of Lapentor
and we had very limited resources to investigate the
issue.
•
Creating job onboarding video content without prede-
ﬁned scripts. While we were in the cold storage and in
a logging site in the forest, we did not use any scripts.
Usage of scripts might have increased the quality of
video material and decreased the time we spent for
video recording. On the other hand. we feel that we
received more authentic job onboarding material by
ignoring the scripts.
•
Multi-provider network of actors. Although we had an
excellent team, multi-provider network caused com-
munication gaps in implementation of the virtual job
onboarding system. As an example, our XR specialist
had generated a high-quality, rendered 3D model of
the storage. Somehow, the insufﬁcient 3D model was
still used in creating the virtual collaboration space (a
large part of the storage was of point cloud quality)
It would be very interesting to compare our XR challenges
to the challenges encountered by other academians especially
on the forest sector. Conducting this case study has remarkably
increased our knowledge on opportunities and limitations of
XR spaces and their beneﬁts for job onboarding.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we aimed at answering the research problem:
How software engineering and XR engineering can be used
together to create virtual job onboarding spaces? We used a
case study research method to collect data from a Finnish forest
machine operator company. Our results and experiences may
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

be useful both for software engineers and for XR engineers.
The job onboarding system that we developed supports also
the Green Transition approach. Thus, our ﬁndings can also be
beneﬁcial to sustainability engineers.
Next, our ﬁndings related to three research questions are
summarized. Concerning the ﬁrst research question (How soft-
ware engineering and XR engineering ﬁt together in creating
virtual job onboarding environment and how they differ from
each other?), we observed that software development and XR
development have a lot of common. It is fair to state that many
academians and practitioners shall really likely consider XR as
just one additional type of software development.
However, XR engineering has its own terminology and
concepts (polycounts, realt-time rendering, heatmap) that most
software engineers might have never heard of. While soft-
ware engineers’ skillsets include software development, cloud,
database, and mobile app development, XR engineers typically
need the same skills but also game development knowhow. Of
course, programming skills are key skills for both XR engi-
neers and software engineers. During our study, we observed
that software development lifecycle activities help especially
in improving the quality of XR development and planning test
coverage. Software test cases are useful in identifying defects
in any type of software including XR and virtual spaces.
During a relatively short testing period, our test cases manage
to reveal some interesting defects during the case study. One
defect was found by using administrator priviledges.
For the second research question ( How employees express
beneﬁts of virtual job onboarding), we captured narratives
that referred to beneﬁts of job onboarding. According to our
ﬁndings, case organization considered as expected beneﬁts of
virtual job onboarding: preparing staff better for their job
tasks, saving travelling costs and time, ensuring compliance
with regulations, eliiminating unnecessary waste sorting and
increasing productivity. The organization’s top management
emphasized overall productivity increase due to better job
onboarding.
Our ﬁnal research question dealt with virtual job onboard-
ing implementation challenges. During our case study, the
following challenges were identiﬁed: deciding which 360 plat-
form or virtual collaboration platform could be best; challenges
in planning the bidding process for virtual spaces; conducting
video shootings and 3D model creation in winter conditions;
planning and performing 3D rendering; failure in creating
digital twin and integrating it to the job onboarding system;
creating job onboarding video content without predeﬁned
scripts; communication gaps due to multi-provider network of
actors in the XR engineering project.
There are certain limitations related to the case study
method that we utilized. First, data was collected during a
relatively short time period (during a 6-month digital experi-
ment). Interviewing and engaging more end-users to trial the
new job onboarding system could have provided new insights
and ideas for further development. Second, only qualitative
data was used and collected during the study. In the future,
quantitative data, for example, from a controlled experiment
with new employees could be collected to analyze the impact
of more immersive job onboarding. Further research could also
focus on extending the scope of job onboarding to adjustment
of forest machine settings.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the case organization for valuable
collaboration. This paper is based on research in Develop-
ment of AIKA Arctic Data Intelligence and Supercomputing
Ecosystem in Kainuu project (A78688) funded by European
Regional Development Fund and Regional Council of Kainuu.
The prototype of the virtual job onboarding platform was
created in DIH World experiment co-funded by the Horizon
2020 Framework Programme of the European Union under
grant agreement no 952176.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Sibisi and G. Kappers, “Onboarding can make or break a new hire’s
experience,” Harvard Business Review, April 2022.
[2]
J. Caruzzi, “To retain new hires, spend more time onboarding them,”
Harvard Business Review, April 2018.
[3]
R. Satava and S. Jones, “An integrated medical virtual reality program.
the military application,” IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Magazine, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 94–97, 1996.
[4]
M. Moshell, “Three views of virtual reality: virtual environments in the
us military,” Computer, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 81–82, 1993.
[5]
A. Vianez, A. Marques, and R. Almeida, “Virtual reality exposure
therapy for armed forces veterans with post-traumatic stress disorder:
A systematic review and focus group,” International Journal of Envi-
ronmental Research and Public Health, vol. 19, p. 464, 01 2022.
[6]
J. Bell and S. Fogler, “The application of virtual reality to ( chemical
engineering ) education.” 01 2004, pp. 217–218.
[7]
Z. Liang, K. Zhou, and K. Gao, “Development of virtual reality
serious game for underground rock-related hazards safety training,”
IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 118 639–118 649, 2019.
[8]
A. Boyd, C. Bradley, and L. Waugh, “Use of virtual reality to mini-
mize the spread of covid-19 on construction sites,” in Proceedings of
the Canadian Society of Civil Engineering Annual Conference 2021.
Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore, 2023, pp. 273–281.
[9]
IEEE Standard 729-1983 1, IEEE Standard Glossary of Software
Engineering Terminology.
IEEE, 1990.
[10]
A. Elliott, B. Peiris, and C. Parnin, “Virtual reality in software engi-
neering: Affordances, applications, and challenges,” in 2015 IEEE/ACM
37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering, vol. 2,
2015, pp. 547–550.
[11]
E. Yigitbas, S. Gorissen, N. Weidmann, and G. Engels, “Collabora-
tive software modeling in virtual reality,” in 2021 ACM/IEEE 24th
International Conference on Model Driven Engineering Languages and
Systems (MODELS), 2021, pp. 261–272.
[12]
I. Sommerville, Software Engineering.
Pearson Education Limited,
USA, 2016.
[13]
B. Blair Maclntyre and T. Smith, “Thoughts on the future of webxr and
the immersive web,” in 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed
and Augmented Reality Adjunct (ISMAR-Adjunct), 2018, pp. 338–342.
[14]
R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods, Fourth edition.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publishing, 2009.
[15]
K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,” Academy
of Management Review, vol. 14, pp. 532–550, 1989.
[16]
R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage Publishing, 1994.
[17]
P. Kruchten, The Rational Uniﬁed Process: An Introduction.
Addison-
Wesley, 2001.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

