Business Model Canvas as an Option for Co-Creation of Strategic Themes of SAFe 
Portfolio 
 
Eriko Brito 
Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems (CESAR) 
Recife – PE, Brazil 
e-mail: eriko.brito@outlook.com 
Felipe Furtado 
Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems (CESAR) 
Recife – PE, Brazil  
The Open University 
Walton Hall, Milton Keynes, MK7 6AA , United Kingdon 
e-mail: furtado.fs@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—This article discusses the use of the Business Model 
Canvas (BMC) technique as a co-creative option for the 
elaboration of strategic themes of the Scaled Agile Framework 
(SAFe). The proposed model is different from SAFe, although it 
quotes the technique as an alternative, and establishes a process 
for using BMC in conjunction with formulating strategic 
themes. It is work-in-progress which exploits a visual way of 
thinking about strategy and the SAFe approach to corporate 
management. Evaluation of the proposal will use focus group 
techniques and the opinions of specialists will be surveyed. 
Keywords—Business 
Model 
Generation; 
SAFe; 
Agile 
Methods; Strategic Planning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the mid-60s, strategic planning established itself as “the 
best way” to design and implement strategies. Early strategic 
systems are currently viewed as instruments that guarantee 
that strategic decisions will be developed without errors at 
tactical and operational levels. However, planning does not 
exactly occur in this way [1]. 
Mintzberg [1] dedicates four chapters to analyzing 
typically related problems and defines the fallacies of strategic 
planning as follows: a) The fallacy of prediction - attempting 
to design the future based on predetermined steps, b) The 
fallacy of detachment, - an erroneous understanding that 
functional units of a company have the autonomy to define 
and implement strategies, c) The fallacy of formalization 
which sees to it that strategic planning is “written in stone,” 
rigid, inflexible, and follows a fixed pattern. 
Parallel to the context presented so far in this paper, 
software engineering gained experience of agile management 
models. Melo [2] in his study which had 466 participants, 
presented a series of benefits when agile practices were 
adapted. VersionOne reported in its ninth and tenth annual 
report on agility status, [3][4], that interest had grown in 
frameworks such as Large-Scale-Scrum (LeSS), Disciplined 
Agile Delivery (DAD), Scrum of Scrums and Agile Portfolio 
Management (APM), and set out to scale best practices of 
agile management, especially the SAFe model. 
Of these models, SAFe is the only one to present, within 
its structure, an explicit openness to strategic management and 
does so by defining strategic themes and the project portfolio 
backlog, these being options which, respectively, are 
analogous to objective strategy concepts [5], and portfolio 
projects [6]. 
Having historically dealt with similar complexities while 
at a tactical level, the management area/project planning has 
sought to simplify its processes as a result of the emergence 
of agile models based on design thinking and co-creation [7]. 
The role that the BMC plays in this is to be regarded as a 
collaborative technique for innovation in business models and 
strategic planning. 
Given these correlations, this paper presents a process 
option for using the BMC technique, suggested but not 
sketched out by Leffingwell [8], to co-create SAFe strategic 
themes, thereby introducing agile practices of software 
engineering into corporate strategic management. 
The structure of this paper is as follows. Section II presents 
the research method and Section III presents the theoretical 
basis of research on strategic planning, SAFe, BMC, and Blue 
Ocean Strategy. Section IV discusses the proposal, and puts 
forward a roadmap for using BMC with SAFe. Lastly in 
Section V, some conclusions are drawn and suggestions for 
future studies are made.  
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
Initially, a theoretical study was conducted on the SAFe 
model and a detailed understanding was formed on how the 
process of setting strategic themes at the portfolio level 
occurs. This concept was the starting point for introducing the 
BMC technique which had already been suggested by 
Leffingwell [8] as an option for formulating strategic themes. 
Next, a Table of equivalence between processes for 
formulating strategic themes and good strategic planning 
practices was compiled in order to determine analogies. Fig. 1 
illustrates this process as a whole. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Research method. 
 
333
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

For conceptual support of the equivalence between the 
methods when the research was being undertaken, the 
literature was reviewed with a view to seeking references in 
the fields of project management, portfolio management, 
strategic planning, and agile operations. 
The proposal will be evaluated by applying two 
techniques: a) Focus groups [9], as this is a research method 
which has to be well-planned and structured in which, arising 
from group discussion. insights about diverse contexts are 
obtained, and b) a Survey of the opinions of specialists [10], 
which is a broad tool for gathering information from which 
comparisons, adjustments and explanations can be made. 
III. 
BACKGROUND REVIEW  
The background review presents the main concepts used 
in this work as follows.  
A. Strategic Planning 
For Drucker [11], strategic planning is a systematic 
continuous process of decision-making that involves 
controlled risks to achieve the strategic objectives.  
In terms of processes for formulating a competitive 
strategy in one plan, Porter [12] has three main steps: a) What 
is the business currently achieving. This addresses the implicit 
and explicit identification of current strategies, b) What is 
happening in the environment? This aims to identify the 
capacity of competitors, industry, society and their strengths 
and weaknesses and, c) What should the business do? This 
relates to support for testing the strategic assumptions, making 
a survey of alternative strategies, and choosing the strategies 
for business that will add the greatest value to it. 
One option for addressing the steps/questions a, b and c 
proposed by Porter [12] is to use SWOT analysis, an acronym 
for Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats. The 
technique is presented by Kotler and Keller [13] as a corporate 
overview, as an instrument to monitor the dimensions of the 
company internally consisting of its strengths and 
weaknesses, and externally, of mapping the opportunities and 
threats. 
B. Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe) 
Stettina and Hörz [14] introduce an alternative to the 
challenges placed in management with agile processes which 
they call the Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe). This adds an 
agile philosophy to managing the software of project 
portfolios and also, among other techniques, recursion 
processes and activities. The model is divided into four major 
thematic groups, namely, portfolio, value chain, programs, 
and staff. The model presents how to scale the agility of 
software engineering as an option that corporate management 
ought to consider.  
The level of a Portfolio, Fig. 2, should be designed and 
monitored to ensure that the strategic view is maintained and 
that key resources are allocated to the value chain of the 
business. This is supported by strategic themes which act as 
connectors between the business strategy and the vision of the 
portfolio [8]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Portfolio level. Adapted from [8]. 
 
C. Business Model Canvas (BMC) 
In general, the starting point of any discussion of a 
particular model of business should be that the business itself 
is thoroughly understood [15]. The BMC is a tool that 
provides a unified reading of business models which 
addresses four key areas: clients, supply, infrastructure and 
financial viability structured into nine thematic blocks as see 
in Fig 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. BMC. Adapted from [15]. 
 
The process of modeling business or a strategy which uses 
BMC is conducted in a single frame, preferably printed on an 
A1 sheet of paper using blocks of adhesive notes (post-its), 
during stakeholders’ meetings. These post-its are used to fill 
the BMC until a thorough understanding of the process has 
been formed or the strategy reviewed. 
D. Blue Ocean Strategy (BOS) 
Designed for the purpose of formulating market 
differentiation strategies, BOS is presented by Kim and 
Mauborgne [16] as a technique for use by a company in a red 
ocean, where the business effort and formulation strategies are 
focused on competition, for a context where concurrence is 
irrelevant because the market is vast and has not yet been 
explored.  
As an option to create business strategies to gain access to 
this unexplored and vast market, Kim and Mauborgne [16] 
present a framework with four actions to create value which 
minimizes the impact on costs, namely, a) Which of the 
factors that the industry takes for granted should be 
eliminated? b) Which factors should be reduced well below 
the industry’s standard? c) Which factors should be raised 
well above the industry’s standard? and d) Which factors 
should be created that the industry has never offered? 
The first question causes a company to reflect on the 
possibility of eliminating the points over which it has been 
competing in its segment for a long time but which offer no 
Enterprise
Strategic
Themes
Program
Portfolio
Management
Epic Owners
Enterprise
Architect
Kanban
NFRs
Backlog
CapEx & OpEx
Enabler
Epic
Enabler
Epic
Value Streams
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

noticeable differences. The second leads the company to think 
about the products and services that have been oversized in 
their cost structure, thus adversely affecting its competitive 
position in the market. The third reflects on the relationship 
with the client, the need for rediscovery, and to improve the 
services and products the company offers and provides. And 
finally, the fourth question prompts a company to discover 
new sources of value for customers, thereby generating new 
market demands. 
IV. 
PROPOSAL: BMC AS AN OPTION FOR SAFE 
Leffingwell  [8] considers that strategic themes may 
represent points of connection, see Table 1, between the 
corporate strategic objectives presented by Olsen [5] and the 
backlog portfolio of projects, and that formulating both of 
them requires a large collaborative effort and many hours of 
teamwork.  
TABLE I.  
STRATEGIC PLANNING AND STRATEGIC THEMES 
Strategic Planning 
Strategic Themes 
Where are we now? 
Mission, Principles, Skills and 
Environment 
How do we get there? 
Financial Goals and Budget  
Where are we going? 
Vision and Business Direction 
 
Fig. 4 is adapted from [8] to represent the BMC entry point 
in the flow of SAFe and this is used to formulate the strategic 
themes by mapping how they are supported.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. BMC in strategic themes flow. Adapted from [8]. 
 
Steps for deriving strategies with the BMC were organized 
into four groups of processes, see Fig. 5: a) Identify the current 
model, b) Analyze the internal scenario, c) Analyze the 
external environment and, d) Formulate the strategic themes. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Derivation of strategies using the BMC.  
 
The following paragraphs discuss how to deploy the four 
groups of processes to fill the BMC and formulate strategic 
themes. 
A. Identify current model 
With the help of a moderator, stakeholders must record the 
actual situation of the company on the BMC, current strategies 
or their proposals for current values. Each thematic group 
should reflect its context. 
Finally, the BMC must be 100% completed which will 
result in the model giving a picture of the company´s current 
business model or its strategies. There are no restrictions on 
using more than one BMC framework to reflect all the 
company's value propositions. 
B. Conduct an internal analysis 
After the current scenario has been mapped, the next step 
is to analyze the internal environment. The assessments 
suggested by Osterwalder and Pigneur [15] can be used to 
map the strengths and weaknesses. New post-its can be used 
to record findings on the canvas and marked (S) for the 
strengths and (W) for the weak points, as illustrated in the 
example in Fig. 6. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Strengths and weaknesses.  
 
C. Conduct an external analysis 
After having identified the strengths and weaknesses of 
the current model, the next step is to look at the opportunities 
and resident threats of the external scenario. The assessment 
of opportunities and threats may occur according to Kotler and 
Keller [13]. The record of these points requires the inclusion 
of new post-its with descriptions which should be marked with 
(T) for threats and (O) for opportunities. Fig. 7 illustrates an 
example. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Opportunities and threats.  
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
At the end of this phase, it is expected that the BMC will 
show the current model and highlight the strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities and threats. This will reflect two 
situations discussed by Osterwalder and Pigneur [15], namely: 
a) A picture of where the company is and, b) Suggestions for 
future actions. 
D. Formulate the strategic themes 
The strategic themes can now be formulated, bearing in 
mind that, as they are strategic objectives as defined by Kotler 
and Keller [13], they should be specific and limited in time. 
To establish these correlations, Osterwalder and Pigneur [15] 
make use of BOS [16]  so as to demonstrate that the BMC is 
a natural extension of BOS and that together they help in 
understanding the cause and effect relationship between these 
two techniques. 
The BMC can then be factored into regions as shown in 
Fig. 8 and be used to tap into the strategic themes as follows: 
a) Can costs be reduced by eliminating or reducing canvas 
components? b) What new values can be created or improved 
for clients without significantly impacting costs? 
 
 
 
Figure 8. BOS and BMC. Adapted from [15]. 
 
Since the corporate strategic themes were derived, they 
can follow the SAFe flow to the phase of mapping its 
influence.  
V. 
FINAL COMMENTS AND NEXT STEPS 
This work in progress discussed a proposal for how to use 
the BMC, as a visual co-creative option, to create the strategic 
themes on SAFe portfolio level.  
In terms of future actions, the strategy presented will be 
evaluated in a focus group and survey with experts. 
Evaluations need to be made of other models and techniques 
such as  Lean Canvas [17], Strategy Model Canvas [18], and 
Lean Startup [19], so as to ensure that they have the same 
capability as BMC in formulating strategies. 
As a continuation of the research, the following matters 
will be investigated: a) The influence of corporate strategic 
themes on results, b) The Project Model Canvas [20], as an 
option for preparing the portfolio backlog, c) The evolution of 
the research by identifying details of equivalence between the 
models and, d) Evaluating the final proposal by using focus 
group techniques and conducting a survey on the views of 
specialists. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Mintzberg, “Rethinking strategic planning part I: Pitfalls 
and fallacies,” Long Range Planning, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 12–21, 
1994. 
[2] C. De Melo, V. et al, “Agile methods in Brazil: the state of 
practice in teams and organizations” Relatório Técnico RT-\- 
MAC-2012-\-03. Dep. Ciência da Comput. IME-USP., no. 
2010, p. 9, 2012. 
[3] VersionOne, “9thAnnual State of Agile Survey,” pp. 1–17, 
2015. 
[4] VersionOne, “10thAnnual State of Agile Survey,” pp. 1–16, 
2016. 
[5] E. Olsen, Strategic Planning For Dummies. Indianapolis, 
Indiana: Wiley Publishing, Inc., 2011. 
[6] A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, Fifth 
Edition. Newtown Square, Pennsylvania 19073-3299 USA: 
Project Management Institute, Inc, 2013. 
[7] E. Brito, R. Costa, A. Duarte, P. De Pós-graduação, and I. Ppgi, 
“About the Use of Model Canvas in Data Management Plans 
for Digital Curation Research Projects.” VIII Brazilian e-
Science Workshop, Brasília, 2014. 
[8] D. Leffingwell, “Scaled agile framework,” 2016. [Online]. 
Available: http://scaledagileframework.com. [Accessed: 02-
Feb-2016]. 
[9] J. Kontio, J. Lehtola, L. Bragge, “Using the focus group 
method in software engineering: obtaining practitioner and 
user experiences”. Redondo Beach, CA: International 
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE), 
2004. 
[10] S. L. Pfleeger and B. A. Kitchenham, “Principles of Survey 
Research Part 1 " Turning Lemons into Lemonade Systems / 
Software , I n c . What our series will discuss Description of 
the Lethbridge survey,” vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 16–18, 2001. 
[11] P. F. Drucker, Introduction to Adminsitration, São Paulo: 
Pioneira Thompson Learning, 2002. ISBN 8522101305. 
[12] M. E. Porter, Competitive strategy: Techniques for analyzing 
industries and companies. Simon and Schuster, 2008. 
[13] P. Kotler and K. L. Keller, Marketing Management. Pearson, 
2011. ISBN 0132102927. 
[14] C. J. Stettina and J. Hörz, “Agile portfolio management: An 
empirical perspective on the practice in use,” Int. J. Proj. 
Manag., vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 140–152, 2015. 
[15] A. Osterwalder, Y. Pigneur, A. Smith, and T. Movement, 
Business Model Generation. Hoboken, New Jersey: John 
Wiley & Sons Inc, 2010. 
[16] W. C. Kim and R. Mauborgne, Blue Ocean Strategy: How to 
Create Uncontested Market Space and Make the Competition 
Irrelevant. Boston, Massachusetts: Harvard Business School 
Publishing Corporation, 2005. 
[17] A. Maurya, Running Lean, Second. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2012. 
[18] L. C. Passos, “Strategy Model Canvas.” Sergipe, AL, 2015. 
[Online].Available: http://www.strategymodelcanvas.com.br/. 
[Accessed: 02-Feb-2016]. 
[19] E. Ries, The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use 
Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful 
Businesses. 2011. 
[20] J. F. Júnior, Project Model Canvas: project management 
without bureaucracy. Brasil, Elsevier, 2014.
 
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

