Development of Network System Based on Fiber-To-The-Desktop (FTTD) in a 
National University Hospital 
 
Osamu Takaki, Kota Torikai, Shinichi Tsujimura, Ryoji Suzuki, Yuichiro Saito  
System Integration Center  
Gunma University Hospital 
Maebashi, Japan 
email: {takaki, torikai, tsujimura, ryoji-s, saitoyui}@gunma-u.ac.jp 
Takashi Aoki 
Division of Medical Information 
Gunma University Hospital 
Maebashi, Japan 
email: taoki@lemon.plala.or.jp 
Ichiroh Suzuta 
Eastern Japan Sales Department 
Alaxala Networks Corporation 
Kawasaki, Japan 
email: ichiroh.suzuta@alaxala.com 
Kenta Maeda 
1st Solution Department 
NEC Networks & System Integration Corporation 
Tokyo, Japan 
email: maeda@z5.nesic.com 
Nobukuni Hamamoto 
Library and Information Technology Center 
Gunma University 
Maebashi, Japan 
email: n.hamamoto@gunma-u.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— The authors have developed a network system in a 
national university hospital based on Fiber-To-The-Desktop 
(FTTD), which is a network architecture that has a star 
network topology. This paper describes backgrounds from 
which the hospital required the FTTD-based network system 
and issues that the authors faced in development of the 
network system. Moreover, this paper evaluates effects of their 
FTTD-based 
system 
and 
discusses 
advantages 
and 
disadvantages of FTTD, based on the authors’ experiences of 
both development and administration of the network system. 
Keywords-FTTD; 
network system; 
national 
university 
hospital. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, a lot of large hospitals including university 
hospitals introduce various information systems to assist 
medical care services ranging from administration of 
patients’ healthcare records to accounting service [1][2]. 
Consequently, network systems, which are base of the 
hospital information systems, have become large and 
complex. The reason why the network systems have grown 
is not only the growth of the server systems of hospital 
informations systems but also diversification of devices that 
medical staffs employ. Today medical staffs use multiple 
information 
terminal 
devices 
ranging 
from 
desktop 
computers to smart phone everywhere in hospitals to input 
and view information for medical services. Since this 
tendency continues for the foreseeable future, network 
systems of hospitals will grow increasingly large.  
The growth of scale and complexity of a network system 
increases in not only the cost of the system development, but 
also the burden of both operation and maintenance of the 
system. Therefore, it is important to keep performance of the 
network system without making the system complex. 
Fiber-To-The-Desktop (FTTD) is known as a network 
system architecture to reduce risks and costs of maintenance 
by simplifying the structure of the network system itself by 
eliminating intermediate network switches. However, it 
seems that FTTD has seldom been publicly evaluated its 
advantages and disadvantages from practical viewpoints, 
with real development of FTTD-based network systems. 
Therefore, this paper describes backgrounds from which a 
university hospital required a FTTD-based network system, 
issues that the authors faced in development of the network 
system, effects of the FTTD-based system, and advantages 
and disadvantages of FTTD from practical viewpoints, based 
on 
the 
authors' 
experiences 
of 
development 
and 
administration of the FTTD-based large scale network 
system in the university hospital. 
In order to develop the FTTD-based network system, the 
authors employed the standard development framework of 
information systems in software engineering. The framework 
consists of (i) requirements analysis for the FTTD-based 
system, (ii) specification of the system based on the 
requirements, (iii) implementation of the system based on the 
specification and (iv) evaluation of the system based on the 
original requirements. 
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
Section II briefly explains FTTD. Section III takes for 
example a university hospital, and describes backgrounds 
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

from which the hospital required FTTD. Section IV takes the 
development of a FTTD-based large-scale network system in 
the university hospital, and describes issues that the authors 
faced in the development of the network system and how 
they addressed the issues. Section V evaluates effects of the 
FTTD-based network system and describes advantages and 
disadvantages of FTTD based on both development and 
administration of the system. The last section presents 
conclusions. 
II. 
BRIEF EXPLANATION OF FTTD 
Fiber-To-The-Desktop (FTTD) is a network system 
architecture that has a star network topology [3][4] (Fig. 1). 
A star network topology has the central part that controls 
data (packets or datagrams) and multiple terminals which 
are attached to servers, client computers and so forth. In this 
paper, the central part above is called “the central control 
part”, and the terminals above are called “terminal parts”. In 
FTTD, each terminal part is connected to the central control 
part by a fiber cable (in many cases, an optical fiber cable). 
 
Figure 1. Network topology of FTTD 
The main feature of FTTD is that an FTTD-based 
network system has no network switch that relays data 
between the central control part and a terminal part, and 
hence, the structure of FTTD is very simple. Typical 
advantages of FTTD by virtue of its simple structure are 
reliability and expandability. The feature that FTTD has no 
intermediate switches and simple structure reduces 
opportunities where failure risks occur in the network 
system. This enhances reliability of an FTTD-based network 
system. On the other hand, in many cases, the fiber cable 
between the central control part and each terminal part is 
made to have not lower than 1Gbps data rate, which makes 
it possible to connect computers or devices which require 
more traffic data to the network system. This indicates that 
FTTD has high expandability. 
As a typical disadvantage of FTTD, this network 
architecture requires higher development costs [4]. The 
issue will be again described in Section IV. 
III. 
BACKGROUND FROM WHICH A UNIVERSITY 
HOSPITAL REQUIRES FTTD 
One of the authors' missions is development and 
administration of the network system in a national university 
hospital at which the authors work. When the authors 
designed a network system of the hospital that became fully 
operational on September 2015, they chose FTTD as the 
network architecture of the main part of the network system. 
In this section, in order to clarify significance of FTTD, the 
objectives that should be accomplished by developing the 
network system are described, as follows. 
Integration of diversified network systems in the 
hospital: A university hospital consists of a lot of 
departments. Each department has a certain level of self-
government or process which the staff in the department 
perform tasks according to. Moreover, each department has 
its own budget by which its own information systems are 
independently introduced, and some of which require 
additional network systems. Therefore, some small network 
systems are independently developed for a particular 
department in the hospital. However, when such small 
network systems are connected to the main network system 
of the whole hospital remaining the small systems not 
controlled by the administrators of the main network, various 
problems including network failure and decline of network 
performance sometimes happen. Therefore, such small 
network systems should be developed and operated in 
accordance with the guideline or governance of the whole 
hospital. To this ends, the main network should provide 
unified network environment to each department, on which 
the staffs in the department can develop their information 
systems. 
Strengthening of fault tolerance: With increasing 
network devices to that client computers, instruments that 
need the network system, other network devices including 
small network hubs and so forth can be connected, the risk of 
network failure also increases by wrong connecting to the 
network devices. Moreover, as a network system becomes 
large, it becomes harder to specify the failure point and to 
address the point when a failure occurs. Therefore, it needs 
to develop the network system in that a failure seldom occurs 
and even if such a failure occurs one can specify the failure 
point and cope with it easily. 
Strengthening of usability: In recent years, there have 
been increased opportunities that medical staffs use various 
devices and computers to input and/or view patients' 
healthcare records including vital data and ordering data for 
patients everywhere in the hospital. Thus, there is a growing 
need to assist users to access network systems from wherever 
in the hospital they need for their tasks. 
In the following sections, the authors describe how the 
objectives are accomplished by FTTD. 
IV. 
DEVELOPMENT OF FTTD-BASED NETWORK SYSTEM 
IN A UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL 
In 2015, the authors developed a large-scale network 
system in our university hospital. The network system 
consists of three sub-network systems: the first sub-network 
system is the main part of the whole network system, which 
is based on FTTD-architecture; the second and third sub-
network systems are developed on traditional tree 
architecture. The three sub-network systems are connected 
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

by a big L3-layer switch that we call the "core-switch" (Fig. 
2). 
This paper focuses on the first sub-network system, 
which the authors call "FTTD-system". In the following sub-
sections, this paper describes main issues that the authors 
faced when they developed the sub-network system and how 
they addressed the issues. 
A. Development of a Large-Scale FTTD-Based Network 
System 
The FTTD-system is required to have about 1200 
terminal parts and considerably large. Thus, from a financial 
viewpoint, it is not easy to develop the central control part of 
the FTTD-system by employing a single network switch 
directly. Therefore, the authors focused on a box-type 
network switch from Alaxala Networks Corporation, which 
is one of AX3800S series network switches. Here, the 
authors call it an "FTTD-switch".  
This switch has advantages that it has 40 ports to which 
optical fiber cable can be attached despite its height with 
only 1U size, and it has sufficient switching capacity. 
Moreover, these switches can be connected to each other by 
10Gbps cables that are called "directly attached cables" and 
that are relatively reasonable. The authors procured 35 
FTTD-switches, and grouped them into 5 groups. Each 
group of FTTD-switches, which consists of 7 FTTD-
switches, has a ring network topology in which each FTTD-
switch connected to each other by four or two 10Gbps 
directly attached cables (Fig. 2). Moreover, each group of 
FTTD-switches is connected to the core-switch by four SR-
cables that are 10Gbps optical fiber cables (Fig. 2). Thus, the 
authors constructed a large scale central control part that has 
1260 downlink ports. 
Moreover, the authors aggregated each pair of the 
10Gpbs cables above and duplicated all parts of the core-
switch. Thus, the central control part is constructed not to 
stop even if every part breaks down as far as the failure point 
is single. 
B. Reduction of Development Cost and Space 
It is a typical issue that the cost to develop a FTTD-based 
network system often becomes expensive. In the authors' 
case too, the issue to reduce the cost was not negligible. The 
cost issue of FTTD can be classified into the following three 
issues: (i) the cost of the central control part, (ii) the costs of 
parts and (iii) the cost of cable wiring. Here, a "part" above 
mainly denotes a media convertor, that is used to connect an 
optical fiber cable with a copper (metal) cable, or a small 
form-factor pluggable (SFP) transceiver, that is a module 
attached to a port in a network switch to connect fiber cable 
with the network switch. Moreover, the authors realized that 
it was also a considerable issue to reduce the size of the 
central control part. For example, if the authors chose media 
convertors to connect 1200 optical fiber cables with the 
central control part, they would need a space to set 1200 
media convertors and their electric power supplies.
 
Figure 2. Architecture of FTTD-system 
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
To reduce the cost of network switches that compose the 
central control part and to reduce the size of it, the authors 
chose network switches of AX3800S series from Alaxala 
network Corporation as FTTD-switches. The FTTD-switches 
have 40 ports to which optical fiber cables can be attached 
via SFP transceivers per 1U. Moreover, they are relatively 
reasonable, compared with chassis-type network switches 
that have the same density of ports as the FTTD-switches. 
On the other hand, the authors could not reduce the costs 
of (ii) and (iii) in the first paragraph of this subsection. 
Especially, it took considerable cost to have optical fiber 
cables installed. However, it is partly legitimate that the cost 
of cable wiring is expensive, since optical fiber cables are 
longer-term resources than network equipments, and since 
sooner or later many hospitals will need fiber cables in the 
near future. 
C. Development of Authentication Infrastructure 
To realize integrated network systems, it is incomplete 
only to improve the network topology. That is, the network 
system also should have the capability to prevent users from 
adding their own network systems without permission or 
from attaching unexpected equipments to the network system. 
Therefore, 
the 
authors 
developed 
an 
authorization 
infrastructure in their FTTD-system. More specifically, they 
constructed a server that administers mac addresses of 
equipments that are admitted to be connected to the FTTD-
system and VLAN identification numbers (VLAN-IDs) 
corresponding to the mac addresses. This server prevents any 
equipment with mac address unregistered from being 
connected to the FTTD-system. Moreover, when an 
equipment with mac address registered in the server is 
connected to the FTTD-system, the server configures the 
setting for VLAN for the equipment in accordance with the 
VLAN-ID corresponding to the mac address. Thus, the user 
of the equipment above can use it wherever in the area that is 
indicated by the VLAN-ID. 
To ensure information security, it is quite insufficient to 
restrict equipments to connect to the network system only by 
their mac addresses. In fact, the way to collect mac addresses 
that are registered in the server and to fake them is well 
known (for example, see [5]). However, just for preventing 
staffs in the hospital from connecting non-admitted 
equipments with the network system, the restriction based on 
mac addresses is effective at least partly, since staffs should 
hesitate in explicitly violating information security guideline 
as well as faking mac addresses. 
V. 
EVALUATION OF FTTD 
This section describes effects of FTTD architecture from 
two viewpoints, and discusses advantages and disadvantages 
of FTTD based on the authors' experiences of development 
and administration of their FTTD-based network system. 
A. Evaluation of The FTTD-System Through Observing Its 
Structure 
Before 
developing 
the 
FTTD-system, 
several 
departments that have their own information systems 
constructed their own network systems independently and 
often connected them to the main network system. When the 
authors developed the new FTTD-based network system, 
they clarified and integrated the small network systems as 
many as possible. They broadened the unified network 
system and simplified the structure based on FTTD 
architecture. As a result, they obtained a network system that 
has considerably good visibility. 
Visibility of a network system is useful not only in 
learning the structure of the system, but also in determining 
the cause of the failure when a failure occurs in the network 
system. For example, the authors faced a network failure due 
to a malfunction of a control device of access points. Since 
any equipment did not present its malfunction explicitly, it 
was not easy to completely determine the cause of the failure 
though they predicted a malfunction of one of the control 
devises in an early stage. However, due to simplification of 
the network system, it did not take long time for the authors 
to eliminate the possibility of other equipments' malfunctions. 
As a result, they could focus on the control device and begin 
checking it in detail early on. 
B. Evaluation Through Observing Log Data 
One of the main objectives from which the authors 
developed the FTTD-system was to reduce the number of 
network failures due to connecting a non-admitted 
equipment to the network system. A typical problem of the 
failures above was a network loop problem, which is also 
called a switching loop problem. Thus, the authors looked at 
log data that FTTD-switches have output since the starting 
day of operating the FTTD-system. More specifically, they 
first inspected the number of records of network loop 
problems among log data of FTTD-switches for 242 days 
between the starting day of operating the FTTD-system and 
today. As a result, 4 loop problems were detected. 
The authors next inspected how the problems were 
resolved. By inspecting log data, it was confirmed that, in 
every case in the four problems, the terminal part that 
contained the failure point of the loop was cut off by the 
FTTD-switch immediately after detecting the loop problem. 
Each terminal part is attached by a media convertor that is 
attached by a computer or a small switch that is attached by 
several access points (cf. Fig. 2). Every terminal part 
attached by a media convertor is set at a location that is easy 
for network administrators to check, while every terminal 
part attached by access points is isolated from users. 
Moreover, network administrators can immediately identify 
the location of every terminal part. Therefore, even if a user 
raises a loop problem, network administrators can detect the 
problem point and remove it immediately by checking log 
data from FTTD-switches. In fact, in any case in the four 
loop problems, it did not take long time to resolve the 
problem. Thus, it can be concluded that it enhanced fault 
tolerance of the network system to introduce FTTD as the 
base architecture of the system. 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

C. Advantages and disadvantages of FTTD 
In this subsection, the authors discuss advantages and 
disadvantages of FTTD based on their experiences described 
in the previous sections. In Section II, they described 
reliability and expandability as typical advantages of FTTD. 
For reliability, the authors explained it as fault tolerance 
against network failures in Section IV. On the other hand, in 
the case of the authors' FTTD-system, every terminal part to 
which a user can attach his/her equipment is located at the 
place near the working place so that both of users and 
network administrators can easily check what is attached to 
the terminal part. Moreover, by administering mac addresses 
of equipments that are admitted to connect to the network 
system and VLAN-IDs corresponding to the mac addresses, 
the FTTD-system provides each admitted equipment an 
adequate network. Thus, while both of users and 
administrators recognizing conditions of the network system, 
they can connect their equipments to it. This implies that the 
FTTD-system enhances expandability as well as reliability. 
As a typical disadvantage of FTTD, one can consider the 
development cost of an FTTD-based network system. 
Actually, as described in Section III.B, the FTTD-system 
required considerable costs of FTTD-switches, parts (media 
convertors and SFP modules) and wiring cables. 
The authors learned another issue of FTTD from their 
experience of administration of the FTTD-switch. That is 
that SFP modules in FTTD-switches have malfunctions 
frequently. This is partly understandable because the central 
control part consists of a lot of FTTD-switches which have a 
lot of SFP modules in high density which are considerably 
accurate. Therefore, it will be required to develop a 
framework that includes a know-how or a guideline to 
effectively and promptly cope with a failure due to a 
malfunction of a parts in the FTTD-system. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper described backgrounds from which a national 
university hospital required a large scale network system 
based on a network architecture called "Fiber-To-The-
Desktop (FTTD)", and issues that the authors faced in 
development of a FTTD-based network system. Moreover, to 
evaluate the FTTD-based system, this paper inspected 
records of network loop problems in log data in the FTTD-
system and how the authors resolved failures including the 
loop problems above, and discussed advantages and 
disadvantages of FTTD architecture based on the authors' 
experiences of both development and administration of the 
FTTD-based system. The evaluation shows that the FTTD-
system partly enhanced reliability and expandability of the 
network system. 
On the other hand, this paper described issues that the 
FTTD-system required high costs in development and 
maintenance of it. It will need to develop a framework to 
maintenance a lot of parts in the FTTD-system.  
All data in a FTTD-based network system go through the 
central control part. It is useful to analyze such log data for 
investigation into the causes of network failure and security 
problem and for preparation for addressing such problems. 
Thus, the authors' next objective will be to develop a 
mechanism for the maintenance all log data collectively at 
the central control part. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant Number 15K00297 and a grant-in-aid for education of 
healthcare informatics for medical professionals.  
REFERENCES. 
[1] L. Nguyen, E. Bellucci, and L. T. Nguyen, “Electronic health 
records implementation”: An evaluation of information 
system impact and contingency factors, International Journal 
of Medical Informatics, Vol. 83, Issue 11, pp.779-796, 2014. 
[2] B. Hadji, G. Martin, I. Dupuis, E. Campoy, and P. Degoulet, 
“14 Years longitudinal evaluation of clinical information 
systems acceptance: The HEGP case”, International Journal 
of Medical Informatics, Vol. 86, pp.20-29, 2016. 
[3] H. Ueda et al., “A renovation of campus IT infrastracture with 
fiber to the desk network”, Journal for Academic Computing 
and Networking, Vol. 14, pp.56-63, 2010, (in Japanese). 
[4] J. L. Stong-Michas, “FTTD: Bring the Future to Your Desk”, 
Electrical Contractor, http://www.ecmag.com/print/section 
/fttd-bring-future-your-desk,  Accessed 18 May 2016. 
[5] M. Ciampa, “CompTIA Security+ Guide to Network Security 
Fundamentals (5th Edition)”, Course Technology, 2014. 
 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

