Middleware Applied to Digital Preservation: A Literature Review 
Eriko Brito, Paulo Cesar Abrantes, Bruno de Freitas Barros 
Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems (CESAR) 
Recife – PE, Brazil 
E-mails: eriko.brito@outlook.com, {pc.abrantes, barrosbruno}@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract — Maintaining digital collections available for 
humanity use at long term is a big challenge for the areas of 
digital preservation, management policies of curator centers 
and technologies for data reproducibility. This paper performs 
a literature review to investigate middleware options for digital 
preservation, listing its main features and applications. Seven 
solutions were found and it was concluded that the cataloged 
technological bases are mature enough, which indicates an 
optimistic future for the digital curation area. 
Keywords—Digital 
Curation; 
Digital 
Preservation; 
Reproducibility; Middleware. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Research and solutions in the digital preservation area 
have evolved significantly in recent decades establishing 
their technological, methodological and political apparatus. 
Brito et al. [1] point out that compared to the physical 
collections 
preservation, 
digital 
content 
brings 
an 
association, almost paradoxically, between a great potential 
risk and a great potential for protection. The potential risk is 
represented by the ephemerality of digital storage that can be 
irretrievably lost because of technical or human failure much 
more easily and quickly than in the case of physical 
representations of content. The potential for protection, in 
turn, is anchored in the fact that digital collections can be 
endlessly reproduced and stored with full fidelity and 
integrity. 
The continuity of digital collections depends, mostly, on 
implementing strategies that take full advantage of the 
potential for protection, attempting to neutralize its inherent 
potential risk. However, the challenge can represent much 
more of a social and institutional problem than a purely 
technical issue, because, particularly concerning digital 
preservation, it depends on institutions that undergo changes 
of direction, mission, administration and funding sources, as 
Arellano defends [2]. 
Concomitantly, in the information technology area, 
distributed systems are established as an information-sharing 
pattern. That leads us to cloud computing that, according to 
Mell et al. [3], is a ubiquitous, convenient and on demand 
model for sharing computing resources that can be managed 
and made available with minimal effort.  
Applying the distributed processing principles and cloud 
computing to the maturity scenario of digital preservation 
seems to be an only natural option. Wittek et al. [4] relates 
distributed systems to distributed digital preservation, 
pointing out that it can ensure the replication of digital 
artifact copies between geographically separated servers. It is 
important to say that distributed digital preservation is not 
only the act of ensuring the backup of digital artifacts, but 
also the possibility to access the data over the years and to 
reuse it.  
Among 
the 
distributed 
systems 
and 
the 
digital 
preservation, there is the middleware, which, for Rocha et al.  
[5], is the group of components located between the 
operating system and the application, promoting generic 
services to support the execution of distributed applications. 
For this Literature Review (LR), the presented concept of 
middleware is extended to a layer situated between the 
business rules of the curator center and the supporting IT 
infrastructure of digital preservation.  
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 presents the review planning with its goals. In 
Section 3, an overview of the middleware options found is 
presented. Section 4 will show a detailed analysis of each 
option and, finally, Section 5 presents conclusion and 
register for future work. 
II. 
REVIEW PLANNING 
This review follows the guidance of Kitchenham et al. 
[6] in its structure. It contains the objectives of the review, 
the research questions to be presented, the criteria used for 
the negative scope of the research, the strategy that will be 
used and the way it will be conducted. It is expected that in 
this way, other researchers can repeat the procedure 
according to their own definitions. 
A. Objectives 
The goal of this LR is to identify existing options in 
literature 
of 
middleware 
solutions 
used 
in 
digital 
preservation processes of curation centers. The result of this 
work can provide the discovery of challenges and trends in 
this research field. 
B. Research Question 
The research question that guides this LR is: what 
middleware options for digital preservation are currently 
available in the literature? 
C. Exclusion Criteria 
For the established research question, it was decided that 
some productions will be excluded from the scope of this 
LR. Specifically, scientific productions that: 
• 
Are in proposal stage; 
• 
Present the state of art for the research question; 
• 
Were published before the year of 2010. 
404
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

D. Research Strategy 
The research strategy consists in establishing the 
premises that will be considered by the LR to achieve its 
goals. Thus, in this section, will be elicited the sources of the 
research project, base language and keywords to be used in 
the search engines listed at the sources. These assumptions 
are defined as follows: 
 
Sources: IEEE Xplorer, Science Direct, ACM Digital 
Library, Compendex and Scopus. 
Language: the English language will be used as 
reference for the LR, as it is considered the most popular 
in the scientific world. 
Keywords: 
Middleware 
to 
digital 
preservation, 
Distributed systems for digital preservation, Electronic 
Records Archives capabilities, reproducibility. 
E. Review Conduction 
This paper was planned and produced in May 2015 in 
response to the approval requirements of the discipline of 
Systems Interoperability of the Professional Master's degree 
in Software Engineering at CESAR.EDU. The sources were 
found by using search strings formed by logical 
combinations of keywords presented as follows:  
(“digital preservation” OR “digital curation” OR 
reproducibility OR cloud OR “distributed systems”) AND 
middleware 
The collection of articles was obtained by reading the 
abstracts, guided by the research question and exclusion 
criteria presented. As a result of this approach, there were 
seven relevant papers to the theme of this LR, which are 
presented in Section 3.  
In summary, the results obtained from the data sources 
were: 
 
a) IEEE Xplorer returned 37 works, out of which 3 were 
considered aligned to the research question.  
b) ACM Digital Library returned 47 results, some of 
them also found in IEEE Xplorer, and 4 of them were 
more relevant to this LR.  
c) In Science Direct 20 results were located. 
d) In Scopus, 7 and,  
e) In Compendex, 5 results.  
 
Results c, d and e were classified as outside of the LR 
scope either because they match the exclusion criteria or 
because the abstracts were not aligned with the research 
question. 
III. 
OVERVIEW OF SELECTED OPTIONS 
This section is dedicated to present the summarized 
results that are the most relevant to this LR. The following 
seven subsections are identified by the titles of the papers. 
They describe relevant aspects of each result and its 
purpose.  
A. Digital Preservation in Grids and Clouds: A 
Middleware Approach 
Digital preservation can be seen as an effort to retain, as 
long as necessary, digital material for future use on research, 
consultations or any other form of knowledge management. 
Several of the current digital preservation systems are 
backed in the computational grid technology, but the advent 
of cloud computing and its potential has become a strong and 
attractive possibility [4]. 
Placed in the business layer of the SHAMAN model, the 
proposal made by Peter Wittek and Sandor Daranyi suggests 
a middleware which is flexible enough to enable a quick and 
transparent switching between cloud computing and grid 
computing, in compliance with business rules and 
requirements of the entity that needs to preserve its digital 
collection [7]. Figure 1 shows the proposed architecture that 
includes, on the left, an archive layer governed by a set of 
pre-established policies and, on the right, computational 
scalability components in clouds or grids. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the Peter and Sándor’s proposal 
 
The considerations of the authors suggest that small 
businesses can be the biggest beneficiaries of the switching 
flexibility, by replacing servers or grid acquisitions with 
service level agreements with computing service providers in 
the clouds. 
B. Content server system architecture for providing 
differentiated levels of service in a Digital Preservation 
Cloud 
Quyen L. Nguyen and Alla Lake [8] write about storage 
challenges and resulting preservation of the rapidly growing 
volume of digital records and the need for some companies 
and industries to stick to directives such as Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act. It is important to note that digital preservation covers 
the need of keeping information available and accessible 
regardless of the hardware and features that originated it. 
In this context, and to the authors, preservation in the 
clouds is a simple and economical option for models such as 
the Open Archive Information System (OAIS), as seen in 
Figure 2, which requires great engineering effort and 
planning. 
405
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
Figure 2. The OAIS Model 
 
In the LDPaaS proposal, the Ingest layers, Preservation, 
Archival Storage and Access are abstracted and offered as 
individual services in the clouds. With this arrangement the 
proposal provides differentiated service levels for the various 
needs of long term digital preservation. 
C. Biopolis, long term preservation of digital user content 
The purpose of the Biopolis is that the digital contents of 
its users can be replicated in the clouds, commercially or not. 
With regard to copyright, the design ensures the ultimate 
relationship between the author and the maintainer of the 
digital material.  
Differently from systems like Google Panoramio and 
Flirk, in which, as Sardis et al. [10] state, time stamps are not 
present, the Biopolis project supports time attribute and is 
prepared to offer, in the coming years, scalable storage, 
preservation and organization through libraries and semantic 
searches if needed, stamping data with its registration time.  
Through the Internet, the users can add their digital 
content via the web interface of the Biopolis system, by 
logging the geographic position of upload and copyrights for 
appropriate action. After the content for retention time 
setting is filtered, storage, procurement, distribution, 
preservation, recovery and reuse options are provided. 
In terms of middleware, the Biopolis project has levels 
with its own API functions, which are used as clients in a 
common runtime environment providing scalability, high 
availability and routing messages. Figure 3 shows the 
middleware components. 
 
 
Figure 3. Biopolis Middleware 
D. PDS cloud: Long term digital preservation in the cloud 
The Preservation DataStores (PDS) proposal is a 
preservation cloud based on the OAIS model, developed by 
Ccsds [9] as an infrastructure component of the European 
Union ENSURE. It employs multiple heterogeneous 
providers and embodies the concept of object-informational 
preservation.  
The authors conducted a gap analysis concluding that 
"just throwing" the data in a cloud is not the solution for 
preservation repositories. Instead, a more professional 
approach is expected. The main features of PDS Cloud 
includes: a) multiple clouds storage support, b) enhancement 
of future understandability of content by supporting data 
access using cloud based virtual appliances and, c) advanced 
services based on the OAIS model. 
As shown in Figure 4, the PDS Cloud architecture is 
implemented as a middleware, composed by a broker that 
OAIS interconnects between multiple entities and the cloud. 
On the front-end, PDS Cloud exposes to the client a set of 
OAIS-based preservation services such as ingest, access, 
delete and preservation actions on OAIS Archival 
Information Packages (AIPs).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. PDS Cloud Architecture 
 
On the back-end, it leverages heterogeneous storage and 
computes cloud platforms from different vendors. AIPs may 
be stored on multiple clouds simultaneously to exploit 
different storage cloud capabilities and pricing structures, 
and to increase data survivability. 
In the conclusions, Rabinovici-Cohen et al. [11] point out 
that the main purpose of PDS Cloud is to keep the 
responsiveness of long term digital material by adhering to 
the changes of technological scenarios. 
E. Rule-based curation and preservation of data: A data 
grid approach using iRODS  
In this paper, Hedges et al. [12] present the 
implementation of a data management layer to support a 
system of preservation research data. For data storage, the 
authors suggest the use of the e-Science technology and grid 
computing middleware, presenting how integrated Rule-
Oriented Data Management System (iRODS) can be used to 
implement complex strategies of digital preservation. 
The contextualization involves the consideration that the 
Storage Resource Broker (SRB) developed by the San Diego 
406
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Supercomputer Center (SDSC) is the most widely used data 
management middleware for digital preservation. The 
iRODS, open source, is presented as its successor, also 
developed by SDSC, with significant evolution especially in 
the political representation of capacity in terms of rules.  
This feature of the iRODS middleware allowed the 
authors to explore two key points: 
 
• 
preservation actions taken when a digital 
resource is ingested into an iRODS data grid; 
• 
post-ingest management of the integrity and 
authenticity of curated digital resources. 
 
In its conclusion, the paper exalted the iRODS skills, such 
as the flexibility to implement the rules in a sequence of 
actions to be executed in particular contexts or when certain 
events like the ingest of the file into the grid, or a timer 
occur. 
F. New Roles for New Times: Digital Curation for 
Preservation  
The work of the authors was to examine tools and 
techniques used to automate the exchange of significant data 
volumes between MetaArchieve Cooperative, which uses 
“Lots of Copies Keep Stuff Safe” (LOCKSS) and the 
Chronopolis preservation system, which uses the Storage 
Resource Broker (SRB). It is expected that this work enable 
the use of preservation systems to share data between these 
two preservation networks in the United States of America 
[13]. 
Staff from the MetaArchive and Chronopolis are 
investigating technologies that allow data exchange between 
LOCKSS and iRODS, based on real-world, practical 
implementations within MetaArchive, Chronopolis and 
CDL. Three methods of exchange are being developed and 
evaluated. 
The first method uses BagIt and related technologies to 
package and transfer large collections efficiently and 
reliably. A second more, sophisticated tool, allows the user 
to identify an existing BagIt bag, transfer its contents, ingest 
these objects into a storage zone and perform quality 
assurance testing for the whole process. The third proposed 
method utilizes a LOCKSS plugin. LOCKSS has its own 
technical architecture that can be enhanced by the use of 
custom-created, XML-based plugins, which allows data to be 
manipulated according to defined rules. They will create 
plugins that will allow the LOCKSS system to interact with 
an iRODS system.  
In its conclusion, the paper emphasizes the importance of 
the project that will integrate two major digital data 
preservation platforms and, by doing so, improve multi-
disciplinary and multi-institutional scientific exploration that 
is highly data-driven. An integrated LOCKSS/iRODS 
infrastructure will better support the growing diversity in 
formats, visualization, and analytical tools that empower 
researchers to utilize information and data more effectively. 
G. Semantic Middleware for E-science Knowledge Spaces  
Futrelle et al. [14] present in his paper a middleware 
called Tupelo, which implements Knowledge Spaces. It 
enables scientists to find, use, relate and discuss data and 
metadata work in a distributed environment. Its construction 
is based on a combination of semantic web technology for 
data management and workflow. The main benefit of Tupelo 
middleware is the simplification of interoperability by 
providing the Knowledge Space view of heterogeneous 
resources distributed in institutional repositories. 
In architecture terms, Tupelo is based on an abstraction 
called “context”, which represents a kind of semantic view of 
distributed 
resources. 
Context 
implementations 
are 
responsible for performing as “operators”, which are atomic 
descriptions of requests to either retrieve or modify the 
contents of a context. Two primary kinds of operations are 
provided:  
 
1. Metadata operations, including asserting and retracting 
statements (i.e., RDF statements) and searching for 
statements that match a query; and  
2. Data operations, including reading, writing, and 
deleting binary large objects (BLOB’s), each of which is 
identified with a URI. 
 
In its closing remarks, the paper suggests that Tupelo’s 
interoperability-based architecture allows it to be used to 
connect, without replacing or displacing, existing software 
stacks to add context and help integrate the heterogeneous 
aspects of large-scale scientific work, including observation, 
analysis, organization, and publication.  
Another significant consideration was related to reducing 
the development effort required to support scientific 
domains, allowing an active view of scientific work with 
strong guarantee of reusability, based on explicit semantics 
and declarative descriptions of analytic processes, opening 
new opportunities for more effectively disseminating and 
preserving the fruits of ongoing, evolving scientific 
discovery.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
This paper presented a literature review of middleware 
available for the area of digital preservation. The main 
objective was to list options available for this context and to 
present their main characteristics and applicability. 
It was possible to observe the complexity of the long-
term digital preservation process, and that this is still an 
evolving model. It was contextualized the term middleware 
as a layer placed between the business rules of the curator 
center and the supporting IT infrastructure of digital 
preservation.  
Thus, it was possible to map the following results as the 
most cited middleware related to digital curation and 
preservation: 
 
a) The Storage Resource Broker (SRB), developed by the 
San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC);  
407
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

b) iRODS, open-source, presented as its successor and 
also developed by SDSC, and the;  
c) LOCKSS Program as an open-source, library-led 
digital preservation system built on the principle that 
“lots of copies keep stuff safe”.  
 
Table 1 shows an overview of the solutions found, being 
organized by the name of the paper, the model used as the 
base of the solution, the use of grids or clouds and its main 
characteristics. 
TABLE 1. SOLUTIONS OVERVIEW 
Paper Title 
Base 
model 
Grid 
Cloud 
Main 
Characteristic 
Digital 
Preservation 
in 
Grids 
and 
Clouds: 
A 
Middleware 
Approach 
SHAMAN 
Yes 
Yes 
Allows 
a 
transparent 
switching 
between 
cloud 
computing 
and 
grid computing 
Content 
server 
system 
architecture for 
providing 
differentiated 
levels of service 
in 
a 
Digital 
Preservation 
Cloud 
OAIS 
No 
Yes 
Abstracts 
the 
layers and offers 
them as individual 
services 
in 
the 
clouds. 
Biopolis, 
long 
term 
preservation 
of 
digital 
user 
content 
None 
No 
Yes 
Provides 
scalability, 
high 
availability 
and 
routing messages. 
PDS 
cloud: 
Long 
term 
digital 
preservation 
in 
the cloud 
OAIS 
No  
Yes 
Supports multiple 
clouds storage and 
provides 
data 
access using cloud 
based 
virtual 
appliances 
Rule-based 
curation 
and 
preservation 
of 
data: A data grid 
approach using 
iRODS 
SRB 
Yes 
No 
Implements 
a 
rule-oriented data 
management layer 
to 
support 
a 
system 
of 
preservation 
research data 
New Roles for 
New 
Times: 
Digital Curation 
for Preservation 
LOCKSS 
and 
iRODS 
Yes 
Yes 
Allows 
data 
exchange between 
LOCKSS system 
and iRODS 
Semantic 
Middleware for 
E-science 
Knowledge 
Spaces 
None 
Yes 
No 
Simplifies 
the 
interoperability by 
providing 
the 
Knowledge Space 
view 
of 
heterogeneous 
resources 
distributed 
in 
institutional 
repositories 
  
Although Brito et al. [1] claim that the digital 
preservation area is still in the early stages of its formation 
and that the technological, methodological and political 
apparatus to preserve digital information is still being built, it 
was found mature middleware options related to digital 
preservation and access to long term information.  
After this research, it was realized that information 
security applied to digital curation is an area that can be 
explored, so as future work is suggested a review of the 
literature to list the existing solutions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
To the CESAR.EDU teaching staff that contributed with 
methodological guidance for the development of this paper. 
We also appreciate the patience and dedication of our 
families that unconditionally supported the work that has 
been done so far. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Brito, R. Costa, A. Duarte, P. De Pós-graduação, and I. 
Ppgi, “The adoption of model canvas in data management 
plans for digital curation in research projects,” 2012. 
[2] M. Arellano, “Digital Preservation Criteria of Scientific 
Information,” Brazil: University of Brasilia, 2008, p. 50.   
[3] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing Recommendations of the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology,” Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Inf. 
Technol. Lab., vol. 145, 2011, p. 7. 
[4] P. Wittek and S. Darányi, “Digital Preservation in Grids and 
Clouds: A Middleware Approach,” J. Grid Comput., vol. 10, 
no. 1, 2012, pp. 133–149. 
[5] V. H. Rocha, F. S. Ferraz, H. N. De Souza, and C. A. G. 
Ferraz, “ME-DiTV  : A middleware extension for digital TV,” 
International Conference on Software Engineering Advances, 
2012, pp. 673-677. 
[6] B. Kitchenham, et al., “Systematic literature reviews in 
software engineering – A tertiary study,” Inf. Softw. Technol., 
vol. 52, no. 8, Aug. 2010, pp. 792–805. 
[7] P. 
Innocenti, 
et 
al., 
“Assessing 
digital 
preservation 
frameworks: the approach of the SHAMAN project,”, 2009, 
pp. 412–416. 
[8] Q. L. Nguyen and A. Lake, “Content server system 
architecture for providing differentiated levels of service in a 
Digital Preservation Cloud,” Proc. IEEE 4th Int. Conf. Cloud 
Computing, 2011, pp. 557–564. 
[9] Ccsds, “Reference Model for an Open Archival Information 
System (OAIS),” Forsp. Data Syst., no. January, 2002, pp. 1–
148. 
[10] E. Sardis, A. Doulamis, V. Anagnostopoulos, and T. 
Varvarigou, “Biopolis, long term preservation of digital user 
content,” IEEE 10th Int. Conf. on e-Business Engineering, 
Sept. 2013, pp. 478-483. 
[11] S. Rabinovici-Cohen, J. Marberg, K. Nagin, and D. Pease, 
“PDS cloud: Long term digital preservation in the cloud,” 
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Eng. IC2E, 2013, pp. 38–45. 
[12] M. Hedges, A. Hasan, and T. Blanke, “Management and 
preservation of research data with iRODS,” in Proceedings of 
the ACM first workshop on CyberInfrastructure: information 
management in eScience - CIMS ’07, 2007, p. 17. 
[13] T. Walters and K. Skinner, "New Roles for New Times: 
Digital Curation for Preservation," Washington: Association 
of Research Libraries, 2011. 
[14] J. Futrelle, et. al., “Semantic middleware for e-Science 
knowledge spaces,” Concurr. Comput. Pract. Exp., vol. 23, 
no. 17, 2011, pp.2107-2117 
 
408
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

