A Harmonization with CMMI-SVC Practices for the Implementation of the ITIL 
Service Design Coordination Process   
George Hamilton Barbosa Fernandes Ota, Sandro Ronaldo Bezerra Oliveira 
Graduate Program in Computer Science 
Federal University of Pará 
Belém, Pará, Brazil 
e-mail: hamilton.ota@gmail.com, srbo@ufpa.br 
Abstract—This 
paper 
proposes 
a 
strategy 
for 
the 
harmonization of the Information Technology (IT) service 
management 
framework, 
the 
Information 
Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) framework, and the process 
improvement model for service used in the IT industry, called 
the Capability Maturity Model for Service (CMMI-SVC). The 
focal point of this harmonization lies in the Design 
Coordination process included in the ITIL Service Design, 
which seeks  to ensure that the design consists of appropriate 
services and coordinates all the design features involved in 
projects, changes, suppliers and support teams. The results of 
the harmonization were checked step by step (in a procedure 
that included a peer review) with the  assistance  of a specialist 
with a knowledge of  the ITIL framework and the CMMI-SVC 
model. Hence, the aim of this work is to correlate the structures 
for  these standards and thus obtain the benefits of being able 
to reduce the time and costs through a joint implementation 
and also to stimulate the implementation of several models 
designed for IT service  management. Thus, the main 
contribution made by this paper is that it finds a way of 
implementing ITIL practices through the adoption of the 
organizational process assets included in CMMI-SVC. This 
form of implementation was evaluated by specialists with an 
expert knowledge of both frameworks and adjustments were 
requested before the final version was completed for this work. 
Keywords-service management; information technology 
services; IT organization; service management model; ITIL; 
CMMI-SVC; harmonization. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, both public and private organizations, 
(regardless of their size), have increased their demand for IT 
services to achieve their strategic goals. This paradigm has 
led the IT area to be seen as a strategic partner of businesses  
by enabling them to act in a competitive way. As a result of 
this change, there is a need to improve standards when 
providing these IT services, by employing methodologies to 
guide their implementation and management. Since they are  
based on best practices, this has enabled companies to 
achieve successful results [1]. 
Several standards of best practice (including proprietary 
knowledge, norms, models and frameworks designed for IT 
service quality management) are available in the market, 
such as the ITIL framework [2], International Organization 
for 
Standardization 
/ 
International 
Electrotechnical 
Commission (ISO / IEC) 20000 [3], CMMI-SVC [4] and 
Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology 
(COBIT) [5]. 
According to the Information Technology Service 
Management Forum (itSMF) UK [1], the ITIL framework 
offers the following benefits: a) providing value to 
customers through IT services, b) integrating a strategy for 
services for business and customer needs, and c) measuring, 
monitoring, optimizing and reducing the cost of IT services. 
Companies such as IBM, Microsoft, HP and HSB are 
success stories in the adoption of the ITIL framework and in 
the 2011 edition of itSMF. There are 5 stages in the service 
lifecycle; each stage has a book of its own, together with 26 
processes and 4 functions, which assist in achieving the 
purposes and goals of each stage. 
In contrast, the CMMI for Services (CMMI-SVC) [4] is 
focused on the processes of service companies that are 
designed to help  these companies  know and improve their 
IT service processes. According to the CMMI Institute, until 
now (2017), their assessment shows that 549 companies 
have been using this maturity and capability model. 
Many organizations see the need to adopt two or more 
IT best practice models or frameworks to improve 
efficiency and effectiveness in providing suitable IT 
services and thus ensure the organization’s survival and 
success in the competitive global market. A set of models or 
frameworks (rather than just one) is used because when 
implemented in isolation they may not be able to fully cover 
all the needs of an organization by improving its IT services. 
Regardless of differences in concept and structure, IT best 
practice frameworks and models are not in principle 
incompatible, which means that they can be combined to  
improve the organization's IT service management. Hence  
the challenge of implementing IT service management 
through more than one standard of best practice, can be 
overcome by means of  harmonization. This task will help to 
establish the similarities and differences between the models 
discussed in this paper [6]. The harmonization technique is 
widely used and accepted by the regulators as a means of 
enhancing the quality of the products and services provided 
and managed by the IT organization. 
The research question raised in this work is about how 
ITIL (the IT service quality framework) and CMMI-SVC 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

(the process quality model) can lead to an organizational 
improvement in an integrated way, by making use of the 
assets (practices, processes and other features) that these 
standards have. In this way, this research is driven by the 
need for materials that can guide the implementation process 
of the multi-models (ITIL and CMMI-SVC) in companies 
through the provision of assets to determine  their strengths 
and weaknesses. It is also the purpose of this research to 
show the relationship between the ITIL framework and the 
CMMI-SVC 
quality 
model, 
by 
harmonizing 
their  
characteristics to show the level of adherence between their 
structures and supporting the organizations that wish to 
implement the framework and model together. Thus, the 
description of the main goal concerns the application of the 
practices defined in the quality models for  IT service  
management. 
The scope of the business / scientific problem and its 
challenges is revealed by the number of existing models that 
are designed to improve the quality of IT services. The 
harmonization can help to identify the common features of 
these models by providing the area responsible for the 
organization’s IT service management with an instrument to 
guide the joint implementation of their practices. In this 
way, time and costs can be reduced and value delivered to 
the customers by means of the IT quality services. Thus, the 
best means to solve this problem is to determine how many 
of the assets (practices, processes and other factors) that are 
needed to support the implementation of different standards, 
can be applied together in the area responsible for the 
organization’s IT service management. 
This paper discusses the details of the harmonization of 
the Design Coordination process included in the ITIL 
Service Design, together with the process areas of the 
CMMI-SVC model. In describing the similarities and 
differences between the models, structures and the coverage 
criteria, an evaluation has been carried out to validate the 
correctness of the harmonization between the model and the 
framework. Thus, the purpose of this work is to design an 
instrument that can guide the joint implementation of the 
practices contained in both standards (ITIL Service Design 
and CMMI-SVC), and explain which CMMI-SVC strategies 
could be used to implement the ITIL set of practices. This 
harmonization does not aim to show the mapping between 
the assets but rather the coverage of ITIL obtained from the 
implementation of CMMI-SVC. 
Several issues need to be addressed in this research,  
including how the nature and scope of the problem 
investigated are related to the IT service quality and the 
improvement of the IT service and process. It also involves  
attempting to ensure that the service improvement can take 
place during the IT service lifecycle. 
The ITIL Service Design lifecycle consists of 8 
processes. The choice of the Design Coordination process 
for this study, was based on the fact that this process seeks  
to ensure that the goals and objectives of the stage are met. 
It also provides and maintains a single point of coordination 
and control for all the activities and processes at this stage 
of the lifecycle. 
It is hoped that the results of this research will: a) reduce 
the costs of organizations with joint implementation models, 
b) overcome the problem of inconsistencies and conflicts 
between the adopted standards, and c) reduce the  costs 
incurred through this type of multi-model implementation. 
The difficulty is how to harmonize the ITIL framework with 
the 
CMMI-SVC 
model, 
as 
defined 
by 
different 
organizations and decide which practices should be 
integrated. Finally, this research is constrained by the fact 
that it is only focused on one process - Design Coordination 
- which is a part of the ITIL Service Design (although  the 
harmonization of other processes included in the ITIL 
Service Design are available at the “SPIDER - Software 
Process Improvement: Development and Research Project 
SPIDER”) and because only one expert has been invited to 
evaluate this harmonization. 
The harmonization of ITIL with CMMI-SVC is 
significant because both standards include assets for the 
implementation of the IT process improvement. This means 
that an organization that is interested in this subject can 
implement an organizational improvement program with the 
good practices of different models. For this reason, it is 
clear that an organization that wishes to achieve this level of 
improvement, could derive the benefits of being able to   
reduce the costs and time of an individual implementation of 
each model, even though it could also carry out a joint 
implementation. With regard to the Design Coordination 
process, it is useful for an organization to move from a 
managed maturity level to a defined maturity level where 
the 
processes 
become 
standardized, 
structured 
and 
institutionalized. 
This paper is structured as follows. Section II examines 
some related work that harmonize the two standards for IT 
service management and discusses in detail the fundamental 
principles of the two standards selected for this research 
study. Section III describes the harmonization between the 
Design Coordination process included in the ITIL Service 
Design and the practices in the CMMI-SVC process areas, 
as well as examining the evaluation undertaken for this 
research and the guidelines on how harmonization should be 
used. Finally, Section IV concludes the paper with some  
final considerations, including the results obtained and the 
limitations of this research, followed by some suggestions 
for possible future work. 
II.
RELATED WORKS AND BACKGROUND
This section provides an overview of the concepts of the 
CMMI-SVC model and the ITIL framework and some 
related works. 
A. Related Works 
 Bridges and Albuquerque’s work [7] set out a hybrid 
model based on equivalences found between the Service 
Availability 
and 
Continuity 
Management 
areas 
of  
Information Technology Services Management (ITSM) and 
the guides for service management, such as CMMI for 
Services, COBIT, ISO 20000, ITIL and Brazilian Software 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Process Improvement (MPS.BR). These are concerned with 
encouraging the use of a quality improvement model in both 
areas (harmonically), with a view to consulting the Database 
of a Supplemental Health Operator in Brazil. 
In [8], Ali, Soomro and Brohi mapped some ITIL 
processes for similar processes in IT standards and best 
practices in IT services: COBIT, ISO / IEC 27002-2005, 
Six Sigma, The Open Group Architecture Framework 
(TOGAF), enhanced Telecom Operations Map (eTOM), 
CMMI, Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards 
(PCI DSS) and the Common Security Framework (CSF). 
This 
mapping 
found 
similarities 
that 
enable 
the 
simultaneous implementation of ITIL in conjunction with 
these standards and norms in organizations and thus  
improve the productivity of business and IT services. 
Although this work took account of the harmonization 
between ITIL and CMMI, the CMMI model that was used 
was CMMI for Development (CMMI-DEV), which is 
concerned with software development and not IT process 
management, which is the focal point of the good practices 
in ITIL and CMMI-SVC used in this paper. 
In a study by Pardo et al. [9], an integrated model is 
devised that harmonizes multiple approaches related to IT 
Governance for the Banking sector, including the 
Technology Governance Model for Banking (ITGSM). This 
involved six models and norms, namely Basileia II, COBIT 
4.1, RISK IT, VAL IT, ISO 27002 and ITIL V.3, and these  
were integrated in pairs in an interactive and incremental 
way to create  the ITGSM model. As a result, benefits were 
obtained for banking organizations, on the basis of a system  
that harmonized these models and norms. 
 Espindola and Audy [10] adopt an evolutionary 
approach to integrate quality models, which define a method 
that systematically executes a meta-model in Unified 
Modeling Language (UML). This is  based on the features 
included in the mapping table for a quality framework and 
several models (CMMI, ISO / IEC 15504, ISO / IEC 20000 
and COBIT). As a means of confirming  the applicability of 
the method, the Reference Model of Brazilian Software 
Process Improvement (MR-MPS) quality model was added 
to validate if the addition of a model that had not been used 
in the development of the meta-model, was able to ratify it. 
 Kusumah, Sutikno and Rosmansyah [11] carried out a 
case study in an organization called INTRAC, which 
introduced the Model Design of Information Security 
Governance Assessment with Collaborative Integration of 
COBIT 5 and ITIL. This integration was, as far as possible,  
aimed at eliminating risks and their effects on the 
organizations, in situations where this had previously been  
fully ensured through the use of a single standard such as 
ISO / IEC 27001:2009 and ISO / IEC 27002:2005. 
Finally, Garcia, Oliveira and Salviano [12] show the 
mapping between CERTICS (a national Brazilian model) 
and CMMI-DEV (an international model), in a situation  
where the main purpose of harmonization was to improve  
the 
area 
of 
Information 
Technology 
Competence   
Management of CERTICS. Each stage was evaluated by a 
specialist in the CERTICS and CMMI-DEV models, 1) to 
ensure the methodology had been formulated correctly, 2) to 
ensure the methodology was being employed correctly and 
3) to ensure it was appropriate to have this kind of 
methodology. The  main value of this was the reduction of 
time and costs during the implementation and, in particular, 
theability to implement several joint projects in the software 
development. 
Organizations can find a wide range of best practices in 
the frameworks and models available which can lead to  
improvements in their processes and make their businesses 
profitable, by attracting companies and customers in very  
different areas. These frameworks and models have some 
similarities, strengths and weaknesses. A notable feature of  
the related work on the harmonization of these practices is 
that they enhance the organizational processes in business, 
without the need to employ a large number of quality 
models, since they are harmonized. As a result of this 
harmonization, the regulatory agencies of these standards, 
models and frameworks can find failings in their good 
practices and correct them in their quality models. 
B. The ITIL Framework 
 ITIL is a public framework owned by AXELOS (a joint 
venture set up in 2014 by the Government of the United 
Kingdom and Capita) and based on best practices i.e., 
“activities or processes that have proven to be successful 
when used in many organizations” [2], that are widely 
recognized in the world for IT service management (ITSM). 
The ITIL Library is made up of a set of 5 books, one for 
each stage of the service lifecycle, where IT services 
effectively contribute to the best practices that can be 
adopted and adapted. It depends on the need and 
convenience of each organization to obtain business value.  
“Stages of the lifecycle work together as an integrated 
system to support the ultimate objective of service 
management for business value realization” [2]. 
The ITIL framework and its 5 service lifecycle stages 
consist of a core publication, which provides a set of best 
practice guidelines for each stage. This model provides an 
insight into the service stages from conception to retirement. 
When each stage is examined,  a set of processes and 
activities can be found  for planning each objective in a 
sequence. The stages of the lifecycle are as follows: 
•
ITIL Service Strategy
- this formulates IT 
strategies and plans that must be appropriately 
aligned to the business and determine which    
services the provider must offer to meet the needs 
of customers or businesses, 
•
ITIL Service Design - at this stage, the design of 
appropriate and innovative IT services, including 
their 
architectures, 
processes, 
policies 
and 
documentation, to meet current and future agreed 
business requirements, 
•
ITIL Service Transition, - this aims at transferring 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

a new or changed service to the work environment 
in a controlled way, 
•
ITIL Service Operation - this is responsible for 
keeping the service within the work environment in 
a good operational condition and ensure that users 
and customers are satisfied with the efficient 
operation of the service, and 
•
ITIL 
Continual 
Service 
- 
this 
provides 
improvements in services and processes to 
maintain the value of the service for the customer 
and business. 
Each stage of the ITIL lifecycle has a set of structured 
processes with activities to achieve a particular goal. The 
processes start with defined triggers and inputs, which result 
in defined outputs [2]. The processes of the ITIL Service 
Design domain are: 
•
Design Coordination, a process that aims at  
ensuring that the goals and objectives of the stage 
are properly met and controlled by a single point of 
coordination and control for all the other processes 
and activities within this stage of the service 
lifecycle, 
•
Service 
Catalog 
Management, 
a 
process 
responsible for providing and maintaining a 
consistent flow of information with regard to all the 
services in operation, as well as the one that is still 
being carried out to start the operation, 
•
Service Level Management, a process that seeks to 
ensure that current and planned IT services are 
delivered in accordance with the goals established 
in the agreements, 
•
Availability Management, a process that is  
designed to guarantee the availability levels for IT 
services and in this way efficiently and effectively 
meet the requirements for availability and service 
level goals agreed with the customer or business, 
•
Capacity Management, which is responsible for 
ensuring that services, service components and the 
IT infrastructure have the required capacity and 
performance and can operate in a timely and 
efficient way, while justifying its  costs, 
•
IT Service Continuity Management, a process 
that manages business risks, which have the 
potential to cause serious damage to IT services and 
can draw up  contingency plans and / or redundancy  
to mitigate  the possible efects of these risks, 
•
Information Security Management, a process that 
seeks to align IT security with business security and  
ensure the confidentiality, integrity and availability 
of IT assets, information, data and services, as 
agreed with the IT service provider, and 
•
Supplier Management, a process that must be 
involved with all stages of the service lifecycle in 
ITIL, because in this stage the suppliers are required 
to design new and / or updated services and  must 
comply with their contractual obligations. 
Owing to the limited space in scope of this paper, we 
decided to select the Design Coordination process of ITIL 
Service Design. This process is structured in two categories 
[13], each with its respective activities, namely: 
•
For the overall service design lifecycle stage: 
-
Define and maintain policies and methods, 
-
Plan design resources and capabilities, 
-
Coordinate design activities, 
-
Manage design risks and issues, and 
-
Improve service design. 
•
For each design:  
-
Plan individual designs, 
-
Coordinate individual designs, 
-
Monitor individual designs, and 
-
Review designs and ensure handover of service 
design package. 
C. The CMMI-SVC Model 
The Capability Maturity Model Integration for Services 
(CMMI-SVC) is a maturity model for assessing, defining, 
implementing 
and 
improving 
the 
quality 
of 
an 
organization’s processes and its ability to manage the 
service. This model was created by the Software 
Engineering Institute (SEI), and contains 24 Process Areas 
(PA), 16 of which are core, 1 is shared and 7 are service-
specific process areas of CMMI-SVC. This model was 
designed to meet the need for development and 
improvement in the maturity of service practices and hence 
make improvements in the performance of the service 
provider leading to customer satisfaction [4]. 
In 2010, the CMMI version 1.3, which brings together 
three constellations, was published by SEI: CMMI for 
Development (CMMI-DEV), which deals with development 
processes, CMMI for Acquisition (CMMI-ACQ), where 
processes of acquisition are worked out, as well as  
outsourcing of products and / or services, and CMMI for 
Services (CMMI-SVC), aimed at improving service 
processes. 
There is a chapter devoted to describing the components 
in the CMMI-SVC model. Understanding these components 
is regarded by the model as a critical factor since it seeks to 
ensure the use of the information is understood. These 
components are grouped into 3 categories: 
•
Required Components - components considered to 
be essential to achieve process improvement in a 
particular process area, and comprising Specific and 
Generic Goals, 
•
Expected Components - components that describe 
the activities that are needed to achieve a required 
component, and are formed of Specific and Generic 
Practices, and 
•
Informative Components - components that help  
the model to be understood, and thus have 
components such as Subpractices, and Examples of 
Work Products.   
  The CMMI-SVC consists of process areas (PA) with 
specific purposes and goals related to each particular 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

process area, as well as generic goals related to all the 
process areas. Specific goals (SG) are also defined that refer 
to the unique features of each process area and generic goal  
(GG) responsible for defining the characteristics that are 
common to all the process areas. For each specific goal, a 
set of specific practices (SP) will be outlined, which are 
activities that need to be completed to ensure that the goal is 
satisfied in each PA. 
The three CMMI-SVC process areas considered in this 
harmonization are: 
•
Organizational Process Definition - the purpose 
of this is to establish and maintain a usable set of 
organizational process assets and work environment 
standards. This process area includes the following 
specific practices: 
o
SP 1.1 Establish Standard Processes, 
o
SP 
1.2. 
Establish 
Lifecycle 
Model 
Descriptions, 
o
SP 1.3 Establish Tailoring Criteria and 
Guidelines, 
o
SP 1.4 Establish the Organization’s 
Measurement Repository, 
o
SP 1.5 Establish the Organization’s 
Process Asset Library, 
o
SP 1.6 Establish Work Environment 
Standards, 
o
SP 1.7 Establish Rules and Guidelines for 
Teams, 
•
Organizational Process Focus - the purpose of this 
is to plan, implement, and deploy organizational 
process improvements based on a thorough 
understanding 
of 
the 
current 
strengths 
and 
weaknesses of the organization’s processes and 
process assets. This process area includes  the 
following specific practices: 
o
SP 1.1 Establish Organizational Process 
Needs, 
o
SP 1.2 Appraise the Organization’s 
Processes, 
o
SP 1.3 Identify the Organization’s Process 
Improvements, 
o
SP 2.1 Establish Process Action Plans, 
o
SP 2.2 Implement Process Action Plans, 
o
SP 3.1 Deploy Organizational Process 
Assets, 
o
SP 3.2 Deploy Standard Processes, 
o
SP 3.3 Monitor the Implementation, 
o
SP 3.4 Incorporate Experiences into 
Organizational Process Assets, 
•
Integrated Work Management - the purpose of 
this is to establish and manage the work and  
involve the stakeholders concerned through an 
integrated and defined process that is adapted to the 
organization’s set of standard processes. This 
process area includes the following practices: 
o
SP 1.1 Establish the Defined Process, 
o
SP 1.2 Use Organizational Process Assets 
for Planning Work Activities, 
o
SP 1.3 Establish the Work Environment, 
o
SP 1.4 Integrate Plans, 
o
SP 1.5 Manage the Work Using Integrated 
Plans, 
o
SP 1.6 Establish Teams, 
o
SP 1.7 Contribute to Organizational 
Process Assets, 
o
SP 2.1 Manage Stakeholder Involvement, 
o
SP 2.2 Manage Dependencies, 
o
SP 2.3 Resolve Coordination Issues. 
The CMMI-SVC model should be consulted for a better 
understanding of the purpose of each specific practice [4]. 
This list of specific practices will be used in the section 
describing the harmonization set out in this paper. 
III. THE HARMONIZATION BETWEEN THE  ITIL FRAMEWORK 
AND CMMI-SVC MODEL
Both the ITIL framework and the CMMI-SVC model 
share the same goal of providing the IT Managers and 
organizations with a set of best practices to manage 
information technology services of quality and create value 
for the organization’s business area during the service 
lifecycle. Although these models have different structures,  
similarities can be found in the set of specific requirements 
for the IT service management, as shown in Table I. 
TABLE I. 
ELEMENTS THAT CAN INFLUENCE THE ITIL FRAMEWORK  
AND CMMI-SVC MODEL
ITIL Elements 
CMMI-SVC Elements 
Process 
Process Area 
Objectives 
Specific 
Goals 
(SG) 
Generic 
Goals 
(GG) 
Activity, 
Methods 
and 
Techniques 
Specific Practices 
(SP) 
Generic Practices 
(GP) 
Policies, 
Principles 
and 
Basic Concepts 
Subpractices 
Generic 
Practice 
Elaborations 
Triggers, 
Inputs 
and 
Outputs 
Example of Work Products (WP) 
 In each service lifecycle, the ITIL framework has a set 
of Processes, that are structured by a set of Activities to 
achieve a certain objective. Similarly, the CMMI-SVC 
model contains a set of Process Areas (PA), where several 
Specific and Generic Practices, (component of the PA), are 
described and must be implemented. 
The Objectives element of the ITIL framework is 
equivalent, in certain respects to the Specific Goals and 
Generic Goals of CMMI-SVC. This is because they include  
a set of characteristics that, must be identified in the 
respective Process of the ITIL by the Objectives element 
and in the Process Area of CMMI-SVC for the Specific and 
Generic Goals before they can be certified by the model in 
the organization. Similarly, the Activities, Methods and 
Techniques of the ITIL framework include areas that must 
be defined to achieve a specific result. This can be 
compared to the Specific Practices and Generic Practices of 
CMMI-SVC, because this includes the details of how to 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

carry out a practice to meet the goals of the model. 
Another similarity that was found refers to the elements 
that are designed to provide guidelines for the appropriate 
implementation process of the models. The fact that ITIL 
framework is present in the Policies, Principles and Basic 
Concepts and in the CMMI-SVC model, can be observed in 
the Subpractices and Generic Practice Elaborations. 
The Triggers, Inputs and Outputs of the ITIL framework 
have similar objectives to the Example Work Products of 
CMMI-SVC, since these elements must be sought during the 
implementation process in each model to ensure that the 
requirements have been met correctly. 
The integration recommended by this paper refers to the 
set of concepts in the ITL framework and the CMMI-SVC 
model elements. It also includes the definition of a set of 
equivalent technologies that assist in the evaluation and 
improvement of IT products and services. In this domain, 
there are tools, techniques, procedures, processes, roles, 
methodologies, frameworks, languages, standards, patterns, 
and so on. 
It should be emphasized that the mapping between the 
elements contained in the ITIL and CMMI-SVC were 
validated through the same correlation in the work [8], 
which confirms that the results for the relationship between 
the elements defined in Table I is correct.  
A. A Conformance Analysis of the Design Coordination 
Process 
The Design Coordination process in the category of 
activities relates  to the overall service design lifecycle 
stage, where the standard service process that needs to be 
adopted is constructed [13]. It includes the following 
activities which are mapped in each subsection below. 
1)
Define and Maintain Policies and Methods 
This activity is intended to ensure that a Consistent and 
Accurate Design(s) for the Service(s) is produced in 
accordance with the required business outcomes. When 
made available in the IT Service Operational Environment, 
it helps (and continues to help) the organization to achieve 
its goals. To do this, this activity requires a Process Area 
and Specific Practices (SP) of CMMI-SVC. 
In the Organizational Process Definition (OPD) area,  
SP.1.1 defines and maintains a set of standard processes that 
can be instantiated to address a particular area of the 
organization’s business. SP.1.2 attempts to describe the 
lifecycle models that are suited to the needs of the 
workgroup, the organization, the definitions of the service 
standard and the environment. SP.1.3 is concerned with 
drawing up the guidelines that will set out the procedure for  
the conduct and execution of the defined process. These are  
based on the information contained in the set of standard 
processes and in the assets of the organizational process. 
SP.1.4 aims to design and maintain the Organization 
Measurement Repository which provides the necessary 
information to understand and interpret the set of common 
measurements for products and processes related to the set 
of standard processes of the organization. Finally, SP.1.5 
designs and implements the organizational process asset 
library, where the procedures are specified for the storage, 
updating and retrieval of items such as policies, process 
descriptions, procedures, development plans, and other 
assets, as well as making these items available for use in 
workgroups. 
The coverage in the Define and Maintain Policies and 
Methods activity was complete, because the CMMI-SVC 
had met the requirements of this activity. 
2)
Plan Design Resources and Capabilities  
The purpose of this activity is to plan the resources and 
capabilities of the Design Coordination process, based on 
the information obtained from the Service Portfolio 
activities (Service Pipeline) and the Change Management 
process of the ITIL Service Transition stage. This is because  
this activity requires a Process Area and Specific Practices 
of CMMI-SVC to achieve its goals. 
In the Organizational Process Definition (OPD) process 
area, SP.1.6 aims to establish and maintain a  standard work 
environment, i.e what resources are required for team work. 
SP.1.7 allocates people to work in the process and defines 
the assignments of these people. 
There was complete coverage for the Plan Design 
Resources and Capabilities, because the CMMI-SVC had 
met the requirements of this activity. 
3)
Coordinate Design Activities 
This area coordinates all the design activities in projects 
and changes, management planning, resources, and conflicts 
with suppliers and support teams when necessary. It thus  
requires a Process Area and Specific Practices of CMMI-
SVC to achieve its goals. 
In the Integrated Work Management (IWM) process area, 
the aim of SP.2.2 is to manage the task dependencies 
between the activities of the process, since these depend on 
the inputs of other activities for their execution and must be 
carefully managed to avoid process gaps. Thus, the SP 
identifies any critical dependencies and plans the work 
schedule, while taking account of  these critical variables in  
the process. 
The coverage of the Coordinate Design Activities was 
complete, 
because 
the 
CMMI-SVC 
had 
met 
its 
requirements. 
4)
Manage Design Risks and Issues 
This activity is responsible for assessing risks in design, 
technical management, managing the risks involved in  
design activities, and tackling the number of problems that 
might be subsequently traced to poor design. It requires a 
Process Area and Specific Practices of CMMI-SVC to 
achieve its goals. 
In the Integrated Work Management (IWM) process area, 
in SP.2.3 the task of management entails  the identification, 
follow-up (status) and communication of the person 
responsible for tackling and solving the problem. 
The coverage in the Manage Design Risks and Issues 
activity was complete, because the CMMI-SVC had met the 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

requirements of this activity. 
5)
Improve Service Design 
The purpose of this activity is to ensure that there is a 
continuous awareness of the goals and objectives of the 
service design phase to improve the effectiveness and 
efficiency of service design activities and processes. This 
activity requires a Process Area and Specific Practices of 
CMMI-SVC to achieve its goals. 
In the Organizational Process Focus (OPF) process area,  
SP.1.1 records the needs and goals of the organizational 
process in the context of the business to ensure that it is 
fully understood. SP.1.2 evaluates and delivers the results of 
the documents needed with regard to methods and 
evaluation criteria. These include the following: the CMMI 
process model, the  International Organization for 
Standardization  (ISO) or benchmarking. SP.1.3 seeks to 
discover if there is a need for improvement in the processes 
and process assets of the organization and involves training 
for teams, and improvement of the tools used, among other 
factors. In SP.2.1 the focus is on how to enable the 
organization 
to 
establish 
and 
maintain 
plans 
for 
improvement. These are subsequently implemented in 
accordance with  the organizational needs defined in SP.2.2.  
SP.3.1 plans, records and executes the implementation of 
the Organizational Process assets and their changes, as well 
as determining what resources are needed to support this 
implementation and thus ensure its compliance with the 
organization’s current goals and objectives. The aim of 
SP.3.2 is to implement the organization’s standard 
processes, and work groups, by periodically updating them, 
and incorporating the latest changes made to the 
standardization. This ensures that all the work activities can  
benefit other work groups in the process. SP.3.4 attempts to 
bring about improvement in the planning and execution of 
the organizational process and in particular, the lessons 
learned, measurements periodically measured, and records 
of improvements in the organizational process activities. 
The coverage in the Improve Service Design activity was 
complete, 
because 
the 
CMMI-SVC 
had 
met 
the 
requirements of this activity. 
With regard to Design Coordination Process in the 
category of activities relating to each individual design,  
each process must be instantiated to allow a service project 
to be implemented [13]. This includes the following 
activities, which are mapped in each subsection below. 
1)
Plan Individual Designs 
This activity involves carefully planning each individual 
project or change to ensure the required business results are 
obtained. This activity requires a Process Area and Specific 
Practices of CMMI-SVC to achieve its goals. 
In the Integrated Work Management (IWM) process area,  
SP.1.1 seeks to define and maintain a process in accordance 
with 
its 
contractual 
obligations, 
operational 
needs, 
opportunities and constraints. SP.1.2 uses the tasks and 
work products of the process defined for the work as a basis 
for planning the work activities. SP.1.3 seeks to plan, design 
and implement a work environment, in terms of its  
equipment, tools, facilities, operations and manuals. SP.1.4 
is concerned with the management of integrated work plans, 
and ensuring the controlled participation of human resources 
in integrated projects to avoid labor conflicts.  The objective 
of SP.1.6 is to form the teams that will work in the process. 
The coverage in the Plan Individual Designs activity was 
complete, 
because 
the 
CMMI-SVC 
had 
met 
its 
requirements. 
2) Coordinate Individual Designs 
This activity is often carried out by a project manager or 
someone else with direct responsibility for the project. He / 
she is also responsible for making changes in the 
coordination of activities and in the instantiation of the 
standard process in response to the customer’s demands.   
This activity requires a Process Area and Specific Practices 
of CMMI-SVC to achieve its goals. 
In the Integrated Work Management (IWM) process area, 
SP.2.1 undertakes the management and scheduling of the 
collaborative activities of the stakeholders (the integrated 
work plan has already been defined in SP.1.4). The 
coordination of people’s dependencies and the negotiation 
of critical issues (contingencies) is carried out in SP 2.2 in 
case there is a need to change the agenda and introduce 
collaborative schedules for the stakeholders. SP.2.3 is 
designed to tackle issues that are important for the 
stakeholders. The ability of the appropriate manager to 
solve these problems depends on their scale. 
The coverage in Coordinate Individual Designs was 
complete, 
because 
the 
CMMI-SVC 
had 
met 
the 
requirements of this activity. 
3) Monitor Individual Designs 
The purpose of this activity is to monitor all aspects of 
the project to ensure the following: a) the agreed methods 
are being adhered to, b) there is no conflict of interest with 
other ongoing design projects, c) the website design 
milestones are  reached,  and d) the development of a design 
is 
comprehensive 
enough to support the 
required 
organizational results. This activity requires a Process Area 
and Specific Practices of CMMI-SVC to achieve its goals. 
In the Integrated Work Management (IWM) process area,  
SP.1.5 focuses on monitoring and controlling work 
activities. It is also concerned with work products from the 
defined processes, work plans, and other plans that can  
affect the work. 
The coverage in Monitor Individual Designs activity was 
complete, 
because 
the 
CMMI-SVC 
had 
met 
the 
requirements of this activity. 
4) Review Designs and Ensure Handover of SDPs 
 The final review of the individual designs is carried out  
to ensure that the standards and conventions are being fully 
complied with in the service design package (SDP). 
Problems should be documented and there is a need to  
determine if alterations are needed in any part of the service 
design or if they can be viewed as a part of the service 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

transition plan. This activity requires two Process Areas and 
Specific Practices of CMMI-SVC to achieve its goals. 
In the Integrated Work Management (IWM) process area,  
SP.1.7 establishes the following: a) the contributions made 
by the defined process information to the work, b) 
organizational 
process 
assets 
and 
c) 
proposed 
improvements. The processes and product measurements are 
stored in the organization’s measurement repository. In the 
Organizational Process Focus (OPF)  area, the SP.3.4 is 
responsible for the improvement of planning and execution 
of the process in the organizational process assets. Its 
activities depend on what has been found out about its 
strengths and weaknesses in the SP.1.7. 
The coverage in the Review Designs and Ensure 
Handover of SDPs activity was complete, because the 
CMMI-SVC had met its requirements. 
B. An Evaluation of the Harmonization of Technology 
Management  
The peer review technique was employed to evaluate the 
harmonization that was obtained between the requirements 
of the ITIL framework and CMMI-SVC model, as outlined 
in the last section. This was overseen by an expert, who has 
over 5 years of experience of implementing quality models 
in IT (Information Technology) companies. He has a 
recognized certification in ITIL and CMMI-SVC, as well as 
being a certified SCAMPI High Maturity lead appraiser. 
The expert was given the document that contains the 
harmonization of ITIL and CMMI-SVC. He carried out the 
review in accordance with a set of criteria, which were 
defined on the basis of Araújos’s work [6], as shown in 
Table II. 
TABLE II. 
CRITERIA DEFINED FOR THE HARMONIZATION 
EVALUATION. 
Criteria 
Definition 
TH (Technical 
High) 
Indicates that a problem in a harmonization item 
was found and, if not changed, would impair the 
system.
TL (Technical 
Low) 
Indicating that a problem in a harmonization item 
was found and a change would be appropriate.
E (Editorial) 
Indicating that a Portuguese language error was 
found or the text can be improved.
Q 
(Questioning) 
Indicating that there were doubts about the 
content.
G (General) 
Indicates that in general a comment is needed.
When 
reviewing 
the 
harmonization 
of 
Design 
Coordination process, the expert detected a problem, which 
was classified as General (G). It was suggested that an 
analysis should be conducted of all the CMMI-SVC specific 
and generic practices that have been mapped in the ITIL 
process with the aim of determining whether they are listed 
and described at the end of the document. If any mapped 
practice had not been listed, the expert suggested that it 
should be included in the document, as a means of enabling 
the purpose e of these practices to be understood. 
The specialist found a problem in the 4 ITIL activities, 
which was classified as TL. Since in this outcome the 
Specific Practice was unnamed, the expert suggested that its 
name should be included in the harmonization document. 
These problems were caused by the following: a) a lack of a 
suitable relationship between some good practices of ITIL 
with CMMI-SVC, b) a lack of detail about what level of 
coverage was determined after the relationship had been 
established between the assets of the two frameworks, c) a 
lack of clarity about what each asset represents (i.e., ITIL 
and CMMI-SVC), and d) a lack of an explanation for the 
relationship between the elements of ITIL and CMMI-SVC. 
The expert did not find any problem classified as TH, E 
or Q. 
After this first peer review the authors of this paper sent 
the corrected harmonization to 3 other experts in the field, 
who are certified and have more than 7 years of experience 
of implementing the two models used in the work. However, 
none of these experts suggested any adjustments should be 
made, although they showed an interest in the use of this 
harmonization 
for 
making 
improvements 
to 
the   
implementation of the program. 
C. How should the Harmonization be used? 
The purpose of the harmonization of the ITIL 
framework and CMMI-SVC model is to help businesses that 
wishing to obtain certifications through multi-model 
implementations or even by making evaluations of the two 
standards. The use of harmonization can optimize cost-
effectiveness, time and effort because the standards now 
have their structures harmonized and interrelated. 
It was possible to highlight the differences and 
similarities included in the requirements of ITIL and 
CMMI-SVC. Hence, it can be seen that although some 
requirements of the standards are similar or even 
complementary, they are not always able  to achieve  their 
goals in the same way. According to the Association for 
Promoting Excellence in Brazilian Software (SOFTEX) 
[14], this may occur because of the different  requirements 
of  some of the practices, outcomes and expected results of 
the standards. 
The harmonization spreadsheets have become an 
important support tool for the joint evaluation or 
implementation of the standards, because they provide 
inputs that allow their frameworks to be adapted / 
harmonized and predict   their expected results, practices 
and outcomes. This can enable the multi-models to be 
implemented in companies. 
As 
a 
result, 
the 
company 
benefits 
from 
the 
implementation of joint standards, because it will not have 
to spend time on separately analyzing the frameworks for 
the standards. This means that there is a need to determine 
in what way one standard can suit another one, because all 
the structures and requirements, (which are the same for all 
the standards), have been identified, harmonized and 
documented in the spreadsheet used for the standards. 
A qualitative criterion for the successful harmonization 
in the design coordination process can be defined as a 
standard process that is well structured, and is subject to 
rules for its adaptation and institutionalization, as well as the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

fact that it can be integrated with different projects. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS FOR FUTURE WORK
This research study examined the harmonization of the 
Design Coordination process with the ITIL framework by 
carrying out the practices defined in the CMMI-SVC 
process areas. Its goals were achieved by seeking to 
determine the similarities and differences between the 
structures of ITIL and CMMI-SVC, and investigating their 
degree of harmonization. To avoid misunderstandings and 
inconsistencies, an expert in these standards evaluated the 
harmonization by means of the peer review technique. The 
results of this review were analyzed and changes were 
suggested to remove any inconsistencies or failure to 
understand the problems detected by the expert.   
The lessons learned from this research stem from the 
fact that there is both an analytical and comparative domain 
between the framework and the object model of this 
research. Thus, it is recommended that more than one 
person should undertake it so that any conflicts or 
uncertainties can be discussed and addressed by a peer 
review. 
A limitation of this study is that the harmonization was 
not evaluated in a public / private company or organization, 
but only assessed by peer review. However, an assessment 
of the harmonization of a public company is now being 
completed in Brazil and its processes are in accordance with 
the practices of maturity level 3 of CMMI-SVC. As a result, 
it will be possible to determine if the harmonization had a  
positive 
or 
negative 
influence 
on 
a 
multi-model 
implementation. A further  limitation is the fact that the peer 
review was only conducted by a single expert, which means 
that there can only be a limited view of the results obtained 
from the research. However, this expert has extensive 
experience with the implementation of the CMMI-SVC 
model and the ITIL framework, and this should reduce the 
risk of bias in the results obtained from the review. 
In a future work, we intend to continue to expand this 
research and apply it to other organizations, so that the 
positive and negative aspects of the use of harmonization 
can be quantified through a multi-model implementation 
(ITIL framework with CMMI-SVC). Another future study 
could involve defining  the complete cycle of harmonization 
based on the results of Araújo's research [6] and the CMMI 
guide [4]. 
So far, it has not been possible to finalize the case study, 
although it is worth drawing attention to the benefits of 
multi-model implementation. These include, the reduction 
of costs and time needed to comply with the expected results 
and practices of the ITIL framework and the CMMI-SVC, 
as well as the creation of a unified and standardized  system 
to achieve the two standards. Finally, there is the advantage 
of being able to standardize the technical language that is 
used among them to define the process of IT service  
management. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Dean of Research 
and Postgraduate Studies at the Federal University of Pará 
(PROPESP/UFPA) by the Qualified Publication Support 
Program (PAPQ), for the financial support. 
REFERENCES
[1] ItSMF UK, “An Introductory Overview of ITIL® 2011”, IT Serv. 
Manag. Forum UK, London, 2011. 
[2] OGC, "ITIL Service Strategy", London: The Stationery Office, 2011. 
[3] ISO/IEC, “ISO/IEC 20000- 1:2011 Information technology — Service 
Management — Part 2: Guidance on the application of service 
management systems”, Geneva, 2011. 
[4] SEI, "CMMI® for Services", Version 1.3, no. November. 2010. 
[5] Isaca, “COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance and 
Management of Enterprise IT”, 2013. 
[6] L. L. Araújo, “Mapping between MPS.SW and MPT.BR and 
CERTICS", Dissertação de Mestrado, COPPE/UFRJ, Brazil, 2014. 
[7] L. Pontes and A. Albuquerque, “Managing Database Services: An 
Approach Based in Information Technology Services Availabilty and 
Continuity Management”, J. Inf. Syst. Eng. Manag., vol. 1, pp. 1–5, 
2017. 
[8] S. M. Ali, T. R. Soomro, and M. N. Brohi, “Mapping Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library With Other Information Standards 
And Best Practices”, J. Comput. Sci. 9(9), vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 1190–
1196, 2013. 
[9] C. Pardo et al., “Integrating Multiple Models for Definition of IT 
Governance Model for Banking ITGSM”, Int. Bus. Manag., vol. 10, 
pp. 4644–4652, 2016. 
[10] R. S. de Espindola and J. L. N. Audy, “An Evolutionary Approach for 
Quality Models Integration”, in Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference on Enterprise Information, 2009, pp. 231–236, doi: 
10.5220/0002008202310236.
[11] P. Kusumah, S. Sutikno, and Y. Rosmansyah, “Model design of 
information security governance assessment with collaborative 
integration of COBIT 5 and ITIL (case study: INTRAC)”, Proc. - 2014 
Int. Conf. ICT Smart Soc. “Smart Syst. Platf. Dev. City Soc. 
GoeSmart 
2014, 
ICISS 
2014, 
2014, 
pp. 
1–6, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICTSS.2014.7013193.
[12] F. W. S. Garcia, S. R. B. Oliveira, and C. F. Salviano, “CERTICS - A 
Harmonization with CMMI-DEV Practices for Implementation of 
Technology Management Competence Area”, in ICSEA 2016 : The 
Eleventh 
International 
Conference 
on 
Software 
Engineering 
Advances, , no. c, pp. 10–15, 2016. 
[13] OGC, "ITIL Service Design". London: The Stationery Office, 2011. 
[14] SOFTEX, “MPS . BR - Brazilian Software Process Improvement 
Assessment Guide:2016”, Brazil, 2016. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

