Smart Cities Security Issues: An Impeding Identity Crisis 
Felipe Silva Ferraz, Carlos André Guimarães Ferraz,  Ademir Gomes
 
CESAR-Centro de Estudos e 
Sistemas Avançados do Recife 
Recife, Brazil 
Email: fsf@cesar.org.br 
Informatics Center 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
Recife, Brazil 
Email:{fsf3, cagf}@cin.ufpe.br 
Engineering department 
Federal Rural University of PE 
Recife, Brazil 
Email: ademir.ferraz@gmail.com
 
Abstract — Cities have changed the manner in which 
population is distributed around the globe. Beginning in the 
70s, a large number of people began to migrate from the 
countryside to a metropolis. In such a scenario, it is necessary 
to build city systems and provide citizens with different 
methods to interact with these systems. Further, citizens play 
an important role in building this interoperable environment, 
and they are required to provide data and information about 
themselves in order to improve the functioning of the systems. 
However, citizens do not want their personal and private data 
to be disseminated in the city. This study explores problems in 
information security, and, more specifically, those related to 
identifier and identity management in the context of a smart 
city environment. This study proposes to address such 
problems by using an architecture that separates identifiers 
from data, thus creating a multiple identity infrastructure. 
Keywords- Identity; Security; Smart Cities; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The first decade of the 21st century has seen a major 
change in population distribution in the world. Owing to 
revolutions in industry and changes in commerce, many 
people began to migrate from the countryside to big cities [1] 
[2].  
In order to deal with this new scenario in which a 
majority of the population lives in metropolises, cities are 
imposing an additional load on their core systems such as the 
Education, Public Safety, Transportation, Energy and Water, 
Healthcare, and Government systems [3]. Thus, cities have 
been created and developed, and citizens have been 
empowered technologically owing to the increasing number 
of instrumented and interconnected urban solutions and 
systems. 
To develop this ubiquitous and intelligent ecosystem, 
several studies are focusing on the concept of a smart city. 
This 
concept 
involves 
better 
management 
of 
the 
infrastructure and data of a city [3]. In a smart city, better 
urban performance must not depend solely on its hardware 
infrastructure or the physical concepts of infrastructure, but 
must start taking into account the social interactions, the 
large amount of generated data, and a faster deployment of 
information and services to every citizen. The adoption of a 
smart city solution is becoming increasingly inevitable in 
order to present entities with an interoperable environment, 
which is capable of influencing web-based systems in data 
storage and sharing, and inter-communication among 
systems and other entities. Henceforth, entities will serve as 
a reference for various aspects of a smart city system such as 
citizens, sensors, and services. 
Issues related to the development of smart cities into 
interoperable urban environments pose a fundamental hurdle 
in solving complex problems of core systems in cities [3]. 
Further, one of the most critical barriers that prevent 
mainstream users (or citizens) from adopting the smart cities 
solution is the uncertainty concerning the safety of their data 
in the various collaborative systems, which form part of a 
unified set of systems that address the problems of urban 
environments. 
It is important to provide citizens with the means to 
manage 
their 
own 
identity 
across 
ubiquitous 
and 
interoperable systems [4]–[6]. This solution must not 
compromise the environment solution in any manner and 
must increase the privacy and anonymity of the citizen. 
Hence, for citizens, identity management is a key enabler for 
the evolution and maintenance of smart cities [7][8]. 
This study enumerates a set of security issues, identity 
issues in particular, that remain to be addressed from the 
perspective of a smart city. It also presents a reference 
architecture based on the management of identifiers. This 
architecture aims to increase security in the environment of 
smart cities, and provides entities (citizens, services, and 
sensors) with a method to interact with systems by using 
unique IDs for each system. Finally, an analysis of these 
issues is performed for the proposed architecture.  
This manuscript is organized as follows: After a brief 
introduction, the concepts of smart cities are introduced in 
Section II. In Section III, security analysis of smart cities is 
presented. The proposed architecture is described in Section 
IV. Section V consists of the evaluation of the proposed 
architecture. In Section VI, the conclusion is presented and 
future work is discussed. 
II. 
SMART CITIES: AN IDENTITY CRISIS 
The current level of urbanization in smart cities has 
attained an unprecedented economic and social growth; large 
cities now accommodate a majority of the world population 
and an increasing percentage of the most skilled, educated, 
creative, and entrepreneurial men and women in the world 
[1]. Today, more than 50% of the people on the planet live in 
large cities. According to the United Nations, this number 
will increase to 70% in less than 50 years [1]. This city 
growth or emergence of urban life is leading to 
unprecedented pressure on the infrastructure of the city 
owing to an increasing demand for basic services that result 
in exponential overloading [3]. 
302
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The smart city concept is based on intelligence, 
connection, and instrumentation. Another perspective, 
represented in Fig. 1, demonstrates three main characteristics 
in a smart city definition; it is an environment that is 
instrumented, interconnected, and intelligent [7]. A system 
that has only one or two of the above mentioned three 
characteristics results in a scenario in which a vital part will 
be missing.  
In spite of various studies and protocols related to 
information security, the number of vulnerabilities in 
connected applications has increased during the past few 
years [9]. Therefore, smart city systems require a distinct 
approach to address specific information security challenges 
[10][11]. 
According to [3][6][12][13], Smart city solutions depend 
on a high degree of connectivity in order to enable their 
systems (such as Education, Government, Traffic, Security, 
Resources, and Health) to create an interoperable network, 
thus offering citizens more powerful, accurate, and 
innovative [14] services. Thus, one of the major challenges 
in smart-city development is related to information security 
in the scope of interoperable systems [1]. Information 
security is a critical issue owing to the increasing potential 
of cyber-attacks and incidents in critical sectors of a smart 
city. 
In addition to deliberate attacks, such as those from 
disgruntled employees, industrial espionage and terrorists, 
information 
security 
must 
also 
address 
accidental 
compromises of the information infrastructure owing to user 
errors, 
equipment 
failures, 
and 
natural 
disasters. 
Vulnerabilities may allow an attacker to penetrate a 
network, gain access to control software [11][15], and 
modify load conditions to destabilize the system in an 
unpredictable manner. In order to protect a smart city 
effectively, various security problems must be addressed 
according to a specific design or plan. 
The belief that a traditional security approach based on 
privacy maintenance, authorization, and authentication can 
simply be added to the critical infrastructure of a city to 
make it safer as the city becomes smarter does not 
correspond to the actual scenario [4]. 
A. Distinct concepts: Identity versus identifier 
Identity is not absolute. An identity describes an entity 
within a specific scope. In our context, an entity could be a 
citizen, computer, service, sensor, organization, or one of 
many other actors of a smart city environment.  
In formal terms, the identity of an entity, within a scope, 
is the set of all characteristics attributed to this entity within 
that scope. For example, one could have an identity related 
to an educational system that contains information about the 
educational record, courses taken, and/or grades received; 
another possible identity could be related to the resource 
systems of a citizen, and the data stored may include the 
amount of energy or water consumed in the home of a 
citizen. Therefore, identities are only valid within a specific 
field and represent more than simply information that 
distinguishes one entity from another; they also represent 
who the entity is, along with its characteristics. 
In order to uniquely identify an entity, it is necessary to 
rely on identifiers and not only on identities. This distinction 
between identity and identifier is essential, and is not always 
correctly understood. The confusion is understandable 
because, 
in 
common 
phrasing, 
identity 
is 
almost 
synonymous with personal data or information used to 
identify an entity, which, in turn, is understood to be a 
unique identifier. Identifiers (such as a user name, sensor 
identifiers, social number, passport number, serial number, 
or serial ID) are also valid and guaranteed to be unique only 
within a scope.  
Thus, instead of considering an entity with a single 
identifier to represent a single identity across different 
systems, it is more natural to view an entity as a collection 
of multiple identifiers (a set of sets), each with its own 
scope, that can represent different identities of the same 
entity because the entity is identified differently within 
different possibilities. Note that this concept is aligned with 
the idea that privacy ensures that information about a person 
does not leak from one scope to another. 
The goal of permitting citizens to manage their own 
identities encompasses the integration of the identity of a 
citizen across multiple systems and services and the ability 
to provide a joint response to the needs arising from daily 
events. This goal also includes the ability to control the type 
of information about the citizen that is released to a 
particular system or at a particular time; however, 
anonymously aggregated data are made more widely 
available [6]. 
Thus, identity management is a key enabler for future 
cities. A unified identity system, which may be able to 
integrate itself with multiple identity providers, and 
different methods of authentication and identification are 
necessary to manage the extensively “wired” nature of the 
city and the density of data transactions, systems, and 
solution diversity [6]. 
Citizens or entities can use their identities to gain access 
to services and systems and utilize through the benefits that 
they have to offer. This is a method to integrate several 
solutions (systems and services); eventually, entities and 
services repeat their identification artifact at various 
instances of time and in various situations. 
Ideally, every citizen and/or entity should have various 
identifiers corresponding to various identities, each of which 
is composed of the scope combined with several attributes 
that are either exposed or used to validate a claim without 
revealing information. The use of multiple identifiers and 
identities limits the exposure of truly important credentials, 
thus minimizing the risk of abuse and identity theft, while 
allowing the exposure of less critical information that is 
helpful to participants in the ecosystem of the city such as 
retailers, building operators, service providers, and 
governments [6]. 
303
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Citizens are responsible for their identities, for the 
information that constitutes such identities, and the 
condition under which this information can be exposed.  
Smart cities will pass through information security 
problems. This paper alerts to security problems, more 
specifically, the problems generated by the relation of 
identity and identifiers. The following sections will depict 
some of this eminent identity threats in the scope of a smart 
city. 
B. Identity management is not a primary objective  
For users and administrators, Identity Management and 
Information Security are not primary concerns. Sometimes, 
issues with privacy are also ignored depending on the 
purpose of an interaction. Citizens, entities, and users, in 
general, are more focused on the task that must be executed 
rather than on the manner in which that task will identify the 
responsible entities. 
An identity management system should focus on 
methods to simplify daily tasks while offering the security, 
transparency, and privacy that a user needs. Citizens expect 
an Identity Management system to be secure and transparent, 
and privacy to be enforced in such a manner that daily tasks 
become easier and not more complex. Although these are 
latent concerns for many users and citizens, it has been 
demonstrated that they are unwilling to invest money and/or 
time to increase security measures in any aspect of the 
interaction with a system or set of systems in spite of the 
hidden problems that such investments could avoid [8]. 
C. Sensing that I have been followed 
Owing to the nature of a smart city, which must be an 
interoperable and interconnected environment and utilize 
various sensors (physical or social), the sensors are used to 
collect data from several city scenarios. This data enables 
urban systems to implement better city management.  
Based on this assumption, it is extremely important that 
the information used by System B and that is originally from 
System A cannot be traced back to its source. Further, 
information provided by a citizen to improve System C must 
not be used to determine where that citizen is or what the 
citizen does [11].  
Therefore, it is important to ensure that the described 
interchange of data has resources that prevent tracking of an 
entity identity. 
D. Identity trust is a sensitive matter and must be earned 
In recent times, account managers have been accused of 
fraud related to identity theft. If the person responsible for 
identity management is a suspect, the question of whom a 
citizen can entrust with identity data arises. The answer for 
this question must be deeply analyzed, taking some risk 
assessment into account. Each unique authentication and/or 
authorization service is susceptible to failures or attacks. 
Services are also vulnerable to theft because mistakes could 
occur. These mistakes, in addition, could create a data 
disclosure related to ID. 
Various privacy policies are presented by approximately 
20 Identity Providers (IdPs)—some focus on preserving the 
privacy of user transactions, some focus on enabling a single 
sign on environment, and others focus only on identity 
privacy [8][15].  
E. Various types of system and services access 
Identity management systems, or just IdM, have been 
used to create different sets of access rights. These rights 
offer different risk profile, thus it assumes different relations 
between users, identity provides, and relying parties. 
Unfortunately, users and system designers are not aware of 
this discrepancy in access rights. This may promote a set of 
unacceptable risks; the distinction between membership and 
ownership of a specific resource is fundamental.  
In the context of cities, IdM were first used to centralize 
access rights managements to business systems and in 
educational environment to grant students access to wireless 
areas, digital libraries, laboratories and/or grade systems. In 
either case, identity management was used to verify whether 
a certain citizen is a member of a group, and not the owner of 
a right. Even more, IdM systems are used to enforce 
ownership of a resource.  
Illegal accesses to different types of account could 
impact finances and the correct use of a system. In this 
context, the danger involved in using IdM systems will 
mainly affect a user, in a Smart City context; it may impact 
citizens and sensors. This affects an identity management 
system by enforcing membership, through the creation of 
different trust relations, rather than enforcing data 
ownership. Both cases, an identity management scheme that 
enforces membership is conceptually different from an IdM 
system that promotes ownership [16]. 
F. The paradigm of a single access point 
Identity management systems require the user and the 
accessed system or service to place a large amount of trust 
in the identity provider. A significant part of identity and 
identifier information is stored with the provider; in this 
scenario, entities can take no action other than simply 
trusting the identity server and service to preserve their 
privacy, identifiers, and security, and to properly secure 
their information. However, mistakes can occur and 
privacy-sensitive information can become public, a group of 
attackers can focus their effort on invalidating the server, or 
a bottleneck from entities to service could be created, thus 
making the service unavailable [8][17].  
Thus, the identity provider becomes the single point of 
failure. In different providers, the IdP is a critical and unique 
point of access, and hence, it creates a threat that allows 
security measures and definitions to be converged at a single 
point. However, this point can also become the focus of 
intense attacks.  
G. An easy “phish”  to catch even in the ocean 
Today, identity management solutions provide the user 
with a single authentication mechanism, and the user is 
unable to authenticate a new IdP and Relying Party (RP). 
This feature is necessary in order to avoid phishing attacks 
in which the attacker makes users believe that their identity 
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

data and credentials must be revealed. With the extent of 
identity management increasing, phishing attacks based on 
obtaining IdP and login credentials will most likely increase 
[8][18]. 
Hence, it is necessary to create and define a centralized 
solution in which it is feasible to moderate the number of 
points in the transactions performed in order to reduce the 
possible locations where a phish could occur. This feature 
would also allow data to be updated when a system flaw or 
compromise occurs. 
H. To be or not to be, an identity crisis 
One of the many advantages of identity management for 
citizens is that the entities do not need to remember every 
single identifier that may be used in order to access various 
solutions. In some scenarios, an entity requires only one 
identifier, e.g., a user name and password, in order to log in 
and receive a multisite token.  
Based on this perspective, it would be suitable to have a 
single 
identity 
provider 
that 
uses 
a 
single 
user 
name/password or another authentication token to guarantee 
and apply a broad identification feature across different 
systems.  
Based on a less optimistic view, this much-needed 
feature may not be feasible owing to the fact that users may 
not trust a single identity provider having access to all their 
services, tokens, and systems [8]. 
I. 
What you are looking at and should not: Privacy issues 
Every 
day, 
solutions 
responsible 
for 
identifier 
management are requested to intervene in numerous 
transactions from different users on the Internet. Based on 
the approach, these solutions mediate transactions from 
entity to entity, RP, devices, systems, services, and 
components involving personal data information, thus 
registering data related to who connects with whom.  
This property raises obvious privacy concerns owing to 
the fact that a user is prompted to provide identity (and/or 
identifiers) information in order to connect with different 
services using a unique identifier. This information is sent to 
an environment that audits those transactions [5][19][20]. 
J. 
Linkability across domains  
A smart city uses an interconnected and interoperable 
environment to provide applications and solutions that have 
the opportunity to interact with each other, thus exchanging 
data. In this context, a broad linkability across all the 
systems involved in a smart city is potentially harmful and 
can result in the risk of a viral effect being created [20].  
If the boundaries that delimit the connections between 
systems are not well protected, a system may encounter a 
scenario in which a value is changed in System A, and the 
use of this changed value by System B may corrupt the 
information created or stored in System B. The consequence 
of this behavior is known as viral effect because a system 
will affect another system, thus propagating a situation 
throughout the environment, which, in this case, is a city.  
Identity Management plays an important role by 
providing a user the capability to track an entity across all 
the systems using that entity. To maintain privacy, it should 
be possible for users to keep their information and data 
private, or to create a scenario in which it is not possible for 
a domain to resolve "who" an identifier is in another domain, 
thus preventing the domain from maintaining records of who 
an entity is and what the entity has been doing [8]. 
K. Where has my data gone? 
Smart systems, within the context of urban environment 
or smart cities, may utilize devices such as smartphones, 
tablets, and other gadgets. These devices provide smart 
systems with a wide range of data and information. 
Depending on the data type handled by these devices, it is 
possible to store personal data such as messages, pictures, 
appointments, bank account, and contacts. 
In 
addition 
to 
being 
responsible 
for 
enabling 
communication with everyone, mobile devices have 
changed the way common citizens handle their daily tasks. 
A smart device has become a vault for storing and saving 
valuable and sensitive data that is accessible instantly. This 
model could create a sensitive scenario in which valuable 
information could be lost if the applications and solutions 
responsible for storing, saving, and accessing data are not 
well implemented and lack security measures [11][15][20]. 
L. Crossed access to information in data centers 
In this scenario, we address situations related to 
undesired access to information resulting from exploitation 
of breaches on the server side. 
This issue deals with a situation that is beyond the 
authentication and authorization of a particular entity. The 
focus must be on correct restrictions and definition of 
boundaries in an interoperable environment.  
For example, while accessing information related to the 
education of a student, a given entity (application) can 
recover criminal records related to this citizen although the 
solution should use only information related to Educational 
Services. This situation may occur if both the systems share 
a common space or permissions that must be respected in 
order to avoid this kind of behavior are not implemented 
[11][15][20]. 
 
III. 
SMART CITY SECURITY ARCHITECTURE 
OAuth, Security Assertion and Markup Language 
(SAML), and OpenID are solutions for authentication and 
authorization of assets. They are based on the assumption 
that each ID will be created as a unique identifier for a set of 
systems. 
The assets could be any type of information or entities 
such as documents, data, and photos. Through the 
mentioned technologies adoption, it is feasible to create 
mechanisms that make it possible to transfer the 
responsibility of ensuring security to a third party, which 
could be a known server (Facebook, Google, etc.), or to 
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

implement the same approach in an in-house solution. 
However, the demands of a smart city are considerably 
different from the ones addressed by these solutions. It is 
important to define demand-specific solutions in order to 
solve specific problems.  
As previously mentioned this paper intends to present 
identity security issues under the scope of s smart city, 
nonetheless it also slightly presents an architecture proposal 
that detaches identity, identifier and data, thus mitigating the 
identity security issues [21]. 
 
A. Objective  
The main objective of the proposed architecture is to be 
a layer in which an identifier is transformed into another 
one. The new identifier will be generated from a 
combination of an entity ID and the accessed service.  
This mechanism will enable an entity to maintain the 
secrecy of its identity from a unique service and within an 
environment composed of several systems and services.  
This approach will be valid even when the same entity 
accesses different sets of services. The new ID is created 
from a combination of two other identifiers, and hence, the 
resultant ID will be unique for each service accessed by the 
same entity. 
B. General view  
This sub-section describes the general components of the 
proposed architecture. Fig. 1 shows three layers with several 
components. 
Each component represents a framework or technology 
that is well-known and adopted to guarantee information 
security in applications and solutions in a smart city context. 
 
 
Figure.1 Architecture General view. 
Each layer in Fig. 1 is described below: 
Identity: It represents the portion of the reference 
architecture responsible for managing identifiers. It is 
composed of two core components: a Smart City Security 
Layer (SCSL) and Service Manager. 
SCSL: It is an architectural module responsible for 
receiving a set of information and combining this 
information to create a new identifier for an entity.  
Service manager: It is a module responsible for 
managing services that are used by SCSL and, indirectly, by 
the entities. In a following subsection more details about the 
Service Manager and SCSL will be explained. 
Authentication/Authorization: It represents the part of 
the proposed architecture responsible for authentication and 
authorization. In this layer, various technologies such as 
OAuth, OpenID, and SAML are available and should be 
combined with the remainder of the solution.  
Security in Depth: According to Schumacher et al. 
[17], it refers to the adoption of several security measures in 
various parts of a system, or solution, in order to increase 
overall security. This transversal module represents the need 
for security measures in different sections of the code 
responsible for service and identifier management, i.e., the 
implementation must take into account good practices 
related to security such as avoiding security risks indicated 
by the Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP) 
[22]. 
Communication: The proposed architecture explores 
the manner in which identifier management can increase 
security. The communication from an entity to SCSL and 
from SCSL to a service uses security communication 
protocols such as Security Sockets Layer (SSL) and 
Transport Layer Security (TLS). 
C. A unique identity provider  
The proposed architecture is a mechanism based on the 
concept of change identifiers involved in a system relation. 
A system relation is related to an entity sending and 
receiving values from a different set of services. 
In Section IV(B), the general view, with the basic 
components to be adopted, was explored. In the proposed 
architecture, the adoption of SAML, OpenID, or OAuth is 
recommended for the authorization and authentication 
process. Further, two integrated components must be 
developed. These two components, SCSL and Service 
Manager, 
are 
responsible 
for 
providing 
the 
basic 
infrastructure for an entity to communicate with a service 
through the Internet by managing different identifiers for 
different identities of the same entity. 
The Service Manager functions as a name register 
service that is responsible for receiving an address from a 
service. This address represents a system that will handle 
requests from entities. The address is made secure and is 
stored, and an identifier for that address is created and sent 
back to the requester. 
This service identifier must be used by any entity that 
wishes to communicate with the service through SCSL.  
Fig. 2 represents the basic flow associated with the 
architecture mechanism that is responsible for changing the 
ID. 
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 2. SCSL basic flow. 
Fig. 2 is composed of: 
 
Entity: A component that requests information from a 
service. A citizen, a sensor, or a service that is 
interoperating with another service can be an Entity. Thus, 
any actor of a city can be an Entity. 
Service: It represents any service contacted by an entity. 
The Service is composed of systems of an urban 
environment. 
Communication Layer: It represents a contact point 
between an Entity and a Service, and is responsible for 
transforming the identifier sent by the entity to the correct 
ID that must be used within the service. 
ID Service: It is a component responsible for storing 
and managing information that is used to generate the 
correct ID. 
The basic flow in Fig. 2 shows an Entity sending a 
message composed of an Entity_ID, Service_ID, and a 
packet. 
This message is processed in SCSL, where Entity_ID is 
combined with Service_ID. In our case study, we combined 
these values to generate a 256-bit hash value.  
This hash value is verified with an internal database. If 
the hash value does not already exist, a new register will be 
created with the service ID, the entity ID, and the hash 
value. If it already exists, it is passed to the service or used 
to retrieve the original ID of the Entity. This hash value is 
used as the Entity ID, and then, the packet is sent to the 
service that is retrieved from the Service Manager using the 
transmitted Service_ID. 
D. Sequence Diagram  
The sequence diagram in Fig. 3 depicts the flow 
implementation for registering a service and sending a 
message using the proposed architecture. 
 
 
Figure 3. Platform sequence diagram. 
In this scenario, a Service must initially register itself by 
sending a message to the Service Manager.  
This action will provide the Service with an ID that is 
used in future requests by devices, sensors, citizens, etc. 
An Entity sends a message to SCSL using this ID. The 
message contains the Service ID, the Entity ID, and the 
packet containing the data to be transmitted. The data packet 
format could be JSON, XML, or Plain Text. 
The city security layer will execute the process described 
in Section IV(C), and the entity ID will be modified to the 
ID that must be used in the service context. 
Finally, after the change in identifier, the data packet 
contained in the original message will be forwarded to the 
service. 
IV. 
VALIDATION 
In order to conduct the case study, an infrastructure was 
created using AWS.  
This structure is composed of four sets of virtual 
machines. The first has the instances responsible for data 
generation; the second group presents the scenarios; the third 
group is the SCSL implementation, and the last group 
represents city systems.  
The instance type used in this process is t2.medium, 
which has two vCPUs (equivalent to a 1,25GHz) and 4 GB 
of memory RAM.  
The Relational Database Service chosen for SCSL is 
db.t2.medium with two vCPUs and 4 GB of memory RAM. 
For the set of machines responsible for the systems, we 
selected a db.t2.small with one vCPU and 2 GB of RAM.  
With regard to the responsibilities of each set of 
machines, please note the following: 
City systems: responsible for simulating urban services. 
This is composed of three systems: Natural Resources, 
Educational, and Government. Each system is composed of 
a set of web services, which in turn are built using 
Representational State Transfer Application Program 
Interface (REST API) implemented using JAVA APIs [29].  
 
 
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Each system uses one EC2 instance (t2.medium) and one 
RDS instance (db.t2.small). 
SCSL: represents the implementation responsible for 
service management and ID changes. 
The service manager is deployed in one EC2 
(t2.medium) and one RDS (db.t2.small). The ID manager is 
deployed in one EC2 (t2.medium) and in one RDS 
(db.t2.medium).  
Note that the RDS instance used for SCSL has more 
resources because every request passes through SCSL for 
ID changing. 
Data generator: Responsible for generating random 
data used by the systems. This uses three Virtual Machine 
(VM) instances, where each instance generates random data 
for one system exclusively.  
The generated data is sent in the form of a JSON request 
composed of an entity ID that represents the ID to be 
changed in SCSL, a service ID that represents the service to 
be requested, and nested JSON packet that contains data 
related to the service to be requested. In addition, the 
generator is responsible for creating a different and random 
amount of data for each system used by the applications. 
This means that, for example, the educational system can 
have a random number of Schools, each School can have a 
random number of Courses, and each Course can have a 
random number of Students. [29]. 
Scenarios: Scenarios 1, 2, and 3 represent a client 
application that consumes data from the system in the form 
of JSONs. Each scenario is deployed in a separate instance. 
A. ID changed and functionalities preserved.  
The first test used the proposed systems, and built 
applications to create and consume the information. 
Afterward, SCSL was included as a step after the 
applications and before the system to verify whether the 
applications continued to work as designed.  
The changes needed to implement SCSL required each 
application to adopt the consumed/requested services by 
changing them to call the SCSL service using the 
Service_ID instead of directly calling a desired service.  
In addition to these changes, no more updates were required, 
and the applications worked without modifications. 
B. Different and unique ID created. Separting data from 
IDs..  
Systems may be composed of different services in order 
to create a unique solution. For example, the education 
system uses services related to Grades, Schools, and 
Classes. Thus, a system can opt to use a unique ID for every 
service (e.g., the same Student_Number to identify student 
grades and classes), or it could use different IDs for each 
service 
(e.g., 
Student_Number 
for 
grades 
and 
Student_Number_Year for the classes taken by a particular 
student in a given year).  
 
The option selected for TbE was to use different IDs per 
service. In this case, the result is that several IDs were 
created for different scopes of the same system. To validate 
the strengths of the proposal, IDs were revealed through 
applications; and in the services, an attempt was made to 
recover more information using the breached IDs. It was not 
possible to recover information from that entity in the 
services and system. This indicates that the IDs are indeed 
different from one service to another. 
C. ID captured in an application did not compromise the 
system 
This topic discusses how solutions that use different 
systems behave if the IDs from one system are revealed.  
Nevertheless, even if all IDs are breached from all services, 
no corruption or recovery could be found within a different 
scope (in this case, systems in different scenarios). 
D. Entities separated from their data 
The architecture core proposes the creation of a unique 
and different ID for each relationship between an Entity and 
a Service. By doing this, the architecture achieves a 
separation from an Entity to its Identity. Assuming that each 
Identity is composed of an Identifier and its contextual Data, 
the architecture achieves a separation of an Entity from its 
Data. 
E. Compartmentalization and security in depth  
Compartmentalization is a concept explored by 
Schumacher et al. in [17]. For this concept, the authors 
explored 
the 
gains 
related 
to 
defining 
separate 
compartments per functionality.  
The first topic, ID changed and functionalities preserved, 
explored data corruption with a unique system by exposing 
the ID of a service that is part of an environment with a set 
of services. In this case, because of the basic capability of 
changing IDs, the services and system in their entirety were 
unharmed. 
The second topic, IDs within systems were independently 
maintained, explored the ID of a system that has been 
breached without compromising a second system that has a 
relation to the first. In the third topic, ID captured in an 
application did not compromise the system, when corruption 
began in an application (or on the client side), the systems 
using those IDs are still safe. 
These three behaviors (service-to-service, system-to-system, 
and application-to-system/service) indicated that, although 
we are considering a unique application that consumes 
services, the three main components (applications, SCSL, 
and services) were isolated from ID discovery. Finally, the 
last topic, Entities separated from their data, explored the… 
result of SCSL appliance, in which a entity is separated 
from its identity, and therefore, separated from its data.  
 
 
 
308
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Through the mentioned characteristics and gains it can be 
proved that the identity is safer into an interoperable 
environment; moreover, entity privacy is demonstrated to 
have increased. 
 
V. 
EVALUATION 
The main strength of SCSL is its ability to provide a 
citizen with a ubiquitous mechanism in which the entity is 
required to provide the environment with only one 
identifier, allowing the ID service to retrieve and build 
different identifiers, thus different identities, for each 
requested system.   
The adoption of this approach enables identity 
management to be handled differently because the actual 
identification of a citizen or sensor will be hidden from the 
system responsible for the data, and, therefore, from 
eventual breaches in such systems. 
The following subsection depicts the impact of the 
proposed architecture in order to validate how the 
introduced issues are addressed by this approach. 
A. Identity management is not a primary objective 
Identity management will still remain a secondary 
objective; however, the use of the SCSL approach permits 
this concern to be less important.  
The proposed approach will ensure that an Identity 
System is responsible for dealing with identities and 
identifiers, thus diminishing the need for citizens to be 
concerned about this particular aspect. 
B. Sensing that I have been followed 
The main strength of the proposed architecture is in being 
a solution that separates real IDs from operational IDs used 
by city systems. Thus, only the central ID manager will have 
the ability to retrieve the ID of a citizen; however, the 
information related to each ID will not be available to the 
central ID manager. This information will be maintained in 
the city system.  
The city system has only partial information; the actual 
ID is not available to this system. Thus, each component of 
the environment will have certain part of the entire data, and 
therefore, linking information to an ID, and an ID to a citizen 
will not be possible. 
C. Identity trust is a sensitive matter and must be earned 
Let us consider a scenario in which citizens would not 
need to be worried about identity issues by allowing a single 
third party to be responsible for managing their identifiers. 
This situation would probably increase their trust because the 
third party will have access to identifiers and not identities, 
and therefore, the data of citizens will be safe in the system. 
The notion that, even if the data system is breached, the 
identity will remain in safety, is a powerful motivation for 
trusting SCSL. 
D. Various types of system and services access 
This issue deals with problems related to identity 
management systems that are responsible for applying 
various types of access rights and permissions. Although 
OAuth and other frameworks have been specified as 
authorization and authentication frameworks that could be 
used with the remainder of the solution, we do not believe 
that identifier management addresses this issue.  
E. The paradigm of a single access point 
The adoption of a single system responsible for identity 
and identifier management will enable the strength to be 
focused at a single point, thus increasing the overall security. 
The system responsible for the identifiers is the one that must 
be secure; this situation is equivalent to protecting the keys 
in a key-locker system. One does not need to protect the 
entire environment but only the portion that is capable of 
identifying the rest of the environment. 
However, significant attention must be given to this 
characteristic owing to the fact that if the solution fails, the 
entire city will be unable to function because it will not be 
possible to resolve an entity ID.   
F. An easy “phish” to catch even in the ocean 
This issue is not addressed by the proposed approach 
because authentication and authorization concerns are 
beyond the scope of this proposal. Although we have 
suggested the adoption of OAuth, SAML, or OpenID as 
authentication and authorization handlers, our focus is on 
identity management.  
G. To be or not to be, an identity crisis 
The existence of a single identity manager enables the 
citizen and other city entities to refer to a unique point using 
a single identifier to access all other identities that the entity 
may have within the entire environment. This notion permits 
one identifier to be multiplexed by N other identifiers by a 
third party, thus avoiding problems related to managing a 
group of IDs. 
H. What you are looking at and should not: Privacy issues 
Privacy issues are partially solved by identity and 
identifiers management. As mentioned earlier, the primary 
consequence of the adoption of the proposed architecture is a 
separation of data and citizen identifiers, and, thus a 
separation of identity and identifiers.  
Thus, even if certain data is revealed, it will not be 
possible to determine the entity that the data belongs to or 
the data of a specific entity. Therefore, the information of a 
citizen will remain private. 
I. 
Linkability across domains 
This issue is addressed by SCSL owing to the capability 
already mentioned earlier. The same entity account will be 
identified differently in each system and/or service of a city; 
thus, the maintenance of linkability across domains will be 
difficult for an attacker. In order to validate an ID recovered 
from a system, an attacker must initially pass through the 
309
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

identification service, and then, discover the equivalent 
identity in a secondary system. 
J. 
Where has my data gone? 
As mentioned in section IV, the primary strength of the 
three (OAuth, SAML and OpenID) standards lies in 
interoperability and authentication, and therefore, they do not 
impact the issue discussed in Section III. A similar reasoning 
applies to SCSL; it proposes to change the manner in which 
identifiers are sent and used by systems, and therefore, it 
does not impact this issue.   
K. Crossed access to information in data centers 
This issue is addressed by SCSL. Although an attacker 
can compromise a system, gather information about a 
citizen, and access other systems through the compromised 
system, the attacker will have the perception that the system 
databases are composed of different entities. An entity will 
be presented differently for each system or service. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The development of new collaborating systems based on 
the current systems that support a city is an urgent need in 
order to enable urban environments to deliver better service 
to citizens and improve the current infrastructure. Further, 
this development plays a crucial role in the creation of new 
methods to sustain the changes in the composition of cities.  
The new proposed paradigm, related to an interoperable 
environment of city systems, poses various challenges such 
as 
performance, 
usability, 
availability, 
privacy, 
and 
information security. Security concerns are a challenge that 
must be addressed. The absence of a solution to this problem 
will result in citizens avoiding the use of the offered 
solutions, and therefore, the development of smart cities will 
be affected. 
This study explored a set of identification and privacy 
problems that continue to pose challenges and addressed 
questions that must be answered in order to offer a more 
secure environment to citizens. An approach based on 
identifiers and identity separation architecture was presented 
and analyzed. It has been demonstrated that the proposed 
architecture improves the privacy and anonymity of citizens. 
In future work, we intend to conclude an ongoing study 
related to validating performance issues related with the 
adoption of the proposed architecture. Further, we will 
evaluate various new security issues in smart cities and 
deploy a cloud-based system for the identity service. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Dirks and M. Keeling, “A vision of smarter cities: How cities can 
lead the way into a prosperous and sustainable future,” IBM Inst. Bus. 
Value. June, 2009. 
[2] IBM. Ibm smarter healthcare. http://ibm.co/bCJpHX, 2012.  ” 
[Online] Available: 20 – July -2016 ” . 
[3] F. Ferraz, C. Sampaio, and C. Ferraz, “Towards a Smart City Security 
Model Exploring Smart Cities Elements Based on Nowadays 
Solutions,” ICSEA 2013, no. c, pp. 546–550, 2013. 
[4] Y. Wang and Y. Zhou, “Cloud architecture based on Near Field 
Communication in the smart city,” in 2012 7th International 
Conference on Computer Science & Education (ICCSE), 2012, no. 
Iccse, pp. 231–234. 
[5] A. Martinez-Balleste, P. Perez-martinez, and A. Solanas, “The pursuit 
of citizens’ privacy: a privacy-aware smart city is possible,” IEEE 
Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 136–141, Jun. 2013. 
[6] C. Harrison, B. Eckman, R. Hamilton, P. Hartswick, J. Kalagnanam, 
J. Paraszczak, and P. Williams, “Foundations for Smarter Cities,” 
IBM J. Res. Dev., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1–16, Jul. 2010. 
[7] P. (2010). Harrison, C., Eckman, B., Hamilton, R., Hartswick, P., 
Kalagnanam, J., Paraszczak, J., & Williams, “Foundations for 
Smarter Cities,” IBM J. Res. Dev. 
[8] R. Dhamija and L. Dusseault, “The Seven Flaws of Identity 
Management: Usability and Security Challenges,” IEEE Secur. Priv. 
Mag., vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 24–29, Mar. 2008. 
[9] J. M. Gonçalves, “Privacy and Information Security in Brazil? Yes, 
We Have It and We Do It!,” 2010 Seventh Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. 
New Gener., pp. 702–707, 2010. 
[10] A. Bartoli, J. Hernández-Serrano, and M. Soriano, “Security and 
Privacy in your Smart City,”cttc.cat, pp. 1–6. 
[11] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. G. Ferraz, “Smart City Security Issues: 
Depicting Information Security Issues in the Role of an Urban 
Environment,” in 2014 IEEE/ACM 7th International Conference on 
Utility and Cloud Computing, 2014, pp. 842–847. 
[12] C. Balakrishna, “Enabling Technologies for Smart City Services and 
Applications,” 2012 Sixth Int. Conf. Next Gener. Mob. Appl. Serv. 
Technol., pp. 223–227, Sep. 2012. 
[13] W. M. da Silva, A. Alvaro, G. H. R. P. Tomas, R. a. Afonso, K. L. 
Dias, and V. C. Garcia, “Smart cities software architectures,” in 
Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on Applied 
Computing - SAC ’13, 2013, p. 1722. 
[14] M. Batty, K. W. Axhausen, F. Giannotti, a. Pozdnoukhov, a. Bazzani, 
M. Wachowicz, G. Ouzounis, and Y. Portugali, “Smart cities of the 
future,” Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top., vol. 214, no. 1, pp. 481–518, Dec. 
2012. 
[15] M. Sen, A. Dutt, S. Agarwal, and A. Nath, “Issues of Privacy and 
Security in the Role of Software in Smart Cities,” in 2013 
International Conference on Communication Systems and Network 
Technologies, 2013, pp. 518–523. 
[16] G. Alpár, J. Hoepman, and J. Siljee, “The identity crisis. security, 
privacy and usability issues in identity management,” arXiv Prepr. 
arXiv1101.0427, pp. 1–15, 2011. 
[17] M. 
Schumacher, 
E. 
Fernandez-Buglioni, 
D. 
Hybertson, 
F. 
Buschmann, and P. Sommerlad, Security Patterns : Integrating 
Security and Systems Engineering (Wiley Software Patterns Series). 
John Wiley & Sons, 2006. 
[18] I. D. Addo, S. I. Ahamed, S. S. Yau, and A. Buduru, “A Reference 
Architecture for Improving Security and Privacy in Internet of Things 
Applications,” 2014 IEEE Int. Conf. Mob. Serv., pp. 108–115, Jun. 
2014. 
[19] A. Ukil, “Connect with Your Friends and Share Private Information 
Safely,” 2012 Ninth Int. Conf. Inf. Technol. - New Gener., pp. 367–
372, Apr. 2012. 
[20] F. S. Ferraz and C. A. G. Ferraz, “More Than Meets the Eye In Smart 
City Information Security: Exploring security issues far beyond 
privacy concerns,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Intelligence and Computing/International Conference on 
Autonomic and Trusted 2014 IEEE 11th Intl Conf on Ubiquitous 
Intelligence & Computing and 2014 IEEE 11th Intl Conf on 
Autonomic & Trusted Computing and, 2014, vol. 677–686, p. 9. 
[21] F. S. Ferraz, C. Candido, B. Sampaio, C. André, and G. Ferraz, 
“Towards A Smart-City Security Architecture Proposal and Analysis 
of Impact of Major Smart-City Security Issues,” in SOFTENG 2015 : 
The First International Conference on Advances and Trends in 
Software Engineering Information, 2015, no. c, pp. 108–114. 
[22] OWASP, “OWASP Top 10 - 2013 : The ten most critical web 
application security risks,” 2013.  
310
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

