Evaluation of a Security Service Level Agreement
Chen-Yu Lee, Krishna M. Kavi,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of North Texas
1155 Union Cir, Denton, TX 76203, United States
Email: cychrislee@ieee.org, Krishna.Kavi@unt.edu
Abstract—Data breaches are the most serious security breaks
among all types of cybersecurity threats. While Cloud hosting
services provide assurances against data loss, understanding the
security service level agreements (SSLAs) and privacy policies
offered by the service providers empowers consumers to assess
risks and costs associated with migrating their information
technology (IT) operations to the Cloud. We have developed
ontologies to represent security SLAs so that consumers can
understand cybersecurity threats, techniques for mitigating the
risks, and their roles and responsibilities and those of the service
provider in terms of protecting IT systems. Our ontological
representation of security services offered by a provider allows
the customer to evaluate the level of compliance with respect
to federal regulations such as Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA). In this paper, we also describe ways
to quantitatively assess the strength of compliance and the quality
of protections offered by an SSLA. We hope that our approach
can lead to negotiated SSLAs.
Keywords–service level agreement; SLA; security; SSLA; cloud
computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In 2014 and 2015, we have seen numerous and signiﬁcant
data breaches. In September 2014 Home Depot suffered a
data breach of 56 million credit card numbers [1] and in
October 2014, 1.16 million customer payment cards were
stolen from Staples [2]. In February 2015, CareFirst Blue-
Cross BlueShield announced that it was the target of a cyber
attack that compromised the information of about 1.1 million
current and former consumers [3]. Compromised information
included consumer user names for CareFirsts website, as
well as names, birth dates, email addresses and subscriber
identiﬁcation numbers. Most recently (June 2015), the US
Ofﬁce of Personnel Management revealed a data breach that
lead to a foreign nation having access to millions of US federal
employee records [4]. These incidents show that data breaches
(or an unauthorized person gaining access to data) are the
most prevalent types of security attacks. Some of these attacks
involved very sophisticated techniques to circumvent several
levels of cybersecurity protections.
The Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program
(FedRAMP) is a government-wide program that describes a
standardized approach to security assessment, authorization,
and continuous monitoring of Cloud IT products and services.
FedRAMP is the result of close collaborations among cyberse-
curity and cloud experts from the General Services Administra-
tion (GSA), the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the
Department of Defense (DOD), the National Security Agency
(NSA), the Ofﬁce of Management and Budget (OMB), and
Figure 1. Ontology for SLA
the Federal Chief Information Ofﬁcers (CIO) Council. The
assessment process is based on a standardized set of require-
ments in accordance with the Federal Information Security
Management Act (FISMA). The NIST Special Publication
(SP) 800-53 [5] controls security authorizations. NIST is also
working on new guidance, SP 800-174, which will address the
distribution and placement of security controls for cloud com-
puting environments. The new guidance will list the controls
needed for capabilities (or services), and displays how a cloud
capability (or service) should be correctly and completely
secured. Finally, the NIST Cloud Computing program plans
to deﬁne security SLAs, security metrics, security intelligence
and continuous monitoring based on previous documents SP
500-299 [6], SP 500-307 [7], SP 800-173, and SP 800-174.
The Security Service Level Agreement (SSLA) can be used to
improve the credibility and veriﬁability of security and privacy
commitments made by cloud providers.
In general, Service Level Agreements (SLAs) written by
a Cloud provider are very difﬁcult to understand, and it is
even more challenging to quantitatively compare the SLAs of
different providers. To capture and present requirements for
both providers and consumers, Modica et al. proposed an SLA
ontology that captures the deﬁnition of a semantic domain of
knowledge for the cloud business (see Figure. 1) [8]. Based
on the ontology knowledge base, providers can customize their
offerings according to their business strategy, and consumers
can request the resources and services consistent with their
needs. However, this work does not cover security service
levels, which led to our development of ontologies speciﬁcally
for SSLAs.
This paper extends our previous work that proposed ontolo-
gies for SSLAs that could be used to understand the security
333
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

agreements of a provider and to audit the compliance of service
levels with respect to federal regulations, such as HIPAA [9]
[10]. We enrich the ontology models and propose an SSLA
assessment system to evaluate the strength of agreements in
terms of protecting IT assets. Our approach can be used to
negotiate desired levels of security. The rest of the paper is
organized as follows. Section II discusses research that is
closely related to ours. The SSLA ontology framework is
introduced in Section III. Our approach for assessing SSLAs
is described in Section IV and we illustrate how this approach
can be used for negotiating SSLAs in Section V. Section VI
includes a discussion of our current research and our plans for
extending the framework.
II.
RELATED WORKS
A. Service Level Agreement
A SLA is a documented legal agreement between a service
provider and a consumer and identiﬁes services and levels of
service targets based on the ISO 2000 standard for service
management systems [11]. A Cloud Service level agreement
is a document that states the services offered, performance
levels and promises made by the cloud provider.
B. Security Service Level Agreement
The Security Service Level Agreement (SSLA) for spec-
ifying the security service requirements of an enterprise was
ﬁrst proposed by Henning [12]. Monahan et al. considered
the issues of meaningful security SLAs and discussed how a
security SLA embodies certain legal and contractual elements
to satisfy two basic requirements: separation and compart-
mentalization [13]. In 2013, the terms SSLA and security
service-oriented agreement were proposed by Takahashi et
al. [14]. The authors proposed a non-repudiatable security
service-oriented agreement mechanism that describes security
requirements for users and capabilities of service providers.
Rong et al. described some cloud security challenges including
resource location, the multi-tenancy, authentication and trust of
acquired information, system monitoring, and cloud standards
[15]. Hale et al. built an XML-based compliance vocabulary
compatible with the WSLA schema [16]. However, there are no
prior attempts to describe SSLAs formally. Currently SSLAs
are described informally in English, and it is very hard to
evaluate or negotiate the strength of such informal descriptions.
Previously we proposed an ontology for SSLA that covers the
security issues required to meet most security regulations [9]
[10]. This paper expands our previous ontology and proposes
to evaluate the strength of an SSLA.
III.
ONTOLOGY FOR SSLA
As an alternative to the traditional SLAs, written in natural
languages, an XML-based SLA is more useful for automated
processing. Previously we deﬁned several different ontologies
including ontologies for vulnerabilities, attacks and Security
SLAs ( [9] [10] [17]). Our ontology for Security Service Level
Agreements (or SSLAs) are based on the design concepts of a
trustworthiness ontology proposed in [18] and also extends
Hale’s work [16]. To increase the coverage of our SSLA
ontology, we take into account the challenges in covering all
control domains speciﬁed by the Cloud security alliance (CSA)
Cloud Control Matrix (CCM) v3 [19] and the properties of
some security frameworks, such as HITRUST [20].
Figure 2. All classes in SSLA
Figure 3. Audit class in SSLA
In this paper we extend our previous SSLA ontology so
that SSLAs can be evaluated for their strengths. Our SSLA
ontology facilitates an understanding of security concerns in
service level agreements and allows one to match the security
requirements of a customer with the SSLAs offered by service
providers. Summarizing, our SSLAs offer these beneﬁts.
•
SLA agreements are easier to understand, particularly
those related to security.
•
During negotiations, consumers can compare the
SLAs offered by different providers and choose the
one that best ﬁts their needs.
•
It will be easier to monitor (or audit) the compliance
of securities levels offerred by service providers with
security requirements of federal regulations.
For
completeness
sake
we
introduce
our
SSLA
ontology
ﬁrst.
Without
loss
of
generality,
here
we
represent
fourteen
classes
in
our
SSLA
ontology,
including
Networking,
Vulnerability,
Transparency,
DisasterDetectionRecovery,
DataPossession,
CryptoSpec,
AccessControl,
Processing,
Compliance,
Audit,
Selectable,
Subcontractor3rdPartyApp,
and
Equipment
Maintenance as shown in Figure 2. Each class is described
below. The ontology can be modiﬁed by removing or adding
additional classes.
•
Networking: This class organizes the agreements
about the networking environment such as trafﬁc isola-
tion (TrafficIsolation subclass); IP and band-
width monitoring (BandwidthMonitoring and
IPMonitoring subclasses). These subclasses can
be used to deﬁne functions such as allocating band-
width and blacklisting (or whitelisting) IP addresses.
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

•
Vulnerability:
This
class
deﬁnes
assurances
in
terms
of
detecting
and
patching
known
vul-
nerabilities. PatchPolicyComplianceRate and
ScanFrequency subclasses can be used for speci-
fying policies on how often the system is scanned for
malware, and how soon a known patch is applied to
remove vulnerabilities.
•
Transparency: This class regulates the transparency of
the information related to the security management
processes used by the provider. The SSLA should
record the responsible ofﬁce that will provide the
information regarding all security breaches and actions
taken when requested.
•
Disaster detection and recovery: This class describes
the contingency plans and the security incident proce-
dures, and details disaster detection and the recovery
steps in the event of a breach. It may also deﬁne
data backup functions because data is usually the most
valuable asset for consumers.
•
Data possession: This class controls data storage pro-
cedures and veriﬁcation methods, and how often they
are applied to ensure data authenticity. This class can
be used to specify the ownership and the location of
the storage.
•
Audit: This class describes the processes for inter-
nal and external audits of the architecture, man-
agement, and services of providers, and the certiﬁ-
cates obtained (listed in Certiﬁcation) to build con-
sumer trust in the providers as shown in Figure 3.
InternalAudit and ExternalAudit subclasses
also deﬁne the respective audit plans. Log is the
most important evidence of behaviors of attackers,
consumers, and providers. To protect the security of
the log, the Log subclass regulates the secure storage
and retention of the logs. The RiskManagement
subclass describes the risk management and data
risk assessment programs. The system administra-
tors of the providers’ systems have the highest level
of privilege. They can perform any action on any
object. Thus, the ViabilityOfProvider sub-
class deﬁnes what level of consumer data secu-
rity is appropriate for a speciﬁc person and un-
der what conditions. In addition, the class outlines
the real time monitoring mechanisms, the acceptable
percentage and types of security exceptions, secu-
rity reviews, and the protection of consumer privacy
in RealtimeMonitor, PercentOfSecExcept,
PercentOfSecReview and ConsumerPrivacy
subclasses.
•
Subcontractor and third party application: This class
clariﬁes the rights and duties with respect to security
of the subcontractor and the third party application
providers.
•
Cryptography speciﬁcation: Some providers offer en-
cryption services. It is useful to optimize consumer
data encryption while also reducing the associated
computational complexity. Thus the level or type of
encryption technique can be speciﬁed here.
•
Access control: Access control of the instance control
panel directly impacts the security of the instance.
Figure 4. Compliance class in SSLA
This class deﬁnes the access authentication, authoriza-
tion, accounting schemes, including access using mo-
bile devices. This class also can be used to speciﬁy the
responsibility of the consumer in terms of permitting
accesses within their user groups.
•
Processing: This class covers the security demands
for building a secure run time environment for virtual
machine migration, queue service capability, virtual
ﬁrewalls, isolation, portability and integrity of appli-
cations. Systems relying on hardware trusted platform
modules may be viewed as providing higher levels of
trust and this can be indicated in this class.
•
Compliance: Some speciﬁc services must be certiﬁed
as compliant with security and privacy standards,
and practices as required by law. For example, user
services that involve warehousing or mining of elec-
tronic Protected Health Information (ePHI), electronic
Personally Identiﬁable Information (ePII), or Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
data must comply with all associated federal and local
standards [21]. There are many subclasses deﬁned in
Compliance as shown in Figure 4. An SSLA can
indicate the subclasses (or speciﬁc rules of the law)
for which the provider is compliant.
•
Equipment Maintenance: Keeping equipment main-
tained and upgraded may lead to fewer exploitable
weaknesses. This class of our SSLA ontology deﬁnes
the state of equipment, software versions and all
upgrades since the installation.
IV.
SSLA ASSESSMENT SYSTEM
During the process of purchasing cloud services, a review
of the service level agreement is the necessary phase where
customers agree to a binding contract in term of the services
received and payments made. At present, the agreement lists
service guarantees and responsibilities of the provider. Often
they are biased in favor of the provider; in many cases the
customer is not afforded a chance to negotiate service levels.
This is particularly the case when it comes to security levels
offered by the provider. There is very little opportunity for
the customer to explore whether the security is sufﬁcient, or
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

if a lower or higher level security option is available. More
importantly, the customer cannot evaluate the security levels
using meaningful and quantitative measures.
Our SSLA ontology described in Section III contains
fourteen classes and several subclasses that cover most of the
security issues of interest. We feel that this allows one to map
a SSLA contract to our ontology and evaluate the strength
of security provided by the SSLA. In this section, we outline
some potential ways for quantitatively assessing the strength
of SSLAs.
A. Regulation Compliant
In general, a regulation describes rules, such as spec-
iﬁcations, policies, standards, or law, especially the public
regulations that apply in particular ﬁelds. Some examples of
regulations include PCI-DSS [22], HIPAA and others shown in
Fig.4. Each regulation deﬁnes different rules, but many rules
in the regulations are similar. Therefore, an SSLA is stronger
if it complies with more regulations.
B. Types of metrics
To evaluate an SLA, each individual (or a subclass) in our
ontology has to be examined. Each entity should be quantiﬁed
and we offer three different types of measurements for this
purpose.
•
Boolean measures (α): This type of quantiﬁcation
allows us to assess if a speciﬁc requirement (such as a
speciﬁc HIPAA regulation or rule) is satisﬁed or not.
Service providers will be ﬁned if the provider fails to
show that speciﬁc federal requirements are met. Note
that different regulations (e.g., HIPAA, ENISA [23],
PCI) may deﬁne different security requirements, and
this translates to different subclasses (or individuals)
in our ontology for meeting the requirements.
•
Level measures (β): It should be possible to assess the
strength of an agreement using qualitative measures
as High, Medium, Low (or some other such levels).
For example, in terms of the strength of encryption
offered, one can say that using encryption algorithm
Triple DES [24] is classiﬁed as low, but if one
uses AES-128 [25] then the level may be viewed as
medium, and the level is considered High if AES-
192 or AES-256 are used for encryption. These are
subjective assessments and we hope a consensus on
the measurement can be reached through standards
committees.
•
Range measures (γ): These types of assessments can
be used to deﬁne minimum threshold guarantees. For
example, a user requires that the Cloud provider scan
the systems for malware at least once every 12 hours.
Any scanning rate below that can be viewed as less
than satisfactory, and a value (say a percentage) may
be assigned as a qualitative strength for the individual
(or subclass).
C. Estimation of the security strength
We propose a quantitative analysis approach to estimate the
security strength of each service level agreement. The process
can follow the following outline.
Step 1: Prepare an ontology graph for the SSLA. Nor-
mally the ontology data can be stored in OWL or
RDF format. The ﬁrst step is to parse the ontology
ﬁle as a graph for further query, e.g., RDFLib [26]
in Python.
Step 2: Traverse all the individuals using SPARQL query.
To examine each rule in the SSLA ontology, the
approach traverses each individual with a recur-
sive SPARQL query from the root through a class
to each instance. SPARQL is a semantic query
language for databases. It is used to retrieve and
manipulate data stored in Resource Description
Framework (RDF) format.
Step 2a: When visiting an individual (or a subclass), a
score is assigned using the three types of mea-
surement stated above.
P(α) =
1
if α is satisﬁed
0
otherwise
(1)
P(β) =



scorehigh
if β is given a HIGH
scoremedium
if β is given a MEDIUM
scorelow
if β is given a LOW
(2)
P(γ) =

scorerange
if γ is given scorerange
(3)
where 0 ≤ scorerange, scorehigh, scoremedium,
scorelow ≤ 1 and the mapping scores from HIGH,
MEDIUM, and LOW grades can be deﬁned by the
security committee.
Step 2b: The total score of a given SLA is Scoretotal.
Scoretotal =
n
X
i=1
classi
(4)
classi =
n
X
j=1
(Pj(α) + Pj(β) + Pj(γ))wi,j
(5)
where wi,j is the weight of the jth measurement
of the ith class and it can also be deﬁned by
security committee based on the emphasis level.
The default value of wi,j is 1. Weights can be
used to customize the measurements for individual
needs. We describe the customization in the next
section.
V.
CUSTOMIZED AGREEMENT
With our assessment system it is possible to compare
SSLAs during the negotiation phase. An SSLA that scores
highest is the optimal SSLA. This also means that the provider
is held to very high levels of responsibility and liabilities, and
this in turn can translate into higher cost to the customer. A
customer should be able to understand the trade-offs between
cost and the strength of an SSLA.
Figure 5 shows a comparison of two different types of
companies. Figure 5(a) is a medical service provider that
emphasizes compliance, access control, and audit classes of
our ontology since these aspects of an SSLA are most im-
portant to their business. Other classes, such as networking or
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

encryption level are not as signiﬁcant to their business (and
does not interfere in demonstrating compliance with HIPAA
regulations). On the other hand, Figure 5(b) is a company
that offers online or downloadable games. Such a company
is more interested in the security with on-line transactions
(including payment transactions) and must be compliant with
PCI DSS regulations. The company would also have signiﬁcant
interest in the access control, networking and infrastructure
security. These examples are for illustration purposes only
and the classes of companies used here are generic examples.
More detailed analysis of each users requirements is needed
to customize SSLA measurements. These two examples show
that different types of companies may pay attention to the
different classes of security needs. When negotiating SSLA,
which part should be strengthened can be determined through
the evaluation methods we describe in this paper. We assume
that consumers will negotiate their customized SSLAs, instead
of a generic SSLA offered by the provider. A generic SSLA
may not be optimal in terms of cost and the level of security
offerred. However, the generic SSLA may sufﬁce for most
customers.
VI.
DISCUSSION
This paper expands the SSLA ontology to cover more secu-
rity regulations and security frameworks including HITRUST
Cyber Security Framework (CSF). Therefore, in the next
subsections, we ﬁrst describe the implementation issue for the
evaluation system for an SSLA based on the SSLA ontology.
The system provides a quantitative result for the assessment
that can be used to SSLA comparison and negotiation. Also,
the coverage of HITRUST CSF is explained in subsection VI-B
A. Implementation
We implemented an SSLA assessment system to compute
scores of the given agreement based on the approaches in-
troduced in Section IV. Figure 6 is a snapshot of estimating
HIPAA compliance in our assessment system. The program
ﬁrst shows each rule of the law for the consumer so that
the consumer can understand the requirement. The quantitative
scoring of the SSLA is based on the answers provided by the
consumer. Current SSLAs are described in a natural language
(i.e., English) and may be difﬁcult to map onto our ontology.
We require some input from the customer and service provider
to interpret the SSLAs and map them to our ontologies.
We hope future SSLAs will rely on more formal ontological
deﬁnitions.
B. HITRUST Cyber Security Framework
The HITRUST Cyber Security Framework (CSF) is based
on the Cyber Security Framework released by the National In-
stitute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in February 2014.
HITRUST CSF is a certiﬁable framework that provides organi-
zations with a comprehensive, ﬂexible and efﬁcient approach
to demonstrate regulatory compliance and risk management.
Although HITRUST CSF is not a regulation, it provides for
more security and privacy than HIPAA compliance. Figure 7
shows the fact that the HITRUSgrT properties subsume HIPAA
rules related to access authorization. Thus if a provider satisﬁes
the HITRUST CSF framework, the provider is also compliant
with HIPAA regulations, as far as the access authorization
class of our ontology is concerned. Likewise one can map the
compliance with respect to other classes of the SSLA ontology.
C. Scoring system
The assessment system evaluates the SSLA quantitatively.
In general, each mapped individual in our model is assigned
one point; thus an SSLA with more points is assumed to be
better as it satisﬁes more classes of our ontology. The weight
valuable wi,j can be used to allow one to ignore some classes
and place more emphasis on other classes.
D. Benﬁts of our Scoringe system
•
For Cloud infrastructure provider: Since an ontology
is a useful means for describing knowledge, a Cloud
provider can employ our SSLA ontology to present
the security levels guaranteed. Additionally, the SSLA
ontology provides for negotiated agreements. With
respect to HIPAA, the Cloud infrastructure provider
must make sure that the Cloud environment is secure
enough at least for known vulnerabilities and can resist
known attacks. Moreover, the provider can use some
vulnerability evaluation systems (like OKB [17]) to
evaluate the security risks of its resources to deﬁne the
most appropriate security guarantees, or price different
levels of negotiated security agreements.
•
For Cloud infrastructure users (primarily service
providers): When service providers employ a Cloud
environment, they can utilize our SSLA ontology
framework to negotiate better levels of security guar-
antees from the infrastructure provider. Additionally,
the service provider can use our framework to under-
stand compliance issues about the services they offer.
VII.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have developed an SSLA ontology frame-
work that can be used to understand the security agreements
of a provider and to audit the compliance of a provider with
respect to federal regulations. The SSLA assessment system
can be used to quantitatively measure the security strength
of an SSLA, and can be used in the negotiation phase. In this
paper, we are limited by the lack of accessible SSLAs of cloud
providers such as Google, Amazon or Microsoft. We were
only able to outline how HITRUST and HIPAA regulations
translate into security requirements of individual IT systems
and policies. It is our hope that the new federal guidelines
and standards will force service providers to disclose details
of their security SLAs. We will then be able to evaluate actual
SSLAs of providers.
For future work, we plan to design SSLA templates for dif-
ferent types of industries with various levels of budgets based
on the evaluation of collected agreements. These templates can
be used to negotiate SSLAs with providers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported in part by the NSF Net-centric
and Cloud Software and Systems Industry/University Cooper-
ative Research Center and NSF award 1128344. The authors
want to thank David Struble for his editorial contributions to
this paper.
337
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Access Control
20%
Audit
15%
Compliance
20%
Crypto Spec
5%
Data Possession
5%
Disaster Dection & Recovery
10%
Equipment 
Maintenance
0%
Networking
5%
Processing
5%
Subcontractor and 3rd party App
5%
Transparency
0%
Visibility for Provider
0%
Vulnerability
10%
AAA Medical Service
(a) The proportion of the classes in a medical service’s SSLA
Access Control
20%
Audit
5%
Compliance
20%
Crypto Spec
10%
Data Possession
0%
Disaster Dection & Recovery
5%
Equipment Maintenance
0%
Networking
10%
Processing
10%
Subcontractor and 3rd party App
10%
Transparency
0%
Visibility for Provider
0%
Vulnerability
10%
BBB Game company
(b) The proportion of the classes in a game company’s SSLA
Figure 5. The proportion of the classes in SSLA
338
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 6. Snapshot of our SSLA assessment system. For estimating HIPAA compliance, the system ﬁrst shows the rule of law, and the estimation is based on
the administrators answer.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Backman, “Home depot: 56 million cards exposed in breach,”
Sep 2014, URL: http://money.cnn.com/2014/09/18/technology/security/
home-depot-hack [accessed: 2015-09-15].
[2]
J. Tom Huddleston, “Staples: Breach may have affected 1.16 mil-
lion customers’ cards,” Dec 2014, URL: http://fortune.com/2014/12/19/
staples-cards-affected-breach/ [accessed: 2015-09-15].
[3]
D. Bowman, “Hack attack on careﬁrst compromises info for 1.1
million consumers,” May 2015, URL: http://www.ﬁercehealthit.com/
story/hack-attack-careﬁrst-compromises-info-11-million-consumers/
2015-05-20 [accessed: 2015-09-15].
[4]
“Ofﬁce
of
personnel
management
data
breach,”
June
2015,
URL:
http://www.c-span.org/video/?326593-1/
hearing-ofﬁce-personnel-management-data-breach [accessed: 2015-09-
15].
[5]
Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and
Organizations, SP 800-53, NIST, U.S. Department of Commerce Std.,
Rev. 4, Apr. 2013, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r4
[accessed: 2015-09-15].
[6]
NIST Cloud Computing Security Reference Architecture, SP 500-299
Draft, NIST, U.S. Department of Commerce Std., May 2013.
[7]
Cloud Computing Service Metrics Description, SP 500-307 Draft, NIST,
U.S. Department of Commerce Std., 2015, URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.
6028/NIST.SP.307 [accessed: 2015-09-15].
[8]
G. D. Modica, G. Petralia, and O. Tomarchio, “A business ontology
to enable semantic matchmaking in open cloud markets,” in Proc.
SKG2012, Beijing, China, Oct. 2012, pp. 96–103.
[9]
C. Y. Lee, P. Kamongi, K. M. Kavi, and M. Gomathisankaran, “Op-
timus: Framework of vulnerabilities, attacks, defenses and sla ontolo-
gies,” International Journal of Next-Generation Computing, 2015.
[10]
C. Y. Lee, K. M. Kavi, R. A. Paul, and M. Gomathisankaran, “Ontology
of secure service level agreement,” in Proc. HASE 2015, Jan 2015, pp.
166–172.
[11]
Information technology. Service management. Service management
system requirements, ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011, Std., 2011.
[12]
R. R. Henning, “Security service level agreements: quantiﬁable security
for the enterprise?” in Proc. NSPW 1999, Ontario, Canada, Sep. 1999,
pp. 54–60.
[13]
B. Monahan and M. Yearworth, “Meaningful security slas,” HP Labo-
ratories, Tech. Rep. HPL-2005-218R1, 2008.
[14]
T. Takahashi and et al., “Tailored security: Building nonrepudiable
security service-level agreements,” IEEE VT Mag., vol. 8, no. 3, Sep.
2013, pp. 54–62.
[15]
C. Rong, S. T. Nguyen, and M. G. Jaatun, “Beyond lightning: A
survey on security challenges in cloud computing,” Comput. Electr.
Eng., vol. 39, no. 1, 2013, pp. 47–54.
[16]
M. Hale and R. Gamble, “Building a compliance vocabulary to embed
security controls in cloud slas,” in Proc. SERVICES 2013, Jun. 2013,
pp. 118–125.
[17]
P. Kamongi, S. Kotikela, K. Kavi, M. Gomathisankaran, and A. Singhal,
“Vulcan: Vulnerability assessment framework for cloud computing,” in
Proc. SERE 2013, 2013, pp. 218–226.
[18]
R. Paul and et. al., “An ontology-based integrated assessment framework
for high-assurance systems,” in Proc. ICSC 2008, Aug 2008, pp. 386–
393.
[19]
“Cloud controls matrix version 3.0,” Cloud Security Alliance.
[20]
HITRUST Cyber Security Framework, URL: https://hitrustalliance.net/
[accessed: 2015-09-15].
[21]
HIPAA Administrative Simpliﬁcation, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services Ofﬁce for Civil Rights Std., Mar. 2013, URL: http://
www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/ [accessed: 2015-09-15].
[22]
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard: Requirements and Secu-
rity Assessment Procedures, PCI Security Standards Council Std., Rev.
3.0, Nov. 2013, URL: https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/security
standards/ [accessed: 2015-09-15].
[23]
Procure Secure: A guide to monitoring of security service levels in
cloud contracts, European Union Agency for Network and Information
Security (ENISA) Std.
[24]
FIPS PUB 46-3 Data Encryption Standard (DES), National Institute of
Standards and Technology Std.
[25]
FIPS PUB 197 Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), National Institute
of Standards and Technology Std.
[26]
RDFLib Python library, URL: https://github.com/RDFLib/rdﬂib [ac-
cessed: 2015-09-15].
339
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 7. Individuals for both HIPAA and HiTrust in the AccessAuthorization class. The left side is for HiTrust and the right side is for HIPAA.
340
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

