A Holistic Approach to Energy Efficiency Management Systems 
 
Ignacio González 
University of Oviedo 
Oviedo, Spain 
gonzalezaloignacio@uniovi.es 
María Rodríguez Fernández 
University of Oviedo 
Oviedo, Spain 
rodriguezfmaria@uniovi.es 
 
Juan Jacobo Peralta 
Andalusian Institute of Technology 
Málaga, Spain 
jjperalta@iat.es 
Adolfo Cortés 
Ingenia 
Málaga, Spain 
adolfo@ingenia.es 
 
 
Abstract—Improvement in energy efficiency is one of the most 
effective ways in economic terms to increase supply security 
and reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. Furthermore, the 
increased cost of energy resources has encouraged the 
development of new technologies that allows their efficient use. 
Through the identification and control of end users 
consumptions - businesses, residential, public, etc. – these 
technologies allow us to have more efficient consumption 
without lowering the threshold of comfort users are used to. 
The Smart Home Energy project makes a profitable use of 
these technologies to provide a complete solution that, through 
user interaction with electrical devices present in the home and 
integrated into the network, allows on one hand to manage, 
control, plan and in most cases reduce the electric bill, being 
aware about the cost of it, and on the other hand, help to 
improve the environment. 
Keywords-Digital Home; Energy Efficiency; Bill reduction; 
Cloud. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A. Interoperability between systems 
A Digital Home [1] offers users an intelligent 
environment that learns and adapts to the references and 
needs of its occupants. However, there are many restrictions: 
the high cost of certain systems, capacity problems, lack of 
standardization, etc. The most important restriction to solve 
is the lack of real interoperability between different systems. 
Both domotic systems and service robots allow a major 
modernization in Spanish homes and improve energy 
efficiency thereof. These two technologies are the ones that 
provide the greatest technological advances in homes, public 
buildings or workplaces. 
The lack of interoperability makes both systems work 
and interact independently. This means that if we make them 
work together, there would be a duplication of performed 
tasks. So if both systems could coordinate, resources will be 
optimized and it would improve energy efficiency. 
Therefore, it is essential that those devices communicate 
with each other in a complementary way, i.e. sharing the 
services to know what is happening around them and take 
decisions accordingly. 
Technically, it is possible to create a common 
communication protocol at the application level on the 
protocol stack TCP / IP, and the corresponding adapters for 
each device. This protocol, as standard, allows the 
intercommunication between devices that comply with the 
label that ensures the adequacy of their adapters. It is named 
DH Compliant [2] and it is a universal and open standard. 
Because of this, the Smart Home Energy project (hereinafter 
SHE) is based on technology standards, giving them some 
advantages that other protocols lack: 
 
There is neither technological nor brand dependence. 
 
Savings in solution investment. 
 
Intellectual 
and 
economic 
richness 
both 
in 
companies and national research institutions. 
 
Control and simultaneous management of service 
robots, 
smart 
home 
applications 
and 
smart 
appliances. 
B. Device management 
In recent years, computers and electrical appliances that 
are being incorporated at homes are reaching more and more 
energy efficiency levels. However, its contribution is still not 
enough in the current energy scenario, where external energy 
dependence and indefinite rising prices cast doubt on the 
profitability of these devices compared to the useful life and 
the necessary investment. 
This means that energy saving measures and common 
recommendations (energy-efficient light bulbs, A + + 
electrical appliances, awareness campaigns , etc.) are 
increasingly ineffective in achieving a significant reduction 
of consumption, prompting the need for more advanced 
strategies. 
From a technical point of view, a home is an extremely 
complex system with many uncertainty sources depending 
on environmental conditions and human behavior. 
Therefore, the inclusion of monitoring and control 
systems in real time in our homes is becoming increasingly 
necessary. 
415
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The incorporation of these management and control 
devices allows the quantification of the energy performance 
of a home, recording the consumption values in order to 
characterize the profiles and habitual patterns. This provides 
the user - using appropriate predictive models- with the 
necessary information to anticipate and minimize energy 
losses. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Elements involved in home energy management 
 
C. Holistic approach 
From a physical standpoint, all elements on a system may 
interact between each other that may indicate a dependence 
level that could be characterized by statistical analysis based 
on observation of variables and parameters. 
This fact also takes place in the field of HVAC in homes, 
since all the elements of the domestic system (people, 
electrical appliances, lighting, outdoor conditions, etc.) 
exchange heat with each other by changing comfort 
conditions (temperature and humidity). For that reason, 
quantification and analysis of all variables involved in heat 
exchange must be made from a holistic approach, measuring 
the contribution of the element of each system and modeling 
its interaction to propose real energy-efficient alternatives 
within the conditions of comfort that the user sets. 
Applying this integration approach to a energy 
management system using a suitable learning system, 
optimal decisions would be made in real time to reduce 
energy losses (based on "experience" of the system from the 
beginning of its operation); decisions that could be 
ineffective or even counterproductive if the mentioned 
approach is not considered.  
This will result in most cases in a reduction on the 
electric bill, taking into account that the electrical company 
has an important role in the system. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Multidevice architecture scheme 
 
As seen in Figure 2, the great advantage of the 
architecture stands on the fact of implementing a solution 
without having to think about which device is addressed. 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the state of the art. Section III explains the 
proposed solution. In the last section, we draw the 
conclusions and indicate the future work. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART AND DISCUSSION ON HOW TO 
IMPLEMENT THE SOLUTION 
Integration 
of 
various 
automation 
and 
control 
technologies in the domestic environment is called “Digital 
Home”, an idea not only applying to domestic tasks through 
smart home appliances, but also aiming to cover needs of 
personal assistance, education and entertainment as well as 
security and surveillance. 
The following sections will discuss the different points to 
be solved and decisions on the most appropriate technologies 
to be used in the proposed solution: 
A. Efficient energy management 
The Digital Home proposes an efficient energy 
management by integrating some features in common with 
BMS (Building Management System) [3]. such as issues 
related to the HVAC control, a correct monitoring of 
416
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

lighting, allowing a control of consumption and, therefore, 
its associated costs. 
Control of electrical appliances and robots is not covered 
by these systems, so BMS are a good starting point to define 
the features and functionality of SHE, even though their 
ultimate goal does not match the prototype to be developed. 
In terms of architecture, BMS has a similar structure and 
characteristics to those presented by the prototype: hardware 
components (sensors, controllers and actuators), computer 
processing power and control of all sensors and actuators, 
user interface (smart-phones, PCs, tablets, etc.) as well as 
means of transmission.  
The meters that will be referenced in Section III generate 
XML reports, allowing to be processed quickly and giving 
the necessary information for operation to the SHE system. 
In contrast to other research, all business logic will be in the 
cloud and it is going to be described in the next section. As 
will be seen, the core protocol requires only basic input 
parameters 
in 
order 
to 
generate 
configurable 
and 
customizable reports and recommendations, among other 
functions, independent of the measuring device. 
B. Cloud 
It is necessary to store the information from the digital 
home in a centralized way in order to have a database that 
allows 
comparative 
analysis 
and 
heuristics. 
Cloud 
technology [4] allows us to centralize the information 
without requiring high-capacity storage in homes as well as 
to manage and maintain the integrity, security and 
availability of data, storing replicated data to ensure recovery 
in case of a loss of information. 
In turn, the Cloud server-side solution provides an elastic 
system that is able to be sized according to demand using an 
infrastructure that does not require a high initial investment. 
It also allows an adaptive storage capacity and information 
processing to specific needs. This adaptive capacity also 
improves the overall energy efficiency of the system. 
Therefore, this solution provides facilities for software 
updating, software improvements and developments. This is 
immediate and transparent for the user because most of the 
software is centralized and not distributed on each node. 
From the user’s perspective, Cloud technology provides 
access to the stored information from any device, anywhere 
[5].   
C. Communication 
After the study of various technologies, we chose to use 
of DPWS (Devices Profile for Web Services) [7] for the 
communication within the housing as it maintains the 
philosophy of SOA combined with the convenience of Web 
Services. 
It is necessary also to take into account that the system 
requires the input in an agile way and an easy integration of 
different devices. Furthermore, the access to and from the 
outside will be made over different types of networks – 
wired and wireless- so communications between digital 
homes nodes and the Cloud are made using REST API [8]. 
The implementation of the REST API allows defining a 
communication interface between software components 
(API) where an URL represents an object or resource whose 
content is accessed via HTTP. This solution means that a 
digital home can notify captured information to the Cloud. 
These are the advantages of the approach: 
 
Portability between different languages. This is 
highly 
important 
for 
integrating 
different 
manufacturers and technologies in digital home 
nodes.  
 
Performance improvement comparing to other APIs 
(XML, SOAP, etc.), which is particularly critical due 
to the large number of potential nodes of the digital 
homes network. 
 
Easiness of scalability to consider a probable 
exponential in the adoption of digital homes.  
 
REST 
communication 
is 
less 
"heavyweight" 
compared to SOAP, so it is faster and consumes less 
bandwidth.  
 
Lack of strong typing and changeable data structure 
at any request. 
 
On the other hand, applications such as consumers’ 
information transferred to and processed in Cloud also will 
make use of REST API and will serve of these facilities. 
Furthermore, the REST API functionality can be extended in 
client applications using widgets or the own applications or 
if the API is opened by applications developed by the users 
or communities of these manufacturers, utilities, etc.  Next, 
the qualities of the REST API to exploit Cloud information 
are highlighted: 
 
Exploitation and use of information and services in 
an agile way, as well as easy integration into several 
applications and devices. 
 
Resources access is more accessible than SOAP and 
other heavier protocols that require more processing 
of the response to its interpretation. 
 
Customer accessing a REST communication does 
not require large resources compared to SOAP. 
D. DHC Adapters 
The SHE (Smart Home Energy) kernel must be based on 
an open, extensible and modular protocol, so DHCompliant 
[2] including its open energy service DHC Energy is 
considered a very suitable option as it allows integration of 
consumption measuring devices, such as CurrentCost, with 
the other technologies in the home. The services of DHC 
communication protocol are set out below: 
 
DHC- Security & Privacy service provides the 
security and privacy to prevent fraudulent use of 
devices and access to data by people or devices 
outside the system. 
 
DHC- 
Groups 
service 
coordinates 
the 
implementation of collaborative tasks between 
different devices connected to the system. 
 
DHC-Localization Service provides the information 
to locate devices within the home and help them in 
navigation. 
417
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
DHC-Intelligence service provides intelligence to 
the system by managing rules that control the tasks 
and predicting sensor data from a previous training. 
 
DHC-Energy Service [9] improves energy efficiency 
being probably one of the most effective ways in 
economic terms increasing supply security and 
reducing emissions of greenhouse gases and other 
pollutants. 
DHC-Energy arises from that need by establishing 
the concept of energy and smart grids [10] in the 
DHCompliant communication protocol. It defines a 
set of concepts and energy management savings that 
allow the user to know in detail the energy 
consumption data in the Digital Home environment. 
 
The prototype, using an expert system with a rule editor, 
allows the recommendation of actions on a digital home 
environment depending on environmental conditions, 
creating a knowledge database with the consumption.  
For this purpose, the expert system, based on its 
experience, uses the rules to model the system. In addition, 
this editor enables you to test and simulate the rules. The rule 
execution is done with an inference engine based on an 
execution of rules and tree forward. 
 
III. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
Therefore, after studying the state of the art, the SHE 
architecture is proposed. It is specified in SysML, the 
standard and open language for systems engineering. 
 
A. Requirements 
The need to have an intelligent measuring device, Smart 
Meter: will report in real time about the consumption of gas 
and electricity, showing the actual rates. The Smart meter [6] 
shown in Figure 3 (a) and its adapter for connection in 
Figure 3 (b) are examples of the device that are been used: 
 
For tasks that require cooperation among multiple robots, 
first a leader is chosen among them, depending on the energy 
consumption of each robot. 
 
B. Establishment of the charging information 
We selected the most economic energy configuration. 
The user can see the types of charging (maximum 
consumption, cost per kWh, etc.), being able to select the 
best rate, so that the user can choose what time will a device 
be enabled or disabled according to tasks being performed, 
time of day and the tariffs to be applied. 
Figure 4 shows a sequence diagram describing the 
process. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Sequence diagram: Obtain pricing information 
C. Device states 
It is also important to know the user's preferences to be 
compared with the data that shows the state of the device 
and the power source - either renewable or normal electrical 
supply. The sequence diagram that represents the different 
states of the device is shown on Figure 5. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Sequence diagram: Device state 
D. Temperature regulation 
Using metadata is one of the main ways of managing 
energy savings. Through that, the internal and external 
temperatures are known, as well as other certain 
characteristics of the environment (humidity, number of 
 
 
Figure 3.  Smart meter (Current Cost) and his wireless connection 
418
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

sunlight hours, rain, wind, etc.). It is described in the 
following sequence diagram. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Sequence diagram: Temperature regulation 
E. Energy profiles 
There is a large number of devices that are held to 
regulate their energy consumption (TV, mobile phones, 
computers, etc.). Therefore, the DHC-Energy defined a set of 
patterns of energy consumption: 
 
Off – This profile is used to point out that the user 
does not need the device and the power consumption 
is zero. 
 
Stand by – The device is awaiting orders. Its power 
consumption is minimal.  
 
Low - The device is operating at low capacity. In 
this profile, the energy saving rate will be the 
highest. 
 
High - The device is operating at full capacity. In 
this profile, the energy saving rate is the lowest. 
 
Emergency - Full capacity of use. There will be no 
energy savings. 
Assignment of a profile for a device: The user will be 
able to choose one of the define profiles for each device or 
each home. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Sequence diagram: Election of the energy profile 
F. Change Profile  
If a device remains in an inactive state, the device must 
change its energy profile for a lower profile. 
 
G.  Service and devices description  
The DHCompliant device description should contain a 
list of DHC-Energy services. This XML description must 
contain the name of the DHC-Energy service and SCPDURL 
description with the URL to the extended service description. 
This architecture is summarized in a main block, which 
is implemented using Cloud Servers, Smart Home Energy 
Management System, and blocks for adapters that will have 
the common interface ConnectedDevice (device connected). 
On the other hand, the recommendation system will have a 
distributed architecture between the cloud and the devices in 
the home. The information sharing took place by 
exchanging an XML file. After being obtained from the 
SHE adapter (DHC-Energy), this information is sent to the 
cloud. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Prototype interfaces 
As it is shown in Figure 8, the information will be 
displayed on screens, which take into account different 
aspects of usability, accessibility and of course, the 
functional aspects of providing the user of the information 
that allows to manage the environment devices and Smart 
Grid that are in the user digital home. As there are different 
manufacturers working within the SHE, implementations 
depend on each particular company or manufacturer. 
Prototypes that are independent of a particular solution have 
been proposed and they are being used by various 
technologically neutral members of the consortium. 
419
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This architecture work allows to determine that an open 
stage of interaction between devices and the Smart Grid can 
be set by providing more capabilities than pure traditional 
energy efficiency (such as accounting and reductions in 
consumption). It also allows the establishment of a 
consumption profile of the different heterogeneous devices a 
user has at home, as well as a referral system in the cloud 
associated with business intelligence that allows reducing 
even more the energy expenditure. All this is done in a 
distributed way but through a single point where the user 
interacts.  
It can be also concluded that this technology has 
advantages over other approaches because it is open, 
distributed, scalable and requires little or no configuration by 
the end user. In addition to the technical advantages, other 
advantages include the open environments and standards that 
will produce more open market scenarios. The results of 
these market changes are beyond the scope of this 
communication. 
This first interaction has been outlined in architecture, 
prototyping the various adapters and software to deploy in 
the cloud. It remains to be completed, and tested for selected 
use cases in the project Smart Home Environment. 
One open issue is the analysis of the scalability of the 
technology. Different scenarios could be simulated (for 
example using queuing theory) to understand how a large-
scale 
deployment 
would 
consume 
more 
or 
less 
computational resources on the Cloud side and of the 
recommenders. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project is funded by the Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness of Spain (IPT-2011-1237-920000). 
We are also very grateful to all the members of the 
consortium (Ingenia, Satec, Ingho, Tecopysa, Cotesa, IAT, 
University of Oviedo) and to the programmers of the entities 
participating in the project (Víctor García, Alejandro 
Álvarez, José María Ocón). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] I.G. Alonso, O.A. Fres, A.A. Fernandez, P.G. del Torno, J.M. 
Maestre, and M.D.A.G. Fuente. Towards a new open 
communication standard between homes and service robots, 
the DH Compliant case. Robotics and Autonomous Systems. 
Volume 60, Issue 6, June 2012, Pages 889–900. 
[2] DH 
Compliant 
Project, 
2009. 
Web 
Site. 
http://www.dhcompliant.com/  [retrieved: october, 2012] 
[3] R. Spinar, P. Muthukumaran, R. Paz, D. Pesch, W. Song, S. 
Chaudhry, C.J. Sreenan, E. Jafer, and B. O'Flynn. Demo 
Abstract: Efficient Building Management with IP-based 
Wireless Sensor Network, 6th European Conference on 
Wireless Sensor Networks, Cork, 2009. Pp 1-2. 
[4] J. Rhoton and R. Haukioja. Cloud Computing Architected: 
Solution Design Handbook. Recursive Press; 2011. 
[5] L. Spaanenburg and H. Spaanenburg. Cloud Connectivity and 
Embedded 
Sensory 
Systems. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.springer.com/engineering/circuits+%26+systems/
book/978-1-4419-7544-7 [retrieved: july, 2012] 
[6] F.J. Casellas, G. Velasco, F. Guinjoan, and R. Piqué. El 
concepto de Smart Metering en el nuevo escenario de 
distribución eléctrica. Seminario Anual de Automática, 
Electrónica Industrial e Instrumentación. Bilbao: 2010, p. 
752-757 978-84-95809-75-9 
[7] OASIS. 
Devices 
Profile 
for 
Web 
Services. 
2009.http://docs.oasis-open.org/ws-dd/ns/dpws/2009/01 
[retrieved: july, 2012] 
[8] M. Masse. REST API Design Rulebook. O’Reilly Media; 
2011. 
[9] DH Compliant Project. Energy Management. 2009. Web Site. 
http://156.35.46.38/index.php/blog/show/DHCompliant-
Protocol-v.0.2-%28Energy-Subsystem%29.html 
[retrieved: 
october, 2012] 
[10] S. Chen, S. Song, L. Li, and J. Shen. Survey on Smart Grid 
Technology. Power System Technology; 2009-08 
 
420
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-230-1
ICSEA 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

