Design and Innovation in Game Development  
Observations in 7 Small Organizations 
Erno Vanhala, Jussi Kasurinen and Kari Smolander 
Software Engineering and Information Management 
Lappeenranta University of Technology 
Lappeenranta, Finland 
erno.vanhala | jussi.kasurinen | kari.smolander@lut.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Design and innovation of game software is 
considered to be a creative task, which also involves methods 
from 
software 
development. 
But 
how 
do 
the 
game 
organizations actually design their products and innovate? The 
objective of this paper is to understand how game products are 
designed, what factors affect the design process and how game 
designers innovate. This study observed and analyzed seven 
game-developing organizations to allow comparison of their 
used design methods, design objectives and sources of their 
innovation. Based on our study, the game organizations 
regardless of their size are generally driven by the business 
factors, such as expected sales, in product design. Even though 
several organizations promote innovation and creative design, 
the business practicalities require the organization to prioritize 
to products that have high profit expectations. The findings 
indicate that the game development organizations acknowledge 
originality and creativity in their product design, but their 
major objective in the design work is to confirm marketability 
and business potential of the product.  
Keywords- Game design, innovation process, game industry, 
design restrictions 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Game development is a creative field of industry. Its 
software development tasks are also a means of expression 
[1], meaning that the development and design work is much 
more than just collecting and realizing the functionality and 
quality criteria for the new product. Unlike conventional 
software, game products do not have the requirement to 
fulfill a certain purpose and do it efficiently. Instead they are 
required to provide entertainment and keep the player 
interested in the product. 
However, there are also studies on the game industry that 
see game development as comparable to normal software 
design and development [2, 3]. In some occasions, the 
promotion of creative chaos and informality may even be a 
publicity stunt to maintain an illusion that the game business 
is more relaxed or artistic, or at least less money-centric than 
conventional software development [1]. In the development 
of new products for popular, existing franchises this can be 
considered to be somewhat true, since there are established 
markets and a customer base for a certain type of product. 
However, in the development of new concepts, trends and 
franchises there still is room for innovation, since the game 
markets thrive for novelty factors and products, which offer 
something new to the user experience. This innovation and 
design for novel concepts is especially thriving in small and 
medium-sized game studios that are still searching for their 
first breakthrough product and trademark franchise [1]. 
In this paper, we study the innovation processes and 
design principles in small and medium sized game 
developing software organizations. The objective of this 
paper is to identify how game developers design their 
products, what factors affect the design in practice and what 
is the source of innovation in these organizations. Overall, 
the research questions were “How game studios design their 
products” 
and 
“How game-developing 
organizations 
innovate and make business?”. Our research group 
interviewed 27 professional game developers from seven 
game developing organizations to observe how game 
developers innovate and design game products. These 27 
interviews were conducted with several stakeholders in the 
organizations, game designers, developers, project managers 
and upper management, to gain a comprehensive view into 
the game organizations and to understand how these 
organizations innovate and design in game development. 
 This paper is also related to our earlier studies on game 
developing organizations and innovation. In the earlier 
publications, game organizations have been studied from the 
viewpoints of technical infrastructure [4], organizational 
processes [5] and application of new technologies [6].  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 
2, a number of related studies are introduced and assessed. In 
Section 3, the applied research methods are introduced and 
the results are presented in the Section 4. Section 5 discusses 
the study observations and Section 6 closes the paper with 
conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
Game business has been a growing area of industry for 
the last decade [7], regardless of the economic turbulences in 
other global business areas. This has driven up the number of 
game studios in many countries such as United States [7] or 
Finland [8], and increased the demand for new products and 
novel concepts. 
Game design has been addressed in a number of 
publications. For example, a study by Blow [2] has identified 
the increasing complexity of game products during the last 
ten years. Due to increased processing power of the game 
platforms, the game products are able to simulate more 
sophisticated concepts, and at the same time allow more 
complex designs for new products. In addition of increased 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

computing power, the game industry has also developed a 
fairly stable environment of well-known release platforms. 
The major shareholders, such as Sony or Microsoft are 
influential enough to form a de-facto industry standard [9]. 
Dymek [10] discusses the sources of innovation and the 
relationship between the software and game industry. The 
usual problem with the development models in the game 
industry is that the models overestimate the technology 
needs of game products, because the game industry is 
usually associated closely to the software industry. From the 
viewpoint of the game industry, games are cultural products 
that in the design process resemble more interactive movies 
than software [10]. However, Kanode and Haddad [3] have 
identified the most common problems in game development 
projects and point out that the most common problems are 
related to project management and development processes. 
The creative work is mostly used to develop the design for a 
game concept, and then later applied to refine the design “to 
find the fun”. Callelle et al. [11] agrees with Kanode and 
Haddad, mentioning that the development of a game design 
document is the most important design-phase work. 
Kultima and Alha [1] identified seven profiles for people 
working in the games industry. The most common profiles 
were 
called 
“Instrumentalists” 
and 
“Artists”. 
The 
instrumentalists were people were able to identify useful or 
interesting characteristics in the applied platforms. The 
artists were the more common type of innovators; their drive 
to work in the game industry was based on the need to create 
something new. Interestingly, the third most common group 
was the “Nihilists”, who had a negative view on innovation. 
Almost every sixth interviewee was very critical towards 
innovativeness of the game industry, or innovation for the 
sake of innovation.  
From the business viewpoint the game industry has gone 
through a paradigm shift from arcade video game halls to 
massive multiplayer online games and mobile games [12]. In 
games, new business and revenue models have been recently 
taken 
into 
use, 
including 
free-2-play 
or 
in-game 
advertisement models [13-17]. 
Computer gaming industry is also special in the sense 
that it can implement advertising embedded in games as 
value-adding parts [14]. Especially this is seen in sport 
games, where, for example, football players have real team 
outfits with sponsor tags on them. Gamers’ attitudes towards 
advertising is also more permissive than those of the people 
who do not play games [18]. This has made it possible, for 
example, to develop the free-2-play business model [19, 20], 
where games can include advertising and in-game 
purchasing can be done to monetize the game. 
Traditionally in games, there has been a game package to 
buy, but currently digital distribution has started to eliminate 
this expense. Vanhatupa [21] claims that browser-based 
games can be offered for free and still get a steady long-term 
revenue 
stream 
by 
selling 
extra 
features 
and/or 
advertisements. This means that besides actual games, game 
companies always need to develop a working business model 
to monetize their ideas and technological innovations as 
technology itself has no value [22]. 
Overall, it seems that the game design is strongly related 
to the development of novel concepts and innovation for new 
ways to use the existing systems [2, 9]. The game industry 
sees itself more creative than “traditional” software industry, 
but in practice it seems that the most of the creative work is 
done when establishing new brands and franchises, and that 
the creative needs of game development are not that critical 
as expected [1,3,11]. On the business side, new technologies 
and business models cause further development needs for the 
ways how games are developed [19,21,22]. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
The software process including the design, development 
and testing of a commercial product is a complex 
phenomenon, which has varying approaches even with 
seemingly similar organizations [23]. Acknowledging this, 
we decided to pursue empirical qualitative analysis by 
applying the grounded theory method [24-26]. We 
considered Grounded theory suitable for discovering and 
analyzing the activities done during a software project, as it 
observes and describes real-life phenomena within their 
social and organizational context. According to Hughes and 
Jones [27], the method suits well to these objectives.  
Our approach is in accordance with the Strauss and 
Corbin [24] approach and in the process of building a theory 
from the case study research, we followed guidelines as 
described by Eisenhardt [28]. The interpretation of the field 
study results was completed in accordance with principles 
derived from [29] and [30]. 
A. Data Collection 
The initial strategy for the population criteria and 
selection was based on our prior research experiences on 
conducting industry-wide studies on software industry in 
general, made by our research group [for example 23, 31]. 
We carried out four interview rounds in our study (Table 1) 
with four different interviewee groups; project managers, 
game developers, upper management and game designers. 
The sample of the interview rounds consisted of seven game 
development organizations selected from our research 
partners and supplemented with additional volunteering 
organizations to achieve a heterogeneous group of different 
target audiences, development platforms and organizational 
histories. Overall, 27 interview sessions were held during the 
spring, summer and fall of 2012 by seven researchers from 
two research laboratories.  
The 7 organizations in the study group were small to 
medium-sized professional game companies. Five of the 
seven were either recent business startups or new companies 
(less than five published products) and two were more 
experienced organizations with more than five published 
titles. The selection of the cases was based on the polar type 
selection [28] to cover differences between organizations; 
the cases included different target platforms and different 
sizes of development projects. In practice, the organizations 
were selected from a number of volunteering research 
partners and supplemented with additional organizations. 
These organizations varied (Table 2) from newly started 
mobile game developers to browser-based games, PC games 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

offered through digital distribution and even included an 
established developer with products in the retail stores. The 
smallest organization in the focus group was a startup with 
three persons; the largest organization included several 
hundred people that contributed to the product development. 
All of the participating organizations were commercial 
companies, with game development their main source of 
income. 
The objective of this approach was to gain a broader 
understanding of the practice of and to identify the general 
factors that affect the design and innovation work. To 
achieve 
this, 
our 
research 
team 
developed 
four 
questionnaires that included questions on themes such as 
design methods, development processes, quality, business 
models and innovation. Before the first interview round the 
questionnaire was peer reviewed within the research group to 
check for sanity, and between the interview rounds some 
follow-up-questions were added to collect more details and 
test observations. All of the complete questionnaires are 
available at http://www2.it.lut.fi/project/SOCES/.  
The interviews contained semi-structured questions, and 
the whole sessions were tape-recorded for qualitative 
analysis. Typically, an interview lasted for approximately 
one hour and they were arranged as face-to-face interviews 
with one or two organization participant and one or two 
researchers at the location selected by the interviewees. As 
we wanted to test and further flesh out our initial findings 
and observations from the earlier rounds, the interview 
rounds were conducted in order; for example the interviews 
with the second round interviewees started only after all first 
round interviews were conducted. Because of this and 
scheduling problems, we were unable to interview one 
representative during the second interview round, but the 
round-specific topics were discussed with the organization 
representatives on the latter interview rounds. 
The decision to interview project managers during the 
first round was based on our aim to gain a better 
understanding of the operational level of software 
development. We wanted to see whether our observations 
and experiences from [23,31] the software industry were 
applicable in the game industry context.  
The interviewees in the second round were selected from 
a group of developers or programmers, who directly 
contributed to the software product and had experience with 
the technical details of the developed product. To gain more 
insight into the technical infrastructure, the interview topics 
in this round were heavily focused towards programming 
techniques, process activities and applied development tools.  
In the third round, the focus of the interviews was to 
collect more general data on the company beyond the 
development process of the products. During this round 
additional themes beyond the software development such as 
marketing, innovation and financing were collected to better 
understand the context in which the game industry operates. 
In the fourth round, the focus was on the creative aspects of 
the game development, in the design work. During this round 
the interviewed employees were game designers, or 
management-level personnel with the ability to affect the 
final design of the developed product. 
The interview rounds, interviewee roles in the 
organization and study structure are summarized in Table 1, 
and the participating organizational units are summarized in 
Table 2. 
B. Data Analysis 
The grounded theory method contains three data analysis 
steps: open coding, where categories and their related codes 
are extracted from the data; axial coding, where connections 
between the categories and codes are identified; and selective 
coding, where the core category is identified and described 
[24].  
The objective of the open coding was to classify the data 
into categories and identify leads in the data. The process 
started with “seed categories” [33] that contained essential 
stakeholders and known phenomena based on our prior 
studies in this context. Seaman [33] notes that the initial set 
of codes (seed categories) comes from the goals of the study, 
the research questions, and predefined variables of interest. 
In our case, the seed categories were derived and further 
developed from our prior studies on software industry. Our 
selection for the seed categories included general phases of 
the software processes such as design, development, testing 
and project 
management, 
and 
common 
terms 
and 
stakeholders such as financers, customers, project personnel, 
software tools and quality; areas and concepts which should 
exist in software development but which are not too 
restrictive or descriptive to bias the collected data. These 
seed categories were also used to define the themes for the 
questions in the questionnaire. The final data collection 
instrument, a series of open questions, included topics such 
as development process, test processes, tools, quality, design 
TABLE I. INTERVIEW ROUNDS AND THEMES 
Interviews 
Interviewee  
Description 
Main themes of the interviews 
Qualitative 
interview with 7 
organizations 
Team leader or 
project 
manager 
The interviewee is responsible for the management 
of the development of one product, or one phase of 
development for all products. 
Development process, test process, 
quality, outsourcing, development tools, 
organizational aspects. 
Qualitative 
interview with 6 
(+1*) organizations 
Developer 
or 
tester 
The 
interviewee 
was 
responsible 
for 
the 
development tasks, preferably also with the 
responsibilities of software testing activities. 
Development process, test process, 
development 
tools, 
development 
methods, quality. 
Qualitative 
interview with 7 
organizations 
Upper 
management or 
owner 
The interviewee was from the upper management, or 
a business owner with an active role in the 
organization. 
Organization, 
quality, 
marketing, 
innovation 
and 
design 
process, 
development process. 
Qualitative 
interview with 7 
organizations 
Lead designer 
or Art designer 
The interviewee was a game designer, or managerial 
level person with the ability to affect the product 
design and selection of the implement features. 
Development 
process, 
design 
and 
innovation, testing, quality 
* Interview themes discussed during later rounds with other representatives of the organization 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

process and finances, weighted between rounds based on the 
roles of the interviewees. 
In open coding, the classified observations can be 
organized into larger categories. New categories appear and 
are merged because of new information that surfaces during 
the coding. For example, our initial concept of infrastructural 
problems being a seed category was abandoned as the coded 
interview data proved that the process problems were more 
related to personnel and management, technical issues 
having little to none observations in the study group. 
Similarly, several observations in different categories and 
issues which emerged from the data formed the coding for 
our data. Overall, at the end of the open coding, the number 
of codes was 172 codes with 1574 individual observations, 
collected from over 1400 minutes of recordings from 27 
interview sessions. 
The objective of the axial coding, which starts when the 
categories start to emerge and runs somewhat parallel with 
the open coding [24], is to further develop the categories by 
looking for causal conditions or any kind of connections 
between the categories. In this phase, the categories and their 
related observations were becoming fixed, allowing the 
analysis to focus on developing the relationships between 
larger concepts. In this phase, the categories formed groups 
in the sense that similar observations were connected to each 
other. For example, codes such as “Design process: refining 
designs”, “Development process: knowledge transfer” and 
“Problem: Documentation/knowledge transfer related to 
design” formed a chain of evidence of how the organization 
documented and refined their product designs and what 
problems the designers and developers had with this 
approach. By following these types of leads in the data, the 
connections between categories were identified and made. 
The third phase of grounded analysis, selective coding, is 
used to identify the core category [24] and relate it 
systematically to the other categories. The core category is 
sometimes one of the existing categories, and at other times 
no single category is broad or influential enough to cover the 
central phenomenon. In this study, the examination of the 
core category resulted to the category “Overall Objectives of 
the Innovation and Design in Games”, which is an umbrella 
category explaining the observations related to design work, 
innovation and long-term objectives the organizations have.  
 
The core category was formed by abstracting the 
categories and most important issues as none of the existing 
categories was considered influential enough to explain the 
entire phenomena. For example, we observed that the 
primary method of design work was based on one individual, 
who made the decisions based on group work, and that in all 
organizations the objective of the development work was in 
economic aspects, not in artistic presentation or other non-
economic issue even though these topics were discussed in 
some organizations. In addition, the most important 
limitation was resources, specifically time, not the release 
platform or available tools. Additionally, we also observed 
that the most important source of innovation was previous 
experience with game products, and somewhat surprisingly 
the other cultural sources such as folklore or literature were 
not used to a large degree. We adjusted the core category 
“Overall Objectives of the Innovation and Design in 
Games” to include all of the categories and observations, 
which discuss the objectives of the design work in 
organizations before the actual development starts, the 
sources of innovation in the organization and the overall 
effect the marketing and financial aspects have on the game 
product design work. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
In this section we discuss the analysis results. The 
categorized observations and main findings are presented in 
Table 3, and the connections between the categories in 
Figure 1. After explaining the main categories we introduce 
the findings on game design methods and innovation and the 
effect of business aspects on the game design. Finally, we 
discuss the implications of the results. 
A. Categories  
The core category, Overall Objectives of the Innovation 
and Design in Games, is a composition of several categories, 
which all discuss the design work, innovation or aspects that 
affect the design work or innovation. The categories were 
formed inductively from the interviews. They explain the 
relationship between the design objectives and innovation 
process, or the effects of business practices affecting the 
product-related decisions. These selected categories describe 
how our case organizations approached design process and 
how business factors affected the product design. 
The category Objectives of the design phase summarizes 
the most important objective the organization has for the 
design work. In most organizations the objective was on 
exploring the game concepts and testing that the potential 
new product could be marketable, fun to play and with 
proof-of-concept prototypes, doable with the target platform. 
The category Design method describes how the 
organization designs their new products. Vision means that 
the organization has lead game designers that draft the first 
concept based on their own ideas. Idea pitching means that 
the organization applies open sessions where employees can 
pitch their ideas, and the most liked ideas are further studied. 
 
TABLE II. DESCRIPTION OF THE ORGANIZATIONS 
 
Release 
platforms 
Production 
team size1 
Maturity. amount of 
released games 
Case 
A 
PC, 
game 
consoles 
Large 
Established, more than 10 
released products 
Case 
B 
Mobile 
platforms 
Small 
Recent startup, Less than 5 
released products 
Case 
C 
Game 
consoles, 
PC 
Large 
Established, Less than 10 
released products. 
Case 
D 
Mobile 
platforms, 
PC 
Medium 
Startup, 
developing 
first 
product 
Case 
E 
Mobile 
platforms 
Small 
Recent startup, less than 5 
released products 
Case 
F 
PC 
Medium 
Startup, 
developing 
first 
product 
Case 
G 
Browser 
games 
Small 
Startup, 
developing 
first 
product 
1Amount of people contributing to the released product, size by SME 
definitions [32] 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Brainstorming means that the development team organizes 
dedicated design sessions, in which they make the first 
designs for potential new products as a group effort. 
Prototypes mean that the organization develops crude 
prototypes to explore their new concepts and decide which 
prototype to develop to a full game based on their look and 
feel. Pen and paper means that the organization has 
designers or artists, which create mock screenshots and 
concept drawings to flesh out concepts which may be based 
on personal ideas or a group effort.  
The category First vs. published product indicates the 
amount of differences between the typical first functional 
prototype of a game product and the final outcome. Major 
changes indicate that the game may have large changes in 
the design, including genre, theme, release platform or main 
marketing features. Minor changes indicate that the changes 
are only related to the smaller features, such as amount and 
type of game content, game mechanics, changes in creative 
writing or control scheme. In Case G this category was 
divided to technical and game design, since their game had 
only minor changes content-wise, but underwent drastic 
changes in the technical solution. 
The category Level of details in the design describes the 
amount of details in the initial design, which is used to start 
the development of an actual product. Functional prototype 
indicates that the organization develops a proof-of-concept 
prototype, which has all of the intended main features of the 
game to assess the feasibility of the product design. If the 
design is considered usable and marketable, then the 
development team starts to build an actual product. Basic 
gameplay elements mean that the organization designs a 
functional concept with the basic features, story elements, 
themes and characters with some technical studies on 
concept feasibility. Core features and concept art is one step 
towards simple draft documentation; the main features and 
some concepts for theme and creative aspects are drafted but 
usually no programming work is done.  
The category Effect of industry describes the ways the 
organization considers the games industry in general to affect 
their product design, marketing approach or business models. 
Case organizations A, B, C, D and F considered the industry 
to affect mostly on the required features of the game; 
customers expect some abilities such as hand gestures or 
platform-specific functionalities which demand the designers 
to cater to these expectations. Cases C, E and G also 
mentioned that the industry affects their business model, 
either by forcing the organization to constantly update their 
products (Case C) or by opening new market segments or 
revenue models such as free-2-play [20]. 
The category Most important designers indicate in the 
project-level who in the case organization actually leads the 
design work for new product. Producer indicates that in the 
organization the design decisions are ultimately made by the 
project manager, who supervises the designers, developers 
and game artists. Lead designer means that the organization 
has a separate role for the person who makes the decisions 
on designs and can dictate what features are included and 
Overall Objectives 
of the Innovation 
and Design in 
Games
Objective of 
the design 
phase
Innovation vs. 
money
Effect of 
marketing in 
design
Design 
method
Sources of 
Innovation
Most 
important 
designers
Effect of 
Industry
First vs. 
published
Level of details 
in the
design
Figure 1: The main relationships between the study categories; the 
lines represent categories which share related features. 
TABLE III. OBSERVATIONS FROM THE CASE ORGANIZATIONS AND CATEGORIES RELATED TO THE FINDINGS 
  
Case A 
Case B 
Case C 
Case D 
Case E 
Case F 
Case G 
Objective of the 
design phase 
Make something 
that sells, 
marketable in 
near future 
Concept demo 
on technology, 
game mechanics 
Test if the 
concept is fun 
Good 
mechanics, 
game that sells 
Test mechanics 
for concept, 
something that 
is fun. 
Design of own 
thing, things 
selling are old 
six months 
Design 
something we 
are very good at 
making 
Design method 
Idea pitching, 
prototypes, 
brainstorming 
Vision, 
brainstorming 
Vision, Idea 
pitching, 
prototypes 
Vision, pen and 
paper 
Brainstorming, 
prototypes, pen 
and paper 
Prototyping, 
Vision 
Vision 
First vs. 
published 
Major changes 
Minor changes 
Major changes 
Major changes 
Minor changes 
Large major 
changes 
Large technical, 
minor design 
Level of details 
in the design 
Functional 
prototype 
Basic gameplay 
elements 
Functional 
prototype 
Core features, 
concept art 
Basic gameplay 
elements 
Core features, 
concept art 
Basic gameplay 
elements 
Effect of 
industry 
Enforces 
features 
Publisher sets 
requirements 
Enforces 
upkeep, adding 
new content 
Changes to 
design 
New customers, 
business models 
Stabilizing 
effect on designs 
"Marketing 
dictates success" 
Most important 
designers  
Producer 
Lead designer, 
team 
Producer 
Lead designer 
Team 
Management 
Lead designer 
Innovation vs. 
money 
Money first, then 
innovation 
Money first, 
then innovation 
Innovation, 
hopefully money 
Money first, 
then innovation 
Money first 
Money first 
(free2play) 
Money first, then 
innovation 
Effect of 
marketing in 
design 
"We design fun, 
management 
handles sales" 
"Has to be 
profitable" 
"Make fun demo 
and sell it" 
"Business first" 
"Business first" 
"Good game 
sells" 
"Finances has to 
be taken into 
account" 
Sources of 
innovation 
Movies, other 
games 
Success stories, 
industry trends 
Success stories 
Prior 
experiences, old 
games 
Platform 
possibilities, old 
games 
Movies, books, 
TV, games, 
"portfolio of 
stuff" 
Prior 
experiences, 
competition 
analysis 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

excluded from the product. Team indicates that the decisions 
on game design are made by the entire development team, 
with more or less democratic system of discussions and 
voting. Management indicates that the design is directly 
overseen by the management above the development team, 
and deviations from the original design have to be accepted 
by them. 
The category Innovation vs. money describes whether 
organization units are aiming to build financially successful 
business or are motivated by developing their creative idea 
into a product and “hoping” it can produce income. All the 
companies, except Case C, are going with the philosophy 
money first, where they first build products that generate 
profit and after that start building their dream products.  
The category Effect of marketing in design describes how 
the marketing aspects affect the game design. Cases A, C 
and F considered the design work to be separated from 
marketing, indicating that the most important objective of 
design work is to come up with a creative and fun concept, 
with management or marketing focusing on how to sell that 
design. In other case organizations the design starts with a 
market study on what could be a financially feasible product, 
and based on the market study the product is designed and 
developed so that it fits the target audience. 
Finally, the category Sources of innovation describes the 
main sources of innovation and ideas for the designers. Cases 
A, B, C, D and G named the other, earlier success stories of 
the games industry as one of their most important sources of 
innovation, meaning that the organization did markets 
studies such as “what sort of games sell” and “why did this 
game become success”. Other usual sources for innovation 
and ideas were prior gaming experiences and old games in 
general.  
B. On design process, design objectives, innovation and 
business 
The organizations shared two common features in the 
design work. First, all organizations based their design work 
on economic issues, placing financial success over critical 
success. In other way, all organizations expressed that should 
they choose between highly innovative and memorable but 
financially 
adequate 
and 
financially 
successful 
but 
forgettable product, they would aim for the financial success. 
Secondly, all organizations considered that the available 
resources, mostly time, was their most limiting design factor. 
As the case organizations had to plan their product 
publications within a foreseeable timeframe – usually 3-12 
months –, in all organizations the design, development and 
testing tasks did not have much excess time to fine-tune the 
technical implementation or user experience beyond an 
acceptable level of quality. 
“… after all, there really is very limited amount of time 
to do surprisingly large amount of tasks.” – Case B, Lead 
Designer 
 “I don’t think that there really are [technical] 
restrictions to creativity, it’s just that there are limited 
amount of people.” and “ …”too few people, too little time, 
too little money.” – Case E, Lead Designer 
Besides these two observations, our analysis also yielded 
six main findings describing how the game organizations do 
design and innovation work. In following, we will introduce 
these findings one by one. 
1) Game product design is driven by economic factors. 
In most organizations the game design is strongly related 
to the financial potential of the game product. Even if the 
game industry in general is seen as a creative industry, the 
product design follows mostly economic principles. In all 
organizations with the exception of Case C, the organization 
considered the profits to be more important than innovation. 
“It is nice if the critics and people like your game, or if it 
is a review hit, but it may not translate into profits. If I had to 
select between [money and publicity] I would definitely go 
with money.” – Case E, Project manager 
 “I would like to make a game that has cultural impact, 
or at least is very well known for artistic merits. However, 
first we need to have significant financial successes…” – 
Case D, Upper management 
In most organizations the tradeoff between innovative 
and money-making products was that the organization 
needed money first to build innovative, experimental 
products later. This approach also affected the design 
objectives. In cases A, B, D, E and F the organization was 
designing their products based on the marketing potential or 
business-first approach. In case C and F the organizations 
were geared towards more innovative design. These 
organizations considered that well-made games sell 
themselves, so a good design makes a game easy to sell. 
Case A expressed similar sentiments, but ultimately held 
financial potential as the most important design objective. 
“Our strategy is based on our analysis on what is going 
on, what are the most potential, growing areas, and where it 
is most likely to get our investment to resources back.” – 
Case A, Project manager 
Cases F and G had additional considerations for their 
product design. In Case G, the product design was examined 
with proof-of-concept prototypes to ensure that the product 
was possible to develop for the target platform. In Case F the 
design focused heavily into doing “own thing”. As it takes at 
least six months to develop a game, any product resembling 
the themes and concepts of the current top-selling products 
would be “old news” and a past trend when released. 
“If we look into the best seller list of [platform] right 
now, they probably no longer sell in six months.”...”When 
our game after months and months of development is 
released, it is nothing new or exiting. That is why we should 
do something different.” – Case F, Lead designer 
2) Design relies on prototypes, which test out potential 
game concepts  
Game organizations heavily rely in the prototyping 
approaches in their designs. In Cases A, C, E and F the 
organization did design work by studying the game concept 
with varying degrees of prototypes. This approach was 
applied to ensure that the created design also worked in the 
actual implementation. 
“We make a prototype to test if the concept is actually 
fun to play with and ensure that it has the needed potential.” 
– Case C, Project manager 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The two organizations that had already released a number 
of games, built functional prototypes as the first design 
version (Cases A and C). The organizations that were 
building their first product relied merely on concept art and a 
list of core features (Cases D and F). This may indicate that 
early start-ups do not yet have the skill to build a working 
prototype, and therefore they focused on concept art only. 
“We started by simply thinking what sort of control 
mechanics are used in mobile games, based a simple design 
on top of that and with pen and paper, tested, thought out 
and developed a first build.” – Case E, Project manager 
3) Most game designs are based on a concept innovated 
by individuals 
The design work in the development of new products 
was heavily focused on one or few individuals in the 
organization. In Cases B, C, D, F and G the first concept of a 
new game product came from a designer, or a person who 
came up with an idea that was feasible to implement. After 
the initial idea, Cases B and C worked in teams to flesh out 
the idea, whereas in Cases D, F and G the design was still in 
hands of one or few individuals. 
“I am responsible for [making design decisions]. I have 
to do the final call, since groups simply do not sometimes 
have that ability.” – Case B, Lead Designer 
 “I make the decisions, but usually based on the group 
input” – Case D, Upper Management 
In Cases A and C the design work started with an idea 
pitching event, where each individual could propose new 
ideas for new products. Case A was more geared towards 
making a communal decision within a group to select the 
best concepts, whereas Case C relied more on the work of 
the individuals to convince the group to their game concept.  
 “When someone gets an idea, they can show their ideas 
on these concept cups.”…”If enough people like it we take it 
forward to design.” – Case C, Developer 
In all organizations with the exception of Case E and – to 
a lesser extent Case F – the product design and decisions on 
included and excluded features was the responsibility of one 
named person. In Cases B, D and G this person was a lead 
designer, who in all cases was also the person responsible for 
making the first design. In Cases A and C the design changes 
were managed by the game producer, a project manager, 
who made the decisions on what the product should include 
and exclude.  
“We sit down and have a team discussion once in a 
fortnight to see where we are and discuss new ideas. After 
these sessions the producer goes through the ideas and what 
can be included and what not, and includes feasible stuff to 
the next sprint.” – Case A, Upper Management 
The Cases F and B are exceptions to the strong creative 
control observed in other studied organizations. In Case F the 
upper management had a direct control over the aspects of 
the developed games. In this organization the creative 
control was outside the development team. However, the 
upper management was also responsible for designing new 
products for the organization. In Case E the design work and 
change management was done as a group effort. The design 
was changed only if everyone or at least most of the 
development team approved the idea. The first idea was 
developed 
in brainstorming 
sessions, explored 
with 
prototypes and fleshed out as a group effort. Unlike Case B, 
which had similar activities in the design (pre-production) 
phase, Case E did not have a separate lead designer or 
decision maker for creative aspects at any stage. 
“With our first game, we really did not have specific 
planning phase, we simply went as a group and decided to 
do something simple, something like a proof of concept for 
our team being able to make games.” – Case E, Project 
manager 
“We just brainstorm within our development team, there 
really is no further magic to [design work].” – Case E, 
Upper Management 
The most important designer in the project was also 
related to the age of the company. Cases A and C had been 
in the business longer and they reported that their most 
important designer is the producer, whereas the smaller and 
newer companies did not report that such a person even 
existed. This is a bit similar as with functional prototypes in 
finding 2. The early start-ups had not yet grown big enough 
to have their own producers. 
4) Design and innovation are ad-hoc processes 
The Cases report various design and innovation methods, 
like idea pitching, brainstorming, group work and pen and 
paper. Yet, none of the cases report that they have used more 
formalized ways of design, like lateral thinking [34,35] 
which can be used also as a tool to build completely new 
ideas. Although brainstorming can be considered as a more 
formal method [35,36], its whole potential was not used by 
the organizations as interviewees did not explain any 
systematic use of the method. 
“Personally my ideas are born when I have slept 
overnight and I am driving a car by myself and I have some 
time to think.” – Case G, Upper management 
The companies relied more on ad-hoc innovation, which 
could be because they were not aware of the more formal 
methods. As for these methods, brainstorming and idea 
pitching can be seen as semi-formal methods. In idea 
pitching the new idea has to be presented with maximum of 
three slides and after that decision is made whether 
functional prototype is build or not.  
Cases A, B and C mentioned “game concept day” or 
“proto day” as a day when developers discuss and develop 
new concepts and prototypes. This can also be seen as semi-
formal method as the aim is to produce new ideas. 
“If these ideas are developed further, there is reward given.” 
– Case A, Upper management 
One interviewee mentioned a reward system as a 
motivational factor in the innovation process. Its usefulness 
is unclear, but Case A had been in the business for some 
time, this system seems to work at least to some degree. 
5) Sources of innovation are mostly in existing game 
products and success stories  
The most important sources for innovation and ideas for 
new products were old games released for older generation 
of game systems and popular, successful game products of 
the current markets. All interviewed game designers 
indicated that they used their past experiences with game 
systems and old games as one of their source of innovation. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 “Our newest game is inspired by this old game from the 
90’s… it basically was the initial model for our design. We 
made our thing on top of that.” – Case D, Lead Designer 
Beyond prior experiences with games, some of the case 
organizations did actual market reviews and analyzed 
success stories. In Cases B, C, F and G the organization paid 
close attention to the business, analyzing why some games 
were successful and what sort of features the current 
successes had incorporated. Case E added also technical 
point of view into these analyses. 
“We know about markets enough because we took our 
demo to [industry convention] and talked with people. We 
met over 30 people from the industry to understand what 
publishers look for”…”Now we know that we are doing the 
right thing.” – Case G, Upper Management  
“With our prototypes we also test out to see if the 
technical solution is capable of doing what we want it to 
do.” – Case E, Project Manager 
Besides 
success 
stories, 
existing 
products 
and 
competition analysis, other sources for innovation in product 
design were movies, books and other popular media. The 
only popular media that was mentioned several times as a 
source of innovation was summer blockbuster movies.  
“…Also movies, we use movie references really too 
much.” – Case A, Lead Designer 
6) Start-ups are business-driven in game industry 
Six out of seven case organizations described their 
ideology as “money first” (see Table 3). We can argue that 
these companies have understood that technology itself has 
no value [22], as it is the responsibility of the company to 
monetize the technology. In addition four out of these six 
“money 
first” 
organizations 
described 
their 
marketing/finance design as “has to be profitable”, “business 
first” or “finance has to be taken into account”. The one 
organization that had the philosophy of doing “innovation, 
hopefully money” wanted to “make fun demo” and then sell 
it. With these opposite philosophies we saw that money 
played the most important role for almost all cases. 
In addition to the rows innovation vs. money and effects 
of marketing in design, money and selling are also listed in 
three cases in objectives in the design phase. Although this 
paper focuses on design and innovation we also observed 
that selling, business and money were important issues for 
almost all the companies. For example, Case D goes with 
“money first”, “business first” and its design objective is 
“game that sells”; they are going with business-driven 
development where the aim of software development is 
satisfy business requirements [37]. Case C, as an opposite, 
goes with “innovation”, “make fun demo and sell it” and its 
design objective is to “test if the concept is fun”. Although 
Case C has a different attitude than the rest of the 
organizations, it has still managed to establish itself.  
In Figure 2 we present seven case organization units and 
both their number of released products and their business-
drivenness. The latter is calculated from Table 3 by using 
rows objectives in the design phase, innovation vs. money 
and effects of marketing in design. If business/money is 
mentioned as a first thing 1 point is gained. If it is mentioned 
as second thing 0.5 points are gained. If it is not mentioned, 
no points are gained. Maximum is three points.  
 
 
Figure 2: Number of released products from Cases and their business-
drivenness 
The Cases D, F and G are all making their first product 
and they are also business-driven as the lowest score among 
them is 2. On the other hand the rest of the companies have 
already released at least one game and among them the 
highest score is 2. As several cases described that they first 
aim to make profit and after that produce games they really 
want to do. Our observations support the concept that newly 
established game companies are more business-driven and 
think more about money whereas companies who have 
already released successful products can concentrate more on 
other than immediate economic issues. 
“I would like to make a game that is a landmark… But 
first I aim that we can do economic success, which would 
give us economic freedom which would give us freedom to 
ourselves to do artistic game.” – Case D, project manager 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
In this work the core category is the Overall Objectives 
of the Innovation and Design in Games. Based on our 
observations, the game products are designed with creative 
processes comparable to movies or any other artistic 
creation, but games are not intended to be art for art’s sake, 
they are designed and intended to be commercial products 
which generate income. All game developers interviewed in 
this study considered themselves to be doing more or less 
creative work, but in all organizations the most important 
objective in product design was in commercial success.  
The concept that games are designed based on business 
aspects can also be observed from the viewpoint of design 
principles. In some organizations the most important design 
aspect was in developing “fun” product, but in the long run 
the organization was still aiming at commercial success. 
When faced with the dilemma of selecting between a 
commercially successful but forgettable and critically 
acclaimed 
but 
commercially 
adequate 
product, 
all 
interviewees selected the commercially successful product. 
In all organizations marketing and marketability had at least 
some effects on the product design. In Cases B, D, E, F and 
G the financial aspects dictated the products the organization 
was developing, and even in the larger Cases A and C, the 
product had to have a clear audience and a reasonable 
expectation for profit before the product would advance from 
a proof-of-concept prototype onwards. 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Considering the research questions, “How game studios 
design their products” and “How game-developing 
organizations innovate and make business?”, the results 
indicate that the design process is usually led by one 
individual, who uses the team input as suggestions. The 
initial concepts are heavily influenced by the “vision” of the 
new product, and the decisions on which designs mature 
from proof-of-concept prototypes to fully developed 
products is usually dictated by the potential for revenue. The 
common source for innovation in game development seems 
to be legacy games, experiences gathered from other game 
products and movies. The marketing and business aspects 
also heavily affect the innovation process.  
None of the organizations used formalized methods when 
developing new ideas and concepts. The methods used were 
merely ad-hoc and ideas “just emerged” rather than were 
systematically developed, with a few exceptions of “proto 
days” and team brainstorming. In addition, companies seem 
to be more business-driven when they are starting up and 
establishing their position. After that they can be more 
innovative and concentrate less on monetizing ideas.  
In grounded theory study, there are threats to validity. As 
the method of data collection was based on semi-structured 
interviews, threats such as personal bias caused by the 
researchers or questionnaire are valid concerns. For example, 
a study by Whittemore et al. [38] lists integrity, authenticity, 
credibility and criticality as primary criteria for validity in 
qualitative studies. The aim is to describe the observed 
phenomenon and the applied approach with enough details to 
warrant that the analysis process has been critically designed, 
unbiased and faithful to the data. Similar considerations have 
been expressed by Morse et al. [39]. The nature of the 
qualitative studies requires the presentation to constantly 
verify the collected data and analysis results to achieve the 
necessary rigor for a trustworthy qualitative study.  
In our study, the validity concerns have been addressed 
with several precautions. The data collection instruments 
were developed by seven researchers from two different 
research groups. Before the first interview round, the data 
collection instrument was peer-reviewed for sanity and 
neutrality within the research group. The instruments were 
further developed during the data collection, and the data 
collection itself was conducted by six researchers. For this 
study, the data analysis was conducted and discussed by 
three researchers, with conflicts resolved with discussions 
during meetings. To minimize the bias caused by the release 
platforms, business types or interviewee roles, the interviews 
were collected from different types of interviewees, and the 
case study organizations were selected to represent different 
areas of game industry in business maturities, sizes and 
business platforms. In any case, these qualitative results are 
valid only in this environment, and beyond the scope of this 
study these results should be used as recommendations or 
indications of possible organizational activities. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We have introduced our grounded theory study on the 
game developing organizations. We observed seven game 
developing organizations by interviewing 27 industry 
professionals encompassing different roles such as project 
managers, developers and game designers. Our results 
suggest that game design and innovation are closely related 
to the economic aspects of the game industry. The design 
objective is to generate income with development projects 
that are considered feasible for economic success. In many 
organizations the creative game design work is done by one 
person or a small group of people who have creative control 
over the project, although in some cases group decisions also 
have influence. The main sources of innovation in game 
design seem to be in the existing game products and industry 
success stories, with some novel concepts taken from 
popular media, mostly from movies. 
The organizations in our study had different attitudes 
towards business and innovations. Whereas most of the 
organizations wanted to build their business on a business-
driven model, one organization pushed successfully ahead 
with creativity, innovation and fun. It seems that start-up 
organizations are business-driven in the beginning because 
they need to established their position and secure their future 
in the industry.  
The results of this study can be used to understand the 
business practices and development processes of the game 
industry. In future work, the business modeling methods and 
effects of marketing to the development processes should be 
addressed in more detail to study how much influence the 
business decisions have on the development in practice. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was supported by the European Union 
Regional Development Fund project number A31814, 
“Kaakon Peliklusteri”, administered by the Council of 
Southern Karelia, Finland and the organizations funding the 
related research project. We would also like to thank all the 
interviewed organizations and the project partners, especially 
Cursor Oy. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Kultima and K. Alha, “Hopefully Everything I’m Doing 
Has to Do with Innovation: Games industry professionals on 
innovation in 2009”, Proc. 2nd International IEEE Consumer 
Electronics Society’s Games Innovation Conference, Hong 
Kong, China, 2010. 
[2] J., Blow, “Game Development: Harder Than You Think”, 
Queue, Vol. 1(10), February 2004,  pp. 28–37. 
[3] C.M. Kanode and H.M. Haddad, “Software Engineering 
Challenges in Game Development”, Proc. 2009 Sixth 
International Conference on Information Technology: New 
Generations, 27.-29.4., Las Vegas, USA, 2009. DOI:  
10.1109/ITNG.2009.74 
[4] J. Kasurinen, J-P Strandén and K. Smolander, “What do game 
developers expect from development and design tools?”, In 
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on 
Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE 
'13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2013. pp. 36-41. 
DOI=10.1145/2460999.2461004  
[5] J. Kasurinen, R. Laine and K. Smolander, “How applicable is 
ISO/IEC 29110 in Game Software Development?”, accepted 
to the Proc. 14th Int. Conf. on Product-Focused Software 
Development and Process Improvement (Profes 2013), 12.6.-
14.6.2013 Paphos, Cyprus, 2013. 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[6] L. Riungu-Kalliosaari, J. Kasurinen and K. Smolander, 
”Cloud Services and Cloud Gaming in Game Development”, 
accepted to the Proc. Cloud services and cloud gaming in 
game development, accepted to the Proc. IADIS International 
Conference: Game and Entertainment Technologies 2013, 
22.-24.7. Prague, Czech Republic. 
[7] Entertainment Software Association (ESA), “2011 Sales, 
demographic and usage data: Essential facts about computer 
and video game industry”, 2011. 
[8] M. Peltoniemi, “Life-cycle of the Games Industry The 
Specificities of Creative Industries”, Proceedings of the 
Mindtrek’08, 7.-9.10.2008, Tampere, Finland. 
[9] S. Gallagher and S.H. Park, Innovation and competition in 
standard-based industries: a historical analysis of the US 
home video game market, Engineering Management, IEEE 
Transactions on vol.49, no.1, Feb 2002, pp.67-82. doi: 
10.1109/17.985749 
[10] M. Dymek, Content Strategies of the Future: Between Games 
and Stories – Crossroads for the Video Game Industry, Proc. 
3rd Int. Conf. on Digital Interactive Media in Enterntainment 
and Arts (DIMEA’08), 10.9.-12.9.2008, Athens, Greece, 
2008.  
[11] D. Callele, E. Neufeld and K. Schneider, “Requirements 
engineering and the creative process in the video game 
industry”, in Requirements Engineering, 2005. Proceedings. 
13th IEEE International Conference on, pp. 240 – 250. 
[12] P. Zackariasson and T.L. Wilson, “Paradigm shifts in the 
video 
game 
industry”, 
Competitiveness 
Review: 
An 
International Business Journal incorporating Journal of Global 
Competitiveness 20, 2010, pp. 139–151. 
[13] T.R. Alves and L. Roque, “Because Players Pay: The 
Business Model Influence on MMOG Design”, Situated Play, 
Presented at the DiGRA 2007, Tokyo. 
[14] M.R. Nelson, H. Keum, and R.A. Yaros, Advertainment or 
Adcreep? Game Players’ Attitudes toward Advertising and 
Product Placements in Computer Games. Journal of 
Interactive Advertising 5, 2004, pp. 3–21. 
[15] A. Ojala and P. Tyrvainen, “Developing Cloud Business 
Models: A Case Study on Cloud Gaming”, IEEE Software 28, 
2011, pp. 42–47. 
[16] D.J. Teece, “Business Models, Business Strategy and 
Innovation”, Long Range Planning 43, 2010, pp. 172–194 
[17] M. Yang, D. Roskos-Ewoldsen, L. Dinu and L. Arpan, “The 
Effectiveness of “in-Game” Advertising: Comparing College 
Students’ Explicit and Implicit Memory for Brand Names”, 
Journal of Advertising 35, 2006, pp. 143–152. 
[18] S. Youn, M. Lee and K.O. Doyle, “Lifestyles of Online 
Gamers: A Psychographic Approach”, Journal of Inter 3, 
2003. 
[19] J. Hamari And A. Järvinen, A., ”Building Customer 
Relationship through Game Mechanics in Social Games. 
Business, Technological and Social Dimensions of Co mputer 
Games: Multidisciplinary Developments”, IGI Global, 2011, 
Hersey, PA, USA. 
[20] H. Tyni, O. Sotamaa and S. Toivonen, S., “Howdy pardner!: 
on 
free-to-play, 
sociability 
and 
rhythm 
design 
in 
FrontierVille”, Proceedings of 
the 
15th 
International 
Academic MindTrek Conference: Envisioning Future Media 
Environments. ACM, Tampere, Finland, 2011, pp. 22–29. 
[21] J.-M. Vanhatupa, ”Business model of long-term browser-
based games - Income without game packages”, 7th 
International Conference on Next Generation Web Services 
Practices (NWeSP), 2011, pp. 369–372. 
[22] H. Chesbrough, “Business model innovation: it’s not just 
about technology anymore”, Strategy & Leadership 35, 2007, 
pp. 12–17. 
[23] J. Kasurinen, O. Taipale and K. Smolander, K., “Analysis of 
Problems in Testing Practices”, Proc.of the 16th Asia-Pacific 
Software Engineering Conference, 1.12.-3.12.2009, Penang, 
Malaysia, 2009. doi: /10.1109/APSEC.2009.17 
[24] Strauss, A. and Corbin J. (1990). Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques. 
SAGE Publications, Newbury Park, CA, USA. 
[25] B. Glaser and A.L. Strauss, “The Discovery of Grounded 
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research”, Chicago: 
Aldine, 1967. 
[26] J.C. van Niekerk and J.D. Roode, J.D., “Glaserian and 
Straussian grounded theory: similar or completely different?”, 
Proc. of the 2009 Annual Research Conference of the South 
African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information 
Technologists, Vanderbijlpark, South Africa, 2009. DOI: 
10.1145/1632149.1632163,  
[27] J. Hughes and S. Jones, "Reflections on the Use of Grounded 
Theory in Interpretive Information Systems Research" . ECIS 
2003 
Proceedings. 
Paper 
62. 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/ecis2003/62 
[28] K.M. Eisenhardt, 'Building Theories from Case Study 
Research', Academy of Management Review, vol. 14, no. 4, 
1989, pp. 532-550. 
[29] G. Paré and J.J. Elam, “Using Case Study Research to Build 
Theories of IT Implementation”, The IFIP TC8 WG 
International Conference on Information Systems and 
Qualitative Research, Philadelphia, USA. Chapman & Hall, 
1997. 
[30] H.K. Klein and M.D. Myers, "A set of principles for 
conducting and evaluating interpretive field studies in 
information systems”, MIS Quarterly, vol. 23, 1999, pp. 67-
94. 
[31] J. Kasurinen, O. Taipale, and K. Smolander, “Software Test 
Automation in Practice: Empirical Observations”, Advances 
in Software Engineering, Special Issue on Software Test 
Automation, 
Hindawi 
Publishing 
Co., 
2010. 
doi: 
10.1155/2010/620836 
[32] European Comission, "The new SME Definition User guide 
and model declaration" Enterprise and Industry Publications, 
European Commission, 2003. 
[33] C.B. Seaman, "Qualitative methods in empirical studies of 
software engineering", IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering, vol. 25, 1999, pp. 557-572. 
[34] D.J. Hall, “The role of creativity within best practice 
manufacturing”, Technovation 16, 1996, pp. 115–121. 
[35] A. Kultima and J. Paavilainen, ”Creativity techniques in game 
design”, Presented at the FuturePlay 2007, ACM Press, 
Toronto, Canada,  2007, pp. 243. 
[36] P.C. Shih, G. Venolia and G.M. Olson, “Brainstorming under 
constraints: why software developers brainstorm in groups”, 
Proceedings of the 25th BCS Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction. British Computer Society, Newcastle-
upon-Tyne, United Kingdom, 2011, pp. 74–83. 
[37] J. Koehler, R. Hauser, J. Küster, K. Ryndina, K., J. Vanhatalo 
and M. Wahler, ”The Role of Visual Modeling and Model 
Transformations in Business-driven Development”, GT-VMT 
2006. Presented at the 5th International Workshop on Graph 
Transformation and Visual Modeling Techniques, Vienna, 
Austria, 2006, pp. 1–12. 
[38] R. Whittemore, S.K. Chase, C.L. Mandle, “Validity in 
Qualitative Research”, Qual Health Res, July 2001, Vol. 11, 
pp. 522-537. doi:10.1177/104973201129119299 
[39] J.M. Morse, M. Barrett, M. Mayan, K. Olson and J. Spiers,  
“Verification Strategies for Establishing Reliability and 
Validity in Qualitative Reseach”, International Journal of 
Qualitative Methods, Vol 1(2)., 2002. 
 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

