Studying Digital Literacy and AI Adoption in
Software Engineering & Technology Companies
Marko J¨antti
Centre for Measurement and Information Systems
Kajaani University of Applied Sciences
Ketunpolku 1, 87100 Kajaani, Finland
Email: marko.jantti@cemis.ﬁ
Abstract—Traditional IT organizations and software compa-
nies are transitioning into digital service companies in order to
survive in increasing competition. However, this transformation
process is a major change requiring new digital skills, learning
new methodologies and ways to work, introduction of new digital
technologies as well as introducing new roles and responsibilities
within the organization. In this study, we explore how skills,
technologies, methods, ways to work and processes are changing
in Finnish IT companies due to digital transformation. Our
research focused on studying and promoting the adoption of
Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) in IT organizations. The research
problem of this study is: How traditional IT companies are
approaching AI and advanced digital technologies? The main
contribution of this paper is to show preliminary ﬁndings from
an interview study.
Keywords—Digital literacy; Artiﬁcial Intelligence; digital trans-
formation, software company.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Digital transformation and uprise of advanced digital tech-
nologies (Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Extended Reality, Internet of
Things, Digital Twins) affect not only non-ICT organizations
but also ICT companies and software development units. Very
likely, most IT companies use at the moment combinations
of a software engineering approach (software development,
project management and maintenance activities) and a service
engineering approach (service design and engineering, cloud
engineering, agile service development, service management).
However, the role of service engineering is becoming stronger
all the time and service management is altering many of the
software maintenance activities.
IT companies are continuously updating and modernisizing
their key operational processes, such as software release man-
agement [1] to service release and conﬁguration management
[2], changing the scope of IT architecture from software archi-
tectures to enterprise architectures [3] and extending software
quality-focused processes, for example, software defect man-
agement and failure management [4] to have wider approach
(service incident management [5]) that also covers incidents
due to poorly implemented processes, knowledge gaps of
employees and failures made by third party service providers
and seeks permanent solutions by investigating the root cause
of service failures with problem management procedures [6].
Additionally, when a software development organization
grows and complexity of service provision increases, the
toolset of the organization also hanges and evolves. For
example, most software development companies provide bug
tracking systems (Jira and open source ticket systems) and
problem solving communities for their customers since they
start operating as a company. When a company decides to start
operating in a service business, their toolset shall be expanded
and very likely shall include an IT service management tool.
The business growth and digital transformation have a
signiﬁcant impact on organizational structures of software
development. Most of Finnish IT companies are very small
entities. This means that their development and support teams
are small, have relatively limited resources and a richer set
of responsibilities compared to those employees of large IT
service provider organizations where service design, service
transition, service operation, and continual service improve-
ment are typically provided with different resources but certain
level of systematic overlapping can be identiﬁed.
In a mature service organization, development teams are
responsible for Early Life Support (ELS) [7] of new services
for a certain time period. After that customer service and
support are provided by service desk units that may evolve
and mature into omnichannel service centers [8]. The key dif-
ference between a multichannel and omnichannel approaches
is how integration between customer communication channels
has been implemented. The omnichannel approach often in-
volves usage of integrated environment for modern customer
experience (CX) and well-integrated communication channels
[9].
In addition to structuring organizational resources, com-
panies need to pay attention to competencies required by the
digital era. Every employee in the company should understand
his/her role during and after the digital transformation process
as well as understand the opportunities of digital technologies
for the company’s business. This is called in general digital
literacy [10]. For a software development organization, the
transformation might mean that there is less need for traditional
Java developers, business analysts creating Uniﬁed Modeling
Language (UML) diagrams [11] and business case documents
[12] and project managers using waterfall and Rational Uniﬁed
Process approaches; and more need for cloud service special-
ists, service design engineers and Agile project specialists.
Concerning digital literacy, governments world-wide are
investing hundreds of millions for increasing competences of
artiﬁcial intelligence, such as conversational AI [13], Ma-
chine Learning, Machine Vision, predictive analytics and other
forms of artiﬁcial intelligence. Well-deﬁned AI Application
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Programming Interfaces (AI APIs) enable software developers
to utilize latest AI functions in their software code without
investing huge efforts in creating those functionalities in-house.
The large scale use of APIs and related business models
and practices together form the basis of API economy [14].
Software companies could use AI not only in information
systems they provide to customers but also improve their own
processes such as use Machine Learning in defect management
to predict defects [15]. Additionally, machine learning could
assist project management and project portfolio management
to [16] in making better decisions or predict project success.
The goal of the Digital Innovation Hub (DIH) is to act as
a one-stop shop that helps companies of the region in tackling
digital challenges (our focus is on AI, HPC, data analytics
and digital transformation). This study supports directly the
objectives of the DIH by producing new knowledge on AI-
powered digital transformation in Finnish companies and the
status and targets of AI adoption as well as usage of other digi-
tal technologies (cloud, digital service management platforms)
in service operation.
In this paper, we aim at answering the research prob-
lem: How traditional IT companies are approaching AI and
advanced digital technologies? The main contribution of this
paper is to study
•
How evolvement of AI and digital literacy skills
is supported by software development/ICT organiza-
tions’ managers?
•
How AI and related technologies are used in software
development/ICT organizations?
•
How AI affects the daily business operations of a
software development/ICT organization?
•
How AI is linked to software development/ICT orga-
nizations’ productivity?
This paper aims at providing research communities of
software engineering and service science new knowledge on
how managers support increasing AI capabilities related digital
technology competences within their organizations.
The results of this study might be useful for digital trans-
formation managers, development managers of SMEs, project
managers of the projects where digital technologies are applied
as well as HR managers for identifying what digital skills
might be needed in IT companies in the future. The remainder
of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we present
the research methodology of this study. In Section 3, main
ﬁndings of the interview study are presented. Section 4 is the
analysis part of our study. Finally, the conclusions are given
in Section 5.
II.
RESEARCH PROBLEM & METHODOLOGY
The research problem of this study is: How traditional IT
companies are approaching AI and advanced digital technolo-
gies? We selected the research problem because both compa-
nies and government (ministries, regional, national and inter-
national funding agencies) in Finland are pushing more and
more resources for transforming traditional production meth-
ods with artiﬁcial intelligence. However, small and medium
sized companies seem need a lot of help in introduction of
these technologies and integrating AI components to their
products and services.
The research problem was divided into the following
research questions:
1)
How evolvement of AI & digital literacy skills is sup-
ported by software development/ICT organizations’
managers?
2)
How AI and related technologies are used in software
development/ICT organizations?
3)
How AI affects the daily business operations of a
software development / ICT organization?
4)
How AI is linked to software development/ICT orga-
nizations’ productivity?
The ﬁrst research question highlights the management
support for digital transformation initiatives and our aim was to
receive information that demonstrates the management support
for AI projects and increasing competences of AI. The second
research question was created to identify popular technologies
and services that organizations use in their AI initiatives. This
information might give non-AI companies a list of potential
starting points for their AI journeys. With the third research
question, we wanted to explore the impacts (both short term
and long term) of AI programmes and ﬁnally the fourth
research question aimed at generating a view to what types
of beneﬁts AI would result in the organization’s productivity.
A. Data Collection Methods
The paper writing, selection of research methodology and
analysis were performed at CEMIS research centre. However,
empirical data for this study was collected during Digital and
Intelligent Management of Service Operation project (ESF
ELY) from 8 interviewees and their organizations represented
various business domains in service provision such as ICT,
energy, miscallenous services, marketing and advertisement.
Interviewees were selected for this study by using convenience
sampling, however, we tried to achieve a rich, balanced set
of interviewees with varying work positions, including man-
agement and governance (CEOs, senior management), product
owners and product managers, customer service employees,
service managers and designers. ot The questionnaire included
both structured and open-ended interview questions. Due to
COVID-19, most of interviews (1 hour) were conducted by
using Microsoft Teams video conferencing tool and intervie-
wees were provided an option to receive questions before the
actual interview event by email.
B. Data Analysis
The data of this interview study were analyzed using a
thematic content analysis technique that focuses on identifying
common themes while searching the materials organically. The
main objective in the analysis is to ﬁnd common patterns
across the data set. For video interviews conducted with
Microsoft Teams, we used the recording function of Teams
to capture entire interview discussions. This turned out to be
an excellent solution because some answers were really long
and complicated.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Fig. 1.
Context of our interview study
Transcript ﬁles were stored as digital ﬁles in the project’s
digital, cloud-based work environment (internal Teams envi-
ronment) and shared among the research project team. Each
interview transcript was numbered and named according to
predeﬁned naming conventions: ordernumber, name of the
study, status of transcript: rawdata/validated. Transcript ﬁles
were sent to interviewees for short validation and interviewees
were offered an opportunity to remove or change their answers.
III.
FINDINGS OF THE INTERVIEW: AI AND DIGITAL
LITERACY
Figure 1 shows the context of our interview study. This
paper shows preliminary ﬁndings from ﬁrst eight interviews
and from preselected four interview questions that formed our
research questions.
Transcripts were coded according to a thematic content
analysis technique (a category class was allocated to each
answer). During the ﬁrst round, we did not pay a lot of
attention to duplicate categories.
A. How evolvement of AI & digital literacy skills is supported
by software development/ICT organizations’ managers and
employees?
The ﬁrst topic that we focused in exploring digital literacy
was how managers of software and technology ﬁrms had
supported the development of AI skills and competences. We
observed that one answer from an interviewee may result in
several category classes.
•
“By innovating new services that utilize AI and iden-
tifying demand and customer need for AI solutions.
Additionally, we have recruited AI specialist to our
company.”Class: Recruitment of AI specialists, Iden-
tify customer’s AI needs, Service innovation
•
“I have not participated myself in AI training events.
However, I support aims to do work tasks smarter. I
participate in introduction of AI in those parts that
are understandable for me. I act more like a coach /
inspirator in AI matters.”Class: Support for smarter
work, Coaching
•
“I have not been able to support and have not had an
opportunity to participate in AI development”Class:
No support
•
“I participated in Elements of AI course and studied
AI topics myself. I have also explored AI-powered
apps that support our business such as Trello Butler.
We have saved quite a lot of efforts with that app
(avoided around 6000 UI clicks).”Class: Personal AI
learning, Exploring AI features
•
“I have a ’bad’ habit to link all interesting articles and
videos to our team’s Slack. Thus, information sharing
is one way to support. By sharing links and webinar
invitations and encourage colleagues to participate in
these events.”Class: Sharing AI-related information
•
“I have not supported because AI has not been in
our core focus yet. However, if we start purchasing
a new application, we need to observe and think
whether there are some AI features available (cherries
on the cake) and whether it is possible to include
those features to that application.”Class: Exploring AI
features
•
“We have organized general information sessions to
our personnel and encouraged our staff to make their
work more visible and we have also rewarderd em-
ployees based on it. Developing AI competences is
among employees’ personal goals.”Class: Organizing
AI information sessions to staff, Rewarding staff on AI
work, Linking AI to employee’s personal work goals.
•
“Not at all yet”Class: No support
B.
How AI and related technologies are used in software
development/ICT organizations?
The second research question focused on identifying AI
technologies and targets for AI usage in software development
and ICT organizations.
•
Machine vision and machine learning as well as
Natural Language Processing in our products and
services. For example, in care facilities one can listen
operational instructions. Class: NLP, Machine vision,
Machine learning)
•
We use data lakes, Azure cloud technologies and
maintain user information concerning Ofﬁce 365 ser-
vices. I do not know about usage of AI technologies.
Class: Azure cloud, data lake, O365
•
Azure for managing user right information, AWS
cloud in server management, we also store information
to Dropbox cloud storage, Google Ads for promoting
our products and services. Class: Azure cloud, AWS
cloud, Dropbox, Google Ads
•
We have AWS virtual servers, cloud based ﬁle man-
agement and a web-based support system (a contact
form for ordering new items). Some applications we
use have AI features. Class: AI-powered apps, AWS
cloud, cloud ﬁle storage
•
Facebook and Google ads. We obtain services that
utilize these two. Storing information and centralizing
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

it. We have a chatbot introduction project running.
Class: Facebook, Google Ads.
•
We have a commercial chatbot service, we use Re-
queste systen for managing support tickets and Azure
cloud. Class: Commercial chatbot, Requeste support
ticket system, Azure cloud.
•
We do not use Machine Vision in our own work but
for customers we do. We use Machine learning and
neural networks a lot. We use cloud services almost for
everything. Azure, AWS, Google.. We have a service
portal that we have built on ServiceNow. Class: Azure
cloud, AWS cloud, Google cloud, Machine vision,
Machine learning, Service portal
•
We have NLP/NLU (an AI-based bot), we use Azure
and AWS and self service portal. Class: Azure cloud,
AWS cloud, NLP, NLU, AI bot, Service portal
C. Impacts of AI to daily business operations?
Concerning the third research question, we captured what
types of impact AI may have to software development orga-
nizations’ and ICT organizations’ daily business operations.
Interviewees were guided to identify impacts to predeﬁned
business processes: Customer service, sales and marketing, ﬁ-
nancial management, human resources management, logistics,
IT and free choice. Additionally they were asked to describe
rationale for their choices.
•
“In application development, we utilize various AI
algorithms and we develop AI solutions to our cus-
tomers. Regarding sales and marketing, we could use
more analytics for marketing purposes, for example,
with Facebook’s own AI one can target marketing
campaigns.”
•
“In customer service, AI helps in routing tickets
automatically over the ﬁrst support level or with small
amendments. In ﬁnancial management AI helps in
processing purchase invoices or routing them to a
correct person. In inventory management, AI may trig-
ger alerts automatically when thresholds for inventory
saldos are exceeded. AI shall save time in those areas
where it is possible to utilize it. ”
•
“Customer service: when customers send requests,
automation can process them smoother and we can
reduce / avoid paper notes. AI also helps in monitoring
sales and marketing by automating the monitoring.
AI can be used to monitor servers if there are a
lot of customers using systems (loads can be seen
beforehand) ”
•
“Through AI, one does not need to wait for customer
service and level of automation can be increased. AI
may also result in personalized service and customer
service staff can focus on delighting customers in
interactive situations. Self service portals enable em-
ployees and customers to do things by themselves. For
IT organizations, AI can help improving information
security and preparing for Denial of Service attacks.
AI can detect potential attacks and route the trafﬁc
elsewhere because there is some simple artiﬁcial in-
telligence in routers. ”
•
“Especially sales and marketing. It is a big challenge
for us to analyze the data. I see already now that many
organizations develop their own services on the top
of Google and these services help them to identify
correlations in data.”
•
“Customer service: for us customer service is the
biggest part of our business. Thus, everything that
makes it more effective shall improve our business
most. It can bring automated recording of cases and
workﬂow automations. These issues free more work
time and improve the data validity. From the per-
spective of ﬁnancial management, the whole invoicing
could be automated and checked that accounts and
reference numbers are correct. ”
•
“Employee satisfaction has increased, customer ser-
vice process is faster, throughput times are better, AI
has had comprehensive effects to customer satisfac-
tion, automation works more effectively and with less
errors than a human.”
•
“We launch increasingly more chatbots in customer
service and logistics and inventory management uti-
lizes AI. ”
D. How AI is linked to software development/ICT organiza-
tions’ productivity?
The ﬁnal research question addressed the linkage between
artiﬁcial intelligence and the organizational productivity in
the interviewee’s organization. The original questions in the
question form addressed also links between AI and wellbeing
at work, however, these answers were excluded from this paper
due to space limitations:
•
“Concerning productivity, we produce AI services but
we do not exploit AI ourselves.”
•
“Related to ﬁnancial management AI decreases work-
load in invoicing. If we can introduce better solutions,
we can reduce management’s workload.”Class: De-
creased workload
•
“Yes of course there is a link if we can get things that
makes work faster and actually helps when we do not
do unnecessary manual work. AI has to be brought
into right targets. We welcome AI. Sure, there are
things in various domains where AI can help.”Class:
Eliminates manual work, makes work faster
•
“Manual work is not among the most motivating work.
Through automation, we have more time for creative
work. In our company, automation removes clicks
in the UI. Less clicks and more time for drinking
coffee.”Class: Eliminates manual work, more time for
creative work
•
“There is direct connection if you look at marketing.
We have so much data. If we had to perform these
tasks ourselvels and with our own brains, it would be
impossible. Now, when we can rely on AI provided
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

by existing platforms, it is a big plus.”Class: Helps in
processing large amounts of data
•
“It is very close to all processes where we can use
automation and machine learning. These can be uti-
lized for example automated ticketing. It would enable
people focusing on more demanding problems or
communicating with people. When the basic reporting
is ok, we can start creating prediction models of our
customers and own ﬁnance.”Class: Automated tick-
eting, enables focusing on demanding work, creates
basis for predictions
•
“To a signiﬁcant extent, AI results in productivity and
it should be introduced more and more. It makes work
faster and predictive and correlates with proﬁtability
and productivity. ”Class: Makes work faster, affects
proﬁtability
•
“There is a positive connection. There are processes
in the background and we aim at improving them
continously in order to make our operations smoother
and more effective. ”Class: Smoother and effective
operations
IV.
ANALYSIS
The data analysis was performed by using thematic content
analysis technique for the interview data. The goal of the
analysis was to categorize interview data to classes and identify
frequently used classes. Regarding the ﬁrst research question,
we identiﬁed the following categories on management com-
mitment to support the organization’s AI skills:
•
Recruitment of AI specialists,
•
Service innovation
•
Identify customer’s AI needs
•
Support for smarter work
•
Coaching/inspiring
•
Personal AI learning,
•
Exploring AI features in products
•
Sharing AI-related information
•
Organizing AI information sessions to staff
•
Rewarding staff on AI work
•
Linking AI to employee’s personal work goals
•
No support
According to our observations, only one of the interviewed
organizations demonstrated clear management commitment
for supporting AI. In that company, they had increased AI
awareness within the organization, introduced rewarding mech-
anisms for staff and also taken care that AI was visible
in employees’ personal development path. However, other
activities we identiﬁed support well the management’s work
on getting people focused on AI. While used together these
activities (classes) provide management a very good start for
AI roadmap.
Fig. 2.
Impact of AI on organizations’ business processes
Related to the second research question, identiﬁed classes
revealed the use of common AI types (conversational AI
(NLP), machine learning, machine vision) and strong existence
of cloud service platforms (Azure, AWS) but also AI-powered
services such as Google Ads. Regarding the third research
question (impact of AI), we analyzed the answers regarding the
frequency of business processes mentioned by interviewees.
Figure 2 shows our ﬁndings. Each interviewee was asked to
select three business processes from the list of predeﬁned
processes that he/she thinks AI is going to affect in the
near future. Predeﬁned process areas were: customer service,
sales and marketing, ﬁnancial management, human resources
management, logistics and inventory management, information
technology and other (free selection by the interviewee). Ac-
cording to our interview ﬁndings, customer service was most
frequently mentioned (7/8 interviewees) process to be affected
by AI in the near future.
The thematic content analysis of the answers to the fourth
research question resulted in the following category classes.
•
Decreased workload
•
Eliminates manual work
•
Makes work faster
•
More time for creative work
•
Helps in processing large amounts of data
•
Automated ticketing
•
Enables focusing on demanding work
•
Creates basis for predictions
•
Affects proﬁtability
•
Smoother and effective operations
Our ﬁrst observations on these ﬁndings was that ’Makes
work faster’ was mentioned several times. The key message
in the ﬁndings was that AI provides tools for automation and
opportunity to eliminate non-valuable, routine and manual,
demotivating work tasks while resulting in more time for more
meaningful work activities and human to human communica-
tions. However, organizations should carefully evaluate where
to use artiﬁcial intelligence because it does not ﬁt everywhere.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we aimed at answering the research prob-
lem: How traditional IT companies are approaching AI and
advanced digital technologies? We used an interview research
method to collect data from Finnish software development and
information technology organizations. Our results contribute to
the research ﬁeld of softare engineering and service science by
providing new knowledge of AI adoption, targets of AI usage
and impacts of AI to operational processes.
Concerning the ﬁrst research question, our thematic content
analysis revealed several ways how managers and employees
support development of AI skills in their organizations: by
personal AI learning, exploring AI features of products they are
purchasing, sharing AI-related information (such as web links
and AI-related webinar invitations), organizing AI information
sessions to staff, rewarding staff members on visible AI work,
and linking AI to employee’s personal work goals.
Through the second research question, we received infor-
mation on current AI & digital technologies used by the com-
panies. Cloud technologies were most frequently mentioned
technologies, especially Azure. From AI side, both machine
learning and NLU/NLP from conversational AI was clearly
mentioned in two of the eight interviewees. Some of the
companies had ongoing chatbot projects but the interviewees
could not provide any details on technologies used in those
projects. Furthermore, machine vision was mentioned by two
interviewees and one of those stated that they use machine
vision in a customer project.
Related to the third research question, our ﬁndings showed
that customer service is the process area to be most likely
affected by AI in the near future followed by sales and
marketing. Our study revealed few IT-related AI impacts such
as better monitoring of servers and improved information
security though better detection of Denial of Service attacks.
Our ﬁnal research question addressed the relation between
AI and productivity. AI provides tools for powerful tools
for automation and enables organizations to eliminate non-
valuable, routine and manual, demotivating work tasks which
at the same time frees more time for more meaningful work
activities and communicating with customers and employees.
There are certain limitations related to the interview
method that we utilized. First, data were collected from 8
interviewees by using standard interview data collection proce-
dures. Increasing the number of interviewees (especially senior
business managers and programmers) could have provided new
insights and experiences on applying AI services.
Second, thematic content analysis was used for transcripted
data but the analysis and creation of category classes was
performed by one person. Inviting more people to assist the
data analysis would have very likely result in a richer set of
categories. Third, due to space limitations only four questions
from the interview questionnaire were selected for this paper. It
was very difﬁcult to prioritize content. However, this provides
us a fruitful foundation for further research where we can
present the rest of the interview results and new emerging
categories on AI adoption.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank interviewees for valuable responses
that helped us to perform this study as well as managers of
companies enabling this study.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Jansen and S. Brinkkemper, “Ten misconceptions about product soft-
ware release management explained using update cost/value functions,”
in Proceedings of the International Workshop on Software Product
Management.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2006,
pp. 44–50.
[2]
K. Jokela and M. J¨antti, “Challenges and problems in product port-
folio release and deployment management,” in Proceedings of the 9th
International Conference on Service Systems and Service Management
(ICSSSM12).
Shanghai, China: IEEE, 2012, pp. 138–141.
[3]
J. Korhonen and M. Halen, “Enterprise architecture for digital transfor-
mation,” in 2017 IEEE 19th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI),
vol. 01, July 2017, pp. 349–358.
[4]
W. Florac, “Software quality measurement a framework for counting
problems and defects,” Technical Report CMU/SEI-92-TR-22, 1992.
[5]
M. J¨antti, “Lessons learnt from the improvement of customer support
processes: A case study on incident management,” in Product-Focused
Software Process Improvement, ser. Lecture Notes in Business Infor-
mation Processing, W. Aalst, J. Mylopoulos, N. M. Sadeh, M. J. Shaw,
C. Szyperski, F. Bomarius, M. Oivo, P. Jaring, and P. Abrahamsson,
Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 32, pp. 317–331.
[6]
M. Kajko-Mattsson, “Problem management maturity within corrective
maintenance,” Journal of Software Maintenance, vol. 14, no. 3, pp.
197–227, 2002.
[7]
Ofﬁce of Government Commerce(c), ITIL Service Transition.
The
Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[8]
N. Ilk, M. Brusco, and P. Goes, “Workforce management in omnichan-
nel service centers with heterogeneous channel response urgencies,”
Decision Support Systems, vol. 105, pp. 13 – 23, 2018.
[9]
R. Picek, D. Peras, and R. Mekovec, “Opportunities and challenges
of applying omnichannel approach to contact center,” in 2018 4th
International Conference on Information Management (ICIM).
New
York, NY, USA: IEEE Press, 2018, pp. 231–235.
[10]
D. Cetindamar, B. Abedin, and K. Shirahada, “The role of employees in
digital transformation: A preliminary study on how employees’ digital
literacy impacts use of digital technologies,” IEEE Transactions on
Engineering Management, pp. 1–12, 2021.
[11]
M. J¨antti and T. Toroi, “Uml-based testing: A case study,” in Proceed-
ings of NWUML’2004. 2nd Nordic Workshop on the Uniﬁed Modeling
Language.
Turku: Turku Centre for Computer Science, August 2004,
pp. 33–44.
[12]
M. J¨antti, “The rationale for building a business case in software
development,” in IRIS 28. Information Systems Research Seminar in
Scandinavia (Proceedings of the 28th IRIS), Kristiansand, Norway,
2005.
[13]
A. Rajagopal and N. Vedamanickam, “New approach to human ai
interaction to address digital divide amp; ai divide: Creating an in-
teractive aiplatform to connect teachers amp; students,” in 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Electrical, Computer and Communication
Technologies (ICECCT).
New York, NY, USA: IEEE, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[14]
K. Lee and N. Ha, “Ai platform to accelerate api economy and ecosys-
tem,” in 2018 International Conference on Information Networking
(ICOIN).
NY, USA: IBM Press, 2018, pp. 848–852.
[15]
S. Pradhan, V. Nanniyur, and P. Vissapragada, “On the defect prediction
for large scale software systems – from defect density to machine
learning,” in 2020 IEEE 20th International Conference on Software
Quality, Reliability and Security (QRS).
New York, NY, USA: IEEE
Press, 2020, pp. 374–381.
[16]
A. Marchinares and I. Aguilar-Alonso, “Project portfolio management
studies based on machine learning and critical success factors,” in
2020 IEEE International Conference on Progress in Informatics and
Computing (PIC).
NY, USA: IEEE Press, 2020, pp. 369–374.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

