Web Accessibility for Older Users: A Southern Argentinean View 
Viviana Saldaño, Adriana Martin, Gabriela Gaetán, Diego Vilte 
Department of Exact Sciences, Caleta Olivia 
University of Patagonia Austral (UNPA-UACO) 
Santa Cruz, Argentina  
e-mail: vivianas@uaco.unpa.edu.ar, adrianaelba.martin@gmail.com, 
 ggaetan@uaco.unpa.edu.ar, dvilte773@yahoo.com.ar
 
Abstract—Older Web users are now facing one of the most 
difficult challenges of their lives. The Web changes every day 
and they cannot keep up with it. As older age comes, 
individuals experience gradual and fluctuating decline in 
capabilities. These physical impairments make usage of the 
Web even more difficult. Web accessibility is an area devoted 
to solve accessibility problems of disabled people. However, as 
older people suffer disabilities, although less severe ones, they 
can profit from Web accessibility solutions. In this article, we 
review some of the most common impairments that affect older 
Web users, we analyze how these impairments are considered 
by Web Accessibility standards, and explore different 
approaches that improve Web user interface. Finally, we 
introduce our ideas to overcome unsolved Web accessibility 
barriers for older users describing an experience carried out at 
our University in Argentinean Patagonia. 
Keywords - Web Accessibility; Older Web users; User 
Interface (UI);   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Most older adults experience age-related changes to their 
functional abilities (vision, hearing, cognition and mobility). 
These changes may complicate Web use [7], particularly for 
poorly designed sites. In Table I, we show some common 
functional impairments affecting older Web users, which we 
extracted from the literature review published by the W3C 
[21]. 
TABLE I.  
FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENTS AFFECTING OLDER WEB USERS 
Ability 
Impact 
Difficulties 
 
Vision 
 
Screen 
Keyboard 
1. Decreasing ability to focus on near 
tasks 
2. Changing color perception and 
sensitivity 
3. Pupil shrinkage and decreasing 
contrast sensitivity 
 
Hearing 
Audio 
Multimedia 
4. Increasing inability to hear higher-
pitched sounds 
 
Motor skill 
Mouse 
Keyboard 
5. Slowness of movement, trembling 
 
Cognitive 
 
Overall Web 
use 
6. Short 
term 
memory 
problems, 
concentration 
difficulties, 
distraction, change blindness 
 
The study presented by Sayago and Blat [2] revealed that 
the accessibility barriers that had a more negative effect on 
the daily interactions of older people with the Web were 
remembering steps, understanding computer jargon and 
using the mouse. 
Besides, from this study, we acknowledge that older Web 
users desire two conditions: independency and inclusiveness. 
Independency is the ability to use the Web on their own and 
inclusiveness is the need to interact with the Web using 
ordinary technology, as they do not intend to be different 
from the rest of users. 
Another problem that older people have to face is social 
isolation [12]. Factors like diminished personal social 
networks, bereavement and health problems contribute to 
social isolation. Using the internet has significant value for 
elderly people, since it helps avoiding loneliness, boredom, 
helplessness, and decline of mental skills and it may increase 
the self-confidence, ability to learn, and memory retention. 
Traditional communication technologies, such as the 
telephone, have played an important role in mitigating social 
isolation and supporting group gatherings. Also, the World 
Wide Web offers potential benefits for older adults, but its 
uptake is yet extremely limited. 
There are many reasons why older adults do not use the 
Web [11]. Firstly, they tend to see the Internet as a tool to 
achieve functional goals such as bill payment, and not as a 
social or entertainment source [3].  Besides, they need an 
incentive to get and stay online [4]. It is often younger 
people who encourage technology use by older adults. 
Staying connected with geographically remote grandchildren 
is a major motivation for older adults in using technology 
(such as email, Web cams and Skype). An interesting finding 
was reported in [25], in which it is suggested that given the 
right trigger many older people (even those previously 
uninterested) will make tentative steps towards some 
technology. In this case, the trigger was a disaster, the “ash 
cloud”, which caused large scale disruption for air travel 
across Europe in 2010, and it motivated the need for 
computer usage. 
Once older people are online they discover the 
advantages, such as being able to maintain existing social 
relationships and perhaps renew old ones that distance had 
precluded. Over two thirds of “silver surfers” say that using 
the Internet has improved their lives [5].  
Other reasons for non-use of the Web include those 
involved with age-related impairments, such as the ones 
presented before in Table I.  
In this paper, we explore different initiatives aimed at 
providing Web accessibility and usability properties for older 
users and some approaches to improve their Web interface 
621
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

experience [13]. Taking into account the state-of-the-art and 
the experience gained by our group while teaching 
computing to older people, we describe our ideas and show 
the improvements achieved during the delivery of the 
courses for elderly Web users. Since many fields are 
concerned on improving human-technology interaction, such 
as information retrieval and data mining, Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) and GUI, at this point, we have to clarify 
how we decided to face this work. We have been working for 
a while on accessible UI design to conform the W3C 
accessibility recommendations [26] [27]. Our knowledge 
gathered about UI design and Web Accessibility standards, 
permitted us to explore practical techniques to reinforce 
accessibility and usability and focus on the interaction 
between our seniors and the Web, using a real experience on 
Yahoo mail. 
 The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 
II, we review Web accessibility standards and their relation 
with age related disabilities. Then, in Section III, we 
overview different useful approaches to improve older users’ 
Web interface. After that, in Section IV, we describe an 
experience performed at our University and explain our ideas 
for improvement. In Section V, we introduce some 
discussion based on our experiences. Finally, in Section VI, 
we conclude and present some further work. 
II. 
WEB ACCESSIBILITY INITIATIVE GUIDELINES AND 
AGING 
The next few decades will see an unparalleled growth in 
the number of people becoming elderly compared with any 
other period in human history. The United Nations estimates 
that by 2050 one out of every five people will be over 60 
years of age, and in some countries the proportion will be 
much higher than this [1]. 
There are some initiatives that provide advice addressing 
Web accessibility and usability for all people. As regards 
older users, many requirements are already considered by 
these initiatives.  
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web 
Accessibility Initiative (WAI) [16] brings together people 
from industry, disability organizations, government, and 
research labs from around the world to develop guidelines 
and resources to help make the Web accessible to people 
with disabilities including auditory, cognitive, neurological, 
physical, speech, and visual disabilities. 
Among these series of guidelines developed by WAI, 
widely regarded as the international standard for Web 
accessibility, are: Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines 
(ATAG), User Agent Accessibility Guidelines (UAAG) and 
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG). 
 
The 
Authoring 
Tool 
Accessibility 
Guidelines 
(ATAG) documents define how authoring tools 
should help Web developers produce Web content 
that is accessible and complies with Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines. 
 
The User Agent Accessibility Guidelines (UAAG) 
documents explain how to make user agents (Web 
browsers, media players, and assistive technologies) 
accessible to people with disabilities, particularly to 
increase accessibility to Web content.  
 
The WCAG documents explain how Web content 
can be made accessible for people with disabilities. 
The WCAG 2.0 [19] has twelve guidelines, grouped 
in four fundamental principles of accessibility: 
perceivable, operable, understandable, and robust. 
Each guideline is in turn decomposed in a set of 
success criteria, which are classified within three 
levels of conformance: A (lowest), AA, and AAA 
(highest). 
Another WAI project, Web Accessibility Initiative: 
Ageing Education and Harmonization (WAI-AGE) project 
[17] analyzed the Web accessibility requirements of older 
Web users based on the research and investigation of many 
people.  
WAI-AGE has identified that the existing WAI 
accessibility guidelines address the majority of requirements 
of older people for Web use [10]. It also identified that many 
Web designers and researchers are not considering the WAI 
guidelines when making recommendations about Website 
design for older people.  
Although the guidelines developed by WAI were not 
written with older users’ problems in mind, they provide 
solution to many of them. In Table II, we show the results of 
performing a matching analysis between most common older 
people accessibility barriers, presented before in Table I, and 
the corresponding guideline in WCAG 2.0. 
TABLE II.  
OLDER WEB USERS DIFFICULTIES AND CORRESPONDING 
WCAG 2.0 GUIDELINES 
Difficulty 
WCAG 2.0 
Guideline 
1. Decreasing ability to focus on near tasks 
1.4 
2. Changing color perception and sensitivity 
1.4 
3. Pupil 
shrinkage 
and 
decreasing 
contrast 
sensitivity 
1.4 
4. Increasing inability to hear higher-pitched sounds 
1.2 – 1.4 
5. Slowness of movement, trembling 
2.1 – 2.2 
6. Short term memory problems, concentration 
difficulties, distraction, change blindness 
2.2 – 2.4 – 3.2 
– 3.3  
 
We can see that the first three difficulties, which are 
visual impairments, are addressed by WCAG 2.0 in 
guideline 1.4. The fourth barrier, a hearing disability, is 
tackled by guidelines 1.2 and 1.4. The fifth difficulties, 
motor impairments, are addressed by guidelines 2.1 and 2.2. 
Finally, the sixth barriers, cognitive difficulties, are 
considered by guidelines 2.2, 2.4, 3.2, and 3.3. 
This way, we could see that WCAG 2.0 guidelines meet 
all older Web users’ requirements. The problem is that few 
Websites have been designed with these guidelines in mind. 
622
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

III. 
DIFFERENT WEB SOLUTIONS THAT IMPROVE SILVER 
SURFERS' EXPERIENCE 
Older people’s functional impairments are very different 
in type (vision, hearing, mobility, cognitive) and severity, 
and usually change over time. Thus, it is very difficult to 
specify a unique Web interface that meets the requirements 
for all of them [6]. So, the solution could be that each 
individual older user would be able to select the appropriate 
configuration by themselves. 
There are some very interesting works related with this 
idea such as the IBM’s Web Adaptation Technology [9], 
which 
develops 
a 
browser 
extension 
that 
allows 
manipulating Web content by combining and applying a 
number of page transforms and adaptations according to user 
preferences without requiring Web designers and developers 
to rewrite their Web content. 
Another tool is the Senior Citizen on the Web 2.0 
(SCWeb2) Assistance tool [8], which is designed to assist 
older users as they use Web 2.0 content. For some users, 
dynamic content can be problematic due to the many 
updating components throughout the page, causing them 
hesitancy, stress, and frustration about unexpected situations. 
This tool provides help only when users require it, avoiding 
assistance and browsing the page in the usual manner when 
support is not needed. 
There are many other solutions which provide Web 
accessibility not specifically oriented to older people. For 
example, Garrido et al. [24] propose improving Web 
accessibility 
in 
client 
browsers 
through 
interface 
refactorings. This approach is called Client-Side Web 
Refactoring (CSWR), it allows to automatically create 
different, personalized views of the same application. The 
refactorings proposed are compliant with W3C guidelines. 
Besides, there are tools that allow users to change the 
way Web content is presented. GreaseMonkey [20] is a 
Firefox extension that allows writing scripts to alter visited 
Web pages. It can be used to make a Website more readable 
or more usable, Web applications can be modified by adding 
content and/or controls to them. For instance, Mirri et al. [23] 
describe GAPforAPE (GreaseMonkey And Profiling for 
Accessible Pages Enhancement), an augment browsing 
system based on GreaseMonkey, which allows Web users to 
set up their preferences at client side and thus modifying 
content on the browser interface. This application includes a 
profiling system and a client side content transcoding 
system, based on a collection of scripts. In order to enhance 
the accessibility of Web content and to provide the best 
adaptation to each user by meeting their needs and 
preferences, scripts allow the transcoding of Web pages, by 
modifying the CSS rules, the HTML DOM, and also other 
scripts which are used by them. 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF  OLDER USERS’ EXPERIENCE IN 
PATAGONIA 
Since 2009, the National University of Patagonia Austral 
and the National Institute of Social Services for Pensioners 
(PAMI) have signed an agreement [18] for teaching 
computing, music, and theatre courses to older people. 
These courses are taught twice a week and last three 
months. Computing courses are the most crowded, having 
about 20 pupils each. 
Older people who assist to computing courses have 
expressed that they come to learn computing because they 
want to keep in touch with their families, with their 
grandchildren who live in other country regions.  
Here, in Patagonia, distances between cities or towns are 
extremely long; besides, we are 1242 miles away from the 
capital city, Buenos Aires. Moreover, the weather is a critical 
factor, too. Winters are very long and cold, and strong winds 
blow. As a result, older people spend most of their time 
inside their houses, and they often feel lonely. Thus, getting 
online can have positive benefits for them. Tools like Email, 
FaceBook and Skype can empower older adults to stay 
connected with their friends and family.  
In this study, the purpose is to find out which are the 
accessibility failures that the email’s Web interface has got 
and evaluate if a more accessible interface would allow older 
people to utilize it more frequently and without suffering 
frustration for not remembering how to use the application. 
A. Experiment 1 
During the second half of 2012, teachers taught email 
classes. At the beginning of 2013, when computing classes 
started again, teachers noticed that most pupils did not use 
this communication tool. When asked for the reason of not 
using it, most pupils said that they did not remember how to 
use it, a few said that they were not interested in sending or 
receiving mails, and the rest, only some of them, said that 
they still used it. So, the purpose of this experiment is to 
investigate what accessibility difficulties has got the email’s 
Web interface design. 
1) Participants:  
Eighteen older adults ranging in age from 64 to 73 years 
old (eleven women and seven men) were recruited for this 
activity. All of them took computing courses between April 
and June of 2013 and also during the second half of 2012.  
2) Materials:  
For this experiment, we used Yahoo mail application 
(Figure 1) which was also used during email classes.  
Figure 1.  Yahoo mail inbox. 
 
It is important to highlight that the courses are taught in a 
25 desktops Lab equipped with 15 LCD monitors of 19-inch 
623
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

and 10 LCD monitors of 17-inch, whose resolutions are 
WXGA 1366 x 768 and XGA 1024x768, respectively. 
Although changing terminals settings (font sizes and colors) 
is posible, the Lab is used intensively every day to adopt this 
practice as usual. 
3) Procedure:  
Usability testing with the think-aloud method was 
conducted [14]. The evaluations were pair-based because 
older people feel more relaxed and confident about their 
work. Each evaluation was recorded, in order to analyze 
participants behavior and comments.  
4) Tasks:  
Five tasks were proposed to explore the interface 
usability: 
a) Read an email 
b) Reply an email 
c) Write a new email 
d) Delete an email 
e) Close user session 
5) Results:  
Of the 9 couples of participants, all could finish Tasks a) 
and c), 6 could not complete Task b), 2 could not conclude 
Task d) and 8 could not end Task e). These results are 
detailed in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS ACHIEVED BY OLDER USERS IN EMAIL USAGE 
EXPERIMENT 1 
Task 
Couples Error Ratio 
a) Read an email 
0/9 
b) Reply an email 
6/9 
c) Write a new email 
0/9 
d) Delete an email 
2/9 
e) Close user session 
8/9 
 
From these results, we have found three problems 
throughout Tasks a)-e):  
a) Problem 1: Advertisements 
All participants complained about being distracted or 
even confused with the advertisements that appeared on the 
right side of the screen. They were afraid of clicking by error 
on these ads and causing an unexpected behavior of the 
email application, like closing, or losing the work being 
done. 
b) Problem 2: Visual presentation difficulties 
Besides, participants experienced other difficulties 
involving visual presentation of pages. Three couples of 
participants in Tasks a) and b) could not differentiate 
selected emails, because of light color contrast. Three 
couples of participants in Task a), three in Task b), and five 
in Task c) had difficulties in visualizing text because of font 
size, style, and inter-letter spacing. Also, 6 couples of 
participants in Task d) and 9 in Task e) made a great effort to 
distinguish available commands in menu bar. 
c) Problem 3: Not understandable buttons 
Participants also had trouble identifying buttons that 
represented email actions like “Reply” or “Forward”. Eight 
couples of participants had difficulties identifying the button 
to conclude Task b), and 6 couples could not complete the 
task because of this problem. All participants had difficulties 
in Task e), remembering how to leave the application or 
“Sign Out”, and only one couple could complete this task. 
All the difficulties suffered by older users, are age-related 
issues like cognitive and visual impairment. Another factor 
involved is the lack of knowledge of technology and Web 
applications. Evaluating the WCAG 2.0 guidelines, we found 
that all these problems are considered within WCAG 
guidelines as we demonstrated before in Table II. Problems 1 
and 3 correspond to difficulty number 6 detailed in Table II, 
which involves short term memory problems, concentration 
difficulties, distraction, and Problem 2 involves visual 
accessibility barriers shown as difficulties 1, 2, and 3 in 
Table II.  
Hence, Yahoo email application is not compliant with 
this standard. However, this application provides solution to 
some of them, by setting appropriate configurations. But this 
is a very complex task to be performed by older users. 
B. Experiment 2 
The purpose of Experiment 2 is to evaluate an 
improvement to the email Website interface, which we 
developed to solve the problems found in Experiment 1. 
  In this improved interface, vertical banner ads have 
been deleted, and labels have been added for “Reply” and 
“Forward” buttons. Also, a button was added at the top of the 
form to allow users closing their sessions. 
Figure 2 shows the modified interface of Yahoo mail 
inbox, including both adaptations: for Problem 1 vertical ads 
banner removement and for Problem 3 a button (“2” in 
Figure 2) labeled “Cerrar Sesión” to close user session, and 
the two labels “Responder” y ”Reenviar” (“1” in Figure 2) 
for replying and forwarding respectively. 
Figure 2.  Yahoo mail inbox after interface improvement. 
1) Participants:  
Fourteen older adults ranging in age from 66 to 74 years 
old (eight women and six men) were recruited for this 
activity. All of them took computing courses during the first 
half of 2012, and now they are taking theatre but not 
computing classes. However, they were willing to participate 
in this experiment. 
 
624
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

2) Materials:  
We modified Yahoo interface by applying two 
adaptations [15]. One of them is a script for deleting vertical 
ad banners that we downloaded from a scripts repository and 
the other one is a script developed for us in JavaScript to 
solve problems with buttons.  
a) Problem 1: Advertisements 
Although this vertical banner ad can be removed, this 
was not a permanent solution and became an annoyance to 
older pupils. In order to give solution to this problem, we 
chose GreaseMonkey. There are many add-ins that provide a 
number of features for visual and navigational enhancements 
to Web pages, which may fill usability gaps for older users.  
Figure 2 shows the modified interface of Yahoo mail 
inbox where the vertical banner has been deleted. This 
modification was achieved by the installation of a 
GreaseMonkey script, CleanUp 1.1 that we downloaded 
from the scripts repository [22]. 
b) Problem 2: Visual presentation difficulties 
Here, there are solutions provided by the browser and 
also by the operating system. The browser (Mozilla Firefox) 
allows modifying default settings for font size and style, and 
the operating system (Windows 7) provides an Accessibility 
Center that allows improving visual presentation, mouse 
setting and color contrast. 
c) Problem 3: Not understandable buttons 
At this point, we did not find any GreaseMonkey script, 
which solves difficulties with buttons’ understanding or 
‘Sign Out’ explicit inclusion in the application interface. So, 
we developed a script named “Oldie 1.0” that added labels to 
“Reply” and “Forward” buttons and a button to allow users 
closing their sessions. 
3) Procedure and Tasks:  
The same as for Experiment 1, detailed in Sections 
IV.A.3) and IV.A.4) respectively.  
4) Results:  
Of the 7 couples of participants, all could finish Tasks a), 
c) and e), 1 could not complete Task b), and 1 could not 
complete Task d). These results are detailed in Table IV. In 
this experiment, Problems 1, 2 and 3 detected previously 
have been eliminated. A couple of participants could not 
finish tasks b) and d) because they did not remember how to 
perform those tasks. 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS ACHIEVED BY OLDER USERS IN EMAIL USAGE 
EXPERIMENT 2 
Task Id 
Task Description 
Couples Error Ratio 
a) 
Read an email 
0/7 
b) 
Reply an email 
1/7 
c) 
Write a new email 
0/7 
d) 
Delete an email 
1/7 
e) 
Close user session 
0/7 
 
So, we conclude that this improved interface contributed 
to obtaining a better performance of older users and this will 
pay off in more confident users, who use email application 
more frequently and who are willing to go on learning new 
Web applications. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Many of the difficulties suffered by older Web users are 
already solved. However, as older people do not recognize 
their disabilities, they miss the opportunity to use the Web in 
a more comfortable way. 
There are many accessibility tools provided by the 
operating systems and also by the Web browsers. But as they 
are classified as ‘Accessibility Tools’, most users believe that 
they are targeted to help people with severe disabilities that 
do not include the elderly.  
Besides, there are some useful accessibility tools 
developed and available in Web repositories.  
We have worked with some email accessibility 
requirements detected while teaching computing courses to 
older adults. Experiment 1 allowed for gaining a significant 
experience to develop our ideas, while Experiment 2 applied 
for testing these ideas on the field. 
We found that some of the detected requirements could 
be solved by modifying the Web browser or the operating 
system configuration. Other requirements were accomplished 
by installing some scripts that provide the desired 
accessibility adaptations, like the scripts (CleanUp 1.1 and 
Oldie 1.0) we proposed and developed to solve Problems 1 
and 3, respectively. 
However, all these solutions require assistance from a 
computing specialist, or at least, from someone with the 
required skills, who must configure or install the appropriate 
add-ins. 
Thus, we are working on a pragmatic research approach 
and applying an iterative incremental process to develop a 
tool that includes all the accessibility adaptations and allows 
older people select the appropriate configuration by 
themselves. Besides, this tool must be able to provide help to 
older users, who are not familiar with application concepts 
and hence avoiding hesitation and frustration. All this will 
contribute to increasing quality of life of our Patagonian 
older Web users. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Older adults represent the fastest growing portion of the 
world’s population. Most older adults have got some 
declines that affect computer use, as difficulties with vision, 
hearing, mobility or cognition.  
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has got some 
initiatives like Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) and Web 
Accessibility 
Initiative: 
Ageing 
Education 
and 
Harmonisation (WAI-AGE), which provide solutions to 
many of the problems of older people. However, many Web 
designers do not consider WAI recommendations when 
designing Websites. 
So, there are some approaches focused on improving 
Websites’ accessibility. Some of them consist on Web 
adaptations that provide solution to a varying amount of 
accessibility issues. 
In this article, we showed different solutions provided to 
solve distinct older pupils’ requirements. However, from our 
625
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

experience, we must highlight two issues about these 
solutions: (i) they do not cover all needs and, (ii) they are not 
usable enough for elderly citizens. Due to these reasons, new 
solutions should be developed and these solutions must 
prevent older people having to get help from someone else 
who can configure or install suitable accessibility settings to 
grant our seniors one of their main wishes: “independence”. 
As regards social requirements of our older students, our 
next goal is exploring difficulties experienced by them with 
social networks and finding appropriate solutions. This is a 
high priority requirement of our older citizens since our 
distant 
geographical 
situation 
and 
extreme 
weather 
conditions deprive them of enjoying many current activities 
that older people in other geographies can perform. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the UNPA project 29/B144 
(Diseño y Evaluación de Portales Web). 
REFERENCES 
[1] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
Population Division, “World population ageing, 1950-2050,” 
UN, 2002,  accessed 15th  May 2013. 
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worldageing19
502050/index.htm 
[2] S. Sayago and J. Blat, “About the relevance of accessibility 
barriers in the everyday interactions of older people with the 
Web,” Proceedings of the 2009 International Cross-
Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A '09), 
ACM, USA, April 2009, pp. 104-113.  
[3] N. Selwyn, “The information aged: A qualitative study of 
older adults’ use of information and communications 
technology,” Journal of Aging Studies, 18(4), November 
2004, pp. 369-384. 
[4] E. Hartnett, S. Minocha, J. Palmer, M. Petre, S. Evans, C. 
Middup, K. Dunn, B. Murphy, T. Heap, and D. Roberts, 
“Older people and online social interactions: an empirical 
investigation,” The UKAIS International Conference on 
Information Systems (UKAIS), Worcester College, University 
of Oxford, March 2013.  
[5] L. Gibson, W. Moncur, P. Forbes, J. Arnott, C. Martin, and A. 
Bachu, “Designing social networking sites for older adults,” 
Proceedings of the 24th BCS Interaction Specialist Group 
Conference (BCS '10), British Computer Society, Swinton, 
UK, September 2010, pp. 186-194. 
[6] D. Sloan, M. Atkinson, C. Machin, and Y. Li, “The potential 
of adaptive interfaces as an accessibility aid for older Web 
users,” Proceedings of the 2010 International Cross 
Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibility (W4A '10), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, April 2010, Article 35.   
[7] V. Hanson, “Age and web access: the next generation,” 
Proceedings of the 2009 International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A '09), ACM, USA, 
April 2009, pp. 7-15.  
[8] D. Lunn and S. Harper, “Improving the accessibility of 
dynamic web content for older users,” Proceedings of the 
2011 International Cross-Disciplinary Conference on Web 
Accessibility (W4A '11), ACM, New York, NY, USA, March 
2011, Article 16.  
[9] J. Richards and V. Hanson, “Web accessibility: a broader 
view,” Proceedings of the 13th international conference on 
World Wide Web (WWW'04), ACM, USA, May 2004, pp. 
72-79.  
[10] A. Arch, “Web accessibility for older users: successes and 
opportunities,” 
(keynote) 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
2009 
International 
Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference 
on 
Web 
Accessibililty (W4A '09), ACM, USA, April 2009, pp. 1-6.  
[11] A. Dickinson, M. Smith, J. Arnott, A. Newell, and R. Hill, 
“Approaches to web search and navigation for older computer 
novices,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '07), ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, May 2007, pp. 281-290.  
[12] S. Pedell, F. Vetere, L. Kulik, E. Ozanne, and A. Gruner, 
“Social isolation of older people: the role of domestic 
technologies,” Proceedings of the 22nd Conference of the 
Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group of 
Australia on Computer-Human Interaction (OZCHI '10), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, November 2010, pp. 164-167. 
[13] S. Sayago, L. Camacho, and J. Blat, “Evaluation of 
techniques defined in WCAG 2.0 with older people,” 
Proceedings of the 2009 International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A '09), ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, April 2009, pp. 79-82. 
[14] J. Dumas and J. C. Redish, “A Practical Guide to Usability 
Testing,” (1st  ed.), Intellect Books, Exeter, UK, 1999. 
[15] P. Brusilovsky, A. Kobsa, and W. Nejdl, “The Adative Web: 
Methods and Strategies of Web Personalization,” Springer, 
2007. 
[16] Web Accessibility Initiative, accessed 15th  May 2013. 
 http://www.w3.org/WAI/  
[17] Web 
Accessibility 
Initiative: 
Ageing 
Education 
and 
Harmonisation (WAI-AGE), accessed 15th  May 2013.  
 http://www.w3.org/WAI/WAI-AGE/ 
[18] http://www.unpa.edu.ar/noticia/la-unpa-y-el-inssjp-firmaron-
convenios-por-capacitacion-y-continuidad-del-programa-
upami, accessed 10th  June 2013. 
[19] Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0, accessed 
15th  May 2013. http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG/ 
[20] Greasemonkey, accessed 15th  June 2013.  
http://www.greasespot.net/ 
[21] A. Arch, “Web accessibility for older users: a literature 
review,” W3C Working Draft, World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C), May 2008, accessed 15th  June 2013. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/wai-age-literature/ 
[22] http://userscripts.org/, accessed 15th June 2013. 
[23] S. Mirri, P. Salomoni, and C. Prandi, “Augment browsing and 
standard 
profiling 
for 
enhancing 
Web 
accessibility,” 
Proceedings of the 2011 International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A '11), ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, March 2011, Article 5. 
[24] A. Garrido, S. Firmenich, G. Rossi, J. Grigera, N. Medina-
Medina, and I. Harari, “Personalized Web accessibility using 
client-side refactoring,” Internet Computing, IEEE, 17(4), 
July-August 2013, pp. 58-66. 
[25] L. Gibson, P. Forbes, and V. Hanson, “What can the ash 
cloud tell us about older adults’s technology adoption?,”  
Proceedings of the 12th international ACM SIGACCESS 
conference on Computers and accessibility (ASSETS '10), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, October 2010, pp. 301-302. 
[26] A. Martin, V. Saldaño, G. Miranda, and G. Gaetan, “AO-
WAD: A Generalized Approach for Accessible Design within 
the Development of Web-based Systems,” Proceedings of The 
7th International Conference on Software Engineering 
Advances, ICSEA 2012, IARIA, Portugal, November 2012, 
pp. 581-587. 
[27] A. Martín, G. Rossi, A. Cechich, and S. Gordillo, 
“Engineering Accessible Web Applications. An Aspect-
Oriented Approach,” World Wide Web Journal, 13(4), 2010, 
pp. 419-440. 
626
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

