A Device For Electromechanical Braille Reading Digital Texts 
 
Cicília Raquel Maia Leite, Davi Alves Magalhães, Pedro Fernandes Ribeiro Neto, Suellem Stephanne Fernandes 
Queiroz, Yáskara Ygara Menescal Pinto Fernandes 
Department of Informatics 
UERN (University of Rio Grande do Norte) 
Mossoró, Brazil 
ciciliamaia@gmail.com, davialvesmagalhaes@outlook.com, pedrofernandes@uern.br, suellem_stephanne@hotmail.com, 
yaskaramenescal@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— The social and professional inclusion of people with 
visual impairment is currently being sought enough. With 
accessibility is possible to integrate these people in order to provide 
equal conditions to them and thus make them an active part of 
society. Based in this theme, this paper proposes a prototype of an 
eletromechanical braille cell, which, with the use of an Arduino 
board, servomotors and software responsible for handling data, it 
is possible to represent in Braille information collected in the 
System Management Information Transit accessibility to Visually 
Impaired - TRANSITUS -V, making it behave like a human-
machine interface for reading digital texts in braille. 
Keywords—accessibility; 
braille; 
technology; 
arduino; 
servomotors. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In accordance with World Health Organization (WHO), 
there are approximately 160 million visually impaired people 
around the world, and at least 45 million of these individuals are 
completely blind [9]. Due to disability, these people have limited 
their basic rights as citizens. The situation is aggravated in 
digital media, where most of the visually impaired do not have 
access to special devices, or even help from trained professionals 
to help them in the usage of computers and other electronic 
equipments. Without the necessary resources, the person with a 
disability do not have the opportunity to fully utilize the 
phenomena that society experiences, such as social networks, in 
addition to competing at a major disadvantage to the jobs 
available that use of such technologies. 
 
Organizations, states and society have turned their focus in 
ways to enable social and professional inclusion of people with 
visual impairment. Several devices have been and are being 
developed to allow the interaction of blind people with the 
computer. There are many prototypes in the literature with 
different proposals for cheapening and popularizing assistive 
technologies to blind people [1][5][7]. 
Grounded in this theme of accessibility and social inclusion 
of visually impaired, was designed a prototype that focuses 
primarily on the creation of a electromechanical Braille cell and 
implementation of a system composed of hardware and software 
that has the ability to interact with people totally blind, 
displaying in Braille informations obtained in TRANSITUS - V 
(Management of Information Transit Accessibility for the 
Visually Impaired), which has encouraged the development of 
new methodologies for the implementation of accessibility. This 
is an innovation if compared with other prototypes, once besides 
enabling the blind interaction with digital media, also enables 
their integration into the labor market and create conditions that 
these people become an active part of society. 
Section II will describe the two main technologies involved 
in this project: Arduino and Transitus-V. Section III is a brief 
account of the Braille system and the use of servomotors in the 
construction of the prototype. In Section IV, the construction of 
the prototype is shown. In Section V the integration with 
Transitus-V is presented. Finally, Section VI provides a brief 
discussion about the obtained results. 
II. 
ARDUINO PLATAFORM AND SYSTEM TRANSITUS-V 
For being accessible, low cost and comprising hardware and 
software, the Arduino platform was used to preparation of this 
project due to its versatility and open source, ie it possible to 
reuse the hardware and the software libraries freely accordingly 
to the developer’s needs. Also, Arduino allows rapid prototyping 
of projects, which simplifies the manufacturing process by 
reducing the complexities inherent to the programming of the 
microcontroller and electronics prototyping. 
The Arduino is already being widely used for the 
development of many projects focused on themes of social 
inclusion, which has encouraged the development of new 
methodologies for the implementation of accessibility. The 
TRANSITUS-V is a computer system with digital assistive 
technology that manages traffic information, developed in 
accordance with the W3C accessibility guidelines to facilitate 
the use and management of transit through people with visual 
impairments, with the use of shortcut keys, as well as special 
support for screen readers and voice synthesizers that increase 
the possibilities for use by persons with disabilities. 
The system TRANSITUS-V, for having been done on a Web 
platform, requires no installation on the machines of those who 
use, each machine should only have access to the internet, and 
it’s compatible with most web browsers available in the market. 
However, the TRANSITUS-V needs to be hosted on a server 
that supports PHP and the MySQL database [6]. 
612
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

III. 
BRAILLE SYSTEM AND SERVOMOTORS 
The Braille system of reading and writing for the blind, was 
invented by Frenchman Louis Braille, influenced the society in 
the processes that led to the inclusion of these individuals. The 
Braille for its simplicity of reading and writing, was the bridge 
created between the blind and literature. Given the ease of use, 
the production of Braille content was encouraged, well as your 
teaching, spreading the method for worldwide.  
 
With technological advancements, the Braille has been 
integrated into electronic devices allowing the interaction of the 
visually impaired with computers, text editors, internet, digital 
books, among other services. The example used in this project 
and has the servomotors, which are electromechanical devices 
that perform movements, in relation to its axis, in accordance 
with commands (control signals) determined. The device was a 
solution adopted for the project and is responsible for moving 
pins that make up a cell. Besides showing a cheap and easy to 
implement, since it easy to handle and has a library of software 
written specifically for use in conjunction with the the Arduino 
platform. 
IV. 
OBJECTIVE AND CASE STUDY 
Through past difficulties for the visually impaired, the main 
objective of this work is the implementation and deployment of 
a system composed of hardware and software that displays 
Braille information extracted from a digital medium. The 
creation of the Braille cell electromechanical system adds the 
ability to interact with people who are totally blind, which is 
possible only through the web interface. 
 The prototype consists of parts of hardware and software to 
work together in translation and display of information acquired 
in TRANSITUS-V. The hardware part is formed by a plate 
Arduino BT, six servomotors, a button and secondary electronic 
parts, such as resistors and wires. Together, the six servomotors 
represent one braille character, the user can read a character 
string by advancing the read pointer by means of the button, as 
seen in Figure 1. 
Each servo motor is responsible for moving one of the six 
pins that make up a braille cell. The position of the mechanical 
arm of each servomotor is determined by the micro controller to 
which it is connected, controlled angle values ranging between 
0 º and 179 º. The characteristics of each servomotor Mystery 
Mini are shown in Table 1. 
 
 
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SERVOMOTOR MINI MYSTERY 
Characteristics 
Values 
Quickness 
60º at 0.12 seconds 
Torque 
0.7kg 
Voltage 
4.5v – 6v 
Dimensions 
1.98cm x 1.93cm x 8.4cm 
 
Each servomotor has three wires: first, generally black or 
dark brown, which is the negative land should be connected to 
the circuit, the second, usually red, is positive, the third generally 
yellow in color, is attached to a PWM (Pulse Widht Modulation) 
port of the Arduino. 
The hardware model of the Arduino platform used in the 
paper was the Arduino BT, chosen for having an integrated 
Bluetooth module to your hardware, which facilitates 
implementation. Another advantage of the model is to have six 
PWM digital ports, which allows the use of six servomotors, 
suitably representing a braille character. The features of the 
Arduino BT, is identical to the model Arduino UNO, with the 
exception of having an integrated Bluetooth module. The 
Arduino BT used has digital PWM ports 3, 5, 6, 9, 10 and 11 [8], 
and these ports are connected to the six servomotors.  
Although the hardware platform Arduino usually have a 
power outlet dedicated to connecting other devices, a source of 
external power supply was used for the consumption of the 
servomotors, given its energy needs to be higher than what is 
offered at the output of the Arduino board. The diagram in 
Figure 2 describes the connection between the servo, Arduino 
BT and external power source. 
To accommodate the servo motors and the Arduino board, a 
small box was built. In its lid six small holes, so that the 
servomotors to move small iron rods coupled to the blades make 
its surface appear in a character in Braille. The button used to 
move the cursor reading is powered by a 5V voltage obtained at 
one of the power ports Arduino board. The time between 
pressing the button and changing the character is about 0.1 
seconds, according to the specifications of the servomotors seen 
in Table 1, making it very agile character exchange and enabling 
quick reading of the text displayed in the prototype. 
 
The software part of the prototype is composed of the sketch 
that will run on the Arduino board, as well as a middleware 
responsible for brokering the acquisition of information. This 
middleware acquires the information from the database 
TRANSITUS-V and translates it into Braille to, finally, send 
them to skecth in the Arduino BT board. The sketch function is 
to coordinate the motion of the servomotors in accordance with 
the received information so that each character is represented 
correctly. 
 
 
Figure 1. Braille representation of the data in the prototype 
613
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 3. Diagram showing the exchange of messages between the Arduino, 
middleware and Database TRANSITUS-V. 
 
 
We opted for an application that communicates directly with 
the database because it simplifies its use by blind people. Even 
if the prototype can be adapted for use through the site, there are 
several steps prior to use which would be compromised. For 
example, it would be necessary that the blind user initiate the 
program 
from 
accessing 
internet 
browsing 
and 
the 
administrative area for, only then, have access to the information 
TRANSITUS-V. Direct access to the database reduces the steps 
required to use and consequently reduces the barriers that hinder 
the use of the system. So, all information is obtained by SQL 
queries. 
 
After acquiring the specific data in TRANSITUS-V, the 
middleware sends character by character to the the Arduino 
board, previously converted to Braille system, and according to 
user demand. At first, only the first character is sent and 
immediately represented in the prototype. The user has the task 
of requesting the following characters one at a time, to 
middleware by pressing the button. Pressing the button causes 
the Arduino board send a request to the middleware, which is  
done by sending the phrase “new” to the middleware. Upon 
receiving the request, the middleware sends the next character to 
the plate, and so on until they enclose the characters 
representative of the data obtained. Figure 3 describes how is 
this communication performed. 
V. 
USABILITY AND PRACTICE 
 
Figure 4 shows the names of customers registered in the 
system viewable on the web, with one highlighted in blue. The 
information is represented on the prototype, as seen in Figure 5. 
It is observed that the prototype represented correctly the desired 
information. 
 
This work contributes not only with the realization of 
accessibility, but with the inclusion of visually impaired since 
the use of the prototype also allows the inclusion of these people 
in the labor market. 
VI. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
The prototype represented correctly in Braille information 
obtained in Transitus-V system. Further information can be 
obtained by simply writing functions and SQL queries to access 
them. However, the prototype does not have a navigation menu 
for the functions to access information, which is a barrier created 
by the low capacity of the displayed text. Because you can only 
represent one character at a time, creating a navigation menu is 
infeasible. 
 
One difficulty encountered during the development of the 
prototype is that, given the angular movement of the blades 
 
Figure 2. Diagram of connection between the servo and Arduino. 
 
 
Figure 4. Information obtained by persons web interface Transitus-V.  
 
Figure 5. Braille representation of the data in Figure 4 prototype.  
614
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

of the servomotors, the pins do not rise or debase totally 
straight, which makes difficult the construction of smaller 
prototypes. Reducing the size of the blades was required. 
This work is the result of a research project called 
Management of traffic information for the visually impaired, 
developed by the Software Engineering Group of the 
University of Rio Grande do Norte, which, since 2010, 
develops the web system TRANSITUS-V. 
For future work, flip-flops can be used to build the braille 
cells, as seen in [1], giving to the system the capacity of 
representate a large number of characters. It is also suggested 
to create a shield for the Arduino platform representing 
Braille characters. This shield could pave the way for a 
family of accessibility projects, making it easier for the 
visually impaired and driving new research. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Braga, D. S. “Uma interface humano-máquina para leitura de 
documentos digitais por deficientes visuais”. Escola 
politécnica de Pernambuco - Universidade de Pernambuco, 
2010.  
[2] Banzi, 
M. 
“Getting 
started 
with 
Arduino”. 
http://goo.gl/Ue2Hr, First edition, 2009. 
[3] Freedman, R. “Out of Darkness: The Story of Louis Braille”, 
First edition, 1997. 
[4] Godse, A. P., Mulani, A. O. “Embedded systems”, First 
edition, 2009. 
[5] Smithmaitrie, P. “Rehabilitation engineering – chapter 4: 
Analysis and design of Piezoeletric braille display”. pp. 49-
52. ISBN: 978-1-4302-3882-9. Apress, 2011.  
[6] TRANSITUS-V. Official website of the TRANSITUS-V, 
http://les.di.uern.br/transitusportal/index.php/transitus-v.  
[7] Wang, M; Roy, R. “Portable refreshable Braille display”. 
Final Report for ECE 445, Senior Design, 2012. 
[8] Wheat, D. “Arduino internals”. ISBN: 978-1-4302-3882-9. 
Apress, 2011. 
[9] World Health Organization. “World report on disabilities 
2011”. ISBN: 978 92 4 068521 5 
615
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

