COTS Adaptation Method – A Lifecycle Perspective 
Waldemar Britts 
Accenture Digital 
Stockholm, Sweden 
waldemar.britts@accenture.com 
Mira Kajko-Mattsson 
School of Information and Communication Technology 
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
Stockholm, Sweden 
mekm2@kth.se 
 
 
Abstract— 
More 
and 
more 
organizations 
customize 
Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) standard systems instead 
of developing the bespoke ones. Despite this, there are still few 
methods that support adaptations of COTS standard systems. 
The ones that exist are either outdated or they only focus on 
some specific steps. None of the currently defined methods 
cover 
standard 
system 
adaptation 
from 
the 
lifecycle 
perspective and none of them provide concrete guidance for 
how to adapt COTS systems to the customers’ needs. As a 
result, many organizations have to develop their own 
adaptation methods in a trial and error manner. This paper 
suggests COTS Adaptation Method (COTSAM) including 
steps and guidelines providing advice for how to develop and 
evolve COTS-based systems during their lifecycle. The method 
has been explored and evaluated within one company that has 
used COTS for supporting the company’s business processes 
for more than a decade.  
Keywords-standard systems; reuse; lifecycle; business process. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Standard systems have become very popular in the 
software industry. More and more organizations go over 
from developing bespoke systems to re-using complete 
standard systems instead [2][11]. This is because standard 
systems are considered to be more cost and resource 
effective than the bespoke ones. They have been reused 
many times in many different contexts by many different 
customer groups. For this reason, they are regarded to be of 
higher quality, reliability and maintainability. [7] [9] 
Standard systems cannot always be used in their original 
form. Since they are created for a larger client base, they are 
very complex in their structure and can include elements that 
are not always needed by some clients. Therefore, they must 
be adapted to specific customers and their businesses. Some 
of their components must be removed, some may be retained 
in their current form and some other need undergo various 
types of adaptations. [3] 
Adaption work can be very complex [1]. It does not only 
require knowledge of the standard system and of the 
customer's business but also knowledge of how to adapt 
standard systems to the needs of particular customers [7]. 
Methods supporting adaptation work are often called COTS 
(Commercial-Off-The-Shelf) adaptation methods or simply 
standard adaptation or customization methods.  
COTS adaptation methods are extremely important for 
succeeding with the creation of standard-based software 
systems [10]. Lack of them may cost companies many 
failures in form of malfunctioning software, missed 
deliveries, failed projects, or at its worst, failed businesses. 
Despite this, there are still very few methods that support 
adaptations of COTS systems. The ones that exist are either 
too general, or they focus on a limited part of COTS 
adaptation process, often dealing only with COTS selection 
step. Most of them are also old. Their average age is more 
than ten years [4][6][12][13]. To the knowledge of the 
authors of this paper, no published standard adaptation 
method focuses on the lifecycle of the standard-based 
systems. 
To 
succeed 
with 
the 
adaptation 
efforts, 
many 
organizations are forced to use their own adaptation 
methods, which they have developed in a trial and error 
manner. Kliento is one of such organizations. They have 
customized one standard system for building their software 
applications for supporting their business operation. They 
used commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS) component package, 
which they then adapted to their own needs by mainly 
reconfiguring its components, writing glue code, by making 
various settings and by writing new own components. In the 
absence of such a method, Kliento was forced to develop 
their own COTS adaptation method. It has taken them more 
than one decade to develop it and it has cost Kliento both 
time and money in form of initial project problems and 
obstacles. Recently, the method has been successfully 
applied within ten sub-projects. Still however, it has not been 
formalized and documented within the company.  
This paper suggests a COTS Adaptation Method 
(COTSAM) including steps and guidelines providing advice 
for how to manage COTS-based systems during their 
lifecycle. The method has been explored and evaluated 
within Kliento that has used COTS for more than a decade. 
So far, no research proposal has covered a complete 
adaptation method that manages the entire software lifecycle. 
Therefore, we regard COTSAM a unique and innovative 
method suggestion.  
Our work was commissioned by Kliento. It included 
exploring the structure of their adaptation method, 
identifying problems with the method and providing 
suggestions for improving it. The company’s name, Kliento, 
is a fictitious name. The company wishes to remain 
anonymous. We are not allowed to mention any information 
that can be used for identifying the company, project, or even 
the standard system used. The only thing we are allowed to 
reveal is that the application managed information about the 
organization’s business and its very complex equipment.  
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 1. Our research strategy 
 
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section II 
describes the research method taken in this study and the 
criteria for exploring and evaluating the adaptation method. 
Section III presents the explored method at the company 
studied whereas Section IV describes COTSAM method. 
Finally, Sections V and VI evaluate COTSAM and make 
suggestions for future work. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
This study focused on an area that was relatively 
unexplored. The literature proved to be very limited and 
there were few methods dealing with the lifecycle 
perspective of COTS-based systems. Apart from literature 
limitations, it turned out that the method was not well 
established within Kliento. In Swedish parlance, the method 
sat in the walls, everybody knew it, however, understood it 
from his/her individual perspectives. The method was simply 
not well established within the company studied.  
The status within Kliento has strongly impacted the 
design of our research strategy. As shown in Fig. 1, we 
conducted explorative case study to extract the design of 
standard adaptation method and elicit experiences related to 
the adaptation effort. The research was of a design science 
paradigm where the theory was extracted using the 
hermeneutic method [8].  
A. Research Phases 
Our study was divided into four research steps. As shown 
on the top right handside of Fig. 1, these were (1) Study of 
Published COTS Adaptation Systems, (2) Exploration of 
Company’s Adaptation Method, (3) Creation of the 
Preliminary Version of COTSAM, and (4) Evaluation and 
Improvement of COTSAM. The first two steps were 
conducted in parallel. Here, we studied publications about 
standard adaptation methods and problems related to them. 
To our surprise, there were very few publications dealing 
with the subject. Although we found thousands of articles in 
various scientific databases, only five publications were of 
interest. Their focus was however restricted to only selection 
of standard systems.  
In the next parallel step, we first studied Kliento’s 
organization, products, adaptation method and problems 
related to the method. The step was conducted in form of 
explorative interviews with four different interviewees. Here 
we made four interviews with four different interviewees 
possessing the roles of project manager, business architect, 
vice project manager and data coordinator. We used 
Questionnaire 1 to be discussed in Section II.B. Explorative 
interview with Interviewee 1 was made for the purpose of 
understanding the company and its contexts. The explorative 
interviews with Interviewees 2-4 were made for the purpose 
of exploring the standard adaptation method.  
In the third step, we created a preliminary version of 
COTSAM. Here, we studied all the interview answers using 
a hermeneutic method [5]. The interview results were 
interpreted in the context of the organization studied and its 
background and compared to published scientific results as 
achieved in the first research phase. The COTSAM 
preliminary version was then evaluated during our fourth 
step. Here, we had an evaluative interview together with 
Interviewee 4. We used Questionnaire 2 to be discussed in 
Section II.B. The purpose was to determine the soundness 
and applicability of COTSAM method within Kliento.  
B. Research Instruments 
The research instruments used in this study were two 
interview questionnaires based on explorative and evaluative 
research criteria. Using the explorative interviews, we 
examined Kliento’s organization, its structure, adaptation 
method and its problems and consequences. Using the 
evaluative interviews, we established the soundness and 
applicability of COTSAM at Kliento. 
Explorative interviews were conducted using the 
explorative questionnaire. Its purpose was to get acquainted 
with the activities within the organization, its standard 
adaptation method and problems. Questionnaire 1 was based 
on the following explorative criteria: 
• 
Context standing for the development context in which 
Kliento’s standard adaptation method was used. This 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 2. Variants of standard system adaptation methods and problems as explored at Kliento 
 
criterion was used for acquiring basic knowledge of 
Kliento and for understanding its main activities.  
• 
Method standing for a set of activities, rules and criteria 
aiding in adapting standard systems to a functioning 
information system.  
• 
Problems standing for difficulties and consequences that 
Klinto has experienced within standard adaptation work. 
Identification of problems is an important prerequisite 
for drawing lessons learned, for relating them to lack of 
or insufficient process steps, and for designing method 
solutions that may avoid them.  
• 
Method ownership standing for the role possessing end-
to-end responsibility for developing, establishing and 
improving the standard adaptation method and for 
assuring its quality across the whole organization. The 
role’s ultimate responsibility is to ensure that the method 
is consistent throughout the whole organization and that 
it is understood in a uniform manner.  
Questionnaire 2 was of evaluative nature focusing on 
evaluating the applicability and soundness of the preliminary 
version of COTSAM. It was designed according to the 
following evaluation criteria: 
• 
COTSAM structure evaluating the choice of standard 
method steps and the order among them.  
• 
Applicability of COTSAM guidelines finding out 
whether the guidelines were realistic, whether they 
were robust in preventing the problems as identified at 
Kliento and whether they were applicable at Kliento.  
C. Sampling 
The choice of the interviewees was not done through 
randomization but through judgmental sampling [5][11]. The 
interviewees were chosen according to their ability to 
contribute to our research results. They had to fulfill the 
three following criteria: (1) they should have extensive 
experience of the company studied, (2) they should have 
experience in adaptation work, and (3) they should both 
represent user and development sites.  
III. 
EXPLORATION RESULTS 
The exploration step (Step 2 in Fig. 1) has resulted in three 
different method variants. This implies that three different 
interviewees has three different opinions of the standard 
adaptation method. The variants are all presented in Fig. 2 
and briefly describe below. To facilitate the follow up of 
Fig. 2, we mark each activity with a numeric identifier both 
in the figure and the text describing it. 
Variant I has been explored by interviewing Interviewee 
2. In its first step (1), Kliento makes business analysis and 
analyzes a specific business operation by studying its 
documentation and by identifying its needs. The step results 
in a summary of the business operation and a list of 
requirements for the improvements of business operation 
under consideration. This provides input to the next step (2), 
during which the standard system gets adapted according to 
the business requirements. Here, one compares the current 
business process and the data used by the process to the 
business requirements. In parallel, one educates in the new 
improved business operation. In Step 3, Kliento performs a 
serious business game focusing on making initial tests of the 
adapted system. During the game, Kliento reviews the 
overall  business  workflow and  makes sure that it works as  
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 3. COTSAM steps and guidelines 
 
requested. Finally, Kliento conducts system and acceptance 
tests (4) before deploying the system for operation (5).  
Variant II has been explored by interviewing Interviewee 
3. As shown in the middle part of Fig. 5.3, the adaptation 
process starts with recruiting a team (1). The step ensures 
that Kliento has enough staff with the right skills who can 
conduct  the work. The team is then educated and trained 
(2). Afterwards, the team members conduct business 
analysis with the aim of laying out the status  of  the  part of  
business  under consideration (3). This provides input to 
Step 4, that is, input  for   developing  
business processes, adapting the standard system to the 
newly defined business processes and for educating the end 
users in the new business process and the system supporting 
the process. The three parallel adaptation steps converge in 
the business game step (5) testing the changes made. 
Finally, Kliento deploys the system in two consecutive 
steps: for trial operation (6) and for final operation (7).  
Variant 3 has been explored with Interviewee 4. The 
process consists of two stages: initial adaptation and actual 
adaptation. The initial adaptation includes activities 
required for starting the adaptation project. These imply 
definition of business requirements (I1), choice of a 
standard system (I2) and setup of the adaptation project (I3). 
As soon as those activities are finalized, the actual 
adaptation of the standard system starts.  
The actual adaptation is realized in a number of sub-
projects, each dedicated to a particular business operation. 
Here, Kliento makes a detailed analysis of the business 
process under study (2), develops or improves the business 
process (3) and then adapts the standard system (3). The 
system process is then tested with the serious business game 
(4), to be then system and acceptance tested (5), and finally, 
to be deployed for operation (6). 
Our reader does not need to be very astute to see the 
differences of the perceptions of the standard system 
adaptation method at Kliento. The reason is that the process 
was not standardized and established within the whole 
organizations. As shown on the righthand side of Fig. 2, this 
has led to many problems which we classify as follows: 
• 
Business operation problems dealing with insufficient 
knowledge of business operation, lack of standard 
business operation process and too much focus on 
adapting the business process to the standard system 
instead of adapting the system to the process.  
• 
Adapted system problems dealing with insufficient 
system knowledge due to problems, such as insufficient 
system education and system documentation.  
• 
Adaptation method problems dealing with putting too 
few resources into the adaptation projects, inadequate 
tests and improper prioritization of business processes to 
be implemented.  
• 
Customer-related problems implying lack of customer 
engagement and unwillingness to change the business 
processes. 
• 
Supplier problems implying lack of understanding of 
customer needs when developing and evolving standard 
systems which is the result of supplier’s absence in 
assisting the client companies in their adaptation efforts.  
IV. 
COTSAM 
COTSAM is a method that has been explored within the 
adaptation projects at Kliento. It is been extended with 
issues elicited within the literature and evaluated though the 
interview with Interviewee 4. As shown in Fig. 6.1 
COTSAM consists of two parts. These are Method Steps 
and Guidelines. The method steps list the main steps in the 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

adaptation work and guidelines provide guidance for how to 
optimally implement the steps. 
A. COTSAM Method Steps 
COTSAM method steps are presented on two levels (1) 
on the lifecycle level and (2) on the adaptation project level. 
The overall lifecycle steps range from making initial general 
business analysis, to defining business requirements, to 
choosing a standard system, starting adaptation projects, to 
finally, retiring the system. The steps on adaptation project 
level focus on selecting a particular business process and 
adapting the system to the requirements of the selected 
business process. Below, we describe the two levels in 
detail. To facilitate the follow up of Fig. 3, we mark each 
activity with a numeric identifier both in the figure and the 
text below.  
On the lifecycle level, the following takes place. First a 
general business analysis is made (1) and general business 
requirements are specified (2). Here, one does not need to 
go into all the details of the business and requirements. 
What is important is to create an overview of the business 
operation on such a level of detail that it enables informed 
standard system selection (3).  
 After having selected the standard system and before 
starting the adaptation projects, key people must be 
educated in the standard system (4). Education is then 
followed by an initial adaptation of the standard system (5). 
Here, one makes general adjustments of the standard system 
to the overall business needs. This step is then followed by a 
series of adaptation projects (6). Adaptation projects are 
carried out iteratively where focus is put on a particular 
business operation. Finally, the system gets retired if it no 
longer is able to support business operation.  
Each adaptation project includes a number of sub-steps 
(5). Projects start with the selection of a specific business 
operation (5.1), creation of the team dealing with the 
adaptation of the standard system to the business operation 
under consideration and education of its members. The team 
then analyzes the business operation (5.2) and creates 
adaptation requirements specification describing what parts 
of the standard system need to be adjusted to fit the business 
operation.  
As a next step, the standard system gets adapted (5.4). 
The adaptation step is not simple. It consists of several steps 
and the order among the steps may vary from case to case. 
Overall, the steps are conducted almost simultaneously. 
While developing the business process, one adapts the 
standard system to the business needs and educates people 
both in the business process and the adapted standard 
system. All this provides feedback to testing. The newly 
defined business process is being tested at the same time as 
the standard system gets adapted and as the people are 
educated in business processes and in the adapted standard 
systems. The same applies to the adapted standard system. 
As soon as its fully or partially workable solution has been 
implemented, it is tested by playing a serious business game 
simulating the newly defined business operation.  
If the outcome of the business game is satisfying, the 
adapted standard system undergoes system and acceptance 
tests (6.5) to be then forwarded for trial operation (6.6). 
During the trial operation, the new system part is operated 
on together with the old system part. Only after one is 
certain that the new system correctly supports the business 
operation, it gets deployed for operation (6.7). The old 
system part gets retired.  
Our reader may probably react that COTSAM presents 
and suggests the order among its activities. The order 
however is not compulsory. Users of COTSAM may 
conduct activities in any order that they feel comfortable 
with. However, some order is natural and if it is not 
followed, then the adaptation endeavor may encounter 
problems, and thereby, endanger the adaption work. For 
example, you have to define the entire business first, at least 
on a coarse level, before setting up a system to support it.  
B. COTSAM Guidelines 
COTSAM guidelines provide guidance for how to optimally 
carry out the method steps and avoid problems that may be 
encountered within standard method adaptation efforts. 
COTSAM suggest six groups of guidelines. As listed on 
the righthand side of Fig. 3, these are (1) Business 
Operation Guidelines, (2) System Guidelines (3) Method 
Adaptation Guidelines, (4) Customer-Related Guidelines 
and (5) Supplier Guidelines. Their choice depends on the 
problems that have been encountered within Klento. Their 
purpose is to remedy these problems.  
Business Operation Guidelines deal with business 
process understanding, ownership and decision making with 
regard to business processes. Guidelines BG 2-4 deal with 
acquiring understanding of the business process on both 
general and detailed levels. Organizations should put 
enough resources into assuring that the business process is 
correctly understood. One should also have a good 
understanding of all the variants of business operation so 
that they get considered when adapting the standard system. 
All this constitutes a basis for defining the system support 
for the business process.  
To assure uniform understanding of business operation, 
one should define a role responsible for it. For this reason, 
we suggest Guideline BG 1. Here, we suggest establish the 
role of business process manager who should define 
business operation and establish it within the organization. 
Lack of such a role implies a risk that the business process 
will be implemented in different ways by different 
individuals and that the adapted system supporting the 
process will not reflect it properly.  
The last two business operation guidelines, BG 5-6, deal 
with decision making. Organizations should accept the fact 
that business processes change as late as during the 
adaptation process. While adjusting the standard system to 
the 
business 
process, 
one 
may 
acquire 
a 
better 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

understanding of the business process and its defects. This 
should not prevent organizations from changing their 
business processes even that late in the adaptation project 
work. To enable this, organizations should practice dynamic 
decision making allowing them to change or improve their 
decisions based on what is known now and based on the 
new expected or unexpected events that motivate decision 
changes.  
Adapted System Guidelines focus on assuring that the 
system correctly reflects business operation (SG 2). For this, 
organizations should define the role of system manager (SG 
1) who makes sure that while adapting the standard system, 
focus is put on assuring that the system gets adapted to the 
business process and not vice versa (SG3). Finally, system 
manager should make sure that people are educated in the 
adapted system and its use (SG 4).  
Method Adaptation Guidelines focus on assuring that 
companies establish an organization-wide standard system 
adaptation method (MG 3). Companies should make sure 
that they have an appropriate prioritization scheme of 
business 
operations 
that 
should 
be 
chosen 
for 
implementation (MG 4). Before starting any adaptation 
project, they should find out what standard system 
adaptation work implies (MG 2). Is it better to use a 
standard system or is it better to develop a customized 
system? All this should be managed by a method adaptation 
manager (MG 1), the role ensuring that everyone in the 
organization is using the adaptation method in a uniform 
manner.  
The last two guidelines deal with customers and 
suppliers. Customer-Related Guideline (CG 1) remedies the 
problem of lack of customer engagement in the adaptation 
work whereas the Supplier Guideline (SuG 1) aids in 
assuring that the supplier gets insight into the status of the 
adaptation work of their customers, and thereby, become 
better in adapting their standard systems to the needs of 
their customers.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The preliminary version of COTSAM was evaluated during 
the fourth interview using two evaluation criteria (1) the 
structure of COTSAM and (2) the applicability of its 
guidelines. Here, Interviewee 4 was presented the COTSAM 
draft, three variants of the adaptation method as perceived 
by our three interviewees and the COTSAM guidelines. 
Below, we briefly describe the evaluation results.  
A. COTSAM Structure 
Interviewee 4 was of the opinion that COTSAM was sound 
and out of the four variants (three initial variants plus the 
COTSAM draft), the COTSAM draft was the best reflection 
of the standard adaptation work at Kliento. Since Kliento 
did not have time to formalize and generalize their method, 
COTSAM would serve as a basis for improving the 
company’s method.  
According to Interviewee 4, the method was satisfactory 
and all its steps were relevant. The method was complete 
from a lifecycle perspective, and none of its steps were 
superfluous. However, after a closer analysis of the three 
method variants, Interviewee 4 pointed out that COTSAM 
missed a very important step, Step I3 in Variant 3 dealing 
with a setup of an adaptation project. According to him, this 
step constitutes a basis for all further adaptation projects and 
it should be clearly distinguished in the model. This step is 
important for achieving a stable foundation for continuing 
with the adaptation efforts. To remedy this, we extended 
COTSAM with Step 5 which we call Initially adapt the 
standard system.  
The interviewee pointed out that even if the overall 
design of COTSAM looked simple, its steps were very 
complex. For example Step 3 dealing with standard 
selection is very complex, difficult and costly. Also Step 4 
and the newly added Step 5 dealing with the education in 
the standard system and its initial adaptation are very heavy 
and extensive. Here, one must understand the system's 
processes, 
understand 
business 
processes, 
customize 
business processes and system processes, find out how the 
data from the system to be replaced can be transferred to the 
new customized system and how to build interfaces between 
the two systems. All this cannot be done on first attempt. A 
number of retakes is normally required before everything 
falls on place. 
The contents of Step 5 almost corresponds to Step 6 
(Conduct Adaptation Project). The difference lies in the fact 
that the initial project is the first adaptation project (5) in a 
series of adaptation projects (6). It should however be 
distinguished as a separate step due to the fact that its 
success is crucial for the next-coming projects. On purpose, 
the initial project should neither be too large nor too small. 
It should be of such a size so that the organization may 
begin to find its own feet in the adaptation work. 
With the addition of Step 5, the interviewee was of the 
opinion that the choice and the order of COTSAM steps 
were relevant. The sequence of steps assured that the 
method could be conducted in a systematic and controlled 
manner. An incorrect sequence has already led to some 
large efficiency problems at Kliento. For instance, Kliento 
neglected Step 4 dealing with the education in the selected 
standard system. This created problems in Step 5.The initial 
adaptation project took extra long time. This is because the 
adaptation team had to learn the standard system while 
doing the actual adaptation work.  
Although our interviewee agreed that the order was 
relevant and important, he pointed out that the performance 
of COTSAM steps could differ from case to case. For 
example, one could perform the first two steps (Step 1 and 
Step 2) in a number of iterations before one went over to 
Step 3.  
Interviewee 4 was of the opinion that the order of the 
COTSAM steps constituted an excellent roadmap of what 
main steps are to be carried out and where they belong to in 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

the standard system adaptation lifecycle. There should be a 
general business analysis before creating a general 
specification which should be done before choosing a 
standard system. You should not choose a standard system 
first and do a business analysis and create specifications 
then. Nor should you create requirements before you have 
made a business analysis.  
The order between the substeps in Step 6 dealing with 
the actual performance of the adaptation projects was found 
relevant as well. According to our interviewee, these 
activities could be performed either sequentially or in 
parallel. The grade of parallelism could vary from case to 
case and it often depended on the complexity of and 
understanding of the business process to be implemented. 
The simplest case was when business process users 
mastered the business process well. Here, the adaptation 
steps could be conducted sequentially implying that a 
complete solution got produced for a particular business 
operation which was then tested and deployed. Only minor 
training was required. 
More complex cases take place when one defines a new 
business operation and implements it in the standard system. 
Here, each business process step gets implemented in an 
iterative manner. One develops business functionality for 
only the first step, tests it, educates in it while implementing 
and testing the next step and so forth. Next iterations may 
not always imply implementations of the next business 
operation steps. They may imply adjustments of the 
implemented business process steps before going over to the 
next step.  
B. COTSAM Guidelines 
The applicability of the COTSAM guidelines was evaluated 
against the problems as experienced by Kliento. Our 
interviewee agreed that the guidelines were appropriate and 
that most of them have already been implemented at 
Kliento. Only four guidelines have not yet been 
implemented. These are going to be discussed below.  
Our interviewee was of the opinion that all the business 
guidelines were relevant. Kliento has implemented them all 
except for BG 1 dealing with the definition of a business 
process manager role. Although Kliento was aware of its 
importance, they have not managed to fully implement it. 
They have defined the role of business process manager. 
This role however did not conduct his/her responsibilities in 
a satisfactory manner.  
Regarding Business Guidelines 5 and 6 (BG 5 and BG 
6), our interviewee found them especially important and 
crucial for the successful implementation of business 
processes. The guidelines suggest that companies should 
accept the fact that business operation requirements change, 
and therefore, companies should practice dynamic decision 
making. It took Kliento several years to understand that they 
could not practice the traditional decision-making pattern. 
This resulted in substantial project delays, enormous costs 
and other serious productivity problems.  
Guidelines BG2-4 are extremely important according to 
our interviewee. They deal with acquiring understanding of 
business operation on both coarse-grained and detailed 
levels and identifying all their variances. Without them, it is 
practically impossible to run standard system adaptations. 
Because of their negligence, Kliento has experienced most 
of the problems as listed in this paper.  
Kliento has implemented all the system guidelines. 
Despite this, they had problems in understanding the 
system. The system was very complex and as our interview 
expressed it, it was too big for one person to grasp it. More 
people need to have the role of the system manager where 
each system manager is responsible for a specific part of the 
system.  
Out of four method guidelines, Kliento has not 
implemented three of them. These are MG1 suggesting the 
establishment of the role of the method adaptation manager, 
MG 2 dealing with finding out what standard system 
adaptation work implies before starting adaptation projects 
and MG 4 dealing with establishing a prioritization scheme 
for business operations. Kliento is now in the process of 
implementing them. All of them are important for 
succeeding with the adaptation projects and they should be 
implemented from the very beginning. For instance, by not 
finding out what standard adaptation method implied, 
Kliento failed in balancing the allocation of resources to the 
different adaptation method steps. The organization had a 
wrong understanding of what a standard adaptation meant 
with regard to time resource consumption in different 
process steps. Insufficient resources were allocated to 
planning and testing.  
Last but not least, all the customer and supplier 
guidelines (CG1 and SuG1) have been implemented, 
however, too late. Kliento has not been successful in 
continuously engaging the end user in the business process 
development. Neither have they been successful in 
communicating their needs to the standard system supplier. 
Unfortunately, it took several years for Kliento to realize 
that these guidelines were very crucial for the success of 
current and future adaptation efforts. Especially the supplier 
guideline (SuG 1) is crucial for the organization's survival. 
If the supplier lacks understanding of the needs of its clients, 
the clients may become supplier-less, and thereby, system-
less in the future. 
VI. 
FINAL REMARKS 
Despite the fact that more and more organizations procure 
standard systems, there are still few methods that support 
their adaptation and implementation. The ones that are 
available are either out of date or they focus on only the 
initial adaptation stages. This paper suggests a method for 
customizing standard systems. The method is called 
COTSAM (COTS Adaptation Method) and it was 
developed at Kliento. The work was carried out in form of a 
qualitative and explorative study [8]. The study was based 
on five interviews. Overall, one interviewee was involved in  
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 4. Comparing COTSAM to CBA Framework 
 
providing a context for our study, three interviewees were 
involved in the exploration of standard adaptation method as 
defined at Kliento. One of these three interviewees was also 
involved in the evaluation of COTSAM.  
The exploration showed that Kliento’s employees had a 
slightly varying picture of the company’s adaptation 
method. Therefore, our work resulted in three variant 
method descriptions. The reason was the fact that Kliento’s 
method had not been defined and properly established 
within the company. The exploration also resulted in a list 
of problems that were the actual consequences of lack of a 
defined and established standard adaptation method.  
The three variants and the explored problems constituted 
a good basis for defining COTSAM consisting of a number 
of steps and guidelines that will guide the implementation of 
the COTSAM steps. COTSAM method covers the entire 
lifecycle, and therefore, it may be considered to be unique 
and innovative in its design. It provides a new and original 
perspective on a standard adaptation method which has no 
counterpart in the existing methods today. The only method 
that was reasonably related to this study was the Framework 
for Value-based CBA process decisions suggested by [13].  
To evaluate the innovative contribution of this study, we 
compare the COTSAM constituents to the constituents of  
the Framework Value-based CBA decision process. As 
shown in Fig. 4, CBA framework does not take into account 
the important steps, such as training in the standard system, 
the initial adaptation of standard systems, creation of 
adaptation team, training team and training in the system. 
Finally, the main difference is that COTSAM covers the 
entire life cycle whereas CBA is not explicit about it.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
COTSAM is defined on a general level and has only 
been evaluated within one organization. Its structure and 
guidelines need be further evaluated in other organizations. 
COTSAM needs be further expanded with more detailed 
activities and more guidelines. Last but not least, it should 
be expanded with more roles and responsibilities. 
Hopefully, the results of this study will contribute to, and 
accelerate, development of adaptation methods for standard 
systems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. D. Alford Jr, “The problem with aviation COTS,” 
Proceedings of AUTOTESTCON, IEEE, pp. 519-524, 2000. 
[2] B. Boehm and C. Abts, “COTS integration: Plug and Pray?” 
Computer, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 135-138, 1999. 
[3] D. Carney, S. A. Hissam, and D. Plakosh, “Complex 
COTS‐based software systems: practical steps for their 
maintenance,” Journal of Software Maintenance: Research 
and Practice, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 357-376, 2000. 
[4] I. Crnkovic, M. Chaudron, and S. Larsson, “Component-
based development process and component lifecycle,” 
Proceedings of International Conference on Software 
Engineering Advances, IEEE, pp. 44-44, 2006. 
[5] N. K. Denzin and Y. S. Lincoln, “The Sage handbook of 
qualitative research,” Sage Publications, Incorporated, 2005.  
[6] X. Franch and M. Torchiano, “Towards a reference 
framework for COTS-based development: a proposal,” In 
ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, ACM, vol. 30, 
no. 4, pp. 1-4, 2005.   
[7] S. Gilbert, “The emergence of the system configurator,” IT 
professional, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 64-62, 2005. 
[8] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design 
science in information systems research,” MIS quarterly, vol. 
28, no. 1, pp. 75-105, 2004. 
[9] M. Keil, and A. Tiwana, “Beyond cost: the drivers of COTS 
application value,” Software, IEEE, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 64-69, 
2005. 
[10] L. Mariani, and M. Pezzè, “Dynamic detection of COTS 
component incompatibility,” Software, IEEE, vol. 24, no. 5, 
pp. 76-85, 2007. 
[11] M. N. Marshall, “Sampling for qualitative research,” Family 
practice, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 522-526, 1996. 
[12] M. Morisio, et al., “COTS-based software development: 
Processes and open issues,” Journal of Systems and Software, 
vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 189-199, 2002. 
[13] Y. Yang, J. Bhuta, B. Boehm, and D. N. Port, “Value-based 
processes for COTS-based applications,” Software, IEEE, vol. 
22, no. 4, pp. 54-62, 2005. 
 
 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

