Towards Identifying the Factors for Project Management Success in Global 
Software Development: Initial Results 
 
Mahmood Niazi a, b, Sajjad Mahmood a, Mohammad 
Alshayeb a, Abdul Majid Qureshi a, Kanaan Faisal a 
a Department of Information and Computer Science, King 
Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi Arabia 
b Faculty of Computing, Riphah International University 
Islamabad, Pakistan 
{mkniazi, smahmood, alshayeb, g201105290, 
kanaan}@kfupm.edu.sa 
 
Narciso Cerpa 
Faculty of Engineering, Universidad de Talca, Chile 
ncerpa@utalca.cl 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract – Global  Software  Development (GSD)  is  a  
collaborative  development  where  one  company (client) contracts 
out all or part of its software development activities to another 
company (vendor), which provides  services  in  return  for  
remuneration. In today’s world of high cost commitments and 
limited budgets, GSD provides a viable option for developing lower 
cost product with a relatively better quality. However, this comes at 
the cost of overcoming various challenges of managing a project, 
which is geographically distributed. The objective of this paper is 
to identify a set  of  factors  that  contributes  to  the success  of  
project  management in  GSD. We have performed a Systematic 
Literature Review (SLR) by applying customized search strings 
derived from our research question. We have identified success 
factors, such as organizational structure, project managers’ skills, 
communication, requirement specification, cultural awareness, 
and trust building. Our ultimate aim is to develop a model in order 
to measure organizations’ project management readiness for GSD 
activities. 
 
Keywords- Global software development; Software Project 
Management; Systematic Literature Review; Empirical Study.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Low cost software development has always been the 
preamble of many organizations. If this low cost 
development comes with the added advantage of the high 
quality product then it adds to increase long term benefits for 
the organizations [1]. The search for the high quality and low 
cost development has led many organizations to use Global 
Software Development (GSD) model [2]. GSD is the process 
where a company either has its software developed by 
geographically distributed teams or contracts all or part of its 
software development activities in return for remuneration 
[3]. Majority of companies have adopted GSD to gain 
several perceived benefits, such as reduced software 
development time, access to skilled human resources at 
relatively low cost and increase in product quality [2,4]. 
GSD is significantly changing the economic drivers of 
software industry due to round the clock availability of 
skilled personals at lower cost. 
Despite GSD benefits, the cultural differences associated 
with geographically distributed teams and different time-
zones have caused problems for GSD-based projects [5,6]. 
The key GSD challenges are: lack of client involvement, 
hidden costs, lack of trust among the outsourcing companies, 
lack of coordination mechanisms and communication issues 
[5,6,7]. One of the major challenges is that many 
organizations endorse global contracts prior to testing their 
project management readiness for the global development 
activity. Despite the importance of this issue, little research 
has been carried out to improve organizations project 
management readiness for GSD. We believe that a better 
understanding of the factors associated with successful GSD 
project management can assist in improving organizations’ 
project management readiness for GSD projects. 
 
The advances in GSD have not been matched by equal 
advances in the development of new research and practices 
in academia and software industry, which has resulted in a 
gap between the software industry and academia. The up-to-
date research in this area can help to fill this gap. 
  In this paper, we aim to identify success factors via SLR 
that impact project management in GSD projects. Identifying 
these factors will assist GSD organizations in better 
preparing 
for 
challenges 
associated 
with 
project 
management. Our long term research goal is to develop a 
global project management readiness framework to assist 
software development organizations in measuring and 
improving their project management readiness prior to 
starting global activities. To achieve this, we intend to 
address the following research question in this paper:  
RQ: What factors are essential for the success of project 
management in GSD?  
The organization of this paper is as follows: Section 2 
provides the background. The research methodology is 
explained in Section 3. In Section 4, we present and discuss 
the initial results. Finally, we present the conclusion in 
Section 5. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Client organizations benefit from offshore outsourcing 
because vendors in developing countries (offshore vendors) 
typically cost one-third less than onshore vendors and even 
less when compared with in-house operations [4]. Among 
many other reasons for outsourcing, generally, client 
organizations outsource their software development work to 
offshore locations to: gain cost and quality advantages, 
improve their skills’ access leading-edge technologies, and 
focus on their core competencies [8]. It is professed that 
285
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

offshore outsourcing vendors can add significant value to 
their clients’ supply chains [9]. Conversely, quite apart from 
the outsourcing benefits, there are many risks in the 
outsourcing process, such as temporal incompatibility, 
cultural differences and hidden costs [5,6]. IT Week 
magazine reported that eight out of every ten firms that 
outsourced their software development project to an offshore 
vendor faced major problems due to insufficient preparation 
and poor management by both client and vendor 
organizations [10].  
There are many reasons for these problems [10,11]. One 
of the major issues is that many clients endorse global 
contracts with their vendors prior to testing their project 
management readiness for the global activity [1]. For 
example, a recent SLR concluded that the Global Software 
Engineering field is still nascent and comparatively very few 
empirical studies have been conducted, which can help to 
resolve  the problems in this domain [12]. Understanding 
issues related to organization’s global project management 
readiness will help to ensure the successful outcome of 
projects and to maintain long lasting relationships between 
clients and vendors in different geographical locations [3]. 
Hence, in this paper we conduct a SLR to identify project 
management challenges in GSD projects.  The collected data 
focuses on factors that are essential for the success of project 
management in GSD. 
 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
A SLR process [13] was used as the approach for data 
collection. SLR is a defined and methodical process of 
identifying, assessing, and analyzing published primary 
studies in order to investigate a specific research question. 
Systematic reviews differ from ordinary literature surveys in 
being formally planned and methodically executed. In 
finding, evaluating and summarizing all available evidence 
on a specific research question, a systematic review may 
provide a greater level of validity in its findings than might 
be possible in any one of the studies surveyed in the 
systematic review. A systematic review protocol was written 
to describe the plan for the review. The major steps in our 
methodology are: 
• 
Constructing search strategy and then perform the 
search for relevant studies. 
• 
Perform the study selection process. 
• 
Apply study quality assessment. 
• 
Extract data and analyze the extracted data. 
This paper focuses on identifying the factors for 
successful project management in GSD, and therefore, we 
intended to address the following research question: 
RQ: What factors are essential for the success of project 
management in GSD? 
A. Search Strategy 
The search strategy has been based on following steps: 
• 
Derive 
the 
major 
terms 
from 
Population, 
Intervention, and outcome. 
• 
Find synonyms and similar spellings of the derived 
terms obtained above. 
• 
Verify these terms in various academic databases  
• 
Use Boolean operators (AND operator is used to 
connect major terms. OR operator is used to connect 
synonyms and similar spellings). 
Based on the above search strategy, we have constructed 
the following search terms: 
• 
POPULATION:  Global Software Development 
(GSD) organizations. 
• 
INTERVENTION:  Project management success 
factors.  
• 
OUTCOME 
OF 
RELEVANCE: 
Factors 
for 
successful project management of GSD.  
• 
EXPERIMENTAL 
DESIGN: 
SLRs, 
empirical 
studies, theoretical studies and expert opinions. 
We test our terms in various academic databases and the 
following terms show potential relevance to the topic: 
• 
GLOBAL SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT: Global 
Software Development OR GSD OR distributed 
software 
development 
OR 
multisite 
software 
development OR multi-site software development 
OR global software teams. 
• 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT:  Software Project 
Management 
OR 
Software 
Development 
Management OR Software Process Management. 
• 
FACTORS: Factors OR causes OR agents OR 
elements 
OR 
aspects 
OR 
determinants 
OR 
constituents OR ingredients. 
• 
CONTRIBUTE: Contribute OR furnish OR provide 
OR supply. 
• 
SUCCESS: Success OR advance OR progress OR 
favorable OR effective. 
• 
IMPLEMENT: implement OR apply OR utilize OR 
device OR mechanize. 
• 
PRACTICE: procedure OR form OR method OR 
perform OR exercise. 
The final search string is a combination as follows: 
{Global Software Development OR GSD OR distributed 
software development OR multisite software development 
OR global software teams} AND {Factors OR causes OR 
agents OR elements OR aspects OR determinants OR 
constituents OR ingredients} AND {Contribute OR furnish 
OR provide OR supply} AND {Success OR advance OR 
progress OR favorable OR effective} 
B. Digital Libraries used 
Based on the available access, the following digital 
libraries were used: 
• 
ACM Digital Library.   
• 
IEEE Explore.  
• 
Science Direct.  
• 
Google Scholar  
• 
ISI Web of Science.  
• 
Springer Link.  
286
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

C. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
Since these libraries differ in their search mechanism and 
capability, we tailored our search strings accordingly.  
The following inclusion criteria were used: 
• 
Conference Proceedings, Magazines, and Journals 
published after 1980.  
• 
Papers published in any of the primary or secondary 
resources mentioned previously.  
• 
Studies focus on answering our research question. 
The following exclusion criteria were used: 
• 
Papers published before 1980 are excluded since 
Internet starts after that date.   
• 
Manuscripts written in non-English language are 
excluded.  
• 
Technical reports and white papers are excluded.  
• 
Graduation projects, master theses and PhD 
dissertations are excluded  
• 
Textbooks whether in print or electronic are 
excluded from this systematic review. 
D. Selection Process 
The planned selection process had two parts: an initial 
selection from the search results of papers that could 
plausibly satisfy the selection criteria, based on a reading of 
the title and abstract of the papers, followed by a final 
selection from the initially selected list of papers that satisfy 
the selection criteria, based on a reading of the entire papers. 
In order to reduce the researcher’s bias, we have performed 
the inter-rater reliability test. 
 
TABLE I. QUALITY ASSESSMENT 
Criteria 
Notes 
Are the findings and results clearly stated in the 
paper? 
Yes =1 
No =0 
Is there any empirical evidence on the findings? 
Yes =1 
No =0 
Are the arguments well- presented and justified? 
Yes =1 
No =0 
Is the paper well referenced? 
Yes =1 
No =0 
For any paper to pass the selection process, a quality 
assessment was done. Four quality criteria were prepared as 
shown in Table I. We have finally selected 118 articles, 
which meet our inclusion and quality criteria. 
E. Data extraction 
From the finally selected papers, we have extracted data 
in order to address our research question. The following data 
was extracted from each paper: publication type, authors, 
publisher, publication name, publication date, organization 
size, project size, success factors and best practices. 
IV. 
INITIAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The total number of articles retrieved after using the 
search terms in the five electronic databases are shown in 
Table II. After the initial round of screening by reading the 
title and abstract, 292 studies relating to five different 
electronic databases were selected. After full text readings in 
the second screening, 118 primary studies were finally 
selected. 
We have grouped the papers found through SLR into 
three broad study strategies, which are commonly used in the 
empirical software engineering, as shown in Table III. Most 
of the articles have used survey research method. These 
study strategies were initially identified by one researcher 
during the data extraction process. However, second 
researcher has validated these study strategies. 
 
TABLE II. SEARCH EXECUTION 
Resource 
Total Results 
Initial Selection 
Final 
Selection 
IEEE Xplore 
639 
238 
92 
ACM 
29 
14 
7 
Science 
Direct 
27 
10 
4 
Springer Link 
28 
13 
7 
John Wiley 
31 
17 
8 
Total 
754 
292 
118 
 
TABLE III . STUDY STRATEGIES USED 
Study Type 
Count 
Case Studies 
43 
Systematic Literature Reviews (includes literature reviews) 
23 
Survey (includes interviews, experience reports, Delphi 
studies) 
52 
Total 
118 
 
In Table IV, we show the countries where research was 
conducted for the papers included in our SLR study. Not 
surprisingly, the maximum number of studies (a total of 43) 
was carried out in the United States. This might be due to the 
fact that most of the multinational giants in the United States 
prefer GSD mode of development in collaboration with third 
world countries like India and China.  
On the other hand, many studies have also been carried 
out in eastern countries like India, China, and Pakistan as 
these countries are providing vendor services in GSD 
projects. Other geographic locations include Netherlands, 
Ireland, and United Kingdom, where the communication is 
carried out in English language and culturally these countries 
are more or less similar. 
 
TABLE IV. STUDY COUNTRIES 
Country 
Count 
Country 
Count 
Australia 
4 
New Zealand 
1 
Brazil 
5 
Latvia 
3 
Canada 
2 
Malaysia 
2 
China 
5 
Netherlands 
5 
Singapore 
1 
Croatia 
1 
Finland 
5 
Pakistan 
1 
Germany 
3 
South Africa 
1 
Hawaii 
4 
Spain 
2 
India 
10 
Sweden 
1 
Iran 
1 
Saskatoon 
1 
Ireland 
9 
United Kingdom 
5 
Berlin 
3 
USA 
43 
 
287
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

In total, 18 factors that lead to the success of project 
management in GSD projects have been identified as shown 
in the table V. Initially, we have identified 29 success 
factors. After a few iterations, these factors were reduced to 
18 as many factors had similar meaning. These factors have 
been arranged in decreasing order of their frequencies 
(frequency here is a measure of the number of times each 
factor has been suggested/mentioned in the selected study).  
In our study, the most common project management 
success factor in GSD is the ‘organizational structure’ 
(62%). The organizational structure includes the entire 
dynamics of the GSD is risk-prone and hence require special 
as processes and people. GSD organizations follow different 
structures in order to successfully manage global projects as 
shown in Figure 1 [14]. Figure 1 contains an organizational 
structure to develop and implement a new software tool in 
five countries with all program managers located in the UK. 
The software is developed in three countries (project 
manager is located in the UK and the project team members 
are located in the UK, Singapore and Mexico). The pilot 
implementation 
project 
is 
in 
the 
UK. 
The 
local 
implementation projects in the United Arab Emirates, 
Singapore, Mexico and Canada. In such complex project 
structures, it is important that organizations make strategic 
IT investments by improving enterprise architecture in order 
to ensure that IT infrastructure is integrated and 
standardized to be effectively used in GSD. 
Our results show that organizational structure plays an 
important role in the success of GSD project management. 
Table V shows that more than half of the articles have 
cited “project managers’ skills” as a project management 
success factor in GSD. A highly skilled and experienced 
project manager is essential for monitoring and controlling 
projects [15]. GSD is risk-prone and hence requires special 
set of leadership and decision making skills by the project 
manager or the project management team on the whole. 
Project management team’s prior experience in handling 
GSD projects plays a prominent and imminent role for the 
project success.  
The ‘communication’ (54%) is the third frequently 
mentioned success factor in our study. Since the 
development 
sites 
are 
spread 
across 
geographical 
boundaries, communication between different sites is very 
important. Different studies have described the impact of 
communication on GSD projects: Tsuji et al. [16] concluded 
that communication capabilities have a significant impact on 
the results of GSD projects; Ericksen and Ranganathan [17] 
described the case of one offshore software development 
outsourcing project, which completely failed due to the lack 
of adequate communications. Communication is generally 
of two types, i.e., synchronous and asynchronous. By 
synchronous 
communication, 
we 
mean 
face-to-face 
meetings and discussion with team members and client. As 
GSD is different from a collocated development due to the 
geographically distributed teams, communicating face-to-
face is not possible unless team members travel between 
development sites. Lack of face to face meetings can impact 
on 
other 
project 
management 
challenges 
like 
misunderstanding of requirements, lack of team awareness 
and lack of trust in GSD [7,18]. Hence, GSD relies on other 
synchronous and asynchronous communication channels, 
such 
as 
e-mail, 
voice 
mail, 
instant 
messenger, 
teleconferencing, and web conferencing to promote 
communication.  
TABLE V. LIST OF FACTORS 
Factors 
Freq. 
(n=118) 
% 
Organizational structure 
73 
62 
Project managers’ skills  
69 
58 
Communication 
64 
54 
Requirement specification 
48 
41 
Cultural awareness 
47 
40 
Trust building 
41 
35 
Collaboration  
40 
34 
Work dynamics 
38 
32 
Shared Knowledge 
34 
29 
Team commitment and structure 
31 
26 
Time-zone difference awareness 
27 
23 
Cost assessment 
23 
19 
Roles and responsibilities 
17 
14 
Shared goals 
14 
12 
Customer awareness 
11 
9 
Training 
10 
8 
Time to delivery 
9 
8 
Incremental cycles 
7 
6 
 
Requirements specification factor has been mentioned by 
41% of the articles. We consider requirements specification 
important because it is an official statement of the system 
requirements for customers, end-users, software-developers, 
system test engineers and system maintenance staff. Indeed, 
the requirements document can act as a contract between 
customers and developers. The key to requirements 
specification is to present the idea of a shared 
understanding. In other words, all parties should be able to 
read this document as if it is their own.  
In our study, 40% of the articles have mentioned ‘cultural 
awareness’ as one of the project management success 
factors in GSD projects. This is due to the fact that in a 
global software environment the development sites are 
spread across the globe, which invites cultural challenges 
for the project manager to handle. Due to cultural 
differences it is always difficult for both the client and 
vendor organizations to communicate with each other as the 
native language will, generally, not be the same [19]. 
Messages can be misinterpreted by different cultures, which 
can cause confusion and misunderstandings between 
different teams [20]. Hence, we can deduce that cultural 
awareness can improve other project management success 
factors, such as communication and trust, etc. 
288
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

One of the project management success factors  in GSD 
projects is creating confidence and trust among different 
teams [3,5]. This has been depicted in our SLR study where 
35% of the articles have mentioned this as a project 
management success factor in GSD projects. In general, 
researchers agree that trust refers to an aspect of a 
relationship between client and vendor in which parties are 
willing to establish a relationship that will result in a 
positive desired outcome. It is always difficult to create such 
a relationship unless one is fully familiar with all members 
of the globally distributed team. 
 
 
Figure 1 Local program of global projects [14] 
Collaboration has been mentioned in about 34% of the 
articles. The main reason for this factor is the difference in 
time zone between different development sites [21]. The 
other reasons for this factor include geographical and socio-
cultural distance [22]. This factor can have impact on other 
project management factors in GSD projects such as change 
management activities, trust and conflict management. 
Other challenges are less frequently mentioned as shown 
in Table V. In work dynamics, there is a continuous change 
and progression in the work activities, which may lead to a 
better outcome. This success factor has been mentioned in 
32% of the articles. About 29% of the articles have 
described shared knowledge as a project management 
success factor in GSD projects. This is a very important 
factor as knowledge sharing is essential for any kind of 
project transition [20]. Since staff turnover is generally high 
in offshore locations, improper knowledge sharing can lead 
to project management issues, such as poor quality of 
software artifacts and documents and lack of team 
awareness. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The GSD is a modern software engineering paradigm. 
Many companies are adopting GSD to reduce software 
development 
cost 
and 
improve 
quality. 
Vendor 
organizations are struggling to compete internationally in 
attracting software development projects. Due to the 
increasing trend of GSD we are interested in discovering 
project management challenges in GSD projects. In this 
paper, we identified a list of success factors for project 
management in GSD. Among the 18 identified factors, we 
found that organizational structure, project manager’s skills 
and communication and are the most common success 
factors.  
The second phase of this research involves conducting an 
empirical study with the software industry to validate our 
findings and to provide a set of best practices, which can be 
used to implement these factors. The overarching objective 
of this research work is to develop a global project 
management framework to assist software development 
organizations in measuring and improving their project 
management readiness prior to starting any GSD activities. 
 
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the support 
provided by the Deanship of Scientific Research at King 
Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Saudi Arabia, 
under Research Grant 11-INF2152-04.  
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. U. Khan, M. Niazi, and R. Ahmad, "Factors influencing 
clients in the selection of offshore software outsourcing vendors: 
an exploratory study using a systematic literature review," Journal 
of Systems and Software, vol. 84, no. 4, (2011), pp. 686-699. 
[2] A. A. Bush, A. Tiwana, and H. Tsuji, "An Empirical 
Investigation of the Drivers of Software Outsourcing Decisions in 
Japanese Organizations," Information and Software Technology 
Journal, vol. 50, no. 6, (2008), pp. 499-510. 
[3] M. Ali-Babar, J. Verner, and P. Nguyen, "Establishing and 
maintaining trust in software outsourcing relationships: An 
empirical investigation," The Journal of Systems and Software, 
vol. 80, no. 9, (2007), pp. 1438–1449. 
[4] L. McLaughlin, "An eye on India: Outsourcing debate 
continues.," IEEE Software, vol. 20, no. 3, (2003), pp. 114-117. 
[5] S. U. Khan, M. Niazi, and A. Rashid, "Barriers in the selection 
of offshore software development outsourcing vendors: an 
exploratory study using a systematic literature review," Journal of 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 53, no. 7, (2011), pp. 
693-706. 
[6] D. Damian, L. Izquierdo, J. Singer, and I. Kwan, "Awareness in 
the Wild: Why Communication Breakdowns Occur," International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering, (2007), pp. 81-90. 
289
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[7] M. Niazi, N. Ikram, M. Bano, S. Imtiaz, and S. U. Khan, 
"Establishing trust in offshore software outsourcing relationships: 
an exploratory study using a systematic literature review," IET 
Software, vol. in press for publication, no. (2013), pp.  
[8] A. Stetten, v., D. Beimborn, E. Kuznetsova, and B. Moos, "The 
Impact of Cultural Differences on IT Nearshoring Risks from a 
German Perspective," in Proceedings of the 43rd IEEE Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, (2010), pp. 1-10. 
[9] B. Shao, David, J.S., "The impact of offshore outsourcing on IT 
workers in developed countries.," Communications of the ACM, 
vol. 50, no. 2, (2007), pp. 89 - 94. 
[10] L. Mary, and R. Joseph, "Effects of offshore outsourcing of 
information technology work on client project management," 
Strategic Outsourcing: An International Journal, vol. 2, no. 1, 
(2009), pp. 4-26. 
[11] N. B. Moe, D. Smite, and G. K. Hanssen, "From Offshore 
Outsourcing to Offshore Insourcing: Three Stories," IEEE Seventh 
International Conference on Global Software Engineering 
(ICGSE), (2012), pp. 1-10. 
[12] D. Smite, C. Wohlin, T. Gorscheck, and R. Feldt, "Empirical 
evidence in global software engineering: a systematic review," 
Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 15, no. 1, (2010), pp. 91-118. 
[13] B. Kitchenham, and C. Charters, Guidelines for performing 
Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering. Keele 
University and Durham University Joint Report - EBSE 2007-001, 
EBSE 2007-001 (2007). 
[14] J. Binder, Global project management – communication, 
collaboration and management across borders. Gower.(2010). 
[15] S. U. Khan, M. Niazi, and R. Ahmed, "An empirical 
investigation of success factors for offshore software development 
outsourcing vendors," IET Software, vol. 6, no. 1, (2012), pp. 1-15. 
[16] H. Tsuji, A. Sakurai, K. Yoshida, A. Tiwana, and A. Bush, 
"Questionnaire-Based Risk Assessment Scheme for Japanese 
Offshore Software Outsourcing," SEAFOOD07, Springer, (2007), 
pp. 114-127. 
[17] J. M. Ericksen, and C. Ranganathan, "Project Management 
Capabilities: 
Key 
to 
Application 
Development 
Offshore 
Outsourcing," IEEE 39th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, (2006), pp. 199b. 
[18] G. Aranda, N., A. Vizcaíno, and M. Piattini, "A framework to 
improve communication during the requirements elicitation 
process in GSD projects," Requirements engineering, vol. 15, no. 
4, (2010), pp. 397-417. 
[19] H. Christiansen, Munkebo, "Meeting the challenge of 
communication in offshore software development," Software 
Engineering 
Approaches 
for 
Offshore 
and 
Outsourced 
Development. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4716, no. 
(2007), pp. 19-26. 
[20] I. Musio, "IBM Industry Practice: Challenges in Offshore 
Software Development from a Global Delivery Center," Software 
Engineering 
Approaches 
for 
Offshore 
and 
Outsourced 
Development. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, 
vol. 35, no. (2009), pp. 4-13. 
[21] A. Begel, and N. Nagappan, "Global Software Development: 
Who Does It?," IEEE International Conference on Global Software 
Engineering, (2008), pp. 195,199. 
[22] P. Bannerman, E. Hossain, and R. Jeffery, " Scrum Practice 
Mitigation of Global Software Development Coordination 
Challenges: A Distinctive Advantage?," 45th IEEE  International 
Conference on System Science (HICSS), (2012), pp. 5309 - 5318. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

