Revisiting the Requirements Communication Problem 
from a Knowledge Management Perspective 
 
Hermann Kaindl and Lukas Pilat 
Institute of Computer Technology 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
kaindl@ict.tuwien.ac.at, lukas.pilat@student.tuwien.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract—The communication problem between stakeholders in 
requirements engineering is well known. It is typically attributed 
to stakeholders having different background and domain knowl-
edge and, therefore, using different “languages”. However, even 
when this is not the case, there is an inherent problem in such 
communication. In order to explain it, we revisit the require-
ments communication problem from a knowledge management 
perspective. 
Keywords-requirements engineering; communication problem; 
knowledge management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
Gathering requirements from stakeholders involves com-
munication, which may be modeled via communicative acts as 
in [3]. However, what is communicated cannot be the re-
quirements per se, but some representations of them [4]. So, it 
is important to understand the consequences of the transfer and 
transformations involved. 
Knowledge transfer and transformation are central concepts 
of knowledge management (KM) in the context of knowledge 
sharing in organizations [1]. They are based on the distinction 
between tacit knowledge and explicit knowledge, which leads 
to the spiral of knowledge [5]. In our own previous work [6], 
we have adopted this concept in form of a spiral of require-
ments knowledge. We have not yet elaborated there, however, 
on the specific facet of the communication problem related to 
knowledge transformation. 
Since the stakeholders (or their representatives) as well as 
the requirements engineers are humans, the transfer of knowl-
edge can take place either directly through face-to-face ex-
change using human communication, or through the intermedi-
ary of an artifact representing the knowledge to be transferred 
(e.g., a document). Neither the human communication nor the 
representation in form of an artifact can transmit the knowledge 
without communication error and unambiguously. 
This results from the fact that every transfer of knowledge 
is inherently bound to a knowledge transformation. The knowl-
edge that a stakeholder has in his mind is typically transformed 
into an explicit representation in natural language and non-
verbal channels of human communication during direct interac-
tion. The knowledge of a knowledge holder is also transformed 
when he codifies it into an artifact, possibly using a formal 
language with a certain expressiveness. Additionally, the 
receiver of the transferred knowledge transforms codified 
knowledge through his interpretation of the given representa-
tion, which is again error-prone when using natural language 
due to its inherent ambiguity. 
So, in the course of requirements knowledge transfer 
between stakeholders and requirements engineers, transforma-
tion of knowledge occurs and thus errors are creeping in. When 
the stakeholders speak a different “language,” then the 
communication problem is certainly reinforced. Our point is, 
however, that the problem is inherent and exists also if this was 
not the case. 
II. 
THE REQUIREMENTS COMMUNICATION PROBLEM FROM 
A KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE 
In order to explain this inherent requirements communica-
tion problem from a KM perspective, let us assume that the 
stakeholders share the essential domain knowledge and 
“language”. Still, they have to use some language to express 
and represent requirements in the course of the corresponding 
knowledge transfer. We make the following strict distinction 
here, being aware that various combinations in semi-formal 
languages exist as well: 
 Natural language: This is the most widespread kind of 
language in practical use for communicating about 
requirements. It is well known that any natural language 
is inherently ambiguous. It is equally important to know 
that also the expressiveness of any natural language is 
inherently limited. Wittgenstein coined an excellent 
example: the sound of a clarinet can be easily recog-
nized from having heard it before, but a description of 
that very sound in natural language is very hard to give. 
 Formal language: A truly formal language based on 
mathematical axioms is not ambiguous, but it may still 
be wrongly interpreted by humans for various reasons. 
Such a language is much more restricted in terms of 
expressiveness than a natural language. So, even more 
can be “lost” when a requirement is represented in a 
formal language. 
Based on that, let us explain this inherent requirements 
communication problem from a KM perspective in more detail 
595
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

using Figure 1. A stakeholder is the initial holder of some 
requirements knowledge. It has been recognized that the 
knowledge of stakeholders is mostly tacit [2] (for the notion of 
tacit knowledge in KM see Nonaka [5], e.g.: “Tacit knowledge 
is highly personal. It is hard to formalize and, therefore, diffi-
cult to communicate to others.”). So, there is tacit knowledge 
about requirements in the stakeholder’s mind. In the course of 
requirements elicitation, he tries to communicate his require-
ments knowledge to the requirements engineer. As indicated 
above, this can be viewed as a knowledge transfer via 
communicative acts as in [3]. 
In this course, tacit requirements knowledge needs to be 
made explicit, i.e., a knowledge transformation occurs. Usu-
ally, the stakeholder will use some natural language. So, what 
is actually communicated is both restricted through the 
expressiveness of the particular natural language used and 
inherently ambiguous. When the requirements engineer 
attempts to understand the requirement, he has to internalize 
what is communicated to him explicitly and combine it with his 
own tacit knowledge. Since the representation in natural 
language is inherently ambiguous, an error may be induced. If, 
instead, a formal language is used for this communication, its 
expressiveness may cause a major difference between the 
requirements knowledge held by the stakeholder and the one 
internalized by the requirements engineer. 
Based on already changed requirements knowledge as 
received and internalized from several stakeholders, the 
requirements engineer will have to prepare a requirements 
specification, i.e., an explicit representation of the knowledge 
that he acquired about the requirements. (Of course, he may 
intentionally change something, in order to figure out the needs 
from mere wishes of the stakeholders, but this is yet another 
issue beyond the scope of this paper.) Again, depending on the 
(“mix” of) languages used, the same problems arise as 
explained above, so that even more errors creep in. 
This is an inherent difficulty when doing requirements, 
addressed by proceeding in an iterative manner. The initial 
knowledge holder can check his knowledge against the knowl-
edge resulting in the specification. This necessitates that he 
internalizes the knowledge codified within the specification, 
and this is, again, error-prone. 
Alternatively, a stakeholder may directly represent his 
requirements knowledge in the specification. This approach 
avoids the problems through the internalization by the require-
ments engineer, but it still involves the problems of making 
tacit requirements knowledge explicit. Of course, this approach 
entails other problems as well, especially when several stake-
holders would simply put a requirements specification together, 
leading to inconsistencies and even conflicts in the specifica-
tion. 
Finally, it should be noted that tacit knowledge about 
requirements can also be transferred between the stakeholder 
and the requirements engineer through socialization [6]. As 
this does not explicitly involve communicative acts, it is be-
yond the scope of this paper. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we revisit the requirements communication 
problem from a KM perspective. In this way, we explain a 
facet of this problem that appears to have attracted less atten-
tion. Still, it poses an inherent issue when doing requirements. 
With an improved understanding of this issue, it may be possi-
ble to reduce the resulting errors in requirements specifications. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. H. Davenport, and L. Prusak, Working knowledge: how organizations 
manage what they know. Harvard Business School Press, 2000. 
[2] 
R. Gacitua, L. Ma, B. Nuseibeh, P. Piwek, A. N. de Roeck, M. 
Rouncefield, P. Sawyer, A. Willis, and H. Yang, “Making Tacit 
Requirements Explicit”, in Proceedings of the Second Int Managing 
Requirements Knowledge (MARK) Workshop, 40–44, 2009. 
[3] 
I. J. Jureta, J. Mylopoulos, and S. Faulkner, “Revisiting the Core 
Ontology and Problem in Requirements Engineering”, in Proceedings of 
the 16th IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference 
(RE’08), 71–80, Sept. 2008. 
[4] 
H. Kaindl, and D. Svetinovic, “On confusion between requirements and 
their representations”, Requirements Engineering, Springer London, vol. 
15, 307–311, 2010. 
[5] 
I. Nonaka, The knowledge-creating company. Harvard Business Review, 
1991. 
[6] 
L. Pilat, and H. Kaindl, “A Knowledge Management Perspective of 
Requirements Engineering”, in Proceedings of the Fifth IEEE 
International Conference on Research Challenges in Information 
Science (RCIS’11), 48–59, May 2011. 
Figure 1. Transfer, Transformation and Representation of Requirements Knowledge 
596
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

