Engineering IoT-based Software Systems for
Forestry: A Case Study
Marko J¨antti
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
P.O.B. 1627, 70211, Kuopio, Finland
Email: marko.jantti@uef.fi
Markus Aho
UEF Business School
University of Eastern Finland
Yliopistokatu 2, 80100 Joensuu, Finland
Email: markus.aho@uef.fi
Markus Aho
Funlus Oy
Sepontie 15, 73300 Nilsi¨a, Finland
Email: markus.aho@funlus.fi
Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) is a rapidly growing
technology that offers huge possibilities for optimizing processes
and increasing productivity in various domains. The IoT technol-
ogy connects software services, devices, various types of sensors,
and machines to the internet and enables real-time data collection,
analysis and sharing. However, ensuring the quality of the IoT
is a complex challenge for software engineers and requires new
development skills, as well as coordination of third party service
providers. In this case study, we use embedded single case design
with two Internet of Things experiments to study the quality
factors in IoT system implementation. The research problem of
this study is: How quality aspects should be taken into account
while designing and implementing IoT-based software systems
for forestry inventory management? The main contribution of
this paper is to present lessons learnt from two experiments
with different monitoring targets: liquid level monitoring and
continuous mass monitoring of oil canister pallets. Both IoT
experiments were performed in facilities of the second largest
forest harvesting company in Finland.
Keywords—Internet of Things; software system; software engi-
neer; sensor; ICT quality.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a fast-growing network
of interconnected devices that exchange data and enable a
wide range of applications. From smart homes and cities to
industrial automation and intelligent machinery, the IoT has the
potential to transform our lives, workplaces, communication
and processes. However, implementing IoT systems is not a
straightforward task even for experienced software engineers.
Building IoT-based software systems of high quality requires
careful planning and integration of various technologies, de-
vices, services and sensors together.
Especially for forestry domain where actors still operate
with traditional non-digital practices, IoT technology provides
numerous opportunities for improvement and ways to improve
productivity and increase level of automation. While forest
machines involve high tech components, such as machine
vision, robotics and intelligent sensors, the support and mainte-
nance of forest machines including orders for liquids and other
supplies, includes a large number of manual work activities.
Previous studies on using Internet of Things in forestry
domain have mainly focused on monitoring forest assets [1],
creating IoT-based systems for forest environment monitoring
systems [2], improving the safety of forestry workers [3],
establishing IoT-enabled plantation monitoring systems [4]
and studying IoT implementation challenges in experiments
conducted in rural areas [5]. However, surprisingly few of
these studies focus on discussing how to ensure quality in
IoT systems implementation. Identification of these quality
aspects would help IoT engineers and developers to make
better informed decisions on selecting IoT sensor components,
services and platforms. Information on IoT quality aspects
would also help IoT customers, consultants and coordinators
of IoT projects to produce better quality and more accurate
invitations for tender and make acquisition of IoT systems
smoother.
There are several quality factors that software engineers
in IoT projects should take into account. One of the most
important quality aspects of the IoT is reliability. Reliability
means that various IoT devices, sensors, software services and
platforms must work together seamlessly to deliver accurate
and timely data. In Finland, poor network coverage is a real
challenge [6], especially in eastern and northern parts of
Finland. Network failures can lead to significant consequences,
such as loss of data, severe information security breaches,
and unavailability of systems. Thus, it is critical to ensure
that all IoT components are reliable and no weak links shall
exist in the infrastructure. Additionally, when an IoT service
is running in the operation phase, the service provider should
provide frequent reports on the service quality which is part
of a broader service-oriented philosophy [7].
Information security is another important quality aspect
related to the IoT technology. While increasing amount of
data is exchanged over the internet, security breaches have
become a significant concern in Internet of Things projects.
Cyberattacks may be performed even through very standard
IT components, such as web cameras [8].
Fortunately, large cloud service providers have addressed
security concerns of IoT, established security controls by using
IT governance frameworks, such as COBIT [9], created secu-
rity roadmaps and cybersecurity reference architectures [10]
and presented mechanisms for ensuring secure access control,
authentication of various types of devices and detecting poten-
tial security vulnerabilities and providing secure connections
from sensors to IoT cloud services. Cybersecurity plays a very
important role for IoT systems that can control critical systems
or services, such as heating, ventilation, lighting and access
control in smart buildings [11].
The results of this article are aimed at IoT system develop-
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-098-8
ICSEA 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

ers, companies in IoT customer role, Internet of Things consul-
tancy companies and persons responsible for coordinating IoT
projects to increase their awareness of quality aspects related to
IoT implementations in Finland, especially in forestry sector.
In Section 2, research methodology of the study is pre-
sented. In Section 3, case study results are presented. Section 4
is the analysis and finally, the conclusions are given in Section
5.
II.
RESEARCH PROBLEM & METHODOLOGY
This study aimed at answering the following research
problem: How quality aspects should be taken into account
while designing and implementing IoT-based software systems
for forestry? The forestry domain was selected because it has
a large financial impact in Finland. We admit that oil and gas
industries may be forerunners in IoT but they play a very minor
role in Finland compared to forest industry. In this study, we
utilized a case study research method to answer the research
problem with a single case organization (Motoajo Oy, a forest
machine operator from Finland) with an embedded structure
involving two IoT experiments. The research problem was
divided into following three research questions:
•
What types of IoT monitoring needs does a forest
machine operator company have?
•
How quality attributes are visible in building IoT
solutions?
•
How IoT monitoring shall support forest operations?
The case study can be defined as ”an empirical inquiry that
investigates a contemporary phenomenon within its real-life
context” [12]. The real life context refers to daily operations
management of a forest machine operator company. Figure 1
shows the context of this study.
Fig. 1.
The context of the case study.
A. Case Organization
Our target organization Motoajo Oy (SME) is a forestry
contractor company located in Nurmes, Eastern Finland. The
company is Finland’s second largest harvesting company.
Motoajo operates as a family-owned company with 51 forest
machines and 81 employees. Additionally, the company has
in possession 3 Volvo transport trucks, 2 Volvo excavators,
1 wheel loader, 5 MB Sprinter light trucks and 64 Pick-up
trucks. Regarding the staff, there are 35 harvester operators,
28 forwarder operators, 2 transport truck drivers, 3 excavator
operators, 5 mechanics and 8 management staff. Reliable
inventory management and order management of liquids and
other supplies for forest machines are critical business func-
tions for Motoajo. Forest machines cannot operate without
these liquids and supplies and even short operational outages
may cause remarkable costs for the company.
During the case study, the research team including the
authors of this paper collaborated with various Motoajo em-
ployees but especially foreman, CEO, financial administrator
and development manager. The collaboration occurred in joint
digital experiment workshops, work meetings on preparing the
experiment handbook, experiment status reporting meetings
(Motoajo, AIKA DIH, DIH-World coordinator), joint webi-
nars and seminars (2 DIH community days, 2 other regional
dissemination events on digital transformation).
Digital Innovation Hubs (DIH) [13] are one-stop shops that
help companies, especially SMEs and start-ups become more
competitive with regard to their business/production processes,
products or services using digital technologies. The funding
for the first IoT case was received from the 1st call of
experiments of DIH-World project (funded by Horizon 2020).
The idea for the second IoT case was identified in the continual
improvement workshop that was organized at the end of the
first IoT case.
B. Data Collection Methods
Qualitative data for this case study were collected by using
multiple sources of evidence between August 2021 - May
2023. Most of the data were captured while visiting Motoajo’s
facilities (main storage in Nurmes, Finland as well as remote
storage areas). The following sources of evidence were used:
•
Documentation: IoT device specification for Tekelek
tank alert sensor (ultrasonic), Enless Wireless Trans-
mitter product specification, supporting documentation
sent by IoT providers during the bidding process of
weight monitoring system, safety instruction docu-
mentation of diesel exhaust fluid and log marking
colour.
•
Archival records: Data records (JSON) from the IoT
provider, online forms for truck drivers and forest
machine operators (triggered by QR codes in contain-
ers), LoraWAN data conversion Excel sheet by Enless
Wireless.
•
Interviews/discussions: Online meeting discussions
with 9 Internet of Things providers, live discussions
in Solver X reverse pitching event in April 19th, 2023,
interviews with CEO of Motoajo, project discussions
during work meetings with foreman of Motoajo, phone
discussions with CEO.
•
Participative observation: digital experiment work
meetings, several field visits to case organization’s
facilities, such as the main storage area, the remote
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-098-8
ICSEA 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

storage area, a logging site in Nurmes, Finland; partic-
ipative observation in DIH webinars and dissemination
meetings related to Green and Digital Forest Service
Management experiment.
•
Physical artifacts: Artifacts related to case 1 included
Tekelek ultrasonic sensor module, various types of
liquid containers, such as a portable fuel container,
a fungicide container, plastic Intermediate Bulk Con-
tainers (IBC) containing log marking colour and diesel
exhaust fluid. Artifacts related to case 2 included oil
canister pallet, industrial scale PCE RS 2000 by PCE
Instruments and Enless Wireless Analog Transmitter.
•
Direct observations: Monitoring forest machine oper-
ational work in logging site (January 11th, 2022)
C. Data Analysis
Data analysis of this study was performed by case compar-
ison technique with two units of analysis. The case comparison
analysis technique [14] is a common way to compare and
analyze data from multiple cases. Our units of analysis were
two different types of Internet of Things experiments. The first
experiment focused on liquid level monitoring and the second
experiment on weight monitoring.
During the article writing period, the second experiment
was still ongoing. The analysis was performed by two re-
searchers that are also authors of this paper. The case compar-
ison was based on predefined categories (=patterns) describing
the nature and settings of experiments and reflecting the quality
aspects of IoT.
III.
RESULTS OF THE STUDY: ENGINEERING IOT-BASED
SOFTWARE SYSTEM FOR FORESTRY
The results of this exploratory case study are presented in
this section as case narratives with Situation, Task, Action,
Results (STAR) approach. The STAR approach includes four
steps: 1) Situation describing the context within the IoT de-
velopment was performed, 2) Tasks describing responsibilities
or tasks to be done in that particular situation, 3) Action
describing how the task was completed or how the challenge
was resolved, and 4) Results describing the outcomes or results
generated by the action.
A. Situation
Case A: According to the data we received from our
site visits and conversations with the case organization, we
noticed that the process for refilling and retrieving liquids
from containers is mostly done manually. Additionally, we
observed that the online form is not consistently used by truck
drivers and forest machine drivers. The primary issue is that
the company lacks an accurate view of their forestry liquid
inventories, which can lead to a scenario where drivers of forest
machines do not receive the necessary liquids they require.
Motoajo and Digital Innovation Hub AIKA Ecosystem applied
and received funding for the digital transformation initiative
from DIH-WORLD project around 90 Keur.
Case B: The idea for Case B, continuous mass measure-
ment using sensor technology, was received in the end of
Case A when the research team asked case organization what
would be next potential improvement targets for IoT based
monitoring. A joint research consortium was established to
find solutions for the problem. The first research organization
provided expertise on metrology (purchasing and calibration of
the scale) and the second research organization took care of
designing cloud services. No external regional or international
funding was related to this experiment.
B. Task
Case A: The EU funding for the experiment enabled the
research consortium to design, implement, test and validate
the monitoring solution. When the experiments started, no
sensors were used for liquid level monitoring and the company
did not have sensor platform in use. Monitoring consumption
was based on manual checks and required traveling to remote
sites frequently (1-2 monthly visits). The expected benefits
involved, first, increased productivity and quality of operations
for a forest machine operator due to decreased number of
interruptions in production. Significant costs are caused if a
forest machine cannot operate due to lack of liquids; in worst
case scenario, salaries need to be paid to forest machine drivers
also when a machine does not operate and fixed costs, such as
insurance fees are still running. Second, IoT based monitoring
reduces costs associated to travelling to remote storage areas
due to checking whether there is sufficient amount of liquids
available.
Third, monitoring of containers provides more accurate and
timely information on inventory in containers through real-
time consumption monitoring. Fourth, the company can order
refilling of containers proactively and organize pick up for
waste from storage areas. Fifth, our goal was also to increase
operational safety related to dealing with liquids (fungicide,
AdBlue, fuel) that may also lead to decreased workload for
forest machine drivers. Finally, more automated process will
decrease the number of contact requests from employees to
work managers due to unclear or missing liquids-related work
instructions.
Case B: The main task in case B was to design a continuous
mass measurement system using smart sensors and state of
the art cloud services. Our goal was to place an industrial
class ”scale” under the standard IBC container to continuously
measure the mass of the liquid container. The public LoraWAN
was selected as the data network solution because the research
team had positive experiences from the first pilot.
The planned work tasks included research work to design
the solution and select the components, make a build or buy
decision, test and experiment the selected solution, and identify
constraints in Motoajo’s warehouse environment.
C. Action
Case A: The main purpose of the action was to plan,
design, implement, test and validate the IoT based monitoring
system for forestry liquids including tank level sensors and
install sensor modules into plastic IBC containers containing
log marking colour and Diesel Exhaust Fluid. The following
list contains action items from the beginning to the end of the
experiment:
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-098-8
ICSEA 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

•
Kick off for the experiment (objectives and deliver-
ables of the experiment presented and discussed, SME
and DIH plan the work to the Trial Handbook)
•
Capturing user stories for the system
•
Technical specification (technical features of the mo-
bile application, technical details of IoT sensors and
dashboard)
•
Development (development of mobile, IoT dashboard,
configuring and coding)
•
User Interface design (User interface design of the
mobile app, IoT dashboard design)
•
User feedback (collect information from forest ma-
chine drivers and work managers, implementation of
corrections and changes)
•
Testing (sensor testing, data network and integration
testing, testing related to alerts, agile test report)
•
Deployment (deploy solution for diesel exhaust fluid
and marking colour container )
•
User training (train related user groups)
•
Experiment closure meeting (conduct closure meeting,
reflect to the experiment objectives, capture lessons
learnt, plan further dissemination and exploitation
opportunities)
Case B: The main purpose of the action was to imple-
ment a continuous mass measurement system. However, the
monitoring target was changed to the oil canister pallet that is
delivered to the warehouse or a remote storage and the goal
was to find out when there are only few canisters (200 kg/1000
kg) left. The following list contains action items for the case
B:
•
Study the required components for the system (scale,
IoT services, signal transmitter, etc.)
•
Purchase and integrate selected hardware components
(PCE RS 2000, Enless Wireless Signal Transmitter)
•
Conduct meetings with AWS specialists to identify
potential ways to implement the system
•
Sign up an Open Cloud Research Environment Con-
tract to make purchase of services smoother (however,
we decided not to wait this contract to be signed)
•
Establish and test the connection between the signal
transmitter and Digita IoT network (this part went
successfully)
•
Participate in Solver X reverse pitching event in
Helsinki, Finland to identify potential IoT providers
for the cloud system
•
Negotiate with IoT providers and initiate a public
bidding process on implement the system in our own
AWS subscription (we have reached this step)
•
Start implementation (our next step)
D. Results: Case A
Case A: The experiment was considered successful in the
case organization. As the results of Case A, the company
has now an IoT-based monitoring system for liquid containers
(Diesel Exhaust Fluid, log marking colour) that enables moni-
toring liquids in remote storage areas. The monitoring system
includes a mobile application that machine drivers use when
they pick up supplies and liquids from storage areas. Through
the mobile application work managers are able to monitor
containers and see the level of liquids. The system also enables
sending alerts when most of the content in liquid containers has
been consumed. Three sensor modules were installed during
the experiment and according to our knowledge, the company
has ordered more similar sensor modules from the IoT sensor
provider in 2023.
Case B: As main results of Case B, we defined a system ar-
chitecture for the continuous mass measurement system. Figure
2 shows the architecture with key system components. Based
Fig. 2.
The IoT sensor architecture.
on discussions with customer, data transmission frequency
can be approximately one hour and the test site would be in
Nurmes, Eastern Finland in Motoajo’s main storage area. Our
aim was to establish a system where sensor data is directed
to a cost-effective cloud-based IoT environment where data
is stored and a simple graph (for example, generated by open
source visualization tools) is constructed. By implementing the
system to our own AWS premises, we try to avoid potential
vendor lock-in. The scale shall be placed on the warehouse
floor and the system allows lifting goods onto the scale with
a forklift. The prototype of the system is almost ready (at the
time of submitting this paper) and we are preparing to deliver
the system to the customer’s storage facilities.
IV.
ANALYSIS
The data analysis for the study was performed by case
comparison technique. The results of this exploratory case
study are presented in this section according to three research
questions: 1) What types of IoT monitoring needs does a forest
machine operator company have?, 2) how quality attributes
are visible in building IoT solutions for forestry domain? and
3) how IoT-related challenges and barriers can be solved?.
In Table 1, analysis of case study results reflecting the three
research questions of the study is presented.
The following lessons learnt can be identified based on our
cases:
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-098-8
ICSEA 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE I.
ANALYSIS OF THE CASE STUDY WITH TWO IOT
EXPERIMENTS AS UNITS OF ANALYSIS
Category
Case A
Monitoring needs
Monitoring liquid containers
Proactive orders for liquids
Sending alerts on low levels
Ordering refilling containers in time
Quality
Accurate view on liquid level
Data conversion on distance to percent
Data frequency 6 hours
Install sensor to cap of container
Calibration of sensors
Benefits
Check liquid levels remotely
Setting alerts on critical liquid levels
Proactive way to ensure availab. of liquids
Provides data on liquid consumption trends
May reveal container leaks
Category
Case B
Monitoring needs
Contin. mass monitoring
Proactive orders for supplies: oil canisters
Sending alerts on low levels
Oil orders in time
Quality
Number of canisters
4-20 mA to kg
Data frequency 1 hours
Scale under pallet
Calibration of scale
Benefits
Number of oil canisters
Setting alerts on only few oil canisters left
Enables monitoring any tangible items
Consumption of oil canisters
May detect that items are stolen
Lesson 1: Security is a top priority quality aspect: As IoT
devices are connected to the internet, they are prone to cyber
attacks. It is important to ensure that security is top priority
when designing and implementing IoT solutions. In our cases,
data does not control anything and IoT platform was protected
by usernames and passwords. Data was sent from sensors
to IoT platform and further to mobile app. The mobile app
showing virtual version of the container forces users to use
strong passwords.
Lesson 2: Scalability is crucial: IoT solutions may need
to handle large amounts of data and devices. It is important
to design solutions that can scale to accommodate growth.
Regarding case A, our mobile app Alfa was running in AWS
cloud to ensure scalability. In case B, we also aim at using
scalable cloud services instead of third party IoT platforms to
ensure scalability of the system.
Lesson 3: Interoperability is key: IoT devices and platforms
need to be able to communicate with each other seamlessly.
It is important to ensure that devices and platforms are in-
teroperable and can work together. Data in our case A was
delivered by using JSON, standard communication protocol. It
is very likely that case B shall be using the JSON or the MQTT
protocol. We observed in case A that data transmission from
sensors was conducted every 6th hour (the goal was to transmit
data on hourly basis). In case B, we put data transmission
frequency clearly to Invitation for tender document.
Lesson 4: Maintenance is important: IoT devices need
to be maintained and updated regularly to ensure they are
functioning properly and securely. Battery life is impacted by
cold weather. Offers from IoT providers could have clearlier
statements on battery life and maintenance of IoT devices.
Most of the providers are offering their own platform instead
of implementing IoT in customer’s premises.
Lesson 5: Data management is critical: IoT devices gener-
ate large amounts of data. It is important to have proper data
management and analytics tools in place to make sense of this
data. Third party IoT platform was responsible for receiving
data from Digita LoraWAN network. Data was further stored
in AWS MySQL database. The application server of Alfa
application has access only to database server that increases
security of data management.
Lesson 6: User experience is important: IoT solutions
should be designed with the end user in mind. The user
interface should be intuitive and easy to use. In the mobile
application Alfa, visualization of container worked well. We
aimed at listening users carefully to address their needs.
The online form related to QR codes might need further
improvement and clarification.
According to our observations, there are other factors
that might also have effects on IoT system implementations
in Finland: First, if sensors are placed outdoors, there is
significant temperature variation (in extreme cases +35 C - -40
C) between summer and winter seasons in Finland. Second, a
large part of forestry operations are performed in remote forest
destinations, often without official street addresses. This might
cause challenges in producing reliable location data.
Third, there is only one public LoraWAN network provider
Digita in Finland. This should be taken into account while
software engineers build LoraWAN-based systems in Finland.
Creating contracts may take time and thus should not be
ignored while planning IoT project schedules. Fourth, Finland
is a sparsely populated country. Long distances mean a lot
of traveling and eliminating unnecessary traveling creates a
good business case for IoT implementation projects. Finding
a profitable and viable business case for IoT is often a
challenging task.
Fifth, IoT technology also has societal impacts on people
living in rural areas of Finland. Through IoT based monitoring
[15], one can monitor elderly people, detect potential accidents
and incidents both outdoors and indoors or locate injured
forestry workers or trigger alerts.
Finally, despite the high level of digitalization, the lack of
skilled workforce is a challenge for many cities. This means
unavailability of software engineering talents that are able to
design cloud-based IoT systems and take care of advanced
privacy and security requirements.
V.
CONCLUSION
This study aimed at answering the research problem: How
quality aspects should be taken into account while designing
and implementing IoT-based software systems for forestry
inventory management? The main contribution of this paper is
to present lessons learnt from two experiments with different
monitoring targets: liquid level monitoring and continuous
mass monitoring of oil canister pallets. Both IoT experiments
were performed in facilities of the second largest forest har-
vesting company in Finland.
There were three research questions in the study. Regarding
the first research question, we observed various IoT monitoring
needs in the forest machine operator, such as various types and
sizes of containers (fuel containers, water containers, oil con-
tainers, fungicide containers, diesel exhaust fluid containers,
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-098-8
ICSEA 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

marking colour containers). However, in addition to liquids
there are several tangible supplies that company orders on
frequent basis, such as grease tubes, oil filters, oil canister
pallets, chain blades and chains. These tangible supplies need
another type of monitoring system that we aimed at to design
in the second IoT case.
Concerning the second research question, how quality
attributes are visible in building IoT solutions, we highlighted
activities that were specific to IoT-based digital transformation,
such as selecting right sensor and data network solution,
performing data conversion, defining data storage mechanism
for IoT data, as well as installing the sensor modules. All of
these require work efforts.
Finally, related to the third research question, we studied
how IoT monitoring shall support forest operations. First of all,
IoT-based monitoring allows proactive approach on ordering
both liquids and supplies. The monitoring system enables
sending alerts on low inventory levels, as well as showing
visualization as graphs or tables based on the ingested IoT data.
In the future, this data can be used and analyzed to optimize
the ordering process based on consumption patterns.
The following limitations are related to this study: There
are certain limitations related to the case study research
method. First, case study does not allow the generalization
of results to other organisations but we can use our results to
extend the theory related to planning, designing and building
realtime IoT-based systems. Second, Case B is still ongoing
and we have no detailed information how the selected IoT
provided has done the actual implementation in AWS cloud.
However, the prototype is close to delivery to the customer site.
Third, more staff from user side could have been interviewed to
receive more feedback on improved liquids ordering process.
Further research could focus on ICT quality aspects in cloud-
based Internet of Things projects, for example, in Amazon Web
Services projects or Azure IoT implementations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the case organization for valuable
collaboration during the study and DigiCenterNS DIH and
AIKA Ecosystem DIH for research data collection. Digi-
CenterNS was supported by Digiteknologian TKI-ymparist¨o
project A74338 (ERDF, Regional Council of Pohjois-Savo).
AIKA Arctic Data Intelligence and Supercomputing Ecosys-
tem in Kainuu project (A78688) is funded by European
Regional Development Fund and Regional Council of Kainuu.
The IoT-based liquid level monitoring case was created in DIH
World experiment co-funded by the Horizon 2020 Framework
Programme of the European Union under grant agreement no
952176.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Gabrys, “Smart forests and data practices: From the internet of trees
to planetary governance,” Big Data & Society, vol. 7, no. 1-10, pp.
362–377, 2020.
[2]
S. K. Mohammed, S. M. Kamruzzaman, A. Ahmed, A. Hoque, and
F. Shabnam, “Design and implementation of an iot based forest environ-
ment monitoring system,” in 2019 IEEE 5th International Conference
on Computer and Communications (ICCC), 2019, pp. 2152–2156.
[3]
A. Hinze, J. Bowen, and J. K¨onig, “Wearable technology for hazardous
remote environments: Smart shirt and rugged iot network for forestry
worker health,” Smart Health, vol. 23, p. 100225, 12 2021.
[4]
Y. Wang, J. Song, X. Liu, S. Jiang, and Y. Liu, “Plantation monitoring
system based on internet of things,” in 2013 IEEE International Con-
ference on Green Computing and Communications and IEEE Internet
of Things and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing, 2013, pp.
366–369.
[5]
A. Ferrari, M. Bacco, K. Gaber, A. Jedlitschka, S. Hess, J. Kaipainen,
P. Koltsida, E. Toli, and G. Brunori, “Drivers, barriers and impacts of
digitalisation in rural areas from the viewpoint of experts,” Information
and Software Technology, vol. 145, p. 106816, May 2022.
[6]
M. J¨antti and M. Aho, “Improving the quality of ict and forestry service
processes with digital service management approach: A case study
on forestry liquids,” in Quality of Information and Communications
Technology, A. Vallecillo, J. Visser, and R. P´erez-Castillo, Eds. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 175–189.
[7]
A. Cater-Steel, “It service departments struggle to adopt a service-
oriented philosophy,” International Journal of Information Systems in
the Service Sector, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 69–77, 2009.
[8]
Y. Seralathan, T. T. Oh, S. Jadhav, J. Jonathan Myers, P. J. Jeong,
Y. H. Kim, and J. N. Kim, “Iot security vulnerability: A case study of
a web camera,” in 2018 20th International Conference on Advanced
Communication Technology (ICACT), 2018, pp. 172–177.
[9]
COBIT5, Control Objectives for Information and related Technology:
COBIT 5: Enabling Processes.
ISACA, 2012.
[10]
A. Kudrati, C. Peiris, and B. Pillai, Microsoft Cybersecurity Reference
Architecture and Capability Map, 2022, pp. 183–240.
[11]
J. Mace, C. Morisset, K. Pierce, C. Gamble, C. Maple, and J. Fitzgerald,
“A multi-modelling based approach to assessing the security of smart
buildings,” in Living in the Internet of Things: Cybersecurity of the IoT
- 2018, 2018, pp. 1–10.
[12]
R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods, Fourth edition.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publishing, 2009.
[13]
A. Kalpaka, J. Sorvik, and A. Tasigiorgou, “Digital innovation hubs as
policy instruments to boost digitalisation of smes,” Publications Office
of the European Union, Tech. Rep., 2020.
[14]
K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,” Academy
of Management Review, vol. 14, pp. 532–550, 1989.
[15]
M. Bacco, G. Brunori, A. Ferrari, P. Koltsida, and E. Toli, “Iot as a
digital game changer in rural areas: the desira conceptual approach,” in
2020 Global Internet of Things Summit (GIoTS), 2020, pp. 1–6.
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-098-8
ICSEA 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

