On Some Challenges in Assessing the Implementation of Agile Methods in a 
Multisite Environment 
 
Harri Kaikkonen 
Department of Industrial Engineering and Management 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
harri.kaikkonen@oulu.fi 
Pilar Rodríguez, Pasi Kuvaja 
Department of Information Processing Sciences  
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
{pilar.rodriguez, pasi.kuvaja} @oulu.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Organizations utilize agile development methods 
and multisite environments with the intent to reduce costs and 
development time. Assessing the results of utilizing and 
adopting such methods is also frequent. An assessment survey 
instrument was used to analyze the transformation of a 
multisite software development organization from waterfall-
type development into agile development. The transformation 
was done in two globally distributed sites in Finland and India 
around 12 months apart. The assessment survey was 
conducted in the Finnish site 6 months after it had changed its 
working methods and again 12 months later in both sites. The 
site in India had adopted similar methods after the previous 
assessment survey was conducted. The results of the 
assessment survey in the Finnish site indicated regression 
between the two assessment rounds, while the results in India 
appeared to be better compared to Finland in the second 
round. Analysis of the results suggests that cultural differences 
and time elapsed from the organizational transformation may 
have influence in the assessment results and should be taken 
into 
account 
when 
assessing 
the 
implementation 
of 
development methods. 
Keywords-organizational 
change; 
global 
software 
development; agile methods; Scrum; process assessment. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Adopting agile development methods like Scrum [1] and 
extreme programming (XP) [2] have seen a great deal of 
interest in the software development community because of 
their intended benefits of delivering working software and 
being more responsive to changes, among other reasons [3]. 
However, scaling agile methods into larger organizations 
than a single or a few teams has its difficulties and there 
have been several descriptions of how to do that (e.g., 
[4][5]). 
As development organizations become larger, they are 
often also spread out globally out of necessity or because of 
their business environments [6], which causes a whole other 
array of issues to be considered in managing development 
work.  
This publication describes selected results of a 
quantitative process assessment conducted at a medium-
sized software development organization. The organization 
adopted a Scrum-based software development process in 
their multi-site organization. The adoption and the 
assessment were done in two phases. First, the process was 
adopted by a smaller unit in Finland with approximately 30 
people, who were assessed approximately six months after 
the adoption. Then, with the experience gathered from the 
first site, similar processes were adopted in the same 
organization‟s site of about 50 people in India and the 
assessment was repeated in both sites. The adoption was 
also planned to be further expanded to other sites. 
The aim of this publication is to provide evidence of 
issues in assessing the implementation of organizational 
changes such as new development processes in a global 
software 
development 
(GSD), 
or 
other 
multisite 
organization. 
The remainder of the publication is organized as follows. 
Section II contains a description of related work as theory of 
agile 
development 
methods 
and 
global 
software 
development. Section III presents a description of the 
assessment process and Section IV a description of the 
organization in which the assessment was conducted. 
Section V presents the relevant results of the assessments. 
Section VI includes discussion based on the results and the 
paper concludes in Section VII. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The agile movement gained publicity within the 
community during the 1990‟s, and was later epitomized in 
the agile manifesto, published in 2001 [3]. The manifesto 
was a collaborative agreement of what practitioners saw as 
the values and principles of agile software development. In 
addition to the actual manifesto, the authors also described 
twelve principles behind it. The twelve principles were 
agreed as common to the agile practitioners, although agile 
methods had already been described and were in use in 
many different settings. „Agile methods‟ is an umbrella term 
for a wide different set of approaches (e.g., Scrum, XP and 
kanban [7]), that have challenged the traditional waterfall 
model of software development and introduced a more 
lightweight process of producing software. Key differences 
between 
agile 
methods 
and 
traditional 
software 
development include iterative development and promoting 
empowered 
teamwork. 
However, 
a 
common 
misinterpretation of agile software development is that 
agility is achieved with practices and tools, although the 
focus should be on being agile, instead of doing it [4]. 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

During the same time that agile methods started to 
become increasingly prevalent in software development, 
globalization of high-technology businesses have increased 
the need for GSD. Software and its use as both products and 
services has become a competitive weapon which must be 
utilized efficiently to stay ahead in high-technology 
competition [6]. 
The challenges of GSD have been clear from the start 
and have been described in several sources (e.g., [8][9][10]). 
Issues range from strategic level issues like how to divide 
work between different sites, to more tactical level problems 
like how to arrange effective daily communication channels, 
to more complex systems like cultural differences and their 
effect on project and process management [6]. It is clear that 
many types of issues become apparent when dividing any 
kind of work globally, and with development work that 
often realizes inside developers‟ and designers‟ heads, the 
problems can be all the more difficult. Methods have also 
been proposed to reduce the effects of the challenges 
involved with GSD. These methods range from the use of 
maturity models [11] to suggested practices and techniques 
[10]. 
As organizations try to improve their processes and 
products, they often turn to assessments to get further 
understanding of their processes. Many of these assessments 
have 
also 
been 
conducted 
in 
global 
development 
environments (e.g., [12]). Similarly to the identified 
challenges with GSD, analyzing assessment results from 
GSD organizations may also contain challenges that are 
unknown. This is true for assessment results in any multisite 
organization, not just for GSD organizations. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
One of the challenging things in any organizational 
transformation towards a new way of working is how to 
assess the transition process and guide the next steps. This 
research was conducted using the Lean and Agile 
Deployment Survey, which is an assessment instrument 
developed by the University of Oulu in collaboration with 
industrial partners in the Cloud Software Program [13] in 
Finland. The instrument is specifically designed for 
enabling an effective transformation to a lean and agile way 
of working. The survey is based on a generic structure of 
three organizational levels; portfolio, program and project 
[5], and focuses on four main dimensions: organizational 
set-up, practices, outputs and culture/mindset. The survey 
was part of a larger effort that University of Oulu was 
performing in identifying the right agile practices to adopt 
and to determine whether organizations are ready for lean 
and agile. Additionally, the approach is meant to provide 
information for deciding what necessary preparations and 
potential difficulties may be faced during the adoption 
process.  
The 
conducted 
survey 
contained 
four 
context 
information questions for analyzing purposes, and over 70 
statements 
that 
described 
the 
organization‟s 
agile 
development process as it had been planned and taken in use 
internally. The statements were tailored from general 
statements in the Lean and Agile Deployment Survey to 
correspond with the terminology and processes of the case 
organization. Some generic examples of the statements are 
presented below: 
 
 
 The product backlog prioritization is clear 
 The product owner guides the Scrum team by 
prioritizing the user stories 
 I understand when the user stories are complete 
and can be accepted within the sprint 
IV. 
CASE ORGANIZATION 
The case organization designs software for network 
protocol analyzers. One of the organization‟s sites in 
Finland started their agile transformation with pilots during 
the spring of 2010. They further changed that site‟s 
organization of around 30 employees to an agile way of 
working in the beginning of fall of the same year by starting 
to follow the methods of Scrum development [1]. During 
2011, after initial results and experiences in Finland, similar 
processes were taken in use at a development unit in India 
and were planned to be taken in use in other sites as well.  
The Lean and Agile Deployment Survey was conducted 
twice in the organization. The first survey took place after 
the agile methods had been taken in place in Finland and 
had been in place for about 6 months. The second survey 
was conducted 12 months later and was expanded to include 
the site in India, which had adopted similar agile practices 
during that time.  
The targets of the survey assessment were i) to review 
the current status of agile adoption at two of the case 
organization‟s sites, ii) to see how the unit in Finland had 
been progressing with agile methods between the two 
survey rounds, iii) to identify focus areas for continuous 
improvement efforts and iv) to receive feedback on the 
impressions and assumptions on agile and Scrum processes 
in other sites of the organization. 
To obtain results for the last goal, the survey was also 
conducted in a third site, which had not yet fully adopted 
similar processes as the two case sites. The responses of the 
third site are omitted from the results presented in this 
publication.  
The total number of respondents for the first round in 
Finland was 25. For the second round, there were 62 
responses in total, 25 responses from Finland and 37 from 
India. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The survey was very successful in terms of response 
rate, which was a full 100 percent in the first round and 80.5 
percent in the second round. The high response rate was 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

attributed to the close collaboration between the case 
organization and researchers and extensive communication 
to the survey participants. Personnel of the case organization 
also sponsored the survey noticeably, so its conduction was 
well received. 
TABLE I.  
RESPONDENT EXPERIENCE 
 
How many years of experience in software 
industry do you have? 
Round 1 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(India) 
Round 2 
(Total) 
None 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Less than 2 
1 
0 
6 
6 
2-5 
4 
2 
13 
15 
5-10 
5 
5 
16 
21 
10-20 
13 
16 
2 
18 
More than 
20 
2 
2 
0 
2 
Total 
25 
25 
37 
62 
 
A comparison of the respondents‟ experience shows that 
the personnel that participated in the survey were generally 
very experienced in software development (see Table I). 
There is also some difference between the experiences 
between the two sites. Many respondents in Finland had 
over a decade of experience in software development, which 
may amount to some opinions reflected in the survey 
results. 
TABLE II.  
RESPONDENT ROLES 
 
Round 1 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(India) 
Round 2 
(Total) 
Developer 
13 
16 
18 
34 
Tester 
4 
1 
10 
11 
Product 
owner 
4 
4 
2 
6 
Scrum 
master 
3 
2 
6 
8 
Other 
1 
2 
1 
3 
Total 
25 
25 
37 
62 
 
Most of the responses in the survey came from 
developers and testers (see Table II). The other roles with 
significant number of responses were the product owner and 
Scrum master. As the focus of the survey was at the 
implementation of agile development process, the responses 
from these roles also provides a solid basis for the analysis 
of the results.  
Because of the case organization‟s preference, the 
statements were evaluated by the respondents on a four-
point scale, with an additional option of „I don‟t know‟ 
instead of a 5-point Likert-type scale [14] usually utilized 
with the Lean and Agile Deployment Survey. The answering 
options with corresponding weights used in average 
calculation in the following results section were as follows 
(see Table III). 
TABLE III.  
SURVEY ANSWERING OPTIONS 
Option 
Option weight 
Disagree 
1 
Partially agree 
2 
Largely Agree 
3 
Fully Agree 
4 
I don‟t know 
- 
 
The following tables and figures present selected 
findings from the survey which may be interesting in the 
context of multi-site agile adoption. The results for 
individual statements (see Figures 1-10) are presented as the 
distribution of responses and an average result in the 
statements in four separate rows. The first row presents the 
results received in the first survey that was conducted 
around 6 months after the agile adoption had taken place in 
the Finland unit. The second and third row include 
responses 12 months later from the Finnish and Indian units, 
respectively. The final row shows the combined answers in 
the second survey round from both sites (Finland and India).  
Please note that the „I don‟t know‟ –answers are not 
included in the average calculations. However, in some 
statements the amount of „I don‟t know‟ –responses itself is 
significant.  
Firstly, a very interesting finding can be made by 
looking at the collective average of the overall responses 
between the two survey rounds (see Table IV). 
 
TABLE IV.  
SURVEY AVERAGE 
 
Round 1 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(India) 
Round 2 
(Total) 
Response 
average 
3,04 
2,76 
3,28 
3,07 
 
The fact that the average score in Finland in the second 
survey is lower than 12 months earlier is an alerting sign, as 
the statements were formed in a positive form in accordance 
of the case organization‟s process description. There was 
some indication from the case organization that they had not 
had sufficient resources to actively react to issues raised in 
the first survey and subsequent retrospectives during the 12 
month period between the two surveys. A possible cause for 
the reduction in the average results may also be increased 
experience and awareness in the agile methods. This could 
affect the results as people become more aware of their 
processes and the issues concerning them than before.  
Also, perhaps surprisingly, the average score in India 
was much higher than it was in Finland as seen from the 
second round average scores. Several reasons may affect 
this difference, with cultural reasons perhaps being the most 
obvious explanation. 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Reasons for the drop in score are evident in some survey 
results. One main improvement area for the case 
organization based on the first survey was the lack of 
identified value of continuous improvement activities (see 
Figures 1 and 2).  
 
Figure 1.  Scrum teams change their ways of working based on 
retrospectives. 
 
Figure 2.  We reduce wasteful activities frequently. 
The lack of resources assigned for following up on this 
improvement area show as reduced results in the second 
round in the Finland unit. Again, results on the topic are 
higher in the India site. 
A second major improvement area identified based on 
the first survey round was the lack of measured and 
communicated evidence of the benefits of the agile methods 
for the organization (see Figures 3-6). 
 
Figure 3.  I am more productive with the agile way of working. 
 
Figure 4.  We are more productive as a Scrum team. 
 
Figure 5.  Product quality has been improved by applying agile 
development. 
 
Figure 6.  Development time has decreased by applying agile 
development. 
An action point after the first survey round was to 
provide the teams more information on the benefits of agile 
in comparison with earlier working methods. This issue had 
apparently not received enough attention because the second 
survey round indicated some decrease in results on the 
matter as well as an increase in „I don‟t know‟ –responses in 
Finland. Another possibility for the results is that the quality 
and productivity have actually not been improved with the 
new methods. The measuring of the benefits of agile is a 
very interesting and difficult topic among all organizations 
implementing the methods, but high consideration should be 
used on how to provide teams more information on actual 
benefits of agile. 
There was also possible need for further training within 
the organization (see Figures 7 and 8). 
 
Figure 7.  I have received enough training for carrying out my work. 
 
Figure 8.  I feel confident with myself with the agile way of working. 
When comparing the results between the sites in Finland 
and India, it can be seen that the training needs appear to be 
equally divided between the two sites. However, there is a 
noticeable difference between the sites in the confidence in 
individual capabilities. This can possibly again be explained 
by cultural differences. 
There was also some difference in statements about the 
preference of team co-location between the sites. There is a 
noticeable change in the answers between Finland and India 
(see Figures 9 and 10). 
 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 9.  I prefer to work in a multisite Scrum team. 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  I prefer to work in a local Scrum team. 
 
Differing from the answers in India, there seems to be a 
clear preference to co-location of team members in Finland. 
The co-location in generally viewed as an important part in 
Scrum processes and the results in Finland show the 
preference that has come by experience in that site. The 
conflictingly high results of India in both of the two tables 
above may involve cultural influences, but also some lack of 
experience since the agile methods had been in use there for 
a shorter period of time. 
An additional interesting comparison was made between 
the two survey rounds in the overall amount of „I don‟t 
know‟ –answers (see Table V). 
 
TABLE V.  
PERCENTAGE OF „I DON‟T KNOW‟ RESPONSES IN ALL 
STATEMENTS 
Round 1 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(Finland) 
Round 2 
(India) 
Round 2 
(Total) 
9,8% 
12,7% 
7,62 % 
9,8% 
 
In the second survey round, the amount of „I don‟t know‟ 
-answers in Finland is quite a lot higher than in India. When 
results between the two rounds are compared, we find that 
the percentage in Finland has increased between the two 
rounds and that the percentage in India is even lower than 
Finland in the first round. There was a similar amount of 
time elapsed from the agile adoption in Finland in the first 
round and India in the second. This could indicate that the 
amount of knowledge acquired during the 12 months 
between survey rounds in Finland lead to an increase in 
awareness of issues, or to some other reasons which lead to 
this result. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Based on the survey results, the main improvement areas 
identified in the first survey round were not given enough 
attention after conducting the survey. This was also 
admitted by the case organization because of reduced 
resources for the improvement efforts. This is one of the 
main reasons why the results in the Finland site appear 
lower in the second round. 
However, the other main reason for the reduction in 
response averages in some statements is believed to be 
increased awareness on the topic of agile methods and 
possible issues related to them. The combined average result 
in all statements between Finland in round 1 and India in 
round 2 are similar. The amount of time that these two sites 
had been using the agile development methods before their 
first respective survey rounds was also similar. 
The first important improvement suggestion for the case 
organization in the opinion of the researchers was to 
improve the resources currently utilized for change 
management and improvement efforts. The teams may need 
more support and resources for successful organizational 
transformation. This should include more support for 
continuous improvement activities and the follow up of 
these activities, since there were no definitive improvements 
that could be identified from the first assessment round. 
The identified decrease in results should be taken 
seriously to see what kind of improvement actions could be 
taken. This should also include very active participation 
from all members of the development organization, since 
they will be most aware of the issues regarding their daily 
work. The practices and processes that do not work should 
be adapted according to the organization- or unit-specific 
preferences while remembering to include the agile 
principles and mindset. 
Continuous improvement activities should have a strict 
process to follow, which includes communication to all 
interested stakeholders on the progress of the activities and a 
responsible individuals who have allocated time to conduct 
the activity. Many additional success factors can support the 
sustainability of improvement activities as well, which 
should be kept in mind when implementing changes [15]. 
The follow-up of the activities should also include a 
larger scale follow-up of the adoption of agile methods. 
Some forms of quantitative or qualitative measurements of 
the possible benefits of agile (in productivity, quality, etc.) 
should be measured and communicated in all units, 
including the sites that may take the agile methods into use 
in the future. This shows that the organization is committed 
to the changes and that the activities that are requested of 
the members of the organization have justifications behind 
them. There was already some evidence of doubt in the agile 
methods in the first survey round and these doubts should be 
addressed properly through discussion. 
In addition to the assessment results changing with time 
elapsed between the organizational change and the 
assessment, the results of the survey also indicate bias in the 
results based on cultural differences. When assessing the 
success of multisite organizational changes, it should be 
noted that the results may vary between locations for 
reasons that may not be possible to affect with any change 
management processes. Therefore, it may be useful in some 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

cases to assess different global sites individually, instead of 
comparing the results of sites between each other. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The results of this research can be used by researchers 
and practitioners when assessing organizational changes. 
Assessment results between geographically distributed sites 
may not always be directly comparable between each other. 
Cultural differences in results and the difference in elapsed 
time from the organizational change may also affect 
assessment results and should be noted when analyzing data. 
It would also be beneficial to compare results of a 
similar assessment with a different scaling method, like e.g., 
the Likert-type scale. The scaling itself should not be a 
contributing factor in this study, but additional assessment 
cases with similar backgrounds could be used to validate the 
influence of the used survey scale. 
The assessment process could be repeated in the case 
organization for a third time to analyze further progress of 
the organizational change. The findings of this assessment 
were used to focus future improvement efforts in the case 
organization and to provide feedback on how they 
understand their agile transformation so far. The results 
were presented to all participants through an open 
discussion session by the researchers and a written report 
was communicated openly inside the organization. The 
report was also brought into general knowledge by giving 
access to it within the organization. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the contribution 
of the Finnish Cloud Software Program [13] for the funding 
received for this research. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, “Agile Software Development with 
SCRUM”, Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[2] K. Beck, “Embracing change with extreme programming” Computer, 
Volume 32, Issue 10, pp.70-77, 1999. 
[3] K. Beck, et al., “Principles behind the agile manifesto” [Online] 
Available from: http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html 2014.08.12. 
[4] C. Larman and B. Vodde, “Scaling Lean & Agile development. 
Thinking and Organizational tools for Large-scale Scrum. “ Addison-
Wesley, USA. 2009. 
[5] D. Leffingwell, “Scaling software agility: Best practices for large 
enterprises.” Pearson Education, USA, 2007. 
[6] J.D. Herbsleb and D. Moitra, “Global software development”. IEEE 
Software, Volume 12, Issue 2, pp.16-20, 2001. 
[7] D. Anderson, “Kanban - Successful Evolutionary Change for your 
Technology Business”, Blue Hole Press, USA,  2010. 
[8] J. Bosch and P. Bosch-Sijtsema, “From integration to composition: 
On the impact of software product lines, global development and 
ecosystems”, The Journal of Systems and Software, Volume 83, Issue 
1, pp. 67-76, 2010. 
[9] P.J. Ågerfalk, et al., “A framework for considering opportunities and 
threats in distributed software development.”, Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Distributed Software Development, Paris, 
France. Computer Society, 2005. pp. 47-61 
[10] A. S. Alqahtani, J. D. Moore, D. Harrison, and B. Wood, “Distributed 
agile software development challenges and mitigation techniques: A 
case study.” The Eight International Conference on Sofware 
Engineering Advances, (ICSEA 2013) IARIA pp.352-358, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-304-9. 
[11] T. Oliveira and M. Silva, “Method for CMMI-DEV Implementation 
in Distributed Teams” The Sixth International Conference on 
Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2011) IARIA pp.312-317, 
ISBN:978-1-61208-165-6. 
[12] S. Misra and L. Fernández-Sanz, “Quality Issues in Global Software 
Development”, (ICSEA 2011) IARIA pp.325-330, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-165-6. 
[13] Cloud 
Software 
Finland. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.cloudsoftwareprogram.org/cloud-software-program 
2014.08.12. 
[14] R. Likert. "A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes". Archives 
of Psychology Vol. 140, pp. 1–55, 1932. 
[15]  N. Nikitina and M. Kajko-Mattson, ”Success factors leading to the 
sustainability of software process improvement efforts.” The Sixth 
International Conference on Software Engineering Advances (ICSEA 
2011) 
IARIA 
pp. 
581-588, 
ISBN: 
978-1-61208-165-6.
 
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

