Can Business Process Management Benefit from Service Journey Modelling 
Language?
Eunji Lee, Amela Karahasanović 
SINTEF ICT 
Oslo, Norway 
eunji.lee@sintef.no, amela@sintef.no 
 
 
Abstract—Business process management aims to align the 
business processes of an organisation with customers' needs. 
Doing this is of particular importance for services and requires 
a good understanding of interactions among the stakeholders 
involved in service provision and consumption. Several 
business modelling languages have been proposed, such as 
Business Process Modelling Notation (BPMN), Business 
Process Executable Language (BPEL) and Web Services 
Choreography Description Language (WS-CDL). Although 
these languages provide good support for process modelling, 
their consideration of the customer’s point of view seems to be 
insufficient. On the other hand, visualisations of customer 
journeys for the purpose of conceptualisation of new services 
have been successfully used in the area of service design. Our 
hypothesis is that a visual language presenting the customer 
journey through a service might be useful for aligning business 
processes of service providers with customers' needs and, in 
turn, contribute to the delivery of better services. We propose 
Service Journey Modelling Language (SJML) and report our 
first experience with it.   
Keywords-software 
engineering; 
business 
process 
management; services; visual languages 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Services play an important role in the global economy 
[1]. This heightens the need to understand business process 
management (BPM) in the context of services. BPM is used 
to improve the outcomes and operational agility of business 
performance by linking people, information flows, system 
and other assets in order to create and deliver value to 
customers [2].  
Several standard languages have been used for business 
process management. However, the concept of the 
customer’s perspective is not sufficiently considered enough 
in most of the languages.  
Service providers need appropriate methods and 
languages to describe the entire service process from the 
customer’s point of view. This employs knowledge from the 
areas 
of 
information 
visualisation, 
business 
process 
modelling languages, and service design. 
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II 
describes related work. Section III describes visual language 
for modelling service journey. Section IV concludes the 
paper and proposes future work. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Information visualisation increases human cognition [3]. 
It helps people to more easily understand complex 
information [4], and changes over time that could otherwise 
be difficult to comprehend [5]. 
Moody drew visual information transmission with two 
processes: encoding and decoding [6]. We aim to develop a 
visual language for presenting customer journey through 
services (we call it Service Journey Modelling Language, or 
SJML) that includes graphical syntax and information about 
encoder, decoder and channels for effective communication, 
as presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Communication by SJML 
Several languages have been used for BPM, such as: 
 
Business Process Modelling Notation (BPMN). 
BPMN is a graphical notation that shows the steps 
in a business process and depicts a flow chart that 
defines business process workflows [7]. 
 
Business Process Execution Language (BPEL). 
BPEL indicates  a language that is used to define 
and execute business processes by using the 
interfaces via web services in order to export and 
import business information [8]. 
 
Web 
Services 
Choreography 
Description 
Language (WS-CDL). WS-CDL is a non-
executable language based on XML that enables 
global business processes to be shown [9]. 
 
ServiceML. ServiceML includes three packages; 
Business-SoaML, 
Light-USDL 
and 
Service 
Journey Map, which consists of touchpoints. 
Touchpoint means a contact point or interaction 
 
 
 
SJML 
 
SJML 
Encoder 
Decoder 
Encoder 
Decoder 
Channel 
Channel 
Graphical syntax 
Graphical syntax 
579
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

between a customer and a service provider during 
service delivery. The colours of the touchpoints 
stand for the type of behaviours (normal, ad-hoc 
and unexpected) and customer emotional stage 
(unhappy, neutral and happy). 
Customer Journey Map (CJM) is a tool used in service 
design to visualise users' experience. A map is constructed 
with touchpoints. The details of service interactions and the 
associated emotions can be described in a highly accessible 
manner by using a CJM [10]. People use the map to see the 
service delivery process from the user's perspective. The 
CJM overview shows problem areas and opportunities for 
innovation, and the touchpoints assist in further analysis 
[10]. By using CJM, people can easily and quickly compare 
a service with its competitors [10]. 
Service blueprint is a technique that was introduced by 
Shostack and has been used in business and marketing [11]. 
It shows the series of service actions and the time flows 
related to the roles of stakeholders during service delivery 
by dividing them into front tasks and back tasks. Service 
blueprints enable managers to understand the entire process 
properly and provide useful information for new service 
development and its evaluation. 
Above described languages and tools support modelling 
business processes. However there is a lack of methods for 
precise specification of concepts where the customer has a 
role as a co-producer [12]. While partly addressing this, 
CJM and service blueprints are mainly focusing on the 
conceptualisation and evaluation phases [13, 14]  
III. 
VISUAL LANGUAGE FOR MODELLING SERVICE 
JOURNEY 
The main goal of this research is to introduce a generic 
visual language which enhances the service design 
development/improvement process. We propose a visual 
language, called Service Journey Modelling Language 
(SJML) that supports aligning business processes of service 
providers with customers' needs. The language will be 
developed and evaluated in an iterative manner. Information 
visualisation theory [15] and communication theory [6] will 
form a theoretical basis for language design and evaluation. 
Information 
visualisation 
involves 
users, 
tasks 
and 
visualisation forms [15]. We aim to investigate which 
visualisation forms might improve communication between 
stakeholders when performing different tasks within service 
design and development.  
As the first phase of our research, we wanted to 
investigate the needs of practitioners when designing new or 
improving existing services. How do different stakeholders 
such as designers, service developers and managers 
communicate with each other? Which information about 
customers and their interaction with services is essential 
when aligning business process with customers' needs? We 
developed the first version of the language and evaluated it 
in a half-day workshop with twenty-six employees of a 
university library.  
A. Scope  
Services can be divided into the following four areas 
according to the nature of the service act and the recipient of 
the service: services directed at peoples' bodies, services 
directed at physical possessions, services directed at 
peoples' minds and services directed at intangible assets 
[16]. Figure 2 gives examples of these services. We intend 
to use SJML within all four service areas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Service areas covered by SJML 
Table I compares SJML with other similar languages. 
The second column gives the application domain of the 
language. BPMN, BPEL, WS-CDL and ServiceML are used 
in business process management, whereas SJML is used in 
service design and development. The second column 
indicates whether the language considers service providers' 
and/or customers' point of view. The third column indicates 
communication coverage. Front-communication means that 
the 
languages 
cover 
only 
communication 
between 
employees inside organisations. Front-end communication 
means that the language covers also communication 
between service providers and customers. ServiceML 
describes service experience from both customer's and 
service provider's view and cover communication between 
service providers and customers. However, ServiceML 
cannot display third party stakeholder. SJML aims to be 
customer-oriented, cover front-end communication and 
enables to illustrate existing and newly designed services. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF THE LANGUAGES 
Language 
Domain 
Perspective 
Communication 
coverage 
BPMN, 
BPEL, 
WS-CDL 
Business 
Service provider–
oriented 
Front 
communication  
ServiceML 
Business 
Service provider 
/customer-oriented 
Front-end 
communication 
SJML 
Service design 
Customer-oriented 
Front-end 
communication 
 
 
Services directed at  
people's bodies 
 
Services directed at  
Physical possessions 
 
Services directed at  
people's minds 
 
Services directed at  
intangible assets 
Service Journey 
Modelling 
Language (SJML) 
- Passenger transportation 
- Health care 
- … 
- Entertainment 
- Education 
- … 
- Banking 
- Electricity 
- … 
- Freight transportation 
- Janitorial services 
                             - … 
People 
Things 
Tangible  
Actions 
Intangible  
Actions 
580
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Service design includes the following phases: ideation, 
conceptualisation, 
design, 
prototyping, 
development, 
implementation, evaluation, maintenance and improvement. 
Whereas CJM and Service blueprints support ideation and 
conceptualisation phase, SJML is expected to be used in the 
whole service design process from conceptualisation to 
improvement aiming to enhance service quality. 
SJML aims to improve: 
 
communication to strengthen customer orientation 
and facilitate collaboration between all involved 
stakeholders through a common vocabulary and 
extensive use of visualisation; 
 
support for design and development, where 
language serves as a tool for managing the 
development and implementation of innovative 
service concepts; and 
 
support for the analysis of existing and new 
services to ensure consistency and overall customer 
experience across touchpoints and throughout the 
service life cycle. 
B. Specification of SJML 
Meetings, seminars, e-mail and telephone conversations, 
were used to specify requirements and to collect relevant 
data. 
From 
this 
requirement 
and 
data, 
functional 
requirement are specified like below. 
 
Source of requirement: internal, external meetings, 
seminars, e-mail and telephone conversation. 
 
Functional requirement:  
Touchpoint. SJML 
consists of 
a sequence 
of 
touchpoints. Each touchpoint include symbols which 
show channels and devices that are used for the 
touchpoint. 
Actor. The colour of the boundary indicates the actor     
initiating the touchpoint. 
Status. The boundary style indicates the status of the 
touchpoint 
(solid 
boundary: 
completed, 
dashed 
boundary: missing and crossed touchpoint: failed).  
The first version of SJML (SJML v1.0.) consists of 
terminology, symbols and model journey. Customer journey 
relevant terminology such as service and stakeholders was 
studied and summarized for better understanding. Symbols 
and visual elements were developed together with syntax 
and context. Visual symbols represent actions, devices and 
mediums that are used during service delivery process. We 
used SJML v1.0. for model service analysis of four different 
services (Going to the movies, Tax reporting, Retail 
purchase and Air travel). Both expected and actual journeys 
were mapped. 
C. Evaluation and Results 
A service design seminar was held at the science library 
at the University of Oslo in June 2013. The seminar 
consisted of a lecture about service design and two practical 
sessions. SJML was introduced and tested during one of 
these sessions. The session included a short introduction of 
SJML, eight tasks and discussion. Twenty-six librarians 
participated, and the entire session took about 30 minutes. 
Participants were divided into four working groups and 
asked to make customer journey maps of the service process 
of borrowing paper and electronic books at the library using 
SJML. One blank icon plus seventeen book loan service 
relevant icons which were selected among 32 SJML icons 
were given to each group as a set (Figure 3). In this 
workshop, the actor and status concepts were not adapted.   
Figure 3.  SJML icons given at the workshop 
First task was to present customer journey for a 
customer borrowing a paper/electronic book (Figure 4.). The 
process includes extension of the loan and finishes with 
when the book is returned. Second task was to present 
customer journey for a customer ordering a paper/electronic 
book which the library does not have. The process includes 
extension of the loan and finishes when the book is returned. 
Participants were asked to make customer journey maps for 
the both existing (Figure 4.) and desired book loan service. 
Figure 4.  Customer journey maps for a customer borrowing a paper book 
(up) /electronic book (down) in existing book loan service at the library 
The participants had no problems in understanding of 
SJML and using its symbols. Participants were able to 
describe and explain the service journey using the given 
SJML icons. However some of the participants were 
confused about using the symbols that look similar such as 
the icon of PC and the icon of web service via PC. 
581
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Participants also wanted to draw loops that happen 
repeatedly. However they did not know how to present this.   
It was also found that more icons were needed to illustrate 
library service specific touchpoints. These challenges will 
be addressed in the next version of SJML. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Services usually have a complex structure with several 
stakeholders, and their interests are intertwined. Aligning the 
business processes of an organisation with customers' needs 
is important for business process management, especially in 
service field. A good understanding of interactions among 
the stakeholders involved in service provision and 
consumption is need for this. Several modelling languages 
were introduced for business process management and 
several methods were suggested to support service design 
process. However, there is a lack of support for describing, 
communicating 
and 
analysing 
service 
concepts 
for 
stakeholders in a detailed way in order to develop and 
implement new services and improve existing services.  
SJMLv1.0. was developed and tested by adapting 
information visualisation and visual communication theories 
together with requirements. We expect that SJML and 
associated methods can improve business process modelling 
by alleviating communication problems among different 
stakeholders. 
We are going to develop and evaluate several versions of 
SJML in an iterative manner. They will be evaluated in 
collaboration with our industrial partners on real-life 
services they are providing. A literature review, interviews, 
prototyping, usability testing, post-mortem analysis and a 
living lab would be used in further research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is part of the VISUAL project (2012–2016, 
project number 219606) funded by the Research Council of 
Norway and industrial partner companies, and involving 
Sintef ICT and the University of Linköping. 
Thanks to Ragnhild Halvorsrud and Ida Maria Haugstveit 
for the fruitful collaboration in developing the first version of 
SJML, to Alma Culén and Andrea Gasparini for organising 
the workshop and to all participants who took part in the 
workshop. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. P. Soubbotina and K. Sheram, Beyond economic growth: 
Meeting the challenges of global development. World Bank 
Publications, 2000. 
[2] 
Gartner, Inc., “Gartner IT Glossary - Business process 
management (BPM),” 2013. [Online]. Available: 
http://blogs.gartner.com/it-glossary/business-process-
management-bpm-2/. [Accessed: 22-Aug-2013]. 
[3] 
S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings 
in information visualization: using vision to think. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1999. 
[4] 
Y. Rogers, H. Sharp, and J. Preece, Interaction Design: 
Beyond Human Computer Interaction (3rd edition). Wiley, 
2011. 
[5] 
C. Ware, Information visualization, vol. 2. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2000. 
[6] 
D. Moody, “The ‘physics’ of notations: toward a scientific 
basis for constructing visual notations in software 
engineering,” Softw. Eng. IEEE Trans., vol. 35, no. 6, 2009, 
pp. 756–779. 
[7] 
The Object Management Group, “Business Process 
Management Initiative,” 2013. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.omg.org/bpmn/Documents/FAQ.htm. 
[Accessed: 12-Jun-2013]. 
[8] 
M. B. Juric, “A Hands-on Introduction to BPEL.” [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/articles/matjaz-bpel1-
090575.html. [Accessed: 22-Aug-2013]. 
[9] 
Business Process Modeling Forum, “Business Process 
Modeling FAQ | BPM Forum,” 2013. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.bpmodeling.com/faq/. [Accessed: 12-Jun-2013]. 
[10] 
M. Stickdorn and J. Schneider, This is service design 
thinking. Wiley, 2010. 
[11] 
G. L. Shostack, “Designing services that deliver,” Harv. 
Bus. Rev., vol. 62, no. 1, 1984, pp. 133–139. 
[12] 
L. Witell, P. Kristensson, A. Gustafsson, and M. Löfgren, 
“Idea generation: customer co-creation versus traditional 
market research techniques,” J. Serv. Manag., vol. 22, no. 2, 
2011, pp. 140–159. 
[13] 
C. Tollestrup, “Conceptualising services: developing 
service concepts through AT-ONE,” Nord. Conf. Serv. Des. 
Serv. Innov., 2009, pp. 187–199. 
[14] 
G. L. Shostack, “Service positioning through structural 
change,” J. Mark., 1987, pp. 34–43. 
[15] 
C. Chen and Y. Yu, “Empirical studies of information 
visualization: a meta-analysis,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., 
vol. 53, no. 5, 2000, pp. 851–866. 
[16] 
C. H. Lovelock, “Classifying services to gain strategic 
marketing insights,” J. Mark., 1983, pp. 9–20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
582
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

