An Interactive Digital Twin for Visual Querying and Process Mining
 
Spyros Loizou 
Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics 
Cyprus University of Technology 
Limassol, Cyprus 
e-mail: spyros.loizou@cut.ac.cy 
Andreas S. Andreou 
Department of Computer Engineering and Informatics 
Cyprus University of Technology 
Limassol, Cyprus  
e-mail: andreas.andreou@cut.ac.cy 
 
 
Abstract — Large volumes of structured, semi-structured and 
unstructured data are produced daily by industrial businesses 
which require analysis and processing with appropriate models 
and algorithms to obtain valuable knowledge. This paper 
introduces a framework for business technology that combines 
the notion of Digital Twins with Process Mining aiming at 
delivering a simple and efficient way to retrieve customized 
data and process it with the use of graphical techniques, the 
providing interactive visualization of process mining steps. 
More specifically, the proposed framework provides the ability 
to define different data sources and link these sources with a 
visual query generator which constructs, executes and depicts 
graphically the results of custom queries. The framework also 
includes sophisticated Artificial Intelligence / Machine 
Learning algorithms for data analysis, filtering and prediction. 
The framework is demonstrated through an interactive 
dashboard, which was implemented in Python to support a 
fully operational and visual process mining environment that 
facilitates decision making without the need of programming 
or data management skills. 
Keywords- Big Data; Digital Twin; Business Process Mining; 
Visual Querying; Visual Analytics.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the new, most popular scientific trends 
worldwide are the Internet of things (IoT), big data, cloud 
computing and Artificial Intelligence (AI). All these 
technologies generate a large volume of data which may be 
structured, semi-structured and unstructured. Big data 
analysis models and algorithms are used to organize, analyze 
and mine raw data to obtain valuable knowledge. Data 
visualization represents data in some systematic form 
including attributes and variables for the unit of available 
information. Visualization of data allows users and 
businesses mash up data sources to create custom analytical 
views [1]. Data processing and visualization include data 
mining, data collection of various types, structured or 
unstructured, 
as 
well 
as 
their 
knowledge-based 
representation techniques to transform primary data to 
meaningful data.  
A Digital Twin is a virtual representation of an object or 
system that spans its lifecycle, is updated from real-time 
data, and uses simulation, machine learning and reasoning to 
support decision-making. In addition, the digital twin can 
also make predictions about how an asset or process will 
evolve or behave in the future [2]. 
Process Mining is a technique relating the fields of data 
science and process management to support the analysis of 
operational processes based on event logs. The goal of 
process mining is to turn event data into insights and actions. 
Process mining techniques use event data to show what 
people, machines, and organizations are really doing. 
Process mining provides novel insights that can be used to 
identify the executional path taken by operational processes 
and address their performance and compliance problems.  
The relevant open research challenge of this area is to 
investigate how Digital Twins may contribute to enhancing 
the applicability and efficiency of process models so as to 
prevent costly failures in physical objects or activities, and 
improve quality and productivity, by using advanced 
analytical, monitoring and predictive capabilities, test 
processes and services. 
Τhis paper proposes the integration of Process Mining 
with Digital Twins, which targets providing interactive 
visualization capabilities of data related process mining 
steps. In this context, a framework is described for defining 
the data sources, linking them to a visual query generator, 
and finally depicting graphically the results. The framework 
may also utilize sophisticated algorithms residing in its 
Artificial Intelligence / Machine Learning module, mostly 
for performing data analysis and prediction. This interactive 
approach essentially provides smart data processing (logs 
and events) and graphical visualization of the insights 
produced. The user environment is simple, self-explanatory 
and ergonomic, while its graphical form and usability allow 
non-expert users, that is, users without prior knowledge in 
the area of databases or process mining algorithms, to easily 
structure and run queries, execute steps for process mining 
modeling, and receive the result in a comprehensible, 
interactive form. These features make the proposed approach 
unique and quite appealing to personnel in industrial 
environments, such as production engineers and shift 
managers, who wish to be continuously informed about 
selected parts in a process cycle. A prototype tool has been 
developed as a proof of concept which provide the basic 
functionality described above. The tool is work in progress 
and enhanced.   
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
discusses related 
work and provides 
the 
technical 
background in the areas of Process Mining and Digital 
Twins. Section 3 presents the proposed framework and 
describes how Digital Twins are integrated with specific 
process mining phases. This is followed by a system 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

demonstration in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the 
paper and highlights future work directions. 
 
II. 
TECHNICAL BACKGROUND/RELATED WORK 
This section provides a short description of the technical 
background behind Digital Twins, visualization platforms for 
data processing and process mining, and outlines related 
studies. To the best of our knowledge, there are no studies in 
the literature reporting the integration of graphical 
environments for interactive, visual smart data processing 
with process mining based on event logs. 
A. Data Processing and Visualization 
The area of smart data processing comprises the ability to 
clearly define, interoperate, openly share, access, transform, 
link, syndicate, and manage data. Under this perspective, it 
becomes crucial to have various knowledge-based metadata 
representation techniques to structure datasets, annotate 
them, link them with associated processes and software 
services, and deliver or syndicate information to recipients. 
Smart Data Processing Systems are used to include various 
topics to fully utilize the aforementioned capabilities, such as 
data ingestion, data aggregation of an enormous variety of 
structured, 
unstructured and 
semi-structured datasets, 
knowledge-based meta-data representation techniques for the 
conversion of raw into smart data, data privacy and 
protection, automated 
deployment, 
run-time 
software 
performance monitoring and dynamic configuration.  
Data visualization is the graphical representation of 
information and data. By using visual elements like charts, 
graphs, and maps, data visualization tools provide an 
accessible way to see and understand trends, outliers, and 
patterns in data. In the world of Big Data, data visualization 
tools and technologies are the challenges tackled in different 
papers focusing on how to analyze massive amounts of 
information and make data-driven decisions. Visualization-
based data discovery methods allow business users to mash 
up disparate data sources to create custom analytical views. 
Wang et al. [1] present new methods and advances of Big 
Data 
visualization 
through 
introducing 
conventional 
visualization methods and the extension of some of them for 
handling big data, discussing the challenges of big data 
visualization, and analyzing technology progress in big data 
visualization. 
Steed et al. [3] describe and demonstrate a visual 
analytics system, called the Exploratory Data analysis 
ENvironment (EDEN), with specific application to the 
analysis of complex earth system simulation datasets. EDEN 
represents the type of interactive visual analysis tools that is 
necessary to transform data into insights, thereby improving 
critical comprehension of earth system processes.  
B. Digital Twins 
A Digital Twin (DT) is traditionally characterized by 
two-way interactions between the digital and the physical 
world. A DT offers error optimization to save money and 
time, reduces defects and manages the lifecycle of the 
Internet of things (IoT). A DT represents a powerful 
technology because it is able to stream, optimize and analyze 
data in the virtual and physical world. This paper utilizes the 
idea of DTs to graphically represent and interact with event 
data and process logs and applies this approach to industrial 
environments.  
Several papers address the problem of monitoring real-
time data and optimization of an industrial production line or 
product design. Vachalek et al. [4] describe a project which 
is a technological concept focusing on the continuous 
optimization of production processes, proactive maintenance, 
and continuous processing of process data. This project is 
essentially promoting the concept of Industry 4.0, while its 
basic goal is to support the existing production structures 
within the automotive industry and the most efficient use of 
resources by augmented production and planning strategies, 
such as DTs. Schluse et al. [5] introduce the concept of 
Experimental Digital Twins (EDTs) as a new structuring 
element for simulation-based systems engineering processes 
and their interdisciplinary and cross-domain simulation in 
Virtual Test Beds (VTBs). This enables comprehensive 
simulations on system level and allows for seamless 
connection between virtual and real worlds in hybrid 
scenarios. It also introduces new structures and processes to 
consistently use simulations in varying application scenarios 
through-out the life-cycle. Fuller et al. [6] present the 
challenges, applications, and enabling technologies for 
Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things (IoT) and DTs. A 
review of publications relating to DTs is performed, 
producing a categorical review of recent papers which 
discusses a range of papers residing in different scientific 
areas and presents the current state of research, providing at 
the same time an assessment of the enabling technologies, 
challenges and open research issues for DTs.  
C. Process Mining 
Process mining is a technique designed to discover, 
monitor and improve real processes by extracting readily 
available knowledge from event logs stored in information 
systems. Process mining includes process discovery, that is, 
extracting process models from an event log file. Moreover, 
process mining techniques use different algorithms to 
extract and organize data and business flows, with the top 5 
mining algorithms being Alpha Miner, Fuzzy miner, 
Heuristic miner, Inductive Miner and Genetic miner. Alpha 
Miner generates a Petri Net model in which all the 
transactions are visible, unique and correspond to the 
classified events.  
A Petri net is a tuple N = (P, T, F, W, m0), where, 
 
P={p1, p2, …, pm} is a finite set of places, 
T ={t1, t2, …, tk} is a finite set of transitions, 
places P and transitions T are disjoint (P ∩ T = ∅ ), 
F ⊆ (P × T) ∪ (T × P) is the flow relation (arcs), 
W : ((P × T) ∪ (T × P)) → {1, 2, …} is the arc weight 
mapping (where W(f ) = 0 for all f ∈/ F, and W(f ) > 0 
for all f ∈ F), and m0 : P → {1, 2, …} is the initial 
marking representing the initial distribution of tokens. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

     The Heuristics Miner algorithm deals with activities 
expressed as time-based intervals. Burattin et al. [7] 
introduced a new definition of the direct succession relation 
based on time-based intervals. A single event is represented 
as an activity. Accorsi et al. [8] promote the topic of process 
mining and define a set of guiding principles and list 
important challenges, to guide for software developers, 
scientists, consultants, business managers, and end-users. 
The goal is to increase the maturity of process mining as a 
new tool to improve the (re)design, control, and support of 
operational business processes. Bozkaya et al. [9] propose a 
methodology to perform process diagnostics, based on 
process mining. Given an event log of an information 
system within an organization, process diagnostics gives a 
broad overview of the organization’s process(es) within a 
short period of time.  
Recent studies have explored the use of Digital Twins 
for process mining: Park et al. [10] proposed a digital twin 
interface model as a representation of an organization that 
reflects the current state of business processes. Using this 
representation, process analysts are able to define 
constraints and actions that are continuously monitored and 
triggered to improve business processes. Pan et al. [11] 
presented a data-driven Digital Twin framework integrated 
with Building Information Modeling (BIM), IoT, and data 
mining for advanced project management, which can 
facilitate data communication and exploration to better 
understand, predict, and optimize the physical construction 
operations.  
None of the studies on coupling Digital Twins with 
process mining thus far has been concentrated on defining, 
linking and analyzing data used for process modelling or 
enhancement through approaches that alleviate the need for 
expert knowledge. This paper addresses this challenge and 
provides the means for a totally different user experience 
based on visual querying and process mining data-driven 
tasks, 
which 
is 
characterized 
by 
simplicity, 
self-
explainability, ease of use and graphical ergonomics. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The basic idea of using visual analytics is to represent the 
information in a graphical and meaningful visual manner, 
allowing the user to interact with the information, gain 
insight, and make better decisions. The visual representation 
of the information reduces complexity in cognitive work 
needed to perform certain tasks and derives insight from 
massive, dynamic, and often conflicting data by providing 
timely, defensible, and understandable assessments [12]. 
The main target of this paper is to combine Digital Twins 
and process mining in a unified graphical and interactive 
dashboard to deliver visual representation of business data 
and logs, which allows for the execution of visual queries 
and the launch of intelligent (Artificial Intelligence and 
Machine Learnings) algorithms. This target is realized 
through a framework that describes how to transform data 
into a Digital Twin visual representation and then use this 
representation to construct and execute customized visual 
queries for selected process data describing the business 
flow. In this respect, the framework is rather generic to be 
able to apply in every business and data context. Figure 1 
depicts the architectural structure of this approach, which 
involves two distinct parts: (i) the mechanism for importing 
data sources residing in a database (tables, fields, 
relationships and semantics), as well as process mining 
related data in the form of log files and event streams; (ii) the 
interactive dashboard, which offers multiple functions for 
constructing and executing queries in a simple, visual 
manner, without requiring knowledge on databases or 
Structured Query Language (SQL), enhanced by a set of 
AI/ML modules (e.g. Neural Networks, Evolutionary 
Algorithm and Fuzzy Logic) that provide data cleaning 
and/or prediction, and recommendations. The framework is 
generic in the sense that it does not pose strict development 
restrictions on the data importing mechanisms (e.g., format, 
files, data models, etc.) or to the mechanisms for performing 
visual processing of the data. Therefore, the proposed 
architecture essentially converts process mining into an 
interactive procedure that utilizes Digital Twins to visualize 
data and processes retrieved from logs and files stored in a 
database. This involves interacting with all information 
present in logs (activities, resources, cost, time performance, 
etc.) which may now be represented graphically, depicting 
all data connections and relations, as well as the hierarchical 
flow of data that is followed within the business. 
Furthermore, the framework couples AI and machine 
learning algorithms that are stored in its smart engine. These 
algorithms may be trained and executed in the background to 
enable smart data processing, including filtering and 
cleaning (e.g., removing or modifying data that is incorrect, 
incomplete, irrelevant, duplicated, or improperly formatted 
as it may hinder the process or provide inaccurate results), 
prediction and predictive analytics, classification, etc. Using 
visual task execution (querying and machine learning) in the 
background enables users that will use these steps to obtain 
the desired results without the need of programming skills or 
prior knowledge on intelligent algorithms. The smart engine 
is able to host as many intelligent algorithms as desired, 
while the process for adding them into the engine is simple 
and straightforward, following the principles of ML-Ops 
[13]. Currently, the smart engine is under development 
comprising several implementations of neural networks for 
prediction and recommendations.  
A dedicated software tool was developed to demonstrate 
the proposed framework, which was built in Python, mainly 
using pm4py, pandas and Streamlit libraries. Pm4py was the 
main instrument for implementing well-known process 
mining tasks and algorithms. Streamlit, which is an open-
source framework that creates applications for data science 
and machine learning in a short time, was utilized to support 
the development of an interactive, flexible and user-friendly 
dashboard. Finally, pandas, which is a dedicated library that 
offers data structures and operations for manipulating tables 
and time series, was responsible for managing all data from 
databases and events from log files. Lastly, Unity was the 
environment used to produce playful, aesthetically correct 
and user-friendly graphics for the presentation and 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

interactive use of the dashboard.  Unity [14] is a cross-
platform game engine, which is primarily used to develop 
video games and simulations for computers, consoles and 
mobile devices. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IV. 
SYSTEM DEMONSTRATION 
The supporting software system is currently under 
development and its current form supports two process 
discovery algorithms, namely the Directly Follows Graph 
and the Heuristic Miner. 
 Figure 2 illustrates the Directly Follows Graph which is 
constructed using process mining logs that depict the average 
time for each process event. In this graph, each node 
represents an activity, and the arcs describe the relationships 
between various activities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 presents the Heuristic Miner that is considered 
an improvement of the Alpha Miner algorithm and acts on 
the Directly Follows Graph. It provides a way to handle 
noise and to find common constructs. The output of the 
algorithm is a Heuristics Net, an object that contains both the 
activities and the relationships between them. 
The interactive dashboard developed offers the ability to 
graphically analyze large volumes of information and 
facilitate data-driven decision making. A demonstration 
workflow of this graphical dashboard is provided as follows:  
In step 1, the user is able to select the tables they wish to 
process from a pool of data available (Figure 4). This is 
performed by dragging and dropping in the central part of 
the screen called workspace or canvas, any table from the list 
appearing on the right. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When tables are inserted into the workspace, any existing 
relationships are automatically depicted, showing the links 
between fields. The user may also select a field and reveal 
any links to other tables and the corresponding attributes. 
The dashboard supports the importing of disparate data 
sources in its pool of tables, allowing users to mash up 
different information to create custom analytical views. 
Subsequently in Step 2, the user selects the fields they 
want to work with and defines the type of processing they 
wish to perform. To do so, they select an action from a 
toolbar at the bottom center of the screen (Figure 5), which 
dictates how a field is to be processed, (e.g., defines a 
threshold value or logical condition – Figure 6). In essence, 
the user constructs a query without the need of prior 
knowledge on SQL statements or semantics. They just define 
the action that needs to be executed and the system runs it 
and visualizes the results.  
 
  
Figure 1. Architecture of the proposed framework for visual and 
interactive process mining. 
Figure 2. Directly Follows Graph based on average time. 
Figure 3. Heuristic Miner. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
      The results are presented in various tabular and graphical 
forms (Figure 7). Each presentation form is interactive, as 
the user can point and click on a certain part of the visual 
information and be redirected to another part which relates 
new data from existing ones, such as flattening of data in 
process mining terms [8] or offers a different visual 
representation (e.g., from tabular form to a pie chart).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This short presentation of the proposed framework 
demonstrates its usefulness and applicability. The user is 
able to utilize its functionality and depict graphically selected 
data values, connections and relations, as well as construct 
and execute queries in a simple, visual and interactive way. 
In addition, she may produce models presenting the 
hierarchical flow of data that is followed within the business, 
the sequence and dependencies of events within a business 
process, etc.   
       All this data manipulation and business process 
graphical information is produced requiring from users little 
or no prior experience and knowledge on either databases 
and SQL queries, or process mining and process models, 
thus making the framework suitable for practical use in real 
environments by workers that specialize in other tasks, such 
as manufacturing and production.  
Figure 6. Creation and execution of a visual query. 
 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The area of Big Data Visualization and Analytics is in 
great need for efficient and simple ways to retrieve 
customized data mainly with the use of graphical techniques. 
This paper addressed the challenge of providing a framework 
which provides the ability to define data sources in the form 
of tables, attributes and relationships, and then process and 
analyze this data based on the concept of visual querying. 
More specifically, the framework builds upon the notions of 
Digital Twins to provide smart data processing and data 
analytics, and especially targets at bridging graphical 
methods with algorithms and activities from the area of 
process mining. Overall, this approach provides a fully 
operational and interactive environment in which meaningful 
business 
process 
data 
is 
depicted 
graphically 
to 
clients/organizations, and functional decision making, and 
predictive analytics are supported. 
The combination of Digital Twins and Business Process 
Mining offers an interactive visual representation of business 
data and logs. Process data is first transformed into parts of a 
DT and then specific functionality is provided that gives the 
ability to the user to create and execute customized queries 
                 Figure 4. Selection of tables and attributes of interest. 
Figure 5. Selection of logical and arithmetic operators 
                         Figure 7. Results obtained from a visual query. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

of the data and the business flow and visualize results in a 
graphical and interactive form. Digital twins investigate in 
depth the relationships between the data mainly with a 
graphical technique. Algorithms are made available to users 
who will use standard steps to obtain the desired results 
without the need of programming skills.  
Future work will concentrate on the following: (i) Data 
management will be enhanced with the use of Data Lakes in 
which sorted and cleaned data will be hosted, thus ensuring 
the highest quality of data is fed into the AI/ML algorithms; 
(ii) Further expansion of the interactive dashboard with 
inclusion of more sophisticated visualization features 
supporting predictive analytics; and, (iii) Enhancement of the 
visualization component with interactive capabilities that 
will suggest business flow corrections to achieve better 
process results.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is part of the outcomes of the CSA Twinning 
project DESTINI. This project has received funding from the 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation 
programme under grant agreement No 945357. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Wang, G. Wang, and C. A. Alexander, “Big Data and 
Visualization: Methods, Challenges and Technology 
Progress,” Digit. Technol., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 33–38, 2015, 
doi: 10.12691/dt-1-1-7. 
[2] 
A. Rasheed, O. San, and T. Kvamsdal, “Digital twin: 
Values, challenges and enablers from a modeling 
perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 21980–22012, 
2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2970143. 
[3] 
C. A. Steed et al., “Big data visual analytics for 
exploratory earth system simulation analysis,” Comput. 
Geosci., 
vol. 
61, 
pp. 
71–82, 
2013, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.cageo.2013.07.025. 
[4] 
J. Vachalek, L. Bartalsky, O. Rovny, D. Sismisova, M. 
Morhac, and M. Loksik, “The digital twin of an industrial 
production line within the industry 4.0 concept,” Proc. 
2017 21st Int. Conf. Process Control. PC 2017, pp. 258–
262, 2017, doi: 10.1109/PC.2017.7976223. 
[5] 
M. Schluse, M. Priggemeyer, L. Atorf, and J. Rossmann, 
“Experimentable Digital Twins-Streamlining Simulation-
Based Systems Engineering for Industry 4.0,” IEEE 
Trans. Ind. Informatics, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1722–1731, 
2018, doi: 10.1109/TII.2018.2804917. 
[6] 
A. Fuller, Z. Fan, C. Day, and C. Barlow, “Digital Twin: 
Enabling Technologies, Challenges and Open Research,” 
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 108952–108971, 2020, doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2998358. 
[7] 
A. Burattin, Process mining techniques in business 
environments: Theoretical aspects, algorithms, techniques 
and open challenges in process mining, vol. 207. 2015. 
[8] 
R. Accorsi, M. Ullrich, and W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, 
Process mining, vol. 35, no. 5. 2012. 
[9] 
M. Bozkaya, J. Gabriels, and J. M. Van Der Werf, 
“Process diagnostics: A method based on process 
mining,” Proc. - Int. Conf. Information, Process. Knowl. 
Manag. eKNOW 2009, no. 2, pp. 22–27, 2009, doi: 
10.1109/eKNOW.2009.29. 
[10] 
G. Park and W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, “Realizing A 
Digital Twin of An Organization Using Action-oriented 
Process Mining,” Proc. - 2021 3rd Int. Conf. Process 
Mining, 
ICPM 
2021, 
pp. 
104–111, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICPM53251.2021.9576846. 
[11] 
Y. Pan and L. Zhang, “A BIM-data mining integrated 
digital 
twin 
framework 
for 
advanced 
project 
management,” Autom. Constr., vol. 124, no. July 2020, p. 
103564, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.autcon.2021.103564. 
[12] 
C. Mehrotra, N. Chitransh, and A. Singh, “Scope and 
challenges of visual analytics: A survey,” Proceeding - 
IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Autom. ICCCA 2017, 
vol. 2017-Janua, no. 4404, pp. 1229–1234, 2017, doi: 
10.1109/CCAA.2017.8229987. 
[13] 
S. Makinen, H. Skogstrom, E. Laaksonen, and T. 
Mikkonen, “Who needs MLOps: What data scientists 
seek to accomplish and how can MLOps help?,” Proc. - 
2021 IEEE/ACM 1st Work. AI Eng. - Softw. Eng. AI, 
WAIN 
2021, 
pp. 
109–112, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1109/WAIN52551.2021.00024. 
[14]        Unity, [online] https://unity.com/, [accessed Oct. 2022] 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

