3D Human Heart Anatomy : Simulation 
 and Visualization based on MR Images 
 
Tawfik Chebbi1, Rawia Frikha2, Ridha Ejbali2, Mourad Zaied2 
1Higher Institute of Computer Science and Multimedia, University of Gabes, Tunisia 
2REGIM-Lab: REsearch Groups in Intelligent Machines University of Sfax 
e-mail: chebbit.tawfik@gmail.com, e-mail: frikha.rawia.tn@ieee.org 
e-mail: ridha_ejbali@ieee.org, e-mail: mourad.zaied@ieee.org 
 
 
Abstract— Understanding the human heart anatomy is 
important in order to extract information and to 
understand how it works. Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) can be a robust solution to extract some 
information about the heart anatomy. Data from 
multiple image planes can be combined to create a 3D 
model of the cardiac system. The shape of the human 
heart is an irregular shape that makes it difficult to 
model and it takes many hours to create a 3D shape of 
the human heart with a high details and precision. A 
new three-dimensional heart model has been developed 
including structural information from MRI. The method 
uses Marching Cubes (MC) Algorithm for the extraction 
of an equipotential surface (subsurface) of a 3D mesh 
structured and uniform model. In order to visualize the 
3D virtual model created in a real environment, we use 
Augmented Reality techniques (AR).  
 
Keywords-3D heart; MRI; Marching Cubes; Segmentation; 
Augmented 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of death in 
many countries. Therefore, the study of the cardiac system 
has become a priority in computer science. Medical imaging 
technology gave the possibility to create a realistic 3D 
cardiac model from medical images. 
    The heart is the most vital organ in the human body that 
functions as the body’s circulatory pump. Basically, the 
heart contains four chambers: two atria and two ventricles. 
The ventricles are responsible for pumping blood from the 
heart to the rest of the body, while the atria are the chambers 
that receive blood returned to the heart. 
In this paper, we present a novel approach to create an     
anatomic model of the heart based on MRI. 
The basic idea is to use medical imaging technology to 
create a virtual model of the heart. Our model can be used to 
get a 3D real time visualization of a specific patient heart 
and to help in diagnosis as a complement to medical 
imaging information. Our system allows users to create a 
3D shape of the heart using MRI. In our study, we first use 
MRI to generate the virtual model. Then we use the AR to 
visualize it in the real world. The method uses the marching 
cubes algorithm to provide a 3D shape of the heart. The 
visualization of a 3D virtual heart in a real environment 
offer the possibility for the medical field students to better 
understand the anatomy of the cardiac system [1]. 
In Section 2 we describe the differences with existing 
works. In Section 3 we introduce the general architecture of 
our system and we prepare our data: MRI divided on 
multiple planes Sagittal, axial and coronal. In Section 4, to 
ensure a quality image of the model we apply a combined 
region growing and thresholding segmentation. In Section 5, 
we use the Marching cube algorithm to obtain the 3D model 
of the heart. Finally, we correct false faces in order to 
improve the model render quality.  
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In recent years, modeling of the human heart has been 
done successfully using medical imaging technology, as 
demonstrated by early works [2] and [3].  
In this section, we provide a brief overview of some of the 
more distinctive work that has been done on cardiac 3D 
modeling. This will provide an overview of the main 
approaches for cardiac modeling. 
Medical imaging provides the possibility to obtain 
important information, such as structural and functional. 
Using MRI or CT images we can create a 3D model of the 
heart. Neiderer et al. [4] created a specific-patient heart 
model. To create a specific-patient heart, it requires 
magnetic resonance images synchronized with ECG and 
breathing in order to reduce the noise and motion artefacts 
caused by to the cardiac cycle and breathing movements. 
Heart tissue can also be personalized using MRI [5], such as 
the location and extension of the Myocardium. The CCS 
and the fiber orientation cannot be personized yet because of 
limited information. Also the mechanic behavior of the heart 
cannot be simulated with a high accuracy. With the 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

exception of the work by Sermesant et al. [6], most models 
that have been built by the medical imaging/computer vision 
community incorporate only limited aspects of the 
physiology of the heart. Van assen et al. [6], made a 
significant amount of research on active shape based models 
for cardiac segmentation, they succeeded to create a 3D 
shape of the heart. In the other hand, Mitchell et al. [7], 
introduced a new model, it focus on modeling the entire 
cardiac volume, and not just the surface as surface models 
do. The main advantage of this method is: the shape 
deformations can be learned from a given training set. 
Sermesant 
created 
a 
model 
which 
simulates 
the 
electromechanical behavior of the heart in a numeric 
efficient way. By incorporating a priori knowledge about 
cardiac properties. Models based on tissue deformation [8], 
where the third dimension corresponds to time. This method 
estimate the cardiac wall motion with the help of a metric 
measuring the curvature properties of the surface. Matthews 
and baker [9] introduced a novel image alignment 
algorithm. This new algorithm can be used to align MRI 
slices in order to create 3D volume with it. 
 
     To obtain a high quality virtual model of the heart, one 
needs to prepare the data carefully because the final 
rendered model depends on it. A major factor that can affect 
the model quality is the technique used to extract 3D sub-
surfaces. 
     In this paper we offer a new method to create a high 
quality virtual model of the human heart. The model we 
propose is meant to improve the segmentation stage. We use 
both thresholding and growing region segmentation and to 
improve the rendered quality of the model, we used the 
marching cube algorithm. For the visualization stage, we 
used the game engine unity 3D to create an augmented 
reality system. 
. 
III. 
DATA ACQUISITION 
As described in Fig. 1, there are four primary steps in our 
approach 
to 
the 
3D 
heart 
construction 
problem. 
Reconstructing a static heart model involves the following 
four successive steps: 
a. Acquisition of MRI Data Sets. 
b. Semi-automatic extraction of the structure information. 
c. Interpolation and 3D reconstruction of the static heart 
model. 
The overview of the system is shown in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  General Architechture of our system 
    We use MRI images for the construction of 3D heart 
proposed here. The images used for developing the 3D heart 
model are identical to the ones described in [11]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Different palnes,  (A) Axial, (B) Sagittal and (C) Coronal 
The shape of the 3D heart obtained using the MRI data 
was based on the axial, sagittal and coronal planes Fig. 2  of 
the human heart. We use 210 slices to cover the entire heart. 
IV. 
SEGMENTATION 
In this section, we describe the segmentation methods we 
used to correctly perform the segmentation of a 2D cardiac 
slices. 
A. Thresholding 
One of the most important tasks in 3D medical image 
reconstruction is segmentation because it affects directly the 
rendered quality and the results obtained. Each image slice 
is segmented individually to obtain the higher precision as 
we can get. 
 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 3.  Result of segmentation using thresholing, (A) Original image, 
(B) Segmented image S=110 
 
We start by fixing a constant S (a threshold [12]). If a pixel 
F (i, j) has a gray scale value higher than S, it will be 
assigned to category 1 (white color); otherwise, it will be 
assigned to category 2 (black color). 
B. Growing Region 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Growing region segmentation 
 
The concept of ”region” means an assembly of points 
with similar properties. Image segmentation based on region 
aims to partition an image into a set of regions with 
common characteristics. Region growing [13] is a method 
that is based on grouping pixels or sub regions into larger 
regions based on predefined properties (similar properties). 
The main idea is to start with a set of seed points and grow 
the regions by comparing each seed to its neighbor (4 or 8) 
pixels that have similar properties to the seed. 
 
V. 
3D RECONSTRUCTION OF THE HEART 
The principle of the 3D reconstruction models from three 
dimensional stacks of 2D parallel images [14] of an atomic 
structure is done by rendering techniques, such as surface or 
volume that is based on an automatic or manual 
segmentation structures to reconstruct it using the 2D 
images. Marching cubes [15] algorithm is one of the most 
used algorithm in medical images reconstruction. So far, the 
marching cubes algorithm is used in lot of applications due 
to its relatively simple principle and strong quality of 
results.  
The algorithm of Marching Cubes is based on surfaces to 
extract an equipotential surface (subsurface) of a 3D mesh 
structured and uniform model [16]. The marching cube 
algorithm is applied to a cube after the other. Marching 
cubes is based on a divide and conquer method to locate the 
surface in a logical cube created from eight pixels. The 
objective of the Marching Cubes algorithm is to create the 
3D model of the anatomical structure interest. 
 
Figure 5.  Marching Cubes 
 
Principle: 
 
Create a cube Fig. 5 
 
Classification of the vertices on each cube 
 
Create an index for the cube 
 
 Search Configuration corresponding for the 15 
patterns 
 
Positioning the point of intersection of the surface 
with the cube using a Linear interpolation 
 
Calculate the normal for each vertex 
 
 Interpolation normal for each vertex of the triangle 
 
Repeat steps for the other cubes 
The grouping of surfaces obtained surfaces helps to obtain 
the approximation of the desired volume of the cardiac 
system. Paul Bourke invented a cube numbering system that 
allows to create an index for each case, based on the state of 
the vertex Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 6.  Cubes Numbering. 
To create an index we must classify the vertices of 
cubes: 
 
1 if it is inside the surface 
 
0 if it is outside 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Then, we need to create a surface topology in the cube, 
and since there are 8 vertices in the cube and each vertex is 
represented by two binary states inside and outside (0 and 
1), then we have 256 case of surfaces which can intersect in 
a single cube or 256 possible configurations. By giving 
numbers to these 256 cases, we create a table to extract 
surface-edge intersections in each cube, given the labeling 
of a cubes vertices. The table contains the edges intersected 
for each case. But through rotational, symmetries and 
inversion internal / external points can be reduced to 15 only 
configurations that give 15 different triangles shown in Fig. 
7 
 
 
Figure 7.  Trianguled Cubes. 
 
     Using the index to tell which edge the surface intersects, 
we can interpolate the surface intersection along the edge. 
We use linear interpolation, but have experimented with 
higher degree interpolations. Since the algorithm produces 
at least one and as many as four triangles per cube, the 
higher degree surfaces show little improvement over linear 
interpolation. 
In summary, marching cubes creates a surface from a 
threedimensional set of data. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
We have applied MC to data obtained from MRI, as well 
as data generated from analytic functions. We present three 
case studies that illustrate the quality of the constructed 
surfaces and some modeling options. Each image was 
rendered at 512 by 512 resolution. 
 
Figure 8.  3D  Reconstruction using MRI, (A) without segmentation, (B) 
with segmentation 
     This 3D model is obtained after the elimination of the 
segmentation phase. We notice the existance of bones, veins 
and arteries. To isolate the 3D model of the human heart 
should always go through a segmentation phase. Sometimes 
this phase is made in a manual way. We found that the 
quality of rendered increases with increasing the number of 
pictures in the matrix that will interpolate. The heart appears 
as a single object whose geometry is complex. The 
appearance of false 3D geometric facets is due to the 
segmentation problem. 
 
Figure 9.  3D construction using 24 slices 
     Linear interpolation between the different cuts is limited 
because of limitation of images. This affects the quality of  
3D model of the cardiac system. One can notice the 
presence of the right and left ventricle, but the fabric is 
separated is not built. 
 
Figure 10.  3D construction using 210 slices with manual segmentation 
This 3D model Fig. 10 is obtained after eliminating false 
faces. After using 210 images in the reconstruction phase, 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

the model appears with a realistic effect. The phase of 
eliminating false faces remains manual for now . These false 
faces are generated in an automatic way to the noise of 
acquisition. 
In this work, we have created a 3D Model of the human 
heart based on MRI, then we used the AR [17] to visualize 
the 3D model we have created in a real scene. The 
visualization system was developed using the Vuforia 
package in the game engine unity 3D, which provides 
efficient implementations and a high render quality of many 
advanced graphic techniques for the visualization of the 
heart geometry. This system is also based on high quality 
and real time rendering. To get the accurate position of data 
we use a 2D Marker Fig. 11, which we use to manipulate 
parameters of the visualization. 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Marker used to track localization 
Since we track the marker in each frame (100 times per 
second) we need to provide a way for users to easily initiate 
abort interaction with the simulation. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
We create a 3D human heart model based on MRI. We 
have applied MC algorithm to data obtained from MRI. 
Although the model was trained on a small sample of 
representative images (Fig.10), it shows excellent behavior 
for a wide range of images. 3D computational models of 
cardiac anatomy and function have benefited significantly 
from the revolution of medical imaging systems. Compared 
with previously published, the model proposed here is a 
human heart model with a high degree of realism and 
anatomical details developed to improve the understanding 
of the anatomy of the heart. Like most literary models this 
model is an approximation of heart. The level of realism and 
detail achieved is due in large part to the quality of images 
used in the construction of the model. Visual information 
about cardiac conduction system is still limited because of 
data transformation from 2D images to 3D information. As 
a future work, we are going to create a 3D moving heart 
based on TDM images. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
     The authors would like to acknowledge the financial 
support of this work by grants from General Direction of 
Scientific Research (DGRST), Tunisia, under the ARUB 
program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Govind, S. Babyon, and G. Jankharia, Steadystate MRI imaging 
sequences: physics, classification and clinical applications, 2008. 
[2] L. L. Creswell, J. S. Pirlo, W. H. Perman, M. V. Vannier and M. K. 
Pasque, Mathematical Modeling of the Heart Using Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging, 11.581-9, 1992. 
[3] M. Lorgane and R. M. Gulrajani, A Computer Heart Model 
Incorporating Anisotropic Propagation: L. Model Construction and 
Simulation of Normal Activation 26.245-61, 1993. 
[4] S. Neiderer, K. Rhode, R. Razavi and N. Smith, The Importance of 
Model Parameters and Boundary conditions in whole Organ Models 
of Cardiac Contraction. In : Imaging Model Heart, LNCS 5528. 
Berlin Heidelberg : Springe-Verlag, p. 348-56, 2009. 
[5] M. Sermesant et al., Deformable biomedical models :application to 
4D cardiac image analysis, 2003. 
[6] V. Assen et al., SPASM : a 3D-ASM for segmentation of sparse and 
arbitrarily cardiac MRI data, 2006. 
[7] S. Mitchell et al., 3D active apperance models : segmentation of 
cardiac MR and ultrasound images, 2002. 
[8] G. hamarneh and T. Gustavsson, Deformable spatio-temporal shape 
models: extending ASM to 2D + time, 2004.  
[9] I. Matthews and S. Baker, Equivalence and efficiency of image 
alignement algorithms. 
[10] H.Ashikaga et al., Feasibility of image-based simulation to estimate 
ablation target in human Ventricular arrhythmia. Heart Rhythm, 
2013.  
[11] G. Evelin, Y. Lakshmi and G. Wiselin, MR brain Image 
Segmentation based on thresholding, 2013.  
[12] L. Wang and M. Pei, Left Ventricle : Fully Automated Segmentation 
Based on Spatiotemporal Continuity and Myocardium Information in 
Cine Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging (LV-FAST), 2015. 
[13] D. Mendoza et al., Impact of Diastolic Dysfunction Siverity on 
Global Left Venticular Volumetric fillin gassessment by Automated 
Segmentation of routine cine Cardiovascular magnetic resonance, 
2010. 
[14] A. Dietrich and C. E. Scheidegger, Marching Cubes without Skinny 
Triangles, 2009. 
[15] W. E. Lorensen and H. E. Cline, Marching Cubes: A High Resolution 
3D Surface Construction Algorithm, 1987. 
[16] Olov Engwall, A 3D Tongue Model Based on MRI Data, 2000. 
[17] P.chinag  , Augmented Reality Paper Clay Making Based on Hand 
Gesture Recognition , 2014.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

