Database Model Visualization in Virtual Reality: 
A WebVR and Benediktine Space Approach 
Roy Oberhauser 
Computer Science Dept. 
Aalen University 
Aalen, Germany 
e-mail: roy.oberhauser@hs-aalen.de
Abstract - As the data era and the Internet of Everything 
unfolds, databases are becoming ubiquitous and an integral part 
of software while alternative database types such as NoSQL 
grow in popularity. Thus, software engineers, not just database 
specialists, are more likely to encounter and need to deal with 
these databases. While Virtual Reality (VR) technology has 
increased in popularity, its integration in software development 
tooling has been limited. One application area for WebVR 
technology includes database-model visualization, permitting 
web-based cross-platform and remote VR access. This paper 
describes Virtual Reality Immersion in Data Models (VRiDaM), 
a generic database-model approach for visualizing, navigating, 
and conveying database-model information interactively in a 
web browser using WebVR technology utilizing Benediktine 
space visualization for heterogeneous (relational and NoSQL) 
database models. A prototype shows its viability and an 
empirical study looked at usability, effectiveness, and efficiency. 
Keywords - virtual reality; database visualization; database 
tools; visual development environments; database modeling; 
software engineering; WebVR; Benediktine space. 
I.
 INTRODUCTION
Data has become the most coveted "raw material" of both 
our time and the foreseeable future, in some respects 
analogous to a gold rush. Cisco estimates there will be 27bn 
networked devices by 2021 [1]. The ongoing digitalization 
involving Industry 4.0 and the Internet of Everything will 
imply a large increase in databases to be able to store and 
retrieve this data, in particular embedded databases. IDC 
estimates the current annual data creation rate at 16.1ZB 
(Zettabytes), and by 2025 163ZB, with embedded data by then 
constituting nearly 20% of all data created [2]. As data 
explodes, software engineers are increasingly faced with the 
daunting task of structuring and analyzing such databases 
across various DataBase Management System (DBMS) types, 
including relational and NoSQL types such as document 
(semi-structured), key-value, wide column (extensible 
record), in memory, and graph [3]. 
Thus, software engineers are increasingly faced with 
developing and maintaining software that integrates some 
form of data repository, data store, or database. While the 
original developers may have a clear (and correct to a certain 
degree) mental model of their actual data model, the 
maintenance situation is exacerbated by proliferation of 
relational (mostly SQL) and NoSQL database types and the 
relatively high turnover rates common in the software 
industry, resulting in developers unfamiliar with the data 
models attempting to quickly comprehend the database 
structures involved with these software applications.  
Humans tend to be visually-oriented and can detect and 
remember visual patterns well. Information visualization has 
the potential to support human understanding and insight 
while dealing with resource constraints on the human as well 
as computer side. Common ways for visually conveying 
database structures include 2D entity-relationship (E-R) 
modeling and diagrams [4], but these are typically applied to 
relational databases (RDB) and NoSQL databases may or may 
not have a tool that includes visual support. As to DBMS 
tools, often a database product has a preferred product-
specific tool offering web-based or standard 2D graphical user 
interfaces (GUIs), while certain tools support multiple 
database products of one specific type (e.g., MySQL 
workbench for SQL databases).  
Contemporaneously, VR has made inroads in its 
accessibility as hardware prices have dropped and capabilities 
have improved. The VR market is rapidly expanding, with VR 
revenue reaching $2.7bn in 2016, a 10-fold increase to $25bn 
by 2021 [5]. However, software engineers mostly do not have 
access to integrated VR capabilities in their development 
tools. Broad VR usage is relatively new and this market 
segment small compared to the general VR market. 
This application paper contributes Virtual Reality 
Immersion in Data Models (VRiDaM, pronounced like 
freedom), a generalized approach to heterogeneous (relational 
and non-relational) database-model visualization in VR , 
using WebVR in a web browser and a Benediktine-space [6]-
[9] visualization paradigm. Thus, database models from
different data store types can be visualized and navigated
(locally or remotely) in VR via a cross-platform web browser
and a VR headset and controller. We describe its principles
and features for visualizing, navigating, and conveying
database information interactively to support exploratory,
analytical, and descriptive cognitive processes [10]. A
prototype implementation demonstrates its viability and its
usability is evaluated in an empirical study.
The paper is organized as follows: the following section 
discusses related work; Section 3 presents our solution 
approach. In Section 4, our implementation is described. An 
evaluation is described in Section 5, followed by a conclusion. 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

II. 
RELATED WORK 
We are unaware of directly related work regarding 
database visualization using VR. VR Juggler [11] provides 
VR support for developing VR applications, but not for 
database modeling and visualization. As to VR approaches for 
software structure visualization, ExplorViz [12] is a WebVR 
application that supports VR exploration of 3D software cities 
using Oculus Rift together with Microsoft Kinect for gesture 
recognition. As to non-VR visualization, [13] provides an 
overview and survey of 3D software visualization tools across 
various software engineering areas. Software Galaxies [14] 
gives a web-based visualization of dependencies among 
popular package managers and supports flying, with each star 
representing a package clustered by dependencies. CodeCity 
[15] is a 3D software visualization approach based on a city 
metaphor and implemented in SmallTalk on the Moose 
reengineering framework. X3D-UML [16] provides 3D 
support with UML grouping classes in planes. In contrast, 
VRiDaM focuses on visualizing database structures and 
leverages WebVR capabilities without requiring gestures. 
Database management (DBM) tools are typically DB 
type-specific and require some installation. Each professional 
RDB product usually offers its own tool, but since most RDBs 
support the Structured Query Language (SQL), certain RDB 
tools can access other RDBs using RDB-specific drivers. For 
example, MySQL Workbench works across multiple 
databases and supports reverse-engineering of 2D E-R 
diagrams. Schemaball [17] provides a 2D circular composite 
schema diagram for SQL databases. As to 3D RDB tools, 
DIVA (Database Immersive Visual Analysis) uses stacked 
rings with rectangular tables attached to them (forming a 
cylinder), with the tables with the most foreign keys sorted to 
the top of the stack. Alternatively, stacked square layers of 
tables can be displayed and 2D E-R diagrams shown. Actual 
data values are not visualized. For NoSQL databases, each 
database type differs and the associated DBM tools. One 
example of a popular wide-column database (WDB) is 
Apache Cassandra, for which DataStax Studio is a Java-based 
DBM tool with a web GUI (Graphical User Interface). As to 
document-oriented databases (DDBs), MongoDB is a popular 
example and MongoDB Compass, Robomongo, and Studio 
3T being example DBM tools. For graph databases (GDB), 
Neo4j is popular and graph DBM tools include Neo4j admin, 
Structr, Gephi, Graffeine, etc. In contrast, the VRiDaM 
approach is more generalized to work across heterogeneous 
DB types, thus permitting users to only ramp up on one tool, 
it is cross-platform and provides an immersive web-based VR 
experience. Furthermore, in contrast to the 3D DIVA or 2D 
Schemaball, our approach avoids the visual connection 
'yarnballs' as the number of connections and tables scale. 
Work on big data visualization techniques in conjunction 
with VR is discussed by Olshannikova et al. in [18]. Herman, 
Melançon, and Marshall [19] survey work on graph 
visualization and navigation for information visualization. In 
contrast, our focus is displaying the database-model structure, 
not on displaying and analyzing large amounts of data per se, 
and we apply Benediktine spatial placement in conjunction 
with a dynamic self-organizing force-directed graph [20]. 
III. 
SOLUTION 
Visualization, especially VR with its wide viewing angles, 
can leverage peripheral vision for information, whereby visual 
data is both consciously and unconsciously seen and 
processed. If leveraged well, visualization can be cognitively 
easier in providing insights than an equivalent textual analysis 
would require. Traditional text-centric tabular formats or 
boxes in E-R diagrams do not explicitly take advantage of 
such visual capabilities. Also, if the contents of each database 
table were visualized as a rectangular 2D object, as it scales 
both in number of tables and the size of various tables, lucidity 
issues occur that nullify the advantage of VR visualization. 
To provide some background context for our solution, we 
describe 
several 
perspectives 
that 
were 
considered. 
Information can be grouped and large amounts of information 
provided in a relatively small amount of graphical space. Yet 
humans are limited in their sensory perception and focus, and 
thus visualization considerations include: determining the 
proper balance for what to place into visual focus in which 
context, what to place into the periphery, what to hide or show, 
and to what extent and at what point should what be 
visualized. To develop actionable insights from visualization, 
the knowledge crystallization cognitive process involves 
acquiring information, making sense of it, creating something 
new, and acting on it [21]. Regarding visual perception, gestalt 
psychology [22] is based on the four principles of emergence, 
reification, 
multistable 
perception, 
and 
invariance. 
Formulated gestalt grouping laws regarding visual perception 
include proximity, similarity, closure, symmetry, common 
fate, continuity, good gestalt, past experience, common 
region, and element connectedness. For visual representation, 
we considered Don Norman’s design principles, in particular 
affordance, consistency, and mapping [23]. Other concepts 
considered were [9] information space, cognitive space, 
spatialization, ordination, and pre-attentive processing, which 
refers to the accumulation of information from the 
environment subconsciously [24]. Visualization techniques 
explicitly analyzed with regard to their appropriateness for 
displaying data models in VR included books, cone trees, 
fisheye views, information cubes, perspective walls, spheres, 
surface 
plots/cityscapes/3D 
bar 
graphs, 
viewpoints, 
workspace/information space/3D rooms, worlds in worlds, 
and Benediktine space [19][21].   
A. Benediktine Space 
Benediktine space transforms or maps an information 
object’s attributes to extrinsic (e.g., Cartesian coordinates, 
time) and intrinsic (e.g., size, shape, color) information spatial 
dimensions. To keep objects from overlapping, mapping 
principles include exclusion, maximal exclusion, scale, and 
transit [6][7][8][9].  
B. WebVR  
WebVR is a Mozilla JavaScript API that enables web 
browsers to access VR hardware. A-Frame is an open source 
framework for displaying VR content within HTML. It is 
based on an entity component system architecture in which 
each object in a scene is an entity (a container) consisting of 
components that provide desired functionality or behavior for 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

that entity. A-Frame uses the three.js library to provide 3D 
graphics display in the browser and simplify WebGL 
programming. Systems are data containers. In contrast to 
game or PC station VR solutions, the use of VR within web 
browsers is relatively new, thus in deciding on the 
visualization techniques to use we considered the limitations 
and available capabilities and performance offered with 
WebVR for standard hardware (such as notebooks) that 
developers might use. Visualization considerations included 
selecting what and how many objects are displayed at any 
given time. Furthermore, in contrast to games, there is no real 
upper limit on the number of simultaneous entities a database 
or database model may have, which may overtax the 
computing and rendering capabilities and have negative 
impacts on the frame rates in VR, making the experience 
unsatisfactory and possibly resulting in VR sickness.  
To characterize WebVR performance, we experimented 
with the implementation, some measurements of which are 
shown in Table 1. They are averaged across 10 measurements 
for 10 tables with 50 columns each on a notebook with Intel 
Core i5-3320M 2.6Ghz, 8GB RAM, Win7 x64, Intel HD 
Graphics 4000, Chrome 60.0.3112.113 and A-Frame 0.6.1. 
TABLE I.  
AVERAGE A-FRAME PERFORMANCE (FRAMES PER 
SECOND) 
Variants 
Loading 
(fps) 
Running 
(fps) 
spheres, no edges 
25 
61 
spheres, with edges 
21 
53 
labeled spheres, no edges 
11 
19 
circles, no edges 
25 
57 
spheres, no edges (10x nodes) 
3 
12 
 
Based on our experience and measurements with the A-
Frame implementation, the following performance findings 
were made and affected our solution: 1) the number of 
rendered objects has a major impact on performance, 2) edges 
have a negative effect on performance, 3) text labels have a 
severe impact, 4) circles and spheres are equivalent. 
For Finding 1, that implies that only the minimum number 
of objects should be displayed. Thus, rows (data values) will 
only be shown for selected column, not for all columns. Due 
to Finding 2, objects will be displayed without edges and 
connectors between objects will be avoided (force-graph). 
Due to Finding 3, text will be limited and the data value only 
shown when a circle (tuple) is selected. 
C. VRiDaM Solution 
Our VRiDaM solution architecture is based on the 
information visualization reference model by Card et al. [25] 
(see Figure 1) and involves transforming the raw data and its 
metadata to internal structures (the first two being purely data 
forms), and then mapping these to visual element structures, 
and transforming these to the views seen be the user (the last 
two being visual forms). To adjust the views, the user provides 
interaction input affecting one of the aforementioned 
transformation steps. 
 
Figure 1.  VRiDaM architecture. 
The VRiDaM solution principles (P:) are as follows: 
Support heterogeneous database-model types. Our VR 
approach works across different databases products and 
database types (SQL and NoSQL), thus familiarity with a 
single VR app could be leveraged across the various database 
types. Alternatively, currently developing unique VR app 
tools for each database and/or database type would be 
exorbitant relative to the number of software engineers that 
have VR capabilities and have database-model interests, and 
inefficient from a learning/training perspective.  
Leverage spatial visualization in VR using a Benediktine 
spatial object placement approach. Our approach leverages 
the additional dimensional visualization and navigational 
capabilities VR provides (within current limitations of 
WebVR). Specifically, we utilize a Benediktine space 
visualization technique [6] with visual object spatial 
placement based on extrinsic spatial dimensions, whereas 
other entity properties are represented by intrinsic dimensions 
(form, size, color, etc.). The principle of exclusion ensures no 
two objects occupy the same spatial location, and the principle 
of maximal exclusion ensures that different data items are 
separated as much as possible [7]. 
Leverage dynamic self-organizing force-directed graph 
visualization to indicate the strength of relationship between 
objects via proximity. For visualizing relations, dynamic self-
organizing force-directed graph placement [20] can be used in 
place of connectors to indicate via proximity more strongly 
related entities from those that are less- or unrelated. This is 
combined with visual highlighting of related objects when 
selecting an object. In this way we intend to avoid the "ball of 
yarn" issue with visual connectors as database models scale. 
Cross-platform web-centric VR access. Our approach 
utilizes a browser-based implementation based on WebVR to 
enable cross-platform access to VR content assuming the user 
has a VR headset. Software engineers often work across 
different operating systems (Windows, Linux, etc.), and this 
permits them to utilize the app from any platform with 
appropriate WebVR browser support. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The WebVR-based prototype uses A-Frame and D3.js, 
which produces dynamic, interactive data visualizations in 
web browsers. For a self-organizing force-directed graph, our 
implementation uses the d3-force-3d physics engine from D3. 
Firefox and Chrome were used as web browsers. For database 
connectivity, the Spring Framework 4.3.1 was used and tested 
with PostgreSQL, MSSQL, MongoDB, Cassandra, and 
Neo4j. Content for the force-directed graph component was 
transformed to JSON format. The Northwind Trading sample 
database consisting of 13 tables and 6635 records was used, 
primarily, . Figure 2 shows the class diagram regarding 
database integration. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 2.  Class diagram of database integration. 
The following visual object forms were selected: 
Cubes are used to represent database tables (collections for 
document stores, or labels for graphs), analogous to cube 
furniture that can be used as a table (Figure 3).  
Cylinders are used to represent database columns (set of 
similarly typed data, known as keys for document stores or 
graphs), analogous to columns in a building (Figure 4). 
Planes are used for projecting the database data records 
(rows, tuples, or entries - the actual data values) since these 
can be very large in both columns and records and would thus 
occupy a large amount of VR space Figure 5). A plane 
supports maximum readability and permits VR navigation 
around it. 
 
Figure 3.  VRiDaM showing Northwind tables in Benediktine space. 
 
Figure 4.  Columns visible orbiting selected table (identical color). 
 
Figure 5.  Table records projected onto a plane. 
As to navigation and interaction, users can move objects 
as desired using standard VR controllers (we used an HTC 
Vive) or can use a mouse and keyboard. As seen in Figure 6, 
besides using spatial proximity to indicate closer associations, 
if a user selects an object, that object and all its directly 
referenced objects are highlighted. A key image is provided as 
an affordance and, if selected, a popup shows the primary and 
foreign keys names. If desired, lines can optionally be used to 
emphasize relations as shown in Figure 7.  
 
Figure 6.  Primary and foreign keys for table shown as popups. 
 
Figure 7.  Example optional relation visualization using lines. 
The configuration menu is overlaid and can be used to 
connect to a database and query (e.g., SQL, Cypher, etc.) by 
typing on the keyboard and executed via enter. In order to 
quickly find a table, they are listed on the menu for selection 
and navigation to the visual object. 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 8.  VRiDaM of MongoDB with dbkoda example data [26], 
showing spatial orientation and not intended to be readable. 
 
Figure 9.  VRiDaM of Neo4j with Northwind example data. 
Figure 8 shows the VRiDaM visualization for MongoDB 
with dbkoda example data [26] (a Northwind port was no 
longer available), while Figure 9 shows Neo4j with 
Northwind example data. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
To evaluate VRiDaM, we compared its usage with a 
typical 2D database tool, DbVisualizer 10.0.13 (Free), shown 
in Figure 10 with the Northwind database loaded to provide 
an impression of the model’s complexity, not meant to be 
readable. A convenience sample of eleven computer science 
students was selected. One experienced VR sickness 
symptoms and thus only the remaining ten were included in 
the results. All indicated they had some familiarity with SQL 
and they lacked NoSQL experience, so we chose to compare 
VRiDaM with an SQL tool. Three had not experienced VR 
before. The subjects were randomly selected to start in either 
VR mode (6) or the common tool (4). PostgreSQL Version 10 
with the Northwind sample database (Figure 11Figure 10. ) 
was used. Java 8 update 151, Apache Tomcat v8.0, AFRAME 
0.8.2, Firefox 61, and SteamVR Version 2018-05-24 
(1527117754).  
 
Figure 10.  Northwind Traders data model in DbVisualizer. 
These database tasks were given verbally and equivalent 
but not the exact same five questions asked in the other mode:  
1) Which tables have a relation to table X?  
2) To which table(s) does the table X have a relation?  
3) What columns does table X have?  
4) What are the foreign or primary keys of table X?  
5) What are the keys in table X? 
TABLE II.  
VRIDAM VS. DBVISUALIZER TASKS (AVERAGED) 
 
VRiDaM 
DbVisualizer 
Task duration (mm:ss) 
4:48 
1:46 
Cumulative answers given 
(total/incorrect/missing) 
130/6/4 
140/1/6 
Task correctness 
92% 
95% 
 
The tasks results are shown in Table II. VRiDaM task 
duration was 2.7 times longer, and this can be expected since 
VR requires navigation time through space that 2D tools do 
not incur. The number of correct answers across the five tasks 
were 13 in VR and 14 in DbVisualizer, with ten subjects 
resulting in 130 or 140 cumulatively correct answers 
respectively. These longer VR task durations may be 
acceptable for certain user scenarios, and gives insight into 
what liabilities can be expected. A correctness difference of 
3% across ten subjects is not necessarily significant and shows 
that the users were able to immerse themselves within minutes 
into a Benediktine space paradigm and perform tasks 
effectively. The task correctness differences could be 
attributed to personality, human alertness, distraction, or other 
factors beyond the paradigms or VR influence, as only 4 
subjects in VR and only 3 subjects in non-VR were 
responsible for all errors, the rest had no mistakes.  
Subjective impressions are shown in Figure 11 for 
VRiDaM intuitiveness and suitability of the controller 
interface and visualization as well as overall enjoyment. We 
note no significant difference between the interaction and the 
visualization intuitiveness or suitability. Only one preferred 
VRiDaM. This may indicate that more training and experience 
would be needed for them to feel more comfortable with a VR 
tool than with a 2D tool. Various debriefing comments 
indicated that the Benediktine spatial arrangement was either 
liked or not an issue for the subjects. When debriefed about 
what they liked about VRiDaM, comments included that it 
was a better database-model visualization, that tables were 
real objects instead of text boxes, how tables where displayed 
in space, and the highlighting effect. 
 
Figure 11.  Average responses for VRiDaM (scale of 1 to 5 with 5 best). 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The evaluation shows some of the challenges in utilizing 
VR for database-model visualization and interaction. VR 
object interaction is not standardized nor do users have 
familiarity and experience with it as they do with 2D mouse-
based user interfaces. While VR enables new immersive 
paradigms and metaphors, these are not necessarily 
immediately intuitive. VR movement (moving the camera 
perspective) is more time consuming than scrolling or 
zooming a 2D perspective. For simpler tasks, VR tends to 
require more interaction time to accomplish the same task and 
thus entails efficiency costs. A 3D space permits objects to 
hide other objects, and for opaque objects requires movement 
to determine that no other objects are hidden. Given that the 
subjects were already familiar with E-R diagrams and SQL 
tools, yet had no prior training with VRiDaM and Benediktine 
space, we are satisfied with the ratings on suitability and 
intuitiveness. Based on comments about what subjects liked 
about VRiDaM we see it as a positive indicator and intend to 
investigate this approach further. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper contributes VRiDaM, an immersive WebVR 
heterogeneous database visualization approach, applying 
Benediktine space visualization and force-directed graphs to 
(relational and non-relational) database models. It thus avoids 
the connection "yarn-balls" other techniques have in 
visualizing connections by leveraging spatial locality. A 
prototype was used to verify its viability and an empirical 
study evaluated its usability.  
The empirical evaluation showed VRiDaM to be less 
efficient for equivalent analysis tasks while correctness was 
slightly worse. Intuitiveness, suitability, and enjoyment were 
given a better than neutral rating on average. One case of VR 
sickness occurred and we hope to address it in future work.  
One ongoing challenge for a generic tool approach is the 
plethora of non-standardized interfaces to NoSQL and other 
databases. However, by providing driver plugins we believe 
that the adaptation overhead is small in relation to the 
advantages of a VR visualization that VRiDaM brings. Future 
work includes a more comprehensive empirical study and will 
investigate various optimizations to improve usability, 
performance, and scalability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author thanks Christoph Bauer and Camil Pogolski for 
assistance with the design, implementation, and evaluation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cisco. The Zettabyte Era: Trends and Analysis. (Jun 7, 2017). 
Whitepaper. Available from https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/ 
solutions/collateral/service-provider/visual-networking-index-
vni/vni-hyperconnectivity-wp.html 2018.07.24 
[2] D. Reinsel, J. Gantz, and J. Rydning, “Data Age 2025: The 
Evolution of Data to Life-Critical,” IDC Whitepaper (April, 
2017). 
[3] R. Cattell, “Scalable SQL and NoSQL data stores,” Acm 
Sigmod Record 39, no. 4, pp. 2-27, 2011. 
[4] P. Chen, “Entity-Relationship Modeling: Historical Events, 
Future Trends, and Lessons Learned,” In Software pioneers. 
Springer-Verlag, pp. 296-310, 2002.  
[5] T. Merel, “The reality of VR/AR growth,” Jan 11, 2017. 
Available from http://techcrunch.com/2017/01/11/the-reality-
of-vrar-growth/ 2018.07.24 
[6] M. Benedikt, “Cyberspace: some proposals,” In Cyberspace, 
Michael Benedikt (Ed.). MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 119-
224, 1991. 
[7] P. Young, “Three Dimensional Information Visualisation,” 
Technical Report, University of Durham, 1991. 
[8] U. Fayyad, A. Wierse, and G. Grinstein (Eds.), Information 
Visualization in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2002. ISBN: 1558606890. 
[9] S. Fabrikant and B. Buttenfield, "Formalizing Semantic Spaces 
for Information Access," Annals of the Association of 
American Geographers, 91(2), pp. 263-280, 2001. 
[10] D. Butler, J. Almond, R. Bergeron, K. Brodlie, and R. Haber, 
“Visualization reference models,” In Proc. Visualization '93 
Conf., IEEE CS Press, pp. 337-342, 1993. 
[11] A. Bierbaum et al, “VR Juggler: A virtual platform for virtual 
reality application development,” In Proc. IEEE Virtual 
Reality. IEEE, pp. 89-96, 2001. 
[12] F. Fittkau, A. Krause, and W. Hasselbring. “Exploring software 
cities in virtual reality,” In Proc. IEEE 3rd Working Conf. on 
Software Visualization (VISSOFT). IEEE, pp. 130-134, 2015. 
[13] A. Teyseyre and M. Campo, “An overview of 3D software 
visualization,” In IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics. IEEE, 15(1), pp. 87-105, 2009. 
[14] A. 
Kashcha, 
“Software 
Galaxies,” 
Available 
from 
http://github.com/anvaka/pm/ 2018.07.24 
[15] J. Rilling and S. Mudur, “On the use of metaballs to visually 
map source code structures and analysis results onto 3d space,” 
In Proc. 9th Work. Conf. on Reverse Engineering. IEEE, pp. 
299-308, 2002. 
[16] P. 
McIntosh, 
“X3D-UML: 
user-centered 
design, 
implementation and evaluation of 3D UML using X3D,”  Ph.D. 
dissertation, RMIT University, 2009. 
[17] M. Krzywinski, “Schemaball: A New Spin on Database 
Visualization,” In Dr. Dobb's: The World of Software 
Development,, 2004.  
[18] E. Olshannikova, A. Ometov, Y. Koucheryavy, and T. Olsson, 
“Visualizing Big Data with augmented and virtual reality: 
challenges and research agenda,” J. of Big Data, 2(22), 2015. 
[19] I. Herman, G. Melancon, and M. Scott Marshall, “Graph 
visualization and navigation in information visualization: A 
survey,” In IEEE Transactions on visualization and computer 
graphics, 6(1), pp. 24-43, 2000. 
[20] G. Di Battista, P. Eades, R. Tamassia, and I. Tollis, Graph 
drawing: algorithms for the visualization of graphs. Prentice 
Hall PTR, 1998. 
[21] S. Card, “Information Visualization,” In: Human Computer 
Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, 
and Emerging Applications (Ed: Jacko, J.), Third Edition. CRC 
Press, pp. 544-545, 2012. 
[22] S. Palmer, Vision Science. MIT Press, Cambridge (USA) 1999, 
ISBN 978-0262161831. 
[23] D. Norman, The Design of Everyday Things: Revised and 
Expanded Edition. Hachette UK, 2013. 
[24] A. Van der Heijden, “Perception for selection, selection for 
action, and action for perception,” Visual Cognition, 3(4), pp. 
357-361, 1996. 
[25] S. Card, J. Mackinlay, and B. Schneiderman (editors), 
Readings in Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. 
Morgan Kaufman, 1999. 
[26] [Online] 
Available 
from 
https://github.com/ 
SouthbankSoftware/dbkoda-data 2018.08.12 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

