A Survey and Analysis of Reference Architectures for the Internet-of-things 
 
Hongyu Pei Breivold 
Industrial Internet-of-things 
ABB Corporate Research 
Västerås, Sweden 
hongyu.pei-breivold@se.abb.com 
 
 
Abstract—Increased connectivity and emerging autonomous 
cloud and Internet-of-things (IoT) technologies are motivating 
the 
transformation 
of 
the 
traditional 
product-focused 
development to cloud-based solutions and service-oriented 
business model in many companies. In line with this, several 
reference architectures for the Internet-of-things have been 
developed. Although some of these reference architectures 
have continued their development tracks in parallel and have 
different 
focus, 
they 
also 
have 
similarities 
in 
many 
perspectives, which may result in confusion in understanding 
and applying appropriate reference architectures for specific 
use cases. The aim of this study is therefore to survey these 
existing Internet-of-things reference architectures, clarify their 
characteristics, and analyze them from a variety of 
perspectives, including technology, process, quality and key 
system concerns, business and people. We also present several 
other relevant activities and initiatives related to the Internet-
of-things. 
Keywords-reference architecture; industrial internet-of-
things; smart industry; industrial automation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
defines Industrie4.0 [1] as the flexibility to enable machines 
and plants to adapt their behavior to changing orders and 
operating 
conditions 
through 
self-optimization 
and 
reconfiguration. Consequently, future smart factories require 
systems to have the ability to perceive information, derive 
findings and change their behavior accordingly, and store 
knowledge gained from experiences. Many organizations 
start to see the potential opportunities of the Internet-of-
things and its impacts on providing solutions that could offer 
operational advantages [2]. In line with this, there are several 
research initiatives and EU-funded research activities on 
Internet-of-things, covering various aspects, such as 
communication, hardware technology, identification and 
network discovery, security, interoperability, standardization, 
etc. Some examples are IERC – European Research Cluster 
on the Internet of Things [3], Industrial Internet Consortium 
[4], Industri4.0 [5], and the creation of the Alliance for 
Internet of Things Innovation (AIOTI) [6] by the European 
Commission [7], which initiates the development and future 
deployment of the Internet-of-things technology in Europe. 
There has also been a number of EU-funded research 
activities in Internet-of-things implementation and adoption, 
addressing various domains and use cases in smart cities, 
smart energy and smart grid, healthcare, food and water 
tracking, logistics and retail, and transportation [8]. 
Successful adoption of cloud computing and Internet-of-
things requires guidance around planning and integrating 
relevant technologies into the existing services and 
applications. Both industry and academia that want to 
implement cloud-based solutions seek for more information 
about best practices for migrating and adopting cloud 
computing and Internet-of-things concepts. According to [9], 
“Defining a cloud reference architecture is an essential step 
towards achieving higher levels of cloud maturity. Cloud 
reference architecture addresses the concerns of the key 
stakeholders by defining the architecture capabilities and 
roadmap aligned with the business goals and architecture 
vision”. Study [10] holds similar viewpoints. According to 
[10], in order to effectively build cloud-based enterprise 
solutions, there is a need for the definition of a systematic 
architecture that provides templates and guidelines and can 
be used as a reference for the architects or software engineers 
within the software development lifecycle. Therefore, several 
reference architectures have been developed and evolved. 
According to [11], a reference architecture incorporates the 
vision and strategy for the future. With high level of 
abstraction, a reference architecture provides a common 
structure and guidance for dealing with core aspects of 
developing, using and analyzing systems and solutions that 
can be tailored to different use cases and specific needs from 
multiple organizations.  
Although some of the reference architectures in this 
survey have continued their development tracks in parallel 
and have different focus, they also have similarities in many 
perspectives, which may result in confusion in understanding 
and applying appropriate reference architectures for specific 
use cases. In this paper, we present a survey of the existing 
reference architectures for the Internet-of-things, clarify the 
characteristics of these reference architectures, and analyze 
them from a variety of perspectives, including technology, 
process, quality and key system concerns, business and 
people. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II presents an overview of the existing reference 
architectures for the Internet-of-things. Section III describes 
some relevant organized Internet-of-things initiatives and 
activities. Section IV gives a comparison of the surveyed 
reference architectures from different perspectives, including 
technology, process, quality and key system concerns, 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

business and people, and discusses the findings from this 
study, and Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
REFERENCE ARCHITECTURES FOR THE INTERNET OF 
THINGS  
This section presents some well-known reference 
architectures for the Internet-of-things. 
A. Reference Architecture Model for Industrie 4.0 
(RAMI4.0) 
RAMI 4.0 [12] is a reference architecture for smart 
factories. It was initiated in Germany, and is driven by major 
companies in industry sectors. RAMI 4.0 addresses the 
Industrie4.0 [5] problem space from three dimensions, i.e., it 
is hierarchically structured to manage both vertical 
integration within the factory, as well as horizontal 
integration extending beyond individual factory locations, in 
combination 
with 
lifecycle 
and 
value 
streams 
of 
manufacturing applications for all the factories and all the 
parties involved, from engineering through component 
suppliers to the customers. This reference architecture aims 
to address four aspects, including horizontal integration 
through value networks, vertical integration within a factory, 
lifecycle management and end-to-end engineering, and 
human beings orchestrating the value stream. In RAMI4.0, 
the term Industrie4.0 is used to stand for the fourth industrial 
revolution in the organization and control of the entire value 
stream along the life cycle of a product. All relevant 
information is available in real-time through the networking 
of all instances, e.g., people, objects and systems involved in 
value creation. By connecting these instances, the value 
stream are derived from data at all times to create dynamic, 
self-organized, cross-organizational, real-time optimized 
value networks based on a range of criteria, such as costs, 
availability and consumption of resources.  
B. Industrial Internet Reference Architecture (IIRA) 
IIRA [13] is a standard-based reference architecture 
developed by the Industrial Internet Consortium [4] for 
industrial internet systems, which are large end-to-end 
systems integrating industrial control systems with enterprise 
systems, business processes and analytics solutions. In this 
context, the term industrial internet is used to represent 
Internet-of-things, machines, computers and people, enabling 
intelligent industrial operations using advanced data 
analytics for transformational business outcomes. It 
embodies the convergence of the global industrial 
ecosystem, 
advanced 
computing 
and 
manufacturing, 
pervasive sensing and ubiquitous network connectivity. 
This reference architecture is based on ISO/IEC/IEEE 
42010:2011 [14] and adopts the general concepts in the 
specification, such as concern, stakeholder, and viewpoint. 
The term concern refers to any topic of interest pertaining to 
the system. The various concerns of an industrial internet 
system are classified as four viewpoints, i.e., business, usage, 
functional and implementation. The business viewpoint 
addresses the concerns of the identification of stakeholders 
and their business vision, values and objectives. The usage 
viewpoint addresses the concerns of expected system usage 
and capabilities. The functional viewpoint focuses on the 
functional components in an industrial internet system, their 
interrelation and structure, the interfaces and interactions 
between them and with external environment. The 
implementation viewpoint focuses on the technologies 
needed to implement functional components, communication 
schemes and lifecycle procedures. Some key system 
characteristics addressed in IIRA to ensure the core functions 
of industrial systems over time include safety, security and 
resilience.  
C. IoT Architectural Reference Model (IoT-ARM)  
IoT-ARM [15], developed within the European project 
IoT-A, is an architectural reference model that aims to 
connect vertically closed systems, architectures and 
application areas for creating open systems and integrated 
environments and platforms. In this model, Internet-of-things 
is treated as an umbrella term for interconnected 
technologies, devices, objects and services. This reference 
model consists of several sub-models, of which a primary 
and mandatory model is the IoT domain model, describing 
all the concepts and their relations that are relevant in the 
Internet-of-things, such as devices, IoT services, and virtual 
entities. All the other models, such as the IoT information 
model, functional model, communication model, IoT trust, 
security and privacy model, together with the IoT reference 
architecture are based on the concepts introduced in the 
domain model. The IoT reference architecture adopts the 
definition of architectural views and perspectives from [16], 
though excludes use case specific views to ensure IoT- 
specific needs and application-independence in the reference 
architecture. The key architectural views of the Internet-of-
things reference architecture include IoT functional view, 
IoT information view, IoT deployment and operational view. 
The architectural perspectives of the Internet-of-things 
reference architecture tackle non-functional requirements, 
including evolution and interoperability, availability and 
resilience, trust, security and privacy, and performance and 
scalability. 
D. IEEE Standard for an Architectural Framework for 
Internet of Things (P2413) 
The P2413 standard [17] provides an architectural 
framework that aims to capture the commonalities, 
interactions and relationships across multiple domains and 
common architecture elements. It includes descriptions of 
various Internet-of-things domains, definitions of IoT 
domain abstractions, and identification of commonalities 
between different IoT domains. It also provides a blueprint 
for data abstraction and trust that includes protection, 
security, privacy, and safety. Similar to the Industrial 
Internet Reference Architecture, P2413 leverages existing 
applicable standards and follows the recommendations for 
architecture descriptions defined in ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 
[14]. According to [17], this standard provides a reference 
architecture that builds upon the reference model. The 
reference architecture covers the definition of basic 
architectural building blocks and their ability to be integrated 
into multi-tiered systems. The reference architecture also 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

addresses how to document and mitigate architecture 
divergence. In this standard, things, apps and services can be 
integrated into what would be abstracted as a “thing”. 
Information exchange could be horizontal or vertical, or 
both. 
E. Arrowhead Framework 
The Arrowhead framework [18] was developed within an 
European research project in automation, which aims to 
facilitate collaborative automation by networked devices for 
five business domains, i.e., production (manufacturing, 
process, and energy), smart buildings and infrastructures, 
electro-mobility, energy production and virtual markets of 
energy. This framework is based on service-oriented 
architecture to enable the Industrial Internet-of-things. The 
loosely coupled and discovery properties of service-oriented 
architecture improve the interoperability between devices 
and the integration of services provided by these devices. 
The concept of local clouds with well-defined isolation from 
the open Internet is used to support some key requirements 
of automation systems, such as real-time, security and safety, 
scalability and engineering simplicity. The dynamic 
characteristic of Internet of things is key in this framework. 
On the one hand, things come and go, and they may have 
limited bandwidth or energy supply. On the other hand, the 
integration of IoT systems needs to be dynamic based on the 
demand and availability. There are three core components in 
the local cloud services, i.e., service registry, authorization, 
and orchestration. In order to be Arrowhead compliant, the 
applications within the network should register the services 
they provide within the service registry component. The 
authorization component manages the access rules for 
specific services, and the orchestration component manages 
connection rules for specific services to allow dynamic 
reconfiguration of the service consumer and service provider 
endpoints [19].  
F. WSO2 IoT Reference Architecture 
Based on the projects deployed with customers to support 
Internet-of-things capabilities, the company WSO2 has 
proposed a reference architecture [20] that aims to support 
integration between systems and devices. Their definition of 
the Internet-of-things is the set of devices and systems that 
interconnect real-world sensors and actuators to the Internet. 
The WSO2 reference architecture consists of five layers, i.e., 
(i) device layer, in which each device has a unique identifier 
and is directly or indirectly attached to the Internet; (ii) 
communication layer, which supports the connectivity of the 
devices with multiple protocols for communication between 
the devices and the cloud; (iii) aggregation/bus layer, which 
aggregates communications from multiple devices, brokers 
communications to a specific device, and transform between 
various protocols; (iv) event processing and analytics layer; 
which processes and acts upon the events from the bus, and 
perform data storage; and (v) client/external communication 
layer, which enables users to communicate and interact with 
devices and obtain views into analytics and event processing. 
Besides these vertical layers, there are also two cross-cutting 
layers: (i) device manager, which communicates with and 
remotely manages devices, and maintain the list of device 
identities; and (ii) identity and access management for access 
control. 
G. Microsoft Azure IoT Reference Architecture 
The Azure Internet-of-things reference architecture [21] 
is built upon Microsoft Azure platform to connect, store, 
analyze and operationalize device data to provide deep 
business insights. This architecture consists of core platforms 
services and application-level components to facilitate 
processing needs across three main areas of IoT solutions, 
i.e., (1) device connectivity; (2) data processing, analytics 
and management; and (3) presentation and business 
connectivity. The guiding principles for the architecture 
include software and hardware heterogeneity to manage 
diverse scenarios, devices and standards, security and 
privacy, as well as hyper-scale deployments. The goal of the 
reference architecture is to connect sensors, devices, and 
intelligent operations using Microsoft Azure services. The 
key architecture components to reach this goal include (1) 
device connectivity, which manages different device 
connectivity options for IoT solutions; (2) device identity 
store, which manages all device identity information and 
allows for device authentication and management; (3) device 
registry store, which handles discovery and reference 
metadata related to provisioned devices; (4) device 
provisioning, which allows the system to be aware of the 
device capabilities and conditions; (5) device state store, 
which handles operational data related to the devices; (6) 
data flow and stream processing; (7) solution UX for 
graphical visualization of device data and analysis results; 
(8) App backend, which implements required business logic 
of an IoT solution; (9) business systems integration; and (10) 
at-rest data analytics. 
H. Internet-of-everything Reference Model 
The Internet-of-everything reference model [22] is 
developed by the Architecture Committee of the IoT World 
Forum hosted by Cisco. This model defines standard 
terminology and functionality for understanding and 
developing Internet-of-things solutions, which connect 
people, process, data and things to enable intelligent 
interactions between them to achieve relevant and valuable 
business opportunities. This reference model is composed of 
seven levels, including (1) physical devices and controllers 
that control multiple devices; (2) connectivity for reliable 
and timely information transmission between devices and the 
network, across networks, and between the network and low-
level information processing level; (3) edge/fog computing 
that bridges information technology and operational 
technology, i.e., performing high-volume data analysis and 
transformation of network data flows into information 
suitable for storage and higher level processing; (4) data 
accumulation that converts event-based data generated by the 
devices to query-based data consumption for applications to 
access data when necessary; (5) data abstraction that renders 
data and its storage to enable developing simple and 
performance-enhanced applications; (6) applications that 
vary from control application to mobile application or 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

business intelligence and analytics; and (7) collaboration and 
processes that involve people and business processes to 
empower smooth communication and collaboration between 
people. 
I. 
Intel IoT Platform Reference Architecture 
Intel has defined a system architecture specification 
(SAS), which is a reference architecture for Internet-of-
things, i.e., for connecting products and services so that they 
can be aware of each other and surrounding systems in their 
ecosystems [23]. There are two versions of reference 
architectures: version 1.0 for connecting the unconnected, 
using an IoT gateway to securely connect and manage legacy 
devices that are lack of intelligence and Internet 
connectivity; version 2.0 for smart and connected things, 
addressing security and integration capabilities that are 
essential for real-time and closed-loop control of the data 
shared between smart things and the cloud. Similar to the 
Internet-of-things reference architecture proposed by IoT 
World Forum Architecture Committee, version 2.0 also 
facilitates the integration of operational technology and 
information 
technology. 
The 
Intel 
Internet-of-things 
reference architecture is a layered architectural framework, 
comprising of (1) communications and connectivity layer, 
which enables multi-protocol data communication between 
devices at the edge and between endpoint devices/gateways, 
the network, and the data center; (2) data layer with analytics 
distributed across the cloud, gateways, and smart endpoint 
devices for optimized time-critical or computation-intensive 
applications; (3) management layer for realizing automated 
discovery and provisioning of endpoint devices; (4) control 
layer; (5) application layer; and (6) business layer utilizing 
the application layer to access other layers in the solution. 
There is a vertical security layer as well which handles 
protection and security management across all layers, 
spanning endpoint devices, the network, and the cloud. 
III. 
OTHER INTERNET OF THINGS ACTIVITIES 
In addition to the reference architectures presented in the 
previous section, there are also several other projects, 
activities and initiatives dedicated in the architecture context 
for the Internet-of-things. 
A. IoT European Research Cluster (IERC) 
The objective of IERC initiative [3] is to define a 
common vision of Internet-of-things technology and address 
IoT technology research challenges with respect to 
connected objects, the Web of Things, and the future of the 
Internet capabilities at the European level, and facilitate 
knowledge sharing in the view of global development. 
According to IERC, Internet-of-things is a dynamic global 
network infrastructure with self-configuring capabilities 
based on standard and interoperable communication 
protocols where physical and virtual things have identities, 
physical attributes, and virtual personalities and use 
intelligent interfaces, and are seamlessly integrated into the 
information network. To facilitate the vision of Internet-of-
things business ecosystems implementing smart technologies 
to drive innovation, a wide range of research and application 
projects have been set up within the IERC initiative, 
investigating aspects related to (i) devising disruptive 
business models, transforming traditional business model to 
data-driven models where all actors in the value chain are 
closely interconnected; (ii) trust evaluation and management 
in Internet-of-things, concerning provision of reliable 
information and maximizing security, privacy and safety; 
(iii) the impact and consequences of the fast-paced 
technology development enabling connected things, services, 
data and people on society with respect to legal 
considerations, regulations and policies, such as personal 
data protection, data ownership; (iv) standards and IoT 
platforms that support open and dynamic interaction across 
both dimensions of horizontal IoT domains and vertical 
application domains, and overcome the fragmentation of 
closed systems, architectures, and applications. A tightly 
related Internet-of-things activity to IERC is the Alliance for 
Internet of Things Innovation (AIOTI) [6], which was 
initiated by the European Commission to address the 
challenges of Internet-of-things technology and application 
deployment, including standardization, interoperability and 
policy issues that are of common interest among various IoT 
players.  
B. Smart Applicances (SMART) 
SMART is an EU-funded study [24] with focus on 
semantic assets for smart appliance (i.e., devices used in 
households capable of communicating with each other and 
being controlled via Internet) interoperability. It provides a 
standardized framework for the smart appliances reference 
ontology, of which recurring concepts can be used and 
extended in several domains in addition to residential 
environments. 
C. Architecture and Interfaces for Web-oriented 
Automation System (WOAS) 
The project WOAS [25] is funded by the German Federal 
Ministry of Economics and Technology as an industrial joint 
research project with ten German automation companies 
involved. The aim of this project is to research a new 
architecture for automation systems based on cloud-based 
web technologies. The proposed architecture is referred to as 
a Web-Oriented Automation System (WOAS). A WOAS 
comprises a system kernel and a configurable number of 
automation services that implement and realize the required 
automation functions. The automation service is realized 
according to the concept of I40 component [12]. The 
connection of the automation service with distributed 
automation devices in the network is implemented via 
standard industrial interfaces and is also based on the 
concept of I40 component. 
D. Reference Architecture for IoT-based Smart Factory 
A research study [26] presents a reference architecture 
for smart factories and defines the main characteristics of 
such factories with a focus on sustainable energy 
management perspective. According to this study, Internet of 
things relies on both smart objects and smart networks. It is a 
system in which the physical items are enriched with 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

embedded electronics, such as RFID tags and sensors, and 
are connected to the Internet. This reference architecture 
builds upon the interactive relations between smart factories 
and customers, which allow smart factories to collect and 
analyze data from products and processes for improved 
perception of customers’ needs and behaviors, as well as 
better products and services. There are several sets of 
technologies and perspectives in this reference architecture, 
including 
smart 
machines, 
smart 
devices, 
smart 
manufacturing processes, smart engineering, manufacturing 
IT, smart logistics, big data and cloud computing, smart 
suppliers (i.e., building sustainable relations with suppliers), 
smart customers’ behavior, and smart grid infrastructure for 
energy management. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The reference architectures described in section II have 
similarity in technical concepts and architectural principles, 
but there are also differences in their respective technology 
approaches and implementations. Therefore, we group 
particular characteristics that have similar concerns to 
describe the same or related aspects of these reference 
architectures. The aspects in the comparison that we are 
going to address include (i) technology perspective, 
addressing key concepts and principles used; (ii) process 
perspective, addressing the coverage of guidelines and 
process steps involved when using the reference architecture 
to generate concrete architectures or migrate existing 
solutions using the reference architecture; (iii) quality and 
key system concerns perspective, addressing main quality 
attributes and system characteristics that a specific reference 
architecture focuses on; and (iv) business and people 
perspective, addressing the coverage of value stream aspect 
and users-centered perspective in a specific reference 
architecture. Table I summarizes a comparison of the 
surveyed reference architectures 
The inclusion of the reference architectures in this survey 
is based on a mapping study [27] and various research 
initiatives and activities within the Internet-of-things area, 
and covers therefore a collection of the existing reference 
architectures available, which is much more complete than 
the analysis provided in [28], which analyzes only the IoT 
architectural reference model and the architecture proposed 
by WSO2.  
From surveying the existing reference architectures for 
Internet-of-things, we have found out several driving forces 
of the development of these reference architectures, such as 
(i) increasing complexity and size of the systems due to the 
tremendous amount of connected heterogeneous devices 
both within and across domains; (ii) increased need for 
shorter time-to-market and rapid development; (iii) new 
collaborative 
solutions 
that 
require 
integrated 
and 
coordinated information management to ensure improved 
effectiveness and optimized production processes or process 
chains in a single plant or across plants; (iv) increasing need 
to achieve interoperability and compliance between different 
devices and systems; (v) increased focus on optimizing the 
assets in a single physical plant, as well as optimizing 
operations across asset types, fleets, customers and partners 
involved in the Internet-of-things value chain for value co-
creation. Many of these driving forces are also in line with 
the identified objectives of reference architectures as 
described in [11].  
According to [11], reference architectures should address 
technical architecture, business architecture and customer 
context. From surveying the reference architectures, we have 
found that business architecture and customer context are 
often missing. Most of the architectures provide technical 
solutions, design patterns and tactics. For instance, some 
commonly used architecture patterns among these surveyed 
reference architectures include multitier architecture pattern 
using edge tier, platform tier and enterprise tier, edge-to-
cloud architecture pattern, multi-tier data storage architecture 
pattern, distributed analytics architecture pattern, gateway or 
edge connectivity and management architecture pattern. 
However, the business models and lifecycle considerations 
in the business architecture are often missing. In the 
surveyed architectures, RAMI4.0 and IIRA are two reference 
architectures that explicitly include business architectures. A 
main characteristics of RAMI4.0 is the combination of 
lifecycle and value stream with a hierarchically structured 
approach. IIRA explicitly defines business viewpoint to 
address business vision, value proposition and objectives. 
Similar to business architectures, the customer context that 
addresses the processes and user considerations in the 
customer enterprises are often missing as well. 
Another important aspect of a reference architecture is to 
provide practices and guidance for generating new concrete 
architectures [11]. Some reference architectures explicitly 
address this issue. For instance, in IIRA, the implementation 
viewpoint explicitly addresses the technical representation, 
the technologies and system components required to 
implement the activities and functions required when 
generating concrete architectures. Another example is IoT-
ARM, which provides best practices and guidance for 
generating concrete architectures from IoT-ARM. It can also 
be used to devise system roadmaps that lead to minimum 
changes 
between 
two 
product 
generations 
while 
guaranteeing system capability and features. Another use of 
the reference architecture is benchmarking during functional 
components review process. One example is P2413, which 
supports 
system 
benchmarking, 
safety 
and 
security 
assessment.  
For practitioners in industry, coping with typical 
characteristics of legacy systems [29] and addressing legacy 
issues is one important aspect in a reference architecture. 
Among the surveyed reference architectures, Arrowhead is 
one example that addresses explicitly the migration of ISA-
95 systems to service-based collaborative automation 
systems in the cloud. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have surveyed well-known existing 
reference architectures, activities and initiatives for the 
Internet-of-things. 
To 
better 
understand 
and 
apply 
appropriate reference architectures for specific use cases, we 
have made a comparison of these reference architectures 
from different perspectives, including technology, process, 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

quality and key system concerns, business and people. We 
also discuss the driving forces of these reference 
architectures, how they address technical, business and 
customer context, and how they address the generation of 
concrete architectures, as well as the legacy migration 
perspective. Although it is difficult to find information on 
examples of solutions or concrete products implementing 
each architecture described, we believe that our analysis and 
discussions would assist practitioners in their choice of 
reference architectures, and in the meanwhile provide input 
to further improvement of these reference architectures. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Special acknowledgement to the Swedish Foundation for 
Strategic Research through the project “Internet-of-things 
and Cloud for Intelligent Manufacturing” (SM16-0025). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] The Economist Intelligence Unit, “The Internet of Things 
Business Index: A Quiet Revolution Gathers Pace,” 2013. 
[2] Industrial Internet Insights Report for 2015, Accenture . 
[3] European Research Cluster on the Internet of Things, 
http://www.internet-of-things-research.eu/, 
retrieved 
in 
August 2017. 
[4] Industrial 
Internet 
Consortium, 
http://www.industrialinternetconsortium.org/ 
[5] Industri 4.0, http://www.plattform-i40.de/, retrieved in August 
2017. 
[6] https://www.aioti.eu/, retrieved in August 2017. 
[7] European 
Commission 
Internet-of-things, 
http://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/en/internet-things, retrieved 
in August 2017. 
[8] E. Borgia, “The Internet of things vision: key features, 
applications and open issues”, Journal of Computer 
Communications, 2014. 
[9] An Oracle White Paper, “Cloud reference architecture”, 
Oracle Enterprise Transformation Solutions Series, 2012. 
[10] J. Liu, L.J. Zhang, B. Hu, and K. He, “CCRA: Cloud 
computing 
reference 
architecture”, 
IEEE 
International 
Conference on Services Computing (SCC), 2012. 
[11] R. Cloutler, G. Muller, D. Verma, R. Nilchiani, E. Hole, and 
M. Bone, “The concept of reference architectures”, Systems 
Engineering, vol.13, 2010. 
[12] RAMI 4.0, https://www.zvei.org/en/subjects/industry-4-0/the-
reference-architectural-model-rami-40-and-the-industrie-40-
component/, retrieved in August 2017. 
[13] IIRA, http://www.iiconsortium.org/, retrieved in August 2017. 
[14] ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011 Systems and software engineering 
– 
architecture 
description, 
https://www.iso.org/standard/50508.html 
[15] A. Bassi et al, Enabling things to talk – designing IoT 
solutions with the IoT architectural reference model, ISBN 
978-3-642-40402-3, Springer, 2013. 
[16] E. Woods, and R. Nick, “The system context architectural 
viewpoint”, Joint Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on 
Software Architecture and European Conference on Software 
Architecture, WICSA/ECSA, 2009. 
[17] IEEE P2413, http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/2413/, IEEE 
Standards Association 
[18] Arrowhead Framework, http://www.arrowhead.eu/, retrieved 
in August 2017. 
[19] H. Derhamy, J. Eliasson, J. Delsing, and P. Priller, “A survey 
of commercial frameworks for the Internet of things”, IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Emerging 
Technologies 
and 
Factory 
Automation, 2015. 
[20] P. Fremantle, “A reference architecture for the Internet of 
things”, WSO2 White Paper, version 0.9.0, 2015. 
[21] https://azure.microsoft.com/en-au/updates/microsoft-azure-
iot-reference-architecture-available/, 
retrieved 
in 
August 
2017. 
[22] https://www.iotwf.com/resources, retrieved in August 2017. 
[23] http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/internet-of-
things/white-papers/iot-platform-reference-architecture-
paper.html, retrieved in August 2017. 
[24] https://sites.google.com/site/smartappliancesproject/home, 
retrieved in August 2017. 
[25] R. Langmann, and L. Meyer, “Automation services from the 
cloud”, 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Remote 
Engineering and Virtual Instrumentation, 2014. 
[26] F. Shrouf, J. Ordieres, and G. Miragliotta, “Smart factories in 
Industry 4.0: a review of the concept and of energy 
management approached in production based on the Internet 
of things paradigm”, IEEE International Conference on 
Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, 2014. 
[27] H. Pei-Breivold, “Internet-of-things and Cloud computing for 
smart industry: a systematic mapping study”, to be published 
at the International Conference on Enterprise Systems, 2017.  
[28] E. Cavalcante, M.P. Alves, and T. Batista, “An analysis of 
reference 
architectures 
for 
the 
Internet 
of 
things”, 
International Workshop on Exploring Component-based 
Techniques for Constructing Reference Architectures, 2015. 
[29] S. Demeyer, S. Ducasse, and O. M. Nierstrasz, Object-
Oriented Reengineering Patterns, ISBN 978-3-9523341-2-6, 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. 
 
 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
TABLE I.  
A COMPARISON OF REFERENCE ARCHITECTURES FOR INTERNET OF THINGS 
 
 
Reference 
Architectures 
Technology 
Process 
Quality and Key System 
Concerns 
Business and People 
RAMI4.0 
A key concept is I4.0 
component. Service-oriented 
and layered architecture. 
Follow and extend IEC62264 
and IEC61512 standards. 
Permit encapsulation of 
functionalities. Standards 
compliant. 
Address product lifecycle 
management dimension, 
horizontal integration 
across factories and 
vertical integration within 
factory. Allow step by step 
migration to I4.0 
components. 
Address security for 
functionality and data, 
functional safety and 
safety measures. The 
I4.0 component possesses 
the quality of service 
properties necessary for 
specific applications. 
Address people 
orchestrating the value 
stream, and value stream 
dimension throughout 
product lifecycle and 
across factories. 
IIRA 
Key concepts include concern, 
stakeholder, and viewpoint. 
Based on ISO/IEC/IEEE 
42010:2011. 
Standard-based open 
architecture. 
Integration of information 
technologies and 
operational technologies. 
Address safety, security, 
trust and privacy, 
resilience, integrability, 
interoperability and 
composability, 
connectivity. 
Business viewpoint to 
address business vision, 
value proposition and 
objectives. 
IoT-ARM 
Key concepts include aspect-
oriented programming, model-
driven engineering, views and 
perspectives. Evolution and 
interoperability are the main 
drivers for the reference 
model and architecture. 
Provide guidelines and 
process steps on how to 
generate concrete 
architectures, perform IoT 
threat analysis, and derive 
design choices and tactics 
based on qualitative 
requirements. 
Address evolution and 
interoperability, 
performance and 
scalability, trust, security, 
privacy, availability and 
resilience. 
Business goals, cost and 
benefit analysis are used in 
the architecture generation 
process. Specification of 
an IoT business process 
model to make use cases 
IoT-ARM compliant. 
P2413 
Key concepts include concern, 
stakeholder, and viewpoint. 
Based on ISO/IEC/IEEE 
42010:2011 standard. 
Provide guidelines for 
cross-domain interaction, 
documenting and 
migrating architecture 
divergence. 
Address system 
interoperability, functional 
compatibility, protection, 
security, privacy and 
safety. 
People perspective is 
reflected in the process of 
identifying stakeholders 
and their concerns. 
Arrowhead 
Key concepts include local 
cloud, global cloud. 
Automation cloud integration 
based on service-oriented 
architecture. Information 
centric. 
Provide maturity levels of 
legacy system migration to 
cloud, engineering tools 
for development, and test 
support of cloud 
automation systems. 
Address service 
interoperability and 
integrability, security, 
latency, scalability, 
dynamic/continuous 
engineering. 
Not explicit 
WSO2 
Influenced by open-source 
projects and technologies 
Not explicit 
Address connectivity and 
communications, device 
management, data 
collection, analysis and 
actuation, scalability, 
security, and integration. 
Not explicit 
Azure IoT 
Key principles include 
heterogeneity, security, hyper-
scale deployments, and 
flexibility. Data concepts 
include device and data 
model, data streams, and 
device interaction. 
A vendor-specific solution 
architecture 
Not explicit 
Business systems 
integration layer and 
solution UX are two 
architecture components 
relevant to business and 
people. 
Internet-of-
everything 
A key concept is edge-ware. 
Multilevel model for IoT; 
Integration of information 
technologies and 
operational technologies; 
enablement of legacy 
applications. 
Address interoperability, 
security, and legacy 
compatibility. 
Application layer covering 
business intelligence and 
analytics. Collaboration 
and processes layer 
explicitly involves people 
and processes. 
Intel IoT 
Building blocks include 
things, networks, and cloud. 
Integration of information 
technologies and 
operational technologies. 
Address data and device 
connectivity, security, and 
interoperability. 
Value proposition by 
smart decision making 
based on data analytics. 
 
 
 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

