How to Fill the Gap between Practice and Higher
Education: Performing eduScrum with Real World
Problems in Virtual Distance Teaching
Michael Neumann
Dpt. of Business Information Systems
Hochschule Hannover
Hannover, Germany
michael.neumann@hs-hannover.de
David M¨oteﬁndt
Software Development
AWIN AG
Hannover, Germany
david.moeteﬁndt@awin.com
Lukas Linke
Customer Management Tech
Otto GmbH & Co KG.
Hamburg, Germany
lukas.linke@otto.de
Dirk Radtke
Agile Processes
Otto GmbH & Co KG.
Hamburg, Germany
dirk.radtke2@otto.de
Annika Mattst¨adt
Agile Processes
Otto GmbH & Co KG.
Hamburg, Germany
annika.mattstaedt@otto.de
Frederik Herzig
HR Management
Otto GmbH & Co KG.
Hamburg, Germany
frederik.herzig@otto.de
Patricia Regel
Advertising Services
Otto GmbH & Co KG.
Hamburg, Germany
patricia.regel@otto.de
Abstract—Social skills are essential for a successful under-
standing of agile methods in software development. Several
studies highlight the opportunities and advantages of integrating
real-world projects and problems while collaborating with com-
panies into higher education using agile methods. This integration
comes with several opportunities and advantages for both the
students and the company. The students are able to interact with
real-world software development teams, analyze and understand
their challenges and identify possible measures to tackle them.
However, the integration of real-world problems and companies is
complex and may come with a high effort in terms of coordination
and preparation of the course. The challenges related to the
interaction and communication with students are increased by
virtual distance teaching during the Covid-19 pandemic as direct
contact with students is missing. Also, we do not know how
problem-based learning in virtual distance teaching is valued
by the students. This paper presents our adapted eduScrum
approach and learning outcome of integrating experiments with
real-world software development teams from two companies into
a Master of Science course organized in virtual distance teaching.
The evaluation shows that students value analyzing real-world
problems using agile methods. They highlight the interaction
with real-world software development teams. Also, the students
appreciate the organization of the course using an iterative
approach with eduScrum. Based on our ﬁndings, we present
four recommendations for the integration of agile methods and
real world problems into higher education in virtual distance
teaching settings. The results of our paper contribute to the
practitioner and researcher/lecturer community, as we provide
valuable insights how to ﬁll the gap between practice and higher
education in virtual distance settings.
Index Terms—Agile methods, agile education, eduscrum, dis-
tance learning, virtual distance teaching, problem based learning,
Covid-19.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper describes the integration from real world prob-
lems provided by companies (clients) into the Master of
Science course ”Innovative Methods of Project Management”
during the Covid-19 pandemic and related distance teaching
activities. A central purpose of the course is to integrate
challenges and problems from the real world. We prepared,
organized and conducted the course with an adapted eduScrum
method and integrated real world clients since the summer
term in 2019.
Agile and hybrid methods are well-known approaches in
software development for more than two decades [1]. The use
of agile methods like Scrum is widely accepted in practice [2]
and education [3]. Agile methods focus on social aspects like
collaboration and communication [4]. Thus, (social) values and
principles are of high importance in the ﬁeld of agile software
development. The widely use of agile methods in practice led
to an increased integration into higher education over the years
[5], [6]. Also, the combination of software processes with the
integration of real world problems or project based approaches
is often described by other authors (e.g., [7]–[10]). Agile
methods were adapted for their use in educational settings
by several lecturers (e.g., [11]–[16]). Especially, the focus on
social aspects and teaching such skills is of high importance
in higher education [17].
The Covid-19 pandemic and the switch to virtual distance
teaching provides several challenges for lecturers and students
in higher education (e.g., [18]–[20]). Especially, project related
courses in lab settings may be affected from the switch, but
also most of the courses, which comprises physical activities
such as game based learning approaches were inﬂuenced (e.g.,
Lego Serious Play [21]). In 2019, we adapted the eduScrum
method for higher educational settings in an onsite environ-
ment and integrated real world clients to the course [22]. Thus,
the new situation also provides several challenges to us as our
course organization set-up was initially designed for onsite
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

teaching. This leads us to our two research questions:
• RQ1: How can we perform eduScrum integrating real
world problems in higher education in a virtual distance
teaching environment?
• RQ2: How do the students value the work with eduScrum
in a virtual distance teaching environment?
This paper focuses on our adaptions during the Covid-19
pandemic and how we counteract the challenges of distance
learning. However, we identiﬁed several upcoming challenges
related to the new circumstances occurred due to the pandemic.
We present four recommendations for other lecturers, which
are interested to overcome speciﬁc challenges in nowadays
higher education and integrate agile methods as well as real
world problems to their courses.
The paper at hand is structured as follows: First, we describe
the related work in Section II, followed by the course overview
in Section III. We explain the data collection and give a brief
overview of our results in Section IV. The results are discussed
in Section V. Before the paper closes with a conclusion
in Section VII, we present our recommendations for other
lecturers in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
To provide an overview of the literature related to the
topic of our study, we searched for primary studies dealing
with agile methods in higher educating using problem-based
approaches in virtual distance classroom settings during the
Covid-19 pandemic. The search was performed in two digital
libraries (Google Scholar and Scopus) and focused on peer
reviewed literature.
We identiﬁed ﬁve studies dealing with ﬁndings related to
the Covid-19 indicated switch to distance teaching. Matthies
et al. [18] discuss the impact of the switch to a remote
teaching in their agile software engineering project course
during the Covid-19 pandemic. The authors identiﬁed ten chal-
lenges concerning the distance teaching activities and present
speciﬁc counter measurements. Most of these challenges are
also described in practitioner contexts like decreased social
exchange (e.g., [23], [24]) or less focus due to distractions
[25]. Matthies et al. also identiﬁed 13 opportunities, which
positively affected the teaching activities [18].
Stevanovic et al. analyzed the students perspective of virtual
distance teaching during Covid-19 [26]. The survey results
show that students lost focus in virtual distance settings. Also
the motivation of the students is negatively affected, especially
for students, which are used to onsite teaching. Iglesias-Pradas
et al. point out that the ad hoc switch to virtual distance
teaching during Covid-19 is not comparable to a prepared,
permanent integration of virtual distance teaching in higher
education [27]. The authors recommend drawing lessons from
distance teaching during Covid-19 and transferring suitable
concepts to the post-pandemic period.
Another paper, which deals with the Covid-19 related
impact on teaching activities is presented by Siegel et al.
in form of a workgroup report [20]. The authors describe
how the teaching landscape may look like after the pandemic
indicating the lessons learned from the past two years with
Covid-19. However, the literature concerning the impact of
distance learning, especially related to the ﬁeld of software
engineering and agile software development in particular is
limited [28] and needs more attention.
Although we performed the literature search in two digital
libraries, we could not identify peer-reviewed studies dealing
with agile methods using problem-based approaches in higher
education virtual classroom settings.
III. COURSE OVERVIEW
A. General Information of the Course
The course Innovative Methods of Project Management is
organized annually during the summer term and integrated
into the Master of Science program Digital Transformation.
The master program is supervised by the Business Computing
department of the University of Applied Sciences and Arts -
Hochschule Hannover since winter term 2018/2019. A student
group comprises 25 persons.
Each term is divided into different phases: lecture period
(16 weeks), examination period (three weeks) and lecture-free
period (seven weeks). The course is planned with total effort
of 180 hours (68 hours in attendance, 112 hours self study).
The 68 hours are planned as lecture units, as well as during
the Covid-19 pandemic. Thus, the course is planned with four
units ´a 45 minutes per week in an onsite setting.
In the course, students should gain an understanding and
knowledge of new (innovative) methods and upcoming chal-
lenges of project management. The students should be able to
select and perform speciﬁc systematic measures to counteract
relevant challenges. An outline of the learning objectives is
given in Table I.
TABLE I
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Learning objectives
Understand the characteristics, challenges
and opportunities of agile, plan-based and
hybrid approaches in a software develop-
ment context
Understand the challenges of intercultural
project teams
Understand the challenges of (virtual) dis-
tributed international teams
Leadership and team coordination for dif-
ferent project sizes
Conﬂict management in projects
Presentation of status reports for selected
stakeholder
The examination is split into a written paper and a presen-
tation of the study results by each students team. 50 percent
of the grade results from both types of examination.
Our course was initially designed for classroom teaching
in person, as we are an onsite university. The global shift to
virtual and distance learning due to Covid-19 affected also our
university. Covid-19 reached Germany in February 2020. The
summer term in 2020 started in March at our university. After
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

two weeks of onsite teaching in March 2020, we switched to
virtual distance teaching. Thus, the course was offered once
in person (2019) and two times virtually in a distance learning
(2020 and 2021).
B. Pre-pandemic Course Information
This subsection describes the course organization during
the summer terms of 2019 and 2020 and aims to provide an
understanding of our adapted eduScrum approach based on
classroom teaching.
The eduScrum approach was developed by Willy Wijnands
for organizing school lessons [29]. Wijnands et al. present their
guidelines for the agile education method in the eduScrum
guide [30]. The eduScrum guide describes speciﬁc practices,
artifacts and roles, as well as a process model aiming to
provide a common understanding how eduScrum may be
performed in schools. However, the approach is not designed
for higher education integrating real world problems and
clients or stakeholders into the teaching activities. Thus, we
decided to adapt the eduScrum method based on the theoretical
knowledge of well-known agile methods such as Scrum with
the aim to enable students to work with agile practices and gain
practice-relevant experiences. We present the elements of our
adapted eduScrum approach for higher eduction in Figure 1.
Fig. 1. Elements of the adapted eduScrum approach
Our adaptions affect the roles, practices (events) and arti-
facts of the eduScrum approach. In a ﬁrst step, we added the
role of an Agile Coach, which is taken by the lecturer. The
Agile Coach is responsible for supporting the students related
to upcoming questions related to the course organization or
the underlying theoretical knowledge or challenges during
the term. Furthermore, we changed the responsibilities of the
Product Owner. The practitioner from a speciﬁc company takes
this role and is responsible for preparing a product backlog,
which comprises speciﬁc requirements for the students teams
and keeping the backlog up to date. The role also supports
the students teams related to content-related questions or
challenges, e.g., providing project or company documentations
such as guidelines. The students team is self-organized and
thus, decides how to implement the speciﬁc requirements from
the product backlog. The size of the team is restricted to three
to seven students. Each students team choose one student, who
takes the role of the eduScrum Master. This role is responsible
for removing impediments during a sprint.
We organized the agile practices Sprint Planning, Review
and Retrospective with respect to the eduScrum Guide. In
terms of conducting respective practices such as the Retro-
spective the students team have the possibility to select speciﬁc
micro practices (or techniques), such as the starﬁsh model [31].
However, we added the reﬁnement meeting to our adapted
eduScrum approach, as we identiﬁed the need for integrating
an agile practice which aims to provide the possibility for the
students and product owners to collaborate directly concerning
the quality of the product backlog. The reﬁnement always
takes place in the week between the sprint changes.
The artifacts are not described in the eduScrum guide. Thus,
we decided to integrate necessary artifacts from Scrum [32],
in order to integrate real world companies, which are used
to work with artifacts, like product/sprint backlogs and incre-
ments. It provides the possibility for the students to discuss
speciﬁc requirements documented in the backlogs and deal
with challenges such as not done increments or negotiations
with the product owner.
Fig. 2. Course organization in 2019 and 2020
Changes in the students team (e.g., new team assignments)
are not planned in the term. The students should get a
chance to learn the challenges and opportunities of a team
development through the whole term and gain experience of
such a process.
In 2019 and 2020, the course was prepared and performed
by a teaching pair. Each agile coach was responsible for
supporting two student teams (see Figure 2). We integrated
four companies in the summer terms in both years. We selected
the companies based on their project proposals related to the
learning objectives of the course. All companies are part of our
educational and research network and from certain industries
like ﬁnance, retail or chemical. For instance, the companies
proposed projects with the aim to identify success factors of
an agile transition in the ﬁnance industry, or to analyze project
management methods in use at an energy company in order to
provide an approach for a tailored hybrid project management
approach. All projects are based on real world problems and
challenges.
We split the student group of 25 persons and assigned
the students randomly to one of the four eduScrum student
teams. Each student team had one associated product owner
and project.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

During the ﬁrst lecture of the summer terms in 2019 and
2020, we held an introductory event in which we explained
the module’s organization, the examination requirements and
repeated basic theory. Building on this, a kick-off meeting
was held with the product owners in the second event. The
kick-off meetings were already student team-speciﬁc events, so
each product owner held the event with the respective student
team. The aim of the kick-off meeting was to ensure a uniform
understanding of the requirements and goals of the respective
project and to be able to move on to the iterative organization
in the form of sprints. In the third week of the term, the event
was the ﬁrst sprint planning. Starting this week, two-weekly
sprints were planned and executed. In the week without a
sprint planning, reﬁnement meetings were held with the aim of
discussing open questions or ambiguities. One week before the
exam date (submission of the written exam and presentation
of the results), the last sprint in the respective term ended.
C. Modiﬁed Course Organization due to Virtual Distance
Teaching
This subsection describes the course organization during the
summer term of 2021 and aims to provide an understanding
of our corrections made due to the switch to virtual distance
teaching during the Covid-19 pandemic.
Our experiences of 2019 and 2020 have shown that the
preparation of the projects with several companies is extensive
and complex. In addition, there is a risk when integrating sev-
eral companies that the product owner cannot always guarantee
high-quality support for the students, for example with regard
to the quality of the requirements. Due to this challenge and an
organizational change, which meant that only one lecturer was
available for the summer term 2021, we decided to integrate
fewer companies into the course with the same number of
projects in order to decrease the organization and coordination
workload.
Due to the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic on how
agile software development teams work (e.g., [33], [34]), we
have also decided to integrate companies whose teams having
a high degree of maturity in terms of agile methods. We
assumed that the challenges caused by virtual collaboration
had increased and therefore wanted to integrate companies
that have already successfully met these challenges in the ﬁrst
year of the pandemic aiming to provide the opportunity that
our students beneﬁt from these experiences. Thus, we sent
inquiries to six companies from our network and provided
them with comprehensive requirements such as the provision
of several projects at the same time and dedicated support
for each student team. We then held preliminary talks with
four companies and ultimately selected two companies. The
companies come from the e-commerce and online marketing
sectors.
The preparation lay on both sides, the companies and univer-
sity side. The preparation activities for the summer term 2021
started with initial discussions in November 2020 (see Figure
3. We discussed the speciﬁc project aims and ﬁne-tuned the
requirements in January and February 2021. The companies
Fig. 3. Timeline summer term 2021
created internal accounts for the students in order to provide
access on the company internal infrastructure. Furthermore,
our colleagues at the companies discussed with agile software
development teams their motivation to work with students on
speciﬁc projects, challenges or conduct experiments together.
Also, we discussed and clariﬁed all research speciﬁc documen-
tations such as non disclosure agreements and privacy policies.
On university side we prepared the courses in our e-learning
platform and the plan of the timeline throughout the summer
term including the examination dates.
We divided the student group of 25 persons randomly into
ﬁve eduScrum student teams and assigned a product owner and
a project to each student team. A description of the projects
is shown in Table II.
TABLE II
OVERVIEW OF THE PROJECTS IN SUMMER TERM 2021
Company identiﬁer
Project goal
Company A
We want to understand how a 4-
day workweek and a remote work
setting inﬂuences the use of agile
methods in software development
Company B
Analyze if a reduced workload
leads to a higher quality of work.
We assume that the teams outcome
can be maintained with a reduced
workload. What measures are there
to reduce the workload? How is the
quality of work rated?
Company B
What works conditions (e.g., room
for maneuver; ﬂexibility in terms
of time and location; social re-
sources) make ”good work” pos-
sible. ”Good work” means both
the perspective of work quality and
quantity, but also that people work
in a mode that works in the long
term and does not ”wear out”.
Company B
We want to analyze how personal
autonomous gains and interaction
losses in remote work settings are
impacting the teams work.
Company B
We want to understand if and how
self-direction and self-organization
became more important and maybe
a critical skill for work success
during the remote work.
Concerning the eduScrum approach, we did several adap-
tions related to the switch to virtual distance teaching.
First, we decided in discussions with the companies that a
high level of self-organization of the student teams may be a
good idea but needs support from our sides. In order to be
able to support the student teams, we deﬁned the reﬁnement
meetings as obligatory. The student teams should prepare
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

the meetings in terms of discussing requirements, providing
insights on problems and challenges related to the team work.
Second, we wanted to increase the opportunities to provide
feedback in order to support the self-optimization of the
teams. Thus, the support of experienced practitioners from
the company is necessary and we (lecturer and companies)
decided that the product owners from the company should have
at least ﬁve years of experiences working in agile software
development. The student teams got the opportunity to per-
form retrospectives aiming to optimize the self-optimization
through the term and discuss upcoming problems directly with
professional support from the company and university side.
The decision who (agile coach from university and/or product
owner from company side) support the student teams lay by
the students.
Third, the phenomena of video call fatigue and increased
(mental) effort of meetings in remote work in practice is
described in the literature (e.g., [23], [24]). Thus, we decided
to conduct the team events with a timebox of 60 minutes and
camera always on policy. The timebox support focusing on
speciﬁc aspects, which need to be discussed or presented in the
performed agile practices. The timebox was also deﬁned for
further meetings like workshops, besides the regular weekly
schedule. Although we did not ask for the speciﬁc work envi-
ronment and equipment of the students, all of them respected
the camera always on policy and activated their cameras during
our video calls. We did not had any major infrastructure related
problems in terms of internet connection or hardware issues.
Fourth, besides all scheduled events and meetings, we
offered support and availability to the students by several
communication types (chat, email, phone and video calls) in
order to provide as much support as possible during the term.
Finally, we prepared and performed a kick-off and introduc-
tion event at the ﬁrst lecture. We used the event to explain the
course organization, regulations according to the examination
and the theoretical basis. Also, the product owners gave a
brief overview of the company and the project aims. From the
second lecture and during the term, we ran a two-week sprint
rhythm. Thus, as in the 2019 and 2020 summer terms, a sprint
planning and review was carried out every two weeks. The
student teams and the product owner and agile coach were
obligated to be present at the sprint planning dates. In the
weeks without Sprint Change, optional Reﬁnement Meetings
were held. To ensure coordination with the companies, we
have planned and carried out weekly jour-ﬁx appointments.
A project coordination group was set up at both compa-
nies, consisting of the product owners, the agile coach and
stakeholders from the respective agile software development
teams. The jour-ﬁx events aimed to remove impediments, to
synchronize the product coordination group and to prepare
further measurements and tasks. The jour-ﬁx events were
conducted over the entire term. In addition to the examination
presentations, the results were also presented in the companies.
These took place after the summer term and did not inﬂuence
the evaluation.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section, we explain the used evaluation methods and
give a brief overview of the results.
A. Evaluation Method
Usually, we conduct the evaluation data via an anonymized
and analog survey at the end of each term. Due to the switch to
virtual distance teaching the evaluation survey was transferred
to a digitized version. We decided to conduct the evaluation
data via the online survey two times, once during the term
and the other one after the examination. The survey consists
of eight closed questions using a likert scale of 5 (1 totally
agree - 5 totally disagree). Mainly the closed questions ask for
the quality of didactic. Also, two open questions are part of
the survey. The students have the opportunity to name speciﬁc
aspects that they liked or didn’t like.
In addition to the data collection with the online survey,
we used qualitative data collection. By participating in agile
practices, eduScrum offers the opportunity to observe the work
results and organization of the students regularly. There is also
space for informal discussions with the students. The same
applies to the weekly exchange with the product owners, in
which we discussed our impressions of the student groups and
their results. We documented the data collected anonymously
in a Microsoft Excel ﬁle and compared it with the data from
the online survey at the end of the term to validate it.
B. Results Overview
The ﬁrst online survey was sent to the students on the 17th
of May 2021. The students had 14 days to ﬁll it out. 14
students (out of 25) took part in the ﬁrst survey. The second
survey was sent to the students on the 9th of August 2021.
In the second version, they had 21 days to participate to the
survey. Only six students (out of 24; one student de-registered)
completed the second survey. The low response rate may have
several reasons, e.g. the time as the survey was sent during
the free lecture period. However, we notice a decreased rate
of respondents in online survey compared before the Covid-19
pandemic and a physical survey.
The students used different tools during the term. Certain
tools were selected by the companies (e.g., Atlassian Conﬂu-
ence, Atlassian Jira, MS Teams) or the university (Moodle).
Others were selected by the student teams (like Google Docs
or Trello). We give an overview of the tools in Table III.
V. DISCUSSION
In this section, we will discuss the results of our evaluation
data and answer the two research questions of our study.
We begin with our ﬁrst research question: How can we
perform eduScrum integrating real world problems in higher
education?
We present our adapted eduScrum approach for higher
education and the optimization adaptions for virtual distance
teaching in Section III. The virtual distance teaching comes
with several challenges in higher education. In particular,
we noticed an increased effort of preparing and organizing
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE III
OVERVIEW OF THE TOOLS IN USE
Tool
Objective of use
Atlassion Conﬂuence
Visualization of the sprint backlog
Atlassion Jira
Sharing and management of documents
Dropbox
Sharing and management of documents
Google Docs
Sharing and management of documents
Moodle
Learning platform
MS Excel
Documentation
MS Powerpoint
Results presentation
MS Teams
Team communication and coordination
MS Word
Documentation
Trello
Visualization of the sprint backlog
WhatsApp
Team communication and coordination
courses. Also the coaching and support of students take more
time in such an environment. Also, we want to point especially
to the situation when we are integrating external partners in our
lectures. The coordination and collaboration with companies is
complex and takes an increased effort. However, the switch to
virtual distance teaching also provides several opportunities.
We were able to integrate companies from other cities and
areas of Germany to our course. This provides the opportunity
to focus on speciﬁc social skills also in a distributed remote
work environment. In addition, we have already collaborated
with the selected companies on other research projects. An-
other important aspect was the existing experience in remote
work settings, as the summer term in 2021 was already the
third term in a virtual distance teaching environment during the
Covid-19 pandemic. So everybody involved had experiences
with distance teaching and learning or remote work. We also
had the advantage that most of the students already knew each
other, so effective team development could be carried out.
Interestingly, the students rate the course organization over-
all positive (1.7 and 1 in average scores; see Table IV). We
assumed that the direct virtual lecture environment will be
missed by the students and that the responsiveness of the
lecturer will be decreased. Interestingly, the students value the
visibility and quick response time from the lecturer and their
product owners. For instance, one student mentioned in the
survey: ”The commitment of the lecturer is great! The lecturer
is always available and takes a lot of time for the group work”.
The aspect of lecturer support for the student teams is also
validated by several informal talks between the students and
the lecturer as well as the product owners.
Also some improvement proposals were made by the stu-
dents. The interaction and communication among the student
teams could be improved. This could lead to a better transfer
of learn effects from other teams. Following this idea, we
recommend to implement a community of practice in which
the eduScrum masters can be discuss their learning’s to
improve the collaboration among the speciﬁc teams. Another
facet which is described negatively is the extensive project
scope and thus, the needed effort to provide good results.
The second research question is deﬁned as: How do the
students value the work with eduScrum in a virtual distance
TABLE IV
AVERAGE SCORES ON THE COURSE CONTENT AND LECTURERS QUALITY
Survey item
Avg.
score
(1st
survey)
Avg.
score
(2nd
survey)
Overall, I rate the content of the
course positive.
1.7
1
The course content was conveyed
clearly.
2
1
The lecturer explains in a way that
is easy to understand.
1.8
1
The students actively contributed to
the success of the course.
1.6
1
There is a pleasant atmosphere be-
tween students and lecturers.
1.6
1
I was encouraged for independent
thinking.
1.6
1
I had the opportunity to actively
participate.
1.7
1
teaching environment?
In general, the students enjoyed the organization with
eduScrum. The survey data as well as our formal (during agile
practices) and informal talks and discussions with the students
show mostly positive feedback. Especially, the integration of
practice related problems from real world companies and the
work with software development teams were valued by the
students. Also the research characteristic of the projects, espe-
cially conducting experiments with the software development
teams were rated positively. For instance, a student commented
in the survey: ”In this course, the practice-oriented character
that is attributed to a university was lived... Just as you know it
from agile software development and it can also be expected of
Master’s students, there was a high degree of self-organization
and also personal responsibility... We had free ones Decision-
making power when considering possible experiments, as long
as they are scientiﬁcally sound and added value can be hoped
for.” Another student described the used eduScrum method in
a virtual distance teaching environment as: ”Excellent example
of how an online event works”.
However, we identiﬁed several improvement measures, es-
pecially concerning the forming phase of the teams at the
beginning of the term. Also the transfer of theoretical knowl-
edge could be improved in the future. Thus, we recommend
to perform workshops with the whole course at the ﬁrst
two or three lectures. Also it could be helpful to implement
speciﬁc team development measures per eduScrum students
team, especially with the support from the already integrated
practitioners from the companies.
VI. LESSONS LEARNED AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In this section, we present six speciﬁc recommendations
for integrating agile methods into higher education in virtual
distance settings. The recommendations are based on our
experiences from the summer terms in 2020 and 2021.
a) Recommendation 1: Overcome the social distancing
in virtual classroom settings: One major challenge in virtual
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

classroom settings is social distancing between the lecturer and
the class, as well between the students. This challenge may
becoming a problem especially in didactic approaches with
group based organizations through the term. Our experiences
and the results of this paper show that the usage of an agile
method and speciﬁc agile practices support us to overcome the
social distancing. Due to the regular (weekly) coordination and
the associated expectation on all sides (companies, lecturers,
students) to produce results regularly and to put them up
for discussion, the need arises in the student groups to work
together on solutions in self-study. This circumstance leads to
an increased focus among the students. In the last two summer
terms we have not experienced a situation in which groups of
students have not taken an examination. From our point of
view, the students beneﬁt from the organization of the course,
since there is a likelihood of working in practice in the future
and being confronted with social distances in remote work
settings.
b) Recommendation 2: Increase the focus of students in
virtual classroom settings: We also used strict timeboxes for
agile practices in use aiming to support the students focus
during the video calls. The timeboxes were 60 minutes for the
weekly meetings per student team. This short timebox helping
to minimize the risk of video call fatigue [18]. Thus, the
deﬁned weekly schedule increased the opportunity to perform
the agile practices effective and leads to a better focus of the
student teams. Similar effects are described by Matthies et al.
[18]. If necessary, we have planned and carried out additional
coordination and clariﬁcation appointments on other days of
the week.
c) Recommendation 3: Impacting the motivation of stu-
dents in virtual classroom settings through the term:
A
positive impact on motivation of students is of high relevance
when organizing courses with problem based approaches. The
relevance of the course topics, the course organization and the
examination may motivate students performing good results
and stay focused through a term. Several studies show that
our didactic approach and the course organization support the
motivation of students [7], [35]. However, the examination
was planned within the examination period and we discussed
internally several options to integrate part-examinations during
the term. We decided to deﬁne four increments based on the
content, which needs to be provided for the examination. The
student teams had to present the increments during the term
on speciﬁc dates, which we communicated in the ﬁrst lecture.
The increments support a goal-oriented learning for the stu-
dents’ exam and provides us the opportunity to investigate the
students results. The student teams presented the increments
in several ways using various tools and got directly feedback
by the product owners and agile coach. Thus, we recommend
a clear communication what is expected by university and
company side through the term, which leads to a positive
impact on students motivation.
d) Recommendation 4: Increase the opportunities to sup-
port the students in virtual distance teaching: Even if the
use of agile methods is not an option for other lecturers,
we would like to point out that a speciﬁc, targeted exchange
with students brings advantages in virtual distance settings.
Especially, when organizing a course in groups, we have found
that questions were more often asked by the students and
introverted students also participate more often. Interestingly,
we cannot conﬁrm these experiences for other modern didactic
approaches such as ﬂipped classroom with larger groups. We
therefore recommend considering how the possibilities for
speciﬁc support from lecturers can be optimized in virtual
distance teaching. From our point of view, the offer to contact
the IT professionals involved in the course is also supportive.
Even if the social distance causes a loss of trust between
teachers and students, the offer to contact other people (in our
case from the companies) may be helpful in order to be able to
increase the support. Based on our learning’s, offering speciﬁc
agile practices such as reﬁnements and retrospective meetings
help the students to counteract the decrease of feedback within
the student teams and among the stakeholders. This may lead
to an increased trust, especially between lecturers and students
and thus, lead to the opportunity to support the students related
to speciﬁc problems and challenges they have.
e) Recommendation 5: Increase the collaboration with
companies and integrate real world problems into higher
education: The integration of real world problems including
the collaboration with companies may lead to a high effort
of preparing and performing courses in higher education.
However, several studies show that the problem based learning
approach provide several positive effects on the students
motivation and learning outcomes, especially when integrating
real world problems and IT professionals (see Section II).
From our point of view, it is helpful to strive for collaboration
with several companies and to align it in the long term. The
preparation and implementation of courses in higher education
requires thorough preparation. This requires mutual trust and
a corresponding commitment to agreements on both sides.
We made a conscious decision to work with companies with
whom we performed various research projects in the past.
The regular and recurring collaboration inevitably leads to a
trusting cooperation in which common goals can be pursued
and so the companies can also beneﬁt by having the opportu-
nity, for example, to scientiﬁcally examine current challenges
and problems. The strong practical relevance combined with
scientiﬁc work is an advantage for the students. They have the
opportunity to get insights from different contexts and have the
opportunity to examine speciﬁc problems scientiﬁcally.
f) Recommendation 6: Engage the students for publish-
ing their research: After completing the examination of the
course, we gave all student groups the opportunity to strive
for scientiﬁc publications based on the results gained from
their work in the summer term. Four out of ﬁve groups took
advantage of this opportunity. On the one hand, this shows
us that the Master’s students are interested in scientiﬁc work.
The motivation of the participating students was always high.
This is shown in particular by the fact that the publication
processes of some papers continue to this day. One of the
four papers has been already published [36]. Furthermore, two
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

papers are currently in the review process (one at a conference,
one at a journal). Another paper is in revision for a German-
language journal. To prepare for writing the paper, we ﬁrst held
a workshop on scientiﬁc work and writing. This workshop was
structured in the same way for all four student groups. On the
basis of the workshop, we jointly deﬁned speciﬁc measures to
optimize the written examination, which were largely carried
out by the students. We recommend other teachers, especially
in master courses, to motivate students about science and to
show them speciﬁc possibilities to share their results in the
research community. Even if the publication does not work
on the ﬁrst try, the learning effect is given, for example for
the master’s thesis and other scientiﬁc projects in future.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The Covid-19 pandemic came with several challenges and
advantages for teaching in higher educational settings. Many
universities were not used to organize and perform distance
learning courses before the pandemic.
This paper presents our learning’s performing an adapted
eduScrum approach for higher education in virtual distance
teaching with integrated real world problems. We adapted
eduScrum for the use in virtual distance teaching in a Master of
Science course in the summer term 2021. Our results show that
the students value the work with eduScrum and collaborating
with companies aiming to analyze their real world challenges
and problems. Also, the research focused characteristic of
the projects is perceived positively by the students. From
the lecturer and companies points of view, we recommend
to switch the focus to more scientiﬁc grounds while using
problem-based learning approaches in higher education. We
saw valuable research results, which we could submit at
conferences and journals. The ﬁrst paper is already published,
further papers are currently under review.
Based on our results we present four recommendations for
other lecturers to integrate agile methods using a problem-
based approach in virtual classroom settings (recommenda-
tions 1 to 4). Furthermore, we call to increase the collaboration
with companies and set the focus on scientiﬁc grounds and
motivating students for scientiﬁc activities (recommendations
5 and 6):
• Recommendation 1: Overcome the social distancing in
virtual classroom settings
• Recommendation 2: Increase the focus of students in
virtual classroom settings
• Recommendation 3: Impacting the motivation of students
in virtual classroom settings during the term
• Recommendation 4: Increase the opportunities to support
the students in virtual distance teaching
• Recommendation 5: Increase the collaboration with com-
panies and integrate real world problems into higher
education
• Recommendation 6: Engage the students for publishing
their research
In the future, we are planning to put more focus on the
research characteristic and aim to support the students in sci-
entiﬁc activities. Also, we want to consolidate the cooperation
with the companies for the long term and work on strategies
how to establish collaborations also in undergraduate courses.
APPENDICES
The survey data is available at the academic cloud:
https://sync.academiccloud.de/index.php/s/JIsGAOS6is5OlVs
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
First of all, we would like to thank our partners from
practice, who put a lot of suggestions, ideas and effort into the
preparation of the projects. A lot of effort was also put into the
summer term regarding coordination and establishing contacts
with the respective software development teams. Particularly
noteworthy here is the effort at the operationally working agile
software development teams, who were involved in the various
research methods (experiments, semi-structured interviews,
etc.) and always actively supported the students and projects.
We also would like to thank the students for their engagement
during the summer term and their willingness to take part in
further events such as panel discussions and presentations of
results at the companies.
REFERENCES
[1] VersionOne
and
Collabnet,
“15th
annual
state
of
agile
survey
report,” 2021, (Last accessed: October 2022). [Online]. Available:
https://www.stateofagile.com/
[2] M. Kuhrmann et al., “Hybrid software development approaches in
practice: A european perspective,” IEEE Software, vol. 36, no. 4, pp.
20–31, 2019.
[3] V. Mahniˇc, “Scrum in software engineering courses: an outline of the
literature,” Global Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 17, pp. 77–83,
2015.
[4] E. Whitworth and R. Biddle, “The social nature of agile teams,” in Agile
2007, J. Eckstein, Ed. Los Alamitos, Calif.: IEEE Computer Soc, 2007,
pp. 26–36.
[5] A. L´opez-Alcarria, A. Olivares-Vicente, and F. Poza-Vilches, “A sys-
tematic review of the use of agile methodologies in education to foster
sustainability competencies,” Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 10, 2017.
[6] T. F. Otero, R. Barwaldt, L. O. Topin, S. V. Menezes, M. J. R. Torres,
and A. L. de Castro Freitas, “Agile methodologies at an educational
context: a systematic review,” in Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Frontiers
in Education Conference (FIE).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–5.
[7] W. Brown, L. Zhang, D. K. Sharma, I. Dabipi, W. Zhu, Y. Jin, and
D. Bagwell, “Engaging undergraduate engineering and aviation students
to explore project based learning with regard to community impact using
data analytics in higher education,” in Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE
Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 2019, pp. 1–5.
[8] M. Gorlatova, J. Sarik, P. Kinget, I. Kymissis, and G. Zussman, “Project-
based learning within a large-scale interdisciplinary research effort,” in
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Innovation and Technology in
Computer Science Education, ser. ITiCSE ’13, 2013, p. 207–212.
[9] R. Wlodarski and A. Poniszewska-Maranda, “Applying a traditional
software development process to drive projects in higher education,” in
Proceedings of the 45th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering
and Advanced Applications (SEAA), 2019, pp. 309–316.
[10] M. Zarb, T. Young, and W. Ballew, “Integrating real-world clients in a
project management module,” in Proceedings of the 2019 ACM Con-
ference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education,
ser. ITiCSE ’19.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
Machinery, 2019, p. 329–330.
[11] J. Dinis-Carvalho, S. Fernandes, and J. C. R. Filho, “Combining lean
teaching and learning with eduscrum,” International Journal of Six
Sigma and Competitive Advantage, vol. 10, pp. 221–235, 2017.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[12] S. Hof, M. Kropp, and M. Landolt, “Use of gamiﬁcation to teach
agile values and collaboration: A multi-week scrum simulation project
in an undergraduate software engineering course,” ser. ITiCSE ’17.
New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2017, p.
323–328.
[13] P. K. Linos, R. Rybarczyk, and N. Partenheimer, “Involving it pro-
fessionals in scrum student teams: An empirical study on the impact
of students’ learning,” in Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Frontiers in
Education Conference (FIE), 2020, pp. 1–9.
[14] C. Matthies, T. Kowark, and M. Uﬂacker, “Teaching agile the agile way
— employing self-organizing teams in a university software engineering
course,” in 2016 ASEE International Forum.
New Orleans, Louisiana:
ASEE Conferences, June 2016, https://peer.asee.org/27259.
[15] C. Matthies, “Scrum2kanban: Integrating kanban and scrum in a uni-
versity software engineering capstone course,” in Proceedings of the
2nd International Workshop on Software Engineering Education for
Millennials, ser. SEEM ’18, 2018, p. 48–55.
[16] J. C. Metrˆolho, F. R. Ribeiro, and P. Pass˜ao, “Teaching agile software
engineering practices using scrum and a low-code development platform
– a case study,” in Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Software
Engineering Advances, 2020, pp. 160–165.
[17] G. Lang, “Agile learning: Sprinting through the semester,” Information
Systems Education Journal, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 14–21, 2017.
[18] C. Matthies, R. Teusner, and M. Perscheid, “Challenges (and opportu-
nities!) of a remote agile software engineering project course during
covid-19,” in Proceedings of the 55th Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences, 2022, pp. 911–920.
[19] Y. Y. Ng and A. Przybyłek, “Instructor presence in video lectures:
Preliminary ﬁndings from an online experiment,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 36 485–36 499, 2021.
[20] A. A. Siegel et al., “Teaching through a global pandemic: Educational
landscapes before, during and after covid-19,” in Proceedings of the
2021 Working Group Reports on Innovation and Technology in Com-
puter Science Education, ser. ITiCSE-WGR ’21.
New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery, 2022, p. 1–25.
[21] M. Paasivaara, V. Heikkil¨a, C. Lassenius, and T. Toivola, “Teaching
students scrum using lego blocks,” in Companion Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Software Engineering, ser. ICSE
Companion 2014, 2014, p. 382–391.
[22] M. Neumann and L. Baumann, “Agile methods in higher education:
Adapting and using eduscrum with real world projects,” in Proceedings
of the 2021 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), 2021, pp.
1–8.
[23] K. Marek, E. Winska, and W. Dabrowski, “The state of agile software
development teams during the covid-19 pandemic,” in Proceedings of the
5th International Conference on Lean and Agile Software Development.
[S.l.]: Springer, 2021, vol. 408, pp. 24–39.
[24] M. Neumann, Y. Bogdanov, M. Lier, and L. Baumann, “The sars-
cov-2 pandemic and agile methodologies in software development: A
multiple case study in germany,” in Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Lean and Agile Software Development.
[S.l.]: Springer,
2021, vol. 408, pp. 40–58.
[25] S. A. Butt, S. Misra, M. W. Anjum, and S. A. Hassan, “Agile project
development issues during covid-19,” in Proceedings of the 5th Inter-
national Conference on Lean and Agile Software Development.
[S.l.]:
Springer, 2021, vol. 408, pp. 59–70.
[26] A. Stevanovic, R. Bozic, and S. Radovic, “Higher education stu-
dents´experiences and opinion about distance learning during the covid-
19 pandemic,” Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, vol. 37, no. 6,
pp. 1682–1693, 2021.
[27] S. Iglesias-Pradas,
Hernandez-Garcia, J. Chaparro-Pelaez, and J. L.
Prieto, “Emergency remote teaching and students’ academic perfor-
mance in higher education during the covid-19 pandemic: A case study.”
Computers in human behavior, vol. 119, 2021.
[28] M. Bond, S. Bedenlier, V. Marin, and M. Haendel, “Emergency remote
teaching in higher education: mapping the ﬁrst global online semester,”
International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher Education,
vol. 18, no. 50, 2021.
[29] W. Wijnands and A. Stolze, “Transforming education with eduscrum,” in
Agile and Lean Concepts for Teaching and Learning, 2019, pp. 95–114.
[30] W.
Wijnands
et
al.,
“The
eduscrum
guide,”
2020,
(Last
accessed
October
2022).
[Online].
Available:
https://www.eduscrum.nl/img/The eduScrum guide English 2.pdf
[31] A. Przybyłek, M. Albecka, O. Springer, and W. Kowalski, “Game-
based sprint retrospectives: multiple action research,” Empirical Software
Engineering, vol. 27, no. 1, 2022.
[32] K.
Schwaber
and
J.
Sutherland,
“The
scrum
guide,”
2021,
(Last
accessed:
October
2022).
[Online].
Available:
https://www.scrumguides.org/scrum-guide.html
[33] M. Neumann and Y. Bogdanov, “The impact of covid 19 on agile
software development: A systematic literature review,” in Proceedings
of the 55th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2022.
[34] N. Ozkan, O. Erdil, and M. S¸. G¨ok, “Agile teams working from home
during the covid-19 pandemic: A literature review on new advantages
and challenges,” in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference
on Lean and Agile Software Development.
Springer International
Publishing, 2022, pp. 38–60.
[35] V. Mahniˇc, “Teaching scrum through team-project work: Students’
perceptions and teacher’s observations,” International Journal of En-
gineering Education, vol. 26, p. 96, 2010.
[36] J. Topp, J. H. Hille, M. Neumann, and D. M¨oteﬁndt, “How a 4-day
work week and remote work affect agile software development teams,”
in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Lean and Agile
Software Development (LASD), Cham, 2022, pp. 61–77.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-997-3
ICSEA 2022 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

