Towards a Decision Support System 
 An Ontology Validation 
 
Raja Hanafi 
                       National School of Computer,  
              University of Manouba, Manouba, Tunisia 
E-mail: rajarajahanafi@yahoo.com 
 
 
                                       Lassad Mejri 
College of Computer and Information Science, Jouf 
University, Saudi Arabia 
E-mail: Mejrilassad@gmail.com 
 
                                     Henda Hajjami Ben Ghezala 
                       National School of Computer,  
              University of Manouba, Manouba, Tunisia 
                   E-mail: Henda.benghezala@ensi.rnu.tn 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In certain complex situations Decision-making takes 
into account a large number of the so-called knowledge of 
decision-support. This knowledge is often represented as a set 
of database definitions, knowledge bases, general information, 
domain data, statistical data, etc. To make the right decisions 
and to make good use of this mass of knowledge, it is 
preferable to formalize, represent and model them. In the 
literature, several works suggest using the ontology as a 
adequate solution to represent the decision making and 
decision support knowledge. Inspired by this work and based 
on the main objective of our research work, decision ontology 
was proposed to represent and formalize our decision support 
system knowledge which is proposed for computer Project 
Manager. The problem here is that the good practice of a 
decision-making system or a decision support system is not 
limited to the structuring and representation of the knowledge 
used. This knowledge, and given the delicacy of the domain 
studied (computing) requires to be evaluated and to be 
validated by domain experts. Accordingly incremental and 
multi-intervention approaches for the validation of the 
proposed ontology were proposed. This validation also allowed 
us to confirm the set of concepts and relationships forming the 
given ontology. The result of this research is a validated 
ontology which will allow us to build the memory of our 
project and to feed a good consistent and rich decision 
knowledge base. 
Keywords- support decision; decision making; decision ontology; 
ontology validation; computer project. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The main purpose the elaborated ontology [1] is to 
provide a basis for the proposal decision support system 
offered to the project managers in the computer field. This 
system consists essentially of two main modules: The 
decision-making module which functions as a support 
system to computer project leaders, to make a decision 
concerning the onset of their new projects and the decision 
support modules provides guidance and assistance inspired 
from historical projects which are already resolved or which 
have been already dealing with the problematic of their 
project in question. For the two modules, the need for 
knowledge, experience, historical information for resolved, 
unresolved, same context or same class projects, is too 
important in order to have a right course of the decision 
support system and especially the decision-making module. 
To have a broad knowledge of this domain,, we must model 
and represent it in a structured way. In addition, the newly 
created ontology must be validated and evaluated thanks to 
either experts or standard validation tools. Here, we can 
identify two scenarios [5] which justify the validation of the 
ontology: an adequate ontology will allow better reuse of the 
data and oncologists need methods to evaluate and validate 
their models in order to encourage them to share with 
confidence their results with the community. In this context, 
this paper will focus primarily on the problem of validating 
the content of domain ontology. Besides, an incremental 
approach for validation approaches was introduced for the 
proposed ontology which is composed of six steps. In this 
context, we have studied some ontology validation 
approaches: those which are questionnaire based, others 
based on question answering. The problem here that all 
approaches studied are single actor approaches where a 
single validation actor can validate the entire ontology and 
this by applying the semantic and the structural validation 
definitively with no return. The main novelty of our 
validation approach consists essentially of three criteria: the 
incremental validation, the multi-intervention, and the 
respecting of the ―V cycle. In fact, the shift from one 
validation step to other results in an update of the initial 
ontology and this occurs-by the intervention of three experts 
(project management expert, a project computer expert and a 
specialist in ontology engineering). Our proposal approach 
requires a resort between all the validation phases and can 
return to any expert for revalidation if needed. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The paper is organized as the following.. After the 
introduction, Section 2 describes the application of our 
ontology in the decision support system. Section 3 is made 
up of two sub-sections: The first sub-section illustrates some 
ontology validation approaches and their discussions. The 
second sub-section describes the proposed validation 
approach. Finally section 4 reveals the main conclusion and 
futures works. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
In the literature, several works have used ontology as a 
method of modeling and formalizing decision-making 
knowledge. In the following section, we will describe the 
most relevant ones. 
 
A. Main Proposals 
1) A Decision-Making Ontology for Information System 
Engineering[2] 
The author proposed an ontology for the modeling of 
Decision-Making knowledge (DM). The proposed DM 
ontology is a representation of DM concepts and their 
relationships modeled using a Unified Modeling Language 
(UML) class diagram. Then an application in the field of 
Business Process Reengineering (BPR) has been proposed. 
This proposal is based mainly on the unification of the most 
important DM concepts within a single model. The 
suggested Decision-Making-Ontology (DMO) is of a dual 
use namely: to clarify the DM concepts to formalize the DM 
situations and to specify the DM requirements and to 
highlight the components of the DM method. 
 
2) A Productive Credit Decision-Making System Based 
on the Ontology Model [3] 
The 
author 
has 
constructed 
ontology 
for 
the 
development of Decision Support System (DSS) provoked 
by reviews of the effects of the pandemic on the global 
banking system. It emphasizes the relationship and support 
between companies and banks and the need for response 
from banks to ensure a reliable business customer 
experience. It is clear that the decision ontology in banking 
risk management is a component of the general “Banking” 
ontology. 
 
3) A Decision Support Ontology for collaborative 
decision making in engineering design[4] 
 
In this research, a Decision Support Ontology (DSO) is 
developed to facilitate decision making within the 
framework of collaborative design. The structure of the 
developed information model reflects a prior knowledge of 
decision making and supports the communication of 
information independent of any specific decision method. 
As a result, the DSO includes information related to the 
decision such as the design issue, alternatives, rating, 
criteria, and preferences. It also includes the rationale and 
assumptions for the decision, as well as any constraints 
created by the decision and the outcome of the decision. The 
DSO is based on the Ontology Web Language (OWL), 
which facilitates the sharing and integration of decision-
making information between multiple collaborators via the 
Web and description logic. 
 
B. Discusion and synthesis 
The study of these different proposals has enabled us to 
observe that: 
 
The ontologies used for the proposal of a decision 
aid or a decision support are a generic ontology of 
large domain namely the domain of design 
techniques, the domain of knowledge engineering, 
the domain of insurance banking ,  etc. 
 
Most of these ontologies are not well validated and 
if this is the case the validation is not complete and 
suffers from being a support for the formalization 
and the modeling of knowledge. 
It is in this context that we decided to propose decision 
ontology for the proposal of a decision support on three 
main levels. In addition and in order to remedy the problem 
of ontology validation, the following section of this paper is 
proposed as a validation approach. This approach is an 
attempt to guarantee an adequate formalization for the 
knowledge manipulated by the proposed aid system. 
 
III. 
THE APPLICATION OF THE PROPOSED ONTOLOGY IN 
THE DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM 
In order to automate the knowledge capitalization 
approach [1] that we have suggested, we have proposed our 
decision support system offered mainly to computer project 
leaders. The main goal of this support system is to guide the 
manager of a computer project from the start of this new 
project until the resolution and the illustration of the final 
results. Our proposed ontology is described in three main 
concepts: project context, project features and project 
rational design. The proposed system offered three levels of 
assistance and for each level of help we will identify, the 
following: the main role for the proposed support decision 
ontology. 
 
The first level of help is "help oriented services". It 
allows the enrichment, consultation, statistics, 
framing and contextualization of new projects to be 
processed. At this stage the conceptualization and 
definition of concepts and terms describing 
computer projects are needed. The support decision 
knowledge recommended in this type of help is 
given by the instantiation of the concepts and 
relations defining these two classes "project 
features" and "project context" as well as their 
subclasses. 
 
The second level of help is "help oriented decision 
making": that presents the main goal of our decision 
support system. At this level, project leaders (chief 
or project manager) are into taking a decision of 
launching their new project. This decision is made 
by checking whether the problem of their new 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

project is already addressed or not. Here, the need to 
define a "problematic" concept for each project is 
very important. The instantiation of the project 
feature class that contains the concept "project 
problematic" forms the answer to the decision-
making question. 
 
The third level of help is "help oriented decision 
support". For this type of help, the project leader 
will be inspired by the projects already resolved to 
complete their new projects. In this case, they will 
not only be inspired by the suggestions and 
solutions proposed for old projects, but also they 
will benefit from the problems and failures 
encountered during the resolution of these different 
projects. The instantiation of the project Rational 
Design (problem, suggestion and solution) forms a 
basis for decision support knowledge.  
 
Even if the use of the proposed decision ontology plays 
a key role in determining the knowledge necessary for 
building a decision-making knowledge base, it is still 
insufficient. This insufficiency is explained by the fact that 
this knowledge is not always true and needs to be evaluated 
and to be validated by experts and specialists. It is in this 
context that we propose an ontology validation approach 
which aims to evaluate, to verify and to validate the content 
of this ontology, the choice of concepts and the relationships 
between them. The description of this approach is given in 
the following section. 
 
IV. 
ONTOLOGY VALIDATION 
The ontology validation is considered as a stakeholder of 
the life cycle of ontology that they can keep their interest 
related to the applications for which they were built. Then 
the validation of ontology knowledge has an influence on 
the evolution and the maintenance of systems using this 
ontology [6], [7]. In addition, the quality of the knowledge 
modeled by ontology directly affects the quality of these 
systems. It is in this context, and to guarantee a good quality 
of the proposed decision support system, we have decided to 
validate the content of our proposed ontology and we 
propose a validation approach for our proposed ontology 
which is built on a set of criteria. 
A. Main Ontology Validation Approaches 
Several works in the literature have been proposed 
approaches and validation methods. In what follows, we 
will present some proposals. To get the Integrity of the 
Specifications. 
  
a) A validation approach proposed by Rim et al [8] : 
The authors proposed an ontology validation approach 
which minimizes the intervention of an expert in the 
validation of changes through an evolutionary process based 
on consistency check and quality assessment of the 
modified ontology. The verification of consistency is 
employed to ensure that all axioms remain valid after the 
occurance of the change. The proposed validation process 
consists in defining weights by the domain expert for each 
criterion by giving it a weight relative to its importance in 
relation to the domain and the use of the ontology. Thus, the 
process will minimize the intervention of an expert in the 
validation of changes.  
2) An approach for validating the content of an 
ontology proposed by Ben Abacha et al [9]: Authors have 
proposed a semi-automatic approach called SAVANT based 
on the generation of questions to validate their ontologies. 
The first step is to automatically generate a list of Boolean 
questions from the ontology being validated. These 
questions are submitted to experts in the field who provide 
an agreement decision (Yes / No) and then an interpretation 
of these comments made to validate or modify the ontology. 
The originality of this approach rests on the fact that the 
interventions are manual and they are carried out only by 
health professionals. 
3) An interactive method for the validation of ontology 
proposed by Richard [10]: An ontology validation method 
called OVIM "Ontology„s Validation by Interactive 
Method" has been proposed. Authors proposed this method 
for the structural and semantic validation of ontology. This 
method is be based on five stages. They started with the 
structural validation that has four stages of validation 
namely; consistency, validation by OOps, validation by 
request and validation of the choice of the preferential label. 
In the fifth step, they realized the semantic validation by 
collaborating with actors of the modeled domain. 
4) An ontology validation Approach by the experts via a 
questionnaire by Laila et al. [11]: An ontology evaluation 
and validation approach that has been proposed. This 
approach starts from an ontology to be evaluated and ends 
up with an updated ontology according to the evaluators' 
recommendations. 
The 
proposed 
approach 
consists 
essentially of five steps: In the first step, a questionnaire is 
produced from the components of the ontology. Secondly, 
results of the survey of the experts will be done. The third 
step is to analyze and synthesize the results obtained. The 
update of the questionnaire based on expert feedback as well 
as the update of the ontology according to the knowledge of 
the results is realized during the last two stages. 
 
5) A validation approach based on evaluation by Tartir 
et all[12]: This approach essentially consists of verifying 
the consistency and measuring the impact of the change on 
the quality of the ontology. It also allows consistency 
checking and evaluation of the structure and content of the 
proposed ontology based on well-defined evaluation criteria 
and metrics. 
B. Discussion 
Although the validation approach proposed by [9] is a 
very important approach that allows the validation of 
concepts, relationships and axiom components of ontology. 
In fact, it has been evaluated experimentally on three 
ontologies of different methods of construction but this 
approach presents some lacuna:  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
A bad quality of validated ontology is related to two 
reasons: the absence of ontology-expert interaction 
and the absence of interface.  
 
Wrong time planning of the expert and the reduction 
of his level of concentration during the answers to 
the questions.   
 
The choice of questions is not generic. It also 
depends on the context of the problem. 
 
The validation method of [10] like any other method 
allows the structural and semantic validation.  
 
The problem here is that during the semantic 
validation domain actors verify only the existence of 
the general semantic domain.   
 
Another limit of this approach is the fact that the 
domain experts are not allowed to add, modify or 
update the used concepts.   
 
Expert, in this approach are simply domain actor and 
are not necessarily specialists in the field of ontology 
engineering.   
The approach proposed in [11], is a very interesting 
approach but has some limitations:  
 
It is an approach not updated in the term of the novelties 
of the version of the OWL language. 
 
Uses only English for the generation of questionnaires in 
natural language. 
 
The questionnaires are generated using non-specialists 
in the construction of ontology study which reduces the 
quality of validated ontology. 
 The study of these different approaches allows us to 
notice that:   
 
A total absence of documentation. 
 
Absence of multi-expert validation [just one expert 
involved]. 
 Generally, the major approaches make use simply of an 
evaluation of their ontology. Effectively, this evaluation 
could not be considered as a validation permitting to exploit 
their ontology. In this context, incremental validation 
approach is introduced which is mainly characterized by 
multi-intervention, documentation and incrementation. In the 
next section, we will describe both the process of building 
ontology and the proposed validation. 
V. 
INCREMENTAL & MULTI-INTERVENTION VALIDATION 
APPROACH 
Evaluating ontology means checking and validating two 
aspects: structural and semantic aspects. The validation of 
the structural aspect of ontology allows verifying the 
consistency and the coherence of a model to check. In this 
way, classes and sub-classes are verified according to the 
criteria of consistency and coherence between them and to 
avoid redundancy.  
In this way, we proposed a validation approach based on 
three criteria: 
 
The first criterion: the Incremental validation of the 
ontology: the passage from one validation step to 
another results in an update [modification, deletion 
or addition] of the initial ontology.   
 
The second criterion: the Multi-intervention criteria: 
This approach is characterized by the intervention 
of several and different experts. Three experts are 
involved in the validation process: 
 The project management expert: He is an 
expert in the field of project management.   
 The project computer expert: He is an expert 
who masters all the concepts of computer 
projects. 
 The specialist in ontology engineering: This 
actor has a good command of all the tools 
and editors of the ontology.   
These experts are the main players in the proposed 
approach; however they are not the only ones. They have 
the right to bring in other experts and specialists when 
necessary. 
 
 
The third criterion: Our validation approach is 
respecting the V cycle .We were inspired by the live 
cycle of software engineering. Effectively our 
approach like the V cycle requires a feedback 
between all the validation phases. Hence, in our 
validation phases, we can return to any expert for 
revalidation if needed. In contrary to a classic 
approach which applies semantics and structural 
validation definitively with no return, we can return 
at any phase of validation to enhance our ontology.  
 
     The proposed validation approach is based mainly on 
a two-level validation method:  
 
A technical validation level, which is carried out 
according to the tools and menus integrated into the 
"Protégé"(ontology 
construction 
environment). 
During this level, we checked at each phase the 
consistency and the coherence of the proposed 
ontology. 
 
A professional validation carried out by a specialist 
in the field of computer project and an expert in the 
field of engineering and ontological construction 
and a knowledge management expert. 
The approach that we proposed is essentially composed    
of six steps (Fig.1): 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 1.  Incremental & Multi-intervention validation approach.
 
 
Step 1: During the first validation step, a descriptive 
document is presented in a tabular form containing 
all the concepts and terms as well as their 
descriptions constituting the first version of the 
ontology prepared (Fig.2). 
 
Step 2: In the second step, it is up to us to update 
our proposal based on the remarks and the 
assertions given by the computer project expert. 
This step was considered as a meeting accompanied 
by discussions. The result of this phase is a second 
version of ontology that is ready for evaluation by 
"project computer expert". This version is an 
amelioration of the version 1 at the level of project 
features (Fig. 3). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  First ontology„s version. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
Figure 3.  Second ontology„s version. 
 
Step 3. During this step, we prepared a second 
report: a document describing our objectives and 
orientations. This report is then submitted to a 
project management expert for evaluation. This 
second expert could affirm or refute, add or modify 
the proposal by adding a textual justification. 
Effectively, in a version 3, this expert proposes to 
restrict the ontology by adding a new super class 
named "project context". This class gives a detailed 
idea about project deliverables, project abstract‖ and 
project keywords‖, etc (Fig.4).  
 
Step 4: After the evaluation done by the project 
management expert, technical check needs to be 
done .This check makes use of a software tool in the 
way to evaluate the consistency and the coherence 
of the latest version of our ontology. This mission is 
assured by a specialist in ontology engineering and 
results in a version 4.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Third ontology„s version. 
 
 
 Step 5: At this step, the fourth version is sent to the 
project management expert according to our objective 
which is essentially to discuss projects problem solving. 
Our goal here is to enrich ontology in the way to 
facilitate problems solving in a new project by 
exploiting historical projects. This step leads to a new 
version of ontology labeled as version 5. At this stage 
the expert proposes to add a new sub-class baptized 
"Rational design" (Fig.5). 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Fifth ontology„s version. 
 Step 6: For this validation phase the specialist of 
ontology engineering chooses to use HERMIT [tool 
integrated in protégé 4.2] to validate the consistency. 
This step results in a new version 6. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND RESULT 
The added value of our approach lies mainly in three 
points: 
 
The first point is presented by the multi-
interventions of experts and specialists who 
cooperate for the validation of ontology. These will 
intervene not only when an error has occurred but in 
each phase where it is necessary to be present. 
 
The second point is the generic validation goal: a 
technical 
validation 
a 
semantic 
validation 
(contained in the meaning of the concept) and an 
ergonomic validation. 
 
The third point consists in favoring a documentation 
content of each validation step favoring an aspect of 
reuse and sharing of validation technique for future 
validation phases and even for future projects.  
The validation methodology followed in our validation 
approach mainly consists in bringing in several experts with 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

different skills and this improves the nature of the 
corrections and updates proposed each time. 
 
However, this approach has some limitations: 
 
It is an approach that is limited to computer projects 
since our experts are restricted to those who are 
specialists in this field. 
 
The approach lacks a means of validating the logical 
aspect of ontology. 
For all these reasons we want to improve our proposal 
with other decisions: 
 We will try to add other experts to strengthen the 
intervention phase. 
 Carry out the logical validation and this by 
adding a phase of logical validation ensured by 
the intervention of a specialist in the field. 
For the validation of the proposed approach, the 
implementation of a prototype proved to be too essential. 
This prototype will always take as input the current version 
of the proposed ontology and based on recommendations 
and human interventions (expert interventions) validation is 
carried out step by step. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
In this paper, we have presented how we have used our 
domain ontology for modelling knowledge decision. The 
proposed ontology decision is a representation of concepts 
and relationships of computer filed used to create a decision 
knowledge base. Then we have shown its application in our 
decision support system. In this context, we proposed a 
validation approach which is an incremental and a multi-
intervention approach that allows a semantic and structural 
validation of the proposed ontology. After the validation 
phase, we will validate experimentally this ontology. In this 
context our future work must focus on the experimentation 
phase. This phase is carried out by building a knowledge 
base containing a real computer projects forming the basis 
of the facts and a set of rules forming the basis of the rules. 
These rules are of two types: classification rules which help 
to classify the projects and association rules which provide a 
help to describe in detail a new project. To do this, we will 
use the classification data mining techniques and we are 
going to propose classification and learning algorithms. 
Although the proposed validation approach seems too 
important to provide a fluid and reliable environment for the 
formalization of computer knowledge useful for decision 
support, it still remains incomplete and inconsistent. To do 
this an experimental study will prove too essential as a 
future contribution. 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 [1] R. Hanafi, L. Mejri and H.B. Ghezela ”Computer-Project-
Ontology Construction,Validation and choice of knowledge 
base”,10th International Joint Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery, 
Knowledge 
Engineering 
and 
Knowledge 
Management. (2018). 
[2] E. Kornyshova and R.Deneckère, ”Using an Ontology for 
Modeling Decision-Making Knowledge”, conference paper, 
International Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent 
Information & Engineering Systems , (2012). 
[3] A. Bakurova, E. Tereschenko, Y .Filei, M.Pasichnyk and 
H.Ropalo, ”Modeling of Decision Making Ontology”, Free 
Open-Access Proceedings for Scientific Conferences and 
Workshops /Vol-2362/paper18.pdf (2018). 
 [4] A. Justin. R. Rockwell, C. Jack, W. Ian, R. Grosse and S 
.Krishnamurty, ”Framework for Ontology-Driven Decision 
Making”, Applied Ontology journal, vol. 12, no. 3-4, pp. 189-
194, (2017) . 
[5] M. Gruninger and M.S. Fox, ”The Role of Competency 
Questions in Enterprise Engineering”, Department of 
Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, 4 Taddle Creek 
Road, Toronto, Ontario M5S IA4, IFIP WG5.7 Workshop on 
Benchmarking - Theory and Practice, Trondheim, Norway, 
(1994). 
 [6] M. Garzallah, ”Contributions to Knowledge Engineering: 
Construction and Validation of Ontology and Semantic 
Measures”, Habilitation to Direct Research (H.D.R.), (2017). 
 [7] A. Baneyx and J. Charlet, ”Evaluation, evolution and 
maintenance of an ontology in medicine: inventory and 
experimentation”. INSERM, U729, Paris, F-75006 
France ;Univ Paris Descartes, F-75006, STIM, DSI, 
AP-HP, Paris, F-75013 France. 
[8] R. Djedidi, H. Abboute and M-A. Aufaure, ”Evolution of 
ontology: Validation of changes based on assessment”, 
projet.liris.cnrs.fr/gom/JFO_2007/4.pdf, (2007).  
[9] A.B.Abacha, 
”Towards 
Natural 
Language 
Question 
,Generation for the Validation of Ontologies and Mappings”, 
Marcos Da Silveira and Cédric Pruski, Journal of Biomedical 
Semantics, (2016). 
 [10]  M. Richard, X. Aimé, M-O. Krebs and J. Charlet, ” LOVMI: 
towards an interactive method for the validation of 
ontologies”, INSERM UMRS 1142, LIMICS, F-75006, 
(2015). 
 [11] LZ. Ghomari1, F. Deghmani and A. Meghnous, ”Generation 
of a Questionnaire from a Domain Ontology”,conference 
paper, 
28es 
Journées 
francophones 
d'Ingénierie 
des 
ConnaissancesAt: Caen, France ,(2017). 
 [12] S. Tartir, S. Amit,I. and B. Arpinar, ”Ontological Evaluation 
and Validation”, from book Theory and Applications of 
Ontology: Computer Applications,Chapter  In book: Theory 
and Applications of Ontology: Computer Applications 
(pp.115-130) [pp.115-130] , (2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

