An Ontology-based Approach For Conformance Checking of Decision Mining Rules 
 
 
 
Sahar Toumia 
RIADI Laboratory, Manouba University, Tunisia 
High Institute on Management of Sousse, Sousse 
University, Tunisia 
sahartoumia@gmail.com 
 
Asma Mejri 
RIADI Laboratory, Manouba University, Tunisia 
High Institute of Computer Science of Kef, Jendouba 
University, Tunisia 
mejri.assma@gmail.com 
Sonia Ayachi-Ghannouchi 
RIADI Laboratory, Manouba University, Tunisia  
High Institute on Management of Sousse, Sousse University,Tunisia 
sonia.ayachi.ghannouchi@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—The decision mining field allows identifying decision 
points and analyzing rules for each choice depending on the 
available attributes in the business process. While significant 
advances have been made in this regard, little attention has been 
given to the manner of exploring the discovered rules, analyzing 
them and addressing the issue about their meaning and 
appropriateness. In order to alleviate this issue, in this work, we 
explore the possibility of investigating the conformance 
checking between the discovered rules that are generated by 
decision mining techniques and the knowledge rules of the 
corresponding ontology. We propose an Ontology-based 
approach for Conformance Checking of Decision mining rules 
(O2CD) in order to discover from event logs the decision models 
for a given process model and check the conformity between the 
corresponding discovered decision rules and the rules of an 
existing ontology. Our approach was evaluated using the 
COVID-19 case study in the COVID-19 crisis unit of the Farhat 
Hached University Hospital Center. 
 
Keywords-Decision mining; DMN; decision rules; ontology 
rules; conformance.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Information systems are becoming more and more 
intertwined with the operational processes they support. As a 
result, multitudes of events are recorded by information 
systems. Nonetheless, organizations have problems when 
extracting value from these data. In this context, the goal of 
process mining is to use event data to extract process-related 
information. It aims to discover, to monitor, and to improve 
real processes by extracting knowledge from event logs 
readily available in today’s systems [1]. However, the 
majority of algorithms, which are used for this purpose, 
produce models that describe the flow of activities, but do not 
detail how decisions are made along it. In this regard, 
Decision Mining (DM) is a method of deriving and analyzing 
event logs with the aim of extracting information from such 
event logs in order to extract rules, to check compliance to 
business rules, and to show performance information [2].  In 
this respect, decision making is one of the most important 
aspects of Business Processes (BPs) in organizations and 
making the right decisions during the BP execution is crucial 
for accomplishing the business goals of an enterprise [3]. 
Furthermore, due to importance of decision making, many 
organizations started to address a need for a standardized 
notation to represent decisions in BP models. Recently, in 
2015, the Decision Model and Notation (DMN) [4] standard 
was published by the Object Management Group (OMG). In 
addition to that, an ontology is a way of representing a 
common understanding of a domain [5]. Lately, the scientific 
communities attempt to explore the decision support in 
organizations by emerging approaches on different decision 
ontologies [6]. In this context, the main objective of this 
paper is to check the conformance checking between decision 
rule models, elicited using process mining techniques, 
against the rules of a given ontology. The evaluation of our 
approach has been done on the basis of a real-life case study, 
which concerns COVID-19 patients care in the Farhat 
Hached University Hospital Center (UHC) in Tunisia. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section 1 introduces 
basic background knowledge relative to the different 
concepts used in our approach. A detailed description of the 
proposed approach is presented in Section 2, and in Section 
3 we illustrate our O2CD approach application and the main 
results of our case study. In Section 4, we describe briefly the 
different related works that we consider relevant to our 
research. Finally, section 5 concludes the paper. 
II. 
BASIC CONCEPTS 
In this section, we start by providing short and simple 
definitions of some important concepts which are decision 
mining, DMN standard and ontology. 
A. Decision Mining 
The term of DM was first introduced in process literature 
in the work of [8]. It was defined as the field that aims at the 
identification of data dependencies that affect the routing of 
a case. Moreover, it is based on the idea that a control flow 
decision can be transformed into a classification problem. 
Hence, machine learning techniques can be used to discover 
structural patterns in data based on a set of training instances.   
In order to solve such a classification problem, there are 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

several algorithms, such as C4.5 and support vector 
machines.  
B. DMN 
Due to the appearance of decision making and decision 
mining, several organizations and companies started to 
address a need for a standardized notation to represent 
decisions in BP models. In 2015, the Object Management 
Group (OMG) published the first version of DMN.  
According to [5], the DMN standard includes two levels; the 
Decision Requirements level (DRD) and the Decision Logic 
level (DL). The DRD level shows the structure of decision. It 
consists of few elements that are used to capture essential 
information with regards to decisions. The DL defines how 
decisions are made.  
One of the most largely used representations for decision 
logic is a decision table, which is used in the rest of this paper. 
C. Ontology 
The term ontology is taken from philosophy, where 
ontology describes the science of being and, with this, of 
descriptions 
for 
the 
organization, 
designation 
and 
categorization of existence [9]. Gruber was the first to 
formulate the term ontology in the field of Computer Science 
[10] and defined it as “a set of representational primitives 
with which to model a domain of knowledge or discourse”.  
In addition to that, ontology is composed of a set of 
elements: (1) Concepts also named terms or classes, which 
represent the class of entities or things within a domain, (2) 
Relations between concepts, which describe the interactions 
between concepts or  concept's properties, (3) Properties, 
which are the set of attributes of the concepts that capture 
further knowledge about the relationships between concepts, 
(4) Rules also named predicates are used to constrain values 
for classes or instances.  
III. 
O2CD APPROACH 
One of the main objectives of this paper is to discover 
from event logs the decision models for a given process 
model and check the conformity between the corresponding 
discovered decision rules and the rules of an existing 
ontology. Therefore, we propose a six-step approach to verify 
this conformity, as depicted in Figure 1. 
• 
Phase 1: Data extraction  
Generally, organizations have the opportunity to store 
information about their activities that are conducted through 
information systems. In addition to that, since most BPs are 
supported by at least one information system, the amount of 
data being stored about process executions is rapidly 
growing. As well, the execution of a case results in a 
sequence of events being recorded. The goal of the data 
extraction phase is to obtain event log from data that is 
extracted from the original data source. 
However, event data exist but some efforts are needed to 
extract them. Often, data preprocessing is an important step 
in process mining. As a result, in this phase, we try to build 
an event log from the data available within the organization. 
This step is part of the most crucial steps in the field of 
process mining. In fact, the different steps that are followed 
in our proposed approach are based on the event log that is 
constructed in this step. Thus, this event log will be used to 
discover a suitable process model. This process model 
discovery step will be discussed in the next section. 
• 
Phase 2: Process Model Discovery 
Based on the results of the previous phase, which is event 
log the next step is the creation of a process model by means 
of process mining. Therefore, the field of process mining can 
be 
categorized 
in 
three 
categories 
[1]: 
discovery, 
conformance, and enhancement. In the scope of this phase, 
we only consider the first category, which is process 
discovery. Its aim is to use the data stored in event logs in 
order to generate automatically a process model that 
describes the execution of a process. Moreover, the first step 
in process discovery is the selection of the algorithm 
responsible for mining the event log from which process 
discovery can be done. Over time, many process mining 
algorithms have been proposed to generate a process [11]. In 
this paper, we select the inductive Miner [12] algorithm to 
discover our process model. The main advantage of this 
algorithm is that it allows to discover models corresponding 
to hidden transitions and invisible tasks as well as the model 
always fits, i.e., the model can generate the traces in the log 
[13]. 
• 
Phase 3: Decision Mining Rules Discovery 
The input of this phase is event log generated from Phase 
1 and process model generated from Phase 2. In this sense, 
DM is the study of the decision-related characteristics of a 
process based on a process model of the process and log of 
previous process executions. It enhances process models with 
additional data on why specific decisions are made. 
Therefore, in accordance with [14], in this step, we use the 
Multi-perspective Process Explorer (MPE) plugin, which is 
available in ProM tool. In this phase, we are interested in the 
data discovery mode to express the set of rules. So, in the 
MPE mode 'Discover Data-Perspective' it is possible to 
enrich the process model with decision rules discovery based 
on the event log. Therefore, the output of this phase is a 
process model enriched with appropriates guards and 
conditions. 
• 
Phase 4: Ontology selection 
Nowadays, there exists a significant and explosion of the 
number of ontologies, which are available in the semantic 
web. Therefore, ontology selection is one of the most 
important steps in order to determine which of the several 
ontologies would be one of the best ontologies for a specific 
context or goal. Thus, in this phase, we aim at identifying and 
selecting the existence of one or more ontologies that are the 
most appropriate and adequate for a given domain. In this 
context, several methods have been proposed to select 
ontologies according to a variety of criteria. For example, 
more specifically, in this step we have based on the work 
presented in [15]. The authors proposed a set of elements and 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

criteria that allows selecting the adequate and appropriate 
ontology. The output of this phase is the selected ontology.  
 
 
 
• 
Phase 5: Representation of Decision Mining Rules 
 and ontology Rules through DMN 
In this phase, we present how the decisions, which were 
discovered in process models, can be represented into the 
corresponding elements of the DMN based on the extraction 
of both decisions and process model from event log. These 
important steps were described in the previous phases. Our 
main idea is that process decision making can be captured and 
analyzed based on an event log. Further, the development of 
the proposed approach to transform DM rules into DMN 
models is inspired by results published by [4]. Secondly, we 
present the ontology rules through DMN. In this step, we start 
by extracting from the selected ontology the set of rules 
corresponding to the represented knowledge. Then, in the 
same way as we did for DM rules, we expressed them through 
DMN elements. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
Phase 6: Conformance checking between decision 
mining rules and ontology rules 
In this phase, we try to check the conformity between the 
rules of ontology which define the acknowledged structured 
knowledge and those obtained by decision mining. In fact, 
rules incorporated in ontologies reflect ideal knowledge of a 
domain, while those from the event log reflect real actual 
execution. In order to do this, we compare the decision 
logic presented as tables with each other. The first table 
references to the corresponding decision tables containing the 
extracted DM rules and the second one references to the 
corresponding decision tables containing the extracted 
ontology rules. Then, we compare them according to a set of 
output, which are obtained according to a set of input data. In 
such tasks, the decision maker observes the cases of 
similarity and differences based on the analysis of the current 
situation. He/she is able of forming a comprehensive 
overview of the result and makes decisions using his/her 
Figure 1. An Ontology-based approach for Conformance Checking of Decision mining rules: O2CD. 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

professional experience and intuition, as well as, he /she can 
review the taken decisions. 
IV. 
O2CD APPROACH APPLICATION AND PROOF OF 
CONCEPT 
This section is dedicated to present the COVID-19 case 
study and to describe the application of our O2CD approach 
in a real-life situation. 
A. Context of our exprimentation 
In Tunisia, the coronavirus disease pandemic has 
officially developed since March 2, 2020. The COVID-19 
crisis unit of the UHC has prepared an action plan for the 
management of COVID-19 patients. However, it has faced 
many difficulties in federating decisions and actions. 
Thereby, our aim is to consider the BP of managing covid-19 
patients in the COVID-19 crisis unit and to help 
physicians/stakeholders evaluate their decisions and take the 
most appropriate ones.  
B. Case study: COVID-19 patients care in the departement 
of infectious diseases  
To evaluate our approach entitled O2CD, we have applied 
it on a real-life case study, which concerns COVID-19 
patients care in the infectious diseases department. For the 
experimental study, we considered the covid-19 event log, 
which was extracted from the Electronic Health Record EHR 
information system. Therefore, we have prepared the log for 
the application of our proposed approach. Then, we 
conducted the different steps of our O2CD approach. 
• 
Application of phase 1 
First, we need to acquire an event log of the process in 
this stage. In the context of our case study, the information 
system records data about its operations in SPSS (Statistical 
Package for the Social Sciences). Then, we obtained a 
snapshot of the database that was taken between March 1, 
2020 and May 31, 2020. It was converted into CSV 
extension. In our case, the purpose was to select patients who 
were suspected to have COVID-19, as shown in the examples 
in Figure 2.  
 
Then we convert the CSV file into an event log in the 
form of XES file. This dataset concerns 100 patients in the 
infectious diseases department which was the unique dataset 
considered in this phase of our research: 1024 events were 
recorded involving 18 distinct activities, and 24 data 
attributes. These attributes encompass the 
different 
symptoms of covid-19 such as fever, headache cough,etc and 
the outcome of test results of coronavirus. 
• 
Application of phase 2 
 After extracting and preparing the event log, the BP 
which is mined from the event log, was discovered as a Petri 
net BP using the “Mine Petri Net with Inductive Miner" 
plugin which is available in ProM framework as depicted in 
Figure3. 
 
Figure 3. An excerpt of the discovered BP model. 
 
As a result, as shown in Figure 3, the discovered model 
can be interpreted. We can see that the BP of managing 
COVID-19 patients starts by receiving the patient. The doctor 
examines the patient and evaluates the degree of emergency, 
and then the isolation is started according to clinical 
documents. Then, a set of activities is activated 
simultaneously which are: doing Polymerase Chain Reaction 
(PCR), preparing for hospital stay as well as deciding the 
appropriate diagnostic protocol and the clinical examination. 
Then, the PCR test is retrieved by the head of department. 
However, the patients can have negative or positive PCR test. 
On the one hand, the patient, with negative PCR result, can 
be discharged (ending of isolation). On the other hand, 
concerning patients with positive PCR result, the staff 
member has to evaluate whether the patient's status is mild, 
moderate, or severe. As well, the physician proceeds with the 
“keep isolated” activity and he/she can choose the Covid-19 
procedure.  
• 
Application of phase 3 
In this phase, the Petri net model and the event log, which 
were obtained in previous steps, served as inputs for a "Multi-
Perspective Process Explorer" plug-in (MPE plug-in). This 
step was carried out to discover the rules on the Petri net 
model. Firstly, the value of the "min instances" parameter 
was modified to the lowest possible value (0.001), which 
allowed the discovery of very large and complex rules related 
to some activities. In our case, the process model involved 10 
rules base. But in this work, we mainly focused on 3 principal 
rules. In Figure 4, it is possible to visualize the large and 
complex     discovery rules in the "Discover Data Perspective" 
mode of MPE found in the position called "p 19" in the Petri 
net model. These rules, shown in Table I, refer to the arc that 
takes the transition (activity) " consider case as mild ", " 
consider case as moderate", and " consider case as severe" 
transition. The rules, which were discovered in this step, were 
evaluated and then validated by the hospital staff. The goal 
was to verify if the discovered rules could be considered as 
correct and as well, if they are really applied within this 
process. The hospital staff agreed on the rules. We concluded 
Figure 2. Screenshot from the Excel sheet. 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

that the applied method may possibly discover correct rules. 
However, this is not enough in this case to provide insights to 
the hospital staff. Therefore, we proceeded to explore the 
discovered rules and check if this information is conformed 
to acknowledged structured knowledge available in a 
selected ontology. 
 
TABLE I. THE DISCOVERED RULES RELATED TO THE " CONSIDER 
CASE AS MODERATE", " CONSIDER CASE AS MILD", " CONSIDER CASE AS 
SEVERE"   ACTIVITIES 
 
 
• 
Application of phase 4 
In this stage, we try to identify and to select the most 
appropriate ontology in the context of COVID-19 pandemic. 
Therefore, we choose COVID-19 ontology for cases and 
patient information (CODO) [16], in accordance with a set of 
criteria, which provides a model for the collection and 
analysis of data about the COVID-19. The ontology already 
has incorporated real world and has uploaded thousands of 
cases from data collected by the government of India. As 
well, the inference rules were written in the Semantic Web 
Rule Language (SWRL), which is the rule representation 
language recommended by the Semantic Web community. 
• 
Application of phase 5 
After identifying and discovering the decision logic from 
the process models and the selected ontology, we try to derive 
a corresponding DMN model according to the proposed 
approach discussed in previous section. In the fragment 
process model shown in Figure 4 when place p19 is marked 
with a token, then, an exclusive choice between the execution 
of transitions needs to be made: “consider case as mild”, 
“consider case as moderate” and “consider case as severe”. 
The doctor evaluates whether the patient's status is mild, 
moderate or severe. As discussed before, DMN defines two 
levels: the decision requirements diagram level and the 
decision logic level. Figure 5 shows the DRD which is based 
on the fragment in Figure 4 from the health care domain. 
Figure 5. Decision Requirement Diagram of the decision point p19. 
 
 The decision to be taken refers to the health assessment 
and can directly be derived from the input data respiratory 
rate, presence of fever, test result, and mode entry. We 
noticed that the decision about how to assess a patient's health 
depends on the clinical classification of cases, which is a 
document performed by the staff of Farhat Hached UHC. 
Moreover, Figure 6 presents the DRD of CODO ontology. 
Therefore, the decision to be taken refers to the health 
assessment; can directly be derived from the input data 
respiratory rate, presence of fever, test result, cough, SpO2, 
and measured fever. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Decision Requirement Diagram of CODO ontology. 
Activity Name 
 
Min 
instances 
Guard 
Consider case as 
moderate 
0.001 
(((respiratory_rate>22.0&& 
respiratory_rate<=28.0)&&testr
esult== 
"positive")&&entry_mode=="urg
ent medical aid service") 
 
Consider case as 
mild 
 
0.001 
((presence_of_fever>0&& 
respiratory_rate<=22.0)&&testr
esult== "positive") 
 
Consider case as 
severe 
 
0.001 
(((respiratory_rate>28.0&& 
respiratory_rate<=30.0)&&testr
esult== 
"positive")&&entry_mode== 
"urgent medical aid service") 
 
Figure 4. Process fragment representing a set of rules discovered by 
decision tree algorithm. 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
We noticed that the decision about how to control a 
patient's health depends on the clinical documentation of 
WHO (World Health Organisation) and a guidance document 
on appropriate management of confirmed cases of COVID-
19 from the ministry of health and family welfare directorate 
general of health Services EMR (Emergency Medical Relief) 
Division of India. In addition to that, according to [17], 
decision logic can be represented in many ways, e.g., by an 
analytic model or a decision table. In this paper, we used 
decision tables.  
 
Figure 7.  Decision table for the rules at place p19 as specified by the DMN 
standard. 
Figure 7 shows the decision rules regarding transitions 
consider case as mild, consider case as moderate, and 
consider case as severe, as a decision table. Figure 8 presents 
the decision rules of CODO ontology as a decision table. It 
can be seen for example from this figure that if the respiratory 
rate is between 15 and 30 and the SpO2 between 90 and 94 
and the patient has a positive test result then the patient status 
is considered moderate. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Decision table for the rules of ontology as specified by the 
DMN standard. 
 
 
• 
Application of phase 6 
In this phase, we try to check the conformity and 
similarity between the discovered rules that were generated 
by DM technique with the ontology rules, which correspond 
to acknowledged structured knowledge. For this purpose, we 
attempt to compare these rules for a specific set of cases. 
More precisely, for each case, we compared the results 
respectively obtained by the discovered rules on one hand and 
the rules from the ontology on the other hand. As a result, in 
our case study, we used the two decision tables: the first one 
for DM rules (blue) and the second one for ontology rules 
(green). In this step, we want also to find out why a test case 
is producing a certain output and we want to see exactly 
which rules fire for the input data set. Thus, the formula 
returns true if the results are exactly the same. If there are any 
differences, the result returned is false and the decision maker 
should check his/her result. Thus, the decision maker can 
observe the cases of similarity and differences and form a 
comprehensive overview of the result. 
 
 
Figure 9. The result of conformance between decision rules and ontology 
rules. 
 
As can be seen in the Figure 9, the formula compares the 
two tables, identifies cells with differences or finds similar 
values and displays the differences and similarities in 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

corresponding cells. In our cases, we have around 75% cases 
of conformance and 25% cases of divergence, which are 
highlighted with the red color. 
V. 
RELATED WORKS ON DECISION MINING AND ONTOLGY 
In this section, we present the reviewed literature that we 
considered relevant to our research. The related works can be 
divided into two groups. The first group refers to the works 
dealing with the using of decision mining technique in 
processes. The second group is related to approaches that 
incorporate ontology in the field of decision-making. In fact, 
in recent Business Process Management (BPM) literature, 
DM appears as a frequent term [18]. In literature of DM, we 
identify three approaches: The first category focuses on 
improving decisions without considering DMN. The term of 
DM was first introduced in process literature in the work of 
[8]. The work identifies and describes the routing and choices 
in Petri nets by using a decision tree algorithm. However, De 
Leoni et al. [2] stated that the technique proposed in the work 
of [8] has several limitations, such as the technique cannot 
discover conditions associated with XOR-splits and many 
loop. To address these problems, the authors proposed a new 
approach, which was implemented by De Leoni et al. [2]. 
Later on, this plug-in was reused and integrated into the 
Multi-perspective Process Explorer plug-in for ProM 
introduced by [14]. The second category is dedicated to 
different approaches to derivate DM within DMN standard. 
In fact, in [19], the authors proposed an approach, which is 
based on using information about decisions incorporated 
implicitly in the process execution data.  Furthermore, they 
proposed a technique to rebuild decision trees and to identify 
the dependencies between the discovered decisions. 
Recently, in [20], the authors proposed a  new approach to 
produce DMN models from BPMN process models while 
focusing on the data perspective of process models. The third 
category is dedicated to Decision-aware control-flow 
discovery approaches. In [18], the proposed approach revised 
the way in which the decision and the process model can be 
retrieved in holistic manner. This work considered process 
activities as the drivers of decisions, whereas in our work we 
assumed that the decision drivers were control flow decision 
points and data attributes. In the second group of the related 
work have been proposed works dedicated to conceptual 
decision ontologies complementary to BPM techniques. The 
literature shows that few works addressed the relationship 
between discovering decision models from process and 
ontology. For example, in [7], the authors presented a 
decision ontology for supporting decision-making in 
information systems. This work derived components to 
decision processes and created independent decision-making 
ontologies. In [21], the investigated problem is whether a DM 
technique allows to identify business rules in Knowledge-
Intensive Processes points. More specifically, in this work, 
the authors were interested in exploring the decision making 
associated to business rules of KIPO (Knowledge-Intensive 
Process Ontology), which is an ontology proposed in 
[22].The literature shows that the most studied works relies 
on the presentation and the discovery of decisions in process 
models on the one hand. On the others hand, a few academic 
works proposing their own decision-making ontology exist. 
However, those works are more conceptual and do not 
provide means for operationalizing of the decision-making 
ontologies. Moreover, we concluded that there is no existing 
works that try to check the conformity and similarity between 
the discovered rules that are generated by decision mining 
techniques with the ontology rules. So, what distinguishes 
our work from the existing works, is that we aim to check this 
conformity. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented our ontology-based approach 
for conformance checking of DM rules using ontologies. Our 
approach deals with discovering from event logs the decision 
models for a given process model and checking the 
conformity between these discovered rules with ontology 
rules, which are already existing. The proposed approach was 
evaluated using a real-life case study. We concluded that the 
proposed approach provided valid and accurate conformance 
gaps that can serve for improving the organization’s decision 
making and hence its overall performance. In the future, we 
plan to extend our approach. We can improve our approach 
by considering more data from the various information 
systems to ensure the diversity of data. We can also collect 
data during a long period in order to examine more cases and 
check the correctness of the results. With more data and for a 
long period, more specific scenarios can be encountered 
which favors obtained better conclusion. Moreover, we aim 
to create an automatic tool for extracting the divergent cases 
when comparing DM rules and ontology rules. Recent 
technologies, such as reinforcement learning [23] and deep 
learning [24] algorithms, could be helpful for achieving this 
purpose. In addition to that, in future work, we will rely on 
similarity metrics specifically dedicated to semantic 
similarity such as semantic cosine similarity [25] and we will 
use different data sets for training and testing. Besides, in this 
work, the assessment stage and the accuracy evaluation are 
still based on a limited test case selection. In future work, we 
will plan for more test cases. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The experimental part of the work was carried out in the 
framework of the SMART2C RRV project in Tunisia 
(Research Results' Valorization project) which deals with 
developing a smart system for a COVID-19 Crisis 
Committee. The authors would like to thank the COVID-19 
Crisis Committee in Farhat Hached hospital for providing the 
datasets and for validating the results. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Van Der Aalst, “Data science in action,” in Process mining, 
Springer, 2016, pp. 3–23. 
[2] M. De Leoni and W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, “Data-aware process 
mining: Discovering decisions in processes using alignments,” 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Proc. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput., no. January, pp. 1454–1461, 
2013, doi: 10.1145/2480362.2480633. 
[3] S. Leewis, K. Smit, and M. Zoet, “Putting Decision Mining into 
Context: A Literature Study,” Lect. Notes Inf. Syst. Organ., vol. 
38, no. September, pp. 31–46, 2020, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-
47355-6_3. 
[4] E. Bazhenova, “Discovery of Decision Models Complementary 
to Process Models.” University Potsdam, 2018. 
[5] D. Model, “Notation (DMN). Version 1.1,” Object Manag. 
Group, 
Inc, 
2016. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.omg.org/spec/DMN/1.1/, 2016. 
[6] R. Kishore and R. Ramesh, Ontologies: a handbook of 
principles, concepts and applications in information systems, 
vol. 14. Springer Science & Business Media, 2007. 
[7] E. Kornyshova and R. Deneckère, “Decision-making ontology 
for information system engineering,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 
(including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes 
Bioinformatics), vol. 6412 LNCS, pp. 104–117, 2010, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-16373-9_8. 
[8] A. Rozinat and W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, “Decision mining in 
ProM,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including 
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture 
Notes in Bioinformatics), 2006, vol. 4102 LNCS, pp. 420–425, 
doi: 10.1007/11841760_33. 
[9] M. Rebstock, F. Janina, and H. Paulheim, Ontologies-based 
business integration. Springer Science & Business Media, 2008. 
[10] T. R. Gruber, “Toward principles for the design of ontologies 
used for knowledge sharing?,” Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud., vol. 
43, no. 5–6, pp. 907–928, 1995. 
[11] E. Gupta, “Process mining algorithms,” Int. J. Adv. Res. Sci. 
Eng., vol. 3, no. 11, pp. 401–412, 2014. 
[12] S. J. J. Leemans, D. Fahland, and W. M. P. van der Aalst, 
“Discovering block-structured process models from event logs-
a constructive approach,” in International conference on 
applications and theory of Petri nets and concurrency, 2013, pp. 
311–329. 
[13] R. Ghawi, “Process Discovery using Inductive Miner and 
Decomposition,” arXiv Prepr. arXiv1610.07989, 2016. 
[14] F. Mannhardt, M. De Leoni, and H. A. Reijers, “The Multi-
perspective Process Explorer.,” BPM, vol. 1418, pp. 130–134, 
2015. 
[15] M. Sabou, V. Lopez, and E. Motta, “Open Research Online,” 
Choice Rev. Online, vol. 51, no. 06, pp. 51-2973-51–2973, 
2014, doi: 10.5860/choice.51-2973. 
[16] B. Dutta and M. DeBellis, “CODO: An Ontology for Collection 
and Analysis of Covid-19 Data,” no. November, pp. 76–85, 
2020, doi: 10.5220/0010112500760085. 
[17] K. Batoulis, A. Meyer, E. Bazhenova, G. Decker, and M. 
Weske, “Extracting decision logic from process models,” in 
International conference on advanced information systems 
engineering, 2015, pp. 349–366. 
[18] J. De Smedt, F. Hasić, S. K. L. M. Vanden Broucke, and J. 
Vanthienen, “Towards a holistic discovery of decisions in 
process-aware information systems,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. 
(including Subser. Lect. Notes Artif. Intell. Lect. Notes 
Bioinformatics), vol. 10445 LNCS, pp. 183–199, 2017, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-65000-511. 
[19] E. Bazhenova, S. Bülow, and M. Weske, “Discovering decision 
models from event logs,” in International Conference on 
Business Information Systems, 2016, pp. 237–251. 
[20] E. Bazhenova, F. Zerbato, B. Oliboni, and M. Weske, “From 
BPMN process models to DMN decision models,” Inf. Syst., 
vol. 83, pp. 69–88, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.is.2019.02.001. 
[21] J. Campos, P. Richetti, F. A. Baião, and F. M. Santoro, 
“Discovering Business Rules in Knowledge-Intensive Processes 
Through Decision Mining: An Experimental Study,” 2018. 
[22] J. B. S. França, F. A. Baião, and F. M. Santoro, “Towards 
characterizing knowledge intensive processes,” in Proceedings 
of the 2012 IEEE 16th International Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), 2012, pp. 
497–504. 
[23] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning: An 
introduction. MIT press, 2018. 
[24] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” Nature, 
vol. 521, no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015. 
[25] F. Rahutomo, T. Kitasuka, and M. Aritsugi, “Semantic cosine 
similarity,” in The 7th International Student Conference on 
Advanced Science and Technology ICAST, 2012, vol. 4, no. 1, 
p. 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

