Choosing a Business Software Systems Development and Enhancement Project 
Variant on the basis of Benchmarking Data – Case Study 
 
Beata Czarnacka-Chrobot 
Department of Business Informatics  
Warsaw School of Economics 
 Warsaw, Poland 
e-mail: bczarn@sgh.waw.pl 
 
 
Abstract—Execution of Business Software Systems (BSS) 
Development 
and 
Enhancement 
Projects 
(D&EP) 
is 
characterised by the exceptionally low effectiveness, leading to 
the considerable financial losses. Thus it is necessary to 
rationalize investment decisions made with regard to the 
projects of this type. Each rational investment decision should 
meet two measurable criteria: of effectiveness and of economic 
efficiency. In order to make ex ante evaluation of these criteria, 
being key to the decision-making process, one may successfully 
use ever richer resources of benchmarking data, having been 
collected in special repositories that were created with 
improvement of software processes in mind. The goal of this 
paper is to present possibilities of rationalization of investment 
decision concerning the choice of BSS D&EP execution variant 
with the use of benchmarking data on the basis of a case study. 
These issues classify into economics problems of software 
engineering. 
   Keywords-business software systems development and 
enhancement projects variants; rational investment decision; 
benchmarking data repositories; software engineering economics 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In practice, execution of Business Software Systems 
(BSS) Development and Enhancement Projects (D&EP) is 
characterised by the exceptionally low effectiveness, leading 
to the considerable financial losses. This may be proved by 
numerous analyses. As indicated by the results of the 
Standish Group studies success rate for application software 
D&EP has never gone beyond 35%, while currently 
products delivered as a result of nearly 45% of them lack on 
average 32% of the required functions and features, the 
estimated project budget is exceeded by approx. 55% on 
average and the planned project time − by nearly 80% on 
average [1] (for more details see [2]). Analyses by T.C. 
Jones plainly indicate that those software D&EP, which are 
aimed at delivery of business software systems, have the 
lowest chance to succeed [3]. The Panorama Consulting 
Group, when investigating in their 2008 study the 
effectiveness of ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) 
systems projects being accomplished worldwide revealed 
that 93% of them were completed after the scheduled time 
while as many as 68% among them were considerably 
delayed comparing to the expected completion time [4]. 
Merely 
7% 
of 
the 
surveyed 
ERP 
projects 
were 
accomplished as planned. Comparison of actual versus 
planned expenses has revealed that as many as 65% of such 
projects overran the planned budget. Only 13% of the 
respondents 
expressed 
high 
satisfaction 
with 
the 
functionality implemented in final product while in merely 
every fifth company at least 50% of the expected benefits 
from its implementation were said to be achieved. 
Meanwhile (see also [2]): 
• 
BSS are one of the fundamental IT application areas. 
• 
BSS development or enhancement often constitutes 
serious investment undertaking. 
• 
In practice, COTS (Commercial-Off-The-Shelf) BSS 
rarely happen to be fully tailored to the particular 
client 
business 
requirements 
therefore 
their 
customization appears vital. 
Low effectiveness of BSS D&EP execution leads to the 
substantial financial losses, on a worldwide scale estimated 
to be hundreds of billions of dollars yearly, sometimes 
making even more than half the funds being invested in 
such projects. The Standish Group estimates that these 
losses – excluding losses caused by business opportunities 
lost by clients, providers losing credibility or legal 
repercussions – range, depending on the year considered, 
from approx. 20% to even 55% of the costs assigned for the 
execution of the analysed projects types (see e.g., [5][6]). 
On the other hand, analyses of The Economist Intelligence 
Unit, which studied the consequences of BSS D&EP delay 
indicate that there is strong correlation between delays in 
delivery of software products and services and decrease in 
profitability of a company therefore failures of BSS D&EP, 
resulting in delays in making new product and services 
available and in decreasing the expected income represent 
threat also to the company’s business activity [7].  
The above studies unequivocally indicate there is a 
significant need to rationalize investment decisions made 
with regard to BSS D&EP. To do so, one may successfully 
use ever richer resources of benchmarking data, having been 
collected with the intention to support improvement of 
various IT projects, including BSS D&EP. The goal of this 
paper is to present possibilities of BSS D&EP investment 
decision rationalization with the use of benchmarking data, 
illustrated with an example taken from development 
practice. This decision concerns choosing variant of BSS 
D&EP execution – since each project of this type may be 
executed using one of the three variants, namely: (1) 
453
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

developing new BSS from scratch, (2) customization of 
COTS BSS, and (3) modernization of BSS being currently 
used. 
The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2 the 
author presents the criteria of rational investment decision in 
the context of BSS D&EP along with the selected results of 
studies concerning ex ante evaluation of these criteria. 
Section 3 is devoted to the presentation of the considered 
case study problem. In Section 4 the main conclusions 
coming from the benchmarking data analysis are pointed 
out, while in Section 5 the effectiveness and efficiency 
factors for the recommended BSS D&EP variant are 
analysed. Finally, in Section 6 the author draws conclusions 
and some open lines about future work on the rationalization 
of BSS D&EP investment decision with the use of 
benchmarking data. 
II. 
RATIONAL INVESTMENT DECISION CRITERIA FOR 
BUSINESS SOFTWARE SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT AND 
ENHANCEMENT PROJECTS 
Each rational investment decision should meet three 
criteria, which in the context of BSS D&EP should be 
interpreted as follows (for more details see [8]): 
• 
Criterion of consistency, which means that the 
project 
undertaken 
should 
comply 
with 
the 
environment (economic, organizational, legal and 
cultural) – unlike the other two criteria, this criterion 
is not subject to quantitative assessment therefore it 
is skipped in this paper.  
• 
Criterion of economic efficiency, meaning that the 
decision should benefit to the maximisation of the 
relationship between the effects to be gained as a 
result of project execution and the costs being 
estimated for the project.  
• 
Criterion of effectiveness, meaning that such 
decision should contribute to achieving the assumed 
result, in the case of BSS D&EP usually being 
considered as delivering product meeting client’s 
requirements with regard to functions and features 
without budget and time overruns.  
Generally speaking, in the case of economic efficiency 
evaluation, effects are compared against costs necessary to 
achieve these effects while in the case of effectiveness 
evaluation these are only the results that are of significance. 
Thus, economic efficiency is measured by relating total 
effects to total costs. Meanwhile, effectiveness is measured 
by the ratio of the achieved result to the assumed result, 
which is being conveniently expressed as a percentage.  
Both 
economic efficiency 
criterion 
as 
well 
as 
effectiveness criterion are based on the obvious assumption 
that the effects, costs and results are measurable. However, 
in the case of BSS D&EP this assumption is often treated as 
controversial. Numerous studies indicate that evaluation of 
BSS D&EP economic efficiency is made relatively rarely 
while fundamental reason for this status quo are difficulties 
related to identification, and most of all quantitative 
expression, of benefits resulting from the execution of such 
projects (see e.g., [9][10][11][12][13]). These studies reveal 
that difficulties related to identification and quantitative 
expression of BSS D&EP costs too are of significance, 
which also is of importance to the evaluation of their 
effectiveness.  
Key conclusions coming from the above mentioned 
studies have also been confirmed by the results of studies 
carried out by the author of this paper in two research cycles 
among Polish dedicated BSS providers (for more details see 
[14]). They revealed that at the turn of the years 2005/2006 
the results obtained with the use of the effort estimation 
methods, employed only by approx. 45% of the respondents, 
were designed for estimating BSS D&EP costs and time 
frame while relatively rarely they were used to estimate 
economic efficiency − such use of these methods was 
indicated by only 25% of those using effort estimation 
methods. Heads of IT departments in Polish companies, for 
which BSS D&EP are executed, still explain the 
sporadically required calculation of this type of investments 
efficiency mostly by the necessity to undertake them – most 
often due to the fact that without such solutions they lack 
possibility to match competition from foreign companies, as 
well as to match foreign business partners requirements. 
While Polish public administration institutions in practice 
still do not see the need for the BSS D&EP economic 
efficiency evaluation, in most cases as an argument giving 
the non-economic purposes of systems being implemented 
in this type of organizations. On the other hand, at the turn 
of the years 2008/2009 the results obtained with the use of 
the BSS D&EP effort estimation methods (approx. 53% of 
BSS providers surveyed in this cycle declared they 
commonly employed such methods) were more often used 
to estimate efficiency: there was an increase to approx. 36% 
of those using effort estimation methods. This applies to 
internal IT departments of Polish companies yet still it does 
not comprise public administration institutions. This 
increase may be explained first of all by stronger care about 
financial means in the times of recession, however it still 
leaves a lot to be desired. Meanwhile, to rationalize various 
BSS D&EP investment decisions, one may successfully use 
benchmarking data, having been collected in special 
repositories with intention to support effective and efficient 
execution of such projects. 
III. 
CASE STUDY: DESCRIPTION OF THE PROBLEM 
A company that was facing the need to choose an 
appropriate variant of BSS D&EP execution collects and 
processes, as a part of its basic activity, orders for certain 
goods from all over the world in a 24-hour mode, 7 days a 
week through: website, client service centres, fax and 
electronic mail (description of the case study taken from 
[15]). All those channels cooperate with the application, 
having been functioning in the company for a dozen or so 
years already, that is designed for orders processing and 
which no longer is able to satisfy present requirements 
since:  
• 
Large part of processes is not automated, which 
requires additional work for registering orders and 
that generates losses. 
454
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

• 
Current status of orders is not known therefore they 
are being lost, as a result of this other losses are also 
borne, which together with earlier mentioned losses 
are estimated to be approx. USD 5000 a day.    
• 
System is expensive and difficult to maintain, with 
frequent malfunctions as it employs obsolete 
technology. 
• 
System extends the time of delivering new products 
to the market, increases the risk of losing clients and 
lack of compliance with their requirements, slows 
down the growth of competitive advantage. 
Thus the company has faced a decision on choosing 
variant of BSS D&EP execution that would:  
• 
Eliminate the above mentioned drawbacks of the 
existing solution.   
• 
Contribute to short- and long-term profits – that’s 
why the costs and duration of project are of great 
significance. 
• 
Reduce the costs of functioning of both company 
and technology. 
• 
Contribute to the reduction of risk, both in terms of 
business and technology.   
Offers for each BSS D&EP variant were submitted, 
having approximate average values as shown in Table I.  
Since each variant was backed by certain part of the 
board and key users, an analysis aimed at supporting 
decision-making process was carried out.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS FROM THE BENCHMARKING DATA 
ANALYSIS 
The analysis used benchmarking data for BSS D&EP 
having been collected in the following repositories:  
• 
Standish Group, featuring data about over 70 
thousands of the accomplished application software 
D&EP, which were analysed using the tool called 
VirtualADVISOR [15]. 
• 
Software Productivity Research (SPR), containing 
data from approx. 15 thousands of the accomplished 
application software D&EP, which were used to 
verify conclusions coming from Standish Group 
repository analysis with the use of SPR Knowledge 
Plan tool [16]. 
• 
International Software Benchmarking Standards 
Group (ISBSG), having collected data from approx. 
5 thousands of the accomplished application 
software D&EP [17], also used to verify findings 
coming from Standish Group repository analysis and 
also with the use of SPR Knowledge Plan tool, 
which at its present version offers possibility to 
import data from the ISBSG repository. 
Priority was given to the Standish Group data and this 
being not only due to the size of this repository, objectivity 
of data (they come solely from clients) or the fact of IT 
branch appreciating its practical value [5] but also because 
they take into account an appropriate kind of client (in terms 
of branch and size of a company), appropriate kinds and size 
of BSS D&EP as well as appropriate type and size of 
application. Thus using the Standish Group repository made 
it possible to match all three kinds of BSS D&EP against the 
profile, with 90% match of the 120 attributes of more than 
100 projects [15].  
What’s also important, in their analyses the Standish 
Group employs clearly defined criteria of project 
classification, dividing projects into the following three 
groups  (see e.g., [1][6][18]):  
• 
Successful projects – that is projects completed with 
delivery of product having functions and features 
being in accordance with client requirements 
specification and within the estimated time and 
budget.  
• 
Challenged projects – that is projects completed with 
delivery of product that is operating yet has fewer 
vital functions/features comparing to the client 
requirements specification and/or with overrun of the 
planned budget and/or duration.  
• 
Failed projects – that is projects that were abandoned 
(cancelled) at some point of their life cycle or were 
completed with delivery of product that had never 
been used. 
In the analysis of the Standish Group data, the following 
criteria were employed as equivalent for particular variants 
of the BSS D&EP considered:  
1) 
Criterion of expected BSS D&EP effectiveness, 
including:  
a) chance to succeed  
b) level of planned costs overrun  
           c) level of planned duration overrun. 
2) 
Criterion of expected BSS D&EP efficiency, 
including:  
     a) return on investment (ROI) 
           b) payback period. 
Data presented in Table II clearly indicate that in the 
case being considered the highest chance to succeed is held 
by modernization variant, for which success coefficient is 
several times higher than that characteristic of variant 
consisting in development of new application, being only 
4% (sic!), and significantly higher than that of COTS 
customization variant. Also in case of variant 3 the lowest 
percentage of projects ends with being abandoned – it is 
several times lower than in case of variant 1 and two times 
lower than in case of variant 2. What seems interesting, the 
highest percentage of projects that ended in partial failure 
(challenged projects) occurs in case of the customization of 
TABLE I.  PARAMETERS OF OFFERS CONCERNING 
EXECUTION OF PARTICULAR VARIANTS OF BSS D&EP 
CONSIDERED 
Variant 
BSS D&EP variant 
Execution 
cost offered 
Execution 
time offered 
1 
Development of new 
BSS from scratch using 
modern technologies  
USD 10 
million  
3 years 
2 
Customization of BSS 
purchased 
USD 5 
million 
2 years 
3 
Modernization of BSS 
used currently 
USD 3,5 
million 
1,5 years 
Source: Author’s analysis based on [15, p. 2].  
455
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

COTS application. What’s more, the average expected 
overrun of both costs (see Table III) and project duration 
(see Table IV) is also the highest in case of this project 
variant.  
Moreover, data in Table III clearly indicate that the 
average expected overrun of the planned costs for projects 
that ended in partial failure too is the lowest in case of 
variant 3. Also the lowest percentage of such projects 
overruns the costs by more than 50%. If offered costs and 
average expected overrun of these costs are taken into 
consideration when calculating the expected cost then it 
appears evident that the lowest expected cost of project 
execution applies to modernization variant.  
 
Analogous conclusions may be drawn on the basis of the 
analysis of data presented in Table IV. Again, the average 
expected overrun of the planned duration for projects that 
ended in partial failure proves being the lowest for variant 3. 
Also the lowest percentage of such projects overruns the 
duration by more than 50%. If we take into account the 
offered duration and average expected overrun of this 
duration then we can see that the lowest expected duration 
of project execution applies to modernization variant too.  
 
TABLE IV. EXPECTED LEVEL OF PLANNED DURATION 
OVERRUN FOR PARTICULAR VARIANTS OF BSS D&EP 
CONSIDERED (CHALLENGED PROJECTS) 
Duration 
overrun 
Variant 1 
Variant 2 
Variant 3 
0% to 50% 
57% 
59% 
80% 
51% to 50% 
43% 
41% 
20% 
Average  
44% 
45% 
29% 
Offered duration 
36 months 
24 months 
18 months 
Estimated 
duration 
52 months 
35 months 
23,5 months 
Source: Author’s analysis based on [15, p. 4].  
 
Data shown in Table V clearly indicate that the highest 
percentage of projects characterised by the highest ROI can 
be found in case of variant 3 again.  On the other hand, 
what’s interesting is that projects with average ROI most 
often are projects consisting in developing new application 
from scratch while the lowest percentage of projects 
characterised by the lowest ROI can be found in case of 
customization variant.  
 
TABLE V. EXPECTED ROI FOR PARTICULAR VARIANTS OF 
BSS D&EP CONSIDERED  
ROI 
Variant 1 
Variant 2 
Variant 3 
High 
11% 
34% 
52% 
Average 
66% 
57% 
37% 
Low 
23% 
9% 
11% 
Source: [15, p. 5].  
 
In Table VI both ROI and payback period for particular 
variants of the considered project were estimated in 
optimistic and pessimistic version. In the optimistic version 
it was assumed that the costs were identical with the offered 
costs while in the pessimistic version - that the costs were 
exceeded by the average values being expected for each 
variant analysed (see Table III). Based on these 
assumptions, both in optimistic and in pessimistic version, 
the highest 5-year gain applies to the modernization variant; 
also in case of that variant the payback period proves the 
shortest. It is worth noting that project in variant consisting 
in developing the new application would pay off after nearly 
5 and half years in the optimistic version and after nearly 7 
and half years in the pessimistic version.  
 
TABLE VI. EXPECTED ROI AND PAYBACK PERIOD FOR 
PARTICULAR VARIANTS OF BSS D&EP CONSIDERED  
 
Optimistic version 
Pessimistic version 
Variant 
Costs 
(in $ 
millions) 
5-year 
gain 
(in $ 
millions) 
Payback 
period 
(in 
years) 
Costs 
(in $ 
millions) 
5-year 
gain 
(in $ 
millions) 
Payback 
period 
(in 
years) 
1 
10 
0 
5,4 
14,4 
0 
7,3 
2 
5 
7,25 
3,2 
7,35 
2,8 
4,4 
3 
3,5 
10,6 
2,4 
4,69 
7,9 
3,1 
Source: Author’s analysis based on [15, p. 5].  
 
The above analysis clearly indicates that what in the 
considered case would be the best of the three BSS D&EP 
variants both from the perspective of the expected 
effectiveness and from the perspective of the expected 
efficiency is variant consisting in modernization of the 
application being used (variant 3).  
V. 
THE EFFECTIVENESS AND EFFICIENCY FACTORS FOR 
THE RECOMMENDED VARIANT 
In the analysed case, BSS D&EP consisting in 
modernization of application being used proves the most 
effective as well as the most efficient, what results, among 
others, from (see also [15]):  
• 
Undertaking of such projects as a rule is a result of 
clearly defined needs of users therefore their goals 
are comprehensible, what undoubtedly promotes 
TABLE II. EXPECTED CHANCE TO SUCCEED FOR 
PARTICULAR VARIANTS OF BSS D&EP CONSIDERED 
Resolution 
Variant 1 
Variant 2 
Variant 3 
Successful 
4% 
30% 
53% 
Challenged 
47% 
54% 
39% 
Failed 
49% 
16% 
8% 
Source: [15, p. 4].  
TABLE III. EXPECTED LEVEL OF PLANNED COST OVERRUN 
FOR PARTICULAR VARIANTS OF BSS D&EP CONSIDERED 
(CHALLENGED PROJECTS) 
Cost overrun 
Variant 1 
Variant 2 
Variant 3 
0% to 50% 
64% 
58% 
75% 
51% to 50% 
36% 
42% 
25% 
Average  
44% 
47% 
34% 
Offered cost 
USD 10 
million 
USD 5 million 
USD 3,5 
million 
Estimated cost  
USD 14,4 
million 
USD 7,35 
million 
USD 4,7 
million 
Source: Author’s analysis based on [15, p. 4].  
456
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

users’ engagement in the project and the board’s 
support for the project, which, according to the list of 
success factors having been developed by the 
Standish Group since 1995, are still the two most 
important success factors [18].  
• 
The fact that modernization projects do not require 
extensive analysis of requirements, numerous 
agreements, long-time training, changes of processes 
that would be destabilizing the work. 
• 
Commonness of such projects thus the skills of 
executing them are high; what’s more, projects of 
this type do not require additional skills in terms of 
project management, they rather require technical, 
the so called „hard”, skills. 
• 
Present structure of project costs in terms of 
development activities, which due to the increased 
complexity of projects and ever more developed 
tools has changed and is now in inverse proportion 
to the structure as it was 25 years ago: now 
programming costs make up approx. 20% while 
other development works make up approx. 80% of 
the total cost.  
• 
The 
fact 
that 
modernization 
projects 
are 
characterised by the lowest hidden cost (mainly 
user’s time), estimated to be 15% of project costs 
versus 55% for variant 2 and versus 35% for variant 
1. 
• 
The discussed projects may be successfully carried 
out using agile approach, which also ranks high 
(sixth position) in the current list of success factors 
[18]. 
• 
Products smaller than those in case of developing 
application from scratch are developed as a result of 
the modernization projects and this is what increases 
their chance to succeed.  
• 
The discussed projects do not have redundant 
requirements – as this is the case of the COTS 
customization where, according to the Standish 
Group data, less than 5% (sic!) of the features and 
functions get used [15], and of the development of 
new products (see Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.   Average use of functions and features in the implemented 
software systems - custom development applications 
Source: Author’s analysis based on [15, p. 15]. 
However, variant recommended in the discussed case is 
not devoid of drawbacks though. Most of all, it evidently is 
not suitable for organizations where BSS have not 
functioned so far (in Poland approx. 95% of small 
companies do not use BSS – comparing to 50% in 
developed 
countries), 
for 
new 
organizations, 
new 
departments, and in case of fusion the modernization often 
ends in failure too. Moreover in modernization variant there 
are limited possibilities to implement fundamental business 
changes. What’s more, the use of obsolete technologies is 
being continued, what makes cooperation with modern 
applications difficult, reduces usability, portability and 
maintainability of the modified application; performance is 
usually lower too. It is worth stressing that these attributes 
are the software product quality attributes of the ISO/IEC 
9126 norm [19]. Thus what appears to be open to doubt is 
reduction of costs and difficulties in maintaining the system 
as well as technological risk - this being one of the major 
goals of the solution variant to be chosen (see Section 2). It 
is also worth mentioning that the ISBSG data indicate lower 
productivity of such projects: in case of BSS D&EP 
consisting in developing new BSS from scratch it ranges on 
average from 9 (for 4GL) to 24.5 (for 3GL) work hours for 
developing 1 function point (for more details about function 
points see [20]) whereas in case of modernization projects it 
takes approx. 27 work hours on average to develop 1 
function point [21].  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on the analysis of benchmarking data coming 
from the Standish Group repository, having been carried out 
with the use of VirtualADVISOR tool, it was concluded that 
what proves the best among the three BSS D&EP variants in 
the discussed case is variant consisting in modernization of 
application being used. Data analysis indicates that choosing 
the above mentioned variant is rational due to the criterion 
of both expected effectiveness and expected efficiency of 
project. This conclusion has been confirmed by the 
verification based on the repository of the SPR and ISBSG 
data, having been carried out with the use of SPR 
Knowledge Plan tool.  
From the point of view of effectiveness and efficiency, 
modernization variant has many advantages yet it is not 
devoid of drawbacks though. What’s more, this does not 
have to be the best solution in other cases, e.g., for real time 
systems, 
for 
small 
software 
product 
development/ 
enhancement projects, or for organizations that specialise in 
developing specific kind of new software systems where 
there is possibility to use the already written code.  It should 
be also mentioned that projects of higher risk, i.e., those 
having lower chance to succeed, often happen to be more 
efficient.  
As indicated by the study results discussed in this paper, 
in view of exceptionally low effectiveness of BSS D&EP it 
is necessary to rationalize investment decisions being made 
with regard to such projects. To do so one may successfully 
use ever richer resources of benchmarking data having been 
collected in repositories with intention to support effective 
and efficient BSS D&EP execution. In the opinion of T.C. 
Always 
7% 
Often 
13% 
Rarely 
19% 
Never 
45% 
Sometimes 
16% 
457
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

Jones: "For many years the lack of readily available 
benchmark data blinded software developers and managers 
to the real economics of software.  Now (…) it is becoming 
possible to make solid business decisions about software 
development practices and their results (…). [Benchmarking 
– B.C.C.] data is a valuable asset for the software industry 
and for all companies that produce software" [22]. This 
paper presented the possibility of rationalization of 
investment decision concerning the choice of the BSS 
D&EP variant execution with the use of such data, 
illustrated on the basis of a case study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Standish Group, “CHAOS summary 2009”, West Yarmouth, 
Massachusetts, 2009, pp. 1-4. 
[2] B. Czarnacka-Chrobot, “The economic importance of 
business software systems size measurement”, Proc. of the 5th 
International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global 
Information Technology (ICCGI 2010), 20-25 September 
2010, Valencia, Spain,  M. Garcia, J-D. Mathias, Eds., IEEE 
Computer Society Conference Publishing Services, Los 
Alamitos, California-Washington-Tokyo, 2010, pp. 293-299.  
[3] T. C. Jones, Patterns of software systems failure and success, 
International Thompson Computer Press, Boston, MA, 1995. 
[4] PCG, “2008 ERP report, topline results”, Panorama 
Consulting Group, Denver, 2008, pp. 1-2. 
[5] J. Johnson, “CHAOS rising”, Proc. of 2nd Polish Conference 
on 
Information 
Systems 
Quality, 
Standish 
Group-
Computerworld, 2005, pp. 1-52.  
[6] Standish Group, “CHAOS summary 2008”, West Yarmouth, 
Massachusetts, 2008, pp. 1-4. 
[7] Economist Intelligence Unit, “Global survey reveals late IT 
projects linked to lower profits, poor business outcomes”, 
Palo 
Alto, 
California, 
2007: 
http://www.hp.com/ 
hpinfo/newsroom/press/2007/070605xa.html (11.07.2011). 
[8] B. Czarnacka-Chrobot, “Evaluation of business software 
systems development and enhancement projects effectiveness 
and economic efficiency on the basis of functional size 
measurement”, Proc. of the 10th International Conference on 
Software Engineering Research and Practice (SERP 2011), 
The 2011 World Congress in Computer Science, Computer 
Engineering  & Applied Computing (WORLDCOMP'11), H. 
R. Arabnia, H. Reza, L. Deligiannidis, Eds., CSREA Press, 
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, July 2011, in press.  
[9] A. Brown, “IS evaluation in practice”, The Electronic Journal 
Information Systems Evaluation, vol. 8, no. 3, 2005, pp. 169–
178. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[10] E. Frisk and A. Plantén, “IT investment evaluation – a survey 
of perceptions among managers in Sweden”, Proc. of the 11th 
European Conference on Information Technology Evaluation, 
Academic Conferences, 2004, pp. 145–154. 
[11] Z. Irani and P. Love, “Information systems evaluation: past, 
present and future”, European Journal of Information 
Systems, vol. 10, no. 4, 2001, pp. 183–188. 
[12] S. Jones and J. Hughes, “Understanding IS evaluation as a 
complex social process: a case study of a UK local authority”, 
European Journal of Information Systems, vol. 10, no. 4, 
2001, pp. 189–203. 
[13] A. J. Silvius, “Does ROI matter? Insights into the true 
business value of IT”, The Electronic Journal Information 
Systems Evaluation, vol. 9, issue 2, 2006, pp. 93–104. 
[14] B. Czarnacka-Chrobot, “Analysis of the functional size 
measurement methods usage by Polish business software 
systems providers”, in Software Process and Product 
Measurement, A. Abran, R. Braungarten, R. Dumke, J. 
Cuadrado-Gallego, J. Brunekreef, Eds., Proc. of the 3rd 
International Conference IWSM/Mensura 2009, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5891, Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin-Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 17–34.  
[15] Standish Group, “Modernization – clearing a pathway to 
success”, West Yarmouth, Massachusetts, 2010, pp. 1-16. 
[16] Software Productivity Research: http://www.spr.com/spr-
knowledgeplanr.html (11.07.2011). 
[17] ISBSG, “Data demographics release 11”, International 
Software 
Benchmarking 
Standards 
Group, 
Hawthorn, 
Australia, June 2009, pp. 1-24. 
[18] Standish Group, “The CHAOS manifesto”, West Yarmouth, 
Massachusetts, 2009, pp. 1-54. 
[19] ISO/IEC 9126 Software Engineering – Product Quality – Part 
1-4, ISO, Geneva, 2001-2004.  
[20] B. Czarnacka-Chrobot, “The effectiveness of business 
software systems functional size measurement”, Proc. of the 
6th International Multi-Conference on Computing in the 
Global Information Technology (ICCGI 2011), 19-24 June 
2011, Luxemburg City, Luxemburg, Constantin Paleologu, 
Constandinos 
Mavromoustakis, 
Marius 
Minea, 
Eds., 
International Academy, Research, and Industry Association 
(IARIA), Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2011, pp. 63-71. 
[21] Ch. Symons, “The performance of real-time, business 
application and component software projects”, Common 
Software Measurement International Consortium (COSMIC) 
and ISBSG, September 2009, pp. 1-45. 
[22] ISBSG: http://www.isbsg.org (11.07.2011). 
 
458
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

