Benefits and Limitations of Using the MPS.BR Model with Agile Methodologies 
A Survey Based on a Systematic Literature Review 
 
Robson Amorim de Souza 
Department of Computer Science 
Mato Grosso State University, UNEMAT 
Barra do Bugres, Brazil 
robson.unemat@gmail.com 
Fernando Selleri Silva 
Dept. of Computer Science, Mato Grosso State University 
Center of Informatics, Federal University of Pernambuco 
Barra do Bugres, Recife, Brazil 
fss4@cin.ufpe.br 
Felipe Santana Furtado Soares and Silvio Romero de Lemos Meira 
Center of Informatics, Federal University of Pernambuco, UFPE 
Recife Center of Advanced Studies and Systems, C.E.S.A.R 
Recife, Brazil 
fsfs@cin.ufpe.br, srlm@cin.ufpe.br
 
 
Abstract— This paper investigates the benefits and limitations 
of using the Reference Model for the Improvement of the 
Brazilian 
Software 
Process 
(MPS.BR) 
with 
agile 
methodologies. A survey of the Brazilian and international 
literature was performed, which used the concepts of a 
systematic literature review. Altogether 21 studies were 
included on the subject, viz., 12 articles, 1 Master’s 
dissertation, 3 dissertation from post-graduate courses, 4 end-
of-course undergraduate monographs, and 1 report arising 
from an undergraduate traineeship. Based on the results 
presented in the studies, agile methodologies and their 
practices were found to be feasible used in serving the initial 
levels of MPS.BR, but for the highest levels of the model, 
additional practices must be used. 
Keywords-MPS.BR; 
Brazilian 
SPI 
Model; 
Agile 
Methodologies; Suitability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ensuring that their products or services are of good 
quality is essential if organizations have to survival on the 
market. Generally, this quality is related to the production 
processes of the product/service. In the context of 
Information Technology, all software must be of good 
quality, both in the development process and the product 
itself. In order to establish Software Process Improvement 
(SPI), various software development organizations are 
looking for quality reference models available on the market, 
such as: ISO/IEC 90003 - Guidelines for the application of 
ISO 9001:2000 to computer software [1], ISO/IEC 12207 - 
Software Life Cycle Processes [2], CMMI - Capability 
Maturity Model Integration [3], and MPS.BR - Brazilian 
Software Process Improvement [4]. However, quality 
models, generally, establish firstly “what” needs to be done 
in order to engage on demanding processes and secondly, 
methodologies for developing software that indicate “how” 
to do so. 
Agile methodologies for use in software development 
became widely known from 2001, when a group of 
professionals, from the software area, assembled and 
published the Manifesto for Agile Software Development, 
also known as the Agile Manifesto [5]. These methodologies 
aim to develop software with high quality, iteratively and 
incrementally, thereby stimulating team interaction, with less 
documentation, and aim at meeting deadlines, costs and 
quality standards. Among various agile methodologies, the 
most used are Scrum and Extreme Programming (XP) [6]. 
In this context, this paper sets out to discuss by means of 
a survey of the literature that uses the concepts of a 
Systematic Literature Review, the Reference Model (RM) 
for Improving the Brazilian Software Process (MPS.BR) 
together with agile methodologies for software development. 
The following research question was considered: What is 
known about the benefits and limitations of adopting the 
MPS.BR reference model using agile methodologies? 
Further, the paper seeks to characterize academic production 
on the Brazilian model of quality assurance, together with 
agile methodologies. 
The paper is organized in five sections. Section 2 gives a 
brief theoretical description of the MPS.BR model and agile 
methodologies. Section 3 describes the methodology used. 
Section 4 reports the results, and comments on benefits and 
limitations. Conclusions are drawn and recommendations for 
future work are made in Section 5. 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
Initially, the MPS.BR model will be briefly described; 
then, the main concepts regarding agile methodologies are 
presented. 
A. MPS.BR 
MPS.BR is a Brazilian Software Process Improvement 
Program that was created in December 2003, by the 
373
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Association for Promoting Excellence in Brazilian Software 
(SOFTEX), with the support of several public and private 
organizations in Brazil, including: the Ministry of Science 
and Technology (MCT), an Agency that Funds Studies and 
Projects (FINEP), and the Inter-American Development 
Bank (IDB) [4]. MPS.BR aims to assist organizations, 
particularly small and medium-sized Brazilian companies, to 
achieve good quality in software development, in a smoother 
and less expensive way. 
The MPS.BR program proposes the SPI Reference 
Model for Software (MR-MPS-SW), which defines seven 
maturity levels for the software process of an organization 
[4]: In descending order, these are A (In Optimization), B 
(Quantitatively Managed), C (Defined), D (Largely 
Defined), E (Partially Defined), F (Managed), and G 
(Partially Managed). For each maturity level, a profile of 
processes is assigned that suggests where the organization 
must make efforts to improve, as described below (for which 
the acronym is given in Portuguese, in brackets): In 
ascending order of maturity level, these are: 
 
Level 
G: 
Project 
Management 
(GPR) 
and 
Requirements Management (GRE). 
 
Level 
F: 
Acquisition 
(AQU), 
Configuration 
Management (GCO), Quality Assurance (GQA), 
Project 
Portfolio 
Management 
(GPP), 
and 
Measurement (MED). 
 
Level 
E: 
Evaluating 
and 
Improving 
the 
Organizational 
Process 
(AMP), 
Defining 
the 
Organizational Process (DFP), Human Resources 
Management (GRH), and Reuse Management 
(GRU). 
 
Level D: Requirements Development 
(DRE), 
Product Integration (ITP), Product Design and 
Construction 
(PCP), 
Validation 
(VAL), 
and 
Verification (VER). 
 
Level 
C: 
Development 
for 
Reuse 
(DRU), 
Management 
Decisions 
(GDE), 
and 
Risk 
Management (GRI). 
 
Level B: Project Management (GPR – evolution). 
 
Level A: (process optimization). 
B. Agile Methodologies 
Agile methodologies refer to approaches of software 
development used by organizations that focus on flexible 
collaboration, as they deal with projects in which 
requirements change constantly. Their core values were 
defined in the Agile Manifesto [5], as: individuals and 
interactions over processes and tools, working software over 
comprehensive documentation, customer collaboration over 
contract negotiation, and responding to change over 
following a plan. 
Among the main agile methodologies, especially in 
Brazil, Scrum and Extreme Programming (XP) are foremost 
[7], the focus on each is as follows: 
 
Scrum: its focus is on managing software 
development, through an iterative and incremental 
process. It aims to deliver software in the shortest 
time, to meet deadlines and to reduce costs [8]. 
 
Extreme Programming (XP) focuses on the 
development of a specific piece of software, by 
providing a set of practices that addresses the 
different phases of the life cycle, in an incremental 
and iterative format [9]. 
III. 
REVIEW METHOD 
A survey of the literature on the MPS.BR model and 
agile methodologies cited in Brazilian and international 
sources was conducted, using the concepts of a Systematic 
Literature Review, described in Kitchenham and Charters 
[10]. This is a way to identify, evaluate and interpret the 
relevant papers available on a research question in particular, 
a topic area or phenomenon of interest. The systematic 
review process generally consists of identifying a research 
study by using a protocol (described in this section), study 
selection, quality assessment, data extraction and synthesis. 
In this article, we used the stage of study selection, which 
includes (automatic and manual) search and the application 
of inclusion/exclusion criteria, as described below. Due to 
the limit on the available resources, the stage of quality 
assessment was suppressed. Data extraction and synthesis 
stages were performed, the findings of which revealed 
benefits and limitations. 
We chose to search, in addition to articles published in 
journals and conferences, academic studies (works from 
undergraduate 
and 
post-graduate 
courses, 
Master’s 
dissertations and PhD thesis). Although in the systematic 
review process, inclusions such as these are not common, 
mainly due to the review process being less formal, 
academic studies were considered because this enabled 
ongoing research in the area to be mapped. 
A. Search for studies 
The first activity for the search was to formulate a string, 
which makes an automatic search feasible. This string was 
set taking into account the research question addressed in 
Section 1, from which were derived the key terms, their 
synonyms or related words, as shown in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
TERMS USED IN SEARCHES 
Term 
Synonyms or related words 
“MPS.BR” 
“MPSBR”, “MPS BR”, “MPS-BR”, and “Brazilian 
software process improvement” 
“process” 
“method” and “methodology” 
“agile” 
“agility”, “light”, “scrum”, “extreme programming”, 
“XP”, “dynamic system development”, “DSDM”, 
“crystal”, “kanban”, “feature driven development”, 
“FDD”, “lean”, “adaptive software development”, 
“ASD”, “test driven development”, and “TDD” 
 
The terms and their synonyms or related words were 
organized in a standard search string, in which each key term 
was grouped with the logical operator “AND” and its 
synonyms or related words with the operator “OR”, as 
follows: 
("MPS.BR" OR "MPSBR" OR "MPS BR" OR "MPS-BR" 
OR "Brazilian software process improvement") AND 
("process" OR "method" OR "methodology") AND ("agile" 
OR "agility" OR "light" OR "scrum" OR "extreme 
374
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

programming" OR "XP" OR "dynamic system development" 
OR "DSDM" OR "crystal" OR "kanban" OR "feature driven 
development" OR "FDD" OR "lean" OR "adaptive software 
development" OR "ASD" OR "test driven development" OR 
"TDD") 
The next step was to define in which electronic databases 
to conduct searches and to include digital libraries of 
organizations that have an interest in the subject, search 
engines that index academic studies in Brazil and 
international mechanisms for indexing scientific studies. 
Some terms of the string were translated as per the language 
of the database language (Portuguese or English) in order to 
get better results. In some bases (national and international), 
the default string had to be adapted. However, the original 
essence of the string, without restricting the results, was 
preserved. The following databases were considered: 
 
Organizations: 
Association 
for 
Promoting 
Excellence in Brazilian Software (SOFTEX), 
Ministry of Science and Technology (MCT), and 
Brazilian Computer Society (SBC). 
 
National mechanisms: Dedalus – USP, Public 
Domain, Google Web Brazil, Google Scholar Brazil, 
and Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO). 
 
International 
mechanisms: 
ACM, 
Compendex, 
IEEE, ISI, Science Direct, Scopus, Springer, and 
Wiley. 
The inclusion of the Google search engine is not common 
in most systematic reviews. However, it was included with 
the intention of facilitating the identification of academic 
studies originating from a wide variety of Higher Education 
institutions. The search in Google Web returned 980,000 
results, of which only the first 200 results were considered, 
because from that point on, the results proved to be irrelevant 
and/or repetitive. In the other electronic databases, including 
Google Scholar, all returned results were considered. 
The automatic search was conducted from April 28 to 
May 21, 2012, and included studies made available up to 
(and including) December 31, 2011. A summary of the 
results obtained is listed in Table 2, grouped by electronic 
database, and amounted to 836 in total. 
TABLE II.  
AUTOMATIC SEARCH RESULTS 
Eletronic Database 
Result 
MCT (www.mct.gov.br) 
2 
BDBComp – SBC (www.lbd.dcc.ufmg.br/bdbcomp/) 
56 
SOFTEX (www.softex.br)  
58 
Dedalus - USP (www.dedalus.usp.br) 
177 
Public Domain (www.dominiopublico.gov.br)  
27 
Google Web (www.google.com) 
200 
Google Scholar (scholar.google.com) 
172 
Scielo (www.scielo.org) 
55 
ACM (portal.acm.org/dl.cfm) 
6 
Compendex (www.engineeringvillage2.org) 
11 
IEEE (ieeexplore.ieee.org) 
18 
ISI (apps.isiknowledge.com) 
3 
Science Direct (www.sciencedirect.com) 
4 
Scopus (www.scopus.com/home.url) 
17 
Springer (www.springerlink.com) 
29 
Wiley (onlinelibrary.wiley.com) 
1 
Total 
836 
The survey also included a manual search, which was 
undertaken immediately after the automatic search, in the 
proceedings of the Brazilian Symposium on Software 
Quality (SBQS) and the Brazilian Symposium on Software 
Engineering (SBES). The manual search identified one 
potentially relevant study, published in SBQS 2009. 
Altogether 837 results were considered for being selected for 
study. 
B. Study Selection 
First of all, the titles and abstracts of the studies were 
analyzed in order to identify potentially relevant studies. 
After eliminating redundancies (studies returned by more 
than one database engine) and studies clearly irrelevant to 
this research, 56 studies were considered potentially relevant. 
The rationale for this reduction (837 results to 56 potentially 
relevant studies) was due to the redundancy of results arising 
from using two or more database engines and due to the 
extensive coverage of the string, which returned studies with 
the terms, e.g., “MPS.BR”, “process” and “agile”, applied in 
a different context to that of the objective of this research. 
The next stage of the review was to read the complete 
texts 
of 
potentially 
relevant 
studies, 
applying 
inclusion/exclusion criteria. To facilitate the application of 
the criteria for inclusion and exclusion in the studies, a 
Microsoft ExcelTM spreadsheet was used. 
The following inclusion criteria were used: 
1) Studies from academia or industry; 
2) Studies with practical scientific (empirical) or 
bibliographic data or experience reports; 
3) Studies 
that 
addresses 
MPS.BR 
and 
agile 
methodology; 
4) Studies in Portuguese or English. 
As exclusion criteria were adopted: 
1) Studies merely based on expert opinion, without 
being supported by a practical or bibliographic study 
or a report of an experience; 
2) Studies in the format of an editorial, foreword, 
abstract, interview, news, poster and so forth. 
At the end of this stage, 21 studies were included that 
address 
the 
MPS.BR 
model 
together 
with 
agile 
methodologies. The absence of inclusion criterion number 3 
and the occurrence of exclusion criterion number 2 were the 
most frequently instances for excluding studies. When this 
stage was completed, we moved on to extracting data as 
described below. 
C. Data Extraction 
Data from 21 studies were extracted and analyzed, 
including: title, publication year, author, type (article, 
undergraduate monograph, post-graduate dissertation or 
Master’s dissertation), publication source, where the research 
was conducted, research method (case study, experience 
report, survey, experiment, action research, ethnography, and 
literature), research goal, agile method addressed, MPS.BR 
levels involved, and the benefits and limitations of using 
MPS.BR and agile methodologies. Data from each study 
were copied to an Excel spreadsheet, to aid referencing 
during the stage of synthesizing the result. 
375
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

IV. 
RESULTS AND SYNTHESIS 
The studies included 12 articles, 1 Master’s dissertation, 
3 post-graduate dissertations, 4 undergraduate monographs, 
and 1 undergraduate traineeship report. Fig. 1 shows the 
corresponding percentages. The articles were written at the 
following levels: 1 by post-graduate students, 1 by an 
undergraduate student, 4 by students of various levels, 2 by 
industry professionals, and 4 by students and professionals. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Type of studies. 
The sources where the studies were published or 
produced are shown in Table 3. Note that articles published 
in 7 conferences, 1 magazine, and academic studies 
produced in 7 institutions of higher education were included. 
TABLE III.  
SOURCE OF STUDIES 
Type 
Source 
Study 
No. 
Article 
Brazilian Symposium on 
Software Quality (SBQS) 
[11][12]
[13][14] 
4 
Annual Workshop on SPI 
(WAMPS) 
[15][16] 
2 
Informatics Students Meeting 
of Tocantins (ENCOINFO) 
[17] 
1 
Innovations Week in 
Information Systems 
(SIS2INFO) 
[18] 
1 
Regional Seminar on 
Informatics (SRI) 
[19] 
1 
Scientia Plena Magazine 
[20] 
1 
Symposium on Computational 
Mechanics (SIMMEC) 
[21] 
1 
Workshop on Companies 
(W6-MPS.BR) 
[22] 
1 
Master’s 
dissertation 
Pernambuco University (UPE) 
[23] 
1 
Post-graduate 
dissertations 
Federal University of Sergipe 
(UFS) 
[24] 
1 
Pontifical Catholic University 
of Paraná (PUCRS) 
[25] 
1 
State University of Londrina 
(UEL) 
[26] 
1 
Undergraduate 
monographs 
Passo Fundo University (UPF) 
[27][28] 
2 
Santa Cruz do Sul University 
(UNISC) 
[29] 
1 
UniSEB University Center 
[30] 
1 
Undergraduate 
traineeship 
report 
State University of Londrina 
(UEL) 
[31] 
1 
Total 
  
 
21 
 
Fig. 2 shows the percentage of studies with respect to the 
research method. Note that 9 of the 21 studies used 
Bibliographic Research. The 6 empirical studies used the 
following methods: 4 Case Studies, 1 Action Research, and 1 
Survey. Six Experience Reports were also included. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Research methods of studies. 
As reported to the year, it was noted that 2010 was the 
year in which most studies were produced on the subject, as 
illustrated in Fig. 3. The number of studies has been growing 
every year since 2008, but in 2011 there was a small 
reduction. The geographical distribution of studies by State 
was as follows: 4 from Paraná, 4 from Rio Grande do Sul, 3 
from Pernambuco, 3 from Rio de Janeiro, 2 from Minas 
Gerais, 2 from Sergipe, 2 from São Paulo, and 1 from Santa 
Catarina. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Year of studies. 
In Fig. 4, the agile methodologies found in the studies are 
shown. Note that the Scrum methodology was the most used, 
being addressed in 17 studies (81%). In some studies, Scrum 
was used in combination with another methodology. The 
agile practices most addressed were Daily Meetings and 
Development in Sprints (in 13 studies), followed by Product 
Backlog Elaboration (in 11 studies), Sprint Review Meeting 
(in 9 studies), Sprint Planning Meeting and Retrospective (in 
8 studies). 
Fig. 5 shows the number of studies related to the levels of 
the MPS.BR model. The studies focus most on the initial 
levels (G and F). Although smaller, the number of studies 
that cites the other levels (A to E) was similar. The most 
addressed processes were Requirements Management (in 19 
studies), Project Management (18), Quality Assurance (10), 
Measurement (9), Configuration Management (8), and 
Acquisition (6). The processes of Project Portfolio 
Management, Reuse Management, and Development for 
376
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Reuse were the least discussed (2 studies). The remaining 
processes were discussed in 3-5 studies. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Agile methodologies addressed. 
 
Figure 5.  Number of studies by MPS.BR Levels. 
Next, the benefits and limitations of MPS.BR together 
with agile methodologies are discussed. 
A. Benefits of using MPS.BR and Agile Methodologies 
At this stage of the review, the benefits were analyzed, as 
per how they were cited by the authors in the studies. 
Oliveira [29] found that the use of Scrum practices, such as 
maintaining the product backlog, satisfies many of the 
expected results from the processes of Requirements 
Management 
and 
Requirements Development, 
which 
correspond to levels G and D, respectively. 
The study of Oliveira, Guimarães, and Fonseca [22] 
reports the experience in a company while the MPS.BR 
model together with Scrum and XP methodologies was being 
implemented, and notes the following benefits: 
 
Significant improvements with regard to team 
performance and the quality of final product. 
 
Indicators defined for the processes of Project 
Management and Requirements Management, such 
as productivity indicators, percentage of rework and 
percentage of deviation from predicted vs. actual, 
provided important feedback to the team and created 
goals to be achieved. 
 
Indicators also support decision making and create 
an atmosphere of continuous improvement. 
 
Indicators of Configuration Management ensured 
that certain practices were followed, providing 
greater control of the versions generated and 
continuous integration. 
 
Practices of Quality Management, such as audits, 
ensured the institutionalization of the development 
process and the quality of work products. 
The study also considers that, when problems are 
identified, those responsible for Quality Management must 
submit proposals for solutions and improvements, and 
monitor the deliberations until completion. 
According to Santesso [26], the combination of Scrum 
and MPS.BR proved to be satisfactory and feasible. Silva 
and Denardi [18] observed that the use of Scrum practices 
might bring quick results and with quality in the processes, 
in order to achieve the maturity levels of MPS.BR model. 
For Mancine [30], agile methods, in particular Scrum, were 
able to streamline the development processes. 
Begnini [27] claims that the use of MPS.BR model can 
also be combined with XP agile methodology, bringing 
benefits to the company that aim to produce software with 
quality and greater agility. 
In the study of Osawa [31], Scrum compatibility with the 
expected results of MPS.BR processes at level G was 
highlighted. 
Considering the benefits mentioned by the studies, the 
use of agile methodologies with MPS.BR model succeeded 
in bringing improvements to organizations, which aim to 
produce software with agility and quality. However, the 
authors also pointed out limitations and challenges, which 
are discussed below. 
B. Limitations of using MPS.BR and Agile Methodologies 
Teixeira [28] concludes that Scrum practices alone is not 
able to meet all the requirements of MPS.BR, thus requiring 
the use of additional practices, as metaphor, planning game, 
pair programming, study documents, develop the model, and 
other, from other agile methodologies, such as XP and FDD. 
Several studies, such as [11][23][28], reported that one agile 
approach alone is not sufficient to achieve the maturity 
levels, and thus require some adjustments. In Silva, Magela, 
Santos, Schots, and Rocha [16], a combination with Unified 
Process 
and 
Scrum 
was 
proposed, 
showing 
that 
organizations can combine different approaches (agile and 
traditional) in order to comply with MPS.BR. 
According to Stanga [19], to use agile practices of XP 
with the MPS.BR model some adjustments should be made 
to the project team, especially to aid Requirements 
Management. The study notes that a formal way of recording 
and monitoring requirement is necessary, but it does not 
offer a solution. The use of a tool for agile project 
management could help in this task. Some teams record 
manually the requirements in a spreadsheet or other 
document. 
Begnini [27] notes that XP does not aid some processes 
of the MPS.BR model, because it does not prioritize the 
documentation of software developed nor the development 
and management of reusable components. Documentation 
and the production of an objective insight are challenges to 
377
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

which MPS.BR and agile methodologies are open. Agile 
teams 
should 
to 
define 
a 
minimum 
of 
essential 
documentation, in other hand, MPS.BR evaluators should 
understand agile values and be open to other forms of 
documentary representation. 
When Salgado et al. [13] report the experience of 
implementing new processes adherent to MPS.BR level C, 
using Scrum practices, the main difficulties were presented: 
 
Discussions about process improvement can divert 
the focus of agile practices, such as retrospective 
meetings, e.g., making these meetings very long; 
 
All team members, including the Product Owner, 
must participate in the meetings, to provide 
communication and visibility of the Sprint status; 
 
Difficulty in estimating the size and time required to 
perform a certain activity, causing project delays; 
 
Team members should have a heterogeneous profile, 
thus avoiding a high turnover of team members. 
Given the limitations observed in the studies, although it 
is possible the use of MPS.BR together with agile 
methodologies, there is the need to use additional practices, 
especially with respect to documentation and the metrics of 
storage. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This article conducted a study, through a systematic 
review, on the MPS.BR model with agile methodologies, 
thereby aiming to contribute to quality improvements in both 
the development process and in the final software product. 
In accordance with the included studies and the benefits 
pointed therein, the adoption of MPS.BR together with agile 
methodologies is feasible, mainly for the initial levels (G to 
D, except processes related to acquisition and reuse). They 
report that agile practices, which enable rapid improvements 
and significant quality in the processes and products, are 
needed to achieve maturity levels. However, the studies also 
pointed out limitations, such as the fact that agile 
methodologies could not completely satisfy the highest 
MPS.BR levels (C to A), thus requiring other practices, such 
as adjustments in the team, the representation of explicit 
knowledge and storage. These limitations can make it 
difficult to apply agile methodologies, and their benefits, in 
organizations. This demands alternatives that overcome 
mainly the problem of documental evidence. 
Regarding the limitations of this review, the fact of not 
having performed a quality assessment of the studies does 
not allow an analysis of the strength of the results found. All 
studies underwent some review process, but this is not 
sufficient to provide a high level of quality. Another possible 
limitation is as to the coverage of the studies. Even though 
automatic and manual searches on major sources and 
indexing mechanisms were conducted, it is possible that 
relevant studies were not included, mainly studies produced 
in educational institutions, not published in journals or 
conferences. Studies produced from 2012 onwards were not 
included. Possible biases introduced throughout the process 
of study selection and data extraction are also considered as 
limitations. However, all the stages were performed by two 
researchers, and then revised by two other researchers who 
are knowledgeable about the area. The approach of MPS.BR 
gave this study a local scope (Brazilian context), but the 
authors undertook a systematic review on the benefits and 
limitations of CMMI and agile methodologies, as their scope 
was more global. The results will be presented in a future 
article. 
The research presented in this paper may contribute to 
the academic area, since it presents an initial mapping of the 
studies conducted with respect to the issue addressed, as well 
as to organizations that focus on improving software 
development processes and adherence to best practices in 
order to ensure the quality of the software they develop. As a 
suggestion for future work, we put forward: 
 
Analyzing the adoption of agile methodologies with 
higher levels of MPS.BR model, aiming to find the 
possibility of smooth adaptation. 
 
The number of empirical studies found (28,5%), 
suggests the importance of more practical studies 
directed to the software industry, in order to meet its 
needs. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study has the support of the Foundation for Science 
and Technology of Pernambuco State (FACEPE), through 
Process No. IBPG-0136-1.03/11. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ISO/IEC 90003, “Software engineering - Guidelines for the 
application of ISO 9001:2000 to computer software”, 2004. 
[2] ISO/IEC 12207, “Systems and software engineering - 
Software life cycle processes”, 2nd ed., 2008. 
[3] SEI, 
Software 
Engineering 
Institute, 
“CMMI® 
for 
Development”, Version 1.3, Technical Report, CMU/SEI-
2010-TR-033, November 2010. 
[4] SOFTEX, Association for Promoting Excellence in Brazilian 
Software, 
“MPS.BR 
- 
Brazilian 
Software 
Process 
Improvement”, SPI General Guide for Software, December 
2012. 
[5] Agile 
Manifesto, 
“Agile 
Manifesto 
for 
Software 
Development”, 
2001, 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org 
[retrieved: August, 2013]. 
[6] VersionOne, “State of Agile Development Survey Results”, 
2011, http://www.versionone.com/pdf/2011_State_of_Agile_ 
Development_Survey_Results.pdf [retrieved: August, 2013]. 
[7] H. Corbucci, A. Goldman, E. Katayama, F. Kon, C. Melo, and 
V.  Santos, “Genesis and evolution of the agile movement in 
Brazil - a perspective from the academia and the industry”, 
Proc. 25th Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering 
(SBES 
11), 
IEEE 
Press, 
Sept. 
2011, 
pp. 
98-107, 
doi:10.1109/SBES.2011.26. 
[8] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, Agile Software Development 
with Scrum, Prentice Hall, 2002. 
[9] K. Beck, Extreme Programming explained: embrace change, 
Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[10] B. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing 
Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering”, 
Technical Report, School of Computer Science and 
Mathematics, Keele University, 2007. 
[11] M. M. Arimoto, E. Murakami, V. V. Camargo, and M. I. 
Cagnin, “Adherence analysis of agile methods according to 
the MR-MPS Reference Model”, Proc. VIII Brazilian 
378
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Symposium on Software Quality (SBQS 09), SBC, Jun. 2009, 
pp. 249-263. 
[12] E. Catunda et al., “Implementation of MR-MPS level F with 
Scrum agile practices in a software factory”, Proc. X 
Brazilian Symposium on Software Quality (SBQS 11), SBC, 
Jun. 2011, pp. 1-8. 
[13] A. Salgado et al., “Applying an agile process for deploying 
software processes based on Scrum at Chemtech”, Proc. IX 
Brazilian Symposium on Software Quality (SBQS 10), SBC, 
Jun. 2010, pp. 351-358. 
[14] C. Santana, A. M. L. Vasconcelos, and A. L. Timoteo, 
“Mapping of the Brazilian Model of Software Process 
Improvement (MPS.BR) for companies using Extreme 
Programming as development methodology”, Proc. V 
Brazilian Symposium on Software Quality (SBQS 06), SBC, 
Jun. 2006, pp. 130-143. 
[15] R. Prikladnicki and A. L. C. C. Magalhães, “Implementation 
of maturity models with agile methodologies: an experience 
report”, Proc. VI Annual Workshop on SPI (WAMPS 10), 
SOFTEX, Oct. 2010, pp. 88-98. 
[16] T. Silva, R. Magela, G. Santos, N. C. L. Schots, and A. R. 
Rocha, “Implementation of MR-MPS level F combining 
features of the Unified Process with Scrum practices”, Proc. 
VII Annual Workshop on SPI (WAMPS 11), SOFTEX, Oct. 
2011, pp. 54-61. 
[17] F. Szimanski, J. Albuquerque, and F. Furtado, “Implementing 
maturity and agility in a software factory using Scrum and 
MPS.BR level G”, Proc. XI Informatics Students Meeting of 
Tocantins (ENCOINFO 09), Lutheran University Center of 
Palmas, Nov. 2009, pp. 161-170. 
[18] A. M. Silva and A. Denardi, “Using Scrum methodology to 
achieve MPS.BR level F”, Proc. XII Innovations Week in 
Information Systems (SIS2INFO 11), UNIPAR, Oct. 2011, 
pp. 1-13.  
[19] M. Stanga, “Integrating XP agile project with MPS.BR level 
G”, Proc. XX Regional Seminar on Informatics (SRI 11), 
URI, Sept. 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[20] F. G. Silva, S. C. P. Hoentsch, and L. M. A. Silva, “An 
analysis of FDD and Scrum agile methodologies under 
MPS.BR quality model perspective”, Scientia Plena, vol. 5, 
Dec. 2009, pp. 1-13. 
[21] T. M. R. Dias, G. F. Moita, M. P. Silva, B. Ferreira, and A. 
M. Silva,  “Feasibility of software development based on the 
MPS.BR model with Extreme Programming methodology”, 
Proc. IX Symposium on Computational Mechanics (SIMMEC 
10), UFSJ, May. 2010, pp. 1-10. 
[22] A. C. G. Oliveira, F. A. Guimarães, and I. A. Fonseca, “Using 
agile methodologies to achieve MPS.BR level F in 
Powerlogic”, Proc. II Workshop on Companies (W6-
MPS.BR), SOFTEX, Oct. 2008, pp. 1-8. 
[23] C. Santana Júnior, “Evaluation of the Use of Agile 
Methodologies in the Context of Software Quality Models”, 
Master’s Dissertation in Computer Engineering, Pernambuco 
University (UPE), 2008, unpublished. 
[24] P. Silva Neto, “Case Study of a Software Project Management 
Process Based on Agile Methods and MPS.BR Model”, Post-
graduate Dissertation in Project Management of Information 
Technology, Federal University of Sergipe (UFS), 2010, 
unpublished. 
[25] D. A. Nunes, M. A. F. Locks, and R. Hayashi, “To Check the 
Suitability of Using the Scrum Agile Methodology for 
MPS.BR Level G”, Post-graduate Dissertation in Software 
Project Management, Pontifical Catholic University of Paraná 
(PUCRS), 2011, unpublished. 
[26] P. H. C. Santesso, “Using Scrum Agile Methods with 
MPS.BR Level G”, Post-graduate Dissertation in Systems 
Analysis, Design and Management with Emphasis on 
Business Intelligence, State University of Londrina (UEL), 
2009, unpublished. 
[27] M. M. Begnini, “An Analysis of XP From the Perspective of 
MPSBR Model, Undergraduate Monograph in Computer 
Science, Passo Fundo University (UPF), 2008, unpublished. 
[28] M. Teixeira, “An Analysis of Scrum From the Perspective of 
MPSBR”, Undergraduate Monograph in Computer Science, 
Passo Fundo University (UPF), 2007, unpublished. 
[29] J. S. Oliveira, “Scrum Methodology Applyed to Requeriment 
Managment and Development Process of MPS.BR Model”, 
Undergraduate Monograph in Information System, Santa 
Cruz do Sul University (UNISC), 2010, unpublished. 
[30] M. H. Mancine, “Analysis of the 
Use of Scrum 
Methodologies and MPS.BR in the Real Case Study in 
Development of Commercial Applications”, Undergraduate 
Monograph in Computer Science, UniSEB University Center, 
2011, unpublished. 
[31] G. S. Osawa, “Analysis of the Implementation of Scrum in a 
Company 
with 
MPS.BR 
Level 
G”, 
Undergraduate 
Traineeship Report in Computer Science, State University of 
Londrina (UEL), 2009, unpublished. 
 
379
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

