Implementation of the ITIL-Based Service Level
Management Process to Improve an Organization’s
Efﬁciency: A Case Study
Antti Suhonen, Sanna Heikkinen, Mika Kurenniemi, and Marko J¨antti
University of Eastern Finland
School of Computing
Email: ﬁrsname.lastname@uef.ﬁ
Abstract—IT organizations’ needs to reduce costs and maxi-
mize the efﬁciency and effectiveness of IT services have become
essential factors for success. Processes, functions, and services
require continual improvement in order to generate positive
business results and high levels of customer satisfaction. This
article presents the results of a process improvement case study
carried out in the Information System Management (ISM) unit
of the Finnish Tax Administration. The researchers focused
on improving the ISM unit’s service level management (SLM)
process to increase employee and customer satisfaction. The
research problem of this study is this: how to implement the
Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL) based
SLM process to improve organization’s efﬁciency? The main
contributions of this paper are: 1) deﬁning how to implement
the ITIL-based SLM practices by using the Keys to IT Service
Management Excellence Technique (KISMET) model to increase
organization’s efﬁciency, and 2) providing the lessons learned
from improving SLM practices.
Keywords—IT service management; ITIL; continual service
improvement; service level management; service level agreement
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL)
is a set of good practices for directing and managing IT
services. The ITIL gives a detailed description of IT service
management (ITSM) processes with comprehensive checklists,
activities, roles, and responsibilities, which can be tailored
to any IT organization [1]. ITIL version 3 approaches ITSM
from the IT service lifecycle point of view. The IT service
lifecycle consists of ﬁve phases: Service Strategy [2], Service
Design [3], Service Transition [4], Service Operation [5],
and Continual Service Improvement [1]. This study focuses
on the Service Design and Continual Service Improvement
(CSI) lifecycle phases, where the business perspective plays
an important role. Continually improving services is vital for
every IT organization because there is strong competition in
business today and the IT services need to be continually
aligned with the customer’s needs. According to ITIL [1],
CSI reviews, analyzes, and makes recommendations on im-
provement opportunities in each IT service lifecycle phase and
ensures that these opportunities are identiﬁed and managed
throughout the service lifecycle.
An ITIL-based service desk provides a single point of
contact between IT organization and users on a day-to-day
basis. This also means that a service desk is responsible for
handling support tickets, which are managed via the IT service
management (ITSM) system. The type of a support ticket can
be an incident or a service request. An incident is an unplanned
interruption to an IT service or reduction in the quality of an
IT service [5]. In practice, an incident can be e.g., a software
error, which prevents normal use of software, a malfunction
in the printer, or a crashed database server. A service request
is a formal request from a user for something to be provided
(for example, a request for information or advice to reset a
password, or to install a workstation for a new user) [5]. The
service desk treats every support ticket as a separate entity
(one logged support ticket to the ITSM system should cover
one incident or service request). However, while handling same
types of incidents, the service desk can create a link between
these incident tickets by using an ITSM system. This practice
enhances the efﬁciency of incident management.
Service level management (SLM) is a process of Service
Design lifecycle phase in ITIL v3 [3]. The purpose of the SLM
process is negotiating and documenting SLM agreements with
appropriate stakeholders, and then monitoring and producing
reports to follow these agreements [3]. According to ITIL,
SLM agreements can be classiﬁed into three groups: service
level agreements (SLA), operational level agreements (OLA),
and underpinning contracts (UC) [3]. A SLA is made between
an IT organization and a customer. An OLA is an agreement
between two parts of the same organization and an UC is a
contract between an IT organization and a third party.
Every SLM agreement contains rules. These rules deﬁne
how an IT organization handles different types of support tick-
ets. Usually a support ticket affects one or more conﬁguration
items (CI). A CI is any component or other service asset
that needs to be managed in order to deliver an IT service.
For example, a CI can be a service, hardware, software, a
building, people or a formal documentation. Looking at SLM
from ITSM system perspective, CIs are mandatory because
they can be used to create links between SLM agreements,
CIs and support tickets. For example, this practice makes it
possible to create SLM agreement, which includes rules that
only focus on incidents of the Service Alpha (an CI).
In practice, a rule in the SLM agreement is a combination
of following attributes:
•
Conﬁguration items (or an item): which CIs (usually
services) are affected by the rule?
457
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

•
Type of the support ticket: which support tickets are
affected by the rule?
•
Reaction and resolution times: what kind of reaction
and resolution times would be best for the selected CIs
(these times might vary depending on the type of the
support ticket)?
•
The priority of the support ticket: how will the
priority of the support ticket affect the calculation of
reaction and resolution times?
•
The states of the support ticket: which states will
affect the calculation of reaction and resolution times?
•
Notiﬁcation settings: which people will be notiﬁed,
when are the notiﬁcations sent, and what is the content
of the notiﬁcation?
In this context, the reaction time means the time in which
work should start on a support ticket after the ITSM system
has registered the ticket and the resolution time means the time
in which a support ticket needs to be solved.
Well designed SLAs, OLAs, and UCs help to improve
and maintain organization’s efﬁciency. According to ITIL v3,
efﬁciency is a measure of whether the right amount of resource
has been used to deliver a process, service or activity. An
efﬁcient process achieves its objectives with the minimum
amount of time, money, people or other resources [3]. In this
paper, the researchers use the description of ITIL v3 for the
term ”efﬁciency”.
The efﬁcient handling of support tickets has become one of
the essential tasks for IT organizations in the last few years.
In practice, separate SLM agreements for different services
enables that support tickets can be handled efﬁciently based on
types and priorities of the tickets. This means that appropriate
amount of resources (e.g., time, money, and right persons) can
be allocated to handle tickets, which makes support ticket han-
dling process efﬁcient and has direct impact to organization’s
overall efﬁciency. It also seems that in the future there will be
an increased number of support tickets, which customers will
expect to be solved quickly and effectively. For these reasons
many organizations have started deﬁning and designing SLAs,
OLAs, and UCs.
CSI has a strong interface with the SLM process. CSI
reviews and analyzes SLA, OLA, and UC reports and if
those reports indicate any deviations (e.g., the resolution times
for support tickets being exceeded) CSI starts appropriate
improvement actions. These actions should follow the ISO/IEC
20 000 standard [6]. ISO/IEC 20 000 is an international
standard for ITSM. ISO/IEC 20 000 requires the results of the
process monitoring to be recorded and reviewed to identify
causes, nonconformities, and opportunities for improvement.
The CSI model has been discussed in our previous paper [7].
A. Related work
There have been few studies which have analyzed the
SLM process from the IT perspective. J¨antti and Suhonen
[8] performed a research study about how to implement SLA
using an ITSM tool. In their paper, Kajko-Mattsson, Ahnlund,
and Lundberg [9] suggested a SLA model and evaluated it
within four support organizations in Sweden. Wegman et al.
[10] illustrated how methods based on the System Enterprise
Architecture Methodology (SEAM) can be used to deﬁne SLA
by modelling the service. Hsueh’s [11] research described
how an IT organization working in the aerospace industry
applied an adaptive approach to ensure that service delivery
meets business requirements in the face of changes in require-
ments. An adaptive SLM approach was used in their study
to deliver a just-in-time quality service. Correia’s and Abreu’s
[12] research work concentrated on deﬁning and observing
compliance with SLA. The main contribution of this research
work was a model-based approach to SLA speciﬁcation and
compliance veriﬁcation for IT services. Barroero’s, Motta’s,
and Durante’s [13] paper focuses on deﬁning sustainable ways
to create and manage service levels in call centres.
The purpose of this article is not to analyze successful
factors of the study. There are many existing studies that have
dealt with the success factors of ITSM such as the study made
by Tan, Cater-Steel, and Toleman [14]. Their study focused on
presenting successful factors in an Australian ITSM project.
The study explained challenges and breakthroughs, conﬁrmed
a set of factors and contributed to the project’s success, and
offered learning opportunities to organizations.
B. Our Contribution
The main contributions of this paper are:
1)
Deﬁning how to implement the ITIL-based SLM
practices by using the KISMET model to increase
organization’s efﬁciency.
2)
Providing the lessons learned from improving SLM
practices.
The results of this study can be used by persons such as service
owners, service managers, process owners, process managers,
and consultants, who are responsible for any phases of the
IT service lifecycle. These results can be used to support CSI
work based on the ITIL framework and the ISO/IEC 20 000
standard.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The research
problem and methods are described in Section 2, and the work
and results of implementing the SLM are covered in Section 3.
The analysis of the ﬁndings, together with the lessons learned,
is covered in Section 4. The conclusion and future work in
Section 5 summarizes the case.
II.
RESEARCH METHODS
The research problem of this study is how to implement
the ITIL-based SLM process to improve the organization’s
efﬁciency. The researchers used a case study research and
action research methods with a single case organization to ﬁnd
answers to the research problem. The research problem was
divided into the following research questions:
•
RQ1: What is the current state of the SLM in the case
organization (this research question is discussed in the
Section III. B. and C.)?
•
RQ2: What kind of things should be taken into con-
sideration when designing SLAs and OLAs (Section
III. D. provides readers with an overview of design
guidelines)?
458
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

•
RQ3: Which issues should be examined while analyz-
ing whether SLAs and OLAs can be conﬁgured to the
ITSM system (in Section III. E., researchers explore
the ITSM system perspective of creating SLAs and
OLAs)?
•
RQ4: What types of beneﬁts do SLM practices provide
from the perspective of continual service improvement
(the improvement cycle is visible in the whole article
and relationships between CSI and SLM are discussed
in the Section III. G.)?
These four research questions highlight the importance of CSI,
while enhancing and deploying ITSM and SLM. This study
was a qualitative research, which was built using the case study
research and action research methods. According to Yin [15],
a case study is ”a research strategy, which focuses on under-
standing the dynamics present with single settings”. During a
case study, the researcher is an outsider who observes and anal-
yses an environment and makes notes by combining different
data collection methods [15]. According to Baskerville [16],
the action research method produces highly relevant research
results, because it is grounded in practical action, and it solves
immediate problem situations. These selected methods support
the situation where the researchers work together on a research
project and their objective is to identify and solve problems in
the IT organization’s environment.
The Keys to IT Service Management Excellence Technique
(KISMET) model supports action research methods, which
focus on improving ITSM practices. For this reason, the
researchers used the KISMET model as a tool to achieve the
goals of this action research study. The KISMET model is
also used in e.g., J¨antti’s and Suhonen’s research paper [8].
Additionally, the researchers used ITIL [1], ISO/IEC 20 000
[6], and COBIT [17] as the theoretical frameworks of this
study.
A. The Case Organization
The case subject of this study was the Information System
Management (ISM) unit, which is part of the IT unit of
the Finnish Tax Administration. In 2012, the Finnish Tax
Administration had around 5300 full-time employees from
which approximately 60 work in the ISM unit. The ISM
unit provided IT services (e.g., creating and maintaining user
privileges, implementing changes to the software and hard-
ware, and supporting the incidents and service requests) to
these employees. The ISM unit is a representative case of a
government agency with a desire to improve and enhance its
IT services using ITIL-based practices.
The most of the ISM unit’s employees perform service
desk and customer support activities either part time or full
time. The ISM unit’s service desk follows ITIL-based incident
management and service request management processes. In
practice, this means that the number of service desk employees
do not affect the support tickets handling principles, but it has
inﬂuence on designing SLM agreements (deﬁning reaction and
resolution times for different types of support tickets).
B. Data Collection and Exploitation Methods
The data which was used in this research was collected
by using the ITIL-based seven-step improvement process [1].
The ITIL-based seven-step improvement process consists of
the following steps: 1) identify the strategy for improvement;
2) deﬁne what you will measure; 3) gather the data; 4) process
the data; 5) analyse the information and data; 6) present and
use the information, and 7) implement improvements.
The steps from 1 to 3 were conducted by the Finnish
Tax Administration IT unit. During these steps the IT unit
identiﬁed the strategy, deﬁned metrics, and gathered the data
for improving their ITSM. In Step 4, the researchers used three
core perspectives of ITSM (people, process, and technology)
to categorize the data that had been gathered (via a customer
satisfaction survey and feedback related to resolved tickets).
In Step 5, the researchers used the categorized data to identify
challenges and opportunities for improving the services and
processes related to ISM’s practice. In Step 6, the researchers
presented the ideas for improvements to the managers of the
ISM unit and they made a decision to improve the SLM
process. In the Step 7, the researchers implemented the im-
provements that had been decided by the ISM unit’s on the
basis of the researchers’ recommendation in Step 6. This paper
concentrates on the results of the Step 7, during which the
researchers started the implementation of the SLM process.
The procedures of the Keys to IT Service Management
Excellence Technique (KISMET) model where used to manage
the SLM implementation activities. The following data collec-
tion methods and data sources were used during the research:
•
Documents and archival records: ITSM documents,
service descriptions, customer satisfaction survey,
feedback data, meeting memos, and other internal
records.
•
Participatory observation: meetings and discussions
with the service manager, customer manager, ITSM
system specialists, and team managers from different
service areas. SLM workshops held in autumn 2012.
•
Physical artifacts: access to the intranet and to the
ITSM system.
C. Data Analysis
This study performed by using within-case analysis for a
single organization. According to Eisenhardt [18], the within-
case method typically involves detailed case study write-ups
for each site and becoming familiar with the case as a stand-
alone entity. The pattern matching technique [15] was used
to ﬁnd patterns from the empirical data. The researchers used
this technique to analyze and categorize the customer survey
results and feedback according to different patterns, such as
people, process, and technology.
The triangulation used in this study allowed the researchers
to be more conﬁdent about their results. Denzin [19] extended
the idea of triangulation beyond its conventional association
with research methods and designs. During the study the
researchers used three forms of triangulation [19]: 1) data
triangulation, which includes collecting data through several
sampling strategies; 2) investigator triangulation, which refers
to the use of more than one researcher in the ﬁeld to gather
and interpret data, and 3) methodological triangulation, which
refers to the use of more than one method for gathering data.
459
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The process improvement events were organized into
chronological order by the phases of the KISMET model. The
research work was validated in weekly meetings with the ISM
unit’s representatives.
III.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ITIL-BASED SERVICE
LEVEL MANAGEMENT PROCESS TO IMPROVE
ORGANIZATION’S EFFICIENCY
The implementation of the ISM unit’s SLM process was
performed using the KISMET model. The model consists of
the following phases: A) create a process improvement infras-
tructure; B) perform a process assessment; C) plan process
improvement actions; D) improve / implement the process
on the basis of the IT service management practices; E)
deploy and introduce the process; F) evaluate the improvement
of the process, and G) design continual process / service
improvement actions.
A. Create a process improvement infrastructure
The ”create a process improvement infrastructure” phase
includes the following steps: motivate the business decision
makers to ITSM, deﬁne business goals for ITSM process
improvement, select an improvement target, and identify the
stakeholders that participate in the process improvement.
The kickoff meeting of the SLM implementation study
between the research team and the ISM unit was held in August
2012. The participants agreed that the main goal for the study
was to improve and unify the ISM unit’s working processes
by implementing ITIL-based SLM. To achieve this goal, the
research team needed to 1) evaluate the current state of the
SLM in the ISM unit; 2) deﬁne SLA and OLA for the ISM
unit, and 3) investigate how to conﬁgure SLAs and OLAs into
the ISM unit’s ITSM system.
B. Perform a process assessment
The ”perform a process assessment” phase includes the
following steps: perform a process assessment for a selected
ITSM process, document the challenges and difﬁculties in
the current state of the process, identify the key concepts
regarding the process, study how tools support the process, and
benchmark the process with ITIL best practices and ISO/IEC
20 000 requirements.
The process assessment was executed by analyzing the
results (the ISM unit’s internal customer satisfaction survey
and feedback related to incidents and service requests that
had been solved) and searching for issues and problems
related to SLM. The analysis of SLM revealed following main
challenges and bottlenecks: 1) there was neither knowledge
nor a systematic way to perform SLM inside the ISM unit
(insufﬁcient amount of people know how to create SLAs and
OLAs); 2) a common agreement between the ISM unit and
customers stipulating that every incident and service request
should be solved within an hour, and 3) the ISM unit needs
appropriate metrics and reporting tools that could be used to
improve and unify the ISM unit’s working processes.
The following comments were captured from the ISM
unit’s customer satisfaction survey and feedback regarding
SLM:
•
"The delay is too long. We need help with incidents
related to workstations immediately, not after a few
days."
•
"I don’t know how long it will take till I actually get
help or a solution."
•
"We have been uncertain about a state or an estimated
resolution time of an incident or a service request."
During the process assessment phase the researchers discov-
ered the following strengths concerning the ISM unit’s SLM.
The ISM unit was interested in SLM, and both the management
and personnel were strongly motivated to increase customer
satisfaction and were ready to improve their ITSM system.
C. Plan process improvement action
The ”plan process improvement actions” phase includes the
following steps: analyze the challenges that have been iden-
tiﬁed, plan improvement actions, and validate the challenges
and improvement actions.
This phase focused on deﬁning the process improvement
actions based on the challenges and bottlenecks that have been
identiﬁed. For each challenge that was identiﬁed, improvement
actions and the business beneﬁt were documented.
Challenge: there is neither knowledge nor a systematic
way to perform SLM inside the ISM unit (insufﬁcient amount
of people know how to create SLAs and OLAs). Improvement
actions: the ISM unit needs to increase its knowledge of
SLM methods and practices, conﬁgure their ITSM system to
support SLM, and train and instruct employees to use the
ITSM system efﬁciently. Business beneﬁt: the ISM unit can
deﬁne clear and measurable objectives for the SLM process.
Additionally, efﬁcient SLM can help the ISM unit to establish
clear responsibilities between the ISM unit and a customer.
Challenge: there is a common agreement between the ISM
unit and customers that stipulates that incidents and service
requests should be solved within an hour. Improvement ac-
tions: the ISM unit needs to design SLAs and OLAs, which
deﬁne reaction and resolution times for different types of
support tickets. Business beneﬁt: all incidents and service
requests can be classiﬁed on the basis of their priorities. This
helps employees to decide the order in which incidents and
service requests should be handled, which makes support ticket
handling process efﬁcient and has direct impact to ISM unit’s
overall efﬁciency.
Challenge: the ISM unit needs appropriate metrics and
reporting tools that could be used to improve and unify the ISM
unit’s working processes. Improvement actions: the ISM unit
should deﬁne metrics that best meet the organization’s goals.
These metrics would direct the ISM unit’s activities to achieve
set targets. Business beneﬁt: a constant monitoring allows
the ISM unit to ensure that incidents and service requests
are processed and solved within the agreed reaction and
resolution times. Additionally, reviewing reports of reaction
and resolution times allows the ISM unit to recognize weak
points in processes and identify opportunities for improvement.
460
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
TABLE I.  
AN EXAMPLE OF SLA RULES CREATED BY SERVICE LEVEL AGREEMENT AND OPERATIONAL LEVEL AGREEMENT RULE DEFINITION MODEL 
Configuration 
item (CI) 
Type of 
support ticket 
Priority 
Reaction time 
Notification of 
reaction time 
Resolution 
time 
Notification of 
resolution time 
Notification targets 
Software A 
Incident 
Low 
15 min. 
1 hour after 
10 working 
days 
2 working days 
before 
Support ticket handler 
Normal 
15 min. 
1 hour after 
3 working 
days 
6 hours before 
Support ticket handler 
High 
15 min. 
10 min. after 
2 hours 
4 hours after 
Support ticket handler 
 
 
D. Improve / implement the process on the basis of ITSM
practices
The purpose of the ”improve / implement the process on
the basis of ITSM practices” phase is to deﬁne and document:
a) process goals; b) the beneﬁts that a process provides to
customers and the IT organization’s business; c) key concepts;
d) roles and responsibilities; e) actions; f) metrics, and g)
relationships to other ITSM processes.
The SLM workshops in the autumn of 2012 played a major
role when the researchers and the ISM unit were designing
SLAs and OLAs for incidents and service requests. Before
the workshops were held, the research team created and sent
a questionnaire to the workshop participants (e.g., the service
manager, the customer manager, and ITSM specialists). Those
attending were told to answer the questions from their own
unit’s perspective (e.g., give an estimation of how fast the unit’s
personnel could handle incidents and service requests). The
questions below were included in the questionnaire:
1)
Who is responsible for SLM (managing SLAs and
OLAs)?
2)
Which conﬁguration items should have their own
SLAs and OLAs during the ﬁrst stage of the imple-
mentation of SLM?
3)
Will the SLAs and OLAs for conﬁguration items be
targeted at incidents or will service requests also be
taken into account?
4)
What types of reaction times would be best for
incidents / service requests which affect the selected
conﬁguration items (the reaction time means the time
in which work should start on an incident or a service
request after the ITSM system has registered the
incident or the service request)?
5)
What types of resolution times would be best for
incidents / service requests which affect the selected
conﬁguration items (the resolution time means the
time in which an incident or a service request needs
to be solved)?
6)
Will different priorities of service requests and in-
cidents have an effect on reaction and resolution
times? Is it necessary to deﬁne a set of reaction and
resolution times for incidents and service requests
on the basis of the priorities of incidents / service
requests? (In this context, the priority is a category
used to identify the relative importance of a support
ticket. Priority is deﬁned on the basis of the impact
and urgency of the support ticket. In practice, a high
priority support ticket need to solved faster than a
low priority ticket.)
7)
When should notiﬁcation messages be sent (when the
reaction or resolution time looks likely to be exceeded
or has already been exceeded)? Will the priority of
the incident or service request affect the sending of
notiﬁcations?
8)
Which person(s) or group(s) will be informed when
the reaction or resolution time looks likely to be
exceeded or has already been exceeded? Will the
priority of an incident or service request have an
effect on the sending of a notiﬁcation to person(s)
or group(s)?
As a result of the workshops the researcher and the ISM unit
deﬁned the SLA and OLA rules for incidents. These rules were
created by using the SLA / OLA rule deﬁnition model. An
example of SLA rules created by deﬁnition model is presented
in Table 1.
E. Deploy and introduce the process
The ”deploy and introduce the process” phase includes the
following steps: deploy an ITSM process with a pilot unit,
create work instructions for how to perform the process in
practice, encourage a positive attitude to ITSM among the staff,
increase the awareness of ITSM in the organization through
training, and organize ITSM workshops to clarify the ITSM
process interfaces.
The researchers organized a workshop in September 2012
to investigate how to implement and conﬁgure SLAs and OLAs
into the ITSM system. The researchers created and used the
following questionnaire to evaluate the readiness of the ITSM
system from the viewpoint of the implementation of SLAs and
OLAs:
Creation of a new SLA / OLA
The SLM process is heavily dependent on the organi-
zation’s ITSM system. In practice, a ITSM system has to
contain a SLM module (a collection of SLM features), which
need to be conﬁgurable. Otherwise SLAs and OLAs cannot
work properly in the ITSM system and the organization will
not be able to execute SLM practices efﬁciently (e.g., ensure
that reaction an resolution times are used as planned). The
following issues should be examined while analyzing ITSM
system’s principles related to the creation of new SLAs /
OLAs:
•
Does the ITSM system contain a proper method to
create new SLAs and OLAs? Is it possible to use pre-
created SLA and OLA templates?
•
Is there a proper method to create a link between a
SLA / OLA and a conﬁguration item (CI)?
461
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

When a new support ticket is registered into the ITSM
system, the data of the ticket will be analyzed. If the
ticket contains a CI that has an existing link to SLA
/ OLA, this SLA / OLA will become active and the
ticket needs to be resolved according to the SLA /
OLA rules.
•
Is there a proper method to activate a completed SLA
/ OLA? Is it possible to set a date when the SLA /
OLA will become active?
Rule deﬁnitions for SLAs and OLAs
Every SLA / OLA contains different types of SLA and
OLA rules. Deﬁning appropriate reaction and resolution times
is an essential task while designing SLA and OLA rules.
A well balanced reaction and resolution times directly affect
organization’s capabilities to manage support tickets effectively
and to keep customers satisﬁed. In practice, a successful
creation of SLAs and OLAs requires that the attribute values
of SLA and OLA rules are accurate (these values were
deﬁned in Section III. D.). The following issues should be
examined while analyzing whether SLA and OLA rules can
be conﬁgured to the ITSM system:
•
Is there a proper method to create new SLA and OLA
rules?
•
Is there a proper method to edit SLA / OLA rule
settings? How are the reaction and resolution time
values conﬁgured into the rule?
•
Is there a proper method to conﬁgure how the priority
of the support ticket affects the calculation of reaction
and resolution times?
•
Is there a proper method to create sets of different
kind of states of support tickets, which are taken into
account in SLA / OLA rules?
In practice, some of the states will affect the calcula-
tion of reaction and resolution times. For example, a
state ”waiting for reply from the third party” should
not affect calculation of a resolution time. These kinds
of states should be well-known and documented.
•
Is there a proper method to create and conﬁgure
working hours and holiday sets which might affect
reaction and resolution times?
•
Is there a proper method to conﬁgure notiﬁcation mes-
sage settings related to reaction and resolution times?
A notiﬁcation message will be send automatically to
the appropriate personnel at the agreed times (e.g.,
when the resolution time exceeds).
•
Is there a proper method to edit the content of the
notiﬁcation message?
Generating SLA and OLA reports
An organization has to deﬁne appropriate metrics to be
able to generate accurate and relevant SLA and OLA reports.
This practice helps to improve support ticket escalation and
work queue management. For example, metrics can be used to
measure the percentage of incidents, which have been resolved
according to reaction and resolution times. This information
is useful when organization reviews the functionality, validity,
and business alignment of SLAs / OLAs. The following issues
should be examined while analyzing ITSM system’s principles
related to metrics and a SLA / OLA report generation:
•
Is there a proper method to conﬁgure metrics that
measure how well SLAs and OLAs are working in
practice?
•
Is there a proper method to generate SLA and OLA
reports?
At the end of the workshop, the researchers were able to
determine that the ISM unit’s ITSM system allows its users
to create appropriate SLA and OLA rules. Based on this
knowledge, the ISM unit decided that it would create SLAs
and OLAs for the incident type of support tickets.
F. Evaluate the improvement of the process
The ”evaluate process improvement” phase involves col-
lecting feedback regarding an improved process, tools, and
training, conducting ﬁne-tuning if necessary, and the deploy-
ment of the processes to other organizational units or services.
After the workshop held in September, the ISM unit
executed a one-month-long evaluation period. During that time
the ISM unit ensured that SLAs and OLAs worked correctly
in the ITSM system. This was done by: 1) creating test
SLAs and OLAs; 2) testing reaction and resolution times by
using different types of incidents (e.g., incidents with different
priorities), and 3) checking whether notiﬁcation messages got
sent to the right persons at the right time.
The ISM unit was able to test the basic SLM features of
the ITSM system and they conﬁrmed that these features work
correctly. However, the ISM unit also stated that one month is
a too short time period to test and conﬁgure all SLM features
thoroughly. The results of this evaluation period were analyzed
in a workshop at the end of October 2012. Evaluate phase
indicates that ISM unit has achieved the following results:
•
ISM unit’s managers have been able to increase their
awareness related to SLM process and its purposes
and practices compared the situation before research
pilot (e.g., before the research only few ISM unit’s
managers had basic knowledge about SLM and after
the research over 10 managers has now good under-
standing about SLM and they know how to design
SLAs and OLAs).
•
During the research workshops ISM unit’s specialists
learned how to create and conﬁgure SLAs and OLAs
to the ITSM system (e.g., before the research, spe-
cialists did not have comprehensive knowledge about
SLM features in the ITSM system).
•
After the research, ISM unit is committed to create
SLAs for the services they are providing and OLAs
for different ISM unit’s work groups (e.g., before the
research, ISM unit used only one SLA, which covered
all services).
462
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

G. Design continual process / service improvement actions
The ”design continual process / service improvement ac-
tions” phase includes the following steps: conduct process
reviews frequently, identify and report process improvement
ideas, and plan and implement improvement actions.
The ISM unit needs to identify critical success factors
(CSF), key performance indicators (KPI), and metrics for SLM
in the same way as in other ITSM processes. The CSFs, the
KPIs, and metrics will determine whether there are gaps be-
tween the expected outcome and the real outcome. The metrics
need to be monitored and the results of the measurements
should be used to identify opportunities for improvement. Ideas
for improvements that are identiﬁed should be logged in the
CSI register for evaluation and possible implementation. A CSI
register is a database or structured document used to record and
manage improvement opportunities throughout their lifecycle
[1].
The metrics direct the ISM unit’s activities to achieve set
targets. The ISM unit has had problems with implementing the
metrics that were designed because of the lack of SLM best
practices. After the research described in this paper, the ISM
unit is now prepared to create reports, which will help it to see
how well SLAs and OLAs are working (with the possibility
of handling incidents within the given reaction and resolution
times) and thus, continually improve its IT services. Complete
understanding of how SLM works also requires the ISM unit
to measure other processes that have interfaces with the SLM
process. For this reason the following CSFs and KPIs were
chosen by ISM unit for incident management [5][20]:
CSF: resolve an incident as quickly as possible to
minimize the impacts on the business:
•
KPI: reduce the mean time required to ﬁnd a resolution
or a workaround for an incident, broken down by
priority.
•
KPI: an increased percentage of incidents resolved
within the agreed resolution times by priority.
CSF: maintain user satisfaction with IT services:
•
KPI: average user survey score (total and by question
category).
•
KPI: percentage of satisfaction surveys answered ver-
sus total number of satisfaction surveys sent.
Communication, training and documentation are required
to move a new or improved service, a tool or a service
management process into production [1]. The ISM unit needs
to review improvement activities to ensure that approved ideas
for improvement are implemented and employees use these
new practices in daily basis. The ISM unit should also organize
training sessions for its employees to make sure that they
understand SLM practices.
IT organizations should create reports where the imple-
mented improvement actions are presented. These reports
should be delivered to employees and customers. For ex-
ample, improvement actions based on customer satisfaction
surveys and feedback motivate employees and customers to
give feedback in the future if their input has been taken into
consideration while improving the service. A report, which
shows improvement trends can be used as marketing tool to
communicate that the organization is committed to continual
improvement [1].
IV.
ANALYSIS
In this section, the researchers analyze the research ﬁndings
in the form of the lessons learned. These lessons learned
can be used as general guidelines while repeating the same
experience. The source for each lesson is presented using the
following abbreviations: DR = documents and archival records,
PO = participatory observation, and PA = physical artifacts.
Lesson I: implement a systematic way to manage and
operate SLM throughout the organization (PO). Non-
existent or incoherent SLM creates different working methods
and practices inside the organization and its units over a long
period of time. With ITIL-based deﬁned roles, responsibilities,
processes, and metrics, the organization should be able to exe-
cute SLM in a systematic way, which improves and uniﬁes the
organization’s working practices and increase organization’s
overall efﬁciency.
Lesson II: deﬁne reaction and resolution times for
different types of support tickets according to the ticket’s
priority (PO, PA). If all support tickets are processed iden-
tically without their types and / or priorities being taken into
consideration, the organization may encounter the following
challenges: 1) employees who work at the service desk may
have difﬁculties with handling support tickets at a sufﬁcient
speed, and 2) customers may also feel that they do not get
solutions for their support tickets fast enough. Also, in case
of high-priority support tickets, resolution time notiﬁcations
should be sent after exceeding a resolution time because time
limits are usually very strict and personnel do not have time
to check their email messages when they are solving a ticket.
In other words, these notiﬁcations should work primary as
reminders to close tickets.
Lesson III: employees and customers might not have
comprehensive knowledge about SLM or the beneﬁts,
which can be gained by using it (PO). If, after the successful
implementation of SLAs and OLAs, a person who submits
support tickets does not understand the meaning of SLAs or
OLAs, he / she might not understand either why his / her
low-priority support ticket takes longer to handle than high-
priority tickets. For this reason, the organization needs to
communicate with employees and customers about new and
changed SLAs and OLAs and increase people’s knowledge
of SLM by organizing training sessions. These actions can
be used to prevent resistance to change with regard to SLM
practices.
Lesson IV: missing SLAs and OLAs might cause self-
inﬂicted hurrying among the employees of the organization
(PO). In this context, self-inﬂicted hurrying means that cus-
tomers have unrealistic expectations about the resolution times
of support tickets and employees want to handle support tickets
as quickly as possible without prioritizing them ﬁrst. SLAs and
OLAs can be used to prevent self-inﬂicted hurrying among the
employees of the organization because SLAs and OLAs create
common rules, which both employees and customers should
know and follow.
463
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Lesson V: deﬁne appropriate metrics for SLM (DR,
PO, PA). The organization needs to deﬁne and conﬁgure
appropriate process metrics to gather measurement data and
monitor trends and performance against service targets at
planned intervals. The measurement data should be used to
identify the causes of nonconformities and opportunities for
improvement.
Lesson VI: organize regular reviews to evaluate how the
SLAs and OLAs have been followed and report the ﬁndings
to interested parties (DR, PO). It is important to deﬁne
requirements for SLM reporting after the deployment of SLAs
or OLAs. The requirements should answer at least the next
questions: Which persons will attend to report reviews? How
often will report reviews be held? What kinds of actions will
be taken if the reaction and resolution times are not working
properly?
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The research problem of this study was this: how to
implement the ITIL-based SLM process to improve the organi-
zation’s efﬁciency. The main contribution of this study was: 1)
deﬁning how to implement the ITIL-based SLM practices by
using the KISMET model to increase organization’s efﬁciency,
and 2) provide the lessons learned from improving SLM
practices. In this study, the researchers used the KISMET
model to improve the IT service process. The improvement
focused on the following things from the viewpoint of the
ITSM: evaluate the current state of the SLM in the ISM unit,
deﬁne SLA and OLA for the ISM unit, and investigate how to
conﬁgure SLAs and OLAs into the ISM unit’s ITSM system.
There are three important reasons why our research results
are valuable: First, poorly planned SLAs may cause signiﬁcant
ﬁnancial losses in the form of sanctions when SLA rules cannot
be met. Second, there are only few academic studies that
deal with interface between CSI and SLM. More studies are
needed to ﬁll this knowledge gap. Third, we provided prac-
tical implications for IT organizations to enable a systematic
improvement of SLM practices by using the KISMET model.
The use of case study and action research methods has
certain limitations. First, the research was performed with one
organization, which means that the research work needs to
be repeated in other organizations, so that the results can be
generalized. However, the results of this study can be used to
extend ITSM theory. Other case study researchers can use the
KISMET model and SLM questionnaires to get similar results
while repeating this study. Second, this research was executed
within a short period of time. A longer research period would
have provided a more detailed analysis of how SLAs and OLAs
work in practice. Third, the researchers could have conducted
more SLA and OLA validation meetings with employees to
get a better understanding of whether the SLA and OLA rules
that were deﬁned correspond with the reality.
More studies are needed to examine SLM and its inter-
faces with other ITSM processes. Further research could also
focus on exploring how to assess and measure ITSM process
maturity by using the ISO / IEC 15504 framework [21]. It
would be also interesting to research how impacts of service
improvement actions could be evaluated in IT organizations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This paper is based on research in the KISMET project
funded by the National Technology Agency, TEKES (no.
70035/10), the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF),
and industrial partners.
REFERENCES
[1]
Cabinet Ofﬁce e, ITIL Continual Service Improvement. The Stationery
Ofﬁce (TSO), United Kingdom, 2011.
[2]
Cabinet Ofﬁce a, ITIL Strategy.
The Stationery Ofﬁce (TSO), United
Kingdom, 2011.
[3]
Cabinet Ofﬁce b, ITIL Service Design.
The Stationery Ofﬁce (TSO),
United Kingdom, 2011.
[4]
Cabinet Ofﬁce c, ITIL Service Transition. The Stationery Ofﬁce (TSO),
United Kingdom, 2011.
[5]
Cabinet Ofﬁce d, ITIL Service Operation. The Stationery Ofﬁce (TSO),
United Kingdom, 2011.
[6]
ISO / IEC, ISO/IEC 20000-1:2011, IT Service management, Part 1:
Service management system requirements. ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 7, 2011.
[7]
S. Heikkinen and M. J¨antti, “Establishing a continual service improve-
ment model: A case study,” in Proceedings of the 19th European Con-
ference: Systems, Software and Service Process Improvement (EuroSPI),
2012, pp. 61 – 72.
[8]
M. J¨antti and A. Suhonen, “Improving service level management
practices: A case study in an IT service provider organization,” in
International Conference on Advanced Applied Informatics (IIAIAAI),
2012, pp. 139 –144.
[9]
M. Kajko-Mattsson, C. Ahnlund, and E. Lundberg, “Cm3: service level
agreement,” in Proceedings of 20th IEEE International Conference on
Software Maintenance, 2004, pp. 432–436.
[10]
A. Wegmann, G. Regev, G.-A. Garret, and F. Marechal, “Specifying
services for ITIL service management,” in International Workshop on
Service-Oriented Computing Consequences for Engineering Require-
ments (SOCCER ’08), 2008, pp. 8 –14.
[11]
M.-C. Hsueh, “Adaptive service level management,” in 11th IEEE Inter-
national Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference (EDOC),
2007, pp. 451 – 456.
[12]
A. Correia and F. B. e Abreu, “Deﬁning and observing the compliance
of service level agreements: A model driven approach,” in Seventh Inter-
national Conference on the Quality of Information and Communications
Technology (QUATIC), 2010, pp. 165 –170.
[13]
T. Barroero, G. Motta, and M. Durante, “Sustainable service level
agreements,” in IEEE International Conference on Services Computing
(SCC), 2011, pp. 679 – 684.
[14]
W.-G. Tan, A. Cater-Steel, and M. Toleman, “Implementing IT service
management: A case study focussing on critical success factors,”
Journal of Computer Information Systems, vol. 50, no. 2, 2009.
[15]
R. K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
CA: Sage
Publications, 2003.
[16]
R. L. Baskerville, “Investigating information systems with action re-
search,” 1999.
[17]
COBIT 4.1, Control Objectives for Information and related Technology:
COBIT 4.1.
IT Governance Institute, 2007.
[18]
K. M. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,” in
Academy of Management Review, 1989, pp. 532–550.
[19]
N. Denzin, The Research Act in Sociology, 1970.
[20]
Ofﬁce of Government Commerce (OGC), Planning to implement ser-
vice management.
The Stationery Ofﬁce, Norwich, 2002.
[21]
Public Research Centre Henri Tudor, ITSM Process Assesment Support-
ing ITIL.
Van Haren Publishing, Zaltbommel, 2009.
464
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

