Antecedents To Achieve Kanban Optimum Benefits In Software Companies
Muhammad Ovais Ahmad  
Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and 
Informatics, Department of Software Engineering, Gdansk 
University of Technology, Poland. 
Department of Mathematics and Computer 
Science, Karlstad University, Sweden   
Anna Rohunen 
Center for Ubiquitous Computing, University of Oulu, 
Oulu, Finland 
Päivi Raulamo-Jurvanen   
M3S Research Unit, University of Oulu, Finland.    
Oulu, Finland  
e-mail: firstname.lastname@oulu.fi 
Abstract— In 2004, Kanban successfully entered the Agile and 
Lean realm. Since then, software companies have been 
increasingly using it in software development teams. The goal 
of this study is to perform an empirical investigation on 
antecedents considered as important for achieving optimum 
benefits of Kanban use and to discuss the practical 
implications of the findings. We conducted an online survey 
with 
software 
professionals 
from 
the 
Lean 
Software 
Development 
LinkedIn 
community 
to 
investigate 
the 
importance of antecedents of using Kanban for achieving 
optimum benefits. Our study reveals that subjective norm, 
organizational support, ease of use, Kanban use experience 
and training are the antecedents for achieving expected 
benefits of Kanban. The potential benefits of Kanban use can 
only be realized when the key antecedents are not only 
identified, but also infused across an organization. When 
managing the transition to or using Kanban, practitioners need 
to adapt their strategies on the extent of various antecedents, a 
few identified in this study. 
Keywords- Agile; Lean; Kanban; Software Development.   
I.
INTRODUCTION  
It has been more than ten years since the use of Kanban 
in software engineering was suggested. During the last 
decade, there has been significant adoption of Kanban in 
domains such as aeronautics, healthcare, retail clothing, 
human resources, and software development [1]. Kanban 
was emerged as part of Toyota Production System. The idea 
was to work effectively under pressure and market situation. 
Kanban literal meaning is signboard [1].  
Toyota, used Kanban due to three reasons: reduction in 
information processing cost, rapid and precise acquisition of 
facts, and limiting surplus capacity of preceding shops or 
stages [10]. In 2004, David Anderson introduced Kanban to 
a software development team in Microsoft. “Kanban (capital 
K) is an evolutionary change method that utilizes a kanban 
(small k) pull system, visualization, and other tools to 
catalyse the introduction of Lean ideas… the process is 
evolutionary and incremental” [1]. Anderson identified five 
key properties, which Boeg called principles: Visualise the 
workflow, Limit Work In Progress, Measure and manage 
flow, Make process policies explicit, Improve collaboratively 
(using models and the scientific method) [1].  
The annual State of Agile VersionOne [3] reported that 
from “2016 to 2017 the use of Kanban grew from 50% to 
65% in software companies”. The most recent systematic 
mapping study on applying Kanban in software engineering 
reports a variety of benefits with the use of Kanban in their 
work [1]. The study distilled various Kanban benefits under 
three broad categories [1]:  
•
Process - Improved visibility and transparency, 
Better control of project activities and tasks, 
Identification of impediments to flow, Improved 
prioritisation of products and tasks.  
•
People 
- 
Improved 
communication 
and 
collaboration, Improved team motivation, Improved 
team building and cohesion, Increased customer 
satisfaction.  
•
Organization - Promotion culture of continuous 
learning and strategic alignment.  
These benefits are achieved by using Kanban in two 
broad knowledge areas: Software engineering process 
management and economics [1]. Despite the positive 
evidence supporting the success of Kanban in software 
organizations, the industry is still facing recurring problems 
(with, e.g., customer satisfaction, organizational culture or 
poor knowledge management) [1]. To achieve the optimum 
benefits of agile and lean approaches there is lack of 
sufficient theoretical foundations. However, a few studies 
have focused on a set of potential factors that impact 
perceived success or ‘acceptance’ of agile practices where 
success is measured using outcomes such as quality, time, 
and cost [4], agile software solution framework [6] and 
assimilation of practices [7]. The existing suggested various 
antecedents which contribute to the effective use of Agile 
methods (e.g., support from organization, positive change 
culture, formal training and developers’ perception about the 
difficulty or ease of use regarding method, practice or tool) 
[1][8][9][11]-[13].  
There is a need for detailed studies on agile software 
development to provide credible advice to software 
companies regarding its use [13]. Kanban also comes under 
the agile realm and is still in its infancy in software 
engineering. Currently, there is lack of empirical evidence 
regarding Kanban antecedents and use benefits. It is 
important to investigate the importance of organizational 
support, training, experience, subjective norms, and 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

perceived ease of use against Kanban claimed benefits. Such 
evidence will help in the generalization of results, and in 
confirming or refuting anecdotal evidence. Further, it will 
provide practical guidelines that can assist software 
practitioners regarding decisions in their selection of 
software development approaches. The goal of this study is 
to investigate various antecedents considered important for 
achieving optimum benefits of Kanban use.   
RQ1. What antecedents make software industry achieve 
the optimum benefits of Kanban from its use? 
To answer RQ1, we conducted a web survey in the 
summer of 2017, targeted LinkedIn practitioners’ group: 
“Lean Software Development” - one of the largest LinkedIn 
communities of professionals whose members are using and 
researching Lean and Kanban.   
The paper is organized as follows. Section II elaborates 
conceptualization of the antecedents. Section III describes 
the survey design, while Section IV presents the methods 
used for analysing the data. Section V presents the results 
before moving to discussion about the findings in Section 
VI. Section VII presents the threats to validity and, Section 
VIII concludes the paper with recommendations for practice 
and researchers. 
II.
ANTECEDENTS CONCEPTUALIZATION 
In 
general, 
software 
and 
system 
development 
methodologies are adaptable. Senapathi and Srinivasan [11] 
claim that agile methods lack a strong theoretical base. The 
information systems literature extensively tested models, e.g., 
the diffusion of innovation, planned behaviour, technology 
acceptance model and information systems implementation 
research [11]. These models generated interest in the agile 
research community [7][11]. To investigate software 
developers’ acceptance of methodologies, Riemenschneider 
et al. [8] compare the existing five theoretical models. Dybå 
et al. [12] added the construct of organizational support to the 
four constructs presented by Riemenschneider et al. [8] i.e., 
perceived ease of use, perceived compatibility, perceived 
usefulness and subjective norms. Similarly, Senapathi and 
Srinivasan [11] identify other constructs pertinent to post-
adoptive usage of agile practices, namely relative advantage, 
team attitude and technical competence, championing, and 
top management support. Ahmad et al. [9] discussed aspects 
that Kanban practitioners perceived to be important (i.e., 
organizational support and social influence). We took Dybå et 
al. [12] model factor as baseline for our study: 
Organizational support is the extent to which change 
agents promote or support efforts, as a factor in explaining 
an innovation’s (e.g., Kanban as a new working method) 
rate of adoption [9]. Coaching and support is a key to the 
success of facilitating and sustaining organizational learning 
and knowledge creation. Iivari and Huisman [16] identified 
that organizational culture contributes in the espousal of 
software development methodologies. Kaemar [17] reported 
that, diffusion of software process effect could be arbitrated 
by perceived organizational usefulness. Therefore, we 
believe, Kanban benefits can be achieved by providing 
organizational support. 
Training, in the form of formal training, of any 
methodology is important for its successful implementation. 
Chan and Thong [4] exhibit that training has a positive 
effect on individuals’ beliefs and perceived compatibility of 
an innovation. In Agile methodologies, training and 
coaching play an important role in the successful use and 
reap of the benefits [4]. In the light of existing studies 
[21][22], formal training plays an important role in the use 
and successful implementation of any methodology. Thus, 
we believe that Kanban benefits can be reaped by providing 
formal training. 
Experience means individuals with the attitude and 
experience to embrace new practices (e.g., Agile) easily and 
fast, whereas high level of team experience contributes to 
increased productivity [23]. High level of experience, 
technical knowledge and self-organizing working style 
within a team affect the successful usage of agile practices. 
Experience can be considered as a positive or negative 
aspect in using agile methods and practices. Salo and 
Abrahamsson [24] present that experienced users of agile 
methods and practices have positive views about its 
usefulness. Laanti et al. [5] found a positive connotation 
between the length of agile experience and attitudes towards 
its usefulness. Whereas Vijayasarathy and Turk [2] found no 
evidence. 
Subjective norms refer to a person’s perception that most 
people who are important to him/her think he/she should or 
should not perform the behaviour in question [8][20]. The 
software companies are encouraging their developers to 
work collaboratively in teams. To some extent, teamwork 
creates social pressure on individuals. Subjective norms are 
significant in methodologies acceptance [4][8] while a few 
found it insignificant [12][20]. Therefore, we can say that, 
the stronger subjective norms, the more likely practitioners 
reap Kanban use benefits.  
Ease of use can be described as “The degree to which a 
person believes that using a particular system would be free 
of effort” Davis [19]. It explains whether a method or tool is 
easy to use or not, and how they are perceived in relation to 
the claimed benefits.  According to Kaemar et al. [17] the 
perceptions of development methodology challenges are 
negatively associated 
with perceived ease of use. 
Riemenschneider et al. [8] in turn, claim that ease of use 
construct has insignificant role in the acceptance of software 
methodologies. However, other studies recur that ease of 
use is a significant determinant of adoption behaviour 
[9][12][19]. Therefore, we believe Kanban’s ease to use is 
an important aspect in achieving the optimum Kanban 
benefits. 
  Self-efficacy is about “belief in one's capabilities to 
organize and execute the courses of action required to 
produce given attainments” [18]. Self-efficacy is to predict 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

positive attitude towards a specific job, technology, training 
proficiency and job performance [18]. Therefore, we believe 
self-efficacy is an important aspect in achieving the optimum 
Kanban benefits. 
III.
SURVEY DESIGN AND DATA COLLECTION 
To reach a global population of Kanban practitioners, we 
sent out a web survey to “Agile and Lean Software 
Development” community of practitioners in LinkedIn. At 
the time of the study, the population of “Agile and Lean 
Software Development” was about 138,460 software 
practitioners.  
Prior to the actual survey launch, we piloted and pre-
tested the survey with four relevant field researchers from 
University of Oulu and five software professionals from the 
software industry. In the light of the feedback, received 
from both the researchers and software professionals, we 
revised and clarified the questions and wordings of the 
statements accordingly. The survey welcome page provided 
a clear description of the study purpose and researchers 
information. The survey remained open for two months 
(June and July 2017) and had three sections: 
•
Background information, Kanban use experience 
and type of Kanban training attended. 
•
Benefits of using Kanban: We based the questions 
on literature [1] and asked the respondents to rate the 
significance of each Kanban benefit for their 
organization using a five-point Likert-type scale 
(from 1 strongly disagree to 5 strongly agree). The 
respondent can also explain the obtained Kanban 
benefits in more detail, in the form of open-ended 
questions.  
•
Antecedents 
for 
achieving 
optimum 
Kanban 
benefits: Similarly, with the help of literature 
[9][20][19], we adapted the questions for the 
antecedents. For rating, we used a five-point Likert-
type scale. 
IV.
DATA ANALYSIS 
In our analysis, we divided the respondents into groups 
with respect to their reported level of received organizational 
support, perception of ease of use, training, subjective norm, 
and experience. These groups were compared to find out 
whether there are differences in the perceived benefits 
between the groups. Such comparison provides insight into 
relationships between perceived benefits of Kanban usage 
and its antecedents.  
Comparisons were conducted through Student's t-test, 
Welch's t-test, analysis of variance or Welch's ANOVA, 
depending on the number of groups to be compared and 
whether 
the 
assumption 
of 
group-wise 
variances’ 
homogeneity was met or not. These tests help to investigate 
whether there are statistically significant differences with 
respect to the perceived benefits between the groups. We 
carried out our analysis with the significance level (α) of 
0.05, i.e., we decided whether to reject the null hypotheses 
(no differences between the groups) with the risk level of 5 
%. 
V.
RESULTS 
The collected data set included 67 responses. Majority of 
the respondents were from organizations developing 
software (n=45), while the rest were working in IT services 
(n=14), 
telecommunication 
(n=2) 
and 
hardware 
manufacturing (n=6).  
We categorized all the organizations reported by the 
respondents, based on small and medium-sized enterprises. 
Most respondents were working in a small organization 
(n=30, number of employees between 10–49), the rest 
worked in large organizations (n=17, more than 250 
employees) and middle size organizations (n=14, number of 
employees between 50–249). Only 6 respondents were from 
start-up company. Respondents’ main organizational roles 
involved first level management (n=20) and development 
teams (n=17). Other reported positions were middle 
management (n=16) and top-level management (n=7). The 
remaining 7 roles were operation & support staff.  
Almost all the respondents understood Kanban. The 
majority (n=35) of the respondents considered themselves as 
advanced beginners using Kanban in a local project. 
However, having said that, only 5 respondents purely used it 
for distributed projects. Table 1 shows, how the respondents 
rated the significance of Kanban use benefits and a few 
explained more in open-ended questions.  
The top three benefits are improved visibility of work, 
reduction in work in progress and improved development 
flow; which are the key pillars of Kanban. It was also 
highlighted that Kanban helps to “visualize tasks in 
progress” and “highlight the bottlenecks” in the flow as 
well as has the “ability to analyse outliers within the 
standard deviation of cycle or lead time, Kanban allows for 
“just-in-time prioritization” and has “moved the team from a 
sprint to finish coding to continually deliver excellent 
software”. 
TABLE I. 
RESPONDENTS RATE KANBAN BENEFITS
Kanban benefits  
Average 
Improved visibility of work 
3.67 
Reduction in work in progress 
3.15 
Improved development flow 
3.00 
Faster time to delivery 
2.88 
Improved team collaboration 
2.63 
Improved understanding of whole value stream 
2.58 
Improved team communication 
2.51 
Improved team motivation 
2.45 
Increased productivity 
2.42 
Reduced cycle time 
 
2.42 
Better meeting of customer needs 
2.27 
Improved software quality 
2.21 
Enhance customer satisfaction 
2.25 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Table II shows the internal consistency of antecedent 
factors using Cronbach’s alpha [15]. The items in each 
variable are grouped together for statistical tests. Cronbach 
Alphas value for all the items varied between 0.64 and 0.83, 
suggesting a relatively high internal consistency, based on 
the 0.7 threshold recommended by Nunnally [15]. 
Cronbach’s alpha was below 0.7 only for OS2 variable 
that measured the respondents’ perceived availability of 
written instructions on Kanban in their organizations. 
However, the overall OS internal consistency is 0.83. With 
respect to the SN and PEOU factors, we did not identify any 
items whose removal would have increased the internal 
consistency [15]. Based on the high internal consistency of 
these items, we calculated the sum variables of all items for 
each factor and used those for statistical tests in subsequent 
stages of the study. 
TABLE II. 
CRONBACH’S ALPHAS
Factors 
Variables 
Cronbach’s alpha (α) 
Organizational Support  
(OS) 
OS1 
0.83 
0.83 
OS2 
0.64 
OS3 
0.83 
Subjective Norms  (SN) 
SN1 
0.79 
0.88 
SN2 
0.79 
Perceived Ease of Use  
(PEOU)  
PEOU1 
0.82 
0.85 
PEOU2 
0.82 
PEOU3 
0.79 
PEOU4 
0.82 
Organizational support: The respondents were divided 
into two groups based on the value of the organizational 
support sum variable (the mean of separate items): 
respondents provided with no support or weak support only 
(sum variable value less than 3), and respondents with 
moderate or strong support (sum variable value 3 or higher). 
Using Student's t-test, a statistically significant difference 
was found between the groups (p=0.000) with the means of 
the perceived benefits presented in Table III. The PS mean 
was higher in the group with moderate or strong support. 
TABLE III. 
MEANS OF PERCEIVED BENEFITS  WITH RESPECT TO OS
Group (n=67) 
Mean of perceived benefits   
No support or weak support 
(n=53) 
2.363 
Moderate or strong support 
(n=14) 
3.699 
We analysed the respondents’ organizational position 
against the Kanban perceived benefits. The respondents 
were divided into three groups based on their organizational 
position: management (including top-level management, 
middle level management, and first level management), 
support 
(including 
IT/operations/support 
staff, 
and 
sales/marketing 
personnel) 
and 
development. 
Using 
ANOVA, a statistically significant difference was found 
between the groups (p=0.016) with the means of the 
perceived benefits shown in Table IV. The mean for 
perceived benefits was lowest in the Development group 
and highest in the Management group. 
TABLE IV. 
MEANS OF PERCEIVED BENEFITS  WITH RESPECT TO 
ORGANISATIONAL POSITION
Group (n=67) 
Mean of perceived benefits  
Management (n=43) 
2.890 
Support (n=7) 
2.388 
Development (n=17)
2.118
The result indicates that the respondents with the 
organizational position management perceive benefits of 
Kanban usage higher than the ones with the organizational 
positions development and support. Additionally, we 
investigated association between organizational position and 
organizational support. In this way, we aimed to find out 
whether the support received by the respondents’ varied 
among the organizational position groups. Table V shows 
cross tabulation of these variables. Based on the calculation 
of Pearson’s Chi-Square test of independence, the 
differences 
in 
organizational 
support 
between 
the 
organizational position groups were statistically significant 
(χ2=6.019, df=2, p=0.049). The cross tabulation shows, none 
of the respondents with the organizational position 
development reported that they had received moderate or 
strong support. 
TABLE V. 
CROSS TABULATION OF POSITION AND OS 
Organizational 
support (N=67) 
Position 
Management 
Development 
Support 
No support or weak 
support provided 
31 
    17 
5 
Moderate or strong 
support provided 
12 
   0 
2 
Ease of use: The respondents were divided into two 
groups based on the value of the perceived ease of use sum 
variable: respondents with lower level of perceived ease of 
use (sum variable value less than three), and respondents 
with higher level of perceived ease of use (sum variable 
value three or higher). Using Welch’s two sample t-test, a 
statistically significant difference was found between the 
groups (p=0.000) with the means of perceived benefits 
presented in Table VI. The mean of perceived benefits was 
higher in the group with higher perceived ease of use. 
TABLE VI. 
MEANS OF PERCEIVED BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO PEOU
Group (n=67) 
Mean of perceived benefits 
Lower perceived ease of use (n=41) 
2.099 
Higher perceived ease of use (n=26) 
3.497 
Kanban training: The respondents were divided into two 
groups based on their Kanban training, i.e., respondents 
with no training or self-studying, and respondents with 
formal training (including peer mentoring, and education 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

with the duration of at least one day). Using Student's t-test, 
no statistically significant difference was found between the 
groups with respect to their perceived benefits (p=0.854, the 
means for the groups with No Kanban training or self-
studying and with Formal Kanban training as 2.620 and 
2.665, respectively). 
In order to obtain better insight into the dependence of 
the perceived benefits on Kanban competence, we 
investigated Kanban knowledge against benefits. We divided 
respondents into two groups based on their Kanban 
knowledge: respondents with lower knowledge (assessed 
themselves as advanced beginners), and respondents with 
higher knowledge (assessed as competent or experts). Using 
Welch's two sample t-test, a statistically significant 
difference (p=0.000) was found between the groups with the 
means of the perceived benefits. The mean of perceived 
benefits was higher in the group with the higher knowledge. 
TABLE VII. 
MEANS OF PERCEIVED BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO 
KANBAN TRAINING
Group (n=67) 
Mean of perceived benefits 
No training or self-studying 
(n=35) 
2.620 
Formal training  
(n=32) 
2.665 
Further, we investigated the association between Kanban 
training and Kanban knowledge. Pearson’s Chi-Square test 
of independence indicated that there is a statistically 
significant association between the variables (χ2=7.81, df=1, 
p=0.005). Although our analysis does not indicate a 
dependence between Kanban training and perceived 
benefits, there still seems to be a relation of some sort 
between Kanban competence and perceived benefits. As 
expected, respondents’ Kanban knowledge was also 
dependent on their length of experience in Kanban usage as 
a statistically significant association was observed between 
these variables (χ2=24.396, df=2, p=0.000).  
TABLE VIII. 
MEANS OF PERCEIVED BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO 
KANBAN KNOWLEDGE (N=67) 
Group  
Mean of perceived benefits 
Lower knowledge 
(n=40) 
2.170 
Higher knowledge 
(n=27) 
3.341 
Subjective norms: The respondents were divided into 
two groups based on the value of subjective norms sum 
variable: the respondents with lower level of subjective 
norms (sum variable value less than three), and the 
respondents with higher level of subjective norms of use 
(sum variable value three or higher). Using Student's t-test, 
a statistically significant difference was found between the 
groups (p=0.000) with the means of the perceived benefits 
presented in Table IX. The mean of perceived benefits was 
higher in the group with higher subjective norms. 
TABLE IX. 
MEANS OF PERCEIVED BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO 
SUBJECTIVE NORMS (N=67) 
Group  
Mean of perceived benefits 
Lower 
subjective 
norms 
(n=43) 
2.289 
Higher 
subjective 
norms 
(n=24) 
3.274 
Kanban experience: The respondents were divided into 
three groups based on their Kanban experience: respondents 
with short experience (one year or less), moderate 
experience (two years or less), long experience (more than 
two years; in practice, up to five years). Using ANOVA, a 
statistically significant difference (p=0.002) was found 
between the groups with the means of the perceived benefits 
presented in Table X. Perceived benefits tend to increase 
along increased Kanban experience. 
TABLE X. 
MEANS OF PERCEIVED BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO 
KANBAN EXPERIENCE (N=67) 
Group  
Mean of perceived benefits 
Short experience 
(n=27) 
2.35 
Moderate experience 
(n=24) 
2.47 
Long experience 
(n=16) 
3.38 
VI.
DISCUSSION 
A quantitative survey was performed to investigate 
antecedents, which help to achieve optimum Kanban use 
benefits. The study shows that Kanban practitioners 
experienced various benefits which are claimed in the 
existing literature, i.e., enhanced visibility of tasks, limit the 
work in progress at given time, smoothly develop and 
deliver various tasks continuously. For example, the 
visibility of various tasks improves team motivation, 
communication and collaboration.   
The ease of use of any method and tool is important for 
achieving positive effects. Ease of use is an important 
antecedent for achieving optimum benefits of Kanban. The 
ease of use is significant to CASE tool usage [21]. Previous 
studies 
support 
that 
learning 
and 
using 
software 
development methods or tools does not require much of 
mental efforts [6][22][20]. In this study, perceived benefits 
seem to depend on ease of use of Kanban. Therefore, it 
should be considered that how to make Kanban use easier. 
The teams need to be free, in order to select the type of 
Kanban board (physical or virtual) [1][9].   
When choosing and adopting to use any new tool, 
method or process “software professionals can be expected 
to be motivated by others who are important to them and 
whose opinions they value” [2]. Our findings highlight that 
perceived Kanban benefits depend on the level of subjective 
norms, and the level of perceived benefits tends to increase 
along with the increased subjective norms. The existing 
studies support the role of subjective norm in the prediction 
of innovation use among individuals [2]. Kanban experience 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

has positive relationships with the perceived benefits. The 
perceived benefits tend to increase along increased Kanban 
experience. This suggests that with the passage of time, 
practitioners get experience using Kanban and achieve the 
optimum benefits which are claimed in existing literature 
[8][20].  
The organizational support is a highly significant 
antecedent of Kanban perceived benefits. This is also in 
accordance with prior studies of Kanban use, development 
processes 
and 
software 
engineering 
methodologies 
[1][8][11]. Organizational support should be provided 
throughout the departments to make Kanban adoption more 
efficient. Management support is important in the decision 
of adopting a new technique for eliciting user requirements. 
A recent systematic mapping study [1] suggested that 
training and allowing teams to experiment with Kanban in a 
specific context is a type organizational support. Our 
findings regarding the dependence between Kanban training 
and perceived benefits are somehow ambiguous. Specific 
attention is required, when about the way training is carried 
out; in order to provide the personnel with skills that really 
promote their Kanban learning and competence. The 
organizations provide customized training to various groups 
(e.g., development or management) and allow them to 
experiment and adopt Kanban principles based on their own 
requirements [20]. Studies support that organizational 
support (aka. training and consultation), play significant role 
in the use of Agile methodologies including Kanban [4][9]. 
VII.
THREATS TO VALIDITY
We followed the guidelines for threats to validity 
presented by Runeson and Höst [14]. A common threat to 
web surveys is that questions might be misunderstood. To 
handle this threat, we piloted the survey with five 
researchers and four industry experts. After piloting, we 
rephrased a few survey questions to provide more clarity. 
Additionally, we designed survey questions using existing 
literature. Several questions were used in parallel for 
measuring many of the studied variables. As part of internal 
validity, a critical point is need to be taken in consideration 
that, this study is exploratory in nature and we are not 
empirically validating any model. We expect that there 
could be many additional factors, which could affect the 
actual use of Kanban.  
We distributed web survey on LinkedIn, which is prone 
to external validity threat (i.e., the general applicability of 
the results) as the sample size was relatively small (n=67). 
However, the survey was conducted with the global 
population of practitioners, instead of a random sample or a 
convenience sample (those both considered as weaker data 
collection approaches). The respondents were individuals 
from various organizations. Therefore, it is difficult for 
individuals to answer on behalf of the whole organization. 
Further, respondents in diverse positions may have different 
opinions and familiarity about the organizational practices. 
Thus, different views could affect the reliability of the 
results to some degree.  
We purposely chose the “Lean Software Development” 
LinkedIn community as the population, to get an apt data 
sample. As they have an appropriate understanding and 
experience of using Kanban. LinkedIn groups and 
professionals are considered as good source of data 
collection from all seniority levels of researchers and 
practitioners [9]. However, the population of this type may 
cause positive biasness in the results. It is also possible that 
many of the respondents were the ones with high-level 
interest in Kanban and open to try new methods in general.  
VIII.
CONCLUSION 
Kanban 
has 
many 
success 
stories 
in 
software 
engineering. It is a good tool for visualizing work within 
and between teams. It helps team members to avoid 
burdening multitasking by limiting to work in progress. 
Such actions indirectly enable continuous delivery to the 
customers. The goal of this study was to examine the 
antecedents of successful Kanban usage to achieve optimum 
benefits from it.  
Our results exhibit that enabling antecedents (such as 
organizational support, experience, training, ease of use, and 
subjective norm), play a vital role in the context of software 
development innovations’ adoption as well as pertinent in 
realizing Kanban benefits. The findings of our study are 
aligned with earlier studies [8][11][20] which have 
identified the importance of these antecedents with respect 
to acceptance and usage of software development methods. 
The greater the organizational support the more benefits of 
Kanban use are achieved by the practitioners. This is also 
reflected in subjective norm and training, which have 
correlation with achieving optimum benefits of Kanban. It is 
beneficial for companies, when they find their influential 
individuals who have adopted Kanban and/or endorse its use.  
This study highlights the importance of Kanban training; 
however, it is essential to allow Kanban experimentation in 
specific context(s). Once a team adopts Kanban to their 
work, they will achieve its benefits. The study shows that 
management experiences more benefits, therefore the 
assumption is that they have more freedom to adopt Kanban 
based on their circumstances, needs and nature of work. 
Practitioners need to monitor and evaluate realization of the 
antecedents which are reported in this study. Constant 
evaluation and observing will aid to sustain good Kanban 
use and achieve maximum benefits.  
In the future, similar studies are required to investigate 
these antecedents in more detail. Further studies need to be 
carried out to replicate the study, on different teams and 
different organizations, to accept or refute the findings and 
to help in the generalizability. 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

REFERENCES
[1]. M.O. Ahmad, D. Dennehy, K. Conboy, and M. Oivo, 
“Kanban in software engineering: A systematic mapping 
study”. Journal of Systems and Software, 137, 96-113. 2018. 
[2]. L. Vijayasarathy, and D. Turk, “Drivers of agile software 
development use: Dialectic interplay between benefits and 
hindrances”. J. Info. and Software Tech. 54(2),137-148. 2012. 
[3]. VersionOne, The 12th Annual State of Agile Survey Annual 
State of Agile Survey. 2018. 
[4]. F. K. Y. Chan, and J.Y.L. Thong, “Acceptance of agile 
methodologies: a critical review and conceptual framework”. 
Decision Support Systems 46, 803–814. 2009. 
[5]. M. Laanti, O. Salo, and P. Abrahamsson, “Agile methods 
rapidly replacing traditional methods at Nokia: a survey of 
opinions on agile transformation”, Information and Software 
Technology.  53 (3), 276-290. 2011. 
[6]. A. Qumer, & B. Henderson-Sellers, “A framework to support 
the evaluation, adoption and improvement of agile methods in 
practice”. Journal of Systems and Software 1899–1919. 2008. 
[7]. M. Pikkarainen, X. Wang, and K. Conboy, “Agile practices in 
use from an innovation assimilation perspective: a multiple 
case study”. International Conf. on Information Syst. 2007. 
[8]. C. K. Riemenschneider, B. C. Hardgrave, & F.D. Davis, 
“Explaining software developer acceptance of methodologies: 
a comparison of five theoretical models”. IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering. 28 (12), 1135-1145. 2002. 
[9]. M. O. Ahmad, J. Markkula, and M. Oivo, “Insights into the 
perceived benefits of Kanban in software companies: 
Practitioners’ views”.  In Agile Conference 156-168.   
[10]. M. O. Ahmad, J. Markkula, M. Oivo, and P. Kuvaja, ”Usage 
of Kanban in software companies: an empirical study on 
motivation, 
benefits 
and 
challenges”. 
International 
Conference on Software Engineering Advances. 2015. 
[11].M. Senapathi, and A. Srinivasan, “Understanding post-
adoptive agile usage: An exploratory cross-case analysis”. 
Journal of Systems and Software, 85(6), 1255-1268. 2012. 
[12].T. Dybå, T, N.B. Moe, and E.M. Mikkelsen, “An empirical 
investigation on factors affecting software development 
acceptance and utilization of Electronic Process Guides”. 
International Symposium on Software Metrics. 220–231.  
[13].T. Dybå, and T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile 
software development: a systematic review”, Information and 
Software Technology, 50, pp. 833-859. 2004. 
[14].P. Runeson, & M. Höst, “Guidelines for conducting and 
reporting case study research in software engineering”. 
Empirical Softw. Eng. 14(2), 131–164. 2009.  
[15].J. C. Nunnally, “Psychometric Theory”. 2nd ed. New York, 
NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 1978, pp. 229- 246. 1989. 
[16].J .Iivari, and M. Huisman, “The relationship between 
organizational culture & the deployment of systems 
development methodologies”. MIS Quarterly, 35-58. 2007. 
[17].C.J.Kaemar, D.J.McManus, E. W. Duggan, J.E. Hale, & D.P. 
Hale, “Software development methodologies in organizations: 
field investigation of use, acceptance, and application”. J. 
Information Resources Management, 22 (3), 16-39. 2009.  
[18].A. Bandura, “Self efficacy: The exercise of control”. New 
York: Freeman. 1997. 
[19].F. Davis, “Perceived Usefulness, Perceived Ease of Use, and 
User Acceptance of Information Technology”. MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 318-339. 1989. 
[20].B.C. Hardgrave, and R.A. Johnson, “Toward an information 
systems development acceptance model: the case of object-
oriented systems development”. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. 
50(3), 322–336. 2003.  
[21].J. Drobka, D. Noftz, and R. Raghu, “Piloting XP on four 
mission-critical projects”.  IEEE Software, 21 (6). 2004.  
[22].T.L. Roberts, & C.T.Hughes, “Obstacles to implementing a 
system development methodology”. J. Syst. Manage. 47(2), 
36–40. 1996. 
[23].L. Williams, L. Layman, and W. Krebs, “Extreme 
Programming Evaluation Framework for Object-Oriented 
Languages Version 1.4”,  NCSU Technical Report. 2004.  
[24].O. Salo, and P. Abrahamsson, “Agile methods in European 
embedded software development organisations: a survey on 
the actual use and usefulness of Extreme Programming and 
Scrum”. IET software, 2(1), 58-64. 2008.  
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

