A Catalog of Best Practices about Supplier Agreement Management and Agile 
Practices  
 
Elisiane Monteiro Soares, Sandro Ronaldo Bezerra 
Oliveira 
Graduate Program in Computer Science 
Federal University of Pará 
Belém, Pará, Brazil 
e-mail: elismclean@gmail.com, srbo@ufpa.br 
 
Melquizedequi Cabral dos Santos, Alexandre Marcos 
Lins de Vasconcelos 
Informatic Center 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil 
e-mail: {mcs6, amlv}@cin.ufpe.br
Abstract—With the growth of the market related to the 
software development industry, it is necessary to adopt 
practices that can assist this area in an agile way. This can 
enable the management of activities related to software 
acquisition to be defined more effectively, both for those who 
provide the system, and for those who acquire it. This paper 
proposes a catalog of best practices using the agile principles 
that are included in some methodologies. These are designed to 
manage the software acquisition process in the organizational 
context of software development, based on the SAM (Supplier 
Agreement Management) process area of the CMMI-DEV 
(Capability Maturity Model Integration for Development). 
The purpose of this catalog is to support the software 
organizations in the definition and implementation of their 
processes that are based on quality improvement programs. 
Keywords-software engineering; software quality; process 
improvement; acquisition; supplier agreement management; 
agile practices. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The software is of an abstract and intangible nature, 
which means that quality software development is a 
complex and challenging task for software organizations 
[1]. 
Some software development organizations are looking 
for new strategies to address these challenges, such as the 
acquisition of parts of the products or services offered to 
customers. This can improve the quality of the process and 
the end product that will be delivered to them. Another 
strategy involves the use of Software Process Improvement 
programs such as the CMMI-DEV model. This provides 
guidance for the application of best practices of CMMI in a 
development organization, to help organizations improve 
their skills in a systematic way and thus meet their 
deadlines and develop software [2]. 
Another approach adopted by organizations is the Agile 
Methodology, which aims to help teams work rapidly and 
efficiently through short and time-boxed iterations for 
planning product increments, and speed up the development 
procedure. This task may be essential for an organization 
that wishes to stay in the competitive market, when there is 
a need for continuous improvement in software products so 
that they can meet the increasing needs of their customers 
[3]. The adoption of agile practices in software development 
has occurred in response to the need to produce software of 
quality, at great speed that satisfies the user’s needs. The 
software projects often require this speed and productivity 
to meet the demands and challenges of the market. As a 
result, the Information Technology (IT) areas have had to 
invest in quality, monitoring and governance capacity. This 
task is a real problem in the context of software 
development and it is essential for companies to achieve 
quality and agility in their development to meet their 
deadlines and ensure cost / risk control effectiveness [1]. 
Other problems may be related to the following: difficulties 
with the planning team, difficulties in reviewing the product 
requirements based on traditional models, dissatisfaction of 
the business area with software development projects, and a 
low response rate with regards to the development process 
carried out to meet market demands. 
Some experiences with software development might be 
successful in delivery of the product, owing to the use of an 
outsourcing strategy. However, organizations are still 
having problems with the planning, implementation and 
management of the acquisition process of goods or services 
from suppliers. This is due to the fact that it is difficult to 
maintain control of the development process of these 
suppliers. There are also problems in managing the quality 
of the goods and services acquired, which may be caused by   
poor planning, and thus lead to a delay in delivery and 
unplanned costs [4]. 
In another study [11] we performed a Systematic 
Literature Mapping (SLM) [5]; this was a ‘secondary’ study 
based on a review of the evidence contained in primary 
studies and its purpose was to identify, analyze, interpret 
and report all the key primary research findings in the study 
area. 
The justification of this study lies in the fact that the 
management of the Acquisition Process is of great 
importance to software development organizations and its 
management, as well as to software maturity models [6]. 
However, these models specify processes that require more 
time for implementation, when what is needed to meet the 
market demands is an acquisition process that is not carried 
out in a bureaucratic and systematic way, but is flexible, 
agile and with quality. 
The main goal of this work is to develop and evaluate a 
Catalog of Best Practices based on the concepts of an agile 
methodology for managing the software acquisition process 
in the context of software development organizations. This 
catalog must comply with the guidelines set out by the 
SAM process area of CMMI-DEV, and are concerned with 
318
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

agile methodologies. It aims to provide a solution to support 
organizations that can contribute to agility, make cost 
reductions and control the time needed to implement the 
acquisition process. 
In addition to this introductory section, this paper is 
structured in the following way: in Section 2 there will be a 
review of related works and this will outline the background 
of this work, Section 3 will describe the catalog of best 
practices produced by SAM and the agile practices, Section 
4 shows the expected results, and Section 5 concludes the 
work with some final considerations. 
II. RELATED WORKS AND BACKGROUND 
This section provides an overview of the concepts of the 
SAM process area in CMMI-DEV and an overview of 
systematic literature mapping performed in another work, 
and examines some related works. 
A. Supplier Agreement Management Process Area in 
CMMI-DEV 
In this work, the CMMI-DEV is the focal point of the 
study, since it has a process area that can support the SAM 
in the acquisition of goods and services in development 
projects. The CMMI for Development has 22 process areas 
that have a set of best practices and these address the 
question of carrying out activities for goods and services 
development, using practices that cover the lifecycle of the 
products from their conception to their delivery and 
maintenance [2], (as shown in Table I). It also a) helps to 
integrate organizational functions that have traditionally 
been separated, b) sets out process improvement goals, c) 
establishes a set of priorities to provide guidance for 
processes quality, and d) provides a benchmark for the 
evaluation of current processes [2]. 
TABLE I.  
CMMI PROCESS MATURITY LEVELS. 
Level 
Categories 
Project 
Management 
Process 
Management 
Engineering 
Support 
5 
 
Organizational 
Performance 
Management 
 
Casual Analysis and 
Resolution. 
4 
Quantitative 
Project 
Management. 
Organizational 
Process 
Performance 
 
 
3 
Integrated 
Project 
Management, 
Risks 
Management. 
Organizational 
Process 
Definition, 
Organizational 
Process Focus, 
Organizational 
Training 
Requirements 
Development, 
Technical 
Solution, 
Product 
Integration, 
Verification, 
Validation. 
Decision 
Analysis 
and Resolution. 
2 
Requirements 
Management, 
Project 
Planning, 
Project 
Monitoring and 
Control, 
Supplier 
Agreement 
Management. 
 
 
Configuration 
Management, 
Process and Product 
Quality Assurance, 
Measurements 
and 
Analysis. 
1 
Process ad hoc. 
The purpose of the SAM process area is to manage the 
acquisition of goods and services from suppliers [2]. The 
scope of the SAM process area covers the acquisition of 
products, services and goods and services components that 
can be delivered to the customer or included in a product or 
service system [2]. This area involves the following specific 
practices: determining the type of acquisition, selecting 
suppliers, drafting supplier agreements, fulfilling the 
supplier agreement, accepting the acquired products, and 
ensuring the delivery of the goods. 
B. An Overview of a Systematic Literature Mapping 
In another study [11], a SLM was performed through a 
research partnership between students and lecturers at the 
Federal University of Pará and University of Pernambuco 
The aim of this was to identify key data on how the 
software acquisition process could be combined with agile 
methodologies. This stage showed that there are gaps in this 
area since the SAM process area was carried out by means 
of agile practices in the software development environment, 
and also showed the significance of the study undertaken in 
this paper. 
The selection of the studies followed several phases and 
the work was carried out by two or more researchers to 
reduce the risk of bias in the selection [5]. The complete 
research protocol is available in [11]. This research was 
performed in four phases; it was conducted by two 
researchers and three reviewers. 
Phase 1 consisted of a) an automatic search to access the 
sources and execute a string to locate the relevant studies in 
accordance with the criteria defined in the protocol, and b) a 
manual search to access the conference and download all 
the studies related to the research topic. 
In Phase 2, each study selected in the previous phase 
was analyzed by two researchers, based on the analysis of 
the title and abstract. Any duplicate studies were discarded 
together with those that were clearly irrelevant to the search 
according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. 
In Phase 3, list of Phase 2 was consolidated and all these 
studies were evaluated by two researchers who applied the 
inclusion and exclusion criteria, through a complete 
reading. If there were conflicts of opinion between the 
researchers, a meeting was held to reach a consensus, and if 
the disagreement persisted, the matter was solved by the 
reviewer. 
On the basis of the consolidated list of Phase 3, a  
quality assessment was conducted in Phase 4 together with 
a  data extraction of all the studies from a complete reading 
of the studies. The studies were analyzed by two researchers 
to evaluate the quality, through the application of quality 
criteria. The data extraction was performed by two 
researchers and the results were documented in a form, and 
the extraction review was conducted by the reviewers. 
Fig. 1 summarizes the phases and the number of 
identified studies from each SLM phase. Before the 
selection, a meeting was held to clarify the concepts and 
discussions about the inclusion and exclusion criteria, so 
that the concepts were understood by all the participants. 
319
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Figure 1. The study selection process 
The findings suggest that there is a lack of research on 
the subject, due to the fact that no relevant data have been 
disclosed about how the SAM process area of CMMI-DEV 
can be combined with agile methodologies. In view of this, 
this result confirms that there is a gap in knowledge about 
the investigated area, which confirms the relevance, 
feasibility and innovativeness of this research study. 
C. Related Works 
The related works to this research were considered to be 
relevant if they addressed the following issues: (1) the need 
to support the systematic implementation of maturity 
models, (2) the study of software acquisition, (3) the use of 
agile 
methodologies 
in 
the 
context 
of 
software 
development, (4) the use of agile methodologies in the 
context of software process improvement. Some studies 
relating to the topics mentioned are described below. 
 Furtado’s research study [7] supports the systematic 
implementation of maturity models, and carried out a task 
based on process improvement models and standards. This 
work defined a proposal for the acquisition process by 
means of a process framework and a tool to support the 
implementation and execution of the process for acquiring 
software and related services. On the basis of this 
framework, this paper confirmed the compatibility of the 
activities that compose it, with regard to the SAM process 
area of CMMI-DEV. Thus, it was able to determine which 
of its activities can be mapped to the agile practices, so as to 
define the catalog of best practices proposed in this paper. 
With regards to the research studies on software 
acquisition, an approach was adopted to define the 
processes required for the acquisition. These included 
different contexts, and defined a software acquisition 
process to enable the reuse of process components in the 
definition and implementation of acquisition processes, and 
support the organizations that implement the software 
acquisition more efficiently. However, this work did not 
include the agile concepts in its approach [8]. 
A related work about the use of agile methodologies in 
software development, showed some of the advantages of 
agile methodologies of software compared with traditional 
methods. This study discussed the main features and 
practices of agile methodologies, and made comparisons 
with traditional methodologies, by emphasizing that agile 
methodologies are based on people rather than processes 
and planning [9]. However, it was restricted to show the 
advantages and disadvantages of eXtreme Programming 
(XP) and Scrum, without focusing on the acquisition 
procedure. 
Another study [10] analyzed quantitative and qualitative 
data collected from the literature and two Brazilian 
organizations that employed the XP agile methodology. The 
main contribution of this work is that it identified features 
from the Agile and CMMI association and the implications 
of this application. 
As a result, this methodology gave an account of fusion 
that was incomplete, since it was found that there are only a 
few quantitative reports. These were insufficient either to 
provide a definitive opinion about this “incomplete” fusion 
or to define in which cases the fusion would generate better 
results. It should be noted that the research was confined to 
dealing with an agile methodology - XP. 
From the analysis of the works above, it is clear that the 
acquisiton process implemented in an agile way was not 
within the scope of these projects. As a differential, this 
study will provide an implementation of the main agile 
approaches with regard to the framework [7] that are 
compatible with the SAM process area of CMMI-DEV, and 
provide the necessary basis for setting up the Catalog of 
Best Practices by employing agile methodologies to support 
the acquisition process in the context of software 
development organizations. 
III.THE CATALOG OF BEST PRACTICES FOR SAM AND AGILE 
PRACTICES 
The first mapping was carried out within the framework 
presented in [7], which included the SAM practices, and the 
second mapping of activities resulted from the first one that 
had   agile methodologies (XP, Scrum and Feature Driven 
Development (FDD)). This provided evidence that the 
application of agile practices can be used in the context of a 
software acquistion procedure. This document was prepared 
as follows: all the activities, which are in the framework 
phases, were related to the SAM practices that resulted from 
each activity and confirmed the level of agile practice that 
was needed to assist in the implementation of the procedure. 
On the basis of the obtained results from the previous 
mapping, a catalog of practices was recommended, which 
included the suggestions for agile practices that can be 
implemented in activities performed in a traditional 
software development organization. When evaluating the 
catalog, the experts in the area of Software Quality used a 
peer review technique to determine the effectiveness of the 
agile practices with regards to the proposed acquisition 
procedure. 
A. The Agile SAM Workflow 
The activities included in the catalog were identified by 
aligning the framework activies of the software and related 
service acquisition processes [7] with the SAM process area 
of CMMI-DEV [2]. In this way the research was able to 
identify the best practices defined for the software 
acquisition process that can support organizations to form 
acquisition agreements based on agile practices. 
The catalog comprises of 4 activities: (1) Preparing the 
320
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Acquisition, (2) Selecting the Supplier, (3) Monitoring 
Acquisition, and (4) Accepting the Acquired Product. The 
macro workflow can be seen in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. The Agile SAM Macro Workflow 
In the first activity, Preparing the Acquisition, the 
activities about acquisition planning are carried out and 
include the following: establishing the needs and desired 
outcomes, setting out the project stakeholders, defining and 
prioritizing the stakeholders’ requirements, reviewing the 
requirements, conducting a technical feasibility analysis, 
developing an acquisition strategy, defining and agreeing on 
the acquisition schedule, defining the criteria for the product 
acceptance, setting out the criteria for supplier selection, 
preparing and approving the acquistion plan, and identifing 
the potential suppliers. 
The aim of the second activity, Selecting the Supplier, is 
to identify and select the supplier that meets the 
expectations of the acquisition. This consists of the 
following 7 activities: receiving the proposals, giving an 
operational opinion, providing a technical opinion, selecting 
the supplier, preparing and negotiating an agreement, 
ensuring the agreement terms are fully understood, and 
drawing up the agreement. 
During the third activity, Monitoring Acquisition, the 
control and monitoring of the acquisition are performed. 
This includes the following activities: reviewing the 
agreement terms, agreeing to the changes, tracking issues, 
and monitoring the supplier processes. In this activity the 
question of whether the product being developed is 
satisfactory or not is determined. If it is unsatisfactory, there 
are two alternatives for the customer that have to be 
evaluated: 
implementing 
the 
necessary 
changes 
or 
terminating the agreement; this finalizes the acquisition 
process. But if the product is satisfactory the activity is 
carried out. 
In the fourth activity, Accepting the Acquired Product, it 
is determined if the product can be accepted by the 
customer. The following activies are carried out: evaluating 
the product delivered by the acquisition, complying with the 
agreement, and accepting the product. During this activity, 
it is still necessary to confirm if the product will be 
accepted, because when necessary, it is susceptible to 
change. However, if no inconsistencies are found, the 
acquisition is completed together with the acceptance of the 
product. 
B. The Catalog of Agile Best Practices 
The catalog of agile best practices was developed on the 
basis of the results obtained by mapping the 4 activities 
identified and the agile practices that can be used in these 
activities. This was achieved by determining if the use of 
the agile practices was compatible with all the activities 
present in the macro workflow, and a total of 25 activities 
were required for the acquisition procedures. Some of the 
agile practices that may be used in each activity of the 
catalog are outlined in the subsection below. 
1) Activity 1: Preparing the Acquisition 
In this activity eleven tasks have been described for the 
implementation of the guidelines for the agile practices. 
Before the ‘Establishment of the Needs and Intended 
Results’ task can be carried out, a meeting must be held to 
discuss the needs and desired outcomes from the 
acquisition, and to compile a Product Backlog with the list 
of required features. At this meeting, questions will be 
raised about the reasons for the acquisition and what 
requirements and restrictions there are of the product that 
will be purchased. By employing the Scrum agile 
methodology, the Product Backlog will be prepared and this 
contains the specifications of the items needed for the 
product, as well as a description of them. This backlog will 
be displayed in CANVAS for the benefit of the team 
involved. 
In ‘Setting out the Project for the Stakeholders’, a 
meeting will be to define the Project to the stakeholders. 
The following items will be determined to identify the 
stakeholder, during the meeting: Who are the people that 
can affect the project? What is the responsibility of the 
project? How can each stakeholder help (positive factor) 
and adversely affect (negative factor) the acquisition? What 
are the degrees of influence of each stakeholder? This  
information is required to fill the Stakeholders Definition 
CANVAS. 
In the ‘Defining and Prioritizing the Stakeholder 
Requirements’ task, a meeting should be held to define the 
order of priority of the items that form the Product Backlog, 
which is compiled during  the ‘Establishment of the Needs 
and Intended Results’ task. In this case, the following 
information will be added to the Backlog: a column called 
“Priority Value”, the aim of which aims is identify the 
priority according to the degree of its importance to the 
project in the range of 1 to 10. These values can be 
classified as follows, 1-3 Low Priority, 4-6 Average Priority 
and 7-10 High Priority. There is another column called 
“Priority Level” that shows the degree of priority of each 
item. This forms the backlog that can be defined, since it is 
represented in an incremental way, “1” being the most 
representative item (High Priority) within a project. In this 
way, it is possible to identify the features that require most  
attention. 
In ‘Revising the Requirements’, after the requirements 
for the acquisition have been defined, an attempt should be 
made to check if all the items listed in the Backlog are in 
accordance with the stakeholders needs and establish if 
321
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

there are any inconsistencies and conflicts that affect the 
cost-effectiveness of each item. This activity is based on the 
Scrum agile practice called Sprint Review, which should be 
carried out in each cycle by the supplier. It is a means of 
determining if the purchaser’s needs are actually being met 
and what changes may be required when necessary. The 
information will be displayed in CANVAS by Checklist. 
The details of each Backlog item must be put on a card, 
which will consist of a single identification (ID), item name 
and its description. The ID is important because it is used 
during the review of each item, since if any inconsistency is 
found, this identification will be used in an “inconsistency” 
card representing the revised item, the description of the 
problem identified and the change required to correct the 
problem. If no problem is identified in the Backlog item, it 
will be marked as Checked (√). 
In ‘Performing the Technical Feasibility Analysis’, a 
meeting should be held to check the technical feasibility and 
preparation of CANVAS. Thus, the following questions 
must be checked:  
• 
Is the solution or the proposed technology practical? 
• 
Does it already have the necessary technology? 
• 
Does it already have the necessary technical 
knowledge? 
• 
Is the schedule reasonable? 
These questions will be analyzed in the light of the 
available resources, existing restrictions for the project and 
the quality and the time required for the Project. Feedback 
must be given for each question. 
In the ‘Developing a Procurement Strategy’ task, a 
meeting will be held to develop an acquisition strategy 
based on the results obtained in ‘Performing the Technical 
Feasibility Analysis’ task. This is because these results 
provide the necessary support for planning a consistent 
strategy with the acquisition needs, that takes account of the 
viable alternatives, risk analysis, costs and benefits of each 
option. The results of this task will be displayed in 
CANVAS, which specifies the acquisition strategy that will 
be adopted. 
In the ‘Defining the Acquisition Schedule’ task, the 
reviewed points of the acquisition will be defined and 
monitored. This meeting should define the day of the month 
in which these revisions will be made. The times of the 
daily and / or weekly meetings will also be set, since they 
are important for checking the activities and the progress 
made in the proposed acquisition, in all its phases. These 
dates should be defined and agreed among the stakeholders. 
Thus, a schedule with the acquisition activities should be 
generated, which will be displayed together with the 
specifications 
for 
the 
activities in 
Kanban 
(Work 
CANVAS), which is responsible for implementing the 
scheme and setting dates for its achievement. Each 
completed activity is given a Checked (√) to show that it 
has been its implemented. 
In ‘Defining the Accepted Criteria for the Purchased 
Product’, a meeting will be held to examine these criteria. 
This involves drawing up a list of project tasks and work 
products that must be delivered at the end of this project. 
These should include a ‘Checklist for Product Acceptance’ 
with the specifications required for the product that need to 
be met. 
In ‘Defining the Supplier Selection Criteria’, a planned 
meeting should be held to choose the criteria that will be 
used for the supplier selection process. This meeting will 
comprise those responsible for acquisition management, and 
will discuss the relevant criteria to be considered when 
choosing a supplier, such as budgeting, preparing a 
schedule for product development, the necessary knowledge 
for carrying out the project and experience in previous 
projects. A Supplier Selection Checklist should be 
generated. 
The ‘Preparation and Approval of  the Acquisition Plan’ 
task, should make use of some of the work products 
generated in other tasks, such as the schedule, the Supplier 
Selection Checklist, and the Product Acceptance Checklist. 
A list of the products that need to be supplied should also be 
prepared, as well as a definition of the stakeholders’ 
responsibilities for the acquisition procedure. On the basis 
of this information, the plan will be prepared that specifies 
the best way to proceed with the acquisition. This plan will 
be sent to the Work CANVAS so that the stakeholders are 
informed. 
In the ‘Identifying the Potential Suppliers’ task, a survey 
will be initially made conducted of the information about 
the suppliers, such as the criteria listed in the Work 
CANVAS, which makes it easy for stakeholders to view the 
list of suppliers that have been analyzed in this activity. 
Thus, the most suitable suppliers for the project will be 
identified. Each feature will have an identification, and this 
ID will be used as a reference-point to show which 
suppliers that meet each of these requirements. In the last 
column the suppliers that come closest to meeting the 
required criteria will be defined, and thus become the 
potential suppliers. 
2) Activity 2: Selecting the Supplier 
In this activity, seven tasks have been described below, 
together with the implementation guidelines based on agile 
principles and practices. 
In ‘Receiving Proposals’, the suppliers proposals will be 
forwarded to the person responsible for the acquisition 
project, who  will evaluate its contents, on the basis of the 
criteria for the potential suppliers. These include the 
specifications of the “unserved criteria”, providing the 
suppliers with better proposals and displaying them in the 
Work CANVAS the Suppliers Proposals List. 
In the ‘Issuing the Operational Opinion’ task, a meeting 
will be held that includes the acquisition management team. 
The purpose of this is to conduct an analysis of the proposal 
by comparing the different features of the suppliers and to 
establish if its proposed solution will actually work. The 
feedback will be provided by the PIECES Operational 
Assessment Framework, i.e. it will take account of 
Performance, Information, Economy, Control, Efficiency 
and Services. These are checked as follows:  
• 
Performance: Does the current operation mode 
provide suitable throughput and response time? 
322
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

• 
Information: Does the current operation mode 
provide the end user and managers with accurate, 
useful, relevant and timely information? 
• 
Economy: Does the current operation mode offer  
information services that are cost effective for the 
organization? 
• 
Control: Does the current operation mode provide 
efficient control services to prevent fraud and to 
ensure the accuracy and security of the data and 
information? 
• 
Efficiency: Does the current operation mode make 
maximum use of available resources? and 
• 
Services: Does the current operation mode provide 
a reliable service? Is it flexible and extensible? 
The ‘Issuing Technical Feedback’ task will take place 
after the previous task and will involve an analysis of 
questions related to supplier features with regard to the 
availability of technical resources and the necessary 
professionals to implement the proposal. 
The ‘Selecting Supplier’ task will be carried out by the 
team responsible for the product acquisition and is 
concerned with discussing the features of the suppliers that 
have already been identified and revealed in the operational 
and technical feedback. On the basis of this information, the 
team selects the most advantageous proposal that meets the 
specifications of the required product. A Supplier Analysis 
and Selection CANVAS will evaluate proposals, together 
with the specification of the selected supplier and the 
rationale for selecting or not selecting each supplier. After 
this, a notification about the acceptance of the selected 
proposal will be made. 
In ‘Preparing and Negotiating a Agreement’, a meeting 
will be be arranged for those responsible for the acquisition 
management and the supplier. This task involves holding a 
discussion about the agreement terms, expectations and 
obligations of those involved (the purchaser and supplier), 
and addressing questions about: costs, the schedule, items to 
be reviewed and the monitoring to be performed, etc. A list 
should be drawn up of the main terms to be agreed among 
those involved . 
In the ‘Ensuring the Agreement Terms are Fully 
Understood’ task, all the agreement terms will be checked. 
This is to ensure, that they are understood by all those 
involved in the acquisition. If there is any question or 
suggestion about the agreement items, these will be 
discussed and analyzed, and any necessary measures taken 
for entry, modification or deletion of the term. At the end of 
the meeting everyone should be aware of what is expected 
to be agreed. A checklist of items that will be carried out 
should be prepared, as well as the agreement and the 
justification for the inclusion or not of the agreement items. 
In the ‘Issuing the Agreement’ task, which is undertaken 
on the completion of the previous task, the provisions that 
will form the agreement will have been defined and agreed.  
Thus, the agreement will be issued at a meeting that will be 
attended by the acquirer and the supplier who are selected 
as the people responsible for issuing and signing the 
agreement. 
3) Activity 3: Monitoring Acquisition 
In this activity four tasks have been described below, 
together with the implementation guidelines based on the 
agile principles and practices. 
The ‘Reviewing the Agreement Terms’ task will be 
carried out by those responsible for acquisition management 
and the suppliers and involves checking all the items 
contained in the Agreement. An analysis will be conducted 
to determine which are relevant and if there any 
inconsistencies, and decisions will be made about the 
necessary changes. Thus, a CANVAS should include the 
list of agreement terms with a checklist of possible changes, 
the proper justification for the amendment of items and / or 
the inclusion of agreement terms. 
The ‘Agreeing the Changes’ task requires a meeting that 
will be attended by the acquisition management team and 
the supplier for analysis of the changes identified in the 
previous task. Thus, a changed card is required and the 
inclusion of the change information in the agreement must 
duly agree among those involved. 
The ‘Tracking the Problems’, will be attended by the 
acquisition management team and involves discussing the 
problems found and the proposed solutions for each 
situation. Thus, a problem tracking CANVAS should be 
generated, which will have TO DO, DOING and DONE 
status. This CANVAS consists of the following: the project 
activities and the identification of problems found in each of 
these activities, a proposed solution, the names of those 
responsible for each solution, and the starting date and 
completion date of the corrections made. 
In the ‘Monitoring the Supplier Process’ task, a meeting 
will be held that will be attended by the acquisition 
management team and the supplier. The aim of this is to 
determine what processes are used by the supplier, to check 
whether the supplier is able to meet expectations of the 
acquirer or if it is carrying out its activities in accordance 
with the agreement. Thus, a Checklist about the analysis of 
processes performed by the supplier should be generated, 
based on criteria for monitoring the execution of processes. 
4) Activity 4:Accepting the Acquired Product 
In this activity three tasks are described below, together 
with the implementation guidelines using the agile 
principles and practices. 
The ‘Evaluating the Product Delivered’ task involves 
evaluating the product by taking account of the product 
acceptance criteria. This will be carried out by the 
acquisition team and the supplier, so that the supplier is 
provided with knowledge of any inconsistencies or 
problems found in the product. Thus, a CANVAS with a 
checklist of acceptance criteria for a product (that includes 
functional and non-functional requirements), is given the 
status of “Attended” or “Not Attended”, together with a) the 
justification for this status, b) recommendations for the 
correction of the problems found, and c) a desription of the 
situation of each checked item. 
The ‘Maintaining the Agreement Compliance’ task 
involves 
holding 
a 
meeting 
with 
the 
acquisition 
323
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

management team and the supplier who conduct a detailed 
analysis of attendance of each item included in the 
agreement. Thus, a CANVAS with the checklist of 
attendance with the agreement items should be generated. 
In ‘Accepting the Product Delivered’, which takes place 
after the product evaluation and the verification of the 
attendance with the agreement, a meeting is held to 
formalize the product acceptance and the signing of the 
Acceptance Agreement by the stakeholders takes place. 
This agreement must include at least the following 
information: Name of the Project, Goals of the Acceptance 
Agreement, Description of the items being delivered, 
Identification of the stakeholdersthat sign the agreement 
(acquirer and supplier), and Signature Date. 
C. The Evaluation of Catalog 
The evaluation of this work was initially made to check 
if the compatibility of the activities that form the acquisition 
process framework of software and related services [7] with 
regard to the practices included in the SAM process area of 
CMMI-DEV [2]. For this reason, for an expert in Software 
Quality and Process Improvement areas was sent a 
questionare to obtain feedback about its evaluation and 
obtain opinions and suggestions for its improvement. 
After this, the evaluation was conducted of the mapping 
of agile practices that are compatible with the framework 
activities included in theSAM process area of CMMI-DEV. 
This was sent to an expert to give feedback about its 
validity and obtain some opinions about it. 
Finally, the Catalog of Best Practices also had its 
validity confirmed through a peer review carried out by an 
expert. An attempt will also be made to validate its 
application in the definition of a process for a software 
organization, which will involve an evaluation of the 
efficiency and effectiveness of this catalog to support this 
activity and bring about an improvement in the 
organizational process. 
IV. EXPECTED RESULTS 
The research product is a catalog of best practices about 
SAM with agile activities that can be used to implement 
each activity present in the macro workflow. This catalog 
was examined by an expert in the area of software quality, 
and will then be submitted to a critical analysis of its 
validity, usability, compatibility with models and standards, 
and feasibility for use in an organizational environment. 
In this way the validity of its agile activities can be 
confirmed and with the aid of the catalog, its evaluation will 
enable improvements to be made to any failings detected by 
the peer review of an expert. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This work has shown the importance of using processes 
for improvement in an organizational environment, 
especially with regard to the software acquisition process. 
Its objective is to know and apply the findings of the 
literature in the area of software development. 
To achieve this goal, we conducted in another work [11] 
a SLM in the preliminary studies of the research area of this 
paper, to determine what gaps there are and their degree of 
importance. After this phase the mapping of an acquisition 
process framework with agile practices was performed, to 
provide the necessary basis for preparing the catalog of best 
practices using agile methodologies for the management of 
the software acquisition process. 
In future work in this research area an experiment 
should be carried out where the catalog can be used in a 
study case. This should be conducted in a software 
development organization so that comparisons can be made 
with regard to the situation of an organization before and 
after the implementation of the practices included in the 
catalog. Thus, we intend to evaluate this together with the 
members of the organization to ensure that the necessary 
improvements in the catalog are made to allow it to be 
adaptated to real situations faced by the organization. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Dean of Research 
and Postgraduate Studies at the Federal University of Pará 
(PROPESP/UFPA) by the Qualified Publication Support 
Program (PAPQ) for the financial support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Sommerville, “Software Engineering”, 9. ed. São Paulo: Pearson 
Prentice Hall, 2011. 
[2] SEI – Software Engineering Institute, “CMMI for Development – V 
1.3”, 2010, Available: http://www.sei.cmu.edu/reports/10tr033.pdf, 
retrieved: July, 2016. 
[3] J. F. Abrantes, “Experimental studies on mobility in the Software 
Development and its Use in Testing Process”, Tese de D.Sc., 
COPPE/UFRJ, Brazil, 2012. 
[4] J. A. Calvo-Manzano, T. San Feliu, and A. Pursche, “The forgotten 
practices of subcontracting”, In Information Systems and Technologies 
(CISTI), Brazil, pp. 1-4, 2010. 
[5] B. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing 
Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering”, Keele 
University and Durham University Joint Report, EBSE 2007-001, 
2007. 
[6] SOFTEX – Associação para Promoção da Excelência do Software 
Brasileiro, “MPS.BR - Acquisition Guide”, 2013, Available: 
http://www.softex.br/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/MPS.BR_Guia_de_ 
Aquisicao_2013.pdf, retrieved: July, 2016. 
[7] J. C. C. Furtado, “Spider-ACQ: An Approach to the systematization of 
Products and Services Acquisition Process Based Quality Multi-
models”, Masters Dissertation, PPGCC/UFPA, 2011. 
[8] E. D. Nunes, “Definition of Software Acquisition Processes for 
Reuse”, Masters Dissertation, COPPE/UFRJ, Brazil, 2011. 
[9] M. S. Soares, “Agile Methodologies Extreme Programming and Scrum 
for Software Development”, Revista Eletrônica de Sistemas de 
Informação. vol. 3, p. 8-13, 2004. 
[10] C. Santana, C. Gusmão, L.Soares, C. Pinheiro, T. Maciel, A. 
Vasconcelos, and A. Rouiller, “Agile Software Development and 
CMMI: What We Do Not Know about Dancing with Elephants”, 
Conference: Agile Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme 
Programming, 10th International Conference, XP 2009, Pula, Sardinia, 
Italy, pp. 124-129,2009. 
[11] M. C. Santos, E. M. Soares, S. R. B. Oliveira, and A. M. L 
Vasconcelos, “A Systematic Mapping about SAM and Agile 
Practices”, 
Available: 
https://www.dropbox.com/s/x0xh8i1653nnqkp/protocolo1.docx?dl=0, 
retrieved: July, 2016. 
324
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

