Economic Impact of Cloud Computing in the Health System: A Systematic Mapping
 Jonathan Santos¹ and Felipe Ferraz¹ ²  
¹CESAR School, ²CESAR - Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems  
Recife, Brazil 
{jcas,fsf}@cesar.school, fsf@cesar.org.br 
Abstract- Cloud computing has become one of the most widely 
used technologies today, bringing positive impacts to its 
adopters and changing the way many areas work, impacting 
their solutions in the market. The healthcare system can enjoy 
the same benefits brought by the adoption of this technology, 
improving its infrastructure, reducing its costs tremendously 
and speeding up processes. With that in mind, what are the 
economic impacts of adopting cloud computing on healthcare 
environments? This paper conducts a systematic mapping in 
order to depict the economic and other impacts of cloud 
computing in the healthcare system and solutions, analyzing 
aspects that go beyond the technological issues. 
Keywords - Cloud computing; economic impacts; health; 
challenges. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing is one of the most impactful 
technologies of recent times. Not surprisingly, large 
companies are embracing this infrastructure paradigm with 
significant economic gains. Highly discussed technologies 
such as blockchain, conversational platforms, and artificial 
intelligence have in common the use or need for cloud 
computing [1]. 
According to the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), Cloud computing is a model for 
enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access 
to a shared pool of configurable computing resources that 
can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal 
management 
effort 
or 
service 
provider 
interaction. 
Comparing with the traditional Information Technology (IT) 
model, cloud computing presents a fundamental change in 
the way IT services are developed, deployed, maintained 
and paid for. 
As global population increases, life expectancy rises, and 
living standards improve, causes of death across the world 
are changing [2]. Heart disease and cancer are the leading 
causes of death. The health system, like any other, needs 
continuous and systematic innovation to deliver high 
quality, safe and cost-effective services. A well-adopted 
cloud gives a lot of advantages to the organization such as 
easy and pervasive access to data and applications, increases 
cost-effectiveness [3]. 
The purpose of this article is to study the economic 
impacts of the use of cloud computing in the health area. 
This work is organized as follows: first, in Section 2, basic 
concepts related to cloud computing and the methodology 
used will be presented together with the objectives of the 
study. Then, in Section 3 the methods, processes, and 
protocols applied in the elaboration of systematic mapping 
will be described. Finally, in Section 4, we will present the 
results obtained, conclusions and plans for future work. 
II. APPLIED PROTOCOL 
Based on the guidelines for developing systematic 
software engineering reviews in software engineering 
described by Kitchenham [4], a new methodology for 
revision was created. The purpose of this review is to 
identify primary studies that focus on the use and benefits of 
cloud computing adoption based on the following question:  

What is the economic impact on cloud computing 
adoption in health/healthcare environments? 
This main question intends to focus not only on the 
technological impacts of using cloud computing, but also to 
conduct research on related, but not limited, topics such as 
economics, time-saving, improved treatment, and other non-
technological factors. However, it is expected that, during 
the analysis features, such as security, privacy, complexity, 
and others, appear as factors that may limit the adoption and 
use of cloud computing.
  From this central question, secondary questions were 
created to help in understanding and comprehension of the 
problem: 
1.
What areas of health can benefit from using Cloud 
Computing?  
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

2.
What is the economic impact of Cloud Computing 
on disease control and treatment? 
3.
What are the main challenges and opportunities for 
using cloud computing in health environments?
A. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria 
For this review, we considered studies that depict 
information and data related to cloud computing adoption, 
usage, positive and negative impacts. This review limited 
the examined studies to the ones published starting from 
year 2015.
    Were also excluded: 

Studies whose focus was only on technical aspects; 

Studies not published in the English language; 

Studies that were unavailable online; 

Studies not based on research and that are not full 
papers; 

Call for works, prefaces, conference annals, 
handouts, summaries, panels, interviews, and news reports. 
B. Search Strategies 
The databases considered in the study is on the list below:

ACM Digital Library; 

IEEE Xplore; 

Science Direct; 
Combinations of terms were created to guarantee that 
relevant information would not be excluded when querying 
different search engines and databases. As a result, four 
search strings were created: 
1.
(Cloud Computing) AND (Economic OR Economy 
OR Business OR Benefits) AND (Health); 
2.
2. (Cloud Computing) AND (Adoption OR 
Migration) AND (Health); 
3.
(Cloud 
Computing) 
AND 
(Challenges 
OR 
Opportunities) AND (Health); 
In the process of extracting information from the databases, 
the search strings were used separately on each database. 
The searches were performed restricting the years between 
2015 and 2019. The results of each search were grouped 
together according to the database and were, later, examined 
closer 
in 
order 
to 
identify 
duplicity. 
C. Studies Selection Process 
This section describes the selection process from the 
beginning: from an initial search using the Search Strategies 
described below to the identification of primary studies. In 
the first step, the studies that were obtained from the 
databases were gathered and added to a management 
citation tool, the authors’ choose Mendeley. Next, once the 
initial studies were selected, the titles of all works selected 
were analyzed to determine its relevance in this systematic 
review. In this stage, an initial filter is conducted removing 
works that did not present relevant topics for this research.  
When the works’ titles were vague or unclear, they were put 
aside to be analyzed in the next step. Since the main 
intention was to analyze aspects not specifically related to 
technology, works that mentioned security or big data, and 
others, were selected for further analysis during the abstract 
reading. At the end of this stage, 5138 citations were 
excluded, thus remaining 142 items for further analysis.
In the third step, all abstracts of the Works found in the 
previous one were assessed. Once more, many were 
eliminated from the study due to them not conforming to the 
scope of cloud computing and topics not related only to 
technologies. One of the difficulties found in this step was 
related to the quality of the abstract, a portion of the abstract 
was not clear about the main topic addressed by the work. 
When that happened, the authors did a deeper analysis 
reading introduction and conclusion looking for topics and 
sentences related to this research. Because of this phase, 103 
studies were excluded, thus remaining 39 to be analyzed 
more closely. Table 1 presents the amount of studies filtered 
in each step
of the selection process. 
TABLE I. AMOUNT OF STUDIES FILTERED IN THE SELECTION 
PROCESS 
   For qualitative and quantitative assessment, seven 
questions were used to assist in quality assessment. The 
questions are: 
1.
Does the study examine impacts and/or economic 
aspects related to cloud computing adoption in healthy 
environments?
2.
Does the study present aspects related to solutions 
that use cloud computing? 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

3.
Does the study present aspects related to challenges 
or opportunities in health? 
4.
Is the study based on research - not merely on 
specialist’s opinions? 
5.
Is the context of the study adequately described? 
6.
Were the research results adequately explained and 
described? 
7.
Does the study contribute to the research of cloud 
and health in any way? 
The research process that was developed resulted in 39 
primary studies. They were written by 119 institution-
related authors and were published between 2015 and 2019. 
As described in the previous Section, each of the primary 
studies was evaluated according to 7 quality criteria 
regarding the rigor and credibility of the research in addition 
to relevance to the topic addressed. Brought together, these 
7 criteria provide a measure of reliability for the conclusions 
that a particular study can bring to the review. The 
classification for each of the criteria used a scale of 
positives (1) and negatives (0) and is presented in Table 2. 
 TABLE II. EXTRACTION OF QUALITY ANALYSIS OF PRIMARY 
STUDIES STUDY
From the primary articles, {5} {6} and {7} scored on all 
questions raised, these articles deal with models and cloud 
adoption in health/care environments, therefore, are aligned 
with the research objectives and realize that the survey, a 
priori, brought work that aggregated in the analyzes made. 
The qualitative and quantitative assessment analyzed all 39 
studies selected as primary studies. Table 2 presents a 
portion of the studies and highlights the studies that had 5 or 
more points. 
III.  DISCUSSION 
After analyzing and extracting data in the primary 
studies, it was possible to identify some aspects related to 
cloud computing in health environments with economic 
impacts, opportunities, and challenges. According to Ferraz 
[3], it is possible to conclude that the adoption of cloud 
computing in the development of a new solution or business 
has a great impact on the economy of companies and 
industries. It is noteworthy that this article does not intend 
to study only the impacts related to healthcare. However, it 
was observed during the research, a large number of studies 
related to this theme and the possible implications on the 
use of cloud computing.
A.  Economic Health. 
Adopting cloud computing can bring health benefits, 
both economically and help institutions fight and prevent 
disease as quickly as possible. According to the study by 
Chang and Zhu [5], in modern and current hospitals, the use 
of cloud computing becomes more centralized data 
management, making hardware and software maintenance 
more convenient. Hospital environments that adopt physical 
servers need to invest large amounts in IT, staff responsible 
for the infrastructure, maintenance and security of the 
machines used. In addition, over time, the model becomes 
increasingly obsolete and costly. This is the fundamental 
change brought about by the cloud, the virtualization of 
resources without the need to maintain an expensive on-site 
infrastructure [3]. 
As seen in [6] biomedicine labs can enjoy positive 
financial impacts, significant flexibility and benefits to their 
administration by using a cloud architecture. This brings 
new solutions that can transform the hospital economy [7], 
and business models begin to emerge with a new vision in 
their solutions. Because all infrastructure can be abstracted 
by the cloud, those involved in creating solutions can be 
more focused on the problem to be solved, bringing 
innovative solutions that change the way the economy of 
these solutions works. 
B. Cloud Treatments. 
The benefits of cloud computing adoption go far beyond 
financial impacts and cost savings. Although the impact of 
cloud computing adoption has generated around the 
economic sphere, major advances in medicine can be seen 
in the use of this and other technologies together.
As can be seen here [8], the authors presents the Disease 
Diagnosis 
and 
Treatment 
Recommendation 
System 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

(DDTRS)  which uses big data and cloud computing to 
generate 
diagnoses 
and 
treatment 
recommendations 
efficiently and assertively, improving the response time of 
diagnosis.  
Another medical cloud use [9] promotes blood pressure 
monitoring in a patient with hypertension. Since monitoring 
is done in real-time, the number of data generated is huge 
and requires an IaaS structure framework for management. 
The academic field also benefits from using cloud 
computing, whether in data storage, infrastructure or 
processing power. Complex studies at the forefront of 
medicine using the latest theoretical chemistry in the 
treatment of cancer [10] generate huge amounts of data and 
require enormous computational power for data processing. 
Research, such as [11] that simulates electron-nuclear 
dynamics of proton cancer therapy reactions, depending on 
the system studied, may take months to present the results. 
Therefore, cloud computing benefits by lowering its costs as 
infrastructure and the use of data science can generate great 
insights of the studied subject.     
C. Health Cloud Challenges. 
Based on the previous Sections and the studies analyzed, 
three major sectors and specific areas were identified as 
cloud computing and health research challenges and 
opportunities. They are security and privacy, chronic disease 
and cloud, cancer treatment and prevention. In the first area, 
the need to ensure the security, privacy, and authenticity of 
the information was identified. Any information that may 
lead to the identification of the user by an unauthorized 
party during authentication or data processing is a breach of 
privacy [12]. Because most data is stored on cloud servers, 
which is susceptible to threats and breaches, there is an 
imminent need to protect against unauthorized access. There 
are many challenges to protecting the privacy of cloud 
patient data; some models have been proposed [13][14]. 
Even so, it is clear, including several studies, that this area is 
extremely important for the future of the use of cloud as a 
whole not only limited to health.  
The second specific area is shown in the development of 
solutions for chronic diseases. The emergence of emerging 
technologies demonstrates opportunities and challenges 
[15]. Most of these technologies have in common the need 
to use cloud computing in their development. Therefore, 
further studies and innovative solutions can change the way 
we treat these diseases in a few years. 
Finally, studies and solutions that advance cancer 
treatment and diagnosis deserve attention as they can 
generate major economic impacts on cancer treatment and 
prevention. The American Cancer Society (ACS) estimates 
that 606,880 Americans will die of cancer by 2019, or 
nearly 1,700 deaths a day. This area generates a huge 
amount of data for storage and requires very large data 
processing power [11]. The search for cancer prevention 
combined with innovative solutions and cloud computing 
should be a priority area of study, considering the numbers 
presented by ASC. The development of SaaS or IaaS 
solutions is a great opportunity for the area.
IV. CONCLUSION 
The main objective of this work was to conduct research 
that analyzed areas related to cloud computing, specifically 
in the health environment, deepening how this technology 
impacts health and solutions for this market. To achieve the 
objective, a systematic mapping was performed, first 
analyzing 5280 articles and deeply analyzing more than 100 
articles in order to discuss topics not only related to the 
technology itself, but how its adoption impacts the health 
area and the economy of its own  solutions.
During the analysis phases, it was clear the benefit of 
adopting cloud computing and how the combination of 
technologies can bring disruptive solutions to the market 
and society. Biomedicine labs and research centers also 
benefit from adoption, reducing response times for exams or 
surveys that require extensive processing and storing data. 
 As future work, further analysis of solutions can be 
developed, facilitating better technical understanding to 
identify more efficient approaches. Further work can be 
done to ensure data privacy and security, and how 
governments will ensure privacy in public health policies. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
K. Panetta.:Gartner, Top 10 strategic technology trends for 
2018. Gartner Top 10 strategic technology trends for 2018, 3 October 2018. 
Gartner 
. 
https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/gartner-top-10-
strategic-technology-trends-for-2018  
[2]
Global Burden of Disease Collaborative Network. Global 
Burden of Disease Study 2017 (GBD 2017) Results. Seattle, United States: 
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME), 2018. 
[3]
F. Ferraz, F. Ribeiro, W. Lima, and C. Sampaio, “A Disturbing 
Question: What is the Economical Impact of Cloud Computing? A 
Systematic Mapping,” IEEE Int. Conf. Cloud Comput. CLOUD, vol. 2018-
July, pp. 853–856, 2018. 
[4]
B. 
Kitchenham 
and 
S. 
Charters,“Guidelines 
for 
performingSystematic Literature reviews in Software Engineering Version 
2.3,” Engineering, vol. 45, no. 4ve, p. 1051, 2007 
[5]
C. Chang and Y. Zhu, “A Study on the Application of Cloud 
Computing Platform in Hospital Information Construction,” pp. 280–282, 
2018 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[6]
A. Rosenthal, P. Mork, M. H. Li, J. Stanford, D. Koester, and P. 
Reynolds, “Cloud computing: A new business paradigm for biomedical 
information sharing,” J. Biomed. Inform., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 342–353, 
2010. 
[7]
C. Venkatesan, P. Karthigaikumar, and S. Satheeskumaran, 
“Mobile cloud computing for ECG telemonitoring and real-time coronary 
heart disease risk detection,” Biomed. Signal Process. Control, vol. 44, pp. 
138–145, 2018. 
[8]
J. Chen, K. Li, H. Rong, K. Bilal, N. Yang, and K. Li, “A 
disease diagnosis and treatment recommendation system based on big data 
mining and cloud computing,” Inf. Sci. (Ny)., vol. 435, pp. 124–149, 2018. 
[9]
B. Yip et al., “Blood Pressure Management with Data Capturing 
in the Cloud among Hypertensive Patients: A Monitoring Platform for 
Hypertensive Patients,” Proc. - 2015 IEEE Int. Congr. Big Data, BigData 
Congr. 2015, pp. 305–308, 2015.   
[10]
  C. Stopera, T. V. Grimes, P. M. McLaurin, A. Privett, and J. 
A. Morales, Some recent developments in the simplest-level electron 
nuclear dynamics method. Theory, code implementation, and applications 
to chemical dynamics, 1st ed., vol. 66. Elsevier Inc., 2013. 
[11]
 E. Teixeira et al., “Electron nuclear dynamics simulations of 
proton cancer therapy reactions: Water radiolysis and proton-and electron-
induced DNA damage in computational prototypes,” Cancers (Basel)., vol. 
10, no. 5, 2018. 
[12]
 M. Dawoud and D. T. Altilar, “Cloud-based e-health systems: 
Security and privacy challenges and solutions,” 2nd Int. Conf. Comput. Sci. 
Eng. UBMK 2017, pp. 861–865, 2017. 
[13]
  M. S. Elsayed and M. A. Azer, “Health Records Privacy Issues 
in Cloud Computing,” 1st Int. Conf. Comput. Appl. Inf. Secur. ICCAIS 
2018, pp. 1–6, 2018.   
[14]
  H. Wang, “Security and Privacy-preserving Challenges of e-
Health Solutions in Cloud Computing,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 74361–
74382, 2019. 
[15]
 D. Gu et al., “Discovering and Visualizing Knowledge 
Evolution 
of 
Chronic 
Disease 
Research 
Driven 
by 
Emerging 
Technologies,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 1–1, 2019. 
[16]
 M. D. Assunção, R. N. Calheiros, S. Bianchi, M. A. S. Netto, 
and R. Buyya, “Big Data computing and clouds: Trends and future 
directions,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 79–80, pp. 3–15, 2015. 
[17]
 F. Gao, S. Thiebes, and A. Sunyaev, “Rethinking the meaning 
of cloud computing for health care: A taxonomic perspective and future 
research directions,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 1–16, 2018. 
[18]
 F. Gao and A. Sunyaev, “Context matters: A review of the 
determinant factors in the decision to adopt cloud computing in 
healthcare,” Int. J. Inf. Manage., vol. 48, no. July 2018, pp. 120–138, 2019. 
[19]
 A. Jemal, R. Siegel, E. Ward, T. Murray, J. Xu, and M. J. Thun, 
“Cancer Statistics, 2007,” CA. Cancer J. Clin., vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 43–66, 
2007.  
[20]
 M. Chen et al., “Wearable 2.0: Enabling Human-Cloud 
Integration in Next Generation Healthcare Systems,” IEEE Commun. 
Mag., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 54–61, 2017 
[21]
 B. B. Rad, M. E. Rana, and T. Diaby, “Cloud computing 
adoption : a short review of issues and challenges,” Int. Conf. E-commerce, 
E-bus. E-Government, pp. 51–55, 2017. 
[22]
 K. K. F. Tsoi, Y. H. Kuo, and H. M. Meng, “A Data Capturing 
Platform in the Cloud for Behavioral Analysis among Smokers: An 
Application Platform for Public Health Research,” Proc. - 2015 IEEE Int. 
Congr. Big Data, BigData Congr. 2015, pp. 737–740, 2015. 
[23]
 L. Leong, G. Petri, B. Gill, and M. Dorosh, “Magic Quadrant 
for Cloud Infrastructure as a Service, Worldwide,” Gartner, no. August, pp. 
1–36, 2017. 
[24]
 D. Chen, and H. Zhao, 2012. Data Security and Privacy 
Protection Issues in CC. IEEE International Conference on Computer 
Science and Electronics Engineering (ICCSEE). 
[25]
Z.  Tang., X. Wang, J. Li, X.  Zhang, and W. Man,  2012. Study 
on Data Security of Cloud Computing. IEEE Spring Congress on 
Engineering and Technology (S-CET). 
[26]
R.  Asija, and N. Rajarathnam. "A Survey on Security and 
Privacy of Healthcare Data." Conference Paper · July (2014). 
[27]
 A. Abbas , K. Bilal , L. Zhang , S.U. Khan , A cloud based 
health insurance plan recommendation system: a user centered approach, 
Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 43–44 (2015) 99–109 . 
[28]
M.S. Hossain, Cloud-supported cyber-physical localization 
framework for patients monitoring, IEEE Syst. J. 11 (2017) 118–127 
[29]
 Q. Wang et al., “Remote analysis of myocardial fiber 
information in vivo assisted by cloud computing,” Futur. Gener. Comput. 
Syst., vol. 85, pp. 146–159, 2018. 
[30]
 J. Yang, “Cloud computing for storing and analyzing petabytes 
of genomic data,” J. Ind. Inf. Integr., no. April, pp. 0–1, 2019. 
[31]
N. Sultan, “Discovering the potential of cloud computing in 
accelerating the search for curing serious illnesses,” Int. J. Inf. Manage., 
vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 221–225, 2014. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-752-8
ICSEA 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

