Metaphors Applied to Interaction Design in Group Learning 
 
 
Anderson Cavalcante Gonçalves, Deller James Ferreira 
Informatics Institute 
Federal University of Goiás 
Goiânia, Brazil 
andersongoncalves@inf.ufg.br, deller@inf.ufg.br 
 
 
 
Abstract—The acquisition of the ability to use metaphors 
effectively contributes in increasing students' capacity to 
analyze and design interfaces. The use of metaphors in 
interaction design offers consistent interfaces, simple and 
intuitive. However, it is not easy for students to learn how to 
use metaphors in interaction design. To teach students how to 
develop interactive experiences through metaphors is not an 
easy task. This paper proposes a method for teaching the use of 
metaphors, while designing the website, desktop, mobile or 
tablet interface and presents the results of a case study on the 
successful teaching method proposed. The teaching method 
developed is a collaborative learning model based on model of 
King questioning and creative dimensions of Ferreira.  It 
consists 
of 
creative 
tasks 
coupled 
with 
structured 
questionnaires with questions and are designed to encourage 
interaction, group learning, and foster creativity of students. 
Keywords-metaphors; interaction; design; teaching; learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Metaphors create connections between concepts that are 
already familiar to people. Metaphors explore the existing 
knowledge of each person to assimilate something new. 
Thus, the person is able to learn new things, using their 
previous knowledge of the world [1]. This means that the 
person will be able to understand and experience one kind of 
thing in terms of another [2]. Considering interaction design, 
it is desirable to provide an interface familiar to the user, 
easy to learn and use. 
The use of metaphorical concepts is one of the resources 
available for creating intuitive user interfaces, simpler to 
learn and use. Entertainment websites, online stores, social 
networks, and others require an interface easy to learn and 
use. The interaction design should be well organized, easy to 
be interpreted and used by the users. Metaphorical concepts 
can be used in an expressive way to achieve this goal. 
Metaphorical concepts are pervasive in the culture of a 
society. Lakoff and Johnson [2] stated that metaphors are 
concepts inherent to subconscious and govern our whole way 
of thinking. Thus, the good use of metaphors in interface 
design is a feature that will make the interaction much easier 
to understand.  Nielsen and Molich [3] established that we 
should minimize the cognitive load of the user. In other 
words, they stated that the designer should facilitate the 
reasoning required to interpret an interface. Also, they state  
 
 
that, in a user interface, there must be a match between the 
system and the real world. The designer should use phrases 
and concepts familiar to the user, rather than system-oriented 
terms.  
The use of metaphors is a powerful resource that can be 
applied to achieve these heuristics. The appropriate 
application of metaphorical concepts turns an interface into 
a better interface. The interface design consists in defining 
how content is organized and presented to the user [4].  
The consistent use of metaphors in the context Human 
Computer Interaction (HCI) helps to reduce the cognitive 
load necessary for understanding the functionality of a 
computational interface. Students´ understanding about a 
good usage of metaphors in HCI improves their ability to 
properly critique and design computer interfaces.  
The use of metaphors is evident in many patterns and 
interaction interface designs. Some examples of the use of 
metahpors in HCI are evident at  Apple's desktop, pattern 
wizard, canvas plus pallet pattern, menus, buttons, 
dashboards, carousel pattern, breadcrumbs pattern, and so 
on. But, how to apply metaphors in interaction design is 
nota easy to learn, the metaphors may have simple literal 
comparisons and complex connections [1]. In addition, there 
are misleading uses of metaphors. It is not simple for 
students to learn how to use metaphors in interaction design. 
To teach students to develop interactive experiences by 
means of metaphors it is not an easy task. Students need to 
understand user experiences, concerns, skills, interests and 
expectations and must develop the ability to create good 
designs based on user’s knowledge.  
Constructing effective metaphors is to some extent a 
complex skill because it depends on the creative ability of 
designers to see new analogies, in order to choose the right 
set of correspondences. These correspondences have to 
enhance some aspects and hide others, because metaphorical 
mediation carries elements of the concept that are 
consistent, but also inconsistent when using metaphors to 
comprehend one thing in terms of the other. For Schwartz 
and Fischer [5], metaphors highlights levels of complexity 
as well as the need for sufficient support to build complex 
understandings, but they do not easily capture the diversity 
of contexts that students might experience that could lead to 
the same abstraction. One of the reasons why metaphors can 
be difficult to learn and teach, it is because they have a high 
558
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

level of complexity. Another reason is that students may 
have different interpretations, which makes teaching 
difficult. 
According to Hodges [6], if we examine the metaphor 
closely, their connotations are often the darkest when 
applied to teaching. Having a problem in one’s research is 
motivating; having a problem in one’s teaching is, well, a 
problem. In order to overcome the difficulty to teach 
metaphors in HCI, we suggest the teacher must apply a 
teaching method that encourages creativity and also 
criticism in interaction design.  
In this work, we aim to awaken and stimulate the use of 
metaphors in teaching and learning interaction design with 
the aim to stimulate students' abilities to discern what is a 
good or bad design, allowing students to differentiate an 
interaction design that it is aesthetically good but possesses a 
bad functional design, and to propose new ideas and 
solutions.   
In this work, we present an innovative teaching method 
to teach metaphors in human computer interaction design 
that fosters student's creativity and criticism. This method is 
based on collaborative learning and creative dimensions 
proposed by Ferreira [7] and the discussion method proposed 
by King [8], as shown in Fig. 1.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. The proposed teaching method. 
 
The creative dimensions, proposed by Ferreira [7], 
contain underlying dialogical processes that align dialogues 
with mental processes linked to both adaptive and innovative 
creativity. The creative dimensions constitute a pedagogical 
framework for designing exercises when teaching human 
computer interaction. They make it possible for teachers to 
create significant collaborative learning experiences to 
students, fostering them to activate mental processes 
underlying creativity during discussions. 
On the other hand, in the discussion method group 
proposed by King [8], questions that trigger patterns of 
discourse in learning groups are designed to facilitate the 
construction of complex knowledge and problem solving.  
Our teaching method proposes a combination Ferreira’s 
framework [7] and King’s [8] types of questions to propose a 
repertory of interaction design exercises exploring the use of 
metaphors. In our teaching method, we also approach the 
most common metaphorical concepts as structural, visual, 
functional, and positional metaphors, and consider where, 
when, why and how they are applied in the field of HCI. 
This metaphorical knowledge is part of the teaching method 
and is used during the tasks and questions created. 
Their use can improve the computational interface and 
provide substantial gains in user productivity.  
For example, visual metaphors are widely used in comic 
books. When a certain character is nervous, he is 
represented by a rough facial expression and smoke coming 
out of his ears, as shown in Fig. 2. 
 
                     
 
Figure 2. By means of prior knowledge acquired from the culture to 
which we operate, we recognize immediately that the character is nervous. 
 
The Pinterest [9] website contains a virtual panel that 
makes possible to create image categories, including 
descriptions and comments. In this website, we have a 
visual metaphor that allows the user to act like in a real 
picture panel.  
An example of positional metaphors application in 
interaction design is that the most important items must be 
at the top of the screen. This rule is very important in mobile 
applications. 
In the LinuxMall [10] website, it is clear the use of 
functional metaphors. In this site, there is a backpack in the 
upper right corner, which suggests the user to place the 
desired products inside it.  
As an example of the application of structural 
metaphors, 
commonly, 
an 
e-commerce 
website 
is 
subdivided into sections like in a real store.  
In this work, we present a case study comparing the 
teaching method proposed in an undergraduate HCI class 
(treatment group) and a method involving students’ 
discussions and informal teacher mediation in another 
undergraduate HCI class (control group). The case study 
conducted showed significant results.  
In Section II, we show the importance of the application 
of metaphorical concepts to human computer interaction and 
show systematic aspects of metaphors. In Section III, we 
describe the teaching method proposed in this article. In 
Sections IV and V, we present a case study of the 
application of the teaching method proposed and the results 
obtained. 
II. 
TEACHING METHOD FOR USE OF METAPHORS 
The use of metaphors is essential for the user experience 
to become simple and intuitive. It facilitates user 
understanding and interactivity. According to Baumer [11], 
metaphors can be powerful aids for understanding because 
they can help the understanding of novel concepts.  
However, learning to apply metaphors in computing 
environments is a difficult task.  Although metaphors abound 
in human thinking, they can be surprisingly difficult to notice 
simply due to their ubiquity.  
559
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

In this work, we developed a teaching method based on 
collaborative learning for teaching metaphors in interaction 
design. Collaborative learning is a successful method to 
awaken 
creativity. 
Creative 
solutions 
emerge 
from 
interactions that encourage students to express and evolve 
their ideas in specific problems.  
According to Jonassen and Land [12], knowledge 
originates from productive discourse among individuals, the 
social relationships that bind them, and the physical artifacts, 
theories, models and methods that they use and produce. 
Productive discussions provide satisfactory results in 
collaborative learning, providing students the opportunity to 
share and co-construct knowledge. 
Creative solutions are built during joint activities that 
trigger productive discussions. Creative and collaborative 
dimensions proposed by Ferreira [7] promote productive 
discussions, where students are encouraged to widen and 
deepen the design space. Students extend the design space 
when a new idea emerges and deepen the space of the project 
when an idea is developed.  
Ferreira´s pedagogical framework allows the teacher to 
elaborate tasks that nourish creative discussions during 
collaborative problem solving in interaction design [7]. The 
author considers that creative products occur as stimulation 
of many different planes. The framework contains seven 
collaborative and creative dimensions to be applied by the 
teacher. According to Ferreira [7], the dimensions are: 
immersion, 
unpacking 
opportunities, 
exploring 
complementary 
ways, 
surpassing 
limits, 
expanding, 
discovering and developing unpredictable places. The 
dimensions contain dialogic processes that are dialogs 
aligned with mental creative processes associated to both 
adaptive and innovative creativity. Dialogic processes 
facilitate students to elaborate ideas built on other ideas, 
during their collaborations. The framework helps and 
challenges teachers to be aware of how complex students´ 
activities can be elaborated during collaborative learning. 
Considering 
students 
perspectives, 
during 
productive 
discussions they are able to detect relevant and irrelevant 
information, recognize the familiar, deal with new 
information, adapt and reapply techniques, among other 
creative important processes.  
The use of provocative questions is another strategy that 
encourages students to interact productively. The students 
absorb and transcend knowledge when they engage 
themselves in profitable interactions.  
King´s model approaches provocative questioning to 
induce relevant cognitive, meta-cognitive and socio-
cognitive processes in participants [8]. Effective learning 
interactions induce complex cognitive processes including 
the analytical thinking necessary to create metaphors. 
According to King [8], learning is constructed during 
interaction with others. During the interaction the students 
engage in the exchange of ideas, opinions and perspectives. 
The speech is composed of provocative questions, 
explanations, justifications, assumptions and conclusions. 
The construction of knowledge occurs when students explain 
concepts to each other. The questioning is a procedure that 
asks questions and answers. The interaction during the 
discussion results in a high level of learning. The model 
proposed by King consists of structured questions on issues 
of entry [8].  For example:  
 
 
How much similar to?  
 
How does it relate to? 
 
What do you remember and why? 
Comprehension questions, for example:  
 
What does it mean? 
 
What's important for?  
Connection questions, for example:  
 
How is similar with?  
 
What is different between? 
 
How can it be used for? 
 
What are the strengths and weaknesses?  
 
The method proposed in this paper involves the 
development of group assignments focusing on the use of 
metaphors in HCI. Using our method, the teacher is able to 
elaborate group tasks and questions that encourage students 
engage themselves in productive discussions.  
The teacher is invited to approach the dimensions 
proposed by Ferreira [7], questioning the model proposed by 
King [8] and knowledge about metaphors when designing 
exercises.   
This way, the students have the opportunity to scrutinize 
metaphors in different contexts and are urged to find 
solutions 
and 
improvements 
in 
the 
application 
of 
metaphorical concepts in interaction design. 
III. 
THE CASE STUDY 
The case study aims to examine the effectiveness of 
teaching the use of metaphors in interaction design by means 
the proposed teaching method.  
In this preliminary case study, four tasks based on the 
proposed method were analyzed. The preliminary results 
indicated that the proposed teaching method has potential to 
help teachers to mediate students' creativity when using 
metaphors in interaction design. 
The students investigated were engaged in two classes of 
undergraduate Software Engineering at Federal University 
of Goiás in 2011 and 2012. There were 44 students in the 
class of 2011 and 42 students in the class of 2012. Each 
class was divided into groups of 6 (six) students and each 
group was evaluated by means of discourse analysis of 
online discussions. 
A. Students’ Profile and Communication Tools Used 
Students are studying Software Engineering at the 
Federal University of Goiás. Students have the profile of 
software developers. They are learning about the concepts 
related to interface design, such as metaphors, usability 
guidelines and interaction patterns in the human computer 
interaction design course.  
The communication tool used was the Moodle platform, 
which facilitates iterations among students. Each student 
posts messages concerning their responses and opinions. 
Moodle is a tool for course managing that can also be used 
560
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

for distance learning. Using the forums, the student can post 
a message at any time and place. 
B. Description of Tasks (Treatment Group) 
The tasks required are described following. 
 
1) Discuss having in mind the questions related to the 
website Taisho [13]. 
Express your opinions and inferences, and propose 
appropriate solutions. In the following, we describe the 
questions regarding the Taisho website: 
Why is it important to use a visual metaphor on the 
website? Are the elements observed on the website similar 
to real objects? How does the geisha and the shamisen relate 
to each other? Is the menu contained in the Website an 
example of positional metaphor? Did the visual metaphors  
facilitate user interaction in the website?  Are the metaphors 
used readily apparent to any user? Why the metaphors were 
used? How each metaphor does interfere with the user's 
perception? How are the used metaphors similar to elements 
of everyday life? Are the metaphors used inherent in the 
culture of the target audience? What are the strengths and 
weaknesses of the use of visual metaphors in the website?  
Is the user able to associate the elements present in the 
metaphorical interface actions and objects represented? 
Does the website have a stable context? Does the 
positioning of the metaphors in the interface facilitate the 
identification of the company name? Does the name have a 
reasonable size and its location is noticeable? Are the 
different metaphorical elements in harmony? Do these 
elements contribute to the user understanding about the 
information contained in the website? Does the interface 
emphasize the services offered by the company? Are the 
interface services clear from the user perspective?  
 
2) Discuss having in mind the questions related to the 
websites Sitotis [14] and Thedeepestsite [15]. 
During the discussions, you must engage critically and 
constructively with the ideas of others. Express your 
opinions, inferences, and propose appropriate solutions. In 
the following, we describe the questions regarding the 
websites: 
The metaphor used in the logo of the company 
contributes to the understanding of company activity? Is it 
possible to satisfactorily answer the purpose of the website? 
Is the website interface sufficiently self-explanatory? Do the 
metaphors present in the website immediately contribute to 
the understanding of its interface? Do you understand the 
services offered by the website? Does he position of the 
website menu help the user to find the desired options in a 
simple and immediate manner? Can the user effortlessly 
navigate in the website? Is it able to distinguish the options? 
Is there a precise notion of what is in each option? Do the 
graphics and animations present on website show the actual 
content? Do the metaphors used emphasize a content or are 
merely illustrative? Is the user able to associate the elements 
present in the metaphorical interface actions and objects that 
they represent? Are the functional metaphors clearly 
perceived? Is the website interface sufficiently self-
explanatory? Do the metaphors present in the website 
immediately contribute to the understanding of its interface? 
Can the user effortlessly navigate the website? Is the user 
able to distinguish the options? 
 
3) Choose a Website to design your Mobile interface. 
a) 
Take a look at the patterns shown in classes  
concerning mobile and navigation patterns. Also, take a 
look at the supplementary bibliography.  
b) 
Use metaphors in the design of the website. 
Discuss having in mind the usability guidelines, particularly 
guidelines for mobile interfaces. Think outside the box 
when designing the website.  Consider the following 
questions about metaphors: 
 
What types of metaphors are more suited to the 
context of your mobile interface? 
 
Do the metaphors used help the user to concentrate 
on the main service offered by the website? 
 
How visual metaphors can be used to enhance the 
understanding and simplicity of the website in a mobile 
environment without sacrificing your design? 
 
 Is it possible to use metaphors to emphasize most 
relevant content to users? 
 
 How can we subtly integrate metaphors and the 
graphic style of the website? 
 
Does the metaphors used provide users a logical 
path to follow, minimizing the effort required for 
understanding, making navigation easy and obvious? 
 
What functional metaphors can be used to facilitate 
the execution of some tasks? 
 
Can he use of metaphors make navigation easier 
and more intuitive for the user? 
 
4) Each student must individually choose a context to 
adapt the wizard pattern using metaphors. 
Defend your choice in your group grounding your 
arguments on the items "when" and "why" of the pattern. 
Each student must design a wizard and defend his idea, 
based on item "as" the wizard should be implemented. 
Discuss, choose and refine the best idea considering the in 
the following questions: 
 
Does the Wizard makes clear to the user what is 
the goal to be achieved? 
 
Is the user notified if he tries to start a new job 
before completing the current? 
 
Does he user have the option to go back and 
change the data entered in the previous step? 
 
It is visible to the user what is missing to achieve 
the goal? 
 
The Wizard is simple and intuitive and does not 
require much effort from the user understand how to use it? 
 
Do the metaphors used help the Wizard to became 
more simple and intuitive? 
 
Do the metaphors used help the user to concentrate 
on the goal to be achieved? 
 
Why metaphors were used? Do the metaphors 
significantly help the user reach success in every step and 
fulfill the purpose of the Wizard? 
561
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

C. Description of Tasks (Control Group) 
The tasks were in accordance to the following 
collaborative script: 
Read a text about metaphors and evaluate the use of 
metaphors in the Websites Taisho and Sitotis. Based on the 
text and previous classes on this subject, express your 
opinions regarding the use of metaphors in the Website. 
D. Used in the Discourse Analysis 
The model used in the discourse analysis was proposed 
by Newman, Webb and Cochrane [16] and is described by 
ten categories:  
1) Relevance: Relevant states or diversions. 
2) Importance: 
Important 
points 
and 
issues 
or 
unimportant points and trivial issues. 
3) Novelty, new info, ideas, and solutions: New 
problem-related information or repeating what has been 
said. 
4) Bringing outside knowledge or experience to bear on 
problem: Drawing on personal experience or sticking to 
prejudice or assumptions. 
5) Ambiguities: clarified or confused: Clear statements 
or confused statements. 
6) Linking ideas, interpretation: Linking facts, ideas 
and notions or repeating information without making 
inferences or offering an interpretation. 
7) Justification: Providing proof or examples or 
irrelevant or obscuring questions or examples. 
8) Critical assessment: Critical assessment or evaluation 
of own or others’ contribution or uncritical acceptance or 
unreasoned rejection. 
9) Practical 
utility 
(grounding): 
Relate 
possible 
solutions to familiar situation or discuss in a vacuum. 
10) Width of understanding (complete picture): Wide 
discussion or narrow discussion. 
Categories 1 to 9 were explored in this case study. 
E. Model Used in the Creativity Analysis 
The model used in the analysis of creativity was 
proposed by Zeng, Salvendry and Zhang [17]. This model 
was structured in a checklist for web site design. The 
checklist comprises: 
1) Aesthetically appealing design: artistic, colorful, 
energetic, beautiful, fascinating, entertaining, engaging, 
attractive, favorable, and desirable. 
2) Interactive design: interactive, animated, available 
multimedia, and dynamic. 
3) Novel and flexible design: unique, appealing, and 
flexible. 
4) Affective design: stimulating, pleasing, delighting, 
and exciting. 
5) Important design: relevant, important, and crucial. 
6) Common and simple design: infrequent, unique and 
sophisticated. 
7) Personalized design: personalized. 
F. Model Used in the Questions Analysis 
In the analysis of the questionnaire, were used 
dimensions of User Experience (UX) involving [18]: 
1) Immersion and Flow: While the user is using the 
system he forgets everything around him. 
2) Tension: The user feels tense while using the system. 
3) Competence: The user thinks that he is good at using 
the system. 
4) Negative Affect: The user feels bored while using the 
system. 
5) Positive Affect: The user has fun while using the 
system. 
6) Challenge: The user makes effort while using the 
system, but he takes pleasure in overcoming obstacles. 
7) Fellowship: Good experiences are produced during 
social interactions. 
8) Discovery: The user is pleased to learn new things. 
9) Expression: The user is pleased to express new things 
and raises self-esteem. 
G. Results 
Each student was individually analyzed according to the 
model of Newman, Webb and Cochrane [16].  
The result obtained by all students in the group, 
produced the group average. The average of all groups 
produced the overall result of the class.  
Statistics of the overall outcome of the class in 2011 are 
shown in table I. 
 
TABLE I. STATISTICS OF INTERACIONS IN 2011 
  
 
Category 
Average 
1.Relevance 
19.5% 
2.Importance 
18.5% 
3.Novely, new info, ideas, solutions 
3.25% 
4.Bringing outside knowledge or experience to 
bear the problem 
8.25% 
5.Ambiguities 
24.37% 
6.Linking ideas, interpretation 
9.37% 
7.Justification 
2% 
8.Critical assessment 
35.62% 
9.Practical utility (grounding) 
10.87% 
Overall average considering all categories 
14.63% 
 
Each category was examined individually in each group 
and the results were obtained by calculating the percentage 
from 0 to 100 per category group. The percentage was 
obtained by examining the student’s posts. Each student 
message posted was analyzed according to each category. 
The result was obtained by analyzing the positive factors of 
each category.  
During the course in 2011, the teaching method 
proposed in this article was not used. The students were 
asked to evaluate and discuss the use of metaphors in 
websites considering no question.  
Table II contains the general outcome of the interactions 
analysis in 2012. 
 
 
TABLE II. STATISTICS OF INTERACTIONS IN 2012 
562
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Category 
Average 
1.Relevance 
71.65% 
2.Importance 
58.73% 
3.Novely, new info, ideas, solutions 
32.86% 
4.Bringing outside knowledge or experience to 
bear the problem 
10.68% 
5.Ambiguities 
5.48% 
6.Linking ideas, interpretation 
10.27% 
7.Justification 
19.48% 
8.Critical assessment 
49.71% 
9.Practical utility (grounding) 
10.06% 
Overall average considering all categories 
29.82% 
 
In category 1, we obtained 71.65% of relevant 
assertions. This result indicates that students had a 
significant improvement in the ability to make relevant 
statements.  In category 2, it was obtained 58.73% of 
important issues. The result obtained in the category two 
indicates a significant improvement in addressing important 
issues. In the category 3, it was obtained 32.86% of new 
information, ideas and solutions. Students were able to 
propose new ideas, solutions and information. In category 4, 
we obtained 10.68%. Students were able to bring the 
information out of knowledge. In category 5, it was obtained 
5.48% of ambiguities. In category 6, we obtained 10.27% of 
union ideas and new interpretations.  In category 7, we 
obtained 19.48% of justification. Students were able to 
justify their ideas and affirmations. In category 8, we 
obtained 49.71% of critical assessment. The students' ability 
to make critical evaluations greatly improved. In category 9, 
we obtained 10.06% of practical utility.  The average in all 
categories of the class of 2012 was 29.82%.  
The results achieved were satisfactory. Compared with 
the class in 2011, class in 2012 achieved an overall gain of 
15.19 percent. There was a clear improvement in all 
categories. In some categories there was a significant gain. 
Gains related to category 3 were 29.61 percent and earnings 
were related to category 8 of 14.09 percent. The category 1 
and category 2 also greatly benefited. We note that the 
category 3 was the most favored. The students have 
acquired the ability to propose something new, new ideas 
and solutions, which is essential for a software engineer and 
interaction designer. Category 8, that is  related to critical 
thinking, also had a great improvement. 
The presented statistics show that the use of our teaching 
method in teaching the use of metaphors interaction design 
instigates and encourages any student to infer criticism and 
find more effective and creative solutions for the design of 
computational interfaces. 
In tasks two and three we analyzed the products 
designed and presented by each group of students. In the 
analysis, we used the creativity checklist for website design 
of Zeng [12], analyzing important design factors, such as: 
aesthetically appealing design, interactive design, novel, and 
flexible design, affective design, design important, common 
and simple design and personalized design.  
 
TABLE III. CREATIVITY CHECKLIST FOR WEBSITE DESIGN 
 
Creativity Checklist 
Classification 
Aesthetically appealing design 
Excellent 
Interactive design 
Good 
Novel and flexible design 
Good 
Affective design 
Good 
Important design 
Excellent 
Common and simple design 
Good 
Personalized design 
Excellent 
 
The results were classified in excellent, good, regular or 
inappropriate. The analysis was based on the products 
presented by the students. Analysis of the products was 
successful. When making the checklist, we  observed that 
the products obtained excellent results regarding the 
aesthetics. The interactive design achieved a good result. 
The novel and flexible design also achieved good results. 
The affective design which includes items such as 
stimulating and exciting achieved good results. The featured 
products have an important and relevant design; this result 
was excellent. In common and simple design products 
observed products with rare and sophisticated design. The 
result was classified as good. In personalized design, the 
result was excellent; all products owned a custom design. 
The results obtained in speech analysis have been confirmed 
in the analysis of the product. Students who possessed better 
performance in the categories of speech produced and 
presented the best products. The critics and creativity 
promoted by collaboration and productive interactions 
among students, trigged by the application of the teaching 
method, contributed effectively to student learning. The 
students applied the concepts discussed adequately. The 
discussions resulted in products of high quality design.  
A questionnaire was developed with twelve questions to 
evaluate the experience gained by the students. Students 
who were involved in the groups that performed all the tasks 
proposed responded to the questionnaire. The analysis was 
performed according to the dimensions of UX [13]. 
 
TABLE IV. QUESTIONS ANALYSIS 
 
Category 
Average 
1. Immersion and Flow 
94.12% 
2. Tension 
85.3% 
3. Competence 
88.3% 
4. Negative Affect 
20.56% 
5. Positive Affect 
79.44% 
6. Challenge 
88.3% 
7. Fellowship 
50% 
8. Discovery 
85.3% 
9. Expression 
94.12% 
According to the analysis 94.12% of the students forgot 
everything around them as they discussed the tasks. For 
85.3% of the students the tension and difficulty decreased 
during task performance. 88.3% of students thought to be 
563
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

consistent inferring opinions. 79.44% of students felt 
excited. 88.3% of students felt challenged and encouraged 
to discover new ideas and solutions. 50% of students shared 
good experiences during social interactions. 85.3% of 
students felt happy to learn new things. 94.12% felt pleasure 
in expressing their ideas and had self-esteem by 
implementing these ideas. The results obtained were very 
satisfactory.  
The results from Table II show that we have improved 
the results obtained on the control group by implementing 
our proposed method. The results obtained from Tables III 
and IV corroborate the results obtained from Table II, 
showing 
that 
the 
students 
pleasingly 
engaged 
in 
collaborative tasks and successfully developed creative 
products. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
It is not known in literature the existence of a teaching  
method to apply metaphors in interaction design. In this 
paper, we highlight the use of metaphors in interaction 
design. The use of metaphors improves the interaction 
design, providing more respect and importance to 
computational interfaces. We addressed different types of 
metaphors, such as visual, functional, structural, and 
positional metaphor. The proper use of metaphors produces 
a positive and significant impact on usability of user 
interfaces.  
However, students find it difficult to learn and apply 
metaphorical concepts in interaction design. In order to 
overcome this problem, we addressed a teaching method to 
teach creativity and criticism in the context of interaction 
design using metaphors. A case study was designed and 
successfully applied. The preliminary results show that the 
teaching method based on collaborative learning through the 
development of questions that stimulate group discussion 
achieved good results. There was a significant improvement 
in the class where the method was applied compared to class 
where there was no application of the method. 
This work contributes to teachers to arouse students' 
creativity, directing and encouraging them to infer creative 
solutions and to properly criticize interaction design. This 
contributes greatly to their learning. In this way, any student 
aggregates the knowledge necessary to criticize and design a 
more intuitive interface that is simpler to learn and use. All 
students tasks were contextualized in the use of metaphors 
in interaction design, as can be seen in the examples 
previously provided. Thus, both the discourse analysis and 
product analysis indicates that the use of metaphors was 
successful.  
The results show the relevance of the study and the 
teaching method applied. However, more case studies are 
being performed as well as the discourse and products 
analysis are being done for more than one researcher to 
reduce the degree of subjectivity of the research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by FAPEG and CNPq – Brazil. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Dijk V., Betsy, Lingnau, A., Landoni, M., and Ruthwen I. 
Metaphorical 
Interaction 
Models/Interfaces. 
PuppyIR. 
University of Twente, July 2011. 
[2] Lakoff, George and Johnson, Mark.  Metaphors We Live By. 
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2003. 
[3] Nielsen, J. and Molich, R. Heuristic evaluation of user 
interfaces. 
Empowering 
People 
- 
Chi’90 
Conference 
Proceedings.  New York: ACMPress, 1990. 
[4] Preece, J. Rogers, Y. and Sharp, H. Interaction Design: 
Beyond Human- Computer Interaction.  New York, NY: John 
Wiley and Sons, 2007. 
[5] Schwartz, M. S., and Fischer, K. W. Useful metaphors for 
tackling problems in teaching and learning. On Campus, 
11(1), 2006, pp. 2-9. 
[6] Hodges, Linda C. 2004. "The Problem as Metaphor in 
Teaching." The Nea Higher Education Journal, 2004, pp. 39-
48. 
[7] Ferreira, D.J. Human Computer Interaction Teaching Method 
to Encourage Creativity. Lisbon, Portugal: ICSEA, 2012, 
pp.472-478. 
[8] O'Donnel, Angela M., and King, Alison. Cognitive 
Perspectives on Peer Learning.  New Jersey: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, 1999. 
[9] Pinterest Website, https://www.pinterest.com/ (current Sep. 
30, 2013). 
[10] LinuxMall Website, http://www.linuxmall.com.br/ (current 
Sep.30, 2013). 
[11] Baumer, S. P. E., Tomlinson, B, Richland E. L. and Hansen J.  
Fostering 
metaphorical 
creativity 
using 
computational 
metaphor identification. Proceedings of the seventh ACM 
conference on Creativity and cognition, New York, NY: 
ACM, 2009, pp. 315-324. 
[12] Jonassen, D. H., Land, S. M. Theoretical foundations of 
learning environments. Preface. In D. H. Jonassen and S. M. 
Land (Eds.), New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2000, pp. 3-9. 
[13] Taisho 
Website, 
http://www.taishoflorianopolis.com.br/ 
(current Sep.30, 2013).  
[14] Sitotis Website, http://www.sitotis.hr/ (current Sep.30, 2013). 
[15] The Deepest Site, http://thedeepestsite.com/ (current Sep.30, 
2013). 
[16] Newman, D. R., Webb, B., and Cochrane, C. A content 
analysis method to measure critical thinking in face-to-face 
and computer supported group learning. St. Louis: University 
of Missouri–St. Louis, 1996. 
[17] Zeng, L., Salvendy G., and Zhang M. January 2009. “Fator 
structure of web site creativity.” Computer in Human 
Behavior. Vol. 25, pp. 568-577, January 2009. 
 
[18] Poels, K., IJsselsteijn, W., and De Kort, Y. Development of 
the Kids Game Experience Questionnaire. Poster presented at 
the Meaningful Play Conference, East Lansing, USA, abstract 
in proceedings, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
564
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

