Detection and Classification of  Dental Caries in X-ray Images Using Deep Neural 
Networks 
 
 
 
Ramzi Ben Ali, Ridha Ejbali and Mourad Zaied 
REGIM-Lab.: REsearch Groups in Intelligent Machines, University of Sfax, ENIS, 
 Sfax, Tunisia 
E-mail: {ramzi.benali.tn, ridha ejbali, mourad.zaied}@ieee.org 
 
 
Abstract—Dental caries, also known as dental cavities,   is the 
most widespread pathology in the world. Up to a very recent 
period, almost all individuals had the experience of this 
pathology at least once in their life. Early detection of dental 
caries can help in a sharp decrease in the dental disease rate.  
Thanks to the growing accessibility to medical imaging, the 
clinical applications now have better impact on patient care. 
Recently, there has been interest in the application of machine 
learning strategies for classification and analysis of image data. 
In this paper, we propose a new method to detect and identify 
dental caries using X-ray images as dataset and deep neural 
network as technique. This technique is based on stacked sparse 
auto-encoder and a softmax classifier. Those techniques, sparse 
auto-encoder and softmax, are used to train a deep neural 
network. The novelty here is to apply deep neural network to 
diagnosis of dental caries. This approach was tested on a real 
dataset and has demonstrated a good performance of detection. 
Keywords-dental 
X-ray; 
classification; 
Deep 
Neural 
Networks; Stacked sparse auto-encoder; Softmax.  
I.   INTRODUCTION  
The radiographs are essential to establish a good 
diagnosis and identify several problems that are impossible 
to visualize otherwise. 
In orthodontics, dental radiography that is used frequently 
is the panoramic shot which offers a good "overview" of the 
teeth and jaws and provides the essential information for 
screening and diagnosis of several conditions and problems 
which can be detected at an early age. 
Dental caries is an infectious disease. The enamel of the 
tooth is the first affected. A cavity forms in the tooth and then 
the decay spreads in depth. If the cavity is not treated, the hole 
expands and decay can affect the dentin (layer under the 
enamel) [1]. Pain is beginning to be felt, especially with the 
hot, cold or sweet things. Decay can affect the pulp of the 
tooth. We then speak about a toothache. Finally, a dental 
abscess may appear when the bacteria attack the periodontal 
ligament, the bone or the gum.  
Cavities are very frequent. More than nine out of ten 
people would have had, at least one, tooth decay. In France, 
more than a third of 6 year-old children and more than half of 
12 year-old children have been affected by this infection. In 
Canada, 57 percent of children aged between 6 and 12 years 
have had at least one tooth decay [2]. 
Dental radiography is an important element in the oral 
health follow up. It comes in addition to the visual 
examination done by the dentist. The x-ray allows dentist to 
"see" what is happening inside of the teeth and bones, thanks 
to x-rays of low intensity which can cross these structures. 
The types of radiography most common used by the dentist 
are: the retro-alveolar, the bite-wing, the panoramic 
radiograph [3]. 
The machine learning is defined as the ability to make an 
agent learn how to take a decision on the basis of observations 
[4]. In the biomedical context, the action of this agent is 
reflected by additional information to assist the dentists in 
making his decision. The patient management is found 
assigned to several steps, either at the level of diagnosis, of 
the treatment choice, or also in the surgical intervention. In 
the framework of this paper, the agent under focus has a role 
to classify biomedical images by machine learning with   the 
intention of discovering clinically pertinent pathology 
patterns. These classification operations are based on 
decision-making tool. However, the inter patients variability 
poses many challenges for the traditional classification 
algorithms. These have for the most part been configured and 
parameterized on small data sets or on a very specific cohort. 
During the last decade, the representations learning, a 
sub-domain of the machine learning, has experienced a huge 
comeback particularly in the computer vision domain. These 
representations algorithms have especially allowed crossing 
a significant step with regards to the objects recognition [7] 
and to speech recognition [8]. In machine learning, the model 
of Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) is a valuable tool. 
Although the ANN, was invented close to sixty years ago, it 
still remains an area of active research. Recently, with the 
deep learning, ANN has in fact allowed to dramatic 
improvements in many applications fields such as the 
computer vision. The increasing amount of available data and 
the computing power have made it easier to train high 
capacity models such as deep learning. However, the inherent 
difficulties involved in training such models, as an example 
the local minima, still have an important impact. The deep 
learning thus aims to find solutions through adding some 
regularization or improving the optimization. Unsupervised 
pre-training or dropout are examples of such solutions. 
Our contribution is as follows: we propose a system of 
detection and classification of dental caries in X-ray images 
using deep neural network. This system can be very useful 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

for dentists to classify dental X-ray images into tooth decay 
or normal tooth images. A stacked sparse auto-encoder and a 
softmax classifier [8] are used in our deep neural network. 
This paper will be structured as follows: Section 2 
presents the recent work. In Section 3, we will describe our 
methodology and demonstrate how to train and classify tooth 
images with deep neural networks with a stacked sparse auto-
encoder and a softmax classifier. In Section 4, we will give 
some results of testing experiments. Finally, Section 5 
concludes this paper. 
II.   RELATED WORK 
Primarily, the detection of dental caries has been a visual 
process, principally based on visual-tactile examination and 
radiographic examination [1]. In the recent literature, several 
techniques have been developed for the detection of dental 
caries. Kositbowornchai et al. [9] developed a neural network 
to detect artificial dental caries using images from a charged 
coupled device (CCD) camera and intra-oral digital 
radiography. The main disadvantage of this method is that the 
evaluation of the system was done using teeth with artificial 
carries, which are completely different from naturally 
affected ones. Saravanan et al. [10] developed a new method 
to detect dental caries in its early stage using histogram and 
power spectral analysis. In this method, the detection of tooth 
cavities is done based on the region of concentration of pixels 
with regard to the histogram and based on the magnitude 
values with regard to the spectrum. The main drawback of 
this study is that this method depends only on the intensity of 
pixels. Berdouses et al. [11] developed a computer-aided 
automated methodology for the detection and classification 
of occlusal caries from photographic color images. This 
method is based on the segmentation of photographic color 
images.  
Even though there are many methods for caries detection 
in early stage, it is still necessary to develop accurate carries 
detection method to help dentist.  
The problem of the classical approach of forms 
recognition is that it is very difficult to build a good 
characteristics extractor and that it must be readjusted for 
each new application. The deep learning is a class of methods 
whose principles are known since the end of 1980s, but 
whose use was really generalized since approximately 2012. 
One of the perspectives of the techniques of deep learning 
is the replacement of work which still is relatively laborious 
by algorithmic models of supervised learning, non-
supervised (i.e., not requiring specific knowledge of the 
problem studied) or by techniques of extraction of 
hierarchical characteristics. 
The idea is very simple: the training system consists of a 
series of modules, each one represent a processing step. Each 
module can be trained, with adjustable parameters similar to 
the weight of the linear classifiers. The system is trained end-
to-end: to each example, all the parameters of all the modules 
are adjusted to approximate the output produced by the 
system of the desired output. The deep qualifying term comes 
from the arrangement of these modules in successive layers 
[12].  
To be able to train the system in this way, it must be 
known in which direction and how much to adjust each 
parameter of each module. For this, it is necessary to 
calculate a gradient. The calculation of this gradient is done 
by the method of back-propagation, practised since mid-
1980s. A deep architecture can be viewed as a multilayer 
network of simple elements, similar to the linear classifiers, 
inter-connected by training weight. This is what is called a 
neural network multi-layers. 
The advantage of deep architectures stems from their 
capacity to learn to represent the world in a hierarchical 
manner. As all layers can be trained, no need to build a 
characteristics extractor by hand. The training will do it [13]. 
In addition, the first layers extract some simple characteristics 
and after that the following layers will combine to form more 
and more complex concepts.  
III.   METHODOLOGY 
In this section, we will describe and motivate how to train 
and classify tooth images with deep neural networks with 
multiple hidden layers. Multiple hidden layers neural 
networks can be very useful in solving classification problems 
with complex data, such as images. Each layer can learn 
features at a different level of abstraction. We will use, in our 
deep neural, stacked sparse auto-encoders for features 
extraction and a softmax layer to classify the teeth images. 
 
 
Tooth Images
Autoencoder
Learned Features
Linear Classifier
tooth decay
Normal Tooth
Figure 1.   Shematization of our deep neural networks architecture
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

A. Stacked Sparse Auto-Encoder 
A stacked auto-encoder is a neural network consisting of 
multiple layers of sparse auto-encoders in which the outputs 
of each layer is wired to the inputs of the successive layer 
[14]. 
In our work, we choose to use stacked sparse auto-
encoder (SSAE) in our deep neural network. The size of tooth 
image is 64-by-64 pixels. The SSAE is trained, in an 
unsupervised fashion, in order to extract hidden features.  
We begin by the training of the first auto-encoder without 
use of labels. The size of the input vector in the training data 
of the first auto-encoder is 4096 nodes. It will be minimized   
into 300 nodes in the first hidden layer. In the second step, 
we train another auto-encoder using data as the encoding of 
the inputs data provided by the previous auto-encoder. In this 
step, also, we decrease the size of the hidden representation 
to 150, so that the encoder in the second auto-encoder learns 
an even smaller representation of the input data. We repeat 
this step according to the number of the desired layers. 
This method trains the parameters of each layer 
individually while freezing parameters for the remainder of 
the model. To produce better results, after this phase of 
training is complete, fine-tuning using back-propagation can 
be used to improve the results by tuning the parameters of all 
layers at the same time. 
B. Softmax layer 
The softmax classifier (SMC) is important in the field of 
machine learning because it can map a vector to a probability 
of a given output in binary classification. Softmax classifier 
is a supervised model which uses a logistic regression defined 
as:  
 
1
1 exp(
T )
h
x


 

  
  
 
Where θ represents a vector of weight, and x is a vector of 
input values learned by the previous SSAE. 
In the softmax function, we suppose that the labels were 
binary:  y(i) ∈ {0,1}. We used this classifier to distinguish 
between decayed teeth and normal teeth.  The SMC's 
parameter θ was trained to minimize the cost function.  The 
output of this classifier, as we can see in Fig. 1, is two classes: 
decayed teeth or normal teeth.  
As we can see in Fig. 3, our diagram of the stacked 
network is formed by the encoders from three auto-encoders 
and the softmax layer. 
IV.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section we report the results of testing experiments 
we carried out to evaluate our deep neural network to classify 
dental X-ray images. The data set of images was collected 
from many dentists. 
The aim of this work is to classify dental X-ray images 
into decayed or normal teeth images. So, we have used 1/3 of 
images for training each class and the rest of other images in 
the dataset were used for the classification test [14]. 
The size of input images is 64-by-64 pixels which is an 
entry vector having as dimension 4096. The images have 
been adjusted in such way that the value of the pixels is 
between 0 and 1. For each image, there are two possible 
labels, corresponding to decayed or normal teeth images.  
 
Figure 2.  Some Dental X-ray images of our data set 
As we can see in Fig. 2, we can view some of the images 
after loading the training data. 
For this experience, all considered networks have a 
hidden layer containing 3 units and a layer of output. The 
structure of the different auto-encoders, as we can see in Fig. 
3, is chosen in a consistent manner. Each experience has been 
repeated 20 times, with 500 iterations for the training and 400 
iterations for the final learning.      
X1
X2
X3
X4
Xn
h1
h2
h3
X1
X1
X1
X1
X1
X1
....
....
....
....
S
Input image
1st hidden layer 
2nd hidden layer 
3rd hidden layer 
Stacked Sparse Auto-encoders
Softmax Classfier
Input raw Pixels
 
Figure 3.   Shematization of stacked auto-encoder and a softmax classfier is to classify dental X-ray images into tooth decay or normal tooth images
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

To measure the quality of our classification system, we 
perform the result by the confusion matrix (Table 1). The 
classification test of our deep neural networks shows very 
good performance with a rate that reaches 97%. 
TABLE I.  
QUALITATIVE RESULT OF OUR CLASSIFICATION APPROACH 
Accuracy  
                            97% 
Target Class 
Tooth 
Decay  
Normal 
Tooth 
Class 
precision 
Output 
class 
Tooth Decay 
48 % 
1% 
98% 
Normal Tooth 
2% 
49% 
96.1% 
Class recall  
96% 
98% 
 
 
     In this Table, 48% of all tooth images are correctly 
classified as decayed teeth. Similarly, 49% cases are correctly 
classified as normal teeth. 1% of all images are incorrectly 
classified as decayed teeth. Similarly, 2% of all data are 
incorrectly classified as normal teeth. Out of teeth decay 
predictions, 98% are correct, and for the normal teeth 
predictions, 96.1% are correct. For all teeth decay cases, 96% 
are correctly predicted as decayed teeth. For all normal teeth 
cases, 98% are correctly classified. Overall, 97% of the 
predictions are correct. 
 
Figure 4.  ROC Curve  
Fig. 4 illustrates the performance of our classifier model 
by showing the TPR (True Positive Rate) against the FPR 
(False Positive Rate) for different threshold values. 
V.  CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a deep neural network using Stacked Sparse 
Auto-encoder framework is presented for classification of 
dental X-ray images. The aim of this work is to classify dental 
X-ray images into decayed or normal teeth images. 
In this work, we have used stacked sparse auto-encoder 
containing three hidden layers and a softmax classifier. 
The conclusion we can draw from our experiments is: in 
comparison with the classic approach to random initialization 
of the network weight, this method promotes a convergence 
of the network to a better local minimum as well in 
classification with regression. This method gives a good 
result, as approved in Table 1. However, the accuracy and 
reliability of our results can be improved using a larger dental 
database. 
The implementation of training strategies on really deep 
structures with several hidden layers is a future extension of 
this work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
        The authors would like to acknowledge the financial 
support of this work by grants from General Direction of  
Scientific Research (DGRST), Tunisia, under the ARUB 
program. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. B. Diniz1, J. Rodrigues, and A. Lussi, “Traditional and Novel 
Caries Detection Methods”, Contemporary Approach to Dental Caries, 
Eds Ming-Yu Li, Chapter 6, 2012. 
[2] C Badet and B Richard, “ Dental caries”,  EMC-Dentisterie, 'pp. 40-
48, 2004. 
[3] R. Ben Ali, R. Ejbali, and M.  Zaied, “ GPU-based Segmentation of 
Dental X-ray Images using Active Contours Without Edges”, 15th 
International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and 
Applications, pp. 505 – 510, 2015. 
[4] H. M.. El Damanhoury, K. S. Fakhruddin, and M. A. Awad, 
“Effectiveness of teaching International Caries Detection and 
Assessment System II and its e-learning program to freshman dental 
students on occlusal caries detection,” European journal of dentistry , 
pp. 493–497, 2014. 
[5] A. Vashishth, B.  Kaushal, and A. Srivastava, “ Caries Detection 
Technique for Radiographic and Intra Oral Camera Images,” 
International Journal of Soft Computing and Engineering (IJSCE), pp. 
2231-2307, Volume-4, Issue-2, 2014. 
[6] Y. Bengio, A. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning : A 
review and new perspectives.”, IEEE transactions on pattern analysis 
and machine intelligence, pp. 580-587, 2013 
[7] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classification 
with deep convolutional neural networks”, In NIPS, pp. 1097–1105, 
2012. 
[8] J. Xu, L. Xiang, Q. Liu,  H. Gilmore, J. Wu, J. Tang, and A. 
Madabhushi,“ Stacked Sparse Autoencoder (SSAE) for Nuclei 
Detection on Breast Cancer Histopathology Images,” IEEE Trans Med 
ol. 35, issue 1, pp. 119-130, 2016 
[9] S. Kositbowornchai,S. Siriteptawee,S. Plermkamon,S. Bureerat, D. 
Chetchotsak, “Anartificial neural network for detection of simulated 
dental caries, Int.J.Comput.Assist.Radiol.Surg., pp. 91–96, 2006. 
[10] T Saravanan, MS Raj, K Gopalakrishnan, “Identification of Early 
Caries in Human Tooth Using Histogram and Power Spectral 
Analysis”, Middle-East Journal of Scientific Research, pp. 871-875, 
2014. 
[11] E. D. Berdouses, G. D. Koutsouri, E.F. Tripoliti, G. K. Matsopoulos, 
C. J. Oulis, and D. I. Fotiadis. A computer-aided automated 
methodology for the detection and classification of occlusal caries from 
photographic color images. Comput Biol Med., pp.119–135, 2015 
[12] N. Srivastava, G. Hinton, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. 
Salakhutdinov, “Dropout : A simple way to prevent neural networks 
from overfitting”, The Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 15, 
no. 1, pp. 1929–1958, 2014.  
[13] D. Kumar, A. Wong, and D. A. Clausi, “Lung nodule classification 
using deep features in ct images,” Computer and Robot Vision (CRV), 
2015 12th Conference on, pp. 133–138, 2015.. 
[14] X. Zhang, H. Dou, T. Ju, Jun Xu, and S. Zhang, “Fusing Heterogeneous 
Features from Stacked Sparse Autoencoder for Histopathological 
Image Analysis”, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 
2015. 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[15] A. E. Rad, I. B. M. Amin, M. S. M. Rahim, and H. Kolivand. 
“Computer-Aided Dental Caries Detection System from X-Ray 
Images”, In Computational Intelligence in Information Systems 
Springer. International Publishing, pp.233-243, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

