Proposal of a Computer Supported Collaborative Work Model for E-Commerce 
Web Sites Based on a Quality Guiding Framework
Hédia Jegham 
ISITCom University of Sousse  
Sousse Tunisia 
e-mail: jegham_hedia@yahoo.fr 
Sonia Ghannouchi
ISG Sousse University of Sousse 
Sousse Tunisia 
e-mail: sonia.ayachi@isgs.rnu.tn
Abstract—The exponential growth of e-commerce practices 
around the world is about to transform drastically traditional 
commerce by its infrastructure potential, the measurement of 
its intensity and its effects on the emergence of an information 
society. The study of the quality of e-commerce web sites is 
then prevalent; it is based on a review of literature in several 
fields: management, web-marketing, software engineering and 
Computer Supported Collaborative Work. The paper has a 
dual purpose, to propose at first a framework to guide the 
quality of e-commerce web sites and then to validate it by 
designing 
and 
developing 
a 
Computer 
Supported 
Collaborative Work. The framework was based on e-
commerce web site’s life cycle and Deming’s wheel in addition 
to a quality measurement scale named e-ComDecaQual as it is 
in ten areas: ergonomics, features, content structure and 
information richness, compatibility, security, accessibility, 
referencing-positioning 
and 
e-reputation, 
adherence 
to 
regulations, compliance with standards, and sustainable 
development. 
Keywords-e-commerce; quality; dimension; measurement scale; 
CSCW. 
I. INTRODUCTION
The World Wide Web, being a giant of information and 
communication technology, allows millions of Internet 
users to engage in business transactions that literally 
transcribe reality and even surpass it by imposing new 
practices and by building creative horizons towards new 
uses and new business models. The United Nations 
Economic and Social Council [42] considers that 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs), 
characterized as universal technologies, have a great 
capacity to enhance development by increasing: 
•
Efficiency of economic and social processes; 
•
Efficiency 
of 
cooperation 
between 
different 
stakeholders; 
•
The volume and range of information available to 
individuals, businesses and governments. 
In the e-commerce domain in particular, we are indeed 
witnessing a frenetic development of applications constantly 
enriched with new services, new forms of navigation, and 
new features of interfaces ranging from flash animations 
that apply quick-views, various zooms on product store, 
specialized research, price comparisons, virtual visits and 
virtual fitting by augmented reality. On certain sites, the 
user becomes "prosumer". "Prosumer" is a new marketing 
concept; it is a diminutive, shortcut and concatenation of 
two words producer and consumer [15]. Consumer becomes 
"prosumer" by participating in the design of his own product 
or service as it is possible on "freeyourshirt" site [69]; the 
examples are multiple. The "prosumer" chooses his location, 
product, then the colour, the size, the picture or design or 
text to be printed on thus he becomes producer of his 
individualized product. 
There is much material for the study of the quality of e-
commerce web sites (E-CWS), which can play a major role 
in improving the turnover of e-commerce by increasing 
traffic. The quality of merchant sites can play a key role in 
attracting customers, gaining their trust and increasing their 
satisfaction, in retaining them and generating competitive 
success. We will therefore base the foundation of a 
framework using a measuring scale that emphasizes the 
quality of an E-CWS. This quality guidance framework 
would constitute an infrastructure of a Computer Supported 
for Cooperative Work (CSCW). 
This paper is structured into six sections. In Section 2, 
the subject is framed in its context and explained by a set of 
questions. In Section 3, a review of the literature is exposed 
and dispatched on the specialties that gave serious 
consideration to the subject, namely management, software 
engineering, web-marketing scholars and practitioners. 
Section 4 gives a synthesis of literature and classifies 
quality domains to prepare Section 5, which is reserved for 
the design of quality guidance framework for e-commerce 
web sites. In Section 6, a validation aspect of quality 
guidance Framework is offered by Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work. 
II. GENERAL CONTEXT AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Several factors come into play to boost or to slow down 
the flowering rate of e-commerce and consequently 
economy. Among these factors we can cite the degree of 
adherence 
to 
technological 
progress, 
comprehensive 
requirement engineering for a project as E-CWS, legislation 
in force in a country, rigorous compliance with standards. 
Adopting a framework for enhancing E-CWS’ quality must 
be considered as part of a quality strategy. During the 
resolution of this issue the study sought to respond these 
questions:  
•
How do companies that practice e-commerce 
guarantee their evolution and their sustainability 
despite their competitors? 
•
Are there precedent means for improving E-CWS’ 
quality? What are the main guidelines or quality 
domains for E-CWS? How these domains are 
refined and how can they be measured?  
•
How do quality dimensions of E-CWS help satisfy 
the customer? 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

•
How to prove and verify such a framework for E-
CWS’ quality? 
As the study seeks to formalize a framework of quality 
for E-CWS, several examinations of theoretical foundations 
about quality were made as a review of literature in different 
domains such as in general management, in merchant web 
practices, in software engineering and in web technologies. 
The objective guided by a firm desire for a continuous 
improvement of quality is firstly to identify relevant 
dimensions and items of E-CWS’ quality, in order to 
propose them a set of control tools. In a second step, by 
dispatching the quality control tools on the various jobs 
profiles, which intervene throughout the life cycle of E-
CWS, we end up formalizing a quality framework for E-
CWS. In a third step, because of an intensive collaborative 
work between team members, CSCW was checked to learn 
how it is possible to concretize the framework in it. 
III.
LITERATURE REVIEW
According to John Ruskin, "Quality is never an 
accident; it is always the result of an intelligent effort" [70]. 
Considering that we are dealing with e-commerce quality 
we need to come back to former disciplines’ contributions 
as management, web-marketing and software engineering. 
These ones will be introduced in following sub-sections.  
A.
Quality in management 
The quality has blossomed in the United States through 
the works of Shewart and Deming, but it has also flourished 
in Japan, and its pioneers are Ishikawa et al. [23][47]. 
Quality is a constantly evolving and predictive foundation 
closely linked to developments in the industrial sectors. It is 
marked by economic movements and the history of 
companies, in particular globalization and the gathering of 
international markets. It focuses on an ultimate goal of 
customer satisfaction, delivering quality products and 
services. The company must deploy a continuous quest to 
identify and define customer needs and expectations in 
order to improve itself, and improve the quality of its 
products and services. Giordano [25] defines quality as "the 
set of sensory and sensorial impressions, as well as clues 
that appeal and attract attention from the first glance, 
interpreted by the consumer as a promise of quality that 
gives him trust, and satisfies him during the use". Yu and 
his collaborators propose that perceived quality is a 
subjective judgment constructed in the mind of the user and 
it is him who determines its value [67]. 
According to the quality management researcher 
Ishikawa [47], it can only be defined in terms of whoever 
does it; for the worker: quality means "being proud of his 
work". For the manager of the company: quality means "the 
realization of the requested production". For the manager of 
the methods: "the quality is the respect of the 
specifications". For the marketing director: "quality is the 
best fit of the product to the expectations of the public". As 
maintained by Chikli [5], "Quality is not the only goal to 
hold a diploma or a certification, the aim is to improve the 
company continuously so that it is more in step with the 
demands of the market". Literature detects the addition of 
other terms, which are embedded to quality in order to 
imply various meanings: Quality inspection, quality control, 
quality insurance and total quality management. All the 
tools and means used to achieve a quality level must be 
replicated on all internal and external processes that 
contribute to the manufacturing of the product or the design 
of the service. In this way, if quality is the act of satisfying 
the customer, total quality concerns the whole company, 
with its environment relations. 
This induces that quality has different views and it is 
oriented to satisfy customer. It concerns every worker and it 
must be replicated all over a firm’s functions and aspects. 
B.
Quality in software engineering 
From a computer science perspective, according to 
Burdet [63], the quality of software raises the problem of 
confusion due to the overuse of the reference framework for 
a given specialty. This fact runs counter the achievement of 
satisfaction, which is the first quality challenge. Indeed, the 
programmer will be interested in the possibility of code 
reuse; the system engineer will be interested in the 
performance and the optimized use of resources; the 
maintenance specialist will more aim at the predisposition 
of the software to modification, improvement and evolution. 
"The ability of a set of intrinsic characteristics to meet 
requirements" is the definition that was adopted by ISO 
9000 for quality software. It dismisses all subjective and 
personal vision; it reveals its strong link to demands or 
requirements engineering. Kano distinguishes between 
explicit and implicit or latent requirements [71]. The 
satisfaction levels of the clients are combined in the Kano 
diagram and are analysed in this way: The quality of 
software is therefore its ability to satisfy expressed but also 
tacit demands. The Kano diagram presented on an 
orthonormal frame includes a diagonal line that goes 
through 
the 
origin 
and 
represents 
the 
expressed 
functionalities; they are formulated by the client who feels 
more satisfied as they are more controlled. On the other 
hand, if the functionalities include any defect, they lead to a 
fall in proportional satisfaction. The Kano diagram [71] also 
includes two hyperbolas: the one at the bottom of the 
diagonal represents the obvious and basic functionality to 
talk first about product and neutral satisfaction. The smallest 
defect in these functions is disastrous (personal data 
security, payment security and product delivered not 
conforming to the representation on the site). The hyperbola 
at the top is that of the attractive and unpredictable features 
that are part of the provocation of the client’s latent needs 
and the creation of expectations. With a minimum of these 
functions, the customer can be exalted. These are value-
adding functions and an opportunity for innovation. This 
can be noticed in virtual testing interfaces on some E-CWS 
or in the interfaces completing the design of customizable 
products. Keeping up with a highly competitive conjecture, 
which includes taking possession of ICT implies that it is no 
longer worth to conform to the quality of the explicit 
requirements or the basic ones for software. One should 
rather look for attractive features to be distinguished. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Consistent with software engineering, it should also be 
pointed out that quality is governed by two model families, 
the models of certification and those of maturity and 
improvement [52]. As examples of the first family of 
models, we can quote the ISO 9000 certification, the France 
Telecom TQE and the DOD 2167A certification. In the 
second family whose purpose is to measure the ability of 
engineering company to develop and maintain quality 
software, we can enumerate the Software-Capability 
Maturity Model (SW-CMM), Trillium (from Bell Canada 
for Telecommunications) and the Software Process 
Improvement and Capability Determination (SPICE) project 
launched in 1993 with the objective of establishing a 
normative 
model 
for 
the 
evaluation 
of 
software 
development processes in the organizations concerned [52]. 
Without pretending to reach the scale of such projects that 
require great human and material investments, it is in the 
second family that we place our attempt to propose a 
framework and a CSCW to enhance E-CWS’ quality. 
C.
Quality according to Web-marketing scholars and 
practitioners 
Several studies have been carried out to find domains 
that greatly influence the perceived quality of E-CWS. Parts 
of them have confirmed the importance of certain domains 
without constructing scales. Some other contributions have 
resulted in formal scales for measuring e-commerce service 
quality. Practically all the studies are based on the same 
research methodology: considering client satisfaction by 
making assumptions, formulating each hypothesis with a set 
of questions that can have qualitative and measurable 
answers according to Lickert scale. The hypothesis is used 
to verify the importance of an aspect of perceived quality. 
This would insinuate a quality dimension. The different 
questions that define a hypothesis transcribe some detail that 
corresponds to a quality item. Results of the questionnaires 
administered to a public of respondents lead to various 
statistical models confirming or invalidating hypotheses. 
They also yield indicators for the degree of correlation of 
quality items. The scale’s coherence is high if the responses 
to the elements are correlated with each other and with the 
total score of the scale. The scale’s coherence is doubtful if 
the scores of several elements are in contradiction with the 
total score. Researchers resort to calculate the Cronbach 
alpha as a method to estimate the internal coherence of their 
scales [17]. 
Among the recurring fixed hypotheses that led to quality 
dimensions and that can be named, we can mention the 
quality of design or ergonomics, information richness, 
reliability, ease of use, responsiveness, security, service, 
efficiency, privacy. Domains found in literature are 
organized separately based on whether they emanate from 
simple studies or from famous scales or further more if they 
are introduced by practitioners. In the following passages 
we list them in descending order of number of authors who 
cited them. 
In studies that did not officialise scales, most quoted 
domain was quality of design, number of researchers 
included 
it 
in 
their 
surveys 
[1][13][27][31][33]-
[36][39][43][48][49][50][54][55][57]. 
Second, scholars dealt with variety and quality of 
information in their studies such as[1][12][13][27][29]-
[31][34][36][43][48][49][54][55][57]. Security domain is in 
third place as well as reliability and reactivity. These 
scholars 
took 
security 
into 
account 
[12] 
[13][27][31][34][39][43][48][49][54][57][64]. Then ease of 
use 
was 
quoted 
by 
[13][35]-
[36][43][48][50][54][55][64][65]. A quality criterion called 
customization was evoked by [33][34][39][43][48][50][55]. 
Performance (or quoted by some ones efficiency) was cited 
by [13][31][39][46][54][56]. Privacy was quoted by 
[13][46][49][56]. We found also reputation quoted by 
[39][46][57][64][65]. 
Feeling 
quoted 
by 
[12][31][39][46][50][55]. 
Despite the fact that Paschaloudis’s study [46] does not 
fall directly within the domain of e-commerce and even if it 
does not bring a new scale, we consider it for several 
reasons: It is a solid exploratory study based on the seven 
dimensions of the most famous scales. The study resulted in 
487 valid responses on a volume of 800 questionnaires, a 
factor and correlation analysis followed by a series of 
regression analysis. Its interest lies in the fact of bringing 
back a double proof, one first proof confirming the 
reliability and consistency of the two scales mentioned 
above. One second proof confirms the strong and positive 
correlation between them and the perception of the quality 
of the banking sites and thus follows the possibility of their 
applicability and reusability in other fields.  
To be complete, other to lesser degrees of citations were 
found in literature are quality of service, access, ease of 
contact, customer loyalty, interactivity, structure, trust, 
incitement, ease of ordering, ease of terms, ease of 
responding, speed of delivery, customer  support, 
community 
for 
e-reputation, 
storage 
capacity, 
maintainability and web store policies. 
As came first, the study was also extensively interested 
in proper quality scales. The scale WebqualTM proposed by 
Loiacono [37][38] is in 12 domains : (1) accommodation of 
information to the task, (2) trust, (3) response time, (4) 
attractiveness of design, (5) intuitiveness, (6) visual 
attraction, (7) creativity, (8) empathy, (9) integrated 
communication, (10) interactivity, (11) business process and 
(12) availability. SiteQual accredited by Yoo [66], has 4 
domains (1) ease of use of the site, (2) site design, (3) speed 
of the order process and (4) security. WebQual scale 
belongs to Barnes [7] and contains 3 quality domains (1) 
quality of interactivity and service (trust, empathy), (2) site 
usability (design), (3) quality of the information presented 
on the site. 
PIRQUAL of Francis [24] encloses 6 quality domains 
(1) online store features, (2) design of the product sheet, (3) 
conditions of sale, (4) conformity of delivered products, (5) 
customer service, (6) security. 
e-ServQual the most famous and former scale coined by 
Zeithaml [68]and Parasuraman [44] as cited by Buttle [11] 
is based on 11 domains : (1) reliability, (2) liability, (3) 
access, (4) flexibility, (5) navigational facility, (6) 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

efficiency, (7) insurance / trust,  (8) security, (9) knowledge 
of prices, (10) aesthetics,  (11) customization. eTailQscale
is the work of Wolfinbarger [62] based on 4 domains (1) 
reliability and compliance with commitments, (2) site 
design, (3) security / privacy, (4) services provided to 
consumers. E-S-QUAL and E-RES-QUAL is a double 
scale considered as the most famous scale set up by 
Parasuraman [45], E-S-QUAL contains (1) efficiency of the 
site, (2) compliance with commitments, (3) system 
availability, (4) respect for the privacy of users and E-RES-
QUAL contains (1) reactivity, (2) compensation and (3) 
contact.
NetQu@l conceived by Bressolles in 2006 [10], is 
composed by (1) quality and quantity of the information 
presented on the site, (2) ease of use of the site, (3) design 
or the graphic style of the site, (4) reliability and 
compliance, (5) security and privacy of personal data, (6) 
offer 
proposed 
on 
the 
site, 
(7) 
interactivity 
and 
customization. eTransQual formalized by Bauer and co-
authors [8] who recognize that a quality scale should 
integrate functional elements and hedonic ones. Their scale 
accommodates (1) features and design, (2) enjoyment 
(Pleasure), (3) business process, (4) reliability and (5) 
reactivity (responsiveness). PeSQ is the measurement tool 
of Cristobal [16] who analysed seriously what leads to user 
satisfaction levels? And what leads to loyalty? It is based on 
(1) website design, (2) customer service, (3) insurance and 
order management. The scale E-SELFQUAL proposed by 
Ding [18] was refined in 4 domains so thus: (1) Perceived 
control: you know what to expect in following steps, you 
know how long it takes to complete the transaction, and you 
know information will be provided in each page. (2) Service 
convenience: convenience for registration, convenience for 
changing items in the basket, convenience to update your 
order. (3) Customer service: customer service is easy to 
access, customer service is responsive, and customer service 
shows a sincere interest in solving problems. (4) Service 
fulfilment:  you get what you ordered, the order is delivered 
as promised, the final price reflects the true value, and the 
product was presented accurately on the site. 
D.
Quality according to practitioners 
Some other quality criteria were gathered from 
practitioners’ experience. According to Malassingne [40], 
web quality is the best way to produce content and web 
services. This encompasses the end result, but also the way 
to do it. It is determined on the basis of identified 
objectives, which make it possible to orient the choices and 
to measure the continuous improvement with regard to these 
objectives. The web quality is managed using all the 
disciplines of the web pages’ design and realization. The set 
is to ensure the best possible user experience while 
optimizing the realization processes [40]. The same 
reference quoted Lafon who started from the definition of 
the web’s god-father Tim Berners Lee: "Put the Web and its 
services at the disposal of all individuals, whatever their 
hardware or software, their network infrastructure, their 
native tongue, their culture, their geographical location, or 
their physical or mental abilities". Lafon quickly realized 
that what comes out of the Tim Berners Lee’s definition is 
the importance of practicing web quality. In its approach, it 
fits perfectly with the precursors, those of the management 
field: To deploy quality measures on all the professions of 
the web useful during the process of any website’s design 
and construction. Lafon bases his method on seven quality 
domains: (1) compliance with standards, (2) accessibility, 
(3) performance, (4) security, (5) functionalities (or 
features), (6) ergonomics and (7) referencing [40].   
Sloïm, a purely quality control manager defines web 
quality as "The ability of an online service to meet implicit 
or explicit requirements". He emphasizes the difference 
between Web Quality and Web Quality Management. The 
latter is a "Set of coordinated activities whose objective is to 
evaluate, improve and guarantee web quality" [40].  
The same reference talked about Taillandier who dealt 
with W3C standards and accessibility in the digital world to 
achieve quality. He gives this definition: "Quality is pre-
eminently an ideal to be achieved and not an end in itself" 
[40]. The challenge is to arrive at taking into account and to 
cohabit for the best all disciplines supposed to intervene in a 
modern web production chain – (1) user experience, (2) 
information architecture, (3) ergonomics, accessibility, (4) 
web design, (5) performance, (6) mobility, and (7) security 
– all of them according to the project specific constraints. In 
conformity with Google's guidelines, there are seven high-
quality criteria [4]: (1) the site must have good content, (2) 
no technical error, (3) positive reputation, (4) website must 
reveal reliability, high level of expertise in addition to some 
authority, (5) site must rotate design around its features, (6) 
the site must provide useful information about the site, and 
(7) the site must offer sufficient quantities of relevant and 
satisfactory information.
IV.
SYNTHESIS OF LITERATURE AND CLASSIFICATION OF 
QUALITY DOMAINS
As outcomes of literature review, many apprenticeships 
are won: Quality is a continuing occupation and labour. 
Quality Management is a set of coordinated activities whose 
objective is to evaluate, improve and guarantee web quality. 
Quality must be considered according to the job profile. 
Quality must be deployed in minute details of domains. E-
CWS must rotate design around its features. Great control of 
programming technologies allows offering expressed and 
attractive features. Nearly thirty domains have been 
identified, a great part of them are dealing with customer 
relationship and customer satisfaction that should be 
transposed on web sites by features.
Every domain contains a set of items. In an effort to 
draw up an almost exhaustive list of quality domains, 
terminology has been first brought closer and unified. Table 
1 shows a decreasing classification of quality domains in 
terms of citation in the literature and according to 
practitioners’ 
recommendations.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

V.DESIGN OF QUALITY GUIDANCE FRAMEWORK FOR E-
COMMERCE WEB SITES
In the development of a quality framework for E-CWS, 
steps that were followed are described in these sub-sections.  
A.
Research methodology  
 The quality of a diagnosis depends on the model’s 
quality; the model describes the organization’s vital aspects 
[19]. In order to design a model for quality guidance 
framework, an ad-hoc approach was adopted. It is described 
as follows: 
1)
Step 1 Gathering domains and items 
•
Collect the maximum of E-CWS’ quality domains 
cited by scholars and some practitioners. 
•
Collect items for each domain. 
•
Move certain domains closer and unify them as they 
have common sense, 30 domains were retained. 
Prepare a matrix: with authors on lines and quality 
domains on columns. 
•
Add a mark at the crossing if the author talks about 
the quality domain in his study. 
•
Sum marks for each quality domain to calculate 
relevance degree for a given quality domain 
according to literature. 
•
Sort totals by domains as shows Table 1 
Three separate matrixes have been produced, depending 
on whether the work proceeds from exploratory studies by 
researchers (Researchers' domains) or whether they are 
quality measurement instruments formalized on formal 
scales 
(Researchers’ 
formal 
scales) 
or 
from 
the 
recommendations of practitioners (Practitioner domains). 
The overall frequency of each of the thirty domains was 
calculated, sorted and combined in Table 1.  
2)
Step 2 Structuring domains in a scale 
•
Highlight the best domains that meet certain 
conditions: those that occupy the best ranks, those 
that correspond to the criteria of software quality 
according to software engineering, those for which 
we are able to find control tools and those that are 
easily placed on E-CWS’ life cycle. Indeed, what we 
are interested in, are domains that are currently 
possible to control by tools and those completely 
under the control of the team members (designers, 
developers, salesmen and web-marketers). 
•
Structure domains with low rates as sub-domains or 
domain items of high domains as depicted in Figure 
1. 
•
As a first outcome we selected the seven first 
domains as follows: Ergonomics, i.e., Design, 
Features, 
Content 
structure 
and 
Information 
Richness, Security, Compatibility, Accessibility and 
Referencing SEO e-reputation. 
3)
Step 3  Enriching the scale 
•
As a contribution, three domains were added. They 
were not sufficiently dealt with until then, but they 
were actually with imminent importance in e-
commerce field according to a number of scholars:  
Quality Domain and its rank 
Rate 
Quality Domain and 
its rank 
Rate 
Quality Domain and its rank 
Rate 
1- Design /Ergonomics
26 
11-Privacy 
7 
21-Maintainability 
2.5 
2- Information variety
22 
12-Access 
6.5 
22-Customer  support  
2 
3- Reliability
17 
13-Insurance 
5.33 
23-Customer loyalty/Fidelity 
2 
4-Security  
17 
14-Feeling 
4.5 
24-Incitement 
2 
5- Ease of use  
16 
15-Trust 
4.16 
25-Ease of terms  
1 
6- Reactivity
14.33 
16- Ease of ordering  
4 
26-Ease of responding   
1 
7- Service quality 
12.33 
17-Structure 
3.5 
27-Speed of delivery   
1 
8- Performance/Efficiency
11.5 
18-Interactivity 
3 
28-Community for e-reputation 
1 
9- Reputation
10.33 
19-Web store policies 
3 
29-Storage capacity 
1 
10- Customization
9 
20- Ease of contact  
2.5 
30-Low prices 
0 
Figure 1. E-ComDecaQual Scale Composition.
TABLE I.  QUALITY DOMAINS’ RATE ACCORDING TO SCHOLARS AND PRACTITIONERS
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

E-commerce regulation [6][32][53], Respect of 
standards 
[3][26][60] 
and 
Sustainable 
development[9][14][20]. 
•
Establishing a new quality scale based on ten 
domains hence the name E-ComDecaQual Figure 1. 
4)
Step 4 Associating control tools to job profiles 
•
Search for tools and test them to control the quality 
of domains’ items. 
•
Assign one or more quality domain to one or more 
job profiles. 
•
Locate quality domains on E-CWS life cycle as a 
first view of the framework, see Figure2. 
E-CWS’s quality is quality perceived by the customer. 
Thus, it mainly revolves around the customer’s satisfaction. 
To reach customer’s satisfaction, we concentrate on all job 
profiles that intervene and operate during E-CWS’s life 
cycle from its birth as a project until its decline. The process 
of designing, developing and exploiting an E-CWS is no 
more than conducting its life cycle while arranging, 
combining and calculating sequential and parallel steps with 
various profiles of jobs. In the schematic representation of 
this point of view, we distribute the quality domains of e-
ComDecaQual scale on different stages. The role of this 
framework view is to highlight job profiles and to ensure 
staff satisfaction according to quality’s predecessors; the 
managers.  
5)
Step 5 Integration in PDCA wheel 
•
Distribute quality domains on Deming’s PDCA 
wheel as another view of the framework and to 
emphasize the continuous and evolving quality 
undertaking as shows Figure 3. 
Being aware that improvement must be continuous to 
strengthen the efficiency of any project [63], the quality 
guidance framework was built around the PDCA model of 
Deming and then map the E-CWS life cycle on it. Deming 
distinguishes three types of quality [2]: 
The quality of the design / redesign: it begins from the 
expression of consumer needs and prototyping. That’s what 
we planned in the Act of the first round of the wheel Figure 
3. The company must adopt the predictive attitude and have 
a long-term vision of the needs and behaviours of 
consumers. It also must continuously operate adaptations of 
production and the commercial apparatus, that’s what we 
planned for further rounds of the wheel. 
Compliance quality is measured by the company's 
ability to conform to and then to exceed the basic product 
specifications. 
It 
is 
based 
on 
a 
managerial 
and 
organizational willpower that leads all processes involved in 
delivering the product / service to do so with a zero-defect 
goal. These are possible due to regular turns of the wheel 
and aiming for attractive features, see Figure3. 
Quality of performance: it observes, through sales 
analysis, how the product is perceived on the market and 
perceives the use that the customer makes. It is through use 
that his consciously expressed and unconscious expectations 
are revealed. The quality of performance will influence the 
quality of re-design to spin the wheel of continuous 
improvement [2]. That’s what we expressed by the e-
commerce life cycle and implication of all actors. 
B.
A model abstraction for e-ComDecaQual 
An overview of the semantics described throughout this 
study is now possible by an object data model. UML allows 
practicing an abstraction of the static vision for the quality 
guidance framework and its e-ComDecaQual scale by 
means of a class diagram, see Figure 4. The domains class is 
at the moment instantiated to the ten domains identified in 
the e-ComDecaQual scale, but it is scalable and dynamic to 
accommodate other domains with their possible structuring 
items and tools since the E-CWS are in perpetual 
relationship with technological progress. The tracking of 
including a quality domain is taken into account by 
monitoring the publications, dates and authors who brought 
back the proof and the demonstration in the manner of the 
present study. The domains class is in full aggregation with 
itself to present the possibility that a domain could be 
divided into sub-domains for a better dispatching of items 
and their measurement tools like ergonomics, which allow 
studying behavioural and structural sub-domains. The 
functional domain is also subdivided into common or 
standard functionalities, e-commerce functionalities and 
collaborative or community functionalities [59]. 
Sub-domains can have a different meaning, which is 
rather a technical structuring such as user tests, statistical 
analysis and eye-traking [59]. Each domain or sub-domain 
is a collection of items. The model even allows multi 
domain patterns (structuration or imbrication). Most items 
are measurable by tools. Tools are known to be specialised 
in one domain. E-commerce compliance with law and 
sustainability do not have classic control tools at present, 
they are related to datamining tools. As dealt with in the 
Deming’s wheel, in Figure 3, E-CWS are inventoried and 
Figure 2.  E-commerce Site’s Life Cycle and Quality Domains.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

they are subject to periodic quality control by a tool that 
measures the quality of items’ set, therefore of a particular 
domain or sub-domain. The control is requested by a 
member of the team specialized in a domain, it could be a 
content editor, a developer or integrator, a web designer or 
computer graphics designer. The quality project manager or 
the administrator coordinates their jobs. A tool naturally 
returns a comprehensible report deciphered for a domain 
specialist. The report is taken into account for the Check and 
the Act. The report is recorded and archived in the domain 
quality repository.  
The inheritance between the team member and the 
quality administrator designates that the population 
concerned is entirely either team members or quality 
administrator and that a member could combine two 
different roles, which is in general the case of the project 
manager who may have another specialty. Quality tools are 
selected and proposed by the specialists of a domain. A 
team member chooses to control E-CWS domain quality 
from this validated set of tools. The quality reports are 
ordered and dated; the PDCA wheel runs continuously. 
VI.
VALIDATION OF QUALITY GUIDANCE FRAMEWORK 
BY A COMPUTER SUPPORTED COLLABORATIVEWORK
As a guidance framework named e-ComDecaQual to 
foster the quality of E-CWS based on two axes and a 
measurement scale was specified in a first part of the 
present study, it made it possible to ascertain that it is 
closely related to domains specialities, but with great regard, 
it was also recognized that quality implicates a high 
collaboration, cooperation, coordination and communication 
between group of actors working together around an e-
commerce project, e.g., various reports monitoring tools 
often address several domains for instance ergonomic 
tools, features, content structure and  information richness 
– Thus the second part of the study is to validate the 
earlier specified quality guidance framework by adapting 
a CSCW.  
In the following section, conceptual specification 
based on computer-based technologies is presented from 
two points of view, from 3C specification (Collaboration, 
Cooperation, and Communication) and then from 
functional specification to give finally an overall view. 
A.   Preliminary 
At present it is a clear fact that among most visited 
websites, we find social networks as Facebook and 
Google Hangout, collaborative document editors as 
Google docs, online games, which are part of 
collaborative applications. According to Teruel et al. [58], 
there is a collaborative trend for modern software 
nevertheless, despite the possibility to adopt exhaustive 
methodologies to design them, these methodologies have 
a great deficiency, and they do not seriously treat 
Requirement Engineering stage. This lack comes from the 
complexity of dispatching user requirements on CSCW’s 
conventional tasks (3C: Collaborating, Cooperating, and 
Communicating), which in turn is subject to the degree of 
users’ awareness [58]. Consequently, to avoid these 
weaknesses, a special consideration will be taken while 
designing e-ComDecaQual’s CSCW. Before that, there is a 
need to clarify the ambiguity between groupware and 
CSCW. 
By focusing on how computer networking technologies 
can support collaborative control quality activities, great 
polemic was felt to firmly settle on a similar or a 
distinguished definition for CSCW and groupware. 
According to Whitaker [61], it is in 1984 that Greif and 
Cashman coined the label Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW) as a marketing tag for a vision of integrated 
office IT support.  He also presents the first definition 
introduced by Bannon and Schmidt in 1989 [61]: "...A 
shorthand way of referring to a set of concerns about 
supporting multiple individuals working together with 
computer systems". But the definition of Eseryel et al. [22] 
seems to be more close to context of quality: "CSCW 
systems are collaborative environments that support 
dispersed working groups so as to improve quality and 
productivity".
CSCW is also known as a multi-disciplinary research 
field bearing upon tools, techniques, task orientation and 
workflows that are networked and/or distributed. It is 
belonging to an emergent phenomenon that deals with 
Technological Support for Work Group Collaboration, 
Collaborative Systems, Workgroup Computing, Group 
Decision 
Support 
Systems 
(GDSS), 
Interpersonal 
Computing, 
Augmented 
Knowledge 
Workshops, 
Coordination 
Technology, 
Computer-Assisted 
Communications 
(CAC), 
Computer-Mediated 
Communication (CMC) and Flexible Interactive Technolo- 
Figure 3. PDCA Cycle of Continuous Improvement of an e-Commerce 
Web Site. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 4. e-ComDecaQual Framework Abstraction by a Class Diagram.
gies for Multi-Person Tasks. According to Whitaker too 
[61], in 1978 the word Groupware was conceived by 
Johnson-Lenz 
and 
Johnson-Lenz 
to 
mean:" 
Intentional GROUP processes and procedures to achieve 
specific purposes plus softWARE tools designed to support 
and facilitate the group's work". 
"A groupware makes the user aware that he is part of a 
group, while most other software seeks to hide and protect 
users from each other ...  Groupware ... is software that 
accentuates the multiple user environment, coordinating 
and orchestrating things so that users can “see” each other, 
yet do not conflict with each other", a definition of Kevin J. 
Lynch brought back by Griffiths [51].  
At the end, we are perfectly at ease with claiming that 
groupware refers to computer-based systems to assist 
interacting 
groups 
whereas 
Computer 
Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW) focuses on the study of how 
groups work and how implement technology to boost their   
interaction and collaboration in addition to studying their 
psychological, social, and organizational effects [21][41]. 
B.
Collaboration, Cooperation, and Communication (3C) 
specification of e-ComDecaQual’s CSCW  
Dealing 
with 
CSCW 
implies 
several 
kinds 
of 
interactions: Collaboration, Cooperation, Coordination, 
Contribution, and Communication. For each one, there is a 
battery of supporting tools and techniques such as e-mails, 
discussion forums, chat-rooms, videoconferences, and posts 
announcements for communication. Distributed learning 
environment besides web-based tool kit, facilitate the 
sharing, and organization of ideas for collaboration. Control 
access to different documents, granting rights and 
prioritization for coordination and control is also made 
possible.  
The collaborative and cooperative approaches can be 
considered as two poles rather than two distinct 
apprehensions; 
one 
evolves 
from 
cooperation 
to 
collaboration. In order to grasp their differences, it is 
necessary to observe the nuances relating to the autonomy 
and the degree of control as well as the means used to 
achieve the goal and to carry out the task and to clearly 
differentiate the level of interdependency between the 
participants. 
Cooperative and collaborative groups work towards a 
common or shared goal. It is in the way of sharing work that 
difference is most visible. Indeed, the way to achieve the 
goal through cooperation is based on the distribution of 
tasks and responsibilities within the group to achieve the 
goal cooperatively. This corresponds to the nature of work 
to lead an e-commerce website project in its entirety and in 
full respect of its life cycle.  
On the other hand collaboration requires individual 
responsibility to achieve the goal, which corresponds to the 
intrinsic responsibility of a specialist member of one domain 
of the e-ComDecaQual scale: Member or team of graphic 
designer, member or group of developers, member or group 
of marketers etc. In the way of carrying out common task, 
there are other dependencies: The maturity of groups, 
interactions between members and the way every one 
considers the goal [28]. 
Collaboration implies a shared vision of a very high 
level with a derisory importance for the division of tasks. 
On the other hand, coordination requires a high control level 
of the subdivisions of the tasks with moderate look for a 
shared vision. Cooperation is between the two. 
The ability to collaborate involves a gradual prior 
appropriation of other abilities, such as cooperation, 
coordination, contribution and communication. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The model of the e-ComDecaQual scale with the PDCA 
axis has clearly emphasized the involvement of a member 
specialized in a domain. This detail is made explicit in 
Figure 
5 
and 
its 
legend 
in 
Table 
2.
C.
Functional specification of e-ComDecaQual’s CSCW 
The proposal for quality guiding framework of E-CWS’ 
is being concretized and validates by developing a CSCW 
structured around ten domains scale named e-ComDecaQual 
and which offers a range of tools broken down according to 
the items of each domain. Some tools can be measuring 
instruments for several domains. Domains as well as their 
tools are specific to the various job profiles of the team 
around the E-CWS. The CSCW allows creation of domains, 
their 
possible 
structuring 
in 
sub-domains 
and 
the 
arrangement of items in various domains / sub-domains. It 
allows assignment of tools to check items. CSCW allows 
registration of team members and their association to job 
profiles.  
It allows collaborative work between them supervised by 
a Quality Control Administrator who could have the 
function of project manager. Team members exchange 
messages with the administrator and receive notifications. 
The E-CWS either under construction, or operating, are 
registered by their URLs and their specifications or user 
requirements (Plan) in order to ensure their quality control 
by rotating (Do) each time a quality domain controlling tool 
and by getting back a report (Check). As an e-commerce 
web site advances his life cycle, a domain or sub-domain is 
monitored. E-ComDecaQual groupware centralizes the 
reports in a repository by allowing their versioning (Act). 
The repository is a capitalization of know-how in the 
various quality domains and an experience accumulation of 
all domains.  
The CSCW functional aspects are represented according 
to 
the 
formalism 
of 
UML’s 
Use 
Case 
Diagram 
(UCD).Figure 6(a) shows the overall functionality supported 
by the groupware and offered to the main actor: The Quality 
Control Manager or Administrator. Figure 6(b) shows the 
functional aspects permitted for any job profile carried out 
by any team member. It is naturally allowed for the 
administrator. Figure 6(c) details the features related to 
quality reports management and related to the global 
repository for e-commerce web site, which leads to the 
accumulation of domains know-how. Figure 6(d) shows 
what is involved in managing the e-ComDecaQual quality 
repository framework. 
An overall view of the work is conjugated in Figure7; it 
shows the goals of the research, it recalls the quality 
guidance framework stand on two axes (life cycle and 
PDCA cycle) and a scale, it summarizes the details of the 
measurement tool e-ComDecaQual based on ten quality 
domains, and it evokes the most important kind of 
interactions between actors. 
VII.
CONCLUSION
Although e-commerce web sites’ quality is progressively 
attracting researchers’ attention, existing scientific literature 
is mainly focused on identifying quality dimensions from 
Internet users’ viewpoint. This has not been taken in a 
comprehensive approach taking into account the work force 
around it. It pays no deep attention to total quality 
management for an E-CWS. It therefore did not focus on 
quality domain constituents’ census and their structuring, no 
longer on the identification of instruments and tools for 
Legend 
Admin  
QC
Quality Control Administrator /Project Manager 
2 
2- Direct communication between team member with the same 
profile: Computer-Mediated communication (CMC) 
TM 
A Team Member : can have different or same speciality with 
another TM 
2’ 
2’- Coordinate 
Art 
Art: Artefact of work of domain and its items 
3 
3- Collaboration: Working using platforms, APIs, languages, 
design tools, frameworks etc…
GA 
Global Artefact 
4 
4- Control quality with dedicated tools, retrieving control 
report and feedback with shared work objects (versioning 
Domain quality report) (feedback mistakes weaknesses and 
warnings)  
QDR 
QDR: Quality Domain Repository. To be verified 
5 
5- Cooperate 
GR 
GR: Global Repository: to be verified and to feed through for 
communication of awareness. 
6 
6- Knowledge management by gathering and collecting final 
quality control reports to constitute the Global Repository 
1 
1- Understanding: meeting and decision support systems for 
common understanding 
Figure 5. 3C Network of e-ComDecaQual’s CSCW 
TABLE  II. 3C SPECIFICATION OF E-COMDECAQUAL’S CSCW
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

(d) Use Case Diagram Management of the Quality Repository
(c) Use Case Diagram Management of e-ComDecaQual scale. 
Figure 6. Functional Specification of e-ComDecaQual’s CSCW.
quality measurement and control. Almost all studies are 
based on working hypotheses and surveys to produce 
mathematical and statistical models without proposing any 
quality approach. This work attempted to fill the gap by 
proposing a quality guiding framework based on a model 
and axes. One axis was to dispatch quality domains on E-
CWS’s life cycle, another axis for continuous quality by 
Deming’s wheel in addition to a measurement scale named 
e-ComDecaQual. The quality guidance framework was after 
that, validated by conceiving a CSCW. Immediate work 
requires the development of a detailed CSCW architecture, 
but the research has established the basis for a number of 
other future works, such as proving the scale e-
ComDecaQual by an exploratory study on a representative 
sample. Managing the quality repository leads first to an 
aspect of knowledge management that can enrich the 
functionality of the CSCW. The repository requires a 
serious work on formatting, unifying and aggregating 
quality tool reports. The study also opens the opportunity 
for further refinements such as proposing quality 
Frameworks and CSCW for other e-commerce business 
models such as B2B, e-Gov and intermediation models.
(a) Use Case Diagram e-ComDecaQual Groupware System Overview.
(b) Use Case Diagram Work of a Member with a Job Profile
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 7. CSCW Model for E-Commerce Web Sites Based on Quality Guiding Framework 
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Aladwani and P. C. Palvia, “Developing and validating 
an instrument for measuring user-perceived web quality”.  
Information & management, vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 467-476, 
2002. 
[2]
A. Jouandeau, “Contribution to the modeling of customer 
satisfaction 
by 
the 
fuzzy 
logic”. 
 
Available 
from:http://theses.insa-
lyon.fr/publication/2004ISAL0063/these.pdf 8 octobre 2004. 
Retrieved: August, 2017.   
[3]
M. Alshamari, “Accessibility Evaluation of Arabic E-
Commerce Web Sites Using Automated Tools”. Journal of 
Software Engineering and Applications, vol. 9, no 09, pp. 
439, 2016.
[4]
A. Voget, “Official: Google's definition of a high quality 
website”. 
 
Available 
from: 
http://newsletter.seoprofiler.com/newsletter709.htm 
24 
novembre 2015.  Retrieved: June, 2017.
[5]
B. 
Chikli, 
“Memory: 
The 
process 
of 
continuous 
improvement within an IT services company”.  Available 
from:     http://fr.slideshare.net/baptistechikli/la-dmarche-
damlioration-continue-au-sein-dune-ssii?qid=0b3c0151-
326f-49a8-8695 
fb96d319306b&v=default&b=&from_search=205 
juillet 
2012.  Retrieved: May, 2017.
[6] C. E. Barnat, “Computer Law Course 2014/2015”.University 
of Manouba Higher School of Digital Economy.  Available 
from:http://chemsjuris-dr-e-
com.blogspot.com/2012/11/cours-de-droit-du-commerce-
electronique.html.  Retrieved: May, 2017.
[7] S. J. Barnes and R. T. Vidgen, (2001,) “Assessing the Quality 
of Auction Web Sites”. System Sciences. Proceedings of the 
34th Annual Hawaii International Conference on. IEEE, 
2001, pp. 10. 
[8] H. H. Bauer, T. Falk, and M. Hammerschmidt, “eTransQual: 
A Transaction Process-based Approach for Capturing 
Service Quality in Online Shopping”. Journal of Business 
Research, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 866-875, 2006. 
[9] L. B. Chevalier, F. De Coninck, and  B. Motte-Baumvol 
(2014). “The peri-urban sustainability of the automotive 
sector in relation to online purchasing practices of 
households”. 51st colloquium of the Association of Regional 
Science of French Language: Metropolisation, cohesion and 
performance: what future for our territories?, In ASRDLF 
2014.
[10] G. Bressolles, “Electronic Quality of Service: NetQu @ 1 
Proposal of a Measurement Scale Applied to Merchant Sites 
and Moderator Effects”. Research and Applications in 
Marketing (French Edition),vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 19–45, 2006.  
Available from :www.jstor.org/stable/40572002. 
[11] F. Buttle, “SERVQUAL: Review, Critique, Research 
Agenda”.  European Journal of Marketing, Vol. 30 No. 1, pp. 
8-32, 1996. 
[12] M. Cao, Q. Zhang, and J. Seydel, (2005), “B2C e-Commerce 
Web Site Quality: an Empirical Examination”.    Industrial 
Management & Data Systems, vol. 105, no 5, p. 645-661, 
2005.
[13] C. Hamadi, “The perceived quality of Internet banking and 
its impact on customer satisfaction and commitment”. 
Doctoral dissertation, Toulouse 1, 2007.
[14] C. Larre and C. Magdelaine, “The Internet consumes more 
and more energy: how to avoid saturation?”.  Available 
from: 
http://www.notre-planete.info/actualites/4328-
consommation-energie-web-saturation 
27 
août 
2015.  
Retrieved: May, 2017. 
[15] B. Cova and P. Ezan. “The consumer-collaborator: activities, 
expectations and impacts. The case of Warhammer 
passionate”. Acts JRMB 2008.
[16] E. Cristobal, C. Flavián, and M. Guinalíu, “Perceived e-
service quality (PeSQ) Measurement validation and effects 
on consumer satisfaction and web site loyalty”. Managing 
service quality: An international journal, vol. 17, no 3, p. 
317-340, 2007. 
[17] L.J. Cronbach, “Coefficient alpha and the internal structure 
of tests”. Psychometrika 1951, vol. 16, no 3, p. 297-334, doi: 
10.1007/BF02310555. 
[18] D. X. Ding, P. J. H. Hu, and O. R. L. Sheng, “e-SELFQUAL 
A scale for measuring online self-service quality”.   Journal 
of Business Research, May 2011, vol. 64, no 5, pp. 508-515. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[19] D. Proulx, “Management of public organizations”. 2nd 
edition reviewed and corrected. Theory and applications 
Press edition of University of Quebec, 2010. 
[20] D. 
Desbois, 
C. 
Gossart, 
N. 
Jullien, 
and 
J. 
B. 
Zimmermann, “Sustainable development in the face of ICT”. 
No. hal-00609295, 2011. 
[21] C. Ellis and J. Wainer, “10 Groupware and Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work”. Multiagent Systems: a 
modern approach to distributed artificial intelligence, pp. 
425, 1999. 
[22] D. Eseryel, R. Ganesan, and G. S. Edmonds, (2002). 
“Review 
of 
computer-supported 
collaborative 
work 
systems”. Educational Technology &Society, vol. 5, no 2, 
pp. 130-136, 2002. 
[23] F. Elgamouz, M. Firni, and A.  Ismaili, “Management de la 
qualité dans les entreprises marocaines”. Université Moulay 
Ismail de Meknès - Licence en sciences économiques et 
gestion. 
Available 
from:http://www.memoireonline.com/11/12/6506/m_Manag
ement-de-la-qualite-dans-les-entreprises-
marocaines1.html#fn1, 2009.  Retrieved: May, 2017.
[24] J. E. Francis and L. White, “PIRQUAL: A scale for 
measuring customer expectations and perceptions of quality 
in Internet retailing”. K. Evans & L. Scheer (Eds.), pp. 263-
270, 2002.
[25] J.L. Giordano,  The perceived quality approach. Groupe 
Eyrolles 2006, ISBN : 2-7081-3493-0. 380 p. 
[26] G. Davis, G. Olsen, and J. Zeldman,“Working together for 
standards The Web Standards Project”. Available from: 
http://www.webstandards.org/learn/faq/#p2. Retrieved: July, 
2017. 
[27] H. Djajadikerta and T. Trireksani, “Measuring University 
Web Site Quality: A Development of a User Perceived 
Instrument and its Initial Implementation to Web sites of 
Accounting Departments in New Zealand’s Universities”. 
School of Accounting, Finance and Economics & FIMARC 
Working Paper Series, September 2006, pp. 1-23. 
[28] F. Henri and K. Lundgren-Cayrol, “Cooperative Learning vs. 
Collaborative 
Learning”. 
 
Available 
from:http://www.ticeduforum.ci/henri-lundgren-cayrol-
apprentissage-cooperatif-vs-apprentissage-collaboratif/.  
Retrieved: August, 2017. 
[29] D. L. Hoffman and   T. P. Novak, “Marketing in hypermedia 
computer-mediated 
environments: 
Conceptual 
foundations”. The Journal of Marketing 1996, pp. 50-68. 
[30] D. L. Hoffman, W. D. Kalsbeek, and   T. P. Novak, “Internet 
and Web use in the US”. Communications of the ACM, vol. 
39, no 12, pp. 36-46, 1996. 
[31] S. Janda, P. J. Trocchia, and K. P. Gwinner, “Consumer 
perceptions of Internet retail service quality”. International 
Journal of Service Industry Management, vol. 13, no 5, p.p. 
412-431, 2002. 
[32] Official Journal of Republic of Tunisia, no 64, 11 August 
2000. 
[33] G. G. Lee and H. F. Lin, “Customer perceptions of e-service 
quality in online shopping”. International Journal of Retail & 
Distribution Management, vol. 33, no 2, p.p. 161-176, 2005. 
[34] H. Li and R. Suomi, “A proposed scale for measuring e-
service quality”. International Journal of u-and e-Service, 
Science and Technology, vol. 2, no 1, p.p. 1-10, 2009. 
[35] C. Liu and   K. P. Arnett, (2000). “Exploring the factors 
associated with Web site success in the context of electronic 
commerce”. Information & management, vol. 38, no 1, p.p. 
23-33, 2000. 
[36] C. Liu, K. P. Arnett, and C. Litecky, “Design Quality of 
Websites 
for 
Electronic 
Commerce: 
Fortune 
1000 
Webmasters' Evaluations”. Electronic Markets, vol. 10, no 2, 
p.p. 120-129, 2000.
[37] E.T. Loiacono, “WebQual: A Website Quality Instrument”. 
Doctoral Dissertation: University of Georgia, 2000, ISBN: 0-
599-90483-6. 
[38] E. T. Loiacono, R. T. Watson, and D. L. Goodhue, 
“WebQual: An instrument for consumer evaluation of web 
sites”. International Journal of Electronic Commerce, vol. 11, 
no 3, p.p. 51-87, 2007. 
[39] C. N. Madu, and   A. A. Madu, “Dimensions of e-
quality”. International Journal of Quality & reliability 
management, vol. 19, no 3, p. 246-258, 2002. 
[40] D. Malassingne, “What is the web quality?”. Available 
from:http://w3qualite.net/metier/qu-est-ce-que-la-qualite-
web 11 octobre 2011.  Retrieved: July, 2017. 
[41] M. -G. Park and M. H. Kim,”Chapter XI.6 Knowledge 
Workforce 
Development 
for 
Computer-Supported 
Collaborative 
Work 
Environments. 
From 
the 
book 
“International Handbook of Education for the Changing 
World of Work: bridging academic and vocational learning”. 
By Rupert Maclean; David N Wilson. Springer ; Bonn : 
UNESCO UNEVOC, International Centre for Technical and 
Vocational Education and Training, cop. 2009  Available 
from: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-1-4020-
5281-1_129. Retrieved: July, 2017. 
[42] United Nations, Economic and Social Council. Information 
and communication technologies for equitable economic and 
social development, Geneva, 2014, p.p.4. 
[43] J. 
Ojasalo, 
“E-service 
quality: 
a 
conceptual 
model”. International Journal of Arts and Sciences, vol. 3, no 
7, p.p. 127-143, 2010. 
[44] A. Parasuraman, V. A.Zeithaml, and L. L. Berry, 
“Alternative scales for measuring service quality: a 
comparative assessment based on psychometric and 
diagnostic criteria”. Handbuch Dienstleistungsmanagement, 
Gabler Verlag, pp.449-482, 1998. 
[45] A. Parasuraman, V. A. Zeithaml, and A. Malhotra, “ES-
QUAL a multiple-item scale for assessing electronic service 
quality”. Journal of service research, vol. 7, no 3, p.p. 213-
233, 2005. 
[46] D. Paschaloudis and M. Tsourela, (2015). Using ES-QUAL 
to Measure Internet Service Quality of EBanking Web Sites 
in 
Greece. The 
Journal 
of 
Internet 
Banking 
and 
Commerce, vol. 19, no 2, p.p. 1-17, 2015. 
[47] R. Abdelkader, “Le management de la qualité totale. La 
qualité totale : les outils du développement de la performance 
des 
entreprises”. 
Available 
from :    
http://www.iefpedia.com/france/wp-
content/uploads/2011/07/Le-management-de-la-
qualit%C3%A9-totale-La-qualit%C3%A9-totale-les-outils-
du-d%C3%A9veloppement-de-la-performance-des-
entreprises-RACHEDI-ABDELKADER1.pdf.  Retrieved: 
May, 2017. 
[48] M. K. Mphil, “Information Technology in Malaysia: E-
service quality and Uptake of Internet banking”. Journal of 
Internet Banking and Commerce,   vol. 13, no 2, p.p. 1, 2008.
[49] C. Ranganathan, and S. Ganapathy, (2002). “Key dimensions 
of 
business-to-consumer 
web 
sites”. Information 
& 
Management, vol. 39, no6, p. 457-465, 2002.
[50] D. Ribbink, A. C. Van Riel, V. Liljander, and S. Streukens, 
“Comfort your online customer: quality, trust and loyalty on 
the internet”. Managing Service Quality: An International 
Journal, vol. 14, no 6, p.p. 446-456.
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[51] R. Griffiths, “Computer Supported Co-operative Work 
(CSCW) 
and 
Groupware”. 
Available 
from:http://www.it.bton.ac.uk/staff/rng/teaching/notes/CSC
Wgroupware.html. Retrieved: August, 2017.
[52] E. Ringenbach and A. Ajraou, “Presentation: Quality 
Assurance - Software Engineering”.   January 2000   
Available 
from:http://users.polytech.unice.fr/~hugues/GL/SPICE/index
.htm. Retrieved: August, 2017.
[53] R. V. Gola, E-commerce law Practical guide to e-commerce. 
Gualino  Editor,  fev 2013; Collection : Guides Pro, ISBN 
: 978-2-297-02478-5 
[54] J. Santos, “E-service quality: a model of virtual service 
quality 
dimensions”. Managing 
Service 
Quality: 
An 
International Journal, vol. 13, no 3, p.p. 233-246,2003.
[55] S. S. Srinivasan, R. Anderson, and K. Ponnavolu, “Customer 
loyalty in e-commerce: an exploration of its antecedents and 
consequence”s. Journal of retailing, vol. 78, no 1, p. 41-50, 
2002.
[56] Q. Sun, C. Wang, and H. Cao, “Applying ES-QUAL scale to 
analysis the factors affecting consumers to use internet 
banking services”. In Services Science, Management and 
Engineering, 2009. SSME'09. IITA International Conference 
on (pp. 242-245). IEEE, 2009.
[57] S. I. Swaid, and R. T. Wigand, “Measuring the quality of e-
service: scale development and initial validation”. Journal of 
Electronic Commerce Research, vol. 10, no 1, p.p. 13, 2009.
[58] M. A. Teruel, E. Navarro, V. López‐Jaquero, F. Montero, 
and   P. González, “A comprehensive framework for 
modeling requirements of CSCW systems”. Journal of 
Software: Evolution and Process, vol. 29, no 5, 2017. 
[59] V. Hiard, Website Auditing, ENI Edition, June 2016. 
[60] W3C, Web Accessibility Evaluation Tools List. Available 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/WAI/ER/tools/. 
 
Retrieved: 
January 2016. 
[61] R. Whitaker, “Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW) and Groupware Overview, Definitions, and 
Distinctions”.
Available 
from: 
http://www.enolagaia.com/UMUArchive/CSCW.html#I.  
Retrieved:August 2017. 
[62] M.F. 
Wolfinbarger 
and 
M.C. 
Gilly, 
“ETAILQ: 
Dimensionalizing, measuring and predicting e- tailing 
quality”. Journal of Retailing, vol. 79, no 3, p.p. 183-198, 
2003. 
[63] X. Burdet under the leadership of Ph. Duguedil, Impact of 
computer decisions Introduction to informatics for the non-
computerized 
decision-maker, 
Chapter 
11, 
PPUR 
Polytechnic and Academic Romandy Press, 2005. 
[64] Z. Yang, M. Jun, and R. T. Peterson, “Measuring customer 
perceived online service quality: scale development and 
managerial implications”. International Journal of Operations 
& Production Management,   vol. 24, no 11, p.p. 1149-1174, 
2004. 
[65] Z. Yang, S. Cai, Z. Zhou, and N. Zhou, “Development and 
validation of an instrument to measure user perceived service 
quality of information presenting web portals”. Information 
& Management, vol.42, no 4, p.p. 575-589, 2005. 
[66] B. Yoo and N. Donthu, “Developing a Scale to Measure the 
Perceived 
Quality 
of 
an 
Internet 
Shopping 
Site 
(SITEQUAL)”, Quarterly Journal of Electronic Commerce, 
vol. 2, no 1, p.p. 31-45, 2001. 
[67] S. Yu, L. Al-Jadir, and S. Spaccapietra, “Matching user's 
Semantics with Data Semantics in Location-Based Services”. 
In: 1st Workshop on Semantics in Mobile Environments 
(SME 05), 2005. 
[68] V. A.  Zeithaml, L. L.Berry, and A. Parasuraman, “The 
behavioral consequences of service quality”. The Journal of 
Marketing, p.p. 31-46, 1996. 
[69] http://www.freeyourshirt.com/. Retrieved: August, 2017. 
[70] http://evene.lefigaro.fr/citations/john-ruskin. Retrieved: 
August, 2017. 
[71] http://people.ucalgary.ca/~design/engg251/First%20Year%2
0Files/kano.pdf . Retrieved: August, 2017.
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

