Applying Questionnaire to Assess the Lessons Learned Process in Software Project 
Management: a Case Study at GAIA 
 
Marco Ikuro Hisatomi, Anderson de Souza Góes, and Rodolfo Miranda de Barros 
Department of Computing  
State University of Londrina (UEL) 
Londrina, PR – Brazil 
marco.hisatomi@gmail.com, andersonsouzagoes@gmail.com, and rodolfo@uel.br 
 
Abstract — In order to obtain benefits from the Lessons 
Learned Process in Software Project Management it is 
necessary to assess the process periodically. To avoid failures, 
assessments can be conducted based on questionnaires duly 
appropriate for each organisation or segment of the software 
project under development. Studies of Lessons Learned and 
Software Project Management have increased the assessments 
techniques and have guided the construction of assessment 
criteria in organisations. In this paper, we present a 
questionnaire template with different alternatives that offer 
different scores and axes of efficiency to enhance the 
assessment. We intend to demonstrate that this questionnaire 
template establishes parameters for accurate measurements of 
the assessment of the Lessons Learned Process.  
Keywords – Lessons Learned, Software Project Management, 
Assessment Questionnaire. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Through research on the organisation itself and with the 
participation of the people involved in software development 
projects, it is possible to maintain an information database 
called Lessons Learned [1]. The content of this database is 
the result of activities performed within an organisation. 
Throughout the project, the experiences are accumulated in 
an organised way to form the Lessons Learned of the project 
team. 
Structuring Lessons Learned Processes in an organisation 
is not always fast and there should be a constant discussion 
of the subject for all people involved. The benefits of 
Lessons Learned should be pursued by those involved in the 
development of a software project [2], in the life cycle of the 
software development process. This paper aims to identify 
the main points that can be improved for this organisation, 
either through classification of information, its source or 
characteristic, or by its complexity. 
Aiming at the success of the project, the application of 
Lessons Learned in the organisation is one of the techniques 
that contribute to this goal [3]. The goals must be constantly 
pursued in spite of the diversity of resources involved, the 
complexities and restrictions required during the project. 
Therefore, in order to facilitate the decision during the 
project, the Lessons Learned is fundamental to promote 
assertiveness in these decisions. 
The maintenance of Lessons Learned contributes 
positively to the successful delivery with the expected 
quality [3], even with the numerous innovative techniques in 
project management [4]. In this paper, the advantages offered 
by the Lessons Learned Process are proposed through the 
development of six axes of efficiency. The development of 
these axes intends to determine the level of efficiency of the 
maintenance of Lessons Learned Process that is being 
practised in the organisation. 
By using the Lessons Learned Process in Software 
Project Management, organisations intend to guarantee 
effective collaboration in building the best software 
development techniques. Therefore, assessments should be 
conducted to measure the efficiency of this process. With 
that in mind, in this paper, we designed an assessment 
questionnaire to measure the efficiency of Lessons Learned 
for the main axes of the management process. 
The present article is organised as follows: in Section 2, 
there is a literature review of the main bases of this project – 
Lessons Learned, Project Management and related work. In 
Section 3, we present the assessment based on the 
questionnaires at GAIA – Software Factory, as a case study. 
In Section 4, the process evaluation of Lessons Learned in 
Project Management. The results are presented in Section 5, 
and finally, the conclusion and future work are presented in 
Section 6. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
We conducted [2] several studies for the literature review 
focusing on two areas: Project Management and Lessons 
Learned. The survey was developed from several documents 
with relevant and current issues in these areas. The study of 
related work also helped to consolidate the assessment 
proposed in this article. 
A. Lessons Learned 
The Lessons Learned Process includes organised 
activities for the recorded experiences of the people involved 
in a particular project and has great value as knowledge. 
Both positive and negative experiences are considered 
equally important in Lessons Learned, e.g., a variation of the 
technique of software testing can be positively considered; 
but if this variation results in failure, it can be considered as 
negative. 
In [5], a Lesson Learned is considered as so when it has 
an impact on daily operations. Basically, adverse experiences 
are observed and used to improve the organisation or a 
particular member of staff. In all cases, the result should be, 
among others, a significant reduction of effort, an 
improvement in design, and an optimisation of computer 
resources. 
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Among the several applications of Lessons Learned, with 
beneficial impacts to the organisation, some can be cited 
according to [3]: 
• 
Time saved in solving problems, since the solutions 
of common problems are centralised in one location 
for easy access by members. 
• 
Reduction or elimination of costs from avoiding the 
same work to be done again when correcting 
discovered defects. 
• 
Encouragement of the use of best practices within 
the organisation, which increases the likelihood of 
success of the projects. 
Narratives that explicit knowledge or understanding 
gained through experience – both positive and negative – can 
still be characterised as a lesson learned. The lesson relates 
what was expected to happen, the facts and deviations that 
happened, the analysis of the causes of these deviations and 
what might be learned during the process [6]. 
The record of the lessons learned is an excellent way to 
avoid the same mistakes previously made and to replicate the 
successes achieved in the past to future projects. According 
to [7], five points are listed for a successful implementation 
of the process of documentation of the lessons learned: 
1) Training of members of the organisation – it is 
necessary to change the paradigm that the collection and 
recording of lessons learned is a waste of time, and to bring 
to knowledge the benefits that information sharing has in an 
organisation. For this process to work, it is very important 
that the manager is able to generate motivation and 
involvement of all. According to [8], to make full use of the 
practices of knowledge management in a company, one of 
the key factors is the involvement of both stakeholders and 
workforce – which involves a change of habits. 
2) Collection and recording of experiences – this task is 
considered to be costly and demands great effort from the 
staff. This task should be performed using practices and 
oriented towards an easy method of items relevant for the 
organisation; also, it is important that these items are 
organised following a set pattern. 
3) Analysis of successes and failures – it is not enough 
that the lessons learned are simply recorded and catalogued; 
they also must be understood and analysed. After the 
identification of the activities that resulted in good results or 
failures, these records must be part of the knowledge basis. 
In that way, the Lessons Learned Process becomes an 
opportunity for analysing facts and for adopting measures for 
a continuous improvement. 
4) Dissemination of knowledge – Simply archiving these 
lessons is not enough; they should also be disclosed 
throughout the organisation. This disclosure must take into 
account the direction and prioritisation of such information 
in accordance with the interests of each group. 
5) Updated records – It is very important to understand 
that the register of the Lessons Learned should be cyclical, 
i.e., it must be constantly updated. 
B. Project Management 
Software development has been one of the major 
technological advances of our days, in the information age. 
All products built based on projects have shown positive 
results and measurable improvements in the future [4]. For 
that, project management is an activity largely applied to 
software development, which has improved significantly 
with less effort. 
The most widely accepted definition for the term 
"project" is presented by the Project Management Body of 
Knowledge (PMBOK), and characterised as "a temporary 
endeavour undertaken to create a product, service or result 
only". In the same line, [9] defines it as "a unique venture to 
produce a set of results according to constraints of time, cost 
and quality clearly defined". 
The great amount of software projects in progress, the 
number of people involved in these tasks and the tight 
delivery deadlines increases the complexity of these projects 
[10]. Therefore, there is a growing practice of Project 
Management (PM) for new software projects, whether new 
products or changes in systems already developed. 
According to [11], PM is used by organisations to manage 
the innovations in their processes. Thus, encouraging the 
creation and dissemination of organisational management 
techniques in these organisations is fundamental to improve 
products and processes services. 
According to [12], there is the PM-specific branch of the 
organisation’s 
activity, 
because 
it 
includes 
various 
techniques in different business areas, such as: general 
administration, military organisation and engineering, among 
others. The activities involved in PM are multidisciplinary 
and require a lot of expertise and the participants' 
commitment to its implementation. The growth of project 
management 
refers 
to 
topics 
such 
as 
roles 
and 
responsibilities, organisational structures, delegation of 
authority, 
decision-making 
and 
especially 
corporate 
profitability [13]. 
Thus, the project management "is the application of 
knowledge, skills, tools and techniques to project activities to 
meet project requirements". Once the characteristics of the 
delivery products (and services) [4] [9] are defined, the 
activities must meet these objectives in an explicit – and not 
implicit – way. Throughout their development, the projects 
are organised according to their life cycle and divided in two 
classes: the projects that involve the activities of PM and the 
products that include the activities of product development 
[12]. 
During the development of a product, the tasks may vary 
according 
to 
the 
branch 
of 
industry 
(software, 
pharmaceutical, manufacturing, etc.), while the PM is 
independent from the segment. They can be classified into 
groups (called stages), such as initiation, definition, 
planning, execution, controlling, and closing. Each stage 
brings together activities with similar purposes, but with 
their own features and goals. 
C. Related Work Process and Lessons Learned 
The Process Management of the Lessons Learned is 
increasing, especially in the area of Information Technology, 
259
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

aiming at consolidating this process in software projects. For 
example, [14] proposes an architectural model for managing 
Lessons Learned in the testing phase. Although there are 
studies reporting the importance of this process, none of 
them includes the assessment questionnaire. 
In the work of [15], the authors developed a guide 
containing major errors in the Lessons Learned. This subject 
was widely discussed by National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) especially after the incident with the 
space shuttle Columbia. These authors’ proposal is to 
consider the following key steps: the collection of lessons 
learned, their management and application in future projects. 
According to [16], Lessons Learned Process is used to 
develop and maintain an organisational memory for a 
technology centre that develops high risk systems. In this 
centre, through interviews, decomposition and reintegration 
of tacit knowledge with explicit information, including the 
information gathering and dissemination, they managed to 
establish a process and obtained good results after its 
implementation. 
In software engineering, the process of knowledge 
dissemination is based on Lessons Learned [17] in order to 
maintain a community of interest. This work describes the 
operation of the engineering centre software based on 
Commercial Off-The-Shelf (COTS) and how the Lessons 
Learned is used. It also includes a detailed description of a 
repository Lessons Learned and a planning evolution for it. 
As previously mentioned, the use of Lessons Learned 
Process has clear aims in project management, which in turn 
requires the assessment of this process so that improvements 
can take place. Several studies focus on Lessons Learned 
Process, highlighting its necessity and advantages. However, 
the formal and effective assessment of this process is not 
always correctly explained. 
In this paper, a formal assessment with the aim of 
improving Lessons Learned Process is proposed through a 
questionnaire applied to all involved in the project. Based on 
the results of this questionnaire, the organisation can decide 
how to employ its resources for each level of need indicated 
by the axes of efficiency. 
III. 
ASSESSMENT OF LESSONS LEARNED PROCESS BASED 
ON A QUESTIONNAIRE 
There are several methods of gathering information to 
meet an internal process in the organisation. In [18], one of 
them includes the collaboration of the team members that 
participated in this survey, so the accuracy of the information 
given is associated to the participants’ commitment. 
Following this principle, a questionnaire was developed to be 
applied to all members of the software development team. 
An assessment was conducted, as a case study, at GAIA 
Software Factory of the Department of Computing, State 
University of Londrina. This organisation was chosen 
because it develops software of various scopes for the 
university itself and, specially, because it is formed by 
undergraduate and postgraduate students that – after their 
graduation – leave the Factory, leading to knowledge loss. 
Other important factors were listed in this case study: 
• 
An environment focused on software development; 
• 
The team works with procedures, attributes and 
templates that can be reused; 
• 
An 
organisation 
focused 
on 
a 
continuous 
improvement of its processes; 
• 
The 
development 
software 
process 
includes 
integration at several software engineering area and 
governance in Information Technology (IT); 
• 
Specialists in knowledge management; 
• 
Experienced staff in project management. 
In the work of [19], a method was used for multiple-item 
development of a questionnaire. The main objective of this 
method was the measurement of a universe through issues 
that represent reality. Alternatives distributed between 
strong, weak and staggered tend to result in accuracy. Thus, 
the questionnaire represents a powerful tool for the 
measurement of a situation. 
In order to obtain a broad and complete picture, the 
questionnaire was built with objective questions, containing 
qualitative and quantitative alternatives. Beyond the issues 
that were considered in the axes of efficiency that lead to 
good practices for each process involved in the use of 
Lessons Learned Process. The axes of efficiency show trends 
for each of the items considered [20]. 
As illustrated in Figure 1, these axes represent the main 
features to use effectively the resources from Lessons 
Learned in a Software Development organisation. Through 
these axes of efficiency it is possible to focus on a specific 
feature, facilitating the management of Lessons Learned 
Process. 
 
Figure 1.  Axes of efficiency in Lessons Learned Process (adapted from 
[20]) 
Each question was elaborated with the objective of 
indicating the need of improvement. Also, it was considered 
getting a diagnosis for the applicability of the process related 
to the efficiency of Lessons Learned Process, according to 
the axes of efficiency. Each alternative indicates the level of 
this applicability, which can be achieved by the weight 
associated to each axis of efficiency, due to the impact that 
this response will provide to the axis. 
The weight of the efficiency as a function of the sum is 
generally a multiplication, with values ranging from 0 to 3, 
in which 0 represents ‘no influence’, 1 ‘low influence’, 2 
‘medium influence’ and 3 ‘high influence’. To this levels of 
influence is added either the signs (+) or (–) determining, 
respectively, a positive or negative influence. The 
alternatives suggest that the participant will be framed 
according to their degree of participation in the Lessons 
260
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Learned Process. As an example, Figure 2 shows the 
possible alternatives for the two issues. 
In Figure 2, the answer to each question consists in an 
alternative, which will be chosen by those involved in the 
development project. In the questionnaire, the participant 
answers the questions without knowing neither the 
correspondent weights nor the axes of efficiency. However, 
for each answer, it will be computed in a general sum and the 
representativeness of a participant’s answer will be given by 
their answer multiplied by its respective weight. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Issues, alternatives, effiency and weights (Produced by the 
authors) 
For example, the question "Is there a documented 
procedure for the dissemination of L.L. (Lesson Learned)?" 
has five alternatives and each one represents gradually the 
position of the organisation. It is possible that the weights 
were assigned to each alternative along an axis of efficiency. 
In spite of the fact that the weights of each answer have a 
simple score calculation, this format leads to results more 
accurately dependent on the granularity of each alternative. 
Different 
weights 
were 
attributed 
for 
the 
axis 
"Dissemination of Lessons Learned": ‘3’ to the alternative 
"Strong, there is a documented procedure for dissemination 
of L.L. and it is periodically assessed for its improvement", 
which indicates a high positive impact to this issue. And so 
on, up to the weight ‘–3’ for the option "Weak, there is no 
documented procedure and there are no plans to define this 
procedure", indicating that there is a high negative impact. 
IV. 
ASSESSMENT OF LESSONS LEARNED PROCESS IN PM 
Based on the proposal and on the issues raised and 
described in Figure 2, we conducted a case study about the 
advantages that its use can provide to the application of the 
Lessons Learned Process as part of software development 
project management. Then, we explain three main 
advantages of the questionnaire with axes of efficiency in the 
assessment of the Lessons Learned Process ([1], [3], [14], 
[21]). These themes were established according to the studies 
conducted in the organisational environment of systems 
development, in which there is collaboration for project 
management. 
The benefits of each axis of efficiency lie on the results 
that each of them will provide for the development of 
systems and especially for the process of software 
development with Lessons Learned Process. For a positive 
result in project management it is necessary that the analysis 
[22] for each axis be part of the process. Thus, each axis of 
efficiency will demonstrate the contribution to the whole 
process. 
A. Explanation of Lessons Learned 
Knowledge is valid for people when the development of 
a task can be controlled by them, and adapted to specific 
needs, i.e., when it becomes a Lesson Learned. That, in turn, 
may or may not be spelled out for future use or shared with 
others [23]. Sharing a Lesson Learned with a software 
project development team becomes an advantage that can 
result in minimisation of effort or improvement of the final 
product. 
The possibility of having an organisational integration of 
knowledge management and, as a consequence, gaining a 
competitive advantage in the market [21], represents the 
importance of explaining Lessons Learned. When described, 
a Lesson Learned becomes reference for use, association or 
improvement of a given process or task within the 
organisation. 
In order to complete the cycle of information, according 
to [23], knowledge must transit between tacit and explicit, in 
phases of socialisation, externalisation, combination and 
internalisation. On the other hand, [24] states that before the 
storage of information, knowledge must be made explicit, 
classified 
and 
integrated, 
so 
it 
can 
contribute 
to 
improvements and add new information. Thus, the axis of 
Explanation of the Lessons Learned is considered essential to 
a formal process; without which it would be impossible to 
continue the treatment and use of acquired knowledge. 
B. Ease of search 
The models and materials surveyed do not offer an 
explicit description of the minimum criteria that would 
facilitate the recovery of the Lessons Learned stored. 
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) reports that 
the recovery of a Lesson Learned should have criteria to 
facilitate this process; however, it does not show how this 
procedure should be done. 
The tool used to storage the Lessons Learned facilitates 
the search and access, encouraging the practice of the 
process as a whole [20]. Besides that, the design is optimised 
in time, considering that several people access several times 
the knowledge repository. If for each survey the time can be 
optimised, then the time of the task can also be reduced. 
The easy access to a Lesson Learned is a major factor 
that drives the effective use of this process. Since a Lesson 
Learned is explicit, it should be made available in a simple 
way for the consultation process. Some keywords are 
fundamental to enable this search by those involved in the 
project. Still, according to [24], this question must have the 
correct rating to have the assertiveness and adequate 
categorisation 
also 
highlighted 
by 
[27]. 
With 
the 
combination of these practices, naturally, one can predict that 
the good explanation and ease of use will boost the 
dissemination of Lessons Learned. 
261
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

C. Configuration Management 
One of the most important activities in software 
development is the responsibility of the project manager to 
control revisions and versions. In this process, all changes 
are controlled in an organised and predictable way [26], 
which can be envisaged for specific versions for each project 
phase. The great advantage in the use of configuration 
management is the control of the record of Lessons Learned, 
for a more efficient decision-making. Comparing a Lesson 
Learned at the exact moment in which its use is being 
analysed [16] ensures the manager an effective decision for 
its application or not. 
This article aims to contribute to the studies analysed 
with an approach in an appropriate format and customisable 
for the assessment of Lessons Learned Process at a software 
development 
organisation. 
The 
axis 
of 
efficiency 
Configuration Management will complement the stability to 
use the Lessons Learned Process, along with the other axes. 
The collaboration of this axis is directly related to the axes of 
Policy of the Access Control and the Dissemination of 
Knowledge. Through proper configuration of each item a 
Lesson Learned will enable the correct version of the item 
according to the responsibility of the project member giving, 
therefore, greater security and reliability of the information 
to the project manager. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The organisation’s choice to conduct the questionnaire 
was crucial because the GAIA has development model 
components that are organised and trained to act in this 
segment. In GAIA, there are three groups: specialists, non-
specialists, and project manager. In this way, it becomes 
feasible to conduct the questionnaire, and because all are 
involved, daily, in the development software process. 
Following the process, proposed by [21], as a 
methodology for collecting results, research was targeted at 
the three groups of the software development team in order 
to obtain the recognition of the assessment questionnaire 
proposed by this article. The team involved and engaged 
belongs to the project GAIA – a Software Factory, a research 
and extension project of the Department of Computing, State 
University of Londrina (UEL). People were classified into 
three groups: project manager, specialists, and non-
specialists. In the first group, there were those who know and 
perform project management; in the second, experts of 
Knowledge Management; and in the third group, the other 
participants of the software development team. 
The statements were designed in accordance with the 
suggestions of the participants of the software development 
team, based on guidelines found in the literature ([21], [25]). 
The statements, presented in Table I, are essential to the 
targeting of objectives of knowledge management and 
assessment of Lessons Learned Process. In order to prepare 
Table I with the statements, we initially prepared questions 
about GAIA’s Lessons Learned and we conducted it to the 
three assessment groups. The questionnaire was designed 
considering the axes of efficiency, treated in Section 3, for a 
more effective assessment.  
TABLE I.  
LIST OF THE ASSESSORS’ CLAIMS 
No. 
Statements 
01 
Lessons Learned Process is initiated by explicit knowledge, 
supporting the possibility for use and improvements. 
02 
With the management of Lessons Learned participants will 
have greater confidence to use and work with the repository. 
03 
Lessons Learned explained and managed becomes part of the 
organisation and is not restrict to the expert who wrote it 
anymore. 
04 
Participants will have the greatest stimulus in the use of 
Lessons Learned when it is easy to use. 
05 
Saving versions of changes in Lessons Learned will enable 
checking the evolution of its use. 
06 
Lessons Learned is not available without access control, 
which will maintain its integrity in a controlled way. 
07 
It is possible to measure the efficiency of use from the reach 
of a Lesson Learned to the ones involved in the project. 
08 
The questionnaire will direct the evolution of the quality of 
the process of Lessons Learned. 
09 
Through the questionnaire containing the axes of efficiency, 
the margin of safety in the assessment of the Lessons Learned 
Proces will be increased. 
10 
The weights allocated to each of the answers indicate greater 
importance in the application of Lessons Learned. 
a. Produced by the authors. 
 
In Table I, we present the advantages of completing the 
assessment of the Lessons Learned framework with the axes 
of efficiency. The efficiency of the proposed process is 
depicted in Table II, which shows a positive assessment, 
with scores close to the maximum. The great advantage – 
presented in this paper – of the assessment methodology 
using the questionnaire is specifically the objectivity to 
validate each point represented by the axes, the contribution 
to the effectiveness and efficiency in project management in 
a software development organisation. 
The applicability of the questionnaire for assessing the 
Lessons Learned Process was presented and submitted in the 
organisation model of software development GAIA, among 
the three groups. Based on the model presented in Figure 2, 
the questionnaire aimed to assess whether it is possible to 
have positive results for assessment of Lessons Learned 
Process in a software development organisation. 
Each group – specialist, non-specialist and project 
manager – analysed the problems with their weights, 
responding according to the applicability in the development 
environment GAIA. Data were collected after each 
participant gave a score between 1 and 5, in which 1 means 
‘strongly disagree’, 2 means ‘partially disagree’, 3 means 
‘agree’, 4 means ‘partially agree’ and 5, ‘fully agree’, 
consistent with the proposed assessment. Finally, the 
optimistic result is expressed in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
TABULATION OF SCORES OF ASSESSORS 
 
b. Produced by the authors. 
262
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The assessment of this work is very satisfactory, since 
the percentage among the assessors numbered 90.8% 
(4.54/5.00) at the final average, as demonstrated in Table II, 
ensuring effective use of the questionnaire. For a good 
Lessons Learned Process management, it is possible that a 
software development company measure through the 
questionnaire process, with axes of efficiency and weights 
for each alternative of the question. 
In this summary, we have demonstrated that 50% of 
project managers pointed favourably for the use of this 
methodology, giving evidence that the results are satisfactory 
for the Lessons Learned Process in software development. 
With this favourable outcome, the process becomes an 
opportunity for improvement in software development, 
boosting the possibility of investing in the assessment and 
improvement of Lessons Learned Processes. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The main objective in the Lessons Learned Process will 
be achieved in a collaborative way among project 
participants when sharing experiences about several criteria 
that are being met. It will not be possible to achieve a 
positive benefit of a Lesson Learned unless the different 
parts of the process are seen as complementary. 
Although methods for assessing a process aim at 
measuring the efficiency and effectiveness within a 
determined period of time, a survey conducted using the 
questionnaire has the advantage of obtaining accurate results 
with a specialisation according to the organisation. 
Depending on the questionnaire, whether it is prepared with 
the axes of efficiency and alternatives on scales, the results 
may be precise and reliable. 
In this article, it is evident that the interrelationship 
among the axes of efficiency, with the intention of Lessons 
Learned, will be essential to this process. To ensure that the 
axes are kept in balance, there is a need to plan and execute a 
periodic assessment [5]. The ongoing assessment will ensure 
that all improvements will be identify to maintain the 
balance among the axes of efficiency aiming at maintaining 
the Lessons Learned Process. If one of the axes suffers 
greater positive change, the other must also be revised so that 
they are all levelled. 
Much of the evolution of these processes – including 
Lessons Learned – is improved from constant assessment. 
According to [28], conducting questionnaires in assessment 
processes has advantages for both the staff and the process. 
Likewise, this advantage was verified by the assessment of 
team project GAIA, mainly by specialists and project 
managers, certifying that this questionnaire model is valid to 
maintain and improve the Lessons Learned Process in 
software development organisations. 
Without the questionnaire it would be impossible to 
identify the possible need for changes in the Lessons 
Learned Process. Each member who answered the 
questionnaire can review how the Lessons Learned Process 
can impact the quality of software development. When 
answering the questionnaire, the member of the development 
team reflects on their performance before the alternatives of 
the questions. This reflection is notice in accordance with the 
objective of pushing the Lessons Learned Process. 
Following the good results of the questionnaire model we 
envisage, in a future work, the application of the same model 
in private companies in the North region of the State of 
Paraná. This region has several technology companies, with 
the potential of producing high quality software and diversity 
training for more than three hundred professional graduates 
every year. The application of this model in organisations of 
various industries will demonstrate that the results are 
significant for more secure conclusions on the use of Lessons 
Learned within this market segment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. de Souza Goes and R. M. de Barros, “Gerenciamento do 
conhecimento em uma fábrica de software: Um estudo de 
caso aplicando a ferramenta GAIA – L.A.”, In Conferencia 
Latinoamericana en Informática (CLEI), 2012. 
[2] A. de Souza Goes, M. I. Hisatomi, B. M. Omena, and R. M. 
de Barros,, “Applying Lessons Learned as an Improved 
Methodology 
for 
Softtware 
Project 
Management”, 
International Conference Information Systems (IADIS), 2013, 
pp 302-306.  
[3] T. H. Roe, “Establishing a Lessons Learned Program: 
Observation, Insights and Lessons”, Center for Army Lessons 
Learned: USA, 2011, pp. 88. 
[4] PMBOK, “Um Guia do Conhecimento em Gerenciamento de 
Projetos”, Quarta Edição, Project Management Institute, Inc, 
Newtown Square, Pennsylvania EUA, 2008. 
[5] MPS-BR (Lições Aprendidas), “Associação para Promoção 
da Excelência do Software Brasileiro”; “Melhoria de Processo 
do Software Brasileiro Guia Geral Sumário”, SOFTEX, 56p., 
2011. 
[6] B. H. Reich, A. Gemino, and C. Sauer, “Knowledge 
management and project-based knowledge in it projects: A 
model and preliminary empirical results”, International 
Journal of Project Management, 2012, pp. 663-674. 
[7] M. G. Aldenucci, “Um modelo de maturidade para o processo 
de gerenciamento de riscos”, Dissertação de Mestrado, 
Pontifícia Universidade Católica: PUC-PR, 2009. 
[8] K. F. Brett and D. Dressler, “The 24 Keys to high 
performance”, Frontline Group Organizational Learning 
Division, 2000. 
[9] J. Westland, “The Project Management Life Cycle: Complete 
Step by Step Methodology for Initiating, Planning, Executing 
& Closing a Project Successfully”, Philadelphia, PA: Kogan 
Page, 2006. 
[10] P. C. Torreão, “Ambiente Inteligente de Aprendizado para 
Educação em Gerenciamento de Projetos”. Dissertação de 
mestrado, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco. Recife: 
UFPE, 2005. 
[11] L. V. Martins, “Gestão Profissional de Projetos”. Revista 
TecHoje. Belo Horizonte: ITEC, 2003. 
[12] P. C. Dinsmore and J. Cabanisbrewin, “The AMA Handbook 
of Project Management”, Second Edition. New York: 
AMACOM, 2006. 
[13] H. Kerzner, “Project Management: A systems Approach to 
Planning, Scheduling and Controlling”, Eighth Edition. 
Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2003, pp. 211. 
[14] J. Andrade, J. Ares, M.-A. Martinez, J. Pazos, S. Rodríguez, J. 
Romera, and S. Suárez, “An architectural model for software 
testing lesson learned systems, Information and Software 
Technology”, vol. 55, n. 1, 2013, pp. 18-34. 
263
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[15] E. W. Rogers, R. L. Dillon, and C. H. Tinsley, “Avoiding 
Common Pitfalls in Lessons Learned Processes that Support 
Decisions with Significant Risks”, Aerospace Conference, 
2007, pp. 1-7. 
[16] D. Mendoza and R. Johnson, “Using a Lessons Learned 
Process to Develop and Maintain Institutional Memory and 
Intelligence”, Aerospace Conference, 2006, pp. 1-10. 
[17] I. Rus, M. Lindvall, C. Seaman, and V. Basili, “Packaging 
and Disseminating Lessons Learned from COTS-Based 
Software Development”, Proceedings of the 27 th Annual 
NASA Goddard/IEEE Software Engineering Workshop, 
2003, pp. 131-138. 
[18] H. Günther, “Como Elaborar um Questionário”, 2003, pp. 01-
14. 
[19] Y.-Y. Chen and H.-L. Huang, “Knowledge management fit 
and its implications for business performance: A profile 
deviation analysis”, Knowledge-Based Systems, 2012, pp. 
262-270. 
[20] G. U. Briganó, “Um framework para desenvolvimento de 
governança de TIC. 2012. 155. Dissertação de Mestrado em 
Ciência da Computação – Universidade Estadual de Londrina, 
Londrina, 2012, pp. 18, 29-55. 
[21] S. Rautenberg, A. V. Steil, and J. L. Todesco, “Modelo de 
Conhecimento para mapeamento de instrumentos da gestão 
do conhecimento e de agentes computacionais da engenharia 
do conhecimento” Perspectivas em Ciência da Informação, 
v.16, n.3, 2011, pp. 26-46. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[22] P. Carrillo, K. Ruikar, and P. Fuller, “When will we learn? 
Improving 
lessons 
learned 
practice 
in 
construction”, 
International Journal of Project Management, 2013, pp. 567-
578. 
[23] I. Nonaka, R. Toyama, and N. Konno, “SECI, Ba and 
Leadership: a Unified Model of Dynamic Knowledge 
Creation”, Leadership, vol. 33, 2000, pp. 5-34. 
[24] J. Xue and Z. Zhang, “The Research on the Application 
Strategies of Information and Communication Technologies 
to Promote the Knowledge Transfer in Regional Innovation 
System”, 2006, pp. 138-145. 
[25] B. Cakici and M. Boman, “A workflow for software 
development within computational epidemiology”, Journal of 
Computational Science, 2011, pp. 216-222. 
[26] ITIL Version 3 Service Transition, pp. 65 – 68. 
[27] E. Serna M., “Maturity model of Knowledge Management in 
the interpretativist perspective”, International Journal of 
Information Management, 2012, pp. 365-371. 
[28] F. E. A. Horita, M. I. Hisatomi, F. H. Gaffo, and R. M. de 
Barros, “Maturity Model and Lesson Learned for improve the 
Quality of Organizational Knowledge and Human Resources 
Management in Software Development”, International Journal 
os Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, 2013, 
pp. 552-555. 
264
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

