A Prototype of Smart Navigation Service
Chia Hung Kao
Department of Applied Mathematics
National Taitung University
Taitung, Taiwan
Email: chkao@nttu.edu.tw
Abstract—Travelers may arrange tourist destinations, plan a
travel route, book a hotel accommodation, and reserve a restau-
rant through different online services. However, the scattering of
the above travel information hinders the efﬁcient browse, search,
and usage during the trip. Besides, the travel information is not
leveraged well for timely and personalized assistance. In this
work, a smart navigation service is proposed to provide efﬁcient
navigation for travelers. Based on travel planning and travel
context of travelers, the smart navigation service can identify
the purpose of travelers, and provide corresponding navigation
through the information retrieved from transportation or news
services proactively.
Keywords–Navigation; travel navigation; cloud computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Before a trip, travelers may arrange tourist destinations,
plan a travel route, book a hotel accommodation, and reserve
a restaurant through different online services [1]. During the
trip, travelers can use smart devices to search for corresponding
travel information preserved in different services [2]. For
instance, travelers can log into online booking service (e.g.,
Booking.com [3], Agoda [4], Trivago [5], and so on) to
retrieve the information of hotel accommodation, and then use
navigation services to ﬁnd the way to the hotel. Travelers
can also log in to mail service to retrieve the message of
transport ticket, ﬁnd the way to the station, locate the correct
platform, and take the corresponding vehicle to the tourist
destinations. Moreover, travel planning preserved in the online
calendar (e.g., Google Calendar) or note applications (e.g.,
Evernote [6], OneNote [7], and Google Keep [8]) provides
navigation reference for travelers during the trip. However, it
can be found that travelers need to manually perform several
tasks through different services to achieve their purpose in the
trip. Major obstacles are stated as follows.
•
The scattering of travel information: One obstacle is
that information associated with the trip could exist in
several services, including online calendar, note appli-
cations, booking services, and mail services. Travelers
need to browse and search for corresponding travel
information from different services during the trip.
The scattering of travel information hinders timely and
efﬁcient assistance to travelers [9][10].
•
The lack of personalized guidance: The other obsta-
cle is the lack of personalized guidance for travelers
according to their travel plans. Based on the infor-
mation (e.g., destination, transportation, reservation,
and so on) preserved in the travel plan and the travel
context of travelers (e.g., date, time, and location),
corresponding navigation could be identiﬁed and pro-
vided proactively [11].
To overcome the obstacles identiﬁed above, a smart nav-
igation service is proposed to provide timely and personal-
ized navigation for travelers. The smart navigation service
acquires travel information from different services under the
authorization of travelers and derives a comprehensive travel
plan. During the trip, the smart navigation service collects
travel context of travelers from smart devices continuously,
and identiﬁes the purpose of travelers based on the identiﬁed
travel plan. In addition, the smart navigation service collects
information about transportation or emergency events contin-
uously. According to the identiﬁed purpose of travelers and
the collected transportation or emergency information, corre-
sponding navigation can be provided for travelers proactively.
In the remainder of this work, Section 2 introduces the ar-
chitecture of the smart navigation service. Section 3 describes
an use case of the prototype of the smart navigation service.
Finally, conclusion and future directions are given in Section
4.
II.
ARCHITECTURE
The overview of the smart navigation service is shown in
Figure 1. Major components in the smart navigation service
are stated as follows.
•
Smart devices: The smart devices carried or wore by
travelers acquire travel context (e.g., date, time, and
location) and transmit the information to the travel
navigation cloud continuously. The travel context will
be used by the travel navigation cloud for identifying
the travel status and purpose of travelers. Based on
the purpose of travelers, the corresponding navigation
can be displayed by the smart devices [12]. In the
near future, augmented reality navigation can also
be employed to achieve better assistance to travel-
ers [13][14].
•
Travel navigation cloud: The travel navigation cloud
is responsible for three major functionalities in the
smart navigation service. The ﬁrst functionality of the
travel navigation cloud is to construct a comprehensive
travel plan based on the information preserved in
different online services. Important information during
a trip, including destination, transportation, accommo-
dation, itinerary, restaurant, associated date and time,
can be retrieved through Application Programming
Interfaces (APIs) of different online services. The in-
formation can be further identiﬁed and recognized by
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 1. Overview of the smart navigation service.
natural language processing and named-entity recog-
nition methods [15][16]. The second functionality of
the travel navigation cloud is to collect current travel
context (e.g., date, time, and location) of travelers
through smart devices and identify the purpose of
travelers based on the derived travel plan. The ﬁnal
functionality of the travel navigation cloud is to collect
information from transportation services and news
services continuously. Similarly, the collected infor-
mation can be further identiﬁed and recognized by
natural language processing and named-entity recog-
nition methods. Based on the information recognized
in the travel plan and the travel context of travelers,
corresponding navigation according to the information
provided by transportation services and news services
could be identiﬁed and provided proactively.
•
Travel planning: Travelers can arrange their travel
plans through various online services nowadays.
For instance, hotel accommodation can be reserved
through online booking services. Transportation tick-
ets can also be purchased online. In addition to the
information preserved in different online services, cor-
responding reservation information might be provided
for travelers through emails. Travelers can also use
online calendar or note applications to manage their
tourist destinations and associated itineraries. Thus,
a travel plan can be extracted and identiﬁed from
the above travel information existed in different ser-
vices. Under the authorization of travelers, the travel
navigation cloud acquires, analyzes, and identiﬁes a
comprehensive travel plan of travelers for proactive
navigation during the trip.
•
Transportation information: During a trip, travel
from one place to another is one of the most important
activities. However, travelers might need to forage
for travel information scattered across different online
services and make a right decision based on several
transmit choices. The provision of personalized trans-
portation information (e.g., timetable, route, vehicle
status, travel time, and fare) will be highly beneﬁcial
to travelers [17]. Thus, detailed information of airport,
rail service, ferry service, bus, and so on will be
retrieved by the travel navigation cloud through APIs
provided by service providers or government open
Figure 2. Travel plan in the online calendar.
data [18]. Based on the derived travel plan, identiﬁed
travel context, and the transportation, proactive navi-
gation can be provided for travelers for better travel
experience.
•
Emergency information: During a trip, emergency
situations (e.g, disaster, trafﬁc accident, strike, and
so on) might happen and have inﬂuences on travel-
ers. The travel navigation cloud retrieves news from
different news services or social networks [19]. The
location, occurrence time, and impact of speciﬁc
emergency situations can be extracted by natural lan-
guage processing and named-entity recognition meth-
ods. Based on the transportation information and the
emergency information, the travel navigation cloud
can identify and provide alternative travel choices for
travelers to avoid emergency situations.
III.
USE CASE
One use case is described to demonstrate the usage of the
smart navigation service. As shown in Figure 2, a traveler
arranges a list of cities (i.e., Tokyo, Nagoya, and Kyoto) on
a journey and puts the information in the online calendar. On
a speciﬁc day during the trip, the traveler arrives at the train
station of the city (i.e., Tokyo). Through the travel context
acquired by the smart device and the travel plan (destination
city) retrieved from the online calendar, the travel navigation
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 3. Travel navigation for travelers.
cloud identiﬁes the current travel status and the purpose of the
traveler (i.e., travel to Nagoya). As shown in Figure 3, based
on the identiﬁed purpose of the traveler and the transportation
information retrieved from the government open data, train
number, departure time, and arrival time of the appropriate
train can be identiﬁed and provided by the smart navigation
service. Thus, without manual operation, the traveler can
get timely and personalized travel guidance efﬁciently. Better
travel experience can be achieved.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A smart navigation service is proposed in this work to
provide timely and personalized navigation for travelers. Based
on travel planning and current travel context of travelers, the
smart navigation service can identify the purpose of travelers,
and provide corresponding navigation through the information
retrieved from transportation services or news services proac-
tively. The design of the smart navigation service is introduced,
and the current prototype is demonstrated through a use case.
Future work includes the integration of more online services,
transportation services, and news services for comprehensive
navigation for travelers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study is supported by the Ministry of Science and
Technology of the Republic of China under grant MOST 108-
2221-E-143-003-MY3.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Stepan, J. M. Morawski, S. Dick, and J. Miller, “Incorporating spatial,
temporal, and social context in recommendations for location-based
social networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Social Systems,
vol. 3, no. 4, Dec 2016, pp. 164–175.
[2]
K. Meehan, T. Lunney, K. Curran, and A. McCaughey, “Context-
aware intelligent recommendation system for tourism,” in 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications
Workshops (PERCOM Workshops), March 2013, pp. 328–331.
[3]
Booking.com, URL: https://www.booking.com/ [accessed: 2020-10-12].
[4]
Agoda, URL: https://www.agoda.com/ [accessed: 2020-10-12].
[5]
Trivago, URL: https://www.trivago.com [accessed: 2020-10-12].
[6]
Evernote, URL: https://evernote.com/ [accessed: 2020-10-12].
[7]
OneNote, URL: https://www.onenote.com/ [accessed: 2020-10-12].
[8]
Google Keep, URL: https://keep.google.com/ [accessed: 2020-10-12].
[9]
A.-C. Schering, M. Dueffer, A. Finger, and I. Bruder, “A mobile tourist
assistance and recommendation system based on complex networks,”
in Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Workshop on Complex
Networks Meet Information and Knowledge Management, 2009, pp.
81–84.
[10]
R. Sood, “Intelligent mobile based tourist assistance system,” in 2017
2nd International Conference for Convergence in Technology (I2CT),
April 2017, pp. 655–658.
[11]
P. Craig and Y. Liu, “A vision for pervasive information visualisation to
support passenger navigation in public metro networks,” in 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications
Workshops (PerCom Workshops), 2019, pp. 202–207.
[12]
M. K. Vichrova, P. H´ajek, M. Kepka, L. Fiegler, W. Dorner, and
M. Juha, “Peregrinus silva bohemica. a digital travel guide for navi-
gation assistance,” in 2019 9th International Conference on Advanced
Computer Information Technologies (ACIT), 2019, pp. 492–495.
[13]
A. R´acz and G. Zilizi, “Virtual reality aided tourism,” in 2019 Smart
City Symposium Prague (SCSP), 2019, pp. 1–5.
[14]
S. M. C. Loureiro, J. Guerreiro, and F. Ali, “20 years of research on
virtual reality and augmented reality in tourism context: A text-mining
approach,” Tourism Management, vol. 77, 2020, p. 104028.
[15]
G. G. Chowdhury, “Natural language processing,” Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, vol. 37, no. 1, 2003, pp. 51–89.
[16]
R. S. Dudhabaware and M. S. Madankar, “Review on natural language
processing tasks for text documents,” in 2014 IEEE International
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Computing Research,
2014, pp. 1–5.
[17]
M. Handte, S. Foell, S. Wagner, G. Kortuem, and P. J. Marr´on, “An
internet-of-things enabled connected navigation system for urban bus
riders,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 3, no. 5, 2016, pp. 735–
744.
[18]
P. Yochum, L. Chang, T. Gu, and M. Zhu, “Linked open data in location-
based recommendation system on tourism domain: A survey,” IEEE
Access, vol. 8, 2020, pp. 16 409–16 439.
[19]
N. Cassavia, P. Dicosta, E. Masciari, and D. Sacc`a, “Improving tourist
experience by big data tools,” in 2015 International Conference on High
Performance Computing Simulation (HPCS), 2015, pp. 553–556.
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

