1 
 
Evidence in Requirements Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review Protocol 
Talat Ambreen, Muhammad Usman, Naveed Ikram, Muneera Bano 
International Islamic University Islamabad, Pakistan 
{talat.ambreen, m.usman, naveed.ikram,muneera}@iiu.edu.pk  
 
 
Abstract— Requirements Engineering (RE) is recognized as 
one of the critical phases in software development. RE has its 
own journals and conferences where lots of work has been 
published. As the area is maturing, increasingly large numbers 
of empirically supported studies have been reported in RE. 
There is a need to synthesize evidence based RE literature. We 
plan to systematically investigate evidence based RE studies to 
see and report state of the art in evidence based RE reported 
research.  This paper aims at providing a systematic literature 
review (SLR) protocol to describe a process for synthesizing 
the empirically supported work in the area of RE that will 
eventually present a state of the art of the field. This SLR 
intends to not only summarize the empirical data regarding 
RE but will also be helpful for various practitioners in this 
field to find out areas of RE rich in terms of tools, techniques, 
frameworks, models and guidelines to aid in their work. It will 
also facilitate RE researchers to identify knowledge gaps to 
recognize needs and chances for future research directions in 
this field. 
Keywords-systematic 
literature 
review; 
requirements 
engineering; evidence-based software engineering. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Software Requirements Knowledge Area (KA) is 
concerned with the elicitation, analysis, specification, and 
validation of software requirements [1]. Requirements 
engineering is known as the key to success to software and 
systems development [2].  
Requirements are very fundamental aspect of a software 
system as Fredrick Brooks illustrates “The hardest part of 
building a software system is deciding precisely what to 
build. No other part of the work so cripples the resulting 
system if done wrong. No other part is more difficult to 
rectify later” [3]. 
RE is recognized as one of the important activities in 
software development that deals with the requirements, from 
their elicitation until the system is validated for completion 
of requirements. Software requirement elicitation, analysis of 
the requirements, and writing good requirements are the 
most difficult parts of software engineering. As Karl Wiegers 
[4] describes, “If you don’t get the requirements right, it 
doesn’t matter how well you do anything else”, because if 
requirements are wrongly captured or developed it results in 
a flawed product. 
    Software requirements have been considered a problem 
repeatedly during the past 36 years [17]. Ross and Schoman 
[10] broadly described the scope of requirement engineering. 
Since then the work progressed in this field in terms of 
research and development. 
A lot of research has been done in all the areas of 
requirement engineering. Some of the famous international 
Journals and Conferences [5,6] of requirement engineering 
have published significant research in this field.  
  But, after all the research in this field, the question 
arises; how much of RE literature is supported by evidence? 
What is the nature of evidence in RE studies? What is the 
strength of evidence in RE studies?  These are important 
questions. Answers to these questions will help RE 
researchers and practitioners to work with clear focus and 
see where more attention needs to be given. For finding 
solution to these questions, one needs to look for ways to 
gather this important information. One of the way of 
gathering information related to some specific topic of 
interest is through a systematic way of discovering, 
synthesizing and then reporting that information, i.e., 
through the methodology of SLR.  Despite of significant 
research in the field of RE, there has not been done any 
effort of carrying out an SLR for the whole field of RE. The 
SLR described in this paper, intends to capture all the useful 
information related to software requirement engineering in a 
systematic way. This process of capturing information based 
on evidence is rigorous and repeatable. To the best of our 
knowledge, no such systematic review has been reported at 
this level of RE yet, so this SLR is first of its kind that will 
review all evidence based RE studies covering all the 
subareas of RE. 
This paper aims at providing a systematic literature review 
protocol to describe a process for capturing the current 
empirically evaluated knowledge in the area of software 
requirement engineering and to recognize needs and chances 
for future research in this field. The rest of the paper consists 
of following sections; Section II presents background, 
Section III describes the systematic literature review 
protocol, while Section IV concludes the paper along with 
future work.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Requirement Engineering is an important phase in 
software development because a software success is strongly 
tied to the fulfillment of requirements as put by various 
stakeholders. Having recognized this fact, there is a vast 
amount of research available in all the areas of this field, 
aiming at providing specific tools, techniques, and guidelines 
for improving sub areas of RE. Despite of all this research, 
RE lacks a study describing the state of the art of this field. 
To carry out such a study which is based on evidence, 
there are specific methodologies like Systematic Literature 
Review [12] and Systematic Mapping [18], which have been 
frequently used by many research fields like evidence-based 
576
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

2 
 
medicine. But they have not been much employed in 
software engineering for validation of empirical studies.  
In the field of software engineering, there has been a new 
drift towards evidence-based software engineering (EBSE) 
[7] with an emphasis on new empirical and systematic 
research methods. 
EBSE is concerned with capturing current best evidence 
from research and then integrating it with practical 
experience and human values in the software development 
decision making process [8,9]. The main tool of EBSE is 
Systematic Literature Review [12] which has been employed 
in this review. 
The main motive to undertake this SLR is to discover 
gaps and commonalities in software requirement engineering 
empirical research and providing a summary of the existing 
empirical evidence in this field to form a stepping-stone for 
future research in this field and for practitioners for their 
practical use 
III. 
SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW PROTOCOL  
      There are three main phases of a systematic literature 
review process; planning, conducting and reporting of 
review as described by Kitchenham [12]. 
     This paper aims at describing the first phase of the 
review i.e., planning the review, in the specified field of 
requirement engineering. The output achieved after 
completion of this phase is a systematic review protocol 
which has significance as it tells about rationale and 
process of carrying out the whole systematic review step 
by step. A systematic review protocol developed in such 
a way in the start of a systematic review lessens the risk 
of bias on the part of a researcher [12]. 
     The steps followed in this review protocol have been 
developed 
according 
to 
guidelines 
provided 
by 
Kitchenham [12]. This protocol describes various steps 
for carrying out a systematic review that aims at 
reviewing primary studies related to software requirement 
engineering to present an outline of existing information 
related to this field that will eventually help in drawing a 
broad category of conclusions from this information. 
     The review intends to find a state of the art in the field 
of software requirement engineering and the research 
questions have been formulated according to the motive 
of the review. The research questions are: 
RQ1: What is state of the art in empirical studies of RE? 
     The purpose of this question is to empirically evaluate 
the status of the software requirement engineering and 
finding out future research directions in this field 
     For this purpose specific information will be collected 
through existing research papers in the software 
requirement engineering field by carrying out a 
systematic review of research papers in this field.  
RQ2: What is the strength of empirical evidence reflected 
in empirical requirement engineering literature? 
   The aim of this question is to find out the strength of 
empirical evidences, i.e., what we actually know 
regarding the evidences we collected. This question will 
provide information about the strength of the studies in 
terms of sources of the evidence and research approach 
used.  
A. Search Strategy 
The search strategy contains different decisions like 
search string, resources to be searched and selection items to 
be searched. 
This has been done in steps as: 
 
Identifying Major Terms from Research Question 
Major terms from research questions are: 
- 
RQ1: Software, Requirements Engineering, 
Empirical studies 
- 
RQ2: Software, Requirements Engineering, 
Empirical studies 
 
Identifying Alternate Spellings and Acronym for 
Major Terms 
Alternate Spellings and Acronym for Major Terms are: 
- 
A: (All synonyms of requirement engineering) 
requirements 
process, 
requirements 
development, 
requirements 
elicitation, 
requirements 
gathering, 
requirements 
identification, 
requirements 
discovery, 
requirements 
analysis, 
requirements 
specification, 
requirements 
validation, 
requirements verification, requirements testing, 
requirements 
checking, 
requirements 
negotiation, 
requirements 
documentation, 
requirements 
management, 
requirements 
change management. 
- 
B: (All synonyms of empirical studies) 
empirical, case study, experiment, industrial 
report, experience report, observational study, 
survey. 
 
Formulating Search String 
The final search string will be like: 
 (All synonyms of requirement engineering ORed) 
AND 
(All synonyms of empirical studies ORed) 
     The search string will be modified according to the 
search 
criteria 
provided 
by 
different 
sources 
like 
Compendex, ACM digital Library, etc. during the 
conduction of review. 
 
Deciding Resources to be Searched 
Resources to be searched include: 
IEEE Explore, ACM digital library, ScienceDirect, 
SpringerLink and Compendex. 
 
Selecting Items to be Searched 
The items to be searched include: Journal articles, 
Workshop papers and Conference papers. 
 
Deciding Language of Review Studies 
The research papers in English language will be selected      
for review. 
 
Deciding Publication Period 
Publication period included in the review will be from the 
start period as specified in the resource to be searched up to 
year 2011. 
577
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

3 
 
B. Publication Selection 
 
Inclusion Criteria 
The study will be included that fits the criteria as: 
- 
The study is about RE 
- 
 OR the study is about any of sub-areas of RE 
- 
 AND the study has empirical evidence. 
 
Exclusion Criteria 
The study will be excluded that: 
- 
Is in the form of books or thesis or 
unpublished articles  
- 
OR the study that does not directly address RE 
or any of its sub areas 
- 
 OR the study that lacks empirical evidence 
 
Selecting Primary Studies 
The primary studies included in the review will be 
selected in two iterations: 
- 
Level 1 screening 
Initially the papers will be selected by reviewing the 
title, keywords and abstract. By doing this, the studies 
which are relevant to the research questions will be 
selected and those lacking this relevance will be 
excluded. If there is any uncertainty about any paper for 
inclusion/exclusion in level 1 screening then the paper 
will not be excluded at this level rather it will be iterated 
through level 2 screening. 
- 
Level 2 screening 
     The candidate primary studies selected initially in 
level 1 will then be checked against the aforementioned 
inclusion/exclusion criteria by reviewing the studies 
thoroughly by going through their full text. A secondary 
reviewer will then review the studies against the 
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria to cross-check the results of 
inclusion and exclusion. Studies that lack empirical 
evidence or that are not about RE will be excluded in 
this process. And those matching with the inclusion 
criteria will be selected as primary studies for the 
review. 
C. Publication Quality Assessment 
Quality Instrument will be used to evaluate quality of 
empirical evidences as described in the primary studies. The 
Quality instrument used in this review consists of 5 sections; 
a section having general checklist items which are applicable 
to all the studies included while other 4 sections are 
specifically for various research method used in the study 
i.e., experiment, survey, case study and experience report. 
These criteria have been adopted from SLR guidelines [12] 
[13] [14] [15] [16]. The formulation of this checklist is a 
joint group effort of various researchers. Table 1 shows the 
detailed checklist. 
Generic 
Are the aims clearly stated?  
YES/NO 
Are the study participants or 
observational units adequately 
described? 
YES/NO/PARTIAL 
Was the study design appropriate with 
respect to research aim? 
YES/NO/PARTIAL 
Are the data collection methods 
adequately described? 
YES/NO/PARTIAL 
Are the statistical methods justified by 
the author?  
YES/NO 
Is the statistical methods used to analyze 
the 
data 
properly 
described 
and 
referenced?  
YES/NO 
Are negative findings presented? 
YES/NO/PARTIAL 
Are all the study questions answered? 
YES/NO 
Do the researchers explain future 
implications? 
YES/NO 
Survey 
Was 
the 
denominator 
(i.e., 
the 
population size) reported? 
YES/NO 
Did the author justified sample size? 
YES/NO 
Is the sample representative of the 
population to which the results will 
generalize? 
YES/NO 
Have “drop outs” introduced biasness 
on result limitation?  
YES/NO/NOT 
APPLICABLE 
Experiment 
Were treatments randomly allocated? 
YES/NO 
If there is a control group, are 
participants similar to the treatment 
group participants in terms of variables 
that may affect study outcomes? 
YES/NO 
Could lack of blinding introduce bias?  
YES/NO 
Are the variables used in the study 
adequately measured (i.e., are the 
variables likely 
to 
be 
valid 
and 
reliable)?  
YES/NO 
Case Study 
Is case study context defined? 
YES/NO 
Are sufficient raw data presented to 
provide understanding of the case? 
YES/NO 
Is the case study based on theory and 
linked to existing literature? 
YES/NO 
Are ethical issues addressed properly 
(personal intentions, integrity issues, 
consent, review board approval)? 
YES/NO 
Is a clear Chain of evidence established 
from observations to conclusions? 
YES/NO/PARTIAL 
Experience Report 
Is the focus of study reported? 
YES/NO 
Does 
the 
author 
report 
personal 
observation? 
YES/NO 
Is 
there 
a 
link 
between 
data, 
interpretation and conclusion? 
YES/NO/PARTIAL 
Does 
the 
study 
report 
multiple 
experiences? 
YES/NO 
       TABLE 1: QUALITY CHECKLIST ADOPTED FROM [12] [13] [14] [15] [16]. 
 
The questions included in the checklist will be answered 
either Yes, No or Partial and will be rated as 2, 1 or 0 
respectively. The sum of the scores from all these questions 
will be used for assessing the quality of the studies. 
578
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

4 
 
D. Data Extraction Strategy 
    Two reviewers will extract the data randomly and then 
will compare the results. In case of any disagreement, 
reviewer will arbitrate to reach on some agreement. Each 
study will be uniquely numbered and studies reported in 
more than one papers will be counted once. For each 
research question, relevant data will be extracted from all 
accepted papers and will be recorded in data synthesis 
forms. Data will be extracted contributing to each research 
question.  
For RQ1 following information will be extracted: 
- 
RE area (Elicitation, Analysis, Specification, etc.) 
- 
Research output (New Tool, New Technique, New 
Process, Modification of Tool/Technique/Process, 
Usage 
Experience 
Tool, 
Usage 
Experience 
Technique, Usage Experience Process, RE issues 
and Challenges).  
- 
Participant Type (Academia, Industry, Mixed) 
- 
Country (involved in research) 
- 
Conference/ Journal 
- 
Year of Publication  
For RQ2 following information will be extracted: 
- 
Type 
of 
evidence 
(case 
study, 
experiment, 
experience report, etc.) 
- 
Data collection method (interview, questionnaire,  
etc) 
- 
Type of research: For extracting information about 
type of research we have consulted an already 
developed classification of research approaches by 
Wieringa [11] who has categorized research types as 
validation research, evaluation research, solution 
proposal, philosophical papers, opinion papers and 
experience papers. 
E. Data Synthesis Strategy 
Data from all the included papers will be extracted and 
recorded. Different kind of data will be extracted for each 
research question as has been described in section D of this 
paper. The data will be extracted by using well defined data 
extraction forms, where data will be fed to the best in a 
quantitative way so that data can finally be analyzed for 
various patterns. 
Data related to RQ1 will help out in finding information 
like: 
 
Which area of requirements engineering is 
empirically evaluated more/less frequently and in 
what context these empirical studies have been 
carried out?  
 
What type of tools, techniques, frameworks and 
models, etc. are being used in the field of RE?  
 
Where these tools, techniques and models, etc. are 
adopted mostly?  
 
What are the areas of RE that are rich in terms of 
tools and techniques available and what are the 
areas where more attention needs to be given?  
 
What areas of RE are under more consideration and 
where more work is required?  
 
Which era of RE can be said as having maximum 
progress in terms of new advances?  
 
Which research participants are more involved in 
RE progress?  
 
What is the knowledge gap pointed by the evidence 
in RE? 
  Data related to RQ2 will help out in finding: 
 
Which research methods have been employed more 
frequently in RE?  
 
Which research methods have been employed for 
investigating which sub areas of RE?  
 
Which data collection method has been used for 
investigating which sub area of RE and by using 
which research method?  
 
What type of research has been presented more 
frequently by the empirical studies of RE? 
The extracted data will then be analyzed using various 
quantitative and qualitative methods for synthesizing the 
data. Based on this data, different statistics and reports will 
be generated like: 
 
Percentage of studies containing case studies, 
experiments and experiences 
 
Percentage of studies for each RE area. 
 
Percentage of studies for different research types. 
 
Percentage of studies for different participant types. 
 
Analysis of evidence type versus participant type. 
 
Analysis of evidence type versus RE area type. 
 
Analysis of evidence type versus type of research. 
 
And more complex analysis comprising more than 
two parameters. 
All of this information will be finally presented in the 
form of systematic maps like bar graphs, bubble plots, etc.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Requirements engineering being a mature field of software 
engineering, presents a vast history of research and developments 
in all of its sub areas. But there lacks a study summarizing the 
whole field of RE with an emphasis on empirical evidences 
presented in this field to date. This paper in the form of a protocol 
provides a plan for carrying out a systematic literature review for 
the field of requirements engineering, describing state of the art of 
this field. The future work includes successful execution of the 
research plan presented in this paper to present a state of the art of 
software requirements engineering. It will help out various 
practitioners and researchers in the field to find out which areas of 
RE are rich in research and also to identify gaps and thus future 
research directions in this field. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Abran, J. W. Moore, R. Dupuis, R. L. Dupuis, and L. L. 
Tripp, “Guide to the software engineering body of knowledge 
(swebok),” 2004 ed P Bourque R Dupuis A Abran and JW 
Moore Eds IEEE Press, 2001. Last access: March, 2011. 
[2] H. F. Hofmann and F. Lehner, “Requirements engineering as 
a success factor in software projects,” Software, IEEE, vol. 
18, no. 4, pp. 58-66, 2001. Last access: March, 2011. 
[3] F.P. Brooks, “Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software 
Engineering|”, 20th anniversary edition. Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 1995. 
579
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

5 
 
[4] K. E. Wiegers, “In search of excellent requirements,” The 
Journal of the Quality Assurance Institute, vol. 1, 1995. Last 
access: April, 2011. 
[5] Springer, International Journal of Requirement Engineering.   
Website Url:http://www.springer.com/computer/swe/journal/766 
[6] IEEE, International Conference on Requirement Engineering.  
Website Url: http://www.requirements-engineering.org/ 
[7] B. A. Kitchenham, T. Dyba, and M. Jorgensen, “Evidence-
based software engineering,” in Proceedings of the 26th 
international conference on software engineering, 2004, pp. 
273-281. Last access: January, 2011. 
[8] B. Kitchenham, O. Pearl Brereton, D. Budgen, M. Turner, J. 
Bailey, and S. Linkman, “Systematic literature reviews in 
software 
engineering-A 
systematic 
literature 
review,” 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 7-
15, 2009. Last access: March, 2011. 
[9] T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, “Strength of evidence in systematic 
reviews in software engineering,” in Proceedings of the 
Second ACM-IEEE international symposium on Empirical 
software engineering and measurement, 2008, pp. 178-187. 
Last access: March, 2011. 
[10] D. T. Ross and K. E. Schoman Jr, “Structured analysis for 
requirements 
definition,” 
Software 
Engineering, 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
6-15, 
1977, 
doi: 
10.1109/TSE.1977.229899. Last access: May, 2011. 
[11] R. Wieringa, N. Maiden, N. Mead, and C. Rolland, 
“Requirements 
engineering 
paper 
classification 
and 
evaluation 
criteria: 
a 
proposal 
and 
a 
discussion,” 
Requirements Engineering, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 102-107, 2006. 
[12] B. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing 
systematic literature reviews in software engineering,” 
Engineering, vol. 2, no. EBSE 2007-001, 2007. Last access: 
January, 2011. 
[13] B.A. Kitchenham, O.P. Brereton, D. Budgen, and Z. Li, “An 
Evaluation of Quality Checklist Proposals-A participant-
observer case study,” 13th International Conference on 
Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering, Durham 
University, UK, 20 – 21, April 2009. Last access: March, 
2011. 
[14] B. Kitchenham, D.I.K. Sjoberg, O.P. Brereton, D. Budgen, T. 
Dyba, M. Host, D. Pfahl, and P. Runeson, “Can we evaluate 
the 
quality 
of 
software 
engineering 
experiments?,” 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
2010 
ACM-IEEE 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Empirical 
Software 
Engineering 
and 
Measurement, 
ACM, 
2010, 
pp. 
1-8, 
doi:10.1145/1852786.1852789. Last access: March, 2011. 
[15] M. Host and P. Runeson, “Checklists for software engineering 
case study research,” Empirical Software Engineering and 
Measurement, ESEM 2007. First International Symposium 
on, IEEE, 2007, pp. 479-481, doi:10.1109/ESEM.2007.29. 
Last access: January, 2011. 
[16] D. Budgen and C. Zhang, “Preliminary reporting guidelines 
for experience papers,” Proceedings of EASE, 2009, pp. 1-10. 
Last access: March, 2011. 
[17] T.E. Bell and T.A. Thayer, “Software Requirements: Are  
They Really a Problem?”, Proc. ICSE-2: 2nd Intrnational 
Conference on Software Enginering, San Francisco, 1976. 
Last access: January, 2011. 
[18] K. Petersen, R. Feldt, S. Mujtaba, and M. Mattsson, 
“Systematic mapping studies in software engineering,” in 
12th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment 
in Software Engineering, 2008, pp. 71-80. 
 
 
580
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

