CERTICS - A Harmonization with CMMI-DEV Practices for Implementation of 
Technology Management Competence Area  
 
Fabrício Wickey da Silva Garcia 
Faculty of Computing 
Federal University of Pará 
Castanhal, Pará, Brazil 
e-mail: fabriciowgarcia@gmail.com 
 
 
Sandro Ronaldo Bezerra Oliveira 
Graduate Program in Computer 
Science 
Federal University of Pará 
Belém, Pará, Brazil 
e-mail: srbo@ufpa.br 
 
 
Clênio Figueiredo Salviano 
“Renato Archer” Information 
Technology Center 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil 
e-mail: clenio.salviano@cti.gov.br 
 
Abstract—This paper proposes a harmonization between a 
product quality model and a software process model used in 
the industry, CERTICS (a national Brazilian model) and 
CMMI-DEV (an international model). The focus of this 
harmonization is on the Competence Area of Technology 
Management of CERTICS, which addresses the key question 
of 
whether 
“the 
software 
is 
kept 
autonomous 
and 
technologically competitive”. The results of the harmonization 
are examined step by step, as well as including a review of the 
harmonization, and were assisted by an expert on the 
CERTICS and CMMI-DEV models. Thus, this paper aims to 
correlate the structures of the two models to reduce the 
implementation time and costs, and to stimulate the execution 
of multi-model implementations in software development. 
Keywords-software engineering; software quality; technology 
management; CERTICS; CMMI-DEV; harmonization. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The growing use of software in companies means that 
most manual work is now automated, as well as most 
business routines [1]. This can be regarded as a benefit 
since the adoption of software products generates a greater 
demand for goods and services. The increase in demand 
leads to a proportional increase in customer requirements. 
Thus, the requirement for greater quality in software 
products is increasing, since these customers are becoming 
more selective with regard to the software products they 
find acceptable [2]. 
There are several certified models on the market to 
ensure the quality of the software products, such as the 
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) [3], the 
International Organization of Standardization / International 
Electrotechnical Commission (ISO / IEC) 15504 [4] and Six 
Sigma [5]. In Brazil, there are two models that are gaining 
prominence, 
which 
are 
Brazilian 
Software 
Process 
Improvement (MPS.BR) [6], and the Certification of 
National Technology Software and Related Services 
(CERTICS) [7]. 
Brazil is a country, which has one of the world’s largest 
range of software products, and every day the requirements 
of customers regarding the quality and complexity of 
products is increasing. From this standpoint, it can be 
observed that companies are increasingly seeking maturity 
in their software processes so that they can reach   
international standards of quality and productivity, which 
are essential for survival in the IT market. However, the 
cost of certification for a company can be up to US$ 
400,000, which is not feasible for micro, small and 
medium-sized firms, and is a characteristic of Brazilian IT 
Enterprises. Because of this, the Department of Information 
Technology of the Ministry of Science, Technology and 
Innovation launched a number of Government and 
marketing initiatives, which led to a more aggressive stance 
to export-oriented software. These involved the creation of 
models to comply with the features required by national 
companies, and the recent investment policies for the 
training and expertise of professionals [6][7]. 
Despite the wide range of certification models, many 
companies seek to make improvements in their processes 
and products by using more than one of these models. The 
reason for this is that the practices included in a single one 
cannot 
fully 
comply 
with 
their 
requirements 
for 
improvement. The great difficulty in the implementation of 
more than one model is that each has a different kind of 
structure, which causes conflicts and problems about how to 
understand the models, which will be implemented in the 
company. These implementation problems that are found in 
more than one model can only be reduced by achieving a 
harmonization between them. This task will help to identify 
the similarities and differences between the models [8]. This 
harmonization is fully accepted by the regulatory bodies as 
a means of obtaining quality in the products and services 
related to software. 
The research question of this paper is about how 
CERTICS (product quality model) and CMMI-DEV 
(process quality model) can help to bring about an 
organizational improvement in an integrated way by using 
the assets (practices, processes and others) that these models 
possess. Thus, this research is driven by the need for 
materials that guide the implementation process of the 
multi-models (CERTICS and CMMI-DEV) in companies, 
by providing assets to identify their strengths and 
weaknesses. Furthermore, this research aims to show the 
relationship between the CERTICS and CMMI-DEV 
quality models, by harmonizing their features to show the 
level of adhesion between their structures and support 
organizations that want to implement them together. The 
description of the main objective concerns the application 
of the practices defined in the quality models for the 
software process and product. 
The extent of the business / scientific problem and its 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

challenges is revealed by the number of existing models that 
focus on improving the quality of software development. 
The harmonization can help to identify the common features 
of these models, by providing the software company with 
an instrument to guide the joint implementation of its 
practices, and thus reduce time and costs. Thus, the means 
of tackling this problem is to determine how many assets 
(practices, processes and others), which are needed to 
support the implementation of different models, can be 
applied together in the software company. 
In this paper, there are discussions related to the details 
of the harmonization of the CERTICS model of technology 
management competence area with the CMMI-DEV model.  
In describing the similarities between the structures of the 
models, the coverage criteria and evaluation are performed 
to validate the correctness of the harmonization between the 
models. Thus, the purpose of this paper is to design an 
instrument that can guide the joint implementation of the 
practices contained in the two models (CMMI and 
CERTICS). 
Several questions need to be addressed in this research: 
these include the way the nature and scope of the 
investigated problem are related to the software quality and 
the improvement of the process and product. They also 
involve an attempt to ensure that, within the scope of the 
process improvement in practice, the improvement of the 
software products can be achieved. 
According to CTI Renato Archer [7], the model of 
CERTICS 
provides 
benefits 
to 
Brazilian 
software 
development companies that seek to gain preference in 
government procurement and market differentiation, and 
thus create a positive image of the company as an innovator 
of software development and technological progress in the 
country. Until April 2016 this model had 29 products 
certified and registered on the site [7].  
CERTICS is composed of four competence areas. The 
choice of the Technology Management area for this work 
was based on the fact that it involves establishing action-
driven strategies for research and development (R&D). This 
includes the absorption and / or acquisition of existing 
software to be embedded in technologies, based on 
autonomous and technological innovation. This area makes 
use of the results of R&D in domain ownership software, 
together with the relevant technologies used in software. 
This means that the technological innovations and decision-
making capacity in the key software technologies must be 
introduced 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
software 
remains 
technologically competitive [7]. 
Thus, it is expected that the results of this research will:  
a) 
reduce 
the 
burden 
of 
companies 
with 
joint 
implementation models, b) reduce inconsistencies and 
conflicts between models, and c) reduce costs through this 
kind of implementation. The difficulty is how to harmonize 
two models that are defined by different organizations and 
decide which practices should be integrated. Finally, this 
research is constrained by being concentrated in one 
CERTICS competence area and, for this reason, an expert 
has been invited to evaluate the harmonization. 
This paper is structured as follows. Section II examines 
some related works, which carry out the harmonization of 
two or more models, and the two models of this research are 
discussed in detail. Section III outlines the harmonization of 
the 
Technology 
Management 
Competence 
Area 
of 
CERTICS with regard to CMMI-DEV practices. Finally, 
Section IV concludes with some final considerations. These 
include the results obtained and the limitations of this 
research, followed by some suggestions for possible future 
work. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS AND BACKGROUND 
This section provides an overview of the concepts of the 
CMMI-DEV and CERTICS models and some related 
works. 
A. Related Works 
The work of Baldassarre et al. [9] proposes a 
harmonization model that aims to support and guide 
companies in the integration, management and alignment of 
software development and quality management practices, or 
those that are concerned with improving existing ones. This 
is possible by mapping the ISO 9001 and Capability 
Maturity Model Integration for Development (CMMI-DEV) 
model, using the Goal Question Metrics (GQM) for the 
definition of operational goals. In this work, the statements 
of ISO 9001 can be reused in the CMMI assessments. 
In [10], Pelszius and Ragaisis put forward a scheme for 
mapping and matching the maturity levels of the CMMI-
DEV model and ISO / IEC 15504. The authors investigated 
which maturity level of a model was ensured by each level 
of another one. Thus, the mapping was divided into the 
following stages: (i) the elements of the CMMI-DEV 
Process Areas were mapped with the ISO / IEC 15504 
process indicators, (ii) a summary of each level mapped by 
the models, i.e. the CMMI practices were mapped in 
relation to the ISO / IEC 15504 outputs, (iii) calculating the 
percentage of the ISO / IEC 15504 process attributes, (iv) 
defining the indicators that express the capability of each 
process, such as N for Non-Performed, P for Partially 
Performed, L for Largely Performed and F for Fully 
Performed, (v) establishing the capabilities of the ISO / IEC 
15504 processes, and (vi) determining the organizational 
maturity of the ISO / IEC 15504, by ensuring a CMMI-
DEV maturity level. 
In [11], Garcia-Mireles et al. show the results of 
harmonizing the processes and product quality models. A 
different approach is adopted in this work, where guidance 
is given by the improvement goals of the software product 
quality control. Four stages were defined for the mapping 
between the process models, which are: (i) analysis models, 
(ii) definition of mapping, (iii) implementation of mapping, 
and (iv) evaluation of mapping results. 
 Finally, in Araújo’s work [8] there are two mappings: 
the first is between the MPS Reference Model for Software 
(MR-MPS-SW) [6] and the Brazilian Test Process 
Improvement (MPT.Br) [12] models, and the second is 
made with the MR-MPS-SW and CERTICS models. On the 
basis of the results of this research, it was found that the 
first mapping showed a great adherence to the models used, 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

while the second mapping showed that the MR-MPS-SW is 
only slightly adherent to the CERTICS model. 
The existence of many frameworks and works dealing 
with the harmonization of practices included in different 
quality models, led to the joint implementation and 
evaluation of these models. It also helped the regulatory 
bodies to accept the existence of practices that are not yet 
present in the versions of their models. This brings about 
improvements in the the organizational process without the 
need for individual interventions by the large number of 
models. 
B. The CERTICS Model 
CERTICS is a Brazilian evaluation methodology that 
seeks to determine whether or not software is the result of 
technological development and innovation in the national 
sphere. In this way, it seeks to assess whether the product 
developed “creates or expands technological skills that are 
related to the country, or contributes to the creation of 
business based on knowledge. This leads to an increase in 
technological autonomy and innovative capacity.” [7]. 
The CERTICS methodology was designed on the basis 
of the ISO / IEC 15504-2 standard [4] and aims to define a 
minimum set of requirements related to technological 
development and innovation in the country [7]. 
The CERTICS model is composed of four Competence 
Areas and sixteen Outcomes. The Competence Areas 
include the details about the concepts of the resulting 
software that is used for technological innovation and the 
development of the country. Each Competence Area has a 
key feature that describes characteristics that must be 
reached in order to fulfil the requirements of the model. The 
competence areas are as follows:  
• 
Technological Development (DES), key question - 
“Is the software the result of technological 
development in Brazil?”, 
• 
Technology Management (TEC), key question - 
“Does 
the 
software 
remain 
technologically 
autonomous and competitive?”, 
• 
Business Management (GNE), key question - 
“Does the software leverage knowledge-based 
business and is it driven by these business?”, and  
• 
Continuous Improvement (MEC), key question - 
“Is 
the 
software 
the 
result 
of 
continuous 
improvement originating in the management of 
personnel, processes and knowledge to support and 
enhance their development and technological 
innovation?”. 
The Competence Areas have a set of outcomes, which, 
when implemented, must satisfy the goals of the model. The 
model also provides guidance about how to implement each 
outcome, as well as a list of examples of work products that 
illustrate what is desirable to fulfill each outcome [7]. In the 
domain of this work area, the Outcomes of the Technology 
Management Competence Area are: 
• 
TEC.1. Use of Results from Technological R&D - 
the software development uses results from 
Technological Research and Development, 
• 
TEC.2. Appropriation of Relevant Technologies, 
the relevant technologies used in software are 
appropriated by the Organizational Unit, 
• 
TEC.3. 
Introduction 
of 
Technological 
Innovations, - the introduction of technological 
innovations in software are stimulated and kept at 
the Organizational Unit, and 
• 
TEC.4. 
Decision-Making 
Capacity 
- 
the 
Organizational Unit has a decision-making capacity 
for the key technologies in the software. 
C. The CMMI-DEV Model 
CMMI is a maturity model for process improvement 
that is created by Software Engineering Institute (SEI) to 
integrate knowledge areas in a single model, such as 
Systems Engineering (SE), Software Engineering (SW), 
Integrated Products and Process Development (IPPD) and 
Supplier Sourcing (SS) [3]. 
Currently the CMMI is in version 1.3 and is composed 
of three models, which are: CMMI for Development 
(CMMI-DEV), which is concerned with development 
processes, CMMI for Acquisition (CMMI-ACQ), whose 
focus is on acquisition processes, as well as product and / or 
services sourcing, and CMMI for Services (CMMI-SVC), 
which deals with service processes such as maintenance and 
evolution. 
The CMMI structure consists of several elements that 
are grouped into three categories, which are: a) required 
components (Specific and Generic Goals), b) expected 
components (Specific and Generic Practices) and c) 
informative components (Subpractices, Examples of Work 
Products, and others). These components assist in the 
interpretation of the model requirements. Thus, the CMMI-
DEV is composed of twenty-two process areas, which 
consist of its purpose and specific goals for each area 
supplemented by generic goals, since they are related to all 
the process areas. The specific goals define unique 
characteristics for each process area, while the generic goals 
define characteristics that are common to all the process 
areas. Each specific goal has a set of specific practices, 
which are activities that must be taken into account to 
ensure that the goal is satisfied. Similarly, the generic goals 
have generic practices. 
III. THE HARMONIZATION BETWEEN CERTICS AND CMMI-
DEV MODELS 
The CERTICS and CMMI-DEV models have different 
structures, each of which has a set of specific requirements, 
however, despite the particular features of each model, it 
can be inferred that the models have elements that can 
influence the fulfillment of some of the requirements that 
can be found in both models, according to Table I. 
The CERTICS model is formed of Competence Areas, 
which have a set of practices (outcomes) that must be 
implemented so that it can fulfill the requirements of the 
model. Similarly, the CMMI-DEV model has an element 
called Process Area, which is also composed of many 
practices that must be implemented to fulfill their goals; 
these practices are called Specific and Generic Practices. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

TABLE I.  
ELEMENTS THAT CAN INFLUENCE THE FULFILLMENT OF 
THE CERTICS AND CMMI-DEV REQUIREMENTS. 
CERTICS Elements 
CMMI-DEV Elements 
Competence Area 
Process Area 
Key Questions 
Specific 
Goals 
(SG) 
Generic 
Goals 
(GG) 
Outcomes 
Specific Practices 
(SP) 
Generic Practices 
(GP) 
Guidelines 
Subpractices 
Generic 
Practice 
Elaborations 
Evidences from Processes 
related with Software 
Example of Work Products (WP) 
The Key Questions of the CERTICS model are similar 
in some respects to the Specific Goals and Generic Goals of 
CMMI-DEV, because these three elements have a set of 
characteristics that must be identified in a company to 
ensure that it fulfills the requirements of the model. Thus, 
the Outcomes of the CERTICS model have goals that can 
be equated with the Specific Practices and Generic Practices 
of CMMI-DEV, since these features represent the details of 
the requirements with regard to what should be performed 
as a practice to ensure the goals of these models are 
achieved. 
It should be noted that when guiding the implementation 
process of these models, both have some elements that help 
to bring about a correct implementation of the requirements 
of the models. In the CERTICS model there are Guidelines 
and in CMMI-DEVthere are Subpractices and Generic 
Practice Elaborations, which offer guidance about how to 
implement each kind of model item. 
Similarly, it was found that the Evidence of the 
CERTICS model also had goals that can be equated with 
the Example Work Products of CMMI-DEV, because these 
elements can act during the implementation of the models 
as a reference-point for what can be used so that it can 
provide evidence that the requirements of each model have 
been fulfilled. 
The set of supporting concepts adopted in this paper 
defines a set of technologies that can be integrated to assist 
in the software process appraisal and improvement. In this 
domain, there are tools, techniques, procedures, processes, 
roles, methodologies, frameworks, languages, standards, 
patterns, and so on. 
A. The Conformance Analysis of the Competence Area of 
Technology Management  
The competence area of Technology Management has 
four outcomes, which are designed to ensure that the 
software 
remains 
autonomous 
and 
technologically 
competitive [7]. 
1) TEC.1: Use of Results from Technological R&D 
The TEC.1 outcome seeks to analyze the technologies 
used in the software development to find out whether the 
results of the research and technological development 
(R&D) were applied to the development of the software 
product. 
For this reason, when the CMMI-DEV model was 
analyzed, it was noted that the CMMI-DEV does not cover 
this outcome because the model does not require the results 
of the research and development (R&D) results in its 
implementation. To obtain this outcome, it would be 
necessary for the CMMI-DEV practices to provide the use 
of technological resources, such as those of any project that 
seeks to define the technical solutions based on R&D, 
partnerships or investment indicators in R&D related to the 
software product. 
2) TEC.2: Appropriation of Relevant Technologies 
The TEC.2 outcome seeks to determine whether the 
relevant technologies in software development that have 
been used, are appropriate for the organizational unit. In 
assessing whether this outcome has been achieved, the 
organizational unit must demonstrate that action taken for 
the appropriation of technological knowledge is present in 
the software, (such as the training of its professionals). 
Thus, this outcome needs a set of CMMI-DEV Process 
Areas and Practices to achieve its goals. 
In the Project Planning (PP), the SP.2.3 focuses on   
data management planning, and the SP.2.5 and SP.2.6 
ensure that the planning of the professionals involved in the 
project is based on their professional profiles and skills as 
well as the involvement of the stakeholders. 
In the Project Monitoring and Control (PMC), the 
Specific Practice SP.1.1 allows the monitoring of the 
practices that were planned in PP.SP.2.5 and PP.SP.2.6, 
while the SP.1.4 allows the monitoring of data management 
based on the project plan. 
In the Organizational Training (OT), the SP.1.1 seeks 
to maintain the training on the basis of organizational 
strategies and needs. The SP.1.2 determines what the 
training needs are in the business and what the projects are, 
while the SP.1.3 seeks to establish and maintain the tactical 
training plans, as well as the quality of this training to meet 
the needs that are fulfilled by the SP.1.4. Moreover, with 
the SP.2.1 it can ensure that the training takes place in 
accordance with the tactical training plan. The records of 
these training sessions can be kept by the SP.2.2, while the 
SP.2.3 makes it possible to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
training in the company. 
The Generic Practice GP.2.5 seeks to ensure that the 
professionals are able to handle the technology used in the 
company, by providing training that is suited to the needs of 
the company. 
The coverage in TEC.2 was complete, because the 
CMMI-DEV had met the requirements of this outcome. 
3) TEC.3: Introduction of Technological Innovations 
The focus of this outcome is on technological 
innovation, because it seeks to find out whether the 
organizational unit has taken steps to introduce and 
encourage the use of technological innovation in software 
development. To this extent, this outcome needs a CMMI-
DEV Process Area and Practice to achieve its goals. 
In the Organizational Performance Management 
(OPM), with the SP.2.1 it can initiate and categorize the 
suggested improvements. 
The coverage in TEC.3 was not complete because the 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

CMMI-DEV does not have practices for conducting the 
professional activities for members of the project that set up 
the 
schemes 
for 
technological 
innovation. 
Another 
requirement is the incorporation of innovative ideas that 
arise from joint ventures with R&D teams, as well as the 
software made available for technological innovation. 
4) TEC.4: Decision-Making Capacity 
The TEC.4 outcome seeks to determine whether the 
organizational unit has decision-making powers with regard 
to the relevant technologies that are presented in the 
software product. Hence, to ensure that this outcome is 
fulfilled, it is necessary for the organizational unit to prove 
that it has the authority to make changesin the relevant 
technologies that are present in the software. Thus, this 
outcome needs a set of Process Areas and Practices of 
CMMI-DEV to achieve its goals. 
In the Organizational Performance Management 
(OPM), 
the 
Specific 
Practice 
SP.2.2 
allows 
the 
improvements to be analyzed with regard to the possible 
effects of achieving the quality goals of the organizational 
process performance. The SP.2.3 is concerned with   
validating the improvements selected. In the case of the 
SP.2.4, it can select and prepare the improvements for 
implementation in the company, on the basis of an 
evaluation about costs, benefits and other factors. 
The coverage of this outcome was partial because the 
CMMI-DEV has practices that allow the suggested 
improvements to be analyzed by selecting, implementing 
and validating these improvements, but the CMMI-
DEVprovides no evidence to support the updates of the 
relevant technologies that can be found in the software and 
that can allow a decision to be made in the organizational 
unit. 
B. The Evaluation of the Harmonization of Technology 
Management  
The peer review technique was employed to evaluate the 
harmonization between the requirements of the CERTICS 
and CMMI-DEV models outlined in the last section, This 
was overseen by an expert, who has over five years of 
experience with the implementation of quality models in 
software development companies, and has recognized 
certification in CERTICS and CMMI-DEV models. The 
expert 
received 
the 
document 
that 
contains 
the 
harmonization of CERTICS and CMMI-DEV models, and 
carried out the review in accordance with a set of criteria, 
which were defined on the basis of Araújos’s work [8], as 
shown in Table II. 
When reviewing the harmonization of Technology 
Management (TEC) Competence Area, the expert detected a 
problem, which was classified as General (G). It was 
suggested that an analysis should be conducted of all the 
CMMI-DEV specific and generic practices that have been 
mapped in the TEC area with the aim of determining 
whether they are listed and described at the end of the 
document. If any mapped practice had not been listed, the 
expert suggested that it should be included in the document, 
as a means of enabling the goal of these practices to be 
understood. 
TABLE II.  
CRITERIA DEFINED FOR THE HARMONIZATION 
EVALUATION. 
Criteria 
Definition 
TH (Technical 
High) 
Indicates that a problem in a harmonization item 
was found and, if not changed, would impair the 
system. 
TL 
(Technical 
Low) 
Indicating that a problem in a harmonization item 
was found and a change would be appropriate. 
E (Editorial) 
Indicating that a Portuguese language error was 
found or the text can be improved. 
Q (Questioning) 
Indicating that there were doubts about the content. 
G (General) 
Indicates that in general a commentary is needed. 
In TEC 2, the expert found a problem that was classified 
as TL. Since in this outcome a Generic Practice was 
unnamed, the expert suggested that its name should be 
included in the harmonization document. 
The expert did not find any problem classified as TH, E 
or Q. 
C. How should the Harmonization be used? 
The purpose of the harmonization of CERTICS and 
CMMI-DEV models is to help businesses that wishing to 
obtain certifications through multi-model implementations 
or even by making evaluations of the two models. The use 
of harmonization can optimize costs, time and effort 
because the models now have their structures harmonized 
and interrelated. 
It was possible to find and highlight the differences and 
similarities included in the requirements of CERTICS and 
CMMI-DEV models. In this way, it can be seen that 
although some requirements of the models are similar or 
even complementary, it is not always possible for them to 
fulfil their goals in the same way. According to Association 
for Promoting Excellence in Brazilian Software (SOFTEX) 
[6], this may occur because of the different level of 
requirements found in some of the practices, outcomes and 
expected results of the models. 
The harmonization spreadsheets have become an 
important support tool in the joint evaluation or 
implementation of the models, because they provide inputs 
that allow adaptation / harmonization in the frameworks of 
the models and in their expected results, practices and 
outcomes. This can enable the multi-models to be 
implemented in companies. 
As a result, the company saves time from the 
implementation of joint models, because it will not have to 
spend time on separately analyzing the frameworks of the 
models. This means that it has to determine in what way a 
model can suit another one. This is because all the 
structures and requirements, which are the same for all the 
models, have been identified, harmonized and documented 
in the harmonization spreadsheet of the models. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This research study has examined the harmonization of 
Technology Management Competence Area included in 
CERTICS with CMMI-DEV practices. To achieve its goals, 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

this research sought to identify the similarities and 
differences between the CERTICS and CMMI-DEV 
frameworks by investigating their harmonization. To avoid 
problems of understanding and inconsistencies, an expert in 
the models evaluated the harmonization by the peer review 
technique. The results of this review were analyzed and 
suggested changes should be implemented to eliminate 
inconsistencies and problems of understanding problems, 
which were detected by the expert. The document with the 
complete harmonization generated after the peer review, 
including all the CERTICS Competence Areas is available 
in [13]. 
The usability of the harmonization of the two models 
can be corroborated by numerous certifications registered in 
the CERTICS website [7] about products developed by 
Brazilian software companies that have also made 
appraisals of their processes that are outlined in the CMMI 
website [3]. This shows that there is national interest in the 
two models. 
The lessons learned from this research stem from the 
fact that there is an analytical and comparison domain 
between the models. Thus, it is recommended that more 
than one person perform it, so that any conflicts or 
uncertainties can be discussed and solved by a peer review.  
One drawback of this study is that the harmonization has 
not been evaluated in a software development company; it 
has only been evaluated by peer review. An evaluation of 
the harmonization in a company is being completed in 
Brazil, and its processes are in accordance with the practices 
of CMMI-DEV Maturity Level 3. As a result, it is possible 
to determine whether the harmonization contributed 
positively or negative to a multi-model implementation. 
Another drawback is the fact that the peer review has only 
been performed by a single expert, which means that it can 
only be a limited view of the results obtained from the 
research. However, this expert is a part of a team that 
specifies the CERTICS model, and he has extensive 
experience with the implementation of the CMMI-DEV 
model, and reduces the bias of the results obtained from the 
review. 
In the future, we intend to continue expanding this 
research, and apply it to other enterprises, and thus allow 
the positive and negative aspects of the use of 
harmonization in a CERTICS multi-model implementation 
with the CMMI-DEV to be quantified. Another future study 
concerns the definition of the complete cycle of a 
harmonization based on the research results of Araújo’s 
work [8] and the SOFTEX guide [14].  
So far now that the case study has not been completed, it 
is possible to perceive that the benefits of joint 
implementation are as follows: a reduction in costs and time 
to fulfill the expected results and practices in CERTICS and 
CMMI-DEV models, creation of unified and standardized 
evidences 
to 
achieve 
the 
two 
models, 
and 
the 
standardization of technical language, which is employed in 
these models, to define the software development process. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Dean of Research 
and Postgraduate Studies at the Federal University of Pará 
(PROPESP/UFPA) by the Qualified Publication Support 
Program (PAPQ) for the financial support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. G. Cordeiro and A. L. P. Freitas, “Prioritization of requirements 
and evaluation of software quality as perceived buyers”, Ciência da 
Informação, v. 40, n. 2, Brazil, pp. 24-35, 2012. 
[2] itSMF UK, “An Introductory Overview of ITIL® 2011”, The IT 
Service Management Forum UK, London, 2011. 
[3] SEI, “CMMI for Development (CMMI-DEV)”, Version 1.3, Software 
Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA, 2010, 
Available in http://www.cmmiinstitute.com. Retrieved: july/2016. 
[4] ISO/IEC, “ISO/IEC 15504-2: Information Technology – Process 
Assessment - Part 2 -Performing an Assessment”, Geneve, 2003. 
[5] G. Tennant, “Six Sigma - SPC and TQM in Manufacturing and 
Services”, Gower Publishing, Burlington, 2001. 
[6] SOFTEX, “Brazilian Software Process Improvement (MPS.BR) - 
General Guide: 2016”, Brazil, 2016. 
[7] CTI Renato Archer, “Reference Model for the CERTICS Evaluation – 
Detailing Document”, Centro de Tecnologia da Informação Renato 
Archer, Brazil, 2013, Available in http://www.certics.cti.gov.br. 
Retrieved: july/2016. 
[8] L. L. Araújo, “Mapping between MPS.SW and MPT.BR and 
CERTICS”, Dissertação de Mestrado, COPPE/UFRJ, Brazil, 2014. 
[9] M. T. Baldassarre, D. Caivano, F. J. Pino, M. Piattini, and G. 
Visaggio, “Harmonization of ISO/IEC 9001:2000 and CMMI-DEV 
from a theoretical comparison to a real case application”, Springer 
Science+Business Media. v.20 pp. 309-335, 2011. 
[10] S. Pelsdziusand S. Ragaisis, “Comparison of Maturity Levels in 
CMMI-DEV and ISO/IEC 15504”, Applications of Mathematics and 
Computer Engineering, pp. 117-122, 2011. 
[11] G. A. García-Mireles, M. Á. Moraga, F. García, and M. Piattini, 
“Towards the Harmonization of Process and Product Oriented 
Software Quality Approaches”, Springer-Verlag Systems, Software 
and Services Process Improvement, pp.133-144, 2012. 
[12] SOFTEX RECIFE, “MPT.Br Brazilian Test ProcessImprovement – 
Model Reference Guide”, s.l. : SOFTEX RECIFE, 2011. 
[13] F. W. da S. Garcia, “An Approach to Software Quality Multi-Models 
Implementation adopting CERTICS and CMMI-DEV”, Dissertação de 
Mestrado, PPGCC/UFPA, Brazil, 2016. 
[14] SOFTEX, “Implementation Guide - Part 11: Implementation and 
Evaluation of MR-MPS-SW: 2012 Together with CMMI-DEV v1.3”, 
Brazil, 2012. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-498-5
ICSEA 2016 : The Eleventh International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

