A Benchmarking Criteria for the Evaluation of OLAP Tools 
Fiaz Majeed  
Department of Information Technology, University of Gujrat,  
Gujrat, Pakistan.  
Email: fiaz.majeed@uog.edu.pk 
Abstract— Generating queries on Online Analytical Processing 
(OLAP) tools for complex analysis is a difficult assignment for 
the novice users. To compose accurate OLAP queries for 
fulfilling demand, technical knowledge about schema and the 
data is required. This deficiency can be covered by providing 
an easy design for OLAP tool for the purpose of querying.  In 
this paper, a scheme is proposed for comparison of the OLAP 
tools to identify easy and standardized aspects. For this 
purpose, seven parameters have been used which are interface, 
query, drill-down options, roll-up options, aggregation 
function 
support, 
data 
access 
and 
performance. 
For 
experimental 
analysis, 
two 
tools 
SQL 
Server 
and 
MicroStrategy Express have been evaluated based on the 
proposed parameters. The benefits and drawbacks of the 
standardization of tools for non-technical users have been 
identified. 
Keywords-OLAP tool; evaluation criteria; parameters; 
benchmark; standardize. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) comprises a 
relational or multidimensional database intended to deliver 
fast retrieval of multidimensional analysis and pre-
summarized data. The OLAP contains three fundamental 
operations for results presentation including drill-down, 
slicing & dicing, and roll-up. The drill-down operation 
provides navigation towards details (upper to lower levels). 
For example, the user may be interested to view the detail of 
region’s sale in the form of individual products. By contrast, 
roll-up operation consolidates the results (lower to upper 
levels). For instance, individual products can be roll-up to 
region’s sale. Further, slice and dice operation is used to 
select data from the OLAP cube. The OLAP tools provide 
these and many other functionalities. Most popular tools 
include MicroStrategy Express, SQL Server, SAP business 
object, Oracle, QlickView and Pentaho Business Intelligence 
(BI).  
To explore information by diverse angles, OLAP tools 
are utilized extensively and vendors related to them claim 
excellent performance. A number of tools are available 
which have distinct characteristics. All tools have a different 
way of responsiveness, the design of the interface, input 
query and performance. To the best of our knowledge, there 
is no benchmark to design an OLAP tool available. The users 
face a problem in the selection of an appropriate tool due to 
lacking standard. They cannot easily understand which 
OLAP tool is suitable for their requirement. In other words, a 
standard OLAP tool is needed to support novice users.
In this paper, a method has been formulated to identify 
standardized aspects for the comparison of the OLAP tools. 
For this purpose, seven parameters have been proposed 
which are the interface, query, drill-down, roll-up, 
aggregation function support, data access and performance. 
This is the list of parameters available in all of the existing 
tools. We have performed a comparative analysis of two 
OLAP tools: SQL Server and MicroStrategy Express. The 
experiments have been performed using the dataset 
AdventureWorksDW. The comparison exhibits basically the 
opportunities for non-technical users. 
The paper is arranged as follows: detailed literature 
survey is furnished in Section II. The assessment parameters 
are introduced in Section III, while an experimental 
evaluation has been incorporated in Section IV. Finally, 
conclusions and future directions are given in Section V. 
II.
RELATED WORK
The OLAP supports for multi-dimensional complex 
analysis on data warehouses for decision making [1]. To 
compare OLAP tools, several features should be considered. 
The features to evaluate the usefulness of OLAP are ease of 
use, user-friendly, easy learning and easy to get information. 
Seven features are used to measure the OLAP tool, which is: 
visualizations, summarization, Navigation, query function, 
Sophisticated analysis, Dimensionality, and performance [2]. 
An important feature that makes the design of OLAP tool 
user friendly and easy to use is the interface. Visualization is 
an important aspect of interface design. 
A.
Interface 
Visualizations of statistical data need to present 
relationship among data. Existing tools show isolated graphs 
and do not provide support for the relationship in different 
reports. A visual language named as CoDe is used to present 
relationship among data in tabular form. The visualization is 
performed in four phases: CoDe Modeling, OLAP operation 
pattern definition, OLAP Operation and Report Visualization 
[3]. Thus, graphs are an integral part of the interface so big 
process graph refers to process-related partly unstructured 
execution and heterogeneous data of large hybrid collections. 
A set of methods and a framework are given for initiating 
OLAP analytics which is called P-OLAP. The P-OLAP 
introduces analytics over process execution data based on the 
scalable graph. It is the extension of traditional OLAP 
analytics [4].   
Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are manually 
integrated into scorecards and dashboards used by the 
decision makers. Due to this, KPIs are not related to their 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

business objectives and strategy. To make the KPIs dynamic, 
the modeling language Object Constraint Language (OCL) is 
used to represent OLAP actions, which are then translated to 
Multi-Dimensional eXpressions (MDX) query to be 
executed on OLAP engine [5]. As OLAP tools visualize 
results in the form of aggregations, drill-down up to 
maximum detail is also the important feature of the interface. 
Thus, the user may drill-down data to the maximum level 
where maximum measures are to be returned. In such a case, 
pivot table may not visualize data with full precision [6]. 
B.
Aggregations 
The aggregation operations are key to OLAP BI tools. 
The OLAP tools perform several operations including roll-
up, drill-down slice and dice, ranking, selection and 
computed attributes [1]. The OLAP operation “shrink” 
balances data precision with the size of data cube via pivot 
table. It combines similar data in a single slice (f-slice) for 
the purpose of shrinking [6]. An aggregation operator has 
been built for the text embedded in the tweets content based 
on the Formal Concept Analysis (FCA) theory [7]. 
C.
Performance 
The selection of an appropriate server type plays a role in 
the performance of query processing. The OLAP servers 
generate aggregations for efficient query processing based on 
dimensions. The servers are categorized as ROLAP, 
MOLAP and Hybrid of ROLAP and MOLAP [1]. MOLAP 
presents data in multi-dimensional arrays format while 
ROLAP provides query processing on Relational databases 
[2]. Near real-time BI reduces the time of acquisition of data 
in operational sources and analyses on that data. Event 
processing on streaming data is an application of near real-
time BI. Additionally, MapReduce paradigm can search in 
schema-less input files in comparison to parallel database 
approach. For enhanced BI performance, private clouds 
provide more security. Currently, BI is being switched to 
mobile devices as such devices are pervasive [8]. 
There are several advanced OLAP domains, which have 
emerged recently. The Skalla system has been built, which 
translates GMDJ operator into local site level plans. The 
Packet header, flow level traffic statistics, and router 
statistics can be analyzed effectively using OLAP. Heavy 
traffic cannot be loaded into a central data warehouse, thus 
local data warehouses on each site should be implemented to 
avoid loss of data and for efficient execution of OLAP 
queries. The Skalla performs optimization to minimize 
synchronization traffic and local level executions [9]. The 
tweet streams available in unstructured form are organized in 
an OLAP cube for analytics using Time-Aware Fuzzy 
Formal 
Concept 
Analysis 
theory. 
The 
microblog 
summarization algorithm is introduced and it provides the 
subset of the tweet that best represents the OLAP cube data 
for the analytic purpose. The definition of the multi-
dimensional data model for the storage of tweet data streams 
for enabling OLAP analysis is performed [7]. The AOLAP 
maintains data stream’s aggregations by providing OLAP 
queries in the form of approximate answers and maintains 
them in smaller space on the primary memory. In the OLAP 
cube, data summaries are stored related to each materialized 
node which is performed by the proposed Piece-wise Linear 
Approximation (PLA). To minimize overall querying error, 
lattice nodes based optimization technique is proposed [10]. 
Based on the literature, it is clear that there is no 
benchmark available to compare the existing tools. There is a 
need to develop such a benchmark to standardize the design 
and working of each tool to facilitate non-technical users.  
III.
ASSESSMENT PARAMETERS OF OLAP TOOLS
The evaluation criteria for OLAP tools contain seven 
parameters which include interface, query, drill-down 
options, roll-up options, aggregation function support, data 
access and performance. The parameters are depicted in 
Figure 1.  
Figure 1. Evaluation criteria for the OLAP tools 
For instance, User A wants to analyze his company’s 
revenue with the revenue of his competitive companies. He 
wants to choose a BI tool for this purpose, which can provide 
him with a point and click environment to fulfill his demand. 
He selects SQL Server to input a query, but it requires 
training. Here the problem is that there should be a standard 
available based on which each tool can be designed. Each 
tool should provide similar easy query input mechanism for 
novice users.  
The OLAP tools can be compared based on following 
seven parameters:
A.
Interface 
The interface is a fundamental source of communication 
between the user and the system. If interface design is 
adequate, the user can effortlessly interact with the system. 
The interface is evaluated based on following features:  
Design: The aspects of design that are necessary to be 
considered are user understandability, first look impact of 
front page, the size of everything which is shown, colors 
effect, formal things to be used in designing, formatting of 
text and objects, number of formats to display the results, 
support of graphical results, and user understandability 
about results.  
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

User-friendly: The user-friendly feature of the interface can 
be compared based on the sequence of steps understandable 
by the user, user understanding, how the response is shown 
at any step, and support with help and documentation. 
Understandability at each step during any task, make no 
confusion for the user, and user understandability at first 
look. 
Type: The interface is graphical or query based. The 
graphical user interface is easy to use for novice users 
whereas a query based interface is preferable for expert 
users. Hybrid approach (a mixture of graphical and query 
based) provide an advantage to both types of the users. 
User type: There are commonly two types of users for 
OLAP tools are available 1) novice user and 2) expert user. 
Interface comparison of different tools can be performed 
according to the facilities provided for each type of users 
such as the use of interface at first time and support 
available for the new user. 
Visualizations:
The interfaces are divided into three 
categories which are text-based, visualization-based and 
voice-based. The visualization-based interfaces provide 
analysis in the form of plots, trees, and charts. The 
comparison can be made based on easy to interpretable 
results, understanding at first glance, a large volume of data 
summarized in simple graphs. 
Interactive: By this feature, user interaction at the front end 
of the tool is measured. At how many levels, the user can 
perform the task in an interactive way. The user finds a 
correct answer of the query and he may correct query on the 
basis of feedback provided by the system.  
Complexity: The interface should have the capability to take 
input complex query in its simplest form. It should visualize 
complex OLAP analytics results in easy formats which may 
be the mixture of text, visualizations and voice. Many 
OLAP tools display simplified results on dashboards. 
B.
Query 
The query is evaluated based on following features:  
Format: It defines the format of query writing. There are 
four common formats of query input that are Command-
based, Menu-based, Natural language-based, and Wizard-
based. The easiest formats for query input considered for 
novice users are Menu-based, Natural language-based, and 
Wizard-based. 
Procedure: It is categorized as query input procedure and 
results display procedure. The steps of query input are 
simple and natural as commonly input on web or other 
parallel interfaces. It should be according to previous 
familiar interfaces. The display of results is converged to the 
ease of understanding of results. The results must be 
focused for the less technical users. 
Drill-down options: The comparison can be made based on 
summarization level of drill-down e.g. detailed level. How 
drill-down facility is provided either point and clicking way 
or another indirect way. If a user reaches to the detailed 
level of drill-down, how much a tool provides backtracking 
to roll-up levels? 
Expertise required: This feature defines the type of users 
utilizing the tool. How much time is required for a particular 
user to achieve expertise of using the tool? For instance, the 
novice user may get expertise after 10 sessions span one-
hour long.  
Training required: Did any type of training requirements to 
use the tool? Further, if training is required then what level 
of training is demanded to learn and use the tool 
proficiently. Which training options are available? Few 
tools provide a manual for training while a professional 
training is necessary to utilize other tools. 
C.
Drill-down options 
Support: According to support feature, the tools are 
compared based on whether drill-down support is available 
to navigate the results. Most of the tools provide this feature 
available in their interface whereas few of the tools do not 
provide drill-down options.   
Options: How much depth and breadth level of navigation 
are provided? The tool provides drill-down support in one of 
the visualizations such as graphs, charts, tables or a mixture 
of 
them. 
Does 
drill-down 
performed 
on 
pre-built 
aggregations or run-time aggregations may be generated 
upon requirement?  
Point and click: How drill-down facility is provided both 
point and clicking way or another indirect way? Does the 
tool expand a summarized value in the tree format or show 
detailed data in another format? If the user reaches to the 
detailed level of drill-down, how much a tool provides 
backtracking to roll-up levels?
Grouping different way: Is the grouping of data provided 
at run-time? How many attributes can be added in a group? 
Which grouping functions are supported by the tool?   
Complexity: How drill-down results are presented to the 
user? Whether complex results are presented in simplest 
graphical formats? Does track of drill-down is given in 
some tree-like format to memorize the forward and 
backward tracking and switching to any other level of 
hierarchy? 
D.
Roll-up options 
Support: In this feature, the tools are compared based on 
whether roll-up support is available to navigate the results. 
Most of the tools provide this feature available in their 
interface whereas few of the tools do not provide roll-up 
options.  
Options: How much depth and breadth level of navigation 
are provided? The tool provides roll-up support in one of the 
visualizations such as graphs, charts and tables or the 
mixture of them. Does roll-up performed on pre-built 
aggregations or run-time aggregations may be generated 
upon requirement. 
Point and click: How roll-up facility is provided either 
point and clicking way or another indirect way? Does the 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

tool collapse a detailed value in the tree format or show 
summarized data in another format? If a user reaches the 
upper level of roll-up, how much a tool provides 
backtracking to drill-down levels?
Grouping different way: Does grouping of data is 
provided at run-time? How many attributes can be added in 
a group? Which grouping functions are supported by the 
tool?   
Dimensions selection: How many dimensions can be 
selected at a time for grouping the data? How many 
dimensions can be used by default? 
E.
Aggregation function support 
The OLAP servers use Materialized Views (MVs). If a 
particular MV is not found, then minimal MVs are further 
roll-up to generate required summarization level. The OLAP 
servers maintain data aggregated with several aggregation 
functions. At query processing time, the system selects 
desired MVs, aggregated data computed with the use of 
particular aggregation function. Furthermore, user query 
specifies the aggregation level with grouping attributes. 
These maintain aggregated data in specific structures to 
efficiently retrieve the results. The structures are relational 
and multi-dimensional etc. The tools can be compared based 
on aggregation functions supported by these tools. 
F.
Data access
In this, tools are analyzed by data type supported by 
them. The support of a number of fact tables, dimensions and 
measures are also verified. 
G.
Performance 
The performance is measured by analyzing the response 
time by input queries on the tools.  
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION   
For experimental analysis, two OLAP tools SQL Server 
and MicroStrategy Express have been taken. These tools are 
evaluated with respect to interface, query, drill-down 
options, roll-up options, aggregation function support, data 
access and performance. 
SQL Server helps to build secure, reliable and scalable 
enterprise applications for the organizations. It also supports 
to deploy and maintain the applications. It provides 
analytical services to build data warehouses and the OLAP 
applications. It supports relational, multi-dimensional and 
hybrid data manipulations and provides facilities for 
complex 
analysis. 
The 
OLAP 
analytics 
has 
been 
successfully provided to the organizations using the SQL 
Server.   
MicroStrategy Express facilitates secure and twenty times 
faster access to business data. There is no expert help 
needed, no data modeling, and no SQL scripts required. Get 
business insights quickly with interactive dashboards, pixel-
perfect documents, and data visualizations. 
A.
Comparison of Tools
We analyzed these tools with respect to an interface, 
query 
writing, 
drill-down 
options, 
roll-up 
options, 
aggregation function support, data access and performance 
point of view. A survey has been conducted for the 
evaluation of both tools from 150 users. We are able to get 
different ideas of users about query-ability, performance, and 
interface point of view based on the questionnaire. The 
survey is comprised of three types of users which are 
categorized based on their level of expertise: 
•
Novice user 
•
Average user 
•
Professional user 
Different type of user gave response according to their 
understanding. The professional user analyzes the tools 
according to their own needs. Average users analyze the 
tools according to their views and novice user analyzes the 
tools according to their understanding. The results gained for 
interface parameter are given in Table 1. The score is 
calculated in the range between 0 and 1. The response of 
each user is taken and the score is normalized within the 
specified range for each feature. 
TABLE 1. RESULTS FOR THE INTERFACE PARAMETER
Ser. 
# 
Features 
SQL Server 
Micro Strategy 
Express 
01 
Design 
Good(0.64) 
Very Good(0.81) 
02 
User-friendly 
Yes(0.63) 
Yes(0.83) 
03 
Type 
GUI (Desktop)(0.9) 
GUI (Web)(0.7) 
04 
User type 
Known User(0.50) 
Novice(0.77) 
05 
Graph support 
Yes(0.5) 
Yes(0.83) 
06 
Understanding 
Yes(0.64) 
Yes(0.82) 
07 
Interactive 
Yes(0.73) 
Yes(0.88) 
08 
Complexity 
Yes(0.83) 
No(0.63) 
09 
Ease of query 
input 
Yes(0.73) 
Yes(0.73) 
10 
Format of result 
Grid(0.8) 
Multiple 
format(0.9) 
Similarly, the survey results have been calculated for 
each parameter. Based on the average score for both OLAP 
tools, the comparative analysis is depicted in Figure 2. It 
presents the comparative analysis of both tools based on 
seven parameters. According to this, both tools show 
following results:   
Interface design: There are better features in MicroStrategy 
Express with respect to the interface. The design is more 
understandable, 
user 
friendly 
and 
simple 
of 
the 
MicroStrategy Express. Further, it is easy for novice users 
and 
having 
availability 
of 
additional 
options 
for 
visualizations. 
Query: According to query parameter, SQL Server 
outperforms but requires training and expertise to use it. 
Whereas, from the structural point of view MicroStrategy 
Express is easier in query input. 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 2. Comparison results of SQL Server and MicroStrategy Express 
Drill-Down: SQL Server performs well for drill-down 
parameter and provides better options in comparison to the 
MicroStrategy Express. The SQL Server has point and click 
environment having descriptions in detailed level while 
MicroStrategy Express gives initial level drill-down options. 
Roll-up: SQL Server provides additional roll-up options. 
For further aggregations, it delivers complete choices. 
Overall, SQL Server is best with respect to the roll-up 
options. 
Aggregation function support: The average score of the 
MicroStrategy Express is 0.87 which is 0.03 better than the 
SQL Server. It replies quickly in the calculation of the 
aggregation functions. 
Data access: From all point of views, this parameter is 
considered best in SQL Server. SQL Server supports the 
additional quantity of measures, data volume and 
dimensions. One of the deficiencies of the MicroStrategy 
Express is that it supports only excel-based datasets.  
Performance: Performance is calculated based on response 
time in seconds. The MicroStrategy Express outperforms in 
comparison to the SQL Server. 
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, criteria for the evaluation of tools have 
been proposed. Seven parameters include an interface, query 
writing, drill-down options, roll-up options, aggregation 
function support, data access and performance. For 
experimental evaluation, comparative analysis of two tools 
i.e., MicroStrategy Express and SQL Server has been 
performed. The results show that MicroStrategy Express 
outperforms in interface and aggregation method whereas 
input query is easy in comparison to the SQL Server. The 
SQL Server is more attractive along drill-down options, roll-
up options and data access. The MicroStrategy Express only 
supports to excel-based datasets and does not compatible 
with the large databases. Similarly, any tool can be assessed 
based on seven parameters and variation in them can be 
eliminated for standardization purpose. As future work, it is 
required to implement a standardized tool for non-technical 
users for training purpose. After getting training of such a 
tool, the user will be able to use any OLAP tool. 
REFERENCES
[1] S. Chaudhuri and U. Dayal, “An Overview of Data 
Warehouse and OLAP Technology,” Sigmod Rec., vol. 
26, no. 1, pp. 65–74, 1997. 
[2] N. Gorla, “Features to consider in a data warehousing 
system,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 
111–115, 2003. 
[3] M. Risi, M. I. Sessa, M. Tucci, and G. Tortora, “CoDe 
modeling of graph composition for data warehouse report 
visualization,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 26, 
no. 3, pp. 563–576, 2014. 
[4] S. B. B. Benatallah and H. R. Motahari-nezhad, “Scalable 
graph-based OLAP analytics over process,” Distributed 
and Parallel Databases, pp. 379–423, 2014. 
[5] A. Maté, J. Trujillo, and J. Mylopoulos, “Specification 
and derivation of key performance indicators for business 
analytics: A semantic approach,” Data Knowl. Eng., pp. 
30–49, 2016. 
[6] M. Golfarelli, S. Graziani, and S. Rizzi, “Data & 
Knowledge Engineering Shrink : An OLAP operation for 
balancing precision and size of pivot tables,” DATAK, vol. 
93, pp. 19–41, 2014. 
[7] A. Cuzzocrea, C. De Maio, and G. Fenza, “OLAP 
Analysis of Multidimensional Tweet Streams for 
Supporting Advanced Analytics,” pp. 992–999, 2016. 
[8] S. Chaudhuri, U. Dayal, and V. Narasayya, “An overview 
of business intelligence technology,” Commun. ACM, vol. 
54, no. 8, p. 88-98, 2011. 
[9] M. Akinde and T. Johnson, “Efficient OLAP Query 
Processing in Distributed Data Warehouses Michael B ¨,” 
Data Eng., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 6382–6382, 2002. 
[10] S. A. S. B and H. Kitagawa, “Approximate OLAP on 
Sustained Data Streams,” vol. 1, pp. 102–118, 2017. 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-590-6
ICSEA 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

