Towards Ontology-Driven Approach for Data Warehouse Analysis 
Case study  : Healthcare domain 
 
Lama El Sarraj1,2, Bernard Espinasse1 
1LSIS UMR 7296 
Université d‟Aix-Marseille, 
Marseille, France 
{firstname.lastname}@lsis.org 
Thérèse Libourel3 
3Espace-Dev UMR 228 
Université Montpellier 2 
Montpellier, France 
therese.libourel@univ-montp2.fr 
Sophie Rodier2, 
2Assistance publique–Hôpitaux Marseille 
DSIO 
Marseille, France 
{firstname.lastname}@AP-HM.fr   
 
 
Abstract—Understanding, reusing, and maintaining data 
warehouse resources is a key challenge for data warehouse 
users. Data warehouses resources are shared by different 
groups of users. The interpretation of information is 
subjective, it depends on user knowledge. Thus, a resource, like 
a data cube, is interpreted differently from a user to another. 
Unfortunately, misinterpreting data could induce serious 
problems 
and 
conflicts. 
To 
guarantee 
homogenous 
interpretation of data warehouse 
resources additional 
information is necessary. To tackle these challenges we propose 
to use ontologies to help the users in the exploitation of data 
warehouses.  In this paper we propose an ontology-driven 
approach that represents data warehouse, dimensions and 
facts semantically enriched by their equivalent domain 
concepts and related to final resources provided by this data 
warehouse.  
Keywords- data warehouse; ontology; decision information 
systems; decision making;  healthcare institution management 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Several surveys proved that big companies need efficient 
Decision support systems (DSS) and seek to expand the 
number of users over their DSS. To that aim, researchers 
found that companies need to have flexible decision tools, 
especially with, users‟ requirements and domain resources. A 
DSS is a collection of many tools or applications; we call 
them in this paper resources; that enable users to analyze, to 
query and to visualize a huge volume of data. In general, 
those data are stored in a data warehouse, and a set of 
Business Intelligence (BI) tools dedicated for data treatment 
and helping users (directors, managers, analysts, etc.) to 
make decisions. 
Data Warehouse (DW) is the center of the DSS. DW is 
« a subject oriented, nonvolatile, integrated, time variant 
collection of data in support of management's decisions» [1].  
In this paper we only consider resources provided by a data 
warehouse in a decision support system. To facilitate the task 
of DW analysis and treatment, a subset of the DW is created, 
it is called data mart. A data mart is oriented to a specific 
business need or a particular user requirement. Most of the 
times, data mart are organized in a multidimensional 
structure [2]. Data are represented like a point in a 
multidimensional space, visualized like a data cube (see 
Fig.1) [3]. They give users the possibility to synthetize and 
analyze data from three (or higher) dimensional array of 
values and various granularity levels. To manipulate data 
provided by the DW, end-users could use On Line Analytical 
Processing (OLAP) techniques, classic techniques, or even 
dashboards.  
Taking user requirements into account is very important 
for the success or the failure of the DW [4], especially when 
users belong to different domains. The exploitation level of 
DW, as well as the preliminary conception level, is mainly 
based and adapted to user requirements [5]. Most research 
works devoted for DW focus on the approach design [6], 
[7], [8]. Even if these approaches are successful at the 
conceptual level knowledge about the data warehouse 
resources is still needed. It is important that users 
understand the semantic around the information he analyses 
and have a visibility about other resources that could help 
them to make efficient analysis.  
The goal of this work is to design an ontology that relates 
data warehouse structure, resources and domain concepts. In 
consequence, in this paper we address two research 
questions:  
 
What are the competencies questions that our 
ontology takes in consideration? 
 
What are the concepts that compose the ontology to 
help decision makers in their analysis to understand 
indicators provided from a data warehouse?  
Our research is supported by the public hospitals of 
Marseille; Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Marseille 
(APHM). In this context we will present a case study from 
the healthcare domain specific to financial program based on 
the Program of Medicalization of Information Systems 
(PMSI) common to all French healthcare institutions. 
This paper presents a new ontology-driven approach for 
DW personalization to resolute the semantic problematic 
related to the heterogeneous domains we applied our 
approach in healthcare management domain. The paper is 
organized as follow. Section II presents a case study from 
the healthcare domain. Section III presents the competencies 
questions that give an idea about the possible scenarios 
possible to help users in his analysis. Section IV presents 
the needed background. Section V presents an ontology-
driven approach. Section VI presents an ontology-driven 
framework. Finally, before we conclude we present in 
section VII the related works.  
426
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

II. 
CASE STUDY 
In this section we will present a case study from the 
healthcare domain specifically applied in the Program of 
Medicalization of Information Systems (PMSI). This case 
study is a good example that represents heterogeneous users 
that share same data warehouse.  
In the French healthcare management system the PMSI 
has a central place. PMSI is a French adoption for the 
concept of Professor R. Fetter (Yale university, United 
States of America) to finance hospitals. PMSI specify the 
cost of sojourn based on diagnosis related groups that 
classes the hospitalization of patients in homogeneous and 
coherent medico-economic groups. This concept is applied 
in several countries like United States of America, England, 
etc.   
In the healthcare domain users belong to the medical 
domain (doctors, pharmacists, biologists, etc.) whereas 
others don‟t (financial affaire managers, computer scientists, 
human resources, etc.). We should note that our approach is 
not limited to the healthcare domain. It could be applied in 
other business contexts where users are from different 
domains. This is, in general, the case of big institutions.  
In this context we will take the example of a data 
warehouse. Fig.1 represents a data warehouse conceptual 
model for “PMSI activity” analysis. This DW conceptual 
model is composed of a fact table, dimensions, and 
measures.  
Fact table = {Activity_PMSI} 
Dimensions 
= 
{Date, 
Structure, 
Age, 
Exit_Mode, 
International_classification_of_desieases, 
Diagnosis_related_groups } 
Measures = {Number of patient, …} 
 
 
Sojourn
...
Diagnosis_related
_groups
Number of patient
Age
International_clas
sification_of_
desieases
Date
Exit_mode
 
 
Structure
 
 
 
Figure 1.  PMSI activity data warehouse conceptual model. 
The multidimensional table (MT), MT = (M, D), where 
M is a set of measure and D is a set of dimensions. We will 
take an example of a multidimensional pivot table, 
presented in Fig. 2, for ethics reason we have taken fictive 
data:  
D1 = “Structure ” (dimension level “pôle”) 
D2 = “Diagnosis Related Groups” (attributes: DRG, MCD, 
TYPE DRG TITLE) 
M1 = “number of patients” (calculated measures: total of M1 
per Diagnosis Related Groups, total of M1 per pole, total of 
M1 for all DRG and poles. 
 
 
Figure 2.  PMSI pivot table. 
In this research work we will take into consideration 
resources based on data warehouses sources and that 
represent data in a multidimensional table (defined by of 
measure, an operations on the measure, two or three 
dimensions, and a filter). In this context we noticed many 
difficulties:  
Semantic lack  
Users don‟t interpret the results in the same way.  They 
need information about:   
 
Data warehouse concepts: dimensions definition, 
measures calculation methods and their sources 
 
Requirements expression heterogeneity: users don‟t 
belong to the same domain. They don‟t express their 
need with the same terms. For example: number of 
sojourn could be expressed as number of venue 
Analysis needs 
Most of the times, users need to analyze many resources 
to take a decision. In big institutions the big number of 
resources makes this task complicated. To facilitate this 
task, users need a global vision about the existing analysis 
axes. Thus, users need to have a global vision about the data 
warehouse structure to visualize the possibilities or existing 
resources that could help him to take a decision. 
Finally, these difficulties lead us to think about a new 
semantic approach that structure the concepts related to the 
data warehouse based on ontologies. 
III. 
COMPETENCIES QUESTION 
In this section we exemplify and define possible 
scenarios to interrogate our ontology. 
Entry 1: Data warehouse concept. 
Output:  
1. Related data warehouse concept -- Measures 
analysis -- What are the different measures related 
to an analysis axe? What is the different analysis 
axes related to a measure? 
Dimensions (Analysis axes) -- What are the 
measures that could be analyzed over a dimension? 
2. Resources concept -- What are the existing 
resources to analyze a measure?  
3. Domain concepts -- What are the existing measures 
to analyze a domain concept?  
 
 
427
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Entry 2: Resources concept. 
Output:  
1. 
Data warehouse structure concepts -- Which is the 
data warehouse (data mart) that provides a resource  
2. 
Domain concepts -- What are the existing resources 
to analyze a domain concept?  
Entry 3: Domain concept. 
Output:  
1. Data warehouse structure -- Which is the data 
warehouse (data mart) related to this domain 
concept? 
2. Resources concept -- What are the resources to 
analyze a domain concept?  
Those scenarios could be treated by using ontology 
technologies to visualize and have semantic to facilitate the 
analysis. 
IV. 
BACKGROUND 
  
In this section we will define the ontology and present 
some researches that have used ontology for the 
multidimensional systems. 
A. Ontologies  
Ontology is an explicit specification of shared 
conceptualization [9]. Different ontologies are proposed to 
define ontologies. W3C consortium recommends Ontology 
Web Language (OWL) to define ontologies. This language 
is based on the description Logic (DL) [10], it gives the 
opportunity to reason and represent structured knowledge. 
The DL language represents knowledge with concepts and 
roles. The concepts described as a set of individuals 
(instances) and roles describing a binary relation between 
individuals. 
A knowledge base is represented with an ABOX 
(assertion box) and a TBOX (terminological box). An 
ABOX represent extensional knowledge (instances), TBOX 
describes the intentional knowledge of the domain as 
axioms.  
We present the ontology with 4-uplet <C, P, ClassPropt, 
ClassAssoc> that concerns the TBOX.  
Our ontology describes concepts to relate domain, 
resources and data warehouse structure. We consider: 
 
C represents the classes of the ontological model  
 
P represents the properties of the ontological model.  
P is partitioned into :  
o 
Pvalue : represents the characteristics properties  
o 
Pfct : represents domain dependent properties 
 
ClassPropt : C -> 2P relates each class to its property   
 
ClassAssoc : C -> (Opr, Expr (C)) is an expression 
that associate to each class an operator (inclusion or 
exclusion) and an expression to other classes. 
B. Multidimensional system  
We consider that DW resources are multidimensional 
table that represent a slice of the cube. The DW ontology 
registers the DW conceptual schema and the resources 
provided from this DW. For other purposes, several 
researchers like Prat et al [11] represents a multidimensional 
model with an OWL-DL ontology model, based on 
description logic [12], and define the transformation rules 
from the multidimensional level into OWL-DL ontologies. 
We will use these transformation rules to generate an OWL 
ontology of the DW model, based on transformations rules 
proposed in the work of Prat et al [11].  
V. 
ONTOLOGY-DRIVEN APPROACH FOR DATA 
WAREHOUSE ANALYSIS 
In this section we briefly present our approach and the 
architecture of our system.  
Our approach focuses on two key requirements to address 
the research problem:  
 
It represents ontology architecture to describe 
knowledge about decision support system 
 
It provides an ontology-driven approach to help 
users in their analysis 
A. Approach architecture  
Our functional architecture Fig. 3 is based on three inter-
related concepts, in order:  
 
Domain concepts  
 
Data warehouse structure 
 
Resources 
 
 
Figure 3.  Approach architecture. 
The framework system that we propose is based on an 
ontology interrelating three concepts (domain, DW and 
resources) to help users in the analysis task. 
B. Ontology concepts 
We will define the three concepts that compose our 
ontology. These concepts are necessary to help users in the 
analysis process:  
Domain concepts structure: presents concepts of the 
domain and the relation between them. A decision is based 
on one or many indicators. In the analysis processes the user 
check the information‟s that he already know. However, 
most of the times user needs additional indicators to make 
428
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

his analysis. The domain description wills provide the 
information about the relation between domain concepts. 
Data warehouse structure: the multidimensional model 
associated to the data warehouse organizes data into facts 
and dimension. Facts represent the subject of analysis and 
dimensions represent the axis of analysis. Fact table is the 
center of the multidimensional model. It stores elementary 
indicators, 
called 
measures. 
Dimensions 
can 
form 
hierarchies, structured in different granularity levels.  
Resources structure: resources are provided by the data 
warehouse. Resources regroup information necessary for the 
analysis. To understand a component information about the 
indicator are needed like: calculation method, unit of 
measure, calculation period, date of creation, date of update, 
date of validity, objective, definition and the relation with 
the data mart.  
C. Ontology connection  
To connect those three concepts we will follow four 
steps:  
1. Define domain ontology or use an existing domain 
ontology 
2. Generate the data warehouse structure ontology 
based on the transformation rules proposed in the 
work of Prat et al [11]. 
3. Associate the data warehouse structure to the domain 
ontology, this step could be accomplished in several 
methods, for example :  
o 
Administrator 
relates 
data 
warehouse 
concepts to the domain concepts 
o 
Automatically align the data warehouse 
structure ontology with the existing domain 
ontology 
4. Associate to the data warehouse concepts existing 
resources Ontology architecture 
D. Ontology architechture  
We will formalize our ontology by the triple < ODW, OD, 
Map> where: 
 
OD is the domain ontology which provides a schema 
about the domain 
 
ODW is a data warehouse schema which describes the 
resources (DSS components) related to the data 
warehouse 
 
Map is the mapping between ODW and OD which 
establish the connection between domain concepts 
and the DSS components 
This ontology can be used for many purposes with 
ontology-based software. In the first hand, to give a vision 
about the relation between DW, resources and domain 
concepts, in the other hand,  to propose for users other 
related resources to accomplish his analysis, based on the 
relation of the three concepts the resources, the data 
warehouse concepts and the domain concepts. Fig. 4 
presents the ontology architecture meta-model to implement 
the knowledge base of the framework.  
Dimension
Data_warehouse
Measure
Agregation_operations
1..*
1..*
Possibility
Dimension_level
1
1..*
Hierarchy
1..*
2..*
Relatad
1
1..*
Ressource
Domain_
concept
1..*
0..*
Relatad
1..*
1..*
0..*
0..*
Possibility
0..*
1
RollUp
 
Figure 4.  Ontology metamodel.  
This ontology model represents the concepts related to 
the data warehouse. Each data warehouse is composed of 
zero or many measures and related to two or many 
dimensions. Hierarchies are composed of one or many 
dimensions. It is possible to effectuate operations on 
measures and aggregation according to the dimensions 
levels.  
The proposed ontology model has been designed as 
follow to give high expressiveness about data warehouse 
components and to show the relation between DW concepts, 
resources (DSS components) and domain concepts. 
VI. 
ONTOLOGY-DRIVEN FRAMEWORK 
In this section we will present a framework based on our 
ontology. We implemented an ontology based on healthcare 
domain. Thus, this semantic structure will help users to 
discover and retrieve resources related to their domain and 
their first need. 
To test our method we chose to implement OWL 
ontology with Protégé editor [13], and then we will use 
protégé to interrogate and visualize ontology with 
OntoGraph Fig. 5. 
A. Methods 
To create our OWL ontology we use “Protégé”, an open 
source Java tool providing an extensible architecture for the 
creation of customized knowledge-based applications.  
1. Create three classes Data_Warehouse, Domain, and 
resources 
2. Export existing domain ontology or create new 
domain ontology. These ontology concepts will be a 
subset of the domain class 
3. Export data warehouse conceptual model ontology. 
To pass from the data warehouse conceptual model 
to OWL we applied the transformations rules 
proposed by [14]. Data warehouse concepts will be a 
subset of the Data_Warehouse class 
4. Relate the data warehouse concepts to domain 
concepts. This task can be automatic by using 
existing ontology mapping tools; in this work we‟ll 
not consider this option.   To relate data warehouse 
concepts to domain concepts ontology administrator 
will refer to each data warehouse concept the 
equivalent, opposite, etc. concept in the domain 
ontology. 
For 
example, 
the 
data 
warehouse 
429
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

dimension “Diagnosis_Related_Groups” will be 
related to “DRG” class of  the domain ontology 
5. Relate the resources provided by the data warehouse 
to their corresponding concepts. For example, the 
resource named “PMSI_activity” allows user to 
analyze the PMSI activity per month and per medical 
unit. So, this 
resource 
will 
be 
related 
to 
Data_Warehouse subclasses dimensions month and 
medical units  
B. Visualization 
We will consider the example of the data warehouse 
presented in the healthcare domain. We will propose an 
ontology-driven framework.  
Input:  is a need expressed with a term or a group of 
terms. 
Output: are concepts related to this need, about resources 
concepts, domain concepts, and data warehouse structure 
concepts. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example, retrieve „DRG‟ concept from the ontology. 
Thus, the user expresses his need with one or more 
keywords for example DRG. 
 
Domain concept: DRG is equivalent to “diagnosis 
related groups” 
 
DW concept: DRG is a dimension  
So as Fig. 5 shows the resulting visualization of the 
ontology shows the existing concepts that contains DRG, 
equivalent and related concepts. 
VII.   RELATED WORKS 
In the literature researches in the data warehousing field 
have already explored the ontology-based data warehouses 
and the personalization.  
In the first hand, in the ontology-based data warehouses 
field researches are based on the multidimensional schema 
design, representation and its summarizability.   
Prat et al [14] represent a multidimensional model with 
an OWL-DL ontology model to check the multidimensional 
model and its summarizability. Niemi and Niinimäki [15] 
provide an RDF model of an OLAP cube, they focus on the 
relationship between measure and dimension attributes and 
its effect on summarizability. They define the concept of 
measure-dimension consistency and they show how to 
conclude it from OLAP ontology. The OLAP ontology is 
constructed with semantic web technologies and is basically 
used to help users for OLAP cube construction and 
querying. Nebot et al [16] proposes a framework for 
designing semantic data warehouses.  They propose the 
Semantic Data Warehouse to be a repository of ontologies 
and semantically annotated data resources and propose an 
ontology-driven framework to design multidimensional 
analysis models for Semantic Data Warehouses. 
In the other hand, in the personalization of the data 
warehouse field we can distinguish three main objectives: 
 
Customizing data sources schema [17], [18] 
adapting the data structures to a specific needs of 
users 
 
Customizing 
queries 
visualization 
[19], 
or 
representation [20] 
 
Recommendation of OLAP queries [21, 22]  to assist 
in the exploration of the ED 
We also find the personalization of the DW by 
recommendation that can be associated to various works 
such as [17], [21], [23]-[26]. 
All these personalization techniques are not based on 
ontologies. Only Jerbi et al [27] adds semantic by 
annotation of the DW schema but his technique is not based 
on ontologies. 
In our research we use ontology to personalize users need 
and retrieve not only semantic information about DW or 
cube schema but also the eventual existing resource like 
files (PDF, Excel, etc.), OLAP queries, etc. To that aim we 
integrate domain and resources concepts to our DW 
ontology. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The Data Warehouse (DW) resources are shared by users 
from heterogeneous domains. Those resources could be 
interpreted differently from a user to another. Consequently, 
semantic about those resources is necessary to guarantee the 
coherence of the analysis. Ontologies are effective solutions 
to add semantic to concepts. They facilitate the management 
of data, clarify and give a sense to ambiguous concepts. 
Ontologies have been adopted by companies.  Different 
solutions are offered to manage and query these data. In this 
paper we implemented the ontology with Protégé, 
interrogated and visualized the ontology with OntoGraph. 
The study of concepts from healthcare domain confirms 
the need of semantic to help users in the analysis of 
resources provided by DW. One of the main characteristic 
of our proposed ontology architecture is that it provides a 
connection between domain concepts, data warehouse 
structure and data warehouse resources, this connection 
provide semantic information about resources and help users 
to choose other resources that can help him in his analysis. 
This personalization task is based on resources related to 
connected domain concept in the ontology.  
430
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Furthermore, the main asset of our proposition is that it 
combines ontology and data warehouse to add semantic to 
resources analysis.  
We should note that our approach is not restricted to the 
healthcare domain it could be applied for any domain for the 
retrieval of data warehouse resources.  
This work leads to many other tasks. In future work, tasks 
that should be considered (i) test the integrity of the 
ontology when adding new concepts (like new resources), 
(ii) extension of this approach to add other type of resources 
and data source provided from decision support system but 
not related to the data warehouse, (iii) study different 
scenarios of the ontology evolution, (iv) validate our 
approach in a larger context.  
 
REFERENCE 
[1] 
W. H. Inmon, Building the data warehouse, New York, 
NY, USA.: John Wiley & Sons, 1992. 
[2] 
W. Lehner, “Modelling Large Scale OLAP Scenarios,” 
in Advances in Database Technology (EDBT), 1998, pp. 
153-167. 
[3] 
A. Bosworth, J. Gray, A. Layman , H. Pirahesh  “Data 
Cube : A Relational Aggregation Operator Generalizing 
Group-By, Cross-Tab, and Sub-Total,” Data Min. 
Knowl. Discov., pp. 152-159, 1995. 
[4] 
S. Rizzi, A. Abello, J. Lechtenborger, J. Trujillo 
"Research in data warehouse modeling and design: dead 
or alive?," Proceedings of the 9th ACM international 
workshop on Data warehousing and OLAP - DOLAP 
'06, pp. 3-10, 2006. 
[5] 
M. Golfarelli, “From user requirements to conceptual 
design in data warehouse design – a survey,” 2009. 
[6] 
R. Kimball, and M. Ross, The data warehousing toolkit, 
New York: John Wiley&Sons, 1996. 
[7] 
N. Prat, and J. Akoka, “From UML to ROLAP 
multidimensional databases using a pivot model,” in 
8èmes Journées Bases de Données Avancées, 2002, pp. 
24. 
[8] 
A. Tsois, N. Karayannidis, and T. K. Sellis, “Mac : 
Conceptual data modeling for olap,” in 3rd International 
Workshop on Design and Management of Data 
Warehouses (DMDW 2001), Theodoratos 2001, pp. 5. 
[9] 
T. Gruber, “A translation approach to portable ontology 
specification,” Knowledge Acquisition, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 
199-220, 1993. 
[10] 
F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D. L. McGuinness, D. Nardi “ 
The description logic handbook: theory, implementation, 
and applications,” Cambridge University Press 2003. 
[11] 
N. Prat, J. Akoka, and I. Comyn-Wattiau, “Transforming 
multidimensional models into OWL-DL ontologies,” in 
RCIS, 2011. 
[12] 
B. Grosof, I. Horrocks, R. Volz et al., “Description logic 
programs: combining logic programs with description 
logic,” in WWW, Budapest, Hungary, 2003. 
[13] 
Stanford Center for Biomedical Informatics Research. 
14/08/2013, 2013; http://protege.stanford.edu/. 
[14] 
N. Prat, I. Megdiche, and J. Akoka, “Multidimensional 
Models Meet the Semantic Web: Defining and 
Reasoning on OWL-DL Ontologies for OLAP,” in 
DOLAP, Hawaii, USA, 2012. 
[15] 
T. Niemi, and M. Niinimäki, “Ontologies and 
summarizability in OLAP,” in Proc. of SAC‟10, Sierre, 
Switzerland, 2010. 
[16] 
V. Nebot, R. Berlanga, J. Pérez, M. Aramburu, T. 
Pederson “Multidimensional integrated ontologies: a 
framework for designing semantic data warehouses,” 
Journal on Data Semantics, vol. XIII, 2009. 
[17] 
F. Bentayeb, O. Boussaid, C. Favre, F. Ravat, O. Teste 
“Personnalisation dans les entrepôts de données : bilan et 
perspectives,” in Entrepôt de Données et Analyse en 
ligne (EDA), 2009. 
[18] 
I. Garrigos, J. Pardillo, J.-N. Mazon, J. Trujillo., “A 
Conceptual 
Modeling 
Approach 
for 
OLAP 
Personalization,” in Conceptual Modeling-ER Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 401-414. 
[19] 
L. Bellatreche, A. Giacometti, P. Marcel, H Mouloudi, 
D. Laurent “A personalization framework for OLAP 
queries,” in 8th International Workshop on Data 
Warehousing 
and 
OLAP, 
DOLAP‟05, 
Bremen, 
Germany, 2005, pp. 9-18. 
[20] 
D. Xin, J. Han, H. Cheng, X.,A. Li, “Answering top-k 
queries with multi-dimensional selections: The ranking 
cube approach,” in VLDB, 2006, pp. 463-475. 
[21] 
A. Giacometti, P. Marcel, and E. Negre, "A Framework 
for Recommending OLAP Queries." pp. 73-80. 
[22] 
A. 
Giacometti, 
P. 
Marcel, 
and 
E. 
Negre, 
“Recommending Multidimensional Queries ” in DaWaK, 
2009, pp. 453-466. 
[23] 
C. Sapia, “On Modeling and Predicting Query Behavior 
in OLAP Systems,” in DMDW, 1999, pp. 2.1-2.10. 
[24] 
G. Chatzopoulou, M. Eirinaki, and N. Polyzotis, “Query 
Recommendations for Interactive Database Exploration,” 
in SSDBM, 2009, pp. 3-18. 
[25] 
H. Jerbi, F. Ravat, O. Teste, G. Zurfluh, “Applying 
Recommendation Technology in OLAP Systems ” in 
ICEIS, 2009, pp. 220-233. 
[26] 
A. Giacometti, P. Marcel, E. Negre, A. Soulet, "Query 
recommendations for OLAP discovery driven analysis." 
pp. 81-88. 
[27] 
H. Jerbi, F. Ravat, O. Teste, G. Zurfluh, “Management of 
Context-Aware 
Preferences 
in 
Multidimensional 
Databases. ,” in ICDIM 2008, pp. 669-675. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
431
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

