Decision Making and Service Oriented Architecture for Recruitment Process.
Using the New Standard Decision Model and Notation (DMN)
Fatima Boumahdi
LRDSI Laboratory, Sciences Faculty
Saad Dahlab University
BP 270 Soumaa Road Blida, Algeria
Email: F_boumahdi@esi.dz
Houssem Eddine Boulefrakh
University Mouloud Mammeri
Tizi Ouzou, Algeria
Email: h_boulefrakh@esi.dz
Rachid Chalal
LMCS Laboratory
Higher National School of Computer Science
ESI, Oued-Smar (Algiers), Algeria
Email: r_chalal@esi.dz
Abstract—Various models and methods are used to support the
design process of SOA (Service Oriented Architecture), but still
after many years of practice, there are a lot of questions and
unsolved problems that cause the failure of SOA development
projects. One of the reasons is that rapid changes in the business
environment make it necessary to introduce the decision design,
which should be efectively supported by SOA. Indeed, it is a
big challenge to create a system that help the human resource
development in industry to make their work easier without
missing an opportunity to get a best employee. The objective of
this study is to develop a decision making and Service Oriented
Architecture for employee recruitment using analytic hierarchy
process. This study explored the relationship between SOA and
decision making during the recruitment process. To achieve
our goal, we use the new method SOA+d to develop the SOA
architecture. Also we provide the decision using the new standard
Decision Model and Notation (DMN). The novelty of the proposed
approach is in the a) the formal deﬁnition of a complete set of
proposed services b) the uses of standards language and notation
in each dimension of approach c) the speciﬁcation of the mappings
rules to identify a set of services. We illustrate the proposed
approach with a real case study of the Recruitment and Selection
in SAAD DAHLAB University.
Keywords–SOA; SOA+d; DMN; SoaML, AHP.
I.
INTRODUCTION
While organizations are trying to become more agile to
better respond the market changes, and in the midst of rapidly
globalizing competition, they are also facing new challenges.
It is primarily a question of ensuring the decisional aspect
of the information system by adopting the services oriented
architecture (SOA) like a support architecture.
Also,the Human Resources Area needs to carry out differ-
ent activities in order to ﬁnd a person with the skills, abilities,
experience and knowledge to ﬁll a vacancy. This process is
usually time-consuming whereby a lot of manual work is
required and it is necessary to coordinate many people in the
different stages of the process. The Recruitment and Selection
process covers:
•
Requesting a person with certain skills and abilities to
ﬁll a vacancy.
•
Advertising the vacancy internal and external.
•
Scheduling psych technical test, interviews, medical
exams, etc.
•
Collecting result of test and interviews.
•
Updating the candidate list.
The decision environment consists of what a basic
interview necessitates. The interviewer is the major decision-
maker who chooses the right candidate for the vacancy.
Decision period depends mainly on the corporate needs. The
immediacy of the need of an employee, the time needed to
fulﬁll the procedural requirements of the recruitment process
together with the time that the interviews take (this may
change depending on the number of the candidates) are the
major factors that shape the decision period [1].
Additionally, in order to enable a vendor independent
formalization
of
decision
designs
with
a
common
understanding and tool support, the Object Management
Group (OMG) decided to work on a standardized meta-model
and a proﬁle that enables the modeling of decision making
and their elements [2]. The result of this effort is the Decision
model notation Decision Model and Notation (DMN), which
is currently released in version 1.0. Today, DMN gains
increasing tool support, even IBM decided to integrate the
DMN in their proprietary IBM Blueworks [3]. Therefore, the
proposed architecture uses this new standard for modeling the
decision view, and present the principal contribution of our
work in decision ﬁeld.
To develop a Service Oriented Architecture for the recuite-
ment process, we must use the new approach SOA+d [4] which
integrates a decision aspect in SOA.
The SOA+d approach comprises four phases [4] (a) Anal-
ysis phase: it contains three activities, each activity presents
a view of SOA+d and supported by standard modeling that
reinforces key view. Therefore, the UML standard is used to
analyse IS level. We use the BPMN standard for the business
analysis, and we use the new DMN standard to specify decision
view. (b) Identify and categorize services: in this phase, the
applicable mapping rules for service identiﬁcation based on
the use case, BPMN and DMN are deﬁned. (c) The service
design phase,, in which a set of service designs has to be
designed and modeled using the standard Service oriented
architecture Modeling Language (SoaML). d) The realization
services phase present the realization services using existing
tools.
489
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

A. Problem statement
Given the conventional technique of interviewing for a
vacancy in a company, the need of a more systematic approach
is obvious. There are some criteria to be met while the decision
is made. The recruitment decision should be based on:
•
A consistent set of satisfaction of the requirements
•
A clear and objective decision making environment
•
A well deﬁned and documented list of the require-
ments expected to be met by the candidates.
The main goal of our research is to design a new SOA
to support the decision making in the recuitement process. In
order to solve the main problem and develop a research plan
of action, the following sub-problems were identiﬁed:
•
What recruitment and selection strategies are sug-
gested in the literature?
•
To what extent does old methods utilise the recruit-
ment and selection of strategies suggested in the
literature?
•
How the competent are sales managers in using the
suggested recruitment and selection tools?
The recruiting process is typically intended to realize the
following among other objectives:
•
To provide an equal opportunity for potential candi-
dates to apply for vacancies.
•
To systematically collect information about each ap-
plicants ability to meet the requirements of positions.
•
To attract highly qualiﬁed individuals.
•
To select candidates who will be successful in per-
forming the tasks and meeting the responsibilities of
the position.
•
To emphasize active recruitment of traditionally under-
represented groups, i.e. individuals with disabilities,
minority group members and women in order to
resolve historical recruitment imbalances.
B. Paper Organization
In Section II, the DMN notation (Section II-A) and An-
alytical Hierarchical Process (Section II-B) are presented.
These concepts are used in our work for deﬁning the new
architecture. In Section III, we illustrate the different phases
of SOA+d approach. Section IV presentes the development of
the case study by using the New standard DMN and SOA+d
in Recuitement process. Finally, we conclude the paper by
proposing some future works (Section V).
II.
BACKGROUND
In order to ensure comprehension, the following terms,
related to this study, are brieﬂy deﬁned.
A. Decision Model and Notation
The OMG has recently standardized the DMN, which
enables the abstract formalization of decision designs [5].
The goal of DMN is to standardise notations (and associated
metamodel) for decision modelling. DMN will provide
constructs spanning both decision requirements and decision
logic modeling.
The decision requirements level consists of a Decision
Requirements Graph (DRG) depicted in one or more Decision
Requirements Diagrams (DRDs). A DRG models is a domain
of decision making, that shows the most important elements
involved in it and the dependencies between them [5]. The
elements modeled are decisions, areas of business knowledge,
and the input data.
Decision logic level : The components of the decision
requirements level of a decision model may be described, as
they are above, using only business concepts. This level of
description is often sufﬁcient for business analysis of a domain
of decision-making, to identify the business decisions involved,
their interrelationships, the areas of business knowledge and
data required by them, and the sources of the business knowl-
edge [5]. Below are the reasons of using a DMN:
•
DMN creates a standardized bridge for the gap be-
tween the business decision design and decision im-
plementation [5].
•
DMN, as an IT speciﬁcation, is a conﬁrmation that
there is demand for a new kind of software product
aimed at decision modeling and management.
•
Common notation that is readily understandable by
all business users, from the business analysts needing
to create initial decision requirements and then more
detailed decision models, to the technical developers
responsible for automating the decisions in processes,
and ﬁnally, to the business people who will manage
and monitor those decisions.
B. Analytical Hierarchical Process
AHP is a method for ranking decision alternatives and
selecting the best one when the decision maker has multiple
criteria [6]. It answers the question, Which one?. With AHP,
the decision maker selects the alternative that best meets his
or her decision criteria developing a numerical score to rank
each decision alternative based on how well each alternative
meets them.
The application of the AHP to the complex problem usually
involves four major steps:
•
Step 1 : Break down the complex problem into a num-
ber of small constituent elements and then structure
the elements in a hierarchical form.
•
Step 2: Make a series of pair wise comparisons
among the elements according to a ratio scale.
•
Step 3 : Use the eigenvalue method in order to
estimate the relative weights of the elements.
•
Step 4 : Aggregate these relative weights and synthe-
size them for the ﬁnal measurement of given decision
alternatives.
III.
SOA+D APPROACH
SOA+d method based on SoaML and DMN will be
used. In the literature, several authors proposed approach of
the Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) services [7]–[15].
According to the followed vision, each one proposes a set of
steps. SOA+d proposes a new approach for the development
of the SOA. It considers three views that must be analyzed in
490
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

order to develop SOA. The Business and Information vision
are inspired from the works of [9] [11] [13] [14] [16] [17].
SOA+d method contribution consists on the proposal of the
third vision which is: Decision.
SOA+d follows a downward approach to discover the
services. SOA+d articulate around four phases: Analysis, Iden-
tiﬁcation and categorize service, Services modeling and Real-
ization pahse.
A. Phase 1: The analysis
includes three steps: information system analysis, business
analysis and decision analysis steps [4].
B. Phase 2: Identify and categorize services
Is based on the cartographies already worked out to identify
the services (business, information and decision services) [18].
As we already underlined, we identify three service types:
services which exist on the business level, information system
and decision services.
C. Phase 3: Services Modeling
In this step the services must be modeled with formalism.
We adopt a speciﬁcation at the base of the SoaML language
[19] which offers a high level of abstraction, then it is
necessary to reﬁne the services to make them speciﬁc to a
given platform.
D. Phase 4: The realization
Proposes to develop the services and to deploy them to be
called upon. The technical choice (data base management sys-
tem, development environment, application server, processes
business Management system, etc.) must be done in this phase.
IV.
RECRUITMENT AND SELECTION
This research is based on the process of Recruitment and
Selection of SAAD DAHLAB University, located in the north
region of Algeria. The recuitment process covers:
•
Requesting a person with certain skills and abilities to
ﬁll a vacancy.
•
Advertising the vacancy internal and external.
•
Scheduling psych technical test, interviews, medical
exams, etc.
•
Collecting results of tests and interviews.
•
Updating the candidates list.
A. Phase 1: The analysis phase
The
Recruitment
process
begins
when
a
Personnel
Requisition is made. If the job description does not exist, it
is created by a Human Resources Analyst. If the person who
made the request does not have the level of authority, the
process continues to approve request task.
The Recruitment process includes two sub processes :
•
Job Vacancy Advertisement Sub process : The
Human Resources area must arrange and place the
advertisements in an appropriate medium. The adver-
tisements can be placed internal or externally; the
proposed architecture gives the ﬂexibility to choose
between them.
•
The selection process : evaluates possible candidates
for a vacancy; the sub process includes test and
interview scheduling, enter their results and select the
person.
Figure 1 shows the Recruitment business process with the
BPMN (Business Process Management Notation) language.
Figure 1. The Recruitment and Selection Process BPMN
B. Phase 2: Identify and categorize services
After the use of the analysis deﬁned through the phase 1
to the Recruitment process, we found the services of Business,
Information and Decision levels; this is shown in Figure 2.
The Business Process entity is Recruitment; it holds in-
formation about the personnel requisition such as Job Title,
Number of vacancies needed, Area, and other information
about the position. The entity is related to the Job Descrip-
tion, Advertisement and Candidates entities. The relationship
between Recruitment and Candidates is from one of many;
it is necessary to include several candidates in a Selection
Process. The main attributes of the Job Description are: Title,
Code, Responsibilities, Abilities, Experience and Job Descrip-
tion. The Advertisement entity includes Job Title, Location,
Company Description, Contact Details, and Ideal Candidates.
The Candidates entity includes Name, Last Name, CV ﬁle,
Email.
Selecting a candidate is a complex problem involving
qualitative and quantitative multi-criteria. The ﬁrst step in any
candidate rating procedure is to ﬁnd the appropriate criteria
to be used for assessing the candidate. To comply with the
criteria for candidate selection and their importance, required
data were collected.
In order to select the right candidate, the Analytic Hierarchy
Process (AHP) [6] approach has been adopted. The AHP is
a theory of measurement through pairwise comparisons and
relies on the judgements of experts to derive priority scales.
Figure 2 shows the services of decision level.
491
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 2. Decision level of Recruitment Process
C. Phase 3: Services Modeling
The mapping from BPMN diagram to SoaML model
requires ﬁrst and foremost a correspondence between the
elements of BPMN and SoaML elements. For this, we use
the mapping deﬁned in the research work already done [7]
[17] [20] and [21].
After performing the transformation rules we obtain the
services modeling of Recruitment Process illustrate in Figure
3 and Figure 4.
Figure 3. SoaML contratdiagram
Figure 4. SoaML architecture diagram
D. Phase 4: The realization
Figure 5 summarizes the Services Integration in Recruit-
ment Process.
Figure 5. Services Integration
As shows Figure 6, during the Selection Process a Candi-
date must attend several interviews with different people. For
each interview it is necessary to include the results.
Figure 6. Preselection
Afterwards, the person who made the requisition must
select the ﬁnal candidate to ﬁll the vacancy. As shows Figure 7,
if the selected candidate accepts a salary offer the sub process
ends.
Figure 7. Select the ﬁnal candidate
492
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The increasingly globalized world necessitates to choose
the best employee for the company, otherwise, both sides
have to overcome several losses. This project was prepared
with the aim to shed light on Blida University about effective
recruitment process.
In this paper, we developed a system that works automati-
cally to ﬁnd the most suitable candidate for vacancy according
to AHP model and using the new standard DMN. The various
contributions carried out in our work are summarized as
follow:
•
Introduction of the decision aspect into the SOA
Services Oriented Architecture The new approach,
that we developed, extended the principles of the SOA
on the totality of the company system. It brought new
concepts and it restructures the company architecture
in a manner that it is nimbler and able to take part in
decisions from a request.
•
Proposed solution based on standards languages
and notation: in this paper we have presented a
detailed approach using existing modeling languages
such as UML, BPMN and SOAML. The proposed
approach helps in speciﬁcation, design and realiza-
tion of a new type of service to depict the decision
components in SOA.
•
A new approach of SOA uses DMN: SOA ar-
chitecture, that is developed is the ﬁrst architecture
of SOA that considers the modeling of the decision
making aspect by the use of DMN; it extends the
principles of the SOA , on the totality of the entrprise
system. The decision introduced in SOA+d is deﬁned
by the use of DMN. It is worth to note here that the
suggested and modelled decision in SOA+d contains
more information than SOA approaches proposed in
literature. As it was mentioned previously, the decision
model that is obtained from the DMN notation is
complete and shows how to automate the decision.
In our future work, we envisage the tool developement for
proposed architecture to obtain a framework. Moreover, we are
working on the implementation of the mapping rules deﬁned
within the framework, and more speciﬁcally those that allow
us to obtain (as automatically as possible) services details from
real Computational Independent models. Moreover, since our
approach follows an MDE approach for the Service Oriented
Development of SOA, we are currently working on the code
generation from the models for different Web Services plat-
forms. In the light of all these, we shall be able to complete the
integration process between high level SOA and the decision
implementation.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Djenni.Rezoug, F. Nader, and F. Boumahdi, “A new approach
to supporting runtime decision making in mobile olap,” International
Journal of Information and Communication Technology, 2015 In press.
[2]
J. Taylor, A. Fish, J. Vanthienen, and P. Vincent, “Emerging standards
in decision modeling,” BPM and Workﬂow Handbook series, 2013.
[3]
M. Thorpe, J. Holm, G. van den Boer et al., Discovering the Decisions
within Your Business Processes using IBM Blueworks Live.
IBM
Redbooks, 2014.
[4]
F. Boumahdi, R. Chalal, A. Guendouz, and K. Gasmia, “Soa+d:
a
new
way
to
design
the
decision
in
soabased
on
the
new
standard decision model and notation (dmn),” Service Oriented
Computing and Applications, 2014, pp. 1–19. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11761-014-0162-x
[5]
O.
DMN,
“Decision
modeling
notation,”
OMG,
http://www.omg.org/spec/DMN/1.0/Beta1/PDF, Tech. Rep., 2014.
[6]
T. L. Saaty, “Decision making with the analytic hierarchy process,”
International journal of services sciences, vol. 1, no. 1, 2008, pp. 83–
98.
[7]
J. Amsden, “Modeling with soaml, the service-oriented architecture
modeling language.” IBM, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[8]
R. B¨orner and Goeken, “Identiﬁcation of business services,” in 15th
Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS), 2010.
[9]
A. Arsanjani, S. Ghosh, A. Allam, T. Abdollah, S. Ganapathy, and
K. Holley, “Soma: A method for developing service-oriented solutions,”
IBM systems Journal, vol. 47, no. 3, 2008, pp. 377–396.
[10]
A. T. Rahmani, V. Rafe, S. Sedighian, and A. Abbaspour, “An mda-
based modeling and design of service oriented architecture,” in Com-
putational Science–ICCS 2006.
Springer, 2006, pp. 578–585.
[11]
T. Erl, Service-Oriented Architecture: Concepts, Technology, and De-
sign.
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall PTR, 2005.
[12]
B. Berkem, “From the business motivation model (bmm) to service
oriented architecture (soa).” Journal of Object Technology, vol. 7, no. 8,
2008, pp. 57–70.
[13]
M. P. Papazoglou and W.-J. Van Den Heuvel, “Service-oriented design
and development methodology,” International Journal of Web Engineer-
ing and Technology, vol. 2, no. 4, 2006, pp. 412–442.
[14]
S. Chaari, F. Biennier, J. Favrel, and C. Benamar, “Towards a service-
oriented enterprise based on business components identiﬁcation,” in
Enterprise Interoperability II.
Springer, 2007, pp. 495–506.
[15]
K. Mittal, “Build your soa, part 3: The service-oriented uniﬁed process,”
IBM developer Works, www.ibm. com/developerworks/library/ws-soa-
method1.html, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[16]
V. De Castro, E. Marcos, and J. M. Vara, “Applying cim-to-pim model
transformations for the service-oriented development of information
systems,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 53, no. 1, 2011,
pp. 87–105.
[17]
C. Casanave, “Enterprise service oriented architecture using the omg
soaml standard, a model driven solutions,” ModelDriven.org, Tech.
Rep., 2012.
[18]
F.
Boumahdi
and
R.
Chalal,
“Extending
the
service
oriented
architecture
to
include
a
decisional
components,”
in
Intelligent
Decision Technology Support in Practice, ser. Smart Innovation,
Systems and Technologies, J. W. Tweedale, R. Neves-Silva, L. C.
Jain, G. Phillips-Wren, J. Watada, and R. J. Howlett, Eds.
Springer
International
Publishing,
2016,
vol.
42,
pp.
185–199.
[Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-21209-8 11
[19]
S. OMG, “Service oriented architecture modeling version 1.0.1.” OMG,
http://http://www.omg.org/spec/SoaML/1.0.1/PDF, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[20]
B. Elvesæter, A.-J. Berre, and A. Sadovykh, “Specifying services using
the service oriented architecture modeling language (soaml)-a baseline
for speciﬁcation of cloud-based services.” in CLOSER, 2011, pp. 276–
285.
[21]
B. Elvesaeter, D. Panﬁlenko, S. Jacobi, and C. Hahn, “Aligning business
and it models in service-oriented architectures using bpmn and soaml,”
in Proceedings of the First International Workshop on Model-Driven
Interoperability.
ACM, 2010, pp. 61–68.
[22]
B. OMG, “Business process modeling notation (bpmn),” OMG,
http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/PDF, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[23]
F. Boumahdi and R. Chalal, “Soada: A new architecture to enrich soa
with a decisional aspect,” International Journal of Systems and Service-
Oriented Engineering (IJSSOE), vol. 4, no. 2, 2014, pp. 13–27.
493
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

