An Approach for Sensor Placement to Achieve Complete Coverage
and Connectivity in Sensor Networks
Monia Techini
University of Gabes,
National Engineering School
of Gabes (ENIG),
Av. Omar Ibn El Khattab
Zerig-6029, Gabes, Tunisia
Email: moniatec@gmail.com
Ridha Ejbali and Mourad Zaied
REGIM-Lab: REsearch Groups
in Intelligent Machines
BP 1173, Sfax, 3038, Tunisia
Email: ridha_ejbali@ieee.org
Email: mourad.zaied@ieee.org
Abstract—The main objective required for a Wireless Sensor
Network (WSN) is the positioning of the sensor nodes to form
a WSN. There are two strategies for the positioning of nodes in
an area of interest where some phenomena are to be monitored:
deterministically or randomly. In this paper, our goal is to propose
a new sensor placement technique, which is based on random
distribution with coverage and connectivity constraints.
Keywords–Placement; Random; WSN; Coverage; Connectivity.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent developments could not be achieved without a
change in the ﬁeld of communication. Mainly Wireless Sensor
Networks (WSN) and mobile computing become more and
more popular. Control of environmental parameters can give
rise to several applications. In the monitoring area, the WSN
is deployed over a region where some phenomena have to be
monitored. The nodes can be equipped with sensors to measure
temperature, humidity, and gases.
A WSN consists of a number, often signiﬁcant, of sensors
with limited perception and communication capabilities where
each node is connected to one (or sometimes several) sen-
sors. There exist two types of sensors: homogeneous sensors,
which possess the same communication and computation ca-
pabilities and heterogeneous sensors, which possess different
capabilities. Determining the sensor ﬁeld architecture is a key
challenge in sensor resource management. Sensors have to be
placed at critical locations that provide sustainable coverage.
Many works for sensors and sensor placement were done.
In [1], Lin models the sensing ﬁeld as a grid points. Then, he
explains how to place sensors on some grid points in order to
satisfy a particular quality of service based on the Simulated
Annealing approach. Using the genetic algorithm, the authors
in [2] propose an approach for the sensor placement problem.
In [3], the Improved Particle Swarm Optimization (IPSO)
algorithms have been employed to determine the optimal
sensors number and conﬁgurations.
Recent works focused on relay placement algorithm to de-
termine the set of positions which can guarantee connectivity.
The main objective of the work proposed in [4] is to reduce the
set of locations for the existing mobile nodes in the network
to the locations of relay nodes that would ensure connectivity
with the least count. A multi-objective mathematical model
is used to determine the best placement of mobile nodes for
different tasks [5]. In [6], Flushing proposes a combination
of exact method and heuristic method to solve the problem
mentioned below. Thus, his work was based on Mixed-Integer
Linear Programming (MILP) and a Genetic Algorithm (GA).
A related problem to the deployment in WSN is Art Gallery
Problem (AGP) addressed by the art gallery theorem [7]. The
AGP problem consists of determining the minimum number of
guards to cover the interior of an art gallery. Many researches
for the AGP have been discussed in literature. There exist some
similarities between our sensor placement problem and the
AGP, such that the guards (sensors in our case) are assumed
to have similar capabilities.
As we mentioned earlier, there exist two ways for the
placing of sensors with random placement or with grid-based
placement. The former one is deﬁned as a technique where
nodes are deployed at random positions. The latter is deﬁned
as the one where sensors are placed exactly at pre-engineered
positions. Figure 1 shows the different categories of node
placement strategies.
Figure 1. Sensor node placement methodologies
On the other side, the authors in [8] classify the place-
277
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

ment strategies into static and dynamic depending on whether
the optimization is performed at the time of deployment or
while the network is operational, respectively. In [8], Younis
assumes that the choice of the deployment scheme depends on
many properties. Thus, many researches assume that for some
cases, the random placement becomes the only option due to
environment characteres [1] and deployment cost and time [9].
This paper focuses on the implementation of an optimal node
deployment strategy based on a random placement method.
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows:
Section 2 starts by summarising the problem of the sensor
placement. Our sensor placement approach is then presented
in Section 3. Section 4 shows the results of our procedure.
Section 5 provides our conclusions.
II.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
The problem addressed in this paper has as objective to
determine minimum number of sensors when the maximum
of targets are covered. There are two strategies of sensor
node placement: deterministic or non-deterministic (random).
We assume our goal is to deploy the sensors in order to
provide the connectivity and the coverage of the service area.
Thus, the main objective of our approach is to ensure that the
maximum of the area is covered. The authors in [10] formulate
a constrained multivariable nonlinear programming problem
to deploy the sensors in their locations under constraints of
network lifetime and total power consumption. They propose
two optimal placement strategies to this problem.
The number of the sensors is determined by taking into
account both the coverage of the area of interest and the
communication between sensors in the WSN. Thus, communi-
cation in a WSN is an effective and practical way to improve
the system performance of WSN. This suggests that both
the network connectivity and the coverage are an essentiel
parameter which must be taken into account when positioning
sensors. Each deployed sensor should be able to cover an area
in order to increase the coverage in a deﬁned region while
maintaining the connectivity in the WSN.
III.
METHOD
Sensor placement can greatly impact the WSN perfor-
mances, such as coverage and connectivity. The former is
deﬁned to quantify the quality of service (QoS). The latter
answers the questions about the communication network in a
WSN. Table I introduces the parameters used during our work.
TABLE I. PARAMETERS OF THE WSN.
Parameter
Deﬁnition
Ci
Node i
Rs
Node sensing radius
Rc
Node communication radius
A
Network area
Ai
Area of the Voronoi polygon for a sensor
N
Number of sensor nodes in the network
C
Coverage of the total area
Dij
Distance between nodes i and j
Ne
Maximim number of neighbors
Minimizing the number of deployed sensors and main-
taining higher sensor coverage when positioning the sensors
have always been a challenge, especially when the monitoring
region is unknown. The aims of the present article are to
implement an approach for the sensor placement problem with
coverage and communication constraints. The main goal of the
sensor placement approach is to determine the best placement
of the sensors. In addition, the proposed algorithm aims at
achieving high sensor coverage while maintaining network
connectivity.
We assume that a region A is covered if there exists a
sensor at position p with sensing radius Rs that contains the
region A completely [1]. Thus, the ability of detection varies
with the distance between the sensor Ci and the target Tj [11]
[12], mathematically speaking we have:
Di,j ≤ Rs
(1)
where Di,j is the distance between the position of the sensor
Ci and the target Tj.
To guarantee node communication, The connectivity is
assumed to be full if the distance between two sensors is less
than the communication radius of the sensor. The distance is
deﬁned as the Euclidean distance between two sensors. Figure
2 shows a pseudo code of the algorithm.
Figure 2. Algorithm for sensors placement
We begin by generating a random position for the ﬁrst
sensor. Then, deploying the rest by taking into account a
maximum coverage and connectivity in the area of interest as
constraints. The number of neighbors of each deployed sensor
should be less than a deﬁned number Ne in order to ensure a
sufﬁcient distribution in the area.
Process node 1: deploys the ﬁrst sensor randomly.
Process node i: node i is deployed if there is at least a link
with node j (0 ≤ j ≤ i − 1 ) and a sufﬁcient coverage not
achieved yet.
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

The algorithm is iterative, and it places one sensor in the
sensor ﬁeld during each iteration. It terminates either when a
sufﬁcient coverage of the zone is achieved.
IV.
SIMULATION AND RESULTS
The proposed method aims at deﬁning the initial placement
of sensors. All sensors have the same deployment parameters
and have the same sensing coverage (Rc) and the same com-
munication range (Rs). The former helps in the detection of
the designed event. The latter is introduced for the connectivity
of nodes with their neighborhoods. Thus, depending on the
communication range the neighborhood of a node is deﬁned.
We say that the probability of communication between two
nodes varies inversely with the distance between them.
We evaluate the proposed approach via simulations (NS2).
Our topology is a square with total area A = 20 x 20, Ai is
the area of the Voronoi polygon for a sensor for a full sensing
coverage and a full connectivity deﬁned as [13]:
As(Cov, Con) = min(2R2
s, R2
c)
(2)
Twenty seconds is considered as the simulation time. It should
be mentioned that we assume that all links are bi-directional
during simulation. The sensing range is set to 2 while the
communication range is set to 4 and the maximum number
of neighbors (Ne) for each deployed sensor is set to 4. Thus,
each sensor must have a number of neighbors less than Ne
(ﬁxed to 4 in our case).
We assume that the algorithm stops when the coverage C
is greater than 1, we deﬁne C as the ratio of the union of all
areas covered by each node and the area of the entire Region
Of Interest (ROI) [9]. The coverage C helps to ensure that
the region is entirely covered by the sensors when deploying
them. In this work, we try to take into account the overlapping
zone between nodes when calculating the area covered by the
sensors. Each node is characterized by a covered area which
is deﬁned as the circular area within its sensing radius Rs.
C = ∪i=1..NAi
A
(3)
Where Ai is the area covered by the ith node,
N is the total number of nodes,
A stands for the area of ROI.
Our approach is used in order to determine a better
methodology for sensor placement problem in a WSN. As
for results, the number of sensors in the region of interest
varies from 51 to 57 providing full sensing coverage and
full network connectivity. We can observe that our approach
outperforms Max Avg Cov [14] [15] and MIN-MISS [15]
[16]. It is important to point out that in this work, we do
not take into account obstacles in the ROI.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, the sensor placement problem is studied. We
have formulated a new strategy for the initial sensor placement
problem. We start with a random distribution of nodes with
constraints of coverage and connectivity. As part of our future
work, we would extend this result to a case when there are
obstacles in the ROI. Thus, we assume that the above results
are practical and can be used in actual sensor network design.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial sup-
port of this work by grants from General Direction of Scientiﬁc
Research (DGRST), Tunisia, under the ARUB program.
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Lin and P.-L. Chiu, “A near-optimal sensor placement algorithm to
achieve complete coverage-discrimination in sensor networks,” Com-
munications Letters, IEEE 9.1, vol. 9, 2005, pp. 43–45.
[2]
L. T.-M. E. C. Ruben Leal, Jose Aguilar and A. Rios, “An Approach
for Diagnosability Analysis and Sensor Placement for Continuous Pro-
cesses Based on Evolutionary Algorithms and Analytical Redundancy,”
Applied Mathematical Sciences, vol. 9, no 43, 2015, pp. 2125–2146.
[3]
M. Z. A. Bhuiyan, G. Wang, J. Cao, and J. Wu, “Sensor placement with
multiple objectives for structural health monitoring,” ACM Transactions
on Sensor Networks (TOSN), vol. 10, no 4, 2014, pp. 68–113.
[4]
K. A. Izzet F. Senturk and F. Senel, “An effective and scalable
connectivity restoration heuristic for mobile sensor/actor networks,”
Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2012 IEEE, 2012,
pp. 518–523.
[5]
F. Guerriero, A. Violi, E. Natalizio, V. Loscri, and C. Costanzo,
“Modelling and solving optimal placement problems in wireless sensor
networks,” Applied Mathematical Modelling, vol. 35, no 1, 2011, pp.
230–241.
[6]
E. Flushing and G. Di Caro, “Exploiting synergies between exact and
heuristic methods in optimization: an application to the relay placement
problem in wireless sensor networks,” Bio-Inspired Models of Network,
Information, and Computing Systems, vol. 134, 2014, pp. 250–265.
[7]
J. O’Rourke, Ed., Art Gallery Theorems and Algorithms.
Oxford
University Press, 1987.
[8]
M. Younis and K. Akkaya, “Strategies and techniques for node place-
ment in wireless sensor networks: A survey,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol.
6, no 4, 2008, pp. 621–655.
[9]
N. Heo and P. K. Varshney, “An intelligent deployment and clustering
algorithm for a distributed mobile sensor network,” Systems, Man and
Cybernetics, 2003. IEEE International Conference on, vol. 5, 2003, pp.
4576–4581.
[10]
P. Cheng, C.-N. Chuah, and X. Liu, “Energy-aware node placement
in wireless sensor networks,” Global Telecommunications Conference,
2004. GLOBECOM’04. IEEE, vol. 5, 2004, pp. 3210–3214.
[11]
S. S. Dhillon, K. Chakrabarty, and S. Iyengar, “Sensor placement for
grid coverage under imprecise detections,” Information Fusion, 2002.
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference, vol. 2, 2002, pp.
1581–1587.
[12]
S. Adlakha and M. Srivastava, “Critical density thresholds for coverage
in wireless sensor networks,” Wireless Communications and Network-
ing, 2003. WCNC 2003. 2003 IEEE, vol. 3, 2003, pp. 1615–1620.
[13]
Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, and R. Bhandari, “Coverage, Connectivity,
and Deployment in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Recent Development
in Wireless Sensor and Ad-hoc Networks, 2015, pp. 25–44.
[14]
S. S. Dhillon and K. Chakrabarty, “Sensor placement for effective
coverage and surveillance in distributed sensor networks,” vol. 3. IEEE,
2003, pp. 1609–1614.
[15]
S. M. Reda, M. Abdelhamid, O. Latifa, and A. Amar, “Efﬁcient
uncertainty-aware deployment algorithms for wireless sensor networks,”
in Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC),
2012 IEEE.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 2163–2167.
[16]
Y. Zou and K. Chakrabarty, “Uncertainty-aware sensor deployment
algorithms for surveillance applications,” in Global Telecommunications
Conference, 2003. GLOBECOM’03. IEEE, vol. 5.
IEEE, 2003, pp.
2972–2976.
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-438-1
ICSEA 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

