The Technology Executive Role: A Study of the Main Competencies and
Capabilities of the CIO / CTO
A Systematic Review
Carlos Sampaio
CESAR – Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems
Recife, Brazil
Email: ccbs@cesar.org.br
Felipe Silva Ferraz
CESAR – Recife Center for Advanced Studies and Systems
Recife, Brazil
Email: fsf@cesar.org.br
Abstract—Emerging
trends
in
technology
bring
about
a
fundamental
career
change
for
professionals
and,
consequently,
for companies
and businesses.
The digital
transformation and the introduction of new technologies are
exerting a huge impact on the role and responsibilities of the
Technology Executive to support the organization's goals. This
study proposes to examine the skills and responsibilities
associated
with
the
role
of
the
Technology
Executive,
systematically reviewing the literature and comparing patterns
in the analysis of the profiles and skills for this role. The result
shows that the competences of the Technology Executive have
undergone
a
significant
change
to
incorporate
skills
in
different areas, apart from the traditional technical area,
which can be categorized into five main groups: Technologist,
Strategist, Enabler, Innovator, and Financial.
Keywords — IT; Executive; CIO; CTO; Competency; Capability;
Systematic Review; As a Service.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The pace of technological development has reached such
high rates that even the great discoveries of a few years ago
already face challenges from the more recent competing
technologies, before even being able to establish themselves
in a competitive market like the one we live in. Emerging
technologies, named by Gartner, Inc. as Nexus of Forces [1]
[2], or the convergence and mutual reinforcement of trends,
like: social, mobile, data analytics, cloud computing, and the
Internet of Things, just to name a few, leads us to a reflection
about what the professional of the future's work will be like.
It is not difficult to be surprised by the pace of change that
these technologies are exacting in today's professionals and
businesses, but, at the same time, we see that this is exactly
the fast pace that paves the opportunity paths for the entire
reinvention of complicated business models, established
decades, perhaps centuries ago [3]. These business models
are
replaced
not
only
by
creativity,
innovation,
or
entrepreneurial vision but also by the simple competent
application of those new technologies, promoting real
revolutions in certain markets.
In view of these new innovative technologies, we observe
a common trend, the “service-based” business models [4].
Initially associated with specific types of cloud computing
and Big Data, the name came to be used by different offer
opportunities, in markets with heavy user-centric services, as
their main competitive distinctiveness. This trend is defined
by the new jargon of Everything as a Service (XaaS) [4]. It is
this type of offer that serves as a catalyst for several business
initiatives with a focus on the global offer of services, and
with accelerated growth, as is the case of some successful
startups. These new business models are by nature extremely
dynamic and flexible and benefit from the fact that they are
not tied to long-term contracts or large investments in
infrastructure, as with traditional models.
While emerging technologies and service-based business
models are facilitators of innovation and a gateway to an
excess of opportunities, it is not uncommon to be presented
with excellent ideas for new products or services, that never
left the drawing board. The failure to achieve a market-ready
solution can be due to a simple lack of knowledge of the
current technology state that would support this new venture,
or to the unfamiliarity with the market for the supply of raw
materials, support solutions, and information. The absence of
the Technology Executive's proper knowledge and planning
often results in innovative services offers that cannot scale to
global demand, even local demand but with increased
volume, because the technological platform has not been
updated at the same speed as required, or due to the absence
of a link to the next step of development [5]. All of these
factors could pose as roadblocks and will terminate a project
prior to even being started. In this scenario, the technology
executive plays a fundamental role in the success or failure
of a new idea or business model. However, the qualifications
necessary for a good performance of this professional
include, but are not limited to, in-depth technical knowledge,
relationship with the market, leadership, negotiation skills,
interpersonal skills, and strategic foresight of the future. This
causes the recruitment and hiring of a professional with this
skillset difficult and costly for the company [6]. Within this
context, we observe opportunities and challenges to the
mapping of the competencies and role of a Technology
Executive, when submitted to the opportunity to offer these
competencies in an "as a service" model.
This work intends to expand the knowledge about the
role
and
competencies
of
the
Technology
Executive,
evaluate the work that has already been done on the
definition of this role, and how the responsibilities associated
with this profile are categorized, to support future work that
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

would allow for the development of a software abstraction
with the ability to mimic the role of a Chief Information
Officer (CIO) / Chief Technology Officer (CTO), even if
partly.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present basic concepts related to the role of the
Technology
Executive
and
how
its
relevance
and
responsibilities to business success grew in importance over
time. Next, in Section III, we introduce the methodology
along with the objectives, the description of the methods,
processes, and the protocol used in the systematic review of
this study.
In Section IV, we will detail the results
associated with the research. Then, in the following section,
we will interpret the results from the previous one and how
they relate to the research questions. Finally, we conclude
the work in Section VI, where some conclusions and future
works will be depicted.
II.
THE TECHNOLOGY EXECUTIVE ROLE
The preliminary applications, associated with computers
and information systems, had simplified scopes of objectives
and well-defined expectations for both the Information
Technology departments and their managers. They were
required
to
collect,
store,
and
process
financial
and
accounting data [7]. However, the responsibilities of this role
evolved. The changes began with the need for hardware and
software integration activities, in the 1970s, and continued
with the design and implementation of networked platforms,
in the 1990s. These changes continued with the analysis,
selection, and acquisition of new software and services, in
the 2000s. During the last decade, it became expected that
the IT department produced a direct link with the companies'
business model and results. The historical evolution for the
responsibilities of the Technology Executive could be
measured, in the history of companies, by the maturity and
growth of their business model, from the basic use of
technology in everyday processes to the exploration of
emerging technologies to create a differential competitive in
their business objectives.
III.
APPLIED PROTOCOL
Based on the guidelines for performing Systematic
Literature Reviews in Software Engineering proposed by
Kitchenham
[8],
this
work
introduces
the
following
methodology: (1) search strategy, (2) automatic search and
selection, (3) identification of inclusion and exclusion
criteria, (4) critical evaluation, (5) data extraction and (6)
synthesis. This methodology is presented next in the order
indicated above.
The principal goal of this review is to "identify studies
that allow assessing the adoption of the concept of
Everything as a Service, in the offering of technical,
behavioral and business skills, associated with a technology
executive". This study applied the aforementioned guidelines
to systematically review the published research databases,
looking for answers to three research questions:

RQ1 - What studies on defining the technology
executive role have previously been conducted?

RQ2
-
What
are
the
responsibilities
of
the
technology executive role?

RQ3 - How are the competencies associated with the
role of the technology executive categorized?
To properly define the scope of the principal goal of this
review and allow for better structuring of the research
questions, this study used the Population, Intervention,
Comparison, Outcome, and Context (PICOC) criteria [8] in
formulating the search strings, as will be presented on the
following step.
A. Search Strategies
The research strategy underwent some modifications and
trials
before
the
use of
the
Population, Intervention,
Comparison, Outcome, and Context (PICOC) criteria, due to
the broad scope of our study, to better define the structure of
the research questions. It was decided not to limit the
findings by Context criterion to allow a larger universe of
responses.

Population: The technology executive (CIO / CTO);

Intervention: Utilization of an "as a service" model;

Comparison:
Companies
with
a
technology
executive;

Outcomes:
Reduced
dependence
on
technical,
business, or behavioral skills.
B. Automatic Search and Selection
This work prioritized the search for results in the format
of preliminary, academic, and industrial studies, which
presented
evidence
about
the
objective
of
this
work
(PICOC), on the indicated research data sources. Research-
Articles, Journals, Magazines, and studies presented at
conferences, were used. Due to time constraints and better
adherence to the methodology, only two selected data
sources were used for this study. The IEEE Xplore and the
ACM Digital Library are highly recommended and were
chosen due to their recognized scope, content, and relevance.
Both are data sources frequently used in reviews with the
indexed scientific literature.
TABLE I.
BUILDING OF SEARCH STRINGS
PICOC
Criterion
Search String
Population
(("chief information officer" OR cio) OR ("chief
technology officer" OR cto)) AND (challenges OR
opportunities OR role OR attribution OR qualification
OR competencies OR task OR survey)
Intervention
((("chief information officer" OR cio) OR ("chief
technology officer" OR cto)) OR ((corporate OR
enterprise) AND (it OR ("information technology"))))
AND ("as a service")
Comparison
(("technology executive" OR "cto" OR "cio") OR (("c-
level" OR "c level") AND ("it" OR "technology")))
AND ("enterprise" OR "enterprises" OR "company"
OR "companies")
Outcome
(("it" OR "information technology") AND "as a
service")
AND
("cost
reduction"
OR
"increased
performance" OR ("return" AND "investment"))
Context
Not used
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

We chose to compose specific strings to match each
Population,
Intervention,
Comparison,
Outcome,
and
Context (PICOC) criteria. The detail of each criterion was
used to form the basis for the building of each search string,
as described in Table I.
These search strings were applied separately in each of
the research databases, and later consolidated into a single
reference file in the BibTeX format. The total number of
results was 4,236. The initial results are shown in the Table
II below, separated by data source and construction criteria
for each search string.
TABLE II.
INITIAL SEARCH RESULTS
PICOC Criterion
IEEE Xplore
ACM DL
Population
364
1476
Intervention
433
425
Comparison
194
902
Outcome
63
409
Context
Not used
Not used
The initial result, after consolidation, was assessed to
exclude duplicated items. Next, the partial result was
submitted to the inclusion and exclusion criteria presented in
the next step of this study.
C. Identification of Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
In this work, we admitted only studies related to the role
of the Chief Information Officer (CIO) / Chief Technology
Officer (CTO) as a technology executive. Results that did not
highlight in their title any of the criteria for constructing the
search terms were discarded. This review narrowed the
studies examined to those published between 2017 and June
2020, as it is related to a more recent research area.
The studies that fit one or more of these following criteria
were also excluded:

Not written in the English language;

Related
to
topics
with
similar
acronyms,
but
different meanings from the desired;

Call
for
works,
prefaces,
conference
annals,
handouts, summaries, panels, interviews, and news
reports.
We will now describe the application of the inclusion and
exclusion criteria presented above in the search and initial
selection of research papers. This step started with an
individual search per string, described in the previous stage,
in each of the research sources. Each search result,
associated with one PICOC criterion in one data source, was
stored in a file in the BibTeX format. The result files were
then concatenated and grouped by PICOC criteria, and then
merged into a single result file to be imported into the Zotero
software [9] for duplicates exclusion.
A total of 1,418 duplicate items were eliminated from the
initial results after the consolidation. This activity produced
2,848 unique items that were submitted to the Inclusion and
Exclusion Criteria.
Then, a list was generated with the results, in Comma-
Separated Values (CSV) format, for importing into the
Google spreadsheet tool (Google Sheets). Only articles of the
types Conference Papers and Journal Articles were selected,
using the Google Sheets filter tool and the "Item Type"
column.
Additionally, it was established that the cut-off date
required for consideration in this study would be works
produced within the last 3 years at the most. We decided to
consider only the results published from 2017 onwards as
this study relates to new concepts and recent research areas.
The Google Sheets filter tool was used again, and we
selected all results with a value equal to, or greater than,
2017 in the column "Publication Year". This resulted in
another 1,980 items excluded. After limiting the types of
publications and applying the time cut-off criteria described
above, the number of unique items was brought down to 869.
In the next step, we filtered the titles of the remaining
articles to exclude items that do not highlight the relationship
with the main purpose of this review or the alignment with
any of the research questions. To do this, we used the Google
Sheets filter function, with the syntax described below, to
select articles using multiple criteria:
=FILTER('Sampaio-DPES_SLR'!A2:CI,
regexmatch('Sampaio-DPES_SLR'!E2:E ,
"CIO|CTO|Chief Information Officer|Chief
Technology Officer|Information Technology|as a
Service|Role|Technology Management|IT
Governance|Best Practices"))
A total of 238 works remained after this last step. We
analyzed the title for each of these articles to determine its
adherence to this systematic review. Several works that were
not related to the main theme or research questions, but that
met some of the terms used in the filter of the previous step
were eliminated, as we can see from the details below.
Some works related to physics, performance analysis in
software development, human resources, and deployment of
cloud services, were included in the result due to the use of
terms such as “role”, “software as a service”, “executive”,
and the acronyms CIO / CTO. In such cases, papers whose
titles did not comply with the scope of the review were
eliminated. The works whose titles left uncertainties about
their adherence to the main theme were also listed for review
in the next step. At the end of this step, 193 entries were
excluded, leaving 45 items for further analysis.
All abstracts of the remaining works from the previous
stage were evaluated. We were able to perceive that they
ranged greatly in content. Similar to the previous step, some
works were eliminated because they did not have the desired
adherence to the main object of this study. It was necessary
to manually retrieve the summary field of some articles
because they did not present this information as a result of
the search and initial selection. Also included for later
analysis were the articles in which the analysis of adherence
with the scope of this work proved to be imprecise or left
doubts. The reading of the abstract resulted in the exclusion
of another 29 articles, leaving 16 for thorough critical
analysis and data extraction.
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Table III below shows the exclusion numbers for each
step in this part of the study.
TABLE III.
NUMBER OF STUDIES FILTERED IN EACH STEP OF
THE SELECTION PROCESS
Selection process step
Number of articles
selected
Data source search (after deduplication)
2848
Inclusion, exclusion, and time cut-off criteria
869
Title examination
45
Abstract analysis
16
D. Critical Evaluation
The studies that reached this critical evaluation step were
submitted to a complete analysis. The studies were then
analyzed in full, not just titles or abstracts. Six papers were
discarded at the end of this stage since they did not exhibit
adherence to the theme of the review nor answered any
aspect of the leading questions. This resulted in a final set of
10 papers.
The final studies analyzed went on to the data extraction
and synthesis stage, and the results obtained will be
presented in the following section.
IV.
RESULTS
This study identified 10 primary studies [7][10]-[18]
dealing with a wide range of research topics and exploration
models for each different situation.
According to [13], it is possible to categorize the skills of
the Technology Executive into four main groups, namely,
Strategist, Innovator, Enabler, and Technologist. We were
able to find agreement in the primary studies with all four
above mentioned groups, including other groups of less
expressiveness, such as Leadership, Processes, and Business.
The Financial group also yield several references, similar in
number to the main groups indicated above. Studies that did
not fit into any of these groups were classified as General.
These last groups of categories are valid because they
register the tendency to be constituted in sub-categories or to
facilitate the comprehension of the responsibilities associated
with the Technology Executive, evaluated later in this work.
A. Quantitative Analysis
The proposed research process resulted in 10 primary
studies, written by 34 authors, linked to 15 institutions, based
in 10 different countries, spread over four continents, and
were published between the years of 2017 and 2020. The
combined keyword number from the studies assessed by this
paper yield a total of 49 distinct entries.
In what concerns the country of origin, there was no
highlight to be made. Chile, Indonesia, and China appear
with a somewhat higher result than the others (all with two
publications
each).
The
remaining
countries
had
one
publication only. Despite the small general amount of
publications found on the role of the Technology Executive
and the responsibilities associated with that role, we note that
the geographical distribution, which covers most continents,
illustrates the global interest in this subject.
The most common keywords used in the studies, by order
of frequency were CIO (4), CTO (3), IT Executive (2), Role
(3),
Chief
Information
Officer
(2),
Technology
(2),
Technology Management (2). All other items were cited only
once. The first 4 keywords, namely: CIO, CTO, IT
Executive, and Role, indicate precisely the research object
sought by this work.
V.
DISCUSSION
First and foremost, it was possible to identify that the
responsibilities associated with this role are constantly
changing, which reflects in the need to constantly reconstruct
the definition and attributions of that role. Secondly, we
observed in many of the works, the statement that the fashion
in which the profile for the Technology Executive is
categorized is influenced by the type of exposure that the
company has to Technology. The focus and performance of
the executives vary, according to the company's orientation
and exposure concerning technology, as well as its definition
as a strategic asset or as an infrastructure base for operational
efficiency. This comes to show that this research field is very
extensive and that requires a continuous effort to contribute
to its development.
The analysis also pointed to a shortage of supply capable
of playing this role, associated with the need for specific
training to accommodate the demand
for Technology
Executives. This is because there is still a misalignment
between the expected performance of these Executives, by
companies (demand), and the type of professional profile
available to exercise this role (offer).
A. RQ1 – Assessment
We observed that most of the studies opted for the survey
based on interviews (7 studies) when evaluating what types
of studies have already been conducted to define the role of
the Technology Executive. Some works opted for the use of
forms or questionnaires, to qualify the moment of the
interview, or in the selection of the interviewee (4 studies).
The Literature Review was also used to qualify the interview
step (3 studies). Other methods were used, to select the target
audience and to analyze the profile characteristics, to define
the role of the Technology Executive, and to answer this
research question, but which were mentioned only once.
By grouping the types of automation used to select
candidates for the interview and to effectively collect data
for analysis, we found that most studies opted for some
manual method of assessing requirements and profile
characteristics.
Another
smaller
group
opted
to
use
automated data selection and extraction techniques, with a
highlight on the use of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
[15] and on the analysis of public data sources in Social
Networks [13].
To answer this research question, each work could
contribute with more than one type of study, therefore, the
total number of types of studies is not relevant when
compared with the number of primary papers. Out of all
primary papers selected for the final analysis, a single one
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

failed to identify an acceptable answer to this research
question.
B. RQ2 - Assessment
Only half of the studies analyzed indicated some type of
formalization concerning the definition of responsibilities for
the role of the Technology Executive. We understand that
the interest in this area of study has taken a more accelerated
pace over the past few years, when the attributions of this
role were no longer restricted to the issues of the companies'
operational infrastructure, and started to have an impact on
strategic business objectives [7][13].
The
concern
with
the
alignment
between
the
responsibilities
of
the
Technology
Executive
and
the
strategic performance of companies, without neglecting
traditional structuring, operational and support activities,
became clear among the answers found. It was also possible
to identify the growth in requirements for soft skills and
negotiation, indicating that the main target audience for this
role is increasingly closer to the top-level executives (C-
Suite), and to the external client for the businesses.
"The Chief Technology Officer (CTO) is responsible
for linking technology with strategy, market issues, and
top management guidelines; it is also responsible for
promoting innovation and facilitating the intersection
among research, development, technology innovation,
and leadership vision." [18]
C. RQ3 – Assessment
An important highlight that arises as a result of this
research is the finding, in the role of the Technology
Executive, of many requirements commonly associated with
the Business Executive. It is traditional to find technology
profiles that play the role of the main executive; however, we
find several positions occupied by professionals with first
training in business [17].
This work found 43 different terms for category grouping
of the Technology Executive profile. From these, the
Technologist and the Strategist profiles (both with 7 citations
each) stood out. The first profile can be traced back to the
first moments of technology development. It is the technical
role best known for its alignment with operational and
structuring responsibilities. However, the latter describes a
profile further aligned with the strategic business objectives,
the Strategist profile. The other noticeable categories found
in this work are gradually located between the first two
described above. As they have a more technical or business
tendency, they are the Innovator, Financial, and Enabler
(each with 4 citations each). The last terms worth mentioning
are Processes and Leadership (with 2 citations each), and 12
other categories that had only one citation each.
VI.
CONCLUSION
According to the result of this literature review, the skills
of the Technology Executive can be divided into five main
groups, namely, Technologist, Strategist, Enabler, Financial,
and Innovator. The purpose of this review was to identify
previous studies on the role of the Technology Executive,
which
would
allow
us
to
categorize
their
main
responsibilities and competencies. In the search phase, 2848
studies were found, of which 10 were classified as primary
studies after applying the exclusion criteria.
Some limitations should be noted in the present study.
First, the potential bias due to the design of the methodology
using a single researcher only, with the task of deciding the
selection criteria and analyzing the quality of the works by
himself. Second, the absence of data sources outside the
academic
environment,
such
as
social
networks
and
specialized market research companies (Garter Inc. or
McKinsey & Company as examples). The main focus of this
work was to find patterns in how to assess the competencies
and skills associated with the role of the Technology
Executive to offer an overview of the current state of the art.
In future works, we intend to perform studies including
other data sources, and the mapping of the specific duties of
each profile from the Technologist to the Strategist can be
outlined to support a proposal to develop a software
abstraction of the most operational skills of the Technology
Executive.
This work intended to provide an introductory overview
of the difficulty related to mapping roles, competencies, and
activities associated with the Technology Executive. The
development of this research in future works will include and
further explore other research databases to display these facts
and points more palpably.
REFERENCES
[1]
Gartner
Inc.,
“Nexus
of
Forces.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.gartner.com/en/information-
technology/glossary/nexus-of-forces.
[retrieved:
December,
2019].
[2]
M. Hwang, An assignment for the nexus of forces. In:
AMCIS
2017
-
America’s
Conference
on
Information
Systems: A Tradition of Innovation, 2017.
[3]
S. Ackx, “Emerging Technologies, Disrupt or be Disrupted,”
in
ISSE 2014
Securing Electronic Business Processes,
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, 2014, pp. 177–187.
[4]
Y. Duan et al., “Everything as a Service (XaaS) on the Cloud:
Origins,
Current
and
Future Trends,”
2015
IEEE
8th
International Conference on Cloud Computing, pp. 621–628,
Jun. 2015.
[5]
J. Pombinho, D. Aveiro, and J. Tribolet, “A Value-Oriented
Approach to Business/IT Alignment – Towards Formalizing
Purpose in System Engineering,” Advanced Information
Systems Engineering Workshops, pp. 555–566, 2012.
[6]
A. Salim, “The c-suite is paralysed with fear, finds new report
on digital transformation | The Drum,” TheDrum, 2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.thedrum.com/news/2017/11/14/the-c-suite-
paralysed-with-fear-finds-new-report-digital-transformation.
[Retrieved: December, 2019].
[7]
A. La Paz, J. Vasquez, and J. Miranda, “The CIO Gap and
Mismatch,” IT Prof., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 66–72, Mar. 2019.
[8]
P. Brereton, B. A. Kitchenham, D. Budgen, M. Turner, and
M. Khalil, “Lessons from applying the systematic literature
review process within the software engineering domain,”
Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 571–583,
Apr. 2007.
[9]
H.T. Harish, “Zotero: Bibliographic Reference Management
Software” Journal of Advanced Research in Library and
Information Science 05, no. 01, February 19, 2018, pp. 42–49.
doi:10.24321/2395.2288.201807.
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[10] W. Noonpakdee, A. Phothichai, T. Khunkornsiri, and A.
Nuntree, “CIO Competency in Digital Era: A Comparative
Study
between
Government
Organizations
and
Private
Enterprises,” 2020 IEEE 7th International Conference on
Industrial Engineering and Applications (ICIEA), pp. 948–
952, Apr. 2020.
[11] Y. Gong, M. Janssen, and V. Weerakkody, “Current and
expected roles and capabilities of CIOS for the innovation and
adoption
of
new
technology,”
in
ACM
International
Conference Proceeding Series, 2019, pp. 462–467.
[12] S. Kosasi, Vedyanto, and I. D. A. E. Yuliani, “Effectiveness
of IT Governance of Online Businesses with Analytical
Hierarchy
Process
Method,”
in
2018
6th
International
Conference on Cyber and IT Service Management, (CITSM),
Aug. 2018.
[13] A.
La
Paz,
“How to
Become
a
Strategist
CIO,”
IT
Professional, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 48–55, Jan. 2017.
[14] D. A. Saputra, I. Alif, R. A. Wijaya, Y. G. Sucahyo, and M.
K. Hammi, “Role of IT in IT governance practices maturity
perspective,”
International
Conference
on
Advanced
Computer Science and Information Systems, ICACSIS 2019,
pp. 325–330
[15] A.
Kumar,
R.
Mukundan,
and
K.
Jain,
“Technology
Management Practices of CTOs in Emerging Economy
India,”
2017
Portland
International
Conference
on
Management of Engineering and Technology (PICMET), pp.
1–6, Jul. 2017.
[16] B. Lohmuller and A. Petrikhin, “The Growing Importance of
Technology Executives / Hidden Chief Technology Officers
and Their Organizational Roles,” 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Engineering, Technology and Innovation
(ICE/ITMC), Jun. 2018.
[17] D. J. Mazzola, R. D. S. Louis, and M. R. Tanniru, “The path
to the top,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 60, no. 3, pp.
60–68, Feb. 2017.
[18] A. Farina et al., “The role of chief technology office (CTO) in
a modern defense company,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic
Systems Magazine, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 52–56, Mar. 2017.
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-827-3
ICSEA 2020 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

