Towards Cloud-based Collaborative Software Development:  
A Developer-Centric Concept for Managing Privacy, Security, and Trust
Roy Oberhauser 
Computer Science Dept. 
Aalen University 
Aalen, Germany 
roy.oberhauser@htw-aalen.de 
 
 
Abstract—Cloud-centric collaboration in (global) software 
development is gaining traction, resulting in new development 
paradigms such as Tools-as-a-Service (TaaS).  Yet both within 
and between clouds, there are associated security and privacy 
issues to both individuals and organizations that can 
potentially hamper collaboration. In this paper, an inter-cloud 
security and privacy concept for heterogeneous cloud 
developer collaboration environments is described that 
pragmatically addresses the distributed collection, storage, 
transmission, and access of events and data while giving 
individuals fine-granularity control over the privacy of their 
collected data. In a case study, the concept was implemented 
and 
evaluated 
by 
adapting 
an 
existing 
collaborative 
development and measurement infrastructure, the Context-
aware Software Engineering Environment Event-driven 
framework (CoSEEEK). The results showed its practicality 
and technical feasibility while presenting performance 
tradeoffs for different cloud configurations. The concept 
enables infrastructural support for privacy, trust, and 
transparency within teams, and can support compliance with 
privacy 
regulations 
in 
such 
dynamic 
collaborative 
environments. 
Keywords-cloud-based software engineering environments; 
cloud-based software development collaboration; global software 
development; privacy; security; trust 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Global software development (GSD) [1] is increasingly 
taking advantage of cloud-based software applications and 
services [2] and realizing its collaboration potential. Data 
acquired and utilized during the software development and 
maintenance lifecycle is no longer necessarily locally 
controlled or even contained within an organization, but may 
be spread globally among various cloud providers with the 
acquired data retained indefinitely. Tools-as-a-Service 
(TaaS) [3] and cloud mashups will enable powerful new 
applications that utilize the acquired SE data [4]. And while 
the technical landscape is changing, the corporate landscape 
is also. A 2005 survey of American corporations conducted 
by the American Management Association showed that 76% 
monitored employee Internet connections, 50% stored and 
reviewed employee computer files, and 55% retained and 
reviewed email messages, with a rapidly increasing trend [5].  
The ability to measure and minutely observe and track 
software developers during their work is becoming 
technically and economically viable to employers, managers, 
colleagues, virtual teams, and other entities. While metrics 
can be useful for personal improvement (cp. Personal 
Software Process), abuse is also possible (consider misuse of 
public profiling). While software services and apps for the 
public typically attend to user privacy due to their longevity, 
mass accessibility, and legal scrutiny, relatively little 
attention has been paid to the privacy needs of software 
developers, an estimated 17 million worldwide [6]. 
Consequently, privacy is becoming a looming concern 
for software developers that faces unique technical 
challenges that affect collaboration: it involves a highly 
dynamic technical environment typically at the forefront of 
software technology and paradigms (e.g., new languages, 
compilers, or platforms), uses diverse tools ([3] identifies 
384) and  heterogeneous project-specific tool chains (e.g., 
application lifecycle management, version control systems, 
build tools, integrated development environments, etc.), it is 
project-centric (unique, short-lived undertakings), it may 
involve multinational coordination (offshoring), etc.  
Yet the trust climate plays a vital role in the success of 
virtual and distributed teams [7], and trust and transparency 
are considered vital values for effective teams and 
collaboration [8][9]. Where trust exists (cp. Theory Y [10]), 
collected data can be utilized collaboratively to enhance team 
performance [10], for instance by utilizing event data to 
coordinate and trigger actions and to provide insights, 
whereas where data is misused as an instrument of power, 
monitoring, or controlling (cp. Theory X [10]), individuals 
require mechanisms for protection. Since the technical 
development infrastructure cannot know a priori what trust 
situation exists between some spectrum of complete trust to 
complete distrust, infrastructural mechanisms should support 
collaboration within some spectrum, while allowing the 
individuals and organizations to adapt their level of data 
transparency to the changing trust situation. 
Privacy is control over the extent, timing, and 
circumstances of sharing oneself. Cloud service users 
currently have few personal infrastructural mechanisms for 
retaining and controlling their own personal data. Diverse 
privacy regulations are applicable within various geographic 
realms of authority. Various (overlapping) (multi-)national 
laws and regulations may apply to such (global) 
collaborative cloud contexts. For instance, Germany has a 
Federal Data Protection Act, the European Union has a Data 
Protection Directive 95/46/EC, and within the United States, 
various states each have their own internet privacy laws. 
533
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Many privacy and security principles are typically involved 
including notice, consent, disclosure, security, earmarking, 
data avoidance, data economy, etc. Various challenges for 
security and privacy in cloud environments remain [11][13]. 
In the interim, pragmatic infrastructural approaches are 
needed to deal with the issues in some way.  
The main contribution of this paper is to elucidate 
requirements for and describe a solution concept that 
pragmatically addresses various privacy and security 
concerns 
in 
cloud-based 
dynamic 
heterogeneous 
collaborative development environments (CDE). It is based 
on service layering, introduces distributed cloud-based 
datasteading for individuals, and mediates trust with brokers.  
Its technical feasibility and performance tradeoffs were 
investigated in a case study.  
This paper is organized as follows: the next section 
details and provides some justification for the assumptions 
and requirements for a solution, and Section 3 describes 
related work. In Section 4, the solution concept is introduced, 
and the following section provides details of a technical 
implementation based on the concept. Evaluation results are 
presented in Section 6, which is then followed by a 
conclusion and description of future work. 
II. 
REQUIREMENTS 
The following requirements, assumptions, or constraints 
(denoted by the prefix R: in italics) were elicited from the 
primary problems, goals, and challenges introduced in the 
preceding section, and considered to be generally applicable 
for any conceptual solution. They are summarized here to 
highlight key considerations in the solution concept. 
Multi-cloud configurability (R:MCC): private cloud 
(R:PrC), public cloud (R:PuC), and community cloud 
(R:CoC) support for a wide array of deployment options. 
Provider-specific cloud API independence (R:PAI) to 
support wide applicability and avoid provider lock-in. Cloud 
compatibility (R:CCO) with current public cloud provider 
and private cloud APIs and services, meaning no exotic 
solutions requiring special configurations that would limit 
usage. Single tenancy (R:ST) in the personal (developer's) 
cloud to reduce risk (e.g., to avoid a misconfiguration 
compromising a much larger set of tenants simultaneously) 
and avoid access by an organizational administrator, which 
involves an additional trust issue. 
Disclosure (R:D): three fundamental levels of shall be 
supported: non-disclosure, anonymized disclosure, and 
personally-identifiable disclosure to specific requestors. 
Sensor Privacy (R:SP): It is assumed that any client-side and 
server-side sensors, (e. g., version control system sensors) 
distribute personally-identifiable events according to a 
privacy concept. Entity-level privacy control (R:EPC): 
granularity of privacy is controllable by any and all entities 
involved (persons, organizations). 
Restricted network access (R:RNA) to collaboration 
participants, e.g., via Virtual Private Networks (VPN), to 
reduce cloud accessibility to collaborators only. Secure 
communication (R:SC) to protect internal data transmission, 
even within a VPN for personal privacy. Basic security 
mechanisms (R:BSM): Reliance on widely-available off-the-
shelf security mechanisms (e.g., HTTPS), without any 
dependence on specialized or exotic hardware or software 
security platforms (e. g., Trusted Platform Module) or 
research-stage 
mechanisms 
that 
would 
constrain its 
practicality. Beyond (R:SC), encryption (R:ENC) can protect 
data accessibility and storage. 
Trusted code implementation (R:TCI): Open source 
and/or independent code audits together with secure 
distribution mechanisms (e.g., via digital signatures from a 
trusted 
website) 
provide 
assurance 
that 
the 
code 
implementation can be trusted. Additionally, remote runtime 
code integrity verification (R:CIV) shall be supported to 
allow agents (e.g., automated temporally random auditing 
requests or manually initiated user requests) to detect any 
tampering with the implementation, sensors, configuration, 
or the compromise of any privacy safeguards. 
In summary, a primary tenet is that organizations and 
teams want to support privacy freedom for individuals, 
support and value self-organizing teams, and not hinder 
electronic collaboration and communication. While together 
these requirements are in no way sufficient or complete, they 
nevertheless provide a practical basis and can be useful for 
furthering discussion.  
III. 
RELATED WORK 
In the area of global software development, [3] discusses 
support for TaaS and [14] Software-as-a-service in 
collaborative situations. Neither go into detail on various 
privacy issues, nor is support for various aforementioned 
requirements, e.g., individual (R:EPC). Examples industrial 
offers for cloud-based collaboration include Atlassian 
OnDemand and CollabNet CloudForge. Individual (R:EPC, 
R:D) do not appear to be supported. 
Work on more general multicloud collaboration includes 
[4], which similarly supports opportunistic collaboration 
without relying on cloud standardization based on the use of 
proxies. However, aspects such as (R:BSM, R:CI, R:EPC) 
were not considered and a technical implementation was not 
investigated.  
Work in the area of standardization and reference 
architecture includes [15], which mentions privacy but fails 
to prescribe a solution. [16] lists various security and 
interoperability standards and their status, but their maturity 
and market penetration considering (R:MCC) and (R:CCO) 
remain issues. 
Various general cloud security mechanisms have been 
proposed. Privacy as a Service (PasS) [17] relies on secure 
cryptographic coprocessors to provide a trusted and isolated 
execution and data storage environment in the computing 
cloud. However, its dependency on hardware within cloud 
provider infrastructure hampers (R:PAI). Data protection as a 
service (DPaaS) [18] is intended to be a suite of security 
primitives that enforce data security and privacy and are 
offered by a cloud platform. Yet this would inhibit (R:PAI). 
Other work such as [19] describe privacy-preserving fine-
grained access control and key distribution mechanisms, but 
are not readily available for a pragmatic approach that is 
usable today (R:BSM). 
534
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

IV. 
SOLUTION CONCEPT 
For a cloud-based context-aware collaboration system to 
have satisfactory utility, it will depend on some type of event 
and data collection and communication facilities. Thus this 
foundational infrastructure should be equipped with basic 
trust and security mechanisms, such that upper level services 
such as context-awareness and collaboration can ensue.  
Thus, to provide a flexible solution for such 
environments, a primary principle in the solution is the 
application of the Service Layer design pattern to provide a 
decoupling and separation of concerns shown in Figure 1. 
The lower conceptual Event and Data Services Layer 
includes event and/or data services for an entity 
(person/team/organization) including acquisition, storage, 
retention, and dissemination, while the upper Collaboration 
and Tools Services Layer includes CDE and tool services 
that utilize lower layer data to provide collaboration, data 
sharing, analytics, and other value-added services over which 
an entity may have more limited privacy control 
mechanisms. 
 
Event & Data Services Layer
Collaboration & Tool Services Layer
Event 
Service 
Person B
Collaboration 
Service Y
Tool 
Service Z
Data 
Service 
Org C
Sensor
A
Analytics
Service X
 
Figure 1: Services Layer Pattern 
A second solution principle is the introduction of a 
datastead, shown in Figure 2, which is loosely analogous to 
the concept of homesteading or seasteading.  In this case, an 
individual (or some unit) manages and controls clearly 
delineated data resources in the cloud for which they have or 
receive responsibility and ownership rights. The technical 
implementation of a datastead can be in the form of a 
personal cloud in the case of an individual, or within a 
private cloud for an organization. The third principle is the 
inclusion of a Trust Broker that mediates between service 
and data access, acting as both a cloud service broker (for 
interoperability with various tools) and cloud security broker 
(for security). Akin to the Trusted Proxy pattern [20] and 
Policy Enforcement Point [20], it constrains access to 
protected resources and allows custom, finely-tuned policies 
to be enforced (R:EPC). Rules can be used to configure and 
distinguish/filter access by event types, timeframes, projects, 
etc. It provides secure communication mechanisms (R:SC) to 
authenticate and authorize data acquisition and data 
dissemination in the datastead, as well as interoperability 
mechanisms for various collaboration and tool services. Only 
client requests from preconfigured known addresses are 
accepted. A management interface to the Trust Broker 
provides the datastead owner with policy management 
capabilities. It also supports data anonymization on a per 
request basis if so configured. For secure storage, the Trust 
Broker encrypts (R:ENC) acquired events and data 
(Encrypted Storage pattern [20]) to prevent unauthorized 
access by administrators or intruders, and protects access to 
the encrypted storage typically on a single port (Single 
Access Point pattern [20]). The Trusting Broker supports 
runtime code integrity (R:CI) via remote attestation, and a 
client, called the Trusting Tool, can be invoked periodically 
or event-based to ensure that the Trust Broker has not been 
tampered with. 
 
Community Cloud
Datastead
Community Channel
Compute
Trust 
Broker
Collaborator
Event 
Service
Group
Event 
Storage
      Compute
Trust 
Broker
Event 
Service
Inter-Cloud Channel
Trusting 
Tool
Personal Channel
Personal 
Event 
Storage
Data 
Service
Tool 
Service
Collaboration & Tool 
Services Layer
Event & Data 
Services Layer
Collaboration 
Service
Client  
Sensor
Server 
Sensor
 
Figure 2: Generic Solution Concept 
Secure Channels and Secure Sessions [20] are used to 
protect the transmission between the sensors and the 
datastead (the Personal Channel), between sensors and the 
Community Cloud (Community Channel), as well as 
between the datastead and any collaboration and tool 
services (Inter-cloud Channel). For a community cloud, a 
VPN is used to limit network access.  
V. 
TECHNICAL IMPLEMENTATION 
To determine the technical feasibility of the solution 
concept and provide a concrete case study, the solution 
concept was applied to an existing heterogeneous CDE 
called the Context-aware Software Engineering Environment 
Event-driven framework (CoSEEEK) [22], which had 
hitherto not incorporated privacy or security techniques. 
CoSEEEK's architecture and integrated technologies are 
shown in Figure 3. Its suitability is based on its portability 
(use of mainly Java and web-based languages), non-
commercial access to the code and dependent technologies, 
its reliance on distributed communication mechanisms, and 
its heterogeneous tool support. 
For event acquisition, CoSEEEK relies on the Hackystat 
framework [22] and its SE tool-based sensors (e.g., Ant, 
Eclipse, Visual Studio) for event extraction and event storage 
(shown in red in Figure 1). Hackystat does not currently 
provide extensive security and privacy mechanisms. For an 
insight, [24] briefly describes some of its security issues. 
Service Layer Separation: the Hackystat-related elements 
(shown in red) were hereby separated into the Event and 
Data Services Layer and the remaining elements were placed 
in the Collaboration and Tools Services Layer. 
535
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Cloud configuration: To meet (R:MCC, R:CCO, R:PAI), 
two different cloud platforms were utilized in isolation. To 
represent a public IaaS cloud provider configuration 
(R:PuC), Amazon Web Services (AWS) was used, using 
Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) for computing services, the 
Elastic Block Store (EBS) for storing configuration files and 
XML database, and the Relational Database Service (RDS) 
which holds the sensorbase.  
To represent a private cloud (R:PrC) or community cloud 
(R:CoC) deployment, OpenStack was used with Compute 
used for computing and Object Storage used in place of EBS 
storage; and since nothing directly equivalent to AWS RDS 
was available, a Compute instance with Object Storage that 
contains a MySQL Server database was configured. Single 
tenancy (R:ST) with one Compute instance per developer 
with access restricted to the developer was configured. 
 
Process 
Management
Governance
Context Management 
(Semantic Module)
Data Storage
Pellet
XML Tuple Space
Jena
Ontology Storage
Multi-Agent System
JADE
Integration
Apache 
Camel 
Routing
Knowledge 
Management
Semantic 
MediaWiki
Quality 
Assessment
ApacheDS
Apache Server
AristaFlow
Collaboration
Complex Event 
Processing
Esper
Event Extraction
Hackystat
Tool 
Sensors
JBoss Drools
Protégé
Joseki SPARQL
Quality GUI 
Advisor
AJAX JQuery 
RIA Client
MySQL
eXist 
XML DB
Service Mgmt
OSGi Equinox
Event Storage 
(sensorbase)
 
Figure 3. CoSEEEK Architecture (affected areas shown in red). 
Trust Broker: the Trust Broker supports (R:D) was 
implemented in Java. The open source Restlet Framework 
for Java SE was used to provide the REST-based interface. 
An example of a query that can be sent is the following, 
specifying the project via the sensorbase_id, the timeframe, 
the sensor data type, the tool, and its uri source. 
 
GET 
/trustbroker/sensordata/{sensorbase_id}?
startTime={startTime}&endTime={endTime}&
sdt_name={sdt_name}&tool={tool} 
&uriPatterns={uriPatterns} 
 
Encryption of events (R:ENC) can be optionally 
configured. For encryption of arriving events and decryption 
of events on authenticated and authorized retrieval, Java's 
AES 128 and the SHA-256 hash algorithm were used 
(R:BSM). One reason for encrypting the storage is that it 
provides an additional form of protection, should, e.g., a 
provider's agent or intruder gain access.  
The 
measurement 
database called 
sensorbase in 
Hackystat required a few minor adaptations. For (R:D), to 
support anonymization the HACKYUSER table was 
extended to include an anonymization flag, which is checked 
before responding, replacing a userid with anonymous. In 
order to support HTTPS connections, the sensorbase client 
(R:SP) was modified and rebuilt, requiring any sensors to 
utilize this modified jar file. HTTPS (R:BSM) was used to 
secure 
all 
three 
communication 
channels 
(personal, 
community, and inter-cloud) (R:SC). Additional properties 
were added to indicate the location of the keystore. SSH was 
used to configure and manage each cloud. Security groups 
were used in both AWS and OpenStack. 
To implement remote attestation, on the client-side, a 
user configures the Trusting Tool with the expected 
checksum value (provided e.g., by the admin or a trusted 
website), version, and the interval for rechecking. On the 
service side, a REST interface sensorbase/checksum was 
added that loads the local adapted sensorbase.jar file, 
computes 
the 
SHA-256 
hash 
value 
using 
java.security.MessageDigest, and returns this 
value and the sensorbase version to the Trusting Tool. While 
not foolproof, since any unauthorized access on the server or 
client could allow spoofing, it provides an additional level of 
confidence. Various stronger jar file tampering technologies 
could be employed if needed, such as componio JarCryp 
bytecode encryption. 
VI. 
EVALUATION 
The case study evaluated the technical feasibility of the 
concept based on the technical implementation. However, 
security and privacy are highly contextually dependent on 
the expectations, requirements, environment, risks, policies, 
training, available attack mechanisms, implementation 
details (bugs), configuration settings, etc., making a 
comprehensive formal assessment in this area difficult. So 
the assumption is made that the prescribed privacy and 
security mechanisms suffice or are balanced for current 
developer needs in developer settings. 
Since CoSEEEK is a reactive system, the ability to 
respond adequately to contextual changes via events is 
highly dependent on network latency; the evaluation focuses 
on this area for various cloud settings.  
As to hardware, the Client PC (for use by a developer) 
has an i5-2410M (2.3-2.9 GHz) dual core CPU and 6GB 
RAM with 32-bit Windows XP SP3. The network consists of 
gigabit Ethernet and two 1 Gbit connections from the 
university campus in Germany to the Internet Provider. 
Representative for a private (R:PrC) or community cloud 
where a datastead could also be placed, the OpenStack 
configuration (OSCfg) consisted of a local intranet server 
with an i5-650 (3.2-3.4GHz) dual core CPU, 8GB RAM, and 
64-bit Ubuntu Server 12.04. The OpenStack Cloud Essex 
Release was installed on the Server via DevStack and the 
Compute instances also ran Ubuntu Server 12.04. MySQL v. 
5.5.24 was used for Hackystat sensorbase storage in a 
Compute instance. 
As a public cloud provider (R:PuC) representative, a free 
AWS configuration (AWSCfg) was chosen. It consisted of 
536
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

t1.micro EC2 instance types located in US-EAST-1d 
(Virginia) with 613 MiB memory, up to 2 EC2 units (for 
short periodic bursts) with low I/O performance running 64-
bit Ubuntu Server 12.04. MySQL v. 5.5.27 was used for the 
Hackystat sensorbase storage in AWS RDS.  
Common software included Hackystat 8.4 with the 
Noelios Restlet Engine 1.1.5 and JDK 1.6.  
Typical network usage scenarios were considered, thus 
no optimizations were applied to any configurations nor was 
an artificially quiet network state created. All results are the 
average of 10 repeated measurements (with one exception 
noted below). A secure configuration denotes using the 
TrustBroker via HTTPS (R:SC) with encrypted storage 
(R:ENC), and an insecure configuration means no 
TrustBroker and using HTTP. VPN (R:RNA) overheads were 
not measured. 
To determine delays from the client to the datastead in 
cloud variants, on the client PC Ant was invoked, causing 
the Hackystat Ant sensor to send one XML event to the 
Server (a write in the remote sensorbase) consisting of 235 
bytes of event data and 73 bytes of overhead. As shown in 
Figure 4, the average network latency using an insecure 
OSCfg was 214 ms, for a secure OSCfg 389 ms, and for a 
secure AWSCfg 608 ms. 
 
 
Figure 4: Latency (in ms) for sending an event (33 bytes)  
from the client PC to the server sensorbase. 
Once events are in the datastead, then latencies between 
computing instances in a cloud are of interest, since the 
collaboration or tool services will be retrieving this data 
(shown in Figure 5 and Figure 6). For AWSCfg, a single 
query for 67 events (15818 bytes) between two EC2 
instances took 78 ms on average via HTTP and 84 ms over 
HTTPS. In a secure configuration the retrieval took 347 ms. 
For OSCfg between two Compute instances, a single query 
took 38 ms  to return 22 events (5243 bytes). Note that 
HTTP insecure reads in the private cloud had two anomaly 
values (178 and 210 ms) that would have changed the 
average from 38 to 69, and were also far larger than any 
secure value measurements. Thus, these 2 measurement 
values were removed, and the average created from the 
remaining 8 values. These large latencies could perhaps be 
attributed to a network, disk, operating system, or OpenStack 
related issue. Continuing with the measurements with 39 
events (9238 bytes), HTTPS requests took 60 ms while in the 
secure configuration it averaged 61ms.The overhead of the 
privacy approach is the addition of SSL, brokering a second 
SSL connection, and encryption. For the OSCfg, the 
difference of TrustBroker and decryption showed on average 
only a 1ms difference to that with purely SSL. One 
explanation could be that the extra overhead is minimal 
compared to the data transfer delays between OpenStack 
instances, but further investigation of OpenStack internals 
and profiling would be required.  
 
 
Figure 5: Private vs. public cloud inter-computing instance query latencies 
grouped by security (in ms) 
 
Figure 6: Inter-cloud query latency grouped by cloud type  
for different degrees of security (in ms). 
Based on the results shown in the above figures, the use 
of the secure configuration of the OSCfg within a private or 
even a community cloud setting would appear to have 
acceptable 
performance 
overhead 
for 
cloud-centric 
collaborative development work, and distributed retrieval 
from datasteads is viable for responding to changes in the 
collaborative situation. On the other hand, the use of the 
secure configuration in the public cloud (AWSCfg), as 
shown in this perhaps worst case as a no cost offshore 
minimal public cloud setting, incurs substantially higher 
network latencies. Obviously choosing geographically close 
locations when possible is recommended. Also, provisioning 
sufficient computing and I/O resources support to deal with 
the additional inter-cloud and security mechanism overheads 
would also reduce such lags in public cloud configurations. 
Optimization in this area would also be promising. 
To determine the remote attestation overhead, the 
Trusting Tool was measured on the PC using the AWSCfg 
over SSL. The average request-response latency was 702 ms. 
On the server, this involved loading and calculating the 
SHA-256 hash value for the 5.5 MB large sensorbase.jar file. 
Thus the attestation mechanism of the remote cloud instance 
could be configured to be automatically invoked periodically 
by client-side sensors at regular intervals in a separate thread 
or 
process 
to 
not 
interfere 
with 
other 
network 
communication. 
In summary, the evaluation showed that network 
latencies incurred by the concept are most likely insignificant 
for collaboration in PrC settings, but that security overheads 
in global PuC settings may require optimization attention.  
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Latency (ms)
Secure AWSCfg
Secure OSCfg
Insecure OSCfg
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Insecure
HTTPS
Secure
Latency (ms)
Inter-AWSCfg
Inter-OSCfg
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Inter-OSCfg
Inter-AWSCfg
Latency (ms)
Secure
HTTPS
Insecure
537
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To address security and privacy in collaborative cloud 
development, this paper presented a practical concept with 
entity-level control of non-, anonymized-, and personally-
identifiable disclosure for multiple cloud configurations. It 
can further both collaboration and trust by giving individuals 
transparency and control and allowing them to adjust 
disclosure to the changing trust situation. The paper 
contributes a practical basis for illustrating issues, eliciting 
awareness, community discussion, and and may increase 
self-regulation 
and 
infrastructural 
privacy 
offerings. 
Organizations adopting such a privacy infrastructure show 
that they value and trust their employees, enabling them to 
reap mutual trust rewards. Also, one could envision, for 
instance, that an audited "we don't spy here" seal might help 
attract and retain developers.  
The evaluation showed its technical feasibility and 
practicality, requiring only minimal adaptation of the 
CoSEEEK CDE. The Trust Broker enables fine granularity 
access control to personal data. Performance was sufficient 
in private cloud configurations, while public cloud 
configurations using additional security and privacy 
mechanisms may require optimization to ensure fluid 
collaboration situational response. 
Limitations and risks include: extending privacy/trust 
support within and across collaboration layer tools, non-
detection/discovery of (un)intentionally unspecified/hidden 
sensors, data manipulation risk by datastead owners 
themselves, and provider-side access or manipulation risk. 
For service provider trust issues, building your own 
datastead cloud server site could be considered. 
Future work can consider the inclusion of various data 
provenance and data integrity mechanisms to mitigate 
manipulation risk. In the face of shifting privacy norms,  
infrastructural support for data confidentiality is needed to 
limit disclosure of distribution data beyond its original intent, 
like lifetime constraints, transitivity bounds, and claims-
based access [25]. Enhanced remote attestation mechanisms 
could be investigated. Since service privacy is also a broader 
issue, development and adoption of global industry service 
privacy standards combined with independent privacy audits 
involving all service layers would enhance trust of cloud-
based data acquisition and usage offerings.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author acknowledges Jürgen Drotleff for his 
conceptual, implementation, and measurement contributions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. I. Hashmi et al. (2011, August). Using the Cloud to 
Facilitate Global Software Development Challenges. In 
Global Software Engineering Workshop (ICGSEW), 2011 
Sixth IEEE International Conference on (pp. 70-77). IEEE. 
[2] R. L. Grossman, "The case for cloud computing," IT 
professional, 11(2), pp. 23-27. 
[3] M. A. Chauhan and M. A. Babar, "Cloud infrastructure for 
providing tools as a service: quality attributes and potential 
solutions," In Proceedings of the WICSA/ECSA 2012 
Companion Volume, ACM, 2012, pp. 5-13. 
[4] M. Singhal et al., "Collaboration in Multicloud Computing 
Environments: Framework and Security Issues, " Computer, 
46(2), IEEE Computer Society, New York, 2013, pp. 76-84. 
[5] G. D. Nord, T. F. McCubbins, and J. H. Nord, "E-monitoring 
in the workplace: privacy, legislation, and surveillance 
software," Communications of the ACM, 49(8), 2006, pp. 72-
77. 
[6] M. Parsons, "The challenge of multicore: a brief history of a 
brick wall," EPCC News, Issue 65, University of Edinburgh, 
2009, p. 4. 
[7] T. Brahm and F. Kunze, "The role of trust climate in virtual 
teams," Journal of Managerial Psychology, 27(6), 2012, pp. 
595-614. 
[8] A. C. Costa, R. A. Roe, and T. Taillieu, "Trust within teams: 
The relation with performance effectiveness," European 
journal of work and organizational psychology, 10(3), 2001, 
pp. 225-244. 
[9] T. DeMarco and T. R. Lister, Peopleware. Dorset House,  
1987. 
[10] D. McGregor, The Human Side of Enterprise. McGrawHill,  
New York, 1960. 
[11] B. Al-Ani and D. Redmiles, "Trust in distributed teams: 
Support through continuous coordination," IEEE Software, 
IEEE Computer Society, 26(6), 2009, pp. 35-40. 
[12] P. Louridas, "Up in the air: Moving your applications to the 
cloud," IEEE Software, 27(4), IEEE Computer Society, New 
York, 2010, pp. 6-11. 
[13] H. Takabi, J. B. Joshi, and G. J. Ahn, "Security and privacy 
challenges in cloud computing environments," IEEE Security 
& Privacy, IEEE Computer Society, 8(6), 2010, 24-31. 
[14] R. Martignoni, "Global sourcing of software development-a 
review of tools and services," In Fourth IEEE International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering (ICGSE 2009), 
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 303-308. 
[15] F. Liu et al., NIST cloud computing reference architecture. 
NIST Special Publication, 500, 292, 2011. 
[16] M. Hogan, F. Liu, A. Sokol, and J. Tong, Nist cloud 
computing standards roadmap. NIST Special Publication, 35, 
2011. 
[17] W. Itani, A. Kayssi, and A. Chehab, "Privacy as a service: 
Privacy-aware data storage and processing in cloud 
computing architectures," In Eighth IEEE International Conf. 
on 
Dependable, 
Autonomic 
and 
Secure 
Computing 
(DASC'09), IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 711-716.  
[18] D. Song, E. Shi, I. Fischer, and U. Shankar, "Cloud data 
protection for the masses, " Computer, 45(1), 2012, pp. 39-45.  
[19] M. Nabeel and E. Bertino, "Privacy-Preserving Fine-Grained 
Access Control in Public Clouds," Data Engineering, 21, 
2012. 
[20] D. M. Kienzle, M. C. Elder, D. Tyree, and J. Edwards-Hewitt, 
Security patterns repository version 1.0. DARPA, 2002.  
[21] M. Schumacher, E. Fernandez-Buglioni, D. Hybertson, F. 
Buschmann, and P. Sommerlad, Security Patterns: Integrating 
security and systems engineering. Wiley, 2006. 
[22] G. Grambow, R. Oberhauser, and M. Reichert, "Enabling 
Automatic Process-aware Collaboration Support in Software 
Engineering Projects," In Software and Data Technologies, 
Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 73-88. 
[23] P. M. Johnson, "Requirement and Design Trade-offs in 
Hackystat: An In-Process Software Engineering Measurement 
and Analysis System," Proc. 1st Intl. Symposium on Empirical 
Software Engineering and Measurement, 2007, pp. 81-90. 
[24] P. M. Johnson, C. A. Moore, J. Miglani, and S. Zhen, 
Hackystat design notes. 2001. 
[25] D. Reed, D. Gannon, and J. Larus, "Imagining the future: 
Thoughts on computing," Computer, 45(1), 2012, pp. 25-30. 
538
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

