A Systematic Mapping Study on Patient Data Privacy and Security for Software 
System Development 
 
 
Isma Masood 
Department of software engineering 
International Islamic University  
Islamabad, Pakistan 
ismamasood786@gmail.com 
Saad Zafar 
Faculty of Computing 
Riphah International University 
Islamabad, Pakistan 
 saadzafar@riu.edu.pk
 
 
Abstract-The exchange of Electronic Health Records (EHR) 
has increased threats to patient data privacy and security. The 
software systems developed for healthcare sector are required 
to explicitly address patient data privacy and security. A 
number of solutions have been proposed to incorporate these 
requirements into the software systems. However, there is no 
comprehensive study that synthesizes the different research 
initiatives according to any predetermined criteria. The main 
focus of this paper is to survey the various proposed solutions 
in the literature to incorporate patient data privacy and 
security into software systems. The proposed solutions are 
mapped against: (1) the software development stage for which 
the solution has been proposed, and (2) the established patient 
privacy and security principles. The existing literature has 
been surveyed using a systematic mapping study by phrasing 
two questions. In the mapping study, a total of 58 studies, 
dating from 2000 to 2011, were evaluated and mapped against 
the aforementioned categories. 
 
Keywords-Systematic mapping study; Electronic Health 
Records (EHR); Patient data privacy and security; Software 
system development. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Health information and medical records contain sensitive 
personal information including diagnosis and testing  
information along with person’s family history, genetic 
testing, history of diseases and treatments, history of drugs  
used, sexual orientation and practices, and testing for 
sexually transmitted diseases [1]. Nowadays, digitized health 
records are not only used for diagnosis and treatment but 
they are also used for other purposes like improving 
efficiency of the healthcare system, drive public policy 
development administration, conduct medical research, and 
to provide effective health services that can be tracked and 
evaluated [2,3]. 
Increasingly, the electronically shared information within 
healthcare sector is receiving new threats to patient data 
privacy and security. Threats to patient data privacy and 
security become a major cause of inaccuracies and improper 
disclosure of information, which threaten individual’s 
personal life and financial well being [3, 4]. Therefore, many 
laws and policies in different countries have been 
implemented to protect patient data privacy and security 
especially for EHR [5].  
To bridge the gap between different patient privacy rules, 
regulations and policies, Markle Foundation has proposed a 
set of principles under a Common Framework for uniform 
implementation of health information exchange across the 
health sector [9]. Markle Foundation works for advancement 
of health and national security through information and 
information technology in the United States of America. One 
of the major objectives of the Common Framework is to 
ensure patient privacy and seamless connectivity among 
various organizations related to the health sector. The 
privacy principles defined under the framework are 
described later in the paper.  
A number of initiatives have been taken to propose 
effective integration these policies into software systems. 
However, effective implementation of all the policies and 
principles related to patient privacy and security into 
software systems remains a challenge.  
Therefore, there is a room for new and improved 
solutions in this field. But before performing any new 
research, there is a need to synthesize the existing work in 
the area and to understand the need for improvement or to 
identify any new solution to an unresolved matter. Typically, 
a systematic literature review [SLR] is performed for this 
purpose. The idea of conducting SLR in the field of software 
engineering has been proposed by Kitchenham [6]. Often, a 
pre-requisite for conducting SLR is a mapping study, which 
is performed as an initial step to assess the feasibility of a 
complete SLR. In this paper we have conducted a mapping 
study as we could not find any SLR on the proposed 
solutions related to the Patient Data Privacy and Security in 
the field of software engineering. For this mapping study, we 
have followed the guidelines published in [7, 8]. 
We have presented the results of mapping study to 
identify available solutions on patient data privacy and 
security for software system development and have 
categorized 
these 
solutions 
against: 
(1) 
software 
development stages in software development cycle, and, (2) 
the well established policy principles for patient data privacy 
and security presented in [9]. Specifically, our mapping 
study addressed the following research questions (1) which 
solutions of patient data privacy and security have been 
166
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

proposed for software system development? (2) Can we 
categorize these solutions using the Markle Foundation’s 
Common Framework? 
 In Section II, we have described our systematic mapping 
process; in Section III, we provide explicit answers to our 
research questions; the discussion of the results is provided 
in Section IV; conclusion and the future work are given in 
the last section. 
II. 
THE SYSTEMATIC  MAPPING  PROCESS 
For our mapping study, we following the guidelines 
provided in [7, 8]. Accordingly, our mapping study was 
conducted in three stages. In Stage 1, we define the scope, 
the search strategy and the selection criteria. In the second 
stage primary studies were selected applying the search 
strategy and the selection criteria. Lastly, in Stage 3, the 
selected studies are classified into the different categories. 
A. Stage 1: Defining Scope, search strategy and selection 
criteria 
We define the scope of the study as follows. The 
population of the study is selected as the set of articles 
addressing patient data privacy and security. As intervention, 
we selected any patient data privacy and security solution 
proposed for any of the software development cycle (e.g., 
requirements engineering, design, testing, etc.). The outcome 
of our study is a mapping of selected solutions to the patient 
data privacy principles found in [9]. Our search string for 
conducting the research was: 
 
Patient AND Data AND (Privacy OR Security) 
 
The research sources selected for our study were IEEE 
Digital Library, ACM Digital Library, Science Direct and 
Springerlink. To select relevant studies, we used the 
following inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
Inclusion Criteria: A study contribution related to any 
stage of the software system development lifecycle. The 
study should also discuss at least one or more than one 
principles of patient data policy. For this purpose we read 
abstract, conclusion, introduction, or the full paper (if 
required). 
Exclusion Criteria: Any study not related to the domain 
of software engineering, patient data privacy or security is 
not selected. The studies related to patient data privacy and 
security 
for 
images, 
sensor 
network 
and 
wireless 
transmission are also not included. 
B. Stage 2. Selecting primary studies 
In the first iteration, the search string was used at each 
resource. All references along with their abstracts were 
downloaded in Endnote [11] reference library. At this stage, 
we downloaded 4,670 references. In the second iteration, 
abstract of all reference were read and relevant studies which 
explicitly addressed the patient data privacy or security with 
contribution towards software system development were 
selected and placed in another library of selected papers. In 
this iteration, 120 studies were selected. We selected 93 
papers from IEEE, 6 papers from ACM, 17 papers from 
Science Direct and 4 papers from Springerlink. In the third 
iteration, full texts of these 120 studies were downloaded. 
We read all the articles one by one and applied the inclusion 
and exclusion criteria and finally selected 51 studies in our 
third iterative phase. We placed our 12 doubtful studies in 
the pending folder. In the fourth iteration, we discussed these 
doubtful studies and decided to accept 7 studies and to reject 
5 studies. The breakdown of the results from each of the 
source is presented in Table 1, whereas Table 2 shows the 
distribution of our four iterative phases and the number of 
studies which were retained in each phase. In Table 3, we 
summarize the most relevant publication channels. 
 
TABLE 1.  NO. OF STUDIES AT EACH RESOURCE 
 
Resource 
No. of  studies 
No. of 
selected 
studies 
Percentage 
IEEE 
4,540 
44  
0.96% 
ACM 
74 
6 
8.1% 
Science Direct 
40 
8 
20% 
Springerlink 
16 
0 
0% 
Total 
4,670 
58 
1.2% 
 
TABLE 2.  NO. OF STUDIES AT ITERATIONS 
 
1st  iteration 
2nd iteration 
3rd iteration 
4th iteration 
4,670 
120 
51 
58 
 
TABLE 3.  MOST RELEVENT PUBLICATION CHANNELS 
 
Acronym 
Type of  publication 
Percent 
International Journal of 
medical informatics 
Journal 
13.7% 
Information Technology 
in  
Biomedicine 
Journal 
6.8% 
CCSW 
Workshop 
5% 
ICBECS 
Conference 
3.4% 
  
The IEEE Digital Library had yielded the most number 
of papers (4,670), followed by ACM (74), Science Direct 
(40), and Springerlink (16). It is noteworthy that the most 
relevant studies were found in Science Direct (20%) and the 
least were found in Springerlink (0%). ACM had 8.1% and 
IEEE Digital Library had 0.96% relevant studies, 
respectively. Most of the relevant studies were found in 
International Journal of Medical Informatics (13.7%). This 
was followed by Information Technology in Biomedicine 
(6.8%). The rest of the relevant studies were found in two 
conferences: Workshop on cloud computing security 
(CCSW) (5%) and International Conference on Biomedical 
Engineering and Computer Science (ICBECS) (3.4%).  
As part of our inclusion criteria, we included studies 
from the year 2000 to 2011. For the year 2000 we did not 
find any relevant study. However, from the years 2001 to 
2008 the number of relevant studies increased steadily with a 
sharp increase in the year 2008 (frequency=17). The only 
exception to the trend is the year 2009 where the total 
number was reduced to only 4.  In 2010 the number was 
again increased to 10 studies showing a positive trend. Only 
one study was found to be relevant in the first quarter of 
167
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

2011. This trend of number relevant studies per year is given 
in Table 4. 
 
TABLE 4.  PERCENTAGE OF STUDIES AT EACH YEAR  
 
Years 
Relevant 
Studies 
Selected Studies 
Percentage 
2000 
2 
0 
0% 
2001 
5 
2 
3.4% 
2002 
6 
1 
1.7% 
2003 
8 
3 
5.1% 
2004 
8 
3 
5.1% 
2005 
10 
3 
5.1% 
2006 
10 
4 
6.8% 
2007 
23 
8 
13.7% 
2008 
25 
17 
29.3% 
2009 
30 
4 
6.8% 
2010 
23 
10 
17.2% 
2011 
22 
1 
1.7% 
Total 
172 
58 
 
 
C.  Stage 3. Classifying selected Studies 
In the next stage, we divided our studies according into 
three categories. In the first category, we classified the 
studies according to the research approach used in the 
selected primary studies. We divide the research approaches 
according to the classification proposed by Weiringa et al. 
[10]. The validation research is used for those novel 
techniques that have not been implemented and are validated 
through experiments in a lab-like environment. The 
evaluation research is used to evaluate the techniques that 
have been implemented in practice. This research type 
explores how well the technique has been implemented. In 
the solution proposal either a novel solution is proposed or 
an existing solution is extended significantly. The 
philosophical papers propose either a conceptual framework 
to structure concepts into a new taxonomy. On the other 
hand opinion papers express personal opinion of the authors 
about a technique and the experience papers explain the 
experience of the authors of how a technique has been 
implemented in practice. 
 
 
Figure 1: Mapping of studies according to research types 
 
 
TABLE 5.  RESEARCH TYPE AND SOFTWARE DEV.PHASE FACETS 
 
Context 
Solution 
Validation 
Evaluation 
Total 
Req. 
1 
1 
2 
4 
Design 
32 
4 
1 
37 
Imp. 
16 
1 
0 
17 
Ver. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Maint. 
0 
0 
0 
0 
Total 
49 
6 
3 
58 
 
Table 5 shows the distribution of research type facet of 
the selected studies. An overwhelming majority of research 
approaches in the selected primary studies proposed a new 
solution (f=49). The next approach used the most was 
validation research (f=6) followed by evaluation research 
(f=3). However, we did not find any study that could be 
classified into any of the other research type categories. The 
results of this classification are summarized in Figure 1.  
We also classified the studies on the basis of different 
stages of software development. Specifically, we grouped the 
software development stages into: requirements, design, 
implementation, 
verification, 
and 
maintenance. 
The 
breakdown of the classification of the selected studies is 
given in Table 5. The majority of selected primary studies 
addressed the Design phase of the software development 
(f=37), followed by the Implementation phase (f=17), while 
some of the studies were classified under the Requirements 
phase (f=4). We did not find any study related to software 
Verification and Maintenance phases. 
Our next categorization was based on the Markle 
Foundation’s privacy principles [9]. The first principle of (1) 
Openness and Transparency mandates that there should be 
an overall policy of openness regarding personal data. The 
individuals should be aware of the nature stored data, its 
location and its access control policy. The (2) Purpose 
Specification and Minimization principle requires that the 
data collection purpose should be defined at the time of 
collection and its use should be limited to the intended 
purpose. Under the (3) Collection Limitation principle the 
personal health information must only be collected lawfully 
and with the knowledge and consent of the concerned 
individual. The (4) Use Limitation principle states that 
personal data must not be disclosed, made available or used 
in any manner other than the specified purposes. The (5) 
Individual Participation and Control principle requires that 
individuals have the right of access and control over their 
stored personal information. The (6) Data Integrity and 
Quality states that only the relevant data is stored and that 
the data is always accurate, complete, and current. The (7) 
Security Safeguards and Controls requires there should be 
reasonable security safeguards against the risks of loss of 
data or unauthorized access. The accountability of entities 
responsible for keeping and maintaining the personal data 
according to stated principles is covered under the (8) 
Accountability and Oversight principle. Lastly, the (9) 
Remedies principle states that there are adequate legal and 
financial remedies to address any security breaches or 
privacy violations. 
Table 6 shows the distribution of studies according to the 
aforementioned privacy principles. As reflected in the data 
168
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

shown in the table, we found many single studies that 
address multiple privacy principles. The most coverage was 
given to the Use Limitation principle (f=38). This was 
followed equally by the Individual Participation and Control, 
and Security Safeguard and Control principles (f=24). After 
them the most covered principle was Data Integrity and 
Quality principle (f=16), followed by the Purpose 
Specification Principle (f=14). The next principle covered 
the most was the Accountability and Oversight principle 
(f=13), whereas, the Remedies and Collection Limitation had 
the least coverage with a frequency of 3 and 1, respectively. 
 
TABLE 6. CLASSIFICATION OF STUDIES ACCORDING TO 
PRIVACY PRINCIPLES 
 
Principle 
Req. 
Design 
Impl. 
Total 
Openness 
2 
5 
1 
8 
Purpose Specification 
1 
9 
4 
14 
Collection Limitation 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Use Limitation 
1 
23 
14 
38 
Individual Participation 
and Control 
1 
17 
6 
24 
Data Integrity and 
Quality 
1 
13 
2 
16 
Security Safeguards and 
Control 
2 
17 
5 
24 
Accountability and 
Oversight 
2 
9 
2 
13 
Remedies 
0 
2 
1 
3 
 
III. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
Based on the above data, we now answer our two 
research questions. 
RQ1: Which solutions of patient data privacy and 
security 
have 
been 
proposed 
for 
software 
system 
development? 
In our mapping study we found 58 relevant primary 
studies. Out of these studies 63% of the studies were related 
to the Software Design. While 27% of the studies 
contributed towards Software Implementation and only 6% 
aimed at Software Requirements. Therefore, we can 
conclude that the most research is being conducted on how 
to effectively design software systems related to the 
requirements of patient data privacy and security. Similarly, 
there is also significant focus in the research community on 
how to effectively implement the patient data privacy and 
security requirements. Surprisingly, much less studies are 
focused on requirements analysis and specification phase of 
software development (see Figure 2). 
RQ2: Can we categorize these solutions using the Markle 
Foundation’s Privacy Principles [9]? 
The mapping of selected studies against the Markle 
Foundation’s Privacy Principles is given in Figure 3. As 
discussed earlier, a single study was often mapped against 
multiple principles. But we found the solutions in the studies 
mapped reasonably well against the privacy principle. It is 
important to note that the Use Limitation was covered in 
41.4% of the studies, followed by Individual Participation 
and Security Control principles with 41.4% studies. The 
other two principles covered in the selected studies were 
Data Integrity and Quality, and Purpose Specification with 
27.6% and Purpose Specification 24.1%, respectively. The 
coverage of rest of the principles was not very significant.  
 
 
 
Figure 2: Mapping of studies according to software 
development context 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Mapping of studies against privacy principles 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The amount of personal information stored and 
exchanged by the health information systems is increasing 
by the day. With the increase in the volume of data the 
concern about the patient data privacy and security is also 
169
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

increasing. The data stored about the patient include 
sensitive information like history of diseases and treatments, 
history of drugs used, sexual orientation and practices, 
results of sexually transmitted diseases, etc. As a result, a 
number of rules, regulations and best practices have been 
proposed to ensure that the stored data does not violate 
individual’s privacy and that the data is never use 
inappropriately. Consequently, there has been a steady 
increase in research community to ensure that the software 
systems deployed must effectively integrate all the 
requirements related to patient data privacy and security.  
The motivation behind our study was to investigate the 
feasibility for conducting a complete Systematic Literature 
Review. Here we cover the breadth of patient data privacy 
and security presented in the literature. The subsequent SLR 
studies can investigate the depth based on the results 
presented in our work. 
The steady increase in the related primary studies from 
the year 2001 to 2010, with a few possible exceptions, 
indicates a growing interest in this significantly important 
research area (see Table 4). Similarly, the need of 
implementation of patient data and security requirements is 
reflected from the fact that most of the selected studies are 
concerned about the Design and Implementation of the 
privacy related requirements and less attention is paid to 
critically important phases of Requirements Analysis and 
Specification, Verification and Maintenance. This notion is 
further reinforced by the fact that the most common research 
approach used in the primary studies is Solution Proposal, 
with much less studies on validation and evaluation research. 
Likewise, we did not find any study based on experience 
reports, philosophical papers, or opinion papers. 
Perhaps, not surprisingly the most importance is given to 
the Use Limitation, Individual Participation and Security 
Control principles. However, less coverage is given to the 
rest of the privacy principles, without which any software 
system cannot effectively implement a complete set of 
patient data privacy and security requirements. 
We identify the following two limitations of our study: 
(1) some studies may have been missed due to the diverse 
use of the terms used in the search string; and (2) studies 
published in English language were selected in the search.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, we have presented initial findings on 
solutions available for patient data privacy and security to 
develop software system. On this topic, we found 58 papers 
published in the years from 2000 to the first quarter of 2011. 
We have mapped these solutions against principles of 
privacy policy to cover all aspects of patient data privacy and 
security. A large number of studies focused on Software 
Design as compared to Software Implementation and 
Software Requirements while, no study found on testing and 
maintenance. The Use Limitation principle along with 
Individual Participation and Control, and Security Safeguard 
and Control had most coverage in the selected studies. Our 
future work includes performing in-depth Systematic 
Literature Review on various aspects of Patient Data Privacy 
and Security identified in this study. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] U S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment,” Protecting 
Privacy in Computerized Medical Information” OTA-TCT 
576. Washington, DC, US Government Printing Office, Sept 
1993. 
[2] A. Appari and M.E. Johnson., “Information Security and 
Privacy 
in 
Healthcare: 
Current 
State 
of 
Research.”International Journal Internet and Enterprise 
Management, vol. 6, pp. 279-314, Oct. 2010. 
[3] L.Gostin., “Health Care Information and Protection Privacy : 
Ethical and Legal Considerations”  in ETATS-UNIS, 1997, pp.  
683-690. 
[4] C. H. Liu, Y. F. Chung, T. S Chen, and S. D Wang, “The 
Enhancement 
of 
Security 
in 
Healthcare 
Information 
Systems.” International Journal of Medical  System”,pp. 1-
16, Nov. 2010. 
[5] M.Eichelberg, T. Aden, J. Riesmeier, A. Dogac, and G. B. 
Lalecil., ”A Survey and Analysis of Electronic Healthcare 
Records Standards. ”Journal ACM  Computing Surveys, 
vol.37, pp. 277-315, Dec. 2005. 
[6] B. Kitchenham and S.Charters., “Guidelines for performing 
systematic literature reviews in software engineering”, 
Technical Report, EBSE-2007-01, Keele University, 2007. 
[7] K. Petersen, R. Feldt, S. Mujtaba, and M. Mattsson., 
“Systematic mapping studies in software engineering.”, in 
12th International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment 
in Software Engineering (EASE), pp. 71-80 , June. 2008. 
[8] W. Afzal, R. Torkar, and R. Feldt., “A systematic mapping 
study on non-functional search-based software testing”, in 
20th International Conference on Software Engineering and 
Knowledge Engineering (SEKE), 2008. 
[9] Markle Foundation, Connecting for Health Common 
Framework. 
January 
10, 
2011. 
<www.connectingforhealth.org>  
[10] R.Wieringa, 
N.Maiden, 
N.Mead, 
and 
C.Rolland, 
“Requirements 
engineering 
paper 
classification 
and 
evaluation criteria: a proposal and a discussion”, Journal 
Requirements Engineering . vol. 11, pp. 102–107, Dec. 2005. 
[11] T.Reuters,”EndNote-Your smater refrence assistant”Internet. 
June 5, 2010. <http://www.endnote.com/> 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
170
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

