 Business Architecture for a SME: A Case Study of a Manufacturing Firm in 
Mexico 
 
Alicia Valdez  
Research Center 
University Autonomous of Coahuila 
Coahuila, Mexico 
aliciavaldez@uadec.edu.mx  
 
 
Carlos Vega, Elias Olivares, Juan Perez 
Research Center 
UPAEP 
Puebla, Mexico 
carlosarturo.vega@upaep.mx,elias.olivares@upaep.mx, 
juancarlos.perez@upaep.mx  
 
 
 
Abstract— Enterprise architecture is a subject that has 
increased its importance in the Small and Medium Enterprises 
in the manufacturing sector of the industry in Mexico. The 
global competitiveness of the markets has influenced the 
adoption of methodologies that support the strategic alignment 
of the processes with the goals and strategic objectives of the 
firms. The components of the business architecture like 
mission, vision, strategic objectives, products, organizational 
structure, business processes, clients and geographic region, 
were collected from the firm of the case study for the design of 
the architecture. As a result of the practical application, an 
implementation model has been created and four strategic 
objectives were established for to improve productivity and 
competitiveness. This paper is a result of the research project 
of analysis, design and implementing business architecture in a 
medium size manufacturing company like partial architecture 
of an enterprise using ontologies for representing the core 
elements of the business architecture; the study presents 
clearly the importance of the strategic planning for the analysis 
and the detection of the main faults for the success of the 
achievement of goals and objectives. 
 
Keywords-Business 
architecture; 
SME; 
Enterprise 
architecture; Key processes 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Five major markets are emerging in the world, namely,  
China, India, Southeast Asia, Latin America and Eastern 
Europe, where global manufacturing companies have 
considered to make investments, because these regions are 
rapidly growing economies with great potential for business 
[1]. 
In these regions, the Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SMEs) are important in the development of the economy as 
they have a great capacity of generating jobs.  In Mexico,  
99% of the companies are SMEs, ( for every 10 employees, 
7 of these are working on SMEs) [2]; the study “Impact 
Evaluation of SME Programs in Latin America and the 
Caribbean”,  developed by the World Bank has mentioned 
some of the problems faced by SMEs, among which are [3].   
 
Access to financing; 
 
Weak management capacity; 
 
Lack of ability to exploit economies of scale in 
production; 
 
Poor information about market opportunities, and 
 
New 
technologies 
and 
methods 
of 
work 
organization. 
The Enterprise Architecture (EA) is a strategic solution 
to improve the capabilities of these companies and respond 
quickly to the challenges, either business related or 
technological which is today’s markets demand. 
EA  is also a way that aims to provide companies with a 
framework for the use of information on business processes 
in ways that support the business strategy [4].  Orantes, 
Gutierrez, and Lopez have mentioned that the company 
should be in a constantly evolving, redefining business 
processes,  to achieve business process architecture, which 
is the basis for subsequent architectures [5]. 
The EA is the instrument that establishes the structure of 
the company, is a conceptual model of the business and 
information technology solutions (IT), seen as a set of 
pieces that involves processes, and  functions that works 
together in a coherent and well defined way [6]. 
Some authors consider that SMEs have lesser tendencies 
to use IT for strategic purposes [7], and the success of 
architectures 
implementation 
depends 
on 
consistent 
objectives between IT strategy and business strategy [8]. 
The Business Architecture (BA) is a partial architecture 
of the EA, where the business is defined, the organizational 
structure is documented, and the business processes are 
identified. 
 BA analyses the business model relying on strategic 
planning with their areas of interest [9]. 
In this case study, an analysis was performed to 
establish:  What key processes in manufacturing SMEs are 
included in the EA design, as well as, the practices and 
business modeling tools that use these companies to develop 
EA; with the objective of supporting them in increased 
productivity 
and 
competitiveness. 
A 
proposal 
was 
414
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

developed that included EA standards, software tools, and 
methods [10]. 
The software tools [11] can provide support for this 
particular type of companies, that can be easy to use and 
implement to help them in their process of establishing 
enterprise architectures, while developing, a parallel process 
of Strategic Planning to support in setting goals and 
strategic objectives. 
The organization of this paper is as follows; first section 
is mentioning the concepts and methods of the EA; the 
second section shows the information required for the 
business architecture from the company; finally, the 
implementation of the solution derived from the analysis is 
shown. 
II. 
CONTENT 
The EA started as management information systems in 
the early 60's in the United States Company International 
Business Machines (IBM) by “Information Systems, 
Control and Planning Staff" (ISCM)  area. 
 The methodology known as Business Systems Planning 
(BSP) was considered one of the methodologies that started 
the EA. 
 John Zachman, who worked at ISCM,  developed a 
framework for defining the architectures of information 
systems, subsequently became the "Zachman Framework" 
[12]; one of the perspectives was the business model of the 
company. 
In 1994, the Department of Defense of the United States 
of America [13] created the Technical Architectural 
Framework for Information Management (TA-FIM),  based 
on Zachman framework. 
 In 1996, the Congress of the United States of America 
passed a law called "Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996", which 
specifies that federal agencies should improve the efficiency 
of investment on information technologies, establishing the 
Council of Managers of information Technology (CIO's 
Council) group, which originated the Federal Enterprise 
Architecture Framework (FEAF) [14]. 
TAFIM was withdrawn by the Department of Defense 
and the association donated to The Open Group, who later 
developed The Open Group Architecture Framework 
(TOGAF)  standard [15]. 
TOGAF is an enterprise architecture methodology and 
framework, used in organizations to improve business 
efficiency [16], based on the Architecture Development 
Method (ADM); ADM  is divided into 9 phases, an 
overview of the architecture describing how the new 
capacity going to align business goals and strategic 
objectives with IT. Fig. 1 shows the phases of the ADM 
Method.  
In the firsts two phases, preliminary and “A”, the 
principles of the architecture and the architecture vision are 
defined. 
In the “B” phase, the BA with the fundamental business 
organization and its goals, objectives, business processes, 
functions, 
services, 
human 
resources, 
organizational 
structure, the principles governing its design and evolution 
are analyzed.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Architecture Development Method Phases 
 
The metal mechanic industry is representative of the 
northern of Mexico, which provides raw material to the 
automotive cluster with some important firms like General 
Motors, Chrysler, and other important companies. 
The suppliers of the cluster are mainly SMEs; this case 
was developed in SME of the metal mechanic industry and 
the flow of the information of the study case is shown in 
Fig. 2.  
Beginning with the collection of the information 
required, this information was captured in the ontology 
editor; from the editor were obtained reports and maps, and  
flowcharts of the processes were built; after these activities, 
the design of the BA was realized, and finally, the 
implementation of the design. 
The results showed some opportunity areas for 
improvement, in the company.  
 
A. Information of the Business Architecture 
 
The BA involves some elements of the company like 
mission, vision, objectives, goals, values and policies, 
business processes, procedures and functions, organizational 
structure, situational analysis, customers, markets, products 
and long, medium and short strategies. 
Tables I and II show the data of the BA elements,  
processes like distribution, finance, human resources, 
production, quality, sales and marketing, information 
technology, and  product development.  
Each process has a set of activities; for example, the 
product development includes production cycle program, 
cutting, marking, machining and forming of steel plates, and 
415
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

profiles. All processes were collected from the company and 
recorded in software tools. 
 
  
Figure 2. Flowchart of the case study 
 
This information served as base for the next 
architectures, application and technology, where each 
process are linked with a software application and 
technology that supported it. 
 
TABLE I. DATA FOR THE BUSINESS ARCHITECTURE 
 
Business 
Architecture 
Description 
 
Mission 
“Serve society, customers, 
employees, suppliers, be 
the best option for all”. 
 
Vision 
“Being a quality supplier 
of metal products, broaden 
participation in national 
and international markets” 
 
Values 
Responsibility, loyalty, 
respect and quality 
production. 
 
Objectives 
 
Improve the relationship 
between customers and 
suppliers. 
Minimize operation failure. 
Maximize the performance 
of the raw material. 
Have better management 
control. 
Improve planning 
processes. 
Investment plan in 
machinery and 
equipment. 
 
  
The organizational structure of the company has 4 levels 
corresponding to the position of the Chief Executive Officer 
(CEO) and sales manager for the level 1; head of production 
machining, head buyer, finance officer, and human 
resources manager for level 2; machining supervisor, pailer 
supervisor, warehouse manager, billing, and quality control 
for level 3; machining operators and pailer operators for 
level 4. 
The customers belong to the local market of the northern 
of Mexico with Altos Hornos de Mexico, S.A. (AHMSA), 
TAKATA Industries, General Motors Company, Chrysler, 
and other companies of the metal mechanic industry. 
The market is regional; the firm can compete in global 
markets adopting a strategy of certification in quality 
processes. The products of manufacturing are: General 
forklift parts, rotatory joints, various pieces of mechanical 
equipments, and assembly using Computer Numerical 
Control (CNC) machines. 
The first strategy is to manufacture products with high 
quality that markets demands, the support of the IT can 
permit to reduce costs, and increase the competitiveness and 
the productivity. 
With the data obtained from the company, the next step 
is entering data in the ontology software; for this case, we 
use the free software Protégé Ontology Editor 3.4 [17], 
developed by the Stanford University; in this software, we 
can have one super class called EA with some subclasses 
like 
business 
architecture, 
information 
architecture, 
applications architecture, and technology architecture.  
The main components of the BA class are shown in Fig. 
3, these are: 
 
TABLE II. PROCESSES OF THE COMPANY 
 
 Company area 
Processes 
 
Distribution 
Finished products 
delivery 
 
Finance 
Management 
company's finances 
 
Human 
Resources 
Personnel 
administration 
Detect training needs 
of business areas, 
especially productive 
areas for develop 
entrepreneurial 
training program 
Investment 
Administration 
Investments of the 
company 
 
IT 
Provision of  IT 
support for company's 
business processes 
 
Quality 
Manufacture that 
meets production 
specifications  
Testing and inspection 
using ultrasonic 
methods or industrial 
inspection 
Sales and 
Marketing 
Management 
customers. 
Customer service 
Continuous 
communication with 
customers to identify 
needs and complaints.  
Stock 
Register the inputs and 
outputs of goods and 
raw materials. 
Suppliers 
management. 
Product 
development 
Program production 
cycles 
Cutting, marking, 
machining and 
forming of steel plates 
and profiles 
 
  
 
416
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Objective (strategic alignment); 
 
Principle (production requires all processes); 
 
Domain (distribution, sales, quality, etc); 
 
Role (CEO, chief of sales, pailer operator); 
 
Capability 
(planning 
sales, 
machinery 
operator); 
 
Product (rotatory joints, machining),  and 
 
 Process (design products, sales management). 
 
The BA objective is the strategic alignment between 
business 
goals 
and 
IT represented 
like 
“Strategic 
Alignment.” 
The business domains are all areas and functions of the 
company, like distribution, finance, sales, and others.  
The principle business is “Production requires all 
processes.” Business roles are performed by people and the 
business process are all the processes represented in Table 
II, required for the company operation. 
The graphical representation of the all BA components 
is the link between the collected data and the software tool. 
 
Figure 3.  BA Design 
 
Fig. 4 displays the customer’s process with roles and 
capabilities, after entering data in the ontology editor. 
The information of the editor is sent to a graphical tool 
[11], functioning like repository, which is an open source 
software tool for the management of AE, this tool is 
Essential Architecture Manager 3.0 [18], requires some 
prerequisites software like Apache  Tomcat 5.5 or above, 
Java Runtime 1.5 or above, Graphviz 2.26,  and the Protégé 
Ontology Editor 3.4 or above.  
This set of tools creates a graphical environment for 
representing the EA, and each of the partial architectures, 
like BA. Fig. 4 shows partially one process with the 
components of the BA for this process. 
All the processes were represented in the software tools 
for purpose of completing the BA for subsequent 
architectures. 
 
B. Implementation model 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Example of process in software tool 
 
The implementation model is centered on the client, the 
material resources and equipment, organization, human 
resources, logistics, and all that the company needs for 
working in his goals and objectives; so the circle represents 
the firm, the architectures are around the circle, and are 
applied to all processes, for to identify strategic changes 
with assessment of options tending to produce a change 
plan. Fig. 5 shows the implementation model described. 
Some components of the BA were redesigned as a result 
of the analysis for implementation  updating: 
 
Mission; 
 
Vision; 
 
Strategic objectives, and 
 
Organizational structure. 
 
Figure 5. Implementation model diagram 
 
417
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Considering full knowledge of the manufactured 
products, 
identifying 
potential 
markets, 
and 
their 
competitive advantage, and the vision determines the 
strategic direction of the company. Four strategic objectives 
were established:  
Strategic 
objective 
1: 
Increase 
production 
and 
competitiveness to achieve better sales and increase 
company revenue.  
Strategic objective 2: Update, acquire, and implement 
the technology required for increased production and 
competitiveness.  
Strategic objective 3: Update recruitment processes and 
training of existing staff to increase integration and 
productivity.  
Strategic objective 4: Secure your position with existing 
customers, increase local sales and find new customers in 
global markets. 
Two areas from the organizational structure were added: 
Human Resources and Logistics; the justification was that 
the firm does not have human resources area for the training 
of the employees, and logistics are required for the 
management of the resources from the beginning of the 
value chain to final assembly. 
Other needs identified like the strengthening of the 
market position, the total quality culture, and the training of 
human resources to achieve improved organizational 
climate and consequently on the productivity of the entire 
company. 
Current management skills are not sufficient for the next 
five or ten years; it requires that managers, although have 
professionals studies in engineering, must be kept updated 
on the latest management techniques.  
Competition modernizes its production techniques and 
new companies emerge, so the upgrading of equipment and 
technological infrastructure is vital to the long-term 
performance of the company. 
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The process of developing a BA in a SME in metal 
mechanic industry in Mexico reflects the needs of this 
industry sector, to upgrade their management skills to 
compete in global markets. 
BA must be focused on the importance of the technology 
strategy aligned with the business strategy, to gain 
competitive advantage from the use of IT, to enable them to 
be inserted into global markets with a clear plan. 
This project helped to meet the needs of SMEs 
companies to propose affordable solutions that make 
business management resources and technology to solve 
problems. 
BA can be represented on a business ontology designed 
especially to support the structuring of architectural maps of 
the company and its relationships with strategic objectives. 
It is necessary to comprehensively conceptualize 
strategic planning of the company to continue with the 
design of the ontology in the subsequent phases as 
application and technology. 
The contribution of the paper focuses on the approach to 
the problems of the company, with the help of business 
architecture, software tools, and the implementation model. 
The BA supports the strategic alignment between 
objectives, goals, and business processes. 
In the future, this industry will be supplier of the 
aerospace industry in the country, and would be integrated to 
a more specialized chain with greater scope in the domestic 
and international markets. 
This research project was developed in one year for a 
doctoral dissertation in Strategic Planning. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Deloitte T., ”Innovation in emerging markets 2007 annual 
study”, http://www.deloitte.com/assets  [retrieved: 06-2013].  
[2] Secretary of Economy, ”SMEs news”,http://economia.gob.mx/ 
[retrieved:  04-2013]. 
[3] G. Lopez and H. Tan, “Impact evaluation of SME programs in 
Latin America and the Caribbean”, World Bank, Washington, 
USA,  2010,  pp.  4-10. 
[4] S. Spewak and S. Hill, ”Enterprise architecture planning, 
developing a blueprint for data, application and technology”, 
Wiley publisher,  USA, 1992, pp.  1-6. 
[5] S. 
Orantes, 
A. 
Gutierrez 
and 
M. 
Lopez,”Enterprise 
architectures: Business processes management vs Services 
oriented architectures, are they related?”, Redalyc, vol. 13, pp. 
136-144,  2009. 
[6] W. Bruls, M. Steenbergen, R. Foorthius, R. Bos, and S. 
Brinkkemper, “Domain architectures as an instrument to 
refine enterprise architecture”, Communication of the 
association for information systems, vol. 27, pp. 517-540, 
2010. 
[7] B. Goh, “Applying the strategic alignment model to business 
and ICT strategies of Singapore’s small and medium sized 
architecture, 
engineering 
and 
construction 
enterprises”, 
Construction management and economics, vol. 25, pp. 157-
169,  02-2007. 
[8] H. Voordijk, A. Leuven and, A. Laan, ”Enterprise resource 
planning in a large construction firm: implementation 
analysis”, Construction management and economics, vol. 21, 
pp.  511-521, 2003. 
[9] S. Spewak, “Enterprise architecture planning”, Wiley 
publisher,  2000, pp. 85-88. 
[10] J. Schekkerman, “Enterprise architecture good practices guide: 
How to manage the enterprise architecture practice”, Traffod 
publisher,  2008, pp. 15-20. 
[11] D. Rice, “Review of essential architecture manager 1.0”, 
Journal of enterprise architecture, vol. 1,  pp. 1-7,  05-2009. 
[12] J. Zachman, “A framework for information systems 
architecture”, IBM sytems journal, vol  26, pp.  276-292, 1987. 
[13] Departament of Defense of the United States of America, 
”DoD 
architecture 
framework 
version 
2.0”, 
2009,  
http://dodcio.defense.gov/dodaf20.aspx 
[retrieved: 
05-
2013]. 
[14] R. Sessions, “A comparison of the top four enterprise 
architecture 
methodologies”, 
MSDN 
Library, 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb466232.aspx 
[retrieved:  03-2013]. 
[15] The Open Group, ”TOGAF”,http://www.opengroup.org/togaf/ 
[retrieved:  05-2013]. 
418
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[16] The Open Group,”Management overview, in ADM basic 
principles,http://www.togaf.info/  [retrieved:  05-2013]. 
[17] Stanford University, “Tutorial documentation of protégé”, 
http://protege.stanford.edu/doc/users.html#tutorials [retrieved: 
05-2013]. 
[18] Essential 
project,”The 
Essential 
Project”, 
2013, 
http://www.enterprise-architecture.org/  [retrieved: 06-2013]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
419
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

