An Ontology-Driven Framework for Security and Resiliency
in Cyber Physical Systems
Rohith Yanambaka Venkata, Patrick Kamongi and Krishna Kavi
University of North Texas
Denton, Texas-76203
Email: [ry0080, pk0158, krishna.kavi]@unt.edu
Abstract—Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) can be described as an
integration of computation and physical processes, where embed-
ded systems monitor and control physical processes. Advances in
technologies, such as networking and processors have enabled the
adoption of CPS in safety-critical systems like smart grids and
autonomous vehicles. Cyber-attacks, as the name suggests, target
components in the cyber space with the intention of disrupting
the functionality of the physical components. In this paper,
we present an Ontology-driven framework that captures the
relationship between cyber and physical systems to semantically
reason about the impact of cyber-attacks on the physical systems.
We demonstrate the idea using a reference Red-Light Violation
Warning (RLVW) Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I) network. Our
proposed Ontology provides the ability to identify vulnerabilities
in cyber systems that may impact a given physical system,
enumerate potential mitigation steps and help design resilient
physical systems that can meet their design speciﬁcations despite
the occurrence of a cyber-attack.
Keywords–Cyber Physical Systems; CPS; Security; Resiliency;
Ontology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) are systems that involve
coordination between two components: cyber (or computa-
tional) and physical systems. Ashibani et al. [1] describe
CPS as a combination of tightly integrated physical processes
(such as actuation), networking and computation. The physical
processes are monitored and controlled by cyber subsystems
through network interconnects.
The proliferation of CPS has gained increased traction with
the advances in networking and embedded system technologies
like system-on-chip (SoC) and wireless transmitters. With the
increased capability and complexity in CPS, they have found
application in domains such as smart cities, transportation, and
power grids. However, this growth has come at the cost of
potential cyber-attacks [2]. Often, security and resiliency are
either not paid the attention they deserve or are disregarded
altogether. As a result, cyber-attacks on CPS are becoming in-
creasingly prevalent, as evidenced by recent attacks targetting
critical infrastructure:
•
A cyber-attack in 2016 crippled a power grid in
Ukraine, affecting at least 100,000 people. The at-
tackers used software-based attacks to shut down the
Remote Terminal Units (RTUs) that control circuit
breakers, causing a power outage for about an hour
[3].
•
A German steel mill was the target of a cyber-physical
attack in 2014, when malicious actors took control
of the mill’s production software and caused material
damage to the mill [4].
•
On 21 October 2016, an attack on DNS service
provider Dyn caused issues for a list of well-known
services such as Twitter, GitHub, Reddit, Spotify,
Netﬂix, and PayPal. A Mirai botnet compromised tens
of millions of IP addresses. All in all, about 100,000
devices were involved. This was the then largest attack
ever recorded with network trafﬁc volume reaching
1.2Tbps.
•
Perhaps the most recognizable of all the attacks was
the STUXNET worm that infected Iranian nuclear
power plants [5]. The worm caused the centrifuges
to spin too quickly and for too long, damaging or
destroying the delicate equipment in the process. This
is an excellent example of how cyber-attacks affect
physical systems.
It is evident from these examples that an attack targetting the
cyber domain (cyber-attacks) can adversely impact the normal
operation of the physical systems that they control. The impact
is especially acute in safety-critical systems.
One way to understand the impact of cyber-attacks on phys-
ical systems is by modeling CPS systems using Ontologies.
An Ontology is a formal description of knowledge as a set
of concepts within a domain and the relationships that hold
between them [6]. To enable such a description, we need to
formally specify components such as individuals (instances of
objects), classes, attributes, and relations as well as restrictions,
rules, and axioms. Ontologies not only introduce a shareable
and reusable knowledge representation but, can also add new
knowledge about a domain [6]. Ontologies provide numerous
advantages.
•
Ontologies enable automated reasoning about data [6].
•
They provide the ability to represent data formats,
including unstructured, semi-structured or structured
data, enabling smooth data integration, easy concept
and text mining, and data-driven analytics [6].
•
Adding additional relationships, integrating multiple
Ontologies and cross domain concept matching are
also possible.
CPS enable technological advances in diverse critical domains
such as healthcare, trafﬁc ﬂow management, and smart manu-
facturing. Design needs vary across the domains of operation.
So, Ontologies may be able to capture complex dependencies
and relationships between the cyber and physical components
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 1. The Red Light Violation Warning system [8].
and potentially identify common design principles across
multiple domains. Cyber-attacks may or may not affect the
physical system of a CPS. To understand the impact of attacks
on the functioning of physical components, the relationships
captured by the Ontology can be used to semantically reason
about security and resiliency of the physical components.
In this paper, we present our Ontology-driven framework
that captures some of the physical and cyber components
of a Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) reference architecture [7],
including design goals and requirements speciﬁcation from
their design artifacts. This includes information such as func-
tional, security and resiliency requirements. The objective is
to understand the relationship between the cyber and physical
components of the V2I CPS system to be able to reason
about security and resiliency of the physical system. The
Ontology will help understand the impact of cyber-attacks on
the physical components. This information can then be used to
identify mitigation techniques (in physical or cyber domains)
and design changes that can help improve the security and
resiliency of the physical system.
The paper is split into 6 sections. In section II, we brieﬂy
describe the reference architecture that is used to validate
the Ontology. Section III outlines some of our previously-
developed tools that perform vulnerability management. The
CPS Ontology and the reasoning process are brieﬂy described
in section IV. A case study using the Red-Light Violation
Warning (RLVW) and the CPS Ontology is presented in
section V, followed by the conclusion in section VI.
II.
REFERENCE ARCHITECTURE - RED LIGHT VIOLATION
WARNING (RLVW)
The RLVW safety application involves providing a coop-
erative vehicle and infrastructure system that assists drivers in
avoiding crashes at signalized intersections by ﬁrst advising
the driver of a signalized intersection, followed by a warning
to the vehicle’s driver if, based on their speeds and distance to
the intersection, they may violate an upcoming red light. As
a vehicle equipped with a Driver Vehicle Interface (DVI), a
screen on the dash that displays alerts from the infrastructure
as the vehicle approaches an intersection equipped with a
Road Side Equipment (RSE)-controlled trafﬁc light. It receives
messages about the signal phase and timing (SPaT), intersec-
tion geometry, and position correction information [7]. SPaT,
a trafﬁc signal control information that conveys the current
movement state of each active phase in the system can aid in
safety, mobility and monitoring the environment [9]. The driver
is alerted or warned if the RLVW application determines that
given current operating conditions, the driver is predicted to
violate the red light.
The RLVW system is one of six safety applications de-
veloped by the United States Department of Transportation
[7]. The goal of the RLVW application is to improve road-
way safety by reducing red-light running and collisions at
signalized intersections [7]. The infrastructure and vehicle
components include both cyber and physical components.
Figure 1 shows various components of the RLVW application.
We will evaluate our Ontology with this architecture as a
baseline. This application contains:
1) Infrastructure component: The infrastructure component
is responsible for warning drivers of an approaching inter-
section well in advance. In addition, drivers also need to be
warned if their approach is likely to result in a red light
violation.
2) Vehicle component: The vehicle component is responsi-
ble for sensing the world, conveying intent (to other vehicles
and the infrastructure) and situational awareness. All of this
information needs to be sent to the infrastructure.
•
Sensing the world includes measuring speed, getting
current Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates
and determining the lane currently being driven on.
•
Conveying intent is vital in a connected vehicle envi-
ronment (especially Vehicle to Vehicle network). The
information exchanged may inﬂuence the behavior of
other entities in the network.
•
Situational awareness involves attributing context to
the data collected by a physical component. For ex-
ample, if a sensor measures the speed of the vehicle
to be 60 miles per hour, the relevant cyber component
needs to determine if this is a safe speed given the
current context. This speed may be acceptable on a
highway but, not within city limits.
3) Design goals: In this section, we look at some of
the design goals and speciﬁcations of the RLVW application
before we present a preliminary outline of our Ontology design
in the subsequent sections.
Figure 2 outlines some of the important design goals
of the communication model being considered. The three
primary objectives of V2I is to prevent/minimize fatalities,
injuries and property damage. One of the ways this can be
achieved is by using the RLVW application, which attempts
to satisfy the design goals by reducing red light running and
trafﬁc collisions. The various design speciﬁcations and their
relationships are reﬂected in Figure 2.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 2. Design goals for RLVW.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
has published a framework that provides guidance in design-
ing, building, verifying, and analyzing complex CPS systems
[10]. The CPS Framework captures the generic functionalities
that CPS provide, and the activities and artifacts needed to
support conceptualization, realization, and assurance of CPS
[10]. The framework describes the following series of steps
within a reference architecture.
•
The domain of the CPS needs to be identiﬁed.
•
Facets or views on CPS encompassing identiﬁed re-
sponsibilities in the system engineering process [10]
need to be identiﬁed. These include conceptualization,
realization, and assurance. They contain well-deﬁned
activities and artifacts (outputs) for addressing design
goals (or concerns) [10].
•
Aspects need to be consolidated. Aspects are high-
level groupings of cross-cutting concerns. Concerns
are interests in a system relevant to one or more
stakeholders. These may include Functional, Business,
Timing, Data, Trustworthiness, etc [10].
Our objective is to reason about security and resiliency
so, we focus only on the trustworthy concerns. Trustworthi-
ness is the demonstrable likelihood that the system performs
according to designed behavior under any set of conditions
as evidenced by characteristics including, but not limited to,
safety, security, privacy, reliability and resilience [10]. In the
next section, we brieﬂy describe vulnerability assessment for
cyber systems using some of our previous work.
III.
VULNERABILITY-BASED THREATS ASSESSMENT
Given a deployed Cyber-Physical System that leverages
one or more IT (or cyber) components for normal operations,
security evaluation of the IT system is a priority.
In our previous work, we have designed solutions (VUL-
CAN [11], and NEMESIS [12]) to automate essential security
management tasks to assist in identifying, assessing and mit-
igating the threats that may affect any given IT system (this
apply to the Cyber components that power a Cyber-Physical
System).
Let us consider an example of an IT component (that is
part of a Cyber-Physical System) such as the “Qualcomm SD
820 Firmware”. Our VULCAN Framework [11], enable us to
model and represent such an IT component using a Common
Platform Enumeration (CPE) standard [13].
An Ontology Knowledge Base (OKB), which is a pop-
ulated Ontology, plays a central role within the VULCAN
framework by capturing various critical public data feeds of IT
products (e.g., Application/Software, Operating System, and
Hardware) vulnerability, attack, and mitigation information
using an evolving and semantically rich Ontology model.
The vulnerability index generated by VULCAN captures
information about publicly known vulnerabilities (including
their insightful information) that affect our assessed IT com-
ponent. Figure
3 shows a simpliﬁed view of the generated
vulnerability index to highlight a few vulnerabilities (including
their vulnerability description, severity score and Common
Weakness Enumeration (CWE) [14] identiﬁer) that affects our
assessed IT product (viz., Qualcomm SD 820 Firmware). This
System-on-Chip (SoC) is commonly used in level 3 and level
4 autonomous vehicles.
With the amount of semantically rich information captured
within the generated vulnerability index of the assessed IT
component, we can reason and infer various insights in regards
to the current vulnerability status of the ”Qualcomm SD
820 Firmware” and how many of its vulnerabilities have a
damaging impact (if exploited by a malicious actor) to the
core of the Cyber-Physical System in operation.
Using this vulnerability index, our NEMESIS architecture
can assist in performing various threat modeling, and risk
assessment tasks of the for the IT product. This information
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

may be useful towards designing and CPS that are inherently
resilient to the modeled threats.
Table I illustrates a sample view of how NEMESIS clas-
siﬁes vulnerabilities (that affect the assessed IT component
“Qualcomm SD 820 Firmware”) into possible threat types
(using STRIDE threat model [15]) that could arise from their
exploitation. For instance, “CVE-2018-3594” [16] vulnerabil-
ity was identiﬁed by VULCAN that it affects our assessed IT
component, then NEMESIS determines that this vulnerability
could lead to “Tampering, Information Disclosure, Repudi-
ation, and Elevation of Privilege” STRIDE threat types (as
shown in Table I).
TABLE I. QUALCOMM SD 820 FIRMWARE: THREAT
CLASSIFICATION SAMPLE
Vulnerability
S
T
R
I
D
E
CVE-2018-3594
0
1
1
1
0
1
CVE-2017-18140
0
0
1
0
0
0
CVE-2016-10414
0
1
0
0
0
0
CVE-2016-10446
0
1
0
1
0
1
CVE-2016-10434
1
1
1
0
1
1
In Table II we illustrate how NEMESIS ranks all the
classiﬁed threat types by the average severity of all the found
vulnerabilities that can lead to each of the STRIDE threat
types. For instance, “Information Disclosure” threat type is the
most severe threat that the assessed IT component “Qualcomm
SD 820 Firmware” is exposed to.
TABLE II. QUALCOMM SD 820 FIRMWARE: THREAT TYPES
RANKING
Threat Type
Severity [0-10]
Tampering
8.19
Denial of Service
5.0
Spooﬁng
7.5
Information Disclosure
9.0
Repudiation
8.57
Elevation of Privilege
8.78
Security practitioners can use the information for assessing
IT products (or cyber component of CPS) to strategize cyber
mitigations and resiliency measures to counter any of the
perceived threat types that could impact the critical missions
of the operational Cyber-Physical System.
Figure 3. Qualcomm SD 820 Firmware – Vulnerability Index Sample
IV.
CPS ONTOLOGY DESIGN AND REASONING PROCESS
Cyber systems usually include processors, memory mod-
ules, network interfaces and software products. We brieﬂy
discussed vulnerability assessment and management for cyber
systems by introducing some of our previous work in Section
III. We also previously demonstrated the ability to enforce
differentiated levels of security for Internet of Things (IoT)
devices in [17]. Now, our goal is to understand how these
cyber (or IT) vulnerabilities affect physical systems. The
challenge is to capture the relationship between cyber and
physical components to semantically reason about security and
resiliency. The Ontology will be able to provide an insight into
potential mitigation techniques, which may involve changes in
the design or patching and updating software packages in the
cyber domain. The various stages in the reasoning process are
listed below.
•
Design goals and components of a CPS domain need
to be identiﬁed in consultation with domain experts.
•
The relationships between various components in the
domain need to be identiﬁed within the context of the
design goals identiﬁed in the previous step.
•
Given all components and their relationships, threat
modeling needs to be performed so that only threats
relevant to the given CPS are considered.
•
The CPS needs to be redesigned if required.
•
The redesigned system needs to be validated to ensure
it still complies with the design speciﬁcations.
We have constructed an Ontology for the trustworthiness
concern based on NIST’s CPS framework. Figure 4 depicts
a preliminary design for the CPS Ontology that is capable of
reasoning against a limited set of vulnerabilities that we will
discuss in Section V. The Ontology was implemented using
OWL web semantic language [18] on Protege Ontology editor
[19].
The Ontology identiﬁes components and subcomponents of
RLVW system under consideration at conceptual level, assign
roles and responsibilities to them and capture dependencies
among the components (following NIST CPS Framework
[10]). In the realization phase, our framework relates how the
conceptual level components will be implemented using cyber
systems (processors, memory, network). Since each of these
components will be identiﬁed using a unique CPE (Common
Platform Enumeration), VULCAN system can capture security
information about the components from NVD repositories.
This information, including vulnerabilities, severity scores,
attack vectors, patches are indexed and analyzed, generating
comprehensive reports about individual components as well as
for the entire cyber system.
NEMESIS [12] uses the VULCAN [11] to collect informa-
tion in providing a risk score for the cyber components. It uses
a Bayesian model that combines vulnerabilities, dependencies
among components, severity scores, and threat types exposed
by vulnerabilities to compute risks scores and prioritize threat
types faced by the system.
The design speciﬁcations from Figure 2 were translated
into an Ontology. The RLVW concept contains ﬁve different
knowledge points: physical components and cyber components
which are self-explanatory, Abstract, Vehicle and Infrastruc-
ture. The infrastructure and vehicle components are mapped
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 4. An example of the CPS ontology.
to the cyber and physical concepts. A knowledge point called
Abstract captures all the design goals of a CPS domain
(The RLVW safety application in this scenario). The two
components of interest in this Ontology are the trafﬁc light
and RSE. The trafﬁc light interacts with the RSE to display
trafﬁc lights and transition between them.
Design goals may be security requirements (from Security
Service Level Agreements or SSLAs), Resiliency goals and
Functional requirements. Lee et al., [20] describe an Ontology
to capture SSLAs, which can be used to understand security
agreements of a service provider or to audit compliance to
design speciﬁcations [20].
V.
CASE STUDY
Let us evaluate this Ontology using a few simple examples.
We use the STRIDE threat modeling discussed in Section III
and the design speciﬁcations from Section 2. The conﬁguration
of system components is as follows:
•
Qualcomm 820a SoC powers a vehicle.
•
The DVI is controlled by Android Auto operating
system [21].
•
RSE is a facility server running Ubuntu 16.04 LTS.
•
No identiﬁcation scheme exists to authenticate entities
in the network.
•
The data exchanged is not validated (neither by RSE
nor the vehicle).
•
The trafﬁc light is not designed with any fail-safe
modes.
•
No
personally-identiﬁable
information
is
collected/stored.
A. An attack on the RSE
Let us consider the RLVW application discussed before.
We were able to determine using the CPE identiﬁer for
Snapdragon 820a that ﬁve signiﬁcant vulnerabilities could
affect the SoC as discussed in section III. One of the most
important steps in threat modelling for CPS is to assign a
context to a threat/vulnerability i.e, try to understand how a
vulnerability affects a physical system. In the ﬁrst example, let
us consider a scenario where an adversary attacks the RSE (as
depicted in Figure 5). RSE is no longer trustworthy. Potential
attacks are:
•
Spooﬁng : The adversary may masquerade as the
RSE, sending false data to vehicles or the trafﬁc light.
The lights may ﬂash randomly or be turned off. The
vehicle may not receive a warning from the RSE
even if a potential red light violation is detected. For
example, CVE-2018-1111 [22] may be used to create
malicious DHCP packets to compromise the server.
•
Tampering : Data is maliciously modiﬁed before
being sent to vehicles or the trafﬁc light. The potential
impact is similar to that of the Spooﬁng attack. For
example, an adversary may use CVE-2017-1000366
[23] to create a specially crafted environment variable
to perform a buffer overﬂow attack.
•
Repudiation : Non-repudiation is a state of affairs
where a source of speciﬁc information denies ever
creating/issuing it. In this case, the RSE can deny ever
having issued an alert to a vehicle or the trafﬁc light.
In this case, the Ontology will help us understand that
this attack is not relevant to us because it is easy to
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Figure 5. An attack on the RSE.
validate the RSE by using data from the vehicle. This
may not be as critical as spooﬁng or tampering in our
system.
•
Information Disclosure : Since no personally iden-
tiﬁable information is collected, this attack does not
substantially impact the physical system. However, if
the RSE captures images of the vehicle that violated
the red-light, information disclosure may violate pri-
vacy goals. If information about the cyber domain is
leaked, VULCAN can help mitigate it.
•
Denial of Service : The adversary may use any of
the CVEs previously discussed to render the RSE
unresponsive. This means that the vehicles may not
receive alerts and the trafﬁc lights are not controlled.
The impact may be similar to that of the Spooﬁng
attack.
•
Elevation of Prvilege : Elevation of privilege or
privilege escalation attacks involve gaining escalated
access to a resource that is normally protected from a
user. This is a cyber-attack so, VULCAN or NEMESIS
may be able to suggest mitigation techniques.
B. Mitigation techniques
The Ontology will be able to reason about potential mitiga-
tion techniques for a given cyber-vulnerability logically. This
also includes changes to the design speciﬁcation. Let us look
at some of them:
•
For most of the cyber-attacks like elevation of priv-
ilege, updating software packages, applying patches
should sufﬁce.
•
Cyber system can be designed to protect against spoof-
ing attacks by authenticating network entities using a
digital certiﬁcate-based identiﬁcation scheme.
•
Physical systems can be designed to protect against
spooﬁng attacks by using a physical unclonable func-
tion (PUF) based identiﬁcation scheme.
•
The trafﬁc light can be built to ﬂash yellow lights if no
response is received from the RSE for a preset amount
of time.
•
SPaT data can be transmitted by the RSE so that the
vehicles can validate the alerts that were sent.
•
Similarly, speed and location information can be sent
by the vehicles approaching the intersection. The RSE
can validate the data collected by the sensors on the
vehicle with the data collected by the RSE. Cross-
validation may prove to be a useful design feature.
The Ontology can suggest mitigation techniques. Cost Vs
Risk estimates may be used to pick the appropriate mitigation
scheme. The insight provided by the Ontology can be used to
design resilient physical systems.
C. An attack on the cyber component of a vehicle
We brieﬂy discussed how speciﬁc threats that target the
cyber component of the RSE might impact the CPS. Similarly,
the cyber component of a vehicle (such as the Qualcomm 820a
SoC) may be targetted by spooﬁng, tampering, repudiation,
information disclosure, denial of service and elevation of
privilege attacks, which may violate the trustworthy concern
of the V2I system. However, due to the limitation in space,
we are unable to elaborate on this further.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented an argument for modeling
CPS using Ontologies. As systems grow more complex, under-
standing the relationship between various components becomes
harder but, more critical.
We have introduced an Ontology-driven framework that
is capable of capturing the relationship between cyber and
physical domains. We use the example of a V2I communi-
cation model to demonstrate the capability of the Ontology.
This Ontology, designed in consultation with domain experts
helps identify potential vulnerabilities in the cyber domain that
may impact a physical system. Also, it helps in identifying
possible mitigation steps (in the cyber or physical domain)
that can be used to protect against the threats modeled and
also help design resilient physical systems that may provide
reduced functionality to meet design speciﬁcations (resilient)
despite the occurrence of a cyber-attack.
In the future, we intend to develop a more detailed Ontol-
ogy framework that captures complex relationships between
various components. This will also include tools that will be
able to translate design speciﬁcations from the NIST frame-
work into our Ontology to reason about the trustworthiness of
a CPS design.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y.
Ashibani
and
Q.
H.
Mahmoud,
“Cyber
physical
systems
security:
Analysis,
challenges
and
solutions,”
Computers
and
Security,
vol.
68,
2017,
pp.
81
–
97.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167404817300809
[2]
Z. DeSmit, A. E. Elhabashy, L. J. Wells, and J. A. Camelio,
“An
approach
to
cyber-physical
vulnerability
assessment
for
intelligent manufacturing systems,” Journal of Manufacturing Systems,
vol.
43,
2017,
pp.
339
–
351,
high
Performance
Computing
and Data Analytics for Cyber Manufacturing. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S027861251730033X
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[3]
“Why the Ukraine power grid attacks should raise alarm,” Mar.
2017,
URL:https://www.csoonline.com/article/3177209/security/why-
the-ukraine-power-grid-attacks-should-raise-alarm.html/
[accessed:
2018-06-16].
[4]
K. Zetter, “A cyber-attack has caused conﬁrmed physical damage for the
second time ever,” URL:https://www.wired.com/2015/01/german-steel-
mill-hack-destruction/ [accessed: 2018-06-13].
[5]
K. Zetter, “An unprecedented look at STUXNET, the world’s ﬁrst digi-
tal weapon,” URL:https://www.wired.com/2014/11/countdown-to-zero-
day-stuxnet/ [accessed: 2018-06-16].
[6]
“What
are
Ontologies?”
URL:https://ontotext.com/knowledgehub/
fundamentals/what-are-ontologies/ [accessed: 2018-06-13].
[7]
B. Christie, “Vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) safety applications per-
formance requirements, vol. 3, red light violation warning (RLVW),”
United States. Dept. of Transportation. ITS Joint Program Ofﬁce; United
States. Federal Highway Administration, techreport, 2015.
[8]
B. Christie, “Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) Safety Applications: Per-
formance Requirements, Vol. 1, Introduction and Common Require-
ments,” United States. Dept. of Transportation. ITS Joint Program
Ofﬁce; United States. Federal Highway Administration, Tech. Rep.,
2015.
[9]
United
States
Dept.
of
Transportation,
URL:https://www.its.dot.gov/presentations/pdf/SPaT.pdf
[accessed:
2018-06-10].
[10]
Cyber-Physical Systems Public Working Group, “Framework for Cyber-
Physical SystemsRelease 1.0,” National Institute of Standards and
Technology, Tech. Rep., 2016.
[11]
P. Kamongi, S. Kotikela, K. Kavi, M. Gomathisankaran, and A. Singhal,
“Vulcan: Vulnerability assessment framework for cloud computing,”
in Proceedings of The Seventh International Conference on Software
Security and Reliability. SERE (SSIRI) 2013.
IEEE, June 2013, pp.
218–226.
[12]
P. Kamongi, M. Gomathisankaran, and K. Kavi, “Nemesis: Automated
architecture for threat modeling and risk assessment for cloud comput-
ing,” in The Sixth ASE International Conference on Privacy, Security,
Risk and Trust (PASSAT).
ASE, December 2014.
[13]
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Common platform
enumeration (cpe),” https://nvd.nist.gov/cpe.cfm, June 2018.
[14]
MITRE, “Common weakness enumeration (cwe),” http://cwe.mitre.org,
June 2018.
[15]
“The
STRIDE
Threat
Model,”
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
US/library/ee823878(v=cs.20).aspx, June 2018.
[16]
National
Institute
of
Standards
and
Technology,
https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2018-3594, June 2018.
[17]
R. Y. Venkata and K. Kavi, “CLIPS: Customized Levels of IoT Privacy
and Security,” in Proceedings of the 12th The Twelfth International
Conference on Software Engineering Advances Oct 12–14, 2017,
Athens, Greece, pp. 41–47.
[18]
“OWL web semantic language,” URL:https://www.w3.org/OWL/ [ac-
cessed: 2018-06-10].
[19]
M.
A.
Musen
and
the
Prot´eg´e
team,
“The
prot´eg´e
project:
A
look
back
and
a
look
forward,”
AI
Matters,
vol.
1,
no. 4, Jun 2015, pp. 4–12, 27239556[pmid]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4883684/
[20]
C.-Y. Lee, K. Kavi, R. Paul, and M. Gomathisankaran, “Ontology
of secure service level agreement,” 2015 IEEE 16th International
Symposium on High Assurance Systems Engineering, 2015, pp. 166–
172.
[21]
Google,
“The
Android
Auto
Operating
System,”
URL:https://www.android.com/auto/ [accessed: 2018-06-08].
[22]
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “CVE-2018-1111,”
URL:https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2018-1111 [accessed: 2018-
05-18].
[23]
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “CVE-2017-1000366,”
URL:https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2017-1000366
[accessed:
2018-05-18].
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-668-2
ICSEA 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

