Towards a Smart City Security Model  
Exploring Smart Cities Elements Based on Nowadays Solutions 
Felipe Silva Ferraz, Carlos Candido Barros Sampaio,  
Carlos André Guimarães Ferraz, Gustavo Henrique da Silva Alexandre, Ana Catharina Lima de Carvalho 
 
 
Informatics Center 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
Recife, Brazil 
{fsf3, ccbs, cagf, ghsa}@cin.ufpe.br 
 
CESAR – Recife Center for Advanced Studies and 
Systems 
Centro de Estudos e Sistemas Avançados do Recife 
Recife, Brazil 
{fsf, ccbs, ghsa, aclc}@cesar.org.br
Abstract— Even though concepts related to smart cities are 
well established and spread, those concepts are still very thin 
when related to Information Security. This paper will present 
some studies on smart cities, and will show that those studies 
are based on three macro concepts, System Interoperability, 
Applications and Frameworks/Platforms. Solutions and tools 
focusing on Information Security are still far from the common 
and typical scenario of urban systems. Based on that 
assumption, we propose a solution, based on a self-contained 
information security model, that aims to relate several items 
from urban system sand solutions for problems like, privacy 
and information integrity.  This paper presents the first stage 
of this model that is based on elements found on nowadays 
solutions form Smart Cities.   
Keywords-smart city; security; privacy; information. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The term City, in general, means a place or an urban area 
demographically closed, running under economical and 
political understanding [1]. These assumptions are also 
related to the idea that a City is a trading and commercial 
center that offers different services and products to a region. 
Those images are directly influenced by the industrial age 
when the production of services and products had their 
transformation [1]. 
Today, urbanization have reached an unprecedented 
level; different from other ages, large cities have now most 
part of world population and an increasingly share of the 
world's most skilled, educated, creative and entrepreneurial 
minds [2]. More than 50 percent of people on the planet now 
live in large cities [4]. According to United Nations, this 
number will increase to 70 percent in less than 50 fifty years 
[3]-[5]. This so-called city growth or emerging of urban life 
is driving the city infrastructure into a stress level never seen 
before as the demand for basic services are both increased 
and overloaded [6]. 
According to a research called Smarter Cities and Their 
Innovation Challenges, there is an urgent need for urban 
scenarios and cities to be smarter in the management of their 
infrastructure resources and interactions [3]. The urban 
performance must not depend only on its hardware 
infrastructure, or the physical concepts of infrastructure, but 
it must start taking into account social interactions and a 
faster deployment of information and services. 
Cities 
are 
becoming 
increasingly 
empowered 
technologically as their core systems, i.e., Education, Public 
Safety, Transportation, Energy and Water, Healthcare and 
Services, are instrumented and interconnected, enabling new 
ways to deal with massive, parallel and concurrent usage. 
In this paper, we aim to present a Security Model for 
Smart Cities, based on the assumption that this field has few 
works 
focusing 
on 
Information 
Security 
and 
its 
consequences. To that, this paper will present works related 
to security, it will depict Smart City initiatives and will 
present the Security Model based on urban system, data type 
and their interaction. This work is divided as follows:  
In Section II, we present a difference between 
information security in cloud computing areas and smart 
cities. In Section III, there is going to be a detailed model 
basis.  Section IV presents model's entities explanation; 
Section V presents the conclusion and future works. 
II. 
INFORMATION SECURITY, CLOUD COMPUTING 
SECURITY AND SMART CITIES 
Typically, cities or urban areas will begin to increase the 
demand for a better and more spread network connectivity, 
which will serve as a base for a group of different and more 
powerful features and services. Along with that, potential 
threats against those systems will increase, going beyond 
security network aspects. Hence, security measures will be 
needed within system scope. According to Bartoli et al. [7] 
and to Li et al. [8], for an effective protection of a Smart 
City system or its environment in the correct way, a number 
of problems related to security have to be addressed 
following a specific plan, definition or architecture. Those 
plans cover different types of systems and threats, but still 
do not address specific environmental situations and entities 
of a Smart City.  
Although systems information security, within the scope 
of smart city, is not a well-established concept, another area 
presents several advances in this security field; for instance, 
CERT presents a hierarchical graphic where it presents 
potential vulnerabilities and/or exploits to be studied as 
challenges in Cloud Computing area [9]. G-Cloud 
Information [10], on the other hand, presents a series of 
546
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

minimum requirement needed by Cloud Computer Service 
Provides (CCSP).  
Finally, in Security Architectures for Cloud Computing 
[11], international trends in security requirements for Cloud 
computing, along with security architectures proposed by 
Fujitsu such as access protocol, authentication and identity 
(ID) management, and security visualization, is presented 
and discussed. 
Different from the smart city needs, Cloud Computing 
studies on security focus on specific problems for this area, 
among those  problems we can mention topics like   
virtualization, PaaS (Platform as a Service) or IaaS 
(Infrastructure as a Service) or SaaS (Software as a Service) 
failures, 
legal 
responsibility, 
scalability 
to 
ensure 
availability. Even though smart city systems rely on Cloud 
Computing as a host and service provider for its services, it 
is still a scenario where security concerns supersedes far 
beyond the structure it uses.  
As a basic situation, we can explore an application that 
helps citizen to report crimes; this typical application is 
deployed within a cloud computer structure to guarantee 
scalability and availability among others. Still, even a secure 
cloud solution does not create the guarantee for the citizen, 
or user, that its identity will be kept private in case of a 
complaint; nevertheless it also does not answer the question 
“Is this accusation, reliable? Should the system trust this 
complaint? Should it relay on historical denounces to trust 
this one?”  
This situation summarizes a common concern with 
privacy within the use of a Smart City system. Many more 
can be presented, like a patient who does not want his/hers 
medical history reviled, but still, they must be accessible to 
the medical entities. Another situation is of a driver that 
would not want his physical location broadcasted but has to 
have its location ready available for the traffic authorities in 
case of a traffic transgression or does NOT need its location 
just to inform cases of traffic violation. Whatever the 
situation, the smart city system(s) presents different needs 
from a Cloud Computing system, for instance, because it 
needs to deal with a higher, and therefore different, level of 
concern. 
III. 
BACKGROUND 
A century ago, city population would not exceed the size 
of a million people. Nowadays that scenario is known in 
more than 450 cities [4].  The connection from the services 
and structures of those cities has become a big connected 
information system in order to guarantee that the cities are 
becoming smarter and, from that, will endure as a Smart 
City, and not just a connected city. 
Within these scenarios, Smart City environments, or 
solutions, we face three specific topics that are: System 
Interoperability, Platforms and Applications.  
A.  System Interoperability 
In the last decades, major cities around the globe have 
emerged to a reality in which every major public and urban 
system are now represented in the form of a Computer 
System. Urban systems like the ones responsible for 
Education, Public Safety, Transportation, Energy and Water, 
Healthcare and Services are now present and vital to the 
continuity of those cities. Furthermore, those systems deal 
with a historical amount of data that would be impossible to 
manage in any different way.  
One of the problems faced by those environments is that 
their solutions are isolated from each other, therefore it is 
impossible to gather information from one system and use it 
on another system so that it creates more valuable 
information [2]-[6], [12]. To face that, research studies show 
that is vital for cities, which want to have a smarter and 
healthier growth, to open their system to make possible for 
other entities to interact with as many system as possible to 
provide to the citizens, public and private institutions with 
more valuable information [3], [4], [6]. 
B. Platforms or Frameworks 
Once it is understood that urban system face problems 
related to their interconnection, a second approach lays on 
the proposal or the creation of platforms or frameworks to 
connect different units, to interact through this platform. 
Those units are represented in the form of a set of specific 
profiles that are directly related to citizens, buildings or 
companies and Things [13]-[17].   
In this option, there is a highly adopted concept of The 
Internet of Things [18]-[21] which create situations where 
sensors and different entities can and will interact with each 
other. Furthermore we have the concept of social sensors, 
which are presented by values provided directly by citizens 
through social networks like, Twitter or Facebook. Even 
though social networks are a well established concept 
representing an important step to reduce distances and 
connecting people, its importance to urban life lies upon the 
messages, or posts, created by the user (citizen) itself [18], 
[22], [23], which leads to a vision that one  citizen, or its 
information, is equally important as any other citizen. This 
way, Platforms and Frameworks emerge as the infrastructure 
in which the concept of sensor information, which could be 
either physical or a social sensor, is used as input to 
instantiate specific solutions for different urban environment. 
For instance we have Cosm [19], former Pachube, a platform 
for Energy connection that uses a physical sensor to monitor 
energy consumption on Twitter profiles that tracks traffic 
problems, working as a social sensor.  
C. Applications 
The important difference between those two topics 
(Platform x Applications) is that a platform is built with the 
assumption that the power to decide how it is going to be 
used depends upon the choices made by the user that 
instantiate it. For instance, it is possible to see the same 
platform built to serve as a dynamic panel showing opinions 
or as a medical solution showing the status of all systems in a 
hospital [21]. Hence, we are dealing with an approach more 
abstract, which usually comes combined with an application 
as a solution. 
On the other hand, solutions made for urban systems that 
are represented by applications appear as more dedicated, 
practical and less abstract. Some relevant examples are Waze 
547
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[24] and Catch the Bus [25] which are applications that show 
problems related to traffic, Dwolla [26] that attacks scenarios 
of economical behavior and Crime Reports [27] for security 
measures, and even a Big Data based localization system 
called SkyBox [28] that aims to, through satellite photos, 
make easier and faster localization in different environments. 
IV. 
SECURITY MODEL FOR SMART CITIES 
To represent our security model, from a previous 
analysis on several platforms, applications and interoperable 
solutions focusing on smart city situations, we summarized 
entities that somehow are presented in every one of the 
analyzed subjects. Those entities are: System Type, Sensors, 
Actuators, Sensitivity Level and Grouping Value.     
The following sections will explain one by one the 
selected entities and what they represent. 
A. System Type 
In a given system type we exhibit different types of 
system that are involved in Smart City areas. They are: 
Education, Public Safety, Transportation, Energy and Water, 
Healthcare and Government Services. 
Education Systems: Represent every system that is, 
directly or indirectly, related to educational services. 
Public Safety: Represent every system that aims to help 
public areas and citizens to guarantee city safety such as, but 
not only, vigilance systems or crime reports systems. 
Transportation System: Represents every system that, 
in different way, drives citizens into a better movement 
around a city. The movement could be either with or without 
using automotive transportations.  
Energy and Water System: Defines as any system that 
acts directly focusing on natural resources, more specifically 
on Energy or Water.  
Healthcare System: Every system that seeks to improve 
the health and well-being of a patient. 
Government Services: This term depicts every system 
that works within government scenarios. It can vary from a 
justice web system that expose legal issues of each citizen, 
to a platform that opens governmental data to the city itself. 
For example, we have the Open Government Data and 
British Data.gov.uk, both under this same idea [29], [30]. 
 
Figure 1. Core Systems Relations. 
Figure 1 illustrates an environment that contains all systems 
mentioned above. Even though the image presents some 
relations between some systems, it is important to state that 
this is a common example and not the mandatory 
communication. 
B. Sensors  
In Sections A and B, we presented different types of 
sensors that are part of a Platform or Application. Both areas 
work with the same concept. In those areas we find entities 
responsible for gathering information. In our model, those 
entities express themselves as Physical Sensors and/or Social 
Sensors. 
Sensors that generate an expected format of data and non-
personal information represent a Physical Sensor i.e., 
Thermal Sensors, Presence Sensors, Magnetic Sensors, 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) tags and others. 
A Social Sensor represents an entity whose data is 
created from a person and contains personal information, for 
example, a post on Twitter or any other social network. 
C. Actuators 
A sensor, Physical or Social, represents entities 
responsible for gathering information from the environment. 
Hence, an actuator represents the ways that the information 
gathered by the Sensor layer, processed or not, is sent back to 
the user. Take for example a system that collects information 
about traffic, combining twitter with physical traffic sensors, 
and sends back to the driver's Smartphone information about 
which part of city present more or less traffic. This way, both 
the application and the Smartphone are Actuators. 
The actuators can be one of, Direct or Indirect; This 
classification will depend on the access to the information. 
The access can be direct, like on a Smartphone or indirect, 
like through a smart panel. 
548
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

D. Sensitivy Level 
In this section, we present a situation on which 
information is gathered from different types of sensors and 
could be delivered back by different actuators. In this 
particular scenario, the collected data is used as grouped 
information. Grouping value will be the last entity we will 
approach, mainly because it needs more than just one value 
to represent a correct data. Once this requirement is fulfilled, 
it is necessary to take under consideration that this one value 
is a sensible value, and could not compromise the identity of 
the citizen that, through the sensor, sent its location and 
traffic info. Based on that, the information has to respect the 
Sensitive Level that can be private or public.  
Private information cannot be exposed, even further, it 
cannot be associated with its creator. On the other hand, 
Public information can be associated, expose and even stored 
for future use. 
E.  Grouping value 
The last aspect is grouping value and it represents one of 
three possible states any information represents. Those three 
states are, Information Grouped, Information Non-Grouped 
and Reversible Information Grouped. 
Information Grouped represent a group of information 
that does not make sense if analyzed or stored individually, 
e.g., numbers, values or medians. 
Non-Grouped Information represents all kinds of 
information that have value if analyzed or stored 
individually, e.g, Dates, Coordinates or social posts. 
All information that represents a value when presented in 
a grouped fashion, but that can be traced back to its 
individual 
values, 
are 
called 
Reversible 
Grouped 
Information. An example of this concept would be List of 
values or Map Areas. 
V  CONCLUSION 
The presented entities that compose the model are 
summarized in Table 1. 
 
TABLE I: ENTITIES SUMMARIZED 
 
 
This paper has proposed a first stage of a Security Model 
that aims to add more Information Security to Smart Cities 
solutions. The elements presented in Table I are entities 
suggestion based on studies and analysis made on some of 
the solutions listed in this work. Furthermore as future 
works, we intend to develop the second stage of the 
presented model. It will present, a relation between the 
entities presented here with which aspect that is more 
critical in terms of information security. As a final work we 
suggest to present architectural solutions based on Security 
Pattern, those will guide city administration towards more 
secure urban systems. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
R. J. Johnston and D. Gregory, The Dictionary of Human Geography. 
Blackwell Reference, 1981. 
[2]  D. Susanne, G. Constantin, & K. Mary. Smarter Cities for Smarter 
Growth: How Cities "Can Optimize Their Systems for the Talent-
Based Economy". Somers, 2010, NY: IBM Global Business Services. 
[3] 
M. Naphade, G. Banavar, C. Harrison, J. Paraszczak and R. Morris, 
"Smarter Cities and Their Innovation Challenges," Computer, vol.44, 
no.6, pp.32,39, June 2011. 
[4] 
Dirks, S., Keeling, M., and Dencik, J., " A Vision of Smarter Cities: 
How Cities Can Lead the Way into a Prosperous and Sustainable 
Future. Somers, NY: IBM Global Business Services, 2009. 
[5] 
D. Washburn and U. Sindhu, “Helping CIOs Understand ‘ Smart City 
’ Initiatives”, forrester, 2010. 
[6] 
A. Caragliu, C. Del Bo, and P. Nijkamp, “Smart Cities in Europe”, 
Journal of Urban Technology, vol. 18, no. 2, Apr. 2011, pp. 65–82. 
[7] 
A. Bartoli, M. Soriano, J. Hernandez-Serrano, M. Dohler, A. 
Kountouris, D. Barthel, Security and Privacy in your Smart City , in 
Proceedings of Barcelona Smart Cities Congress 2011, 29-2 
December 2011, Barcelona (Spain).  
[8] 
W. Li, J. Chao, and Z. Ping, “Security Structure Study of City 
Management Platform Based on Cloud Computing under the 
Conception of Smart City,” 2012 Fourth International Conference on 
Multimedia Information Networking and Security, Nov. 2012, pp. 
91–94. 
[9] 
W. R. Claycomb and A. Nicoll, "Insider Threats to Cloud Computing: 
Directions for New Research Challenges," Computer Software and 
Applications Conference (COMPSAC), 2012 IEEE 36th Annual , 
vol., no., pp.387,394, 16-20 July 2012. 
[10] HM Government, “G-Cloud Information Assurance Requirements 
and 
Guidance,” 
2012, 
avaliable 
at 
http://gcloud.civilservice.gov.uk/files/2012/05/G-Cloud-Services-IA-
Requirements-and-Guidance-version-1-0-_for-publication_1-2.pdf. 
[11] M. Okuhara, “Security Architectures for Cloud Computing,” pp. 397–
402, fujitso (2010). 
[12] Accenture, Cisco and the GSMA, Smart Mobile Cities: Opportunities 
for Mobile Operators to Deliver Intelligent Cities Contents, 2011, 
available 
at: 
http://www.accenture.com/SiteCollectionDocuments/PDF/Accenture-
Smart-Mobile-Cities.pdf. 
[13] A. Attwood, M. Merabti, P. Fergus, and O. Abuelmaatti, “SCCIR: 
Smart Cities Critical Infrastructure Response Framework,” 2011 
Developments in E-systems Engineering, Dec. 2011, pp. 460–464. 
[14] L. Lugaric, G. S. Member, S. Krajcar, and Z. Simic, “Smart city — 
Platform for emergent phenomena power system testbed simulator," 
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT 
Europe), 2010 IEEE PES , vol., no., pp.1,7, 11-13 Oct. 2010 
[15] H. Chourabi, T. Nam, S. Walker, J. R. Gil-Garcia, S. Mellouli, K. 
Nahon, T. a. Pardo, and H. J. Scholl, “Understanding Smart Cities: 
An Integrative Framework,” 2012 45th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, Jan. 2012, pp. 2289–2297. 
[16] M. Al-Hader, A. Rodzi, A. R. Sharif, and N. Ahmad, “Smart City 
Components Architicture,” 2009 International Conference on 
549
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Computational Intelligence, Modelling and Simulation, 2009, pp. 93–
97. 
[17] F. Gil-Castineira, E. Costa-Montenegro, F. Gonzalez-Castano, C. 
López-Bravo, T. Ojala, and R. Bose, “Experiences inside the 
Ubiquitous Oulu Smart City,” Computer, vol. 44, no. 6, Jun. 2011, pp. 
48–55. 
[18] D. J. Skiba, “The Internet of Things (IoT).,” Nursing education 
perspectives, vol. 34, no. 1, 2011, pp. 63–4. 
[19] “Cosm.” [Online]. Available: https://cosm.com. [Accessed: 10-Aug-
2013]. 
[20] “Sensetecnic.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://sensetecnic.com/. 
[Accessed: 10-Aug -2013]. 
[21] M. Blackstock, N. Kaviani, R. Lea, and A. Friday, “MAGIC Broker 
2: An open and extensible platform for the Internet of Things,” 2010 
Internet of Things (IOT), Nov. 2010, pp. 1–8. 
[22] E. Duravkin, "Using SOA for development of information system 
“Smart 
city”," 
Modern 
Problems 
of 
Radio 
Engineering, 
Telecommunications 
and 
Computer 
Science 
(TCSET), 
2010 
International Conference on , vol., no., pp.258,258, 23-27 Feb. 2010 
[23] J. Guevara, E. Vargas, F. Barrero, S. Member, and S. Toral, 
"Ubiquitous architecture for environmental sensor networks in road 
traffic applications," Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2010 
13th International IEEE Conference on , vol., no., pp.1227,1232, 19-
22 Sept. 2010 
[24] “Waze.” [Online]. Available: www.waze.com. [Accessed: 10-Aug -
2013]. 
[25] “Catch the bus.” [Online]. Available: http://catchthebusapp.com/. 
[Accessed: 10-Aug -2013]. 
[26] “Dwolla.” [Online]. Available: www.dwolla.com. [Accessed: 10-
Aug-2013]. 
[27] “Crime 
Reports.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.crimereports.com/home/iphone_app. [Accessed: 10-Aug-
2013]. 
[28] “Skybox 
Imaging.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.skyboximaging.com/. [Accessed: 10-Aug-2013]. 
[29] “Open 
Government 
Data” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://opengovernmentdata.org. [Accessed: 10-Aug -2013]. 
[30] “Data.gov.uk” [Online]. Available: http://data.gov.uk/. [Accessed: 10-
Aug-2013].  
 
550
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

