Proposed Incident Response Methodology for Data Leakage 
Presenting the best processes and procedures tosafeguardyour business while preventing data leakage 
 
Alex Rabello, Junior Goulart, Marcelo Karam, Marcos Pitanga, Reinaldo Gomes Baldoino Filho and Ronaldo Ricioni 
IESB University Center 
alex.rabello@privamax.com.br, jgoulart@vidalink.com.br, karam@unb.br, marcos.pitanga@talkcomm.com.br, 
reinaldo.baldoino@iesb.edu.br and ronaldo@r3force.com 
 
 
 
Abstract - Most Brazilian companies disregard the national 
privacy law (LGPD) by not ensuring data governance and 
well-managed 
security 
controls 
with 
technical 
and 
organizational measures to prevent data leakage. Brazilian 
LGPD specifies that organizations must report to the national 
authority (ANPD) and the data subject if any security incident 
occurs that could cause relevant risk to the data subject. 
However, this privacy law lacks information on how to respond 
effectively to data leakage by embracing preventive measures 
against data breaches. The appropriate approach to handling 
data leakage is to invest in trained personnel, cutting-edge 
technology, and processes, enabling a proper incident response 
methodology. Organizations will be more willing to comply 
with the privacy law by administering a more approachable 
and straightforward path for security and privacy best 
practices. The development of this methodology is based on the 
international 
standard 
(ISO 
27035) 
and 
some 
recommendations from the NIST 800-61 publication. The 
adaptation of these standards provides a more detailed 
checklist for determining when to perform incident reporting 
and transparency to the Brazilian authority (ANPD) and data 
subjects. Other points discussed are related to properly 
building the security incident response team, using security 
automation tools and playbook resources to ensure the 
application of best practices by handling data leakage 
processes. 
Keywords-Data Leakage; Information Security; Incidents; 
LGPD. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 The advent of privacy and data protection laws and 
regulations worldwide raises one of the most relevant 
questions for most organizations: Has your company ever 
suffered a data leak? If so, the business impact of responding 
publicly with transparency can be massive, with the 
imposition of significant fines and the loss of customer trust 
affecting the company's reputation. Otherwise, in most cases, 
if a company has not had leaked data, it is because it has not 
yet been the target of attacks or because it has invested in 
strategic and tactical actions to avoid Information Security 
incidents. 
The purpose of this article is to describe a methodology 
to propose best practices for the Information Security 
Incident Management, following the definitions and concepts 
standardized by the International Standards Organization 
(ISO / IEC 27035) [6] and some procedures described by the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology(NIST 800-
61) [7] publication, with applicability in the context of 
personal data protection as it is the evolution of the 
Information Security applied to the current scenarios of data 
leakage. 
In the media, reports of data leaks, cyber-attacks, and 
selling of information, including disclosure of confidential 
data, are frequently published by the Ponemon Institute and 
IBM Security [5], disclosing the cost of a data breach, for 
example, on average, the time to identify and contain a data 
breach is 280 days, and 80% of the breaches relate to the 
leakage of personal customer data. 
Examples of security incidents may include system or 
service 
malfunctions, 
cyber-attacks 
(such 
as 
social 
engineering or denial of service), unauthorized access to 
confidential/restricted data, sending or receiving malicious 
code, changes to a system without owner approval, loss, 
misplacement, theft of data or equipment containing 
critical/sensitive information. These security vulnerabilities 
in organizations are among the greatest threats to privacy and 
data protection in the 21st century. 
In this context, it becomes inevitable for any organization 
to prioritize incident governance and management of 
Information Security events to deal with breaches involving 
personal data leakage. 
 
Some questions that guided the article: 
• What is the proper way to analyze security incidents? 
• How to handle a risk analysis to avoid data breaches? 
• How can companies adopt a methodology for Security  
• Incident Management involving data leakages? 
• What is the appropriate communication and notification 
to the national authority and data subjects? 
 
The following Section II describes the standard 
frameworks applied for information security incident 
management and their phases to handle a lifecycle of the 
incident related to data leakage. Section III demonstrates the 
proposed methodology focusing on the key points to be 
addressed during incident security response. Topics IV, V, 
and VI provide specific data leakage scenarios and the 
appropriate solutions available to address the incident 
response. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

II. STANDARDS AND FRAMEWORKS FOR INFORMATION 
SECURITY INCIDENT MANAGEMENT 
ISO standards and NIST publications are recommended 
tools that can help organize and manage security incident 
response for any organization. The NIST 800-61 publication 
brings crucial insight into the structure of the incident 
response team, 
including three models: 
centralized, 
distributed, and coordinated. To choose the appropriate 
model, size and possible locations of the organization must 
be evaluated, but there are also other vital decisions, such as 
defining 24/7 availability, being composed of people 
working either whole or part-time, having in-person or 
outsourced work, cost of hiring based on experience and 
level of knowledge and evaluating stress factors. Regarding 
the incident response lifecycle, NIST recommends four 
phases: 1. Preparation, 2. Detection and Analysis, 3. 
Containment, Eradication and Recovery, and 4. Post-Incident 
Activities. 
ISO/IEC 27035 standard is divided into three parts: 
Incident 
Management 
Principles 
(ISO/IEC 
27035-1), 
Guidelines for Planning and Preparedness for Incident 
Response (ISO/IEC 27035-2), and Guidelines for Incident 
Response 
Operations 
incidents 
(ISO/IEC 
27035-3). 
According to ISO/IEC 27035, a fundamental part of an 
organization's overall information security strategy must 
establish controls and procedures to prevent or contain the 
impact of information security incidents, reducing the direct 
and indirect costs caused by incidents. The main steps to 
minimize the adverse effects of information security 
incidents are 1. Plan and Prepare, 2. Detection and 
Reporting, 3. Evaluation and Decision, 4. Responses and 5. 
Lessons Learned. 
 
III. PROPOSAL FOR AN INCIDENT RESPONSE 
METHODOLOGY FOR DATA LEAKAGE 
Our 
proposed 
incident 
response 
management 
methodology for personal data leakage scenarios is based on 
a response framework adapted to the context of personal data 
protection. An appropriate incident response plan prepares 
the team to handle threats, notifies incidents, isolates 
incidents, identifies severity, contains the attack, eradicates 
the underlying cause, recovers production systems, and 
conducts a post-mortem analysis to prevent future episodes. 
A. Formation of the incident response team 
The incident response team, also known as Computer 
Security Incident Response Team(CSIRT) [1], consists 
mainly of members of the privacy, information security, and 
legal team, with pre-established roles, objectives, and goals 
for each member of the team. The team will improve upon 
implementing procedures and processes to dominate the 
sector in which it operates, bringing the concepts of the 
cybersecurity ecosystem closer to the operational reality of 
the organization. It is essential to recruit and train the 
members in team building, ensuring they have access to the 
relevant systems and technologies for the best performance 
quality. 
B. Defining the roles and responsibilities 
The responsibilities involved are defined in the roles of a 
Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), Data Protection 
Officer (DPO) in case of data subject breaches, incident 
response manager, security analyst, threat researcher, legal 
representative, corporate communications, risk management, 
and external forensic security experts. 
Among the main objectives of the incident response 
team, such as incident analysis, documenting the extent, 
priority, and impact of a breach, to see what assets are 
affected and whether the incident requires attention. With 
this, the team must plan and document procedures are 
containing the description of the incident response plans for 
different types of occurrences, severity levels, and affected 
regulatory bodies. 
C. Plan and identify the risks 
Another relevant procedure refers to implementing a risk 
assessment in case of cyber-attacks, knowing the most 
valuable assets and possible critical impacts on the 
organization's business. In addition to establishing a 
communication plan declaring the situations that require or 
not the issuance of internal and external notifications, 
depending on the level of impact and extent of violations of 
personal data of the holders. This methodology enforces the 
contextualization and adequacy given to the treatment of 
infringements containing personal data, not observed in the 
ISO/IEC 27,035 and NIST 800-61 standards, such as the 
figure of the DPO and notifications referring to violations 
containing personal data. In addition, it should be defined 
which will use tools to record and document incidents and 
mechanisms for detection and correlation of events and 
anomalies to obtain predictability and generate evidence 
records in audits supporting analysis of the incident. 
D. Selecting the proper security tools 
Incident response tools work with applied security 
measures, obtaining response information via network traffic 
analysis, system logs, endpoint alerts, and identity systems to 
detect network security-related anomalies. These tools 
investigate malware infections, password attacks, phishing, 
information leakage, privilege abuse, and other internal and 
external threats. 
Information gathered from security tools, and IT systems 
should be kept in a central location, such as a Security 
Information Event 
Management 
(SIEM) 
[9], 
which 
consolidates events and logs from all types of critical 
computing resources. As a result, this information should be 
used to create an incident timeline and conduct an incident 
investigation with all relevant data points in one place. 
Technology alone cannot detect security breaches therefore, 
human perception must be trusted where the security 
operation team carefully monitoring events and behaviors, 
highlighting the following action approaches: 
• Network traffic anomalies on sensitive internally used 
connections and servers that typically have a stable and 
predictable traffic volume; 
• Access accounts without elite or administrator 
permission levels for more information and systems than 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

regular employees. Since employees tend to be the most 
accessible entry point into cybercrime, it is relevant to 
closely monitor accounts with administrator profiles, noting 
the increase in privileges on standard user accounts. 
• Excessive consumption and suspicious files when 
observing an increase in the performance of the memory or 
hard disks in the environment could signal someone illegally 
accessing or leaking data. 
• Use modern security tools, such as User and Entity 
Behavioral Analytics (UEBA) [11], which automatically 
identify anomalies in user behavior or file access. Provides a 
much better coverage of potential security incidents and 
saves time for security teams. 
E. Handling incidents and threats 
After 
developing 
an 
information 
security 
team 
specializing in monitoring threats and anomalies, it is 
necessary to detail how the organization will handle the 
incident. In conjunction with privacy and data protection 
experts, this information security team must determine what 
types of data are involved and assess the potential harm 
caused, evaluating any jurisdictional or industry laws that the 
company needs to comply with. 
The proposed methodology gives the incident response 
team an accurate analysis of the severity of the breach 
involving personal data and the need for escalation to the 
national authority (ANPD), as required by various 
legislations, including the GDPR and the LGPD. 
F. Incident investigation and recording 
Investigations are based on two types of incident input to 
be handled: IT systems gather events from monitoring tools, 
log files, error messages, firewalls, and intrusion detection 
systems. This data must be analyzed by automated means 
and security analysts to decide whether anomalous events 
represent security incidents. There can be a report of a user 
from any area of the organization who submits a new 
happening in the system reporting an occurrence stating the 
cause of the incident, assets, and suppliers involved. This 
activation carried out via the incident system must follow a 
treatment flow. There is a prior assessment by a member of 
the information security team enabling classification of the 
type of incident, severity, the risk to the business, and 
possible impacts on personal data. 
All evidence and records must be collected and preserved 
in case any criminal activity is recorded. Preservation of 
proof during screening and scope should be considered, 
especially if it becomes apparent that the incident involves 
illegal activity or data breaches. This methodology extends 
the need to preserve evidence and records for violations 
involving personal data, even if it is not criminal activity, 
aiming at the defense in possible lawsuits based on privacy 
filed by the data subjects and administrative data by the 
national authority (ANPD). 
Proper preservation of evidence requires establishing a 
chain of custody procedures that must properly track any 
electronic evidence. 
G. Incident containment, recovery and remediation 
The next step in the process, called containment, aims to 
isolate the security incident to prevent further damage to the 
organization. The strategy to limit damage to organizational 
resources involves activating the information security team 
that works in management and control of confidentiality 
detection and protection resources to identify which business 
process is affected so that it is possible to isolate the 
problem. The priority is to have short-term containment with 
an instant response so that the threat no longer causes 
damage, but also to provide for long-term containment, 
planning corrective actions on affected systems, taking 
measures to prevent the incident from recurring or augment, 
such as installing the latest security patches on affected and 
associated systems, removing accounts and backdoors 
created by intruders, changing firewall rules involving the 
intruder's address, etc. 
The information security team working on remediation 
must isolate the root cause of the attack, removing threats 
and malware, and identifying ways to mitigate vulnerabilities 
that have been exploited to prevent future episodes. These 
steps make configuration updates with a focus on 
minimizing the negative effect on the organization's 
operations. Choosing the proper way to accomplish this is to 
limit the amount of data exposed. In acting to recover 
affected systems, there must be guidelines to minimize the 
chance of another related incident. 
H. Post Incident activities 
Therefore, must validate that another incident does not 
occur by restoring clean backup systems, replacing 
compromised files with clean versions, rebuilding systems 
from scratch, installing patches, changing passwords, and 
strengthening network perimeter security (router access 
control lists rules, firewall rule sets, etc.). It would help to 
consider how long it would take to monitor the network 
system and verify that the affected systems are functioning 
normally. Therefore, the cost of the breach and the 
associated damages are minimized. 
I. Comunnication and Data Breach notification 
In cases of high risk of data breach and possible impacts 
on privacy, the flow should include an immediate 
notification to all members of the communication team and 
crisis team/committee, data protection officer (DPO), third-
party vendors and executives involved, as well as actions to 
preserve all physical evidence regarding the location of the 
breach with detailed documentation of the incident to be 
used in the development of the incident response and 
forensic investigation process when necessary. 
This methodology understands that the DPO must be 
promptly informed about all the steps in handling incidents 
involving the breach of personal data, especially about the 
increased risk. So that it is possible to exercise its role as an 
interlocutor between the organization, national authority 
(ANPD), and the data subjects, following the federal privacy 
law (LGPD). If determined during the previous phases of the 
incident 
response 
plan, 
the 
responsible 
team 
will 
communicate following the notification process where 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

strategic communication and dissemination are developed 
for external audiences and internal staff. 
J. Review and Process Improvement (PDCA) 
Once critical incidents are addressed, and the systems 
involved are recovered, the organization should hold a 
meeting to review the effectiveness of the incident handling 
process and identify necessary improvements to existing 
security controls and practices. 
Information gathered from these meetings should identify 
and correct systemic weaknesses and deficiencies in policies 
and procedures. The security specialist must determine how 
the incident was managed, revalidating what took action to 
recover the attacked system, the areas where the response 
team needed improvement, and the areas where they were 
effective. Evidence reports provide a clear review of the 
entire incident and can be used in meetings, as benchmarks 
for comparison, or as training information for new incident 
response team members. 
K. Development of an incident response playbook 
In addition, the root cause analysis must be prepared so 
that complete documentation is provided with greater 
accuracy after the incident response process, which also 
helps to improve the process for prioritizing technical data 
protection measures aligned with the organization's cyber 
risks. 
Gerard Johansen [3], can elaborate the steps of the 
incident response plan with a set of instructions and actions 
described in a playbook process, where the risks of critical 
threats must be evaluated, indicating the appropriate scenario 
to be followed. 
Due to the large volume of incidents, and the short 
deadlines present in the legislation for the notification of 
violations involving personal data, within 48 hours for a 
response (LGPD) and 72 hours (GDPR), we believe it is 
necessary that these best predictability practices can be 
automated with the implementation of a playbook process, 
building a continuous flow of known approaches to handling 
recurrent or similar cases. The methods described in this 
playbook 
should 
seek 
to 
identify 
patterns, 
deeply 
understanding 
the 
TTP 
(Tactics, 
Techniques, 
and 
Procedures) [8] commonly used by threats, performing 
governance based on threat scenarios with use cases instead 
of just rules, and using connected and integrated security 
platforms using technology such as Security Orchestration, 
Automation, and Response (SOAR) [12] for a centralized 
approach with the ability to automate incident response, 
including personal data breaches. 
IV. SCENARIO ANALYSIS OF DATA LEAKAGE TO APPLY 
DLP SOLUTIONS 
 
 
 
Technology capabilities for preventing data loss or 
leakage are defined by a strategic program that detects, 
monitors, and blocks potential breaches of sensitive data 
while in use (endpoint actions), in-motion (network traffic), 
and at rest (storage data). 
       Following Bose et al. [12], data leakage is an error 
condition in information systems in which information is 
destroyed by failures or neglect in storage, transmission, or 
processing. Information systems implement backup and 
disaster recovery equipment and processes to prevent data 
loss or restore lost information. Data leakage is 
distinguished from data unavailability, such as that arise 
from a network outage. According to Xi et al. [13], it is also 
essential to check the data loss in the use of mobile 
platforms because there has been a significant growth in the 
usability of mobile equipment with innovative platforms, 
unintentional loss of sensitive data due to a malicious agent, 
an inside job, or an unknown employee can lead to 
significant financial loss and reputational damage for any 
organization. To avoid these damages and losses, it is 
imperative to implement solutions for data loss prevention 
(DLP) [2], which can include: 
 
• DLP Endpoint (end-user device) when the user has a 
scope of data on desktop, laptop, USB storage, and virtual 
desktop. 
 
• DLP for data at rest or storage is usually unstructured 
data that resides on a server or structured data that resides in 
databases. 
 
• Network DLP is applied to data that transits or leaves 
the network to the Internet and. 
 
• DLP for cloud is data residing in Google Workspace, 
Microsoft 365, and other personal cloud providers. 
       DLP methods [10] are designed to discover and analyze 
content and context to determine if the presented data 
matches a pattern or expression of an identification number 
or a specific keyword. Once the way is reached, a violation 
or alert can be generated, and it is sent to a management 
console for review by an incident triage and support analyst. 
       When evaluating some proposed scenarios, the possible 
focus of data leakage should be identified, for example, of a 
fictitious company that processes medical insurance claims 
for a regulated health care organization. They are aware that 
sensitive personal data resides on file servers, but they are 
unsure where the data is located. In this case, we should 
prioritize the analysis in the resting DLP solution. The 
strategy would include an unstructured data discovery scan, 
which will scan the selected storage and find data matching 
the keyword pattern (health data) as stated in the scan 
policy. Another common scenario is when a Human 
Resources (HR) manager learns that some department 
members have emailed sensitive files to their email address 
to work on corporate requests overdue over the weekend. To 
address this situation, we must prioritize the use of DLP for 
networks and endpoints. Also, can create a network security 
policy to prevent file uploads to personal email platforms. 
DLP 
for 
Endpoint 
can 
also 
detect 
HTTP/HTTPS 
connections as data leaves the Endpoint to the Internet. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 As a result of applying the proposed methodology, some 
factors are observed as gaps to be treated about the 
procedures and recommendations of the NIST and ISO 
standards.  One of these factors is the use of automation in 
incident processing driven due to the significant increase in 
recent years and the short deadlines established by legislation 
for notification of personal data breaches, and the possibility 
of automating many processing tasks with retransmission to 
systems and IT tools, reducing the amount of human activity 
and human decisions required. Suppose the organization 
already has an incident response team. In that case, it must 
carefully consider all the team building factors provided in 
the NIST document, adding professionals with privacy and 
data protection knowledge, and dual user verification of all 
processes, except for the DPO. As emphasized by NIST, 
handling incidents is a complex task, which can customize 
by implementing security automation. 
An important point within this proposal is the massive 
and in-depth training of information security teams, 
especially those responsible for handling the response to 
incidents, so that they prepare adequate documentation for 
the proper chain of custody, thus tracing the entire timeline 
along with the proper procedures to safeguard the 
environment, avoiding the contamination of evidence, which 
may be necessary for a more in-depth investigation in the 
civil/criminal scope that can use to prove the truth with the 
national data protection authorities or in the public judicial 
spheres for the judgment of the rights of the holders. 
In terms of the ISO / IEC 27035 approach, this standard 
describes and details incident management and allows an 
organization to apply prevention proactively. However, this 
approach depends on the effectiveness of the lessons learned 
and 
continuous 
improvement 
of 
treating 
incident 
management as a linear or cyclical activity. 
The adaptation of the incident response methodology also 
allows for the inclusion of a checklist of actions to decide 
when it is time to notify the incidents to ANPD, as well as 
the data subjects, as in the ISO standard and the NIST 
recommendation, these notification procedures are not as 
emphasized concerning the importance of this requirement 
stated in the LGPD law.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J.Novak, D. Mcintire, A. Hueca, B. Manley, S. Mudd and T. 
Bills , Technical Report - The Sector CSIRT Framework, 
[Online]. 
June2021,Available 
from: 
https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/assetfiles/TechnicalReport/2021
_005_001_734796.pdf 2021.08.25 
[2] A. Gorecki, “Cyber Breach Response that actually works”, 
Willey 2020. 
[3] G. Johansen, “Digital Forensics and Incident Response, 2nd 
ed.” Packt Publishing, Birmingham, UK, 2020. 
[4] LGPD: Lei Geral de Proteção de dados 13.709.[Online]. 
Available from:http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato20 
15-2018/2018/lei/l13709.htm 2021.07.23 
[5] Ponemon Institute: The cost of a Data Breach report.[Online]. 
Available from: https://www.ibm.com/security/data-breach 
[6] ISO/IEC 27035:Information technology - Security techniques 
- 
Information 
security 
incident 
management.[Online]. 
Available from: https://www.iso.org/standard/60803.html 
[7] NIST 800-61:NIST Special Publication 800-61, Revision 2, 
Computer 
Security 
Incident 
Handling 
Guide.[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nist.gov/privacy-framework/ 
nist-sp-800-61 
[8] Threat Intelligence: Radware. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.radware.com/getattachment/Security/Hackers-
Corner/2218/HackersCorner-TTPsDDoS-FINAL-V3.pdf. 
aspx?lang=en-US 
[9] Security information and event management (SIEM) 
technology: Gartner.[Online]. Available from:   https://www. 
gartner.com/en/information-technology/glossary/security-
information-and-event-management-siem 
[10] The 
practical 
executive's 
guide 
to 
Data 
Loss 
Prevention:Forcepoint.[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://media.bitpipe.com/io_14x/io_147455/item_1939907/w
hitepaper_practical_executives_guide_data_loss_prevention_
en%20%283%29.pdf 
[11] User 
and 
Entity 
Behavioral 
Analytics 
(UEBA): 
Forcepoint.[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www. 
forcepoint.com/pt-br/product/ueba-user-entity-behavior-
analytics 
[12] Security 
Orchestration, 
Automation, 
and 
Response 
(SOAR).[Online]. Available from: https://searchsecurity. 
techtarget.com/definition/SOAR 
[13] Bose, Neetu, and N. Vishwanath. "An Improved Method for 
Preventing Data Leakage in an Organization." 
[14] Xi, Ning, et al. "Information flow based defensive chain for 
data leakage detection and prevention: a survey." arXiv 
preprint arXiv:2106.04951 (2021). 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

