A Communities Engagement Tool for Assessing the Resilience and Deterioration of 
Cultural Heritage Sites
Nikolaos Tousert, Antonis Kalis, Maria Krommyda, Nikos Frangakis, Spyridon Nektarios Bolierakis, Angelos 
Amditis 
Institute of Communication and Computer Systems 
Athens, Greece 
e-mails: {nikos.tousert, antonis.kalis, maria.krommyda, nikos.frangakis, spyros.bolierakis, a.amditis}@iccs.gr 
 
 
Abstract—Climate change and geo-hazards (such as landslides 
and earthquakes) may have a negative impact on historic areas 
hosting Cultural Heritage (CH) sites and monuments, which in 
turn yields significant adverse impacts on economies, politics 
and societies. The deterioration of CH sites is one of the biggest 
challenges that needs to be addressed through structural 
responses, 
preventive 
measures, 
restoration 
strategies, 
resilience and adaptation methodologies. In order to assess the 
resilience and deterioration of the historic areas and also the 
potential impacts due to various hazards through a 
community-based participatory environment, a web tool has 
been 
developed, 
entitled 
“Communities’ 
Engagement 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Tool”. 
This paper presents the aforementioned tool which aims at 
engaging cultural heritage aware communities through a web 
platform. This specialized software is an advanced application 
that will encourage citizens to give direct feedback to the 
relevant cultural authorities in order to assist them in assessing 
the deterioration of the cultural heritage sites and determining 
the needed reconstruction needs and expectations. 
Keywords-deterioration; hazards; cultural heritage sites;   
communities engagement tool; monuments. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Communities Engagement ICT Tool (hereafter 
referred to as “Engagement Tool”) is a web based software 
that specializes in preservation and damage assessment of 
cultural heritage. It serves as a collaborative environment 
that can be used directly by the citizens so as to submit 
stories (or else reports) concerning cultural heritage sites 
deterioration. Rather than being a standalone tool, it aims at 
incorporating active communities’ participation through the 
secure integration with the Pluggable Social Platform for 
Heritage Awareness and Participation (PLUGGY) [1]. 
PLUGGY, which is a social network platform for heritage 
gives voice to citizens across Europe and enables them to 
safeguard and enrich the European cultural heritage 
landscape. It is also an open source platform specializing on 
the preservation and promotion of everyday all-around 
heritage, using crowd-sourced techniques. The developed 
tool presented in this paper has taken advantage of the 
pluggable nature of PLUGGY in terms of integration 
potential and focuses on the engagement of local 
communities and business owners in reporting significant 
problems posed in CH sites or businesses that are caused by 
extreme events associated with the impacts of climate 
change and natural hazards.  
Concerning the technical integration aspects, the 
Engagement Tool, which is a pluggable application makes 
use 
of 
already 
developed 
PLUGGY’s 
Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs) and database. The tool has 
been developed by taking advantage of the already registered 
PLUGGY community and its flexible data model. A user-
friendly interface has been developed for the innovative 
presentation of stories to users in order for them to 
experience the content and better understand the changes 
imposed by climate change and extreme events concerning 
the monuments and the operation or disruption of businesses. 
Section III reports the functional requirements which 
define the specifications and behaviours of the Tool. Section 
IV 
addresses 
the 
integration 
aspects 
between 
the 
Engagement Tool and PLUGGY. More specifically, 
Subsection A presents the PLUGGY flexible data model and 
the way it is used by the Engagement Tool. Concerning the 
security and user account management issues, they are 
analysed in Subsection B. The user interface and the 
available functionalities of the Engagement Tool are 
documented in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
  Plenty of research has been conducted on damage 
assessment of cultural heritage sites. According to [2], 
assessing damage to cultural heritage is complex and has to 
be broken down into two phases: an on-site assessment is 
needed first to estimate costs for salvaging, stabilizing and 
mitigating risks to cultural heritage and then, a detailed 
condition assessment of the damaged objects and structural 
elements is needed to estimate the costs. In [3], through the 
case study of Syria, it is highlighted the need for adopting 
well defined methodologies, methods and tools for 
recording both the inventory of sites and monuments and 
also the damage, threats and causes. Moreover, as stated in 
[4], remote sensing techniques (e.g., Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicle (UAV) photogrammetry) can also be used for the 
damage assessment of monuments based on the successful 
post-earthquake damage assessment carried out for 
“Sulamani” temple in Myanmar. Research has also been 
made on damage assessment through crowdsourcing 
involvement, however most of the published work has 
mainly focused either on improving the effectiveness of 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

crowdsourcing results (e.g., mitigating bias due to unreliable 
participants) [5] or on improving the motivation of people to 
contribute (e.g., through media, influencers, memory of the 
city, etc.) [6]. On the contrary, the aim of this research was 
through integration efforts to get damage assessment content 
not from the wider public (which could lead to poor 
crowdsourcing results), but from the users of a cultural 
heritage aware community and more specifically from 
PLUGGY platform through the proposed developed plugin 
(i.e., the Engagement Tool). 
III. 
FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
Table I lists the most important functional requirements 
(FR) of the Engagement Tool which drove its design, 
development and integration with PLUGGY platform. FR  
are program features or functions that software systems 
must implement so as to enable users to accomplish their 
tasks. It is therefore important to make them clear both for 
the development team and the stakeholders. FR describe 
system behaviour under specific conditions, so they consist 
the descriptions of the services that the software must offer. 
As shown in Table I, considering the Engagement Tool, FR 
are mostly relevant to integration aspects, user interaction, 
and type of content stored.  
IV. 
INTEGRATION OF THE COMMUNITIES ENGAGEMENT 
ICT TOOL WITH PLUGGY PLATFORM 
The Engagement Tool has been integrated into PLUGGY 
which is a Pluggable Social Platform for Heritage Awareness 
and Participation. This social platform enables citizens to 
share their local knowledge and everyday experience with 
others. The reasons for integrating with PLUGGY, rather 
than creating a standalone tool, are the following: 
• 
To take advantage of the visitors already engaged in 
PLUGGY platform [1]. This means that a user 
already logged in to PLUGGY platform will be able 
to interact with the Engagement Tool without 
leaving PLUGGY. This can be achieved through the 
plug-in mechanism of PLUGGY. 
• 
To be able to retrieve content from PLUGGY 
platform (monuments information, used tags, photos, 
etc.) by making use of its APIs. 
• 
To take advantage of the number of PLUGGY’s 
users. This is achieved with the integration between 
the Engagement Tool and PLUGGY’s authorization 
component. To this end, users that have already 
created an account in PLUGGY, they are not obliged 
to create another account in a separate authorization 
component. 
• 
All the content of the Engagement Tool (monuments 
deterioration, business losses, etc.) can be viewed 
both through the current tool and the PLUGGY 
platform. 
However, the integration of the Engagement Tool with 
PLUGGY is not only seen as a technical integration that will 
just exploit already developed technical units of PLUGGY, 
but the objective is the semantic integration in a way that 
content related to cultural heritage (CH) stored in PLUGGY 
database 
and 
especially 
monuments 
geo-localised 
information, will be exploited by the Engagement Tool. 
Figure 1 depicts the integration of the Engagement Tool with 
PLUGGY platform and its interaction with the user. The 
stories related to the deterioration of CH sites or business 
damages can be retrieved by any other web client through 
PLUGGY’s 
Representational 
State 
Transfer 
(REST) 
services.  
A. Usage of the flexible PLUGGY database 
TABLE I.  
FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS OF THE 
ENGAGEMENT TOOL 
Functional Requirement 
No. 
Functional Requirement 
Description 
FR 1 
The Engagement Tool must 
provide 
a 
user 
friendly 
interface so as for a citizen 
to be able to store or update 
info relevant to monument 
deterioration 
or 
business 
damages (i.e., Engagement 
Tool stories)  
FR 2 
The Engagement Tool must 
provide 
a 
user 
friendly 
interface so as for logged in 
users to be able to view 
citizen and business owners 
stories  
FR 3 
The Engagement Tool must 
be 
integrated 
with 
the 
identity 
manager 
and 
authorization services of a 
platform 
specialized 
in 
cultural heritage so to be 
able to attract its users with 
their same credentials 
FR 4 
The Engagement Tool must 
store the content generated 
by the users (i.e., business 
and citizen stories) in the 
database 
of 
the 
aforementioned 
platform. 
This would enhance the 
integration.  
FR 5 
The information relevant to 
the monument deterioration 
should include at least the 
following: description of the 
damage, location of the 
monument, photos and tags 
FR 6 
The content relevant to the 
business damages 
should 
include information useful 
to local authorities (e.g., 
business 
damage 
description, relevant tags, 
location, business risk, etc.)  
 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

PLUGGY, being a new paradigm in cultural heritage [7], 
provides the necessary tools to allow users to share their 
local knowledge and everyday experience with others. More 
specifically, it aimed at creating communities of people 
interested in cultural heritage, from simple citizens to 
cultural institutions that would have the opportunity to share 
their own personalized stories of local cultural knowledge 
and experiences.  It is a social platform that aims at building 
extensive networks around a common interest in connecting 
the past, the present and the future. However, apart from 
being a heritage-centric social platform that will bring 
citizens together for creating stories with meaningful 
narratives resulting in Virtual Exhibitions, the architecture of 
the social platform [8] has been designed in a way that it 
allows the easy integration of external applications (or else 
plugins). External applications can make use of PLUGGY 
REST services so as to either retrieve content from social 
platform’s database or curate cultural heritage content. 
To this end, the Engagement Tool makes use of 
PLUGGY’s flexible data model [8] which is depicted in 
Figure 2. As shown in Figure 2, the PLUGGY data model is 
generic enough to be used by other apps and more 
specifically by PLUGGY’s plugins. This is why the 
Engagement Tool, which is a PLUGGY plugin makes use 
both of PLUGGY’s APIs and database. The main entities 
used in PLUGGY data model along with their interpretation 
are the following: 
• 
Asset: It is the elementary unit of content in 
PLUGGY. An asset is a media file with an identified 
owner, a title, a description, a set of tags and a 
license, which specifies how this file can be reused. 
The Asset can be used as a digital representation of 
cultural heritage artifact, tangible or intangible. The 
media file can be text, image, audio, 3d model or any 
type of binary data. 
• 
Exhibition: Cultural heritage stories curated by 
users of PLUGGY using one or more assets. An 
exhibition can be of several types: media stories, 
timelines, geolocated tours, augmented reality 
exhibitions and games. 
 
Figure 1.   Integration of the Engagement Tool within PLUGGY platform. 
 
 
Figure 2.   PLUGGY flexible data model. 
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

• 
Exhibition Point: Exhibition points link exhibitions 
and assets. An exhibition point is the usage of an 
asset in an exhibition and an exhibition is composed 
of one or several exhibition points. For example, 
events are the exhibition points of timelines and 
chapters are the exhibition points of media stories. 
As reported in [8], the PLUGGY provides the four basic 
operations for persistent storage (i.e., create, read, update and 
delete 
(CRUD)) 
for 
manipulation 
purposes 
of 
all 
aforementioned entities. The entities of PLUGGY entitled 
exhibition, exhibition point and asset are being used by the 
Engagement Tool but in a different manner as described 
below: 
• 
Exhibition in the Engagement Tool: Each citizen 
story and each business owner story concerning the 
Engagement Tool corresponds to an exhibition. In 
the Engagement Tool, the exhibition has the 
meaning of a story (either citizen or business owner 
story). This exhibition may contain many exhibition 
points. Apart from the linking to exhibition points, 
the exhibition may contain among others: link to 
other exhibitions, the date when the exhibition was 
updated or created, the owner and the creator of the 
exhibition, and finally the title and description of the 
exhibition. For instance, the title of an exhibition 
concerning a citizen story could be the following: 
“Notable landmark in Wiltshire has deteriorated” 
and a title for an exhibition concerning a business 
owner story could be the following: “Restaurant in 
Athens has damage due to hurricane”. The 
description of an exhibition relevant to a business 
owner story could be: “Restaurant Kitro in Athens 
has suffered damages. A hurricane has caused 
damage in restaurant ‘Kitro’ and is now out of 
service”. 
• 
Exhibition Point in the context of Engagement 
Tool: The exhibition point is linked to a specific 
exhibition (see Figure 2) and contains more detailed 
information regarding the story. Especially for the 
case of business stories for the Engagement Tool, a 
separate JavaScript Object Notation (json) file is 
linked to the exhibition point that when downloaded 
and parsed by the client, it contains the following 
attributes: (this json file is only applicable to 
business owner stories and not to citizen stories): 
o 
Business 
Damage 
Description 
(e.g., 
extensive damage to the building. The 
building has completely flooded over the 
weekend. As such, the restaurant has been 
closed). 
o 
Business Risk Description (e.g., since the 
restaurant is closed for the past week, there 
is the risk to loose high percentage of 
customers). 
o 
Local Authorities info (e.g., there is 
absolute devastation in the surrounding 
area. A fundraiser needs to be set up to help 
families who lost everything. Police has 
informed us that all businesses are under 
water). 
o 
Customers Lost Percentage (e.g., -80%. 
Loses related to last year’s value). 
o 
Priority of the issue (possible values: 
Urgent, High, Medium, Low, Very Low) 
o 
Criticality of the Issue (possible values: 
Very High, High, Medium, Low, Very 
Low) 
o 
Relevant Tags (e.g., restaurant, flooded, 
damage) 
• 
Asset in the context of Engagement Tool: 
Similarly to PLUGGY assets, an asset in the context 
of the Engagement Tool plays the role of a media 
file with an identified owner, a title, a description, a 
set of tags and a license, which specifies how this 
file can be reused. Currently, the kind of assets that 
the Engagement Tool can support are images. It has 
to be noted that the asset contains file metadata (tags, 
file length, name of file, chunk size, date of 
creation/update, file title, file description, etc.) and 
also the identification (ID) of the actual file which is 
required in order to later call the relevant API so as 
to retrieve the binary data.  
This chapter addressed the main data entities of the 
Engagement Tool (i.e., exhibition, exhibition point, asset) 
and their relation to PLUGGY’s data model. The 
Engagement Tool takes advantage of the flexibility 
concerning PLUGGY data model and stores all the relevant 
information into PLUGGY’s database by making use of its 
APIs. To this end, as stated previously the citizen stories and 
the business owner stories curated by the Engagement Tool 
are stored in the PLUGGY’s back-end in the form of 
exhibitions. 
B. Integration with PLUGGY Authorization Server 
PLUGGY is a pluggable platform and multiple 
applications can access users’ content through Open 
Authorization (OAuth 2.0) security protocol. OAuth 2.0 is 
an open standard for access delegation, commonly used as a 
way for Internet users to grant websites or applications 
access to their information on other websites but without 
giving them the passwords [9]. Generally, OAuth 2.0 
provides clients a “secure delegated access” to server 
resources on behalf of a resource owner. It specifies a 
process for resource owners to authorize third-party access 
to their server resources without providing credentials. 
Designed specifically to work with Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP), OAuth 2.0 essentially allows access 
tokens to be issued to third-party clients by an authorization 
server, with the approval of the resource owner. The third-
party then uses the access token to access the protected 
resources hosted by the resource server. 
In this paper, we consider the third-party client to be the 
Engagement Tool. However, any other tool that can be 
integrated into PLUGGY through the OAuth 2.0 protocol, 
will be able to be a third-party client, and as such, it could 
retrieve the relevant content (i.e., citizen stories concerning 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

a monument deterioration or business owner story 
concerning business interruption) through PLUGGY’s APIs. 
Moreover, the resource server is considered to be the back-
end of the PLUGGY platform that holds all the information 
that has been populated through the Engagement Tool. The 
resource owners are the users that created the stories 
through the Engagement Tool. 
Figure 
3 
depicts 
the 
interaction 
between 
the 
aforementioned components so as for both the Engagement 
Tool and any other willing third-party module to be able to 
access PLUGGY protected resources (i.e., citizen and 
business stories). Before this interaction, and as depicted in 
Figure 4, the client (e.g., the Engagement Tool) has to 
register itself to PLUGGY authorization services by 
providing a client ID and a redirect Uniform Resource 
Identifier (URI). Then, the client is able to participate to 
PLUGGY OAuth 2.0 workflow which is the following:  
a) The user wants to login to the client (i.e., the 
Engagement Tool) and therefore is redirected to 
PLUGGY login page. 
b) The user inserts in the form their PLUGGY 
credentials. 
c) After successful login, the access token is provided 
to the client from PLUGGY authorization services. 
d) The user through the Engagement Tool asks for a 
resource (e.g., for the content of a citizen story) and 
therefore the access token is passed to PLUGGY 
resource server (i.e., the PLUGGY back-end). 
e) The PLUGGY resource server validates the token 
and then it passes to the client the resource. 
f) 
The user is able through the client to view or edit the 
citizen or business owner stories. 
After successful authentication, the access token is 
granted to the client and the user is able through the client 
app to view or edit the stories. It has to be noted that through 
the PLUGGY login page, users are also able to reset 
password or create new accounts. 
The registration of the application client to PLUGGY 
authorization services is a prerequisite for integrating into 
PLUGGY security mechanism (i.e., OAuth 2.0 protocol), 
however, this step is automatic for any developer and it is 
provided through PLUGGY platform [10]. According to 
Figure 4, the developer of the app has to provide a client ID 
and a redirection URI to PLUGGY platform so as to 
initialize the integration of the app with PLUGGY OAuth 
2.0 mechanism. Every application can be integrated into 
PLUGGY platform and the security workflow and procedure 
is straightforward [10]. The Engagement Tool has already 
completed this procedure.  
V. 
USER INTERFACE OF ENGAGEMENT TOOL 
 The user interface (UI) is the space where interactions 
between the users and the Engagement Tool occur. The goal 
of these interactions is to allow effective operation and 
control of the Engagement Tool by citizens and business 
owners. The following Subsections document the user 
interface which aims at making easy and efficient the 
creation and managing of citizen and business owner stories. 
A. Wizards for creating stories 
There are two kinds of stories that a user can store within 
the Engagement Tool through wizards: 
• 
Citizen Stories: Citizens are able to create stories 
about the deterioration of cultural heritage sites. In 
this case the user is able through a wizard to store 
the following info: title of the story, monument 
damage description, and relevant photo and tags. 
• 
Business Owner Stories:  Local business owners are 
also able to report about their damages, so as to 
promise the business continuity. More specifically, 
business owners are able to report through the 
Engagement Tool the following: business damage, 
business risk assessment, information useful to 
local authorities, customers lost percentage, priority 
and criticality of the issue, and relevant tags. 
The two aforementioned kinds of stories can both contain 
relevant images, location details and general information. 
Figure 5 depicts the first step of the wizard of the 
Engagement Tool for creating a citizen story concerning a 
monument damage. In this step the user has to enter 
information 
concerning 
story 
title 
and 
monument 
deterioration description along with location. Concerning the 
creation of a business story, the wizard is pretty much the 
same. The only difference lies in the fact that there is one 
more (second step) of the wizard, where the user has to insert 
 
 
Figure 3.   OAuth 2.0 workflow between the Engagement Tool, the 
PLUGGY authorization services and the PLUGGY back-end. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.   The Engagement Tool is registered into PLUGGY 
authorization services.  
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

information relevant to business damages (i.e., business 
damage, risk assessment for the business, information useful 
to local authorities, customers lost percentage, priority and 
criticality of the issue and relevant tags). After the 
completion of each wizard, all relevant information 
concerning the stories is stored in the PLUGGY back-end 
and can be retrieved through its APIs. Thereafter, the content 
could be retrieved by any third party app that has been 
integrated into PLUGGY authorization server. 
B. Presentation of created stories to users 
In addition to uploading these two kinds of stories, the 
users of the Engagement Tool are also able to view already 
stored stories. The page of the app that renders a photo along 
with its metadata concerning the monument damage is 
shown in Figure 6. In addition to the presentation of both 
citizen and business owner stories, the owners of the stories 
are also able to edit or delete them, and therefore dedicated 
pages exist for these functionalities.  
C. Responsive Design of the Engagement Tool 
Responsive web design (RWD) is an approach to web 
design that makes web pages render well on a variety of 
devices and window or screen sizes [11]. Responsive web 
design has become more important as the amount of mobile 
traffic has come to account for more than half of total 
internet traffic. Taking into consideration this, the 
Engagement Tool has been driven by RWD best practices 
and Figure 7 demonstrates a page of the Tool if it was to be 
viewed in a small screen. The Engagement Tool adapts the 
layout to the viewing environment by using fluid, 
proportion-based grids, flexible images, and Cascading Style 
Sheets (CSS3) media queries so as for the user to be able to 
use the tool and view the content of citizen and business 
stories from any device independent on its screen size. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented the Communities Engagement ICT 
Tool which is a software component designed and developed 
in the context of the European project entitled “Hyperion”. 
This tool aims at supporting communities’ participation in 
the process of evaluating monument damages through the 
uploading of stories (i.e, reports). The textual and graphical 
content of the stories could be inspected and evaluated by the 
authorities so as to enhance the overall resilience and 
reconstruction planning of cultural heritage sites. The content 
of both citizen stories (relevant to monument damages) and 
business owner stories (relevant to business disruptions due 
to climate change and extreme events) could be combined, as 
proposed by Hyperion project, with atmospheric modeling, 
geotechnical analysis of CH sites and vulnerability maps so 
as to assess the threats of CH sites and support sustainable 
reconstruction plans. Last but not least, rather than 
developing an isolated and standalone tool, an integration 
with a pluggable social platform was performed and most 
specifically with PLUGGY. This integration benefits the 
Engagement Tool in terms of the free availability of 
PLUGGY data both in terms of existing users (aware of 
cultural heritage), and cultural heritage relevant data (e.g., 
monuments).   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is a part of the Hyperion project. Hyperion has 
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement 
no 821054. Content reflects only the authors’ view and 
European Commission is not responsible for any use that 
may be made of the information it contains. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Lim, N. Frangakis, L. M. Tanco, and L. Picinali, 
“PLUGGY: A pluggable social platform for cultural heritage 
 
Figure 6.   Photo along with its metadata is displayed. 
 
Figure 7.   First step of the citizen story wizard if it was to be viewed 
in a screen 320 * 510.  
 
 
Figure 5.   First step of the citizen story wizard. 
 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

awareness and participation. InAdvances in Digital Cultural 
Heritage” 2018 (pp. 117-129). Springer, Cham. 
[2] A. Tandon, “Post-disaster damage assessment of cultural 
heritage: Are we prepared.” In: ICOM-CC 18th Triennial 
Conference 2017. 2017. (pp. 2017-12). 
[3] A. Vafadari, G. Philip, and R. Jennings,  “Damage assessment 
and monitoring of cultural heritage places in a disaster and 
post-disaster event--a case study of syria.” International 
Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing & Spatial 
Information Sciences 42 (2017). 
[4] E. Baranwal, P. Seth, H. Pande, S. Raghavendra, and S. K. P. 
Kushwaha, "Application of unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) 
for damage assessment of a cultural heritage monument." In 
International Conference on Unmanned Aerial System in 
Geomatics, pp. 123-131. Springer, Cham, 2019. 
[5] A. B. Khajwal and A. Noshadravan, “An uncertainty-aware 
framework for reliable disaster damage assessment via 
crowdsourcing.” International Journal of Disaster Risk 
Reduction. 2021 Mar 1;55:102110. 
[6] P. Kumar, “Crowdsourcing to rescue cultural heritage during 
disasters: A case study of the 1966 Florence Flood.” 
International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction. 2020 Feb 
1;43:101371. 
[7] N. Frangakis et al., “PLUGGY: A pluggable Social Platform 
for 
Cultural 
Heritage 
Awareness 
and 
Participation.” 
InCIRA@ EuroMed 2018 (pp. 21-30). 
[8] J. Hreno, D. Toledo, and S. Bolierakis, “Architecture 
specification. Deliverable D3.1 of the PLUGGY project 
funded under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research 
and innovation programme under grant agreement No 
726765.” 
Available 
at 
https://www.pluggy-
project.eu/deliverables/, [retrieved: 9, 2021].  
[9] K. Dodanduwa and I. Kaluthanthri, “Role of trust in OAuth 
2.0 and OpenID connect.” In2018 IEEE International 
Conference on Information and Automation for Sustainability 
(ICIAfS) 2018 Dec 21 (pp. 1-4). IEEE. 
[10] L. M. Tanco, P. Smatana, D. Toledo, L. Torrico, “Guidelines 
and Instructions for PLUGGY Apps. Deliverable D4.5 of the 
PLUGGY project funded under the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under 
grant 
agreement 
No 
726765.” 
Available 
at 
https://www.pluggy-project.eu/deliverables/, 
[retrieved: 
9, 
2021]. 
[11] A. Hussain and E. O. Mkpojiogu, “The effect of responsive 
web design on the user experience with laptop and 
smartphone devices.” Jurnal Teknologi. 2015;77(4):41-7
 
 
 
 
 
 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

