Implementing IT Service Management as an
Organizational Change: Identifying Factors Affecting
the Change Resistance
Marko J¨antti, Sanna Heikkinen
School of Computing
University of Eastern Finland
Email: {marko.jantti, sanna.heikkinen}@uef.ﬁ
Abstract—When an IT organization decides to launch an IT
service management programme, the discussion among employees
after the decision is not always positive. New concepts, tools, roles
and responsibilities and methods, as well as changes in strategy
and culture may cause remarkable amount of change resistance
among both employees and managers of a software company. Or-
ganizational change management is a fruitful research topic due
to its challenging nature. It addresses employees’ feelings, success
factors of implementing strategic changes, role of change agents
and factors affecting change resistance. In this study, we examine
the IT service management programme as an organizational
change and change resistance related to this change. Our research
focuses on identifying symptoms of change resistance related to
adoption of IT service management best practice framework IT
Infrastructure Library (ITIL). The research problem of this study
is: How does change resistance occur in IT service management
programmes and how can it be decreased systematically? The
main contribution of this paper is to present ﬁndings collected
from ﬁve Finnish IT service provider organizations operating in
different domains.
Keywords—IT service management; organizational change;
change resistance.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Transition from a software engineering company with
software lifecycle models to a service oriented company with
well-established IT Service Management (ITSM) processes
and tools is a long journey that involves numerous challenges.
Thousands of IT organizations world-wide use IT service
management best practice framework IT Infrastructure Library
(ITIL) in their service operations and globally, there are over
million ITIL certiﬁed IT specialists. Despite the existence of
ITSM best practices (ITIL [1], COBIT [2]), standards such
as ISO/IEC 20000-1:2010 Part 1: Service management system
requirements [3], maturity models and operational IT service
management models, carrying out an IT service management
programme successfully is a real challenge. The literature has
shown that most major change initiatives (not only IT-related)
seem to fail in the organizations. This has resulted in a need
to examine how organizations can implement organizational
changes successfully. There are strategic changes, such as
changes in strategic technology platforms, changes related to
service portfolio and changes in relationships between the
service provider and strategic suppliers. IT changes, in turn,
occur when somebody adds, modiﬁes or removes IT services
and their components. Often, there is no need to distinguish
a strategic change from an organizational change because
typically organizational changes are strategic changes.
One of the most famous persons related to the research
ﬁeld of organizational change is Kurt Lewin [4]. Lewin has
proposed several important concepts of managing change such
as action research, ﬁeld theory, group dynamics and three step
model of change. Lewin has presented a cyclic action research
model that can be used to implement change. As a research
method, action research emphasizes the role of actions taken
during the research process. The method has been criticized
with claims that it provides results that cannot be generalized to
other organizations. Lewin applied a ﬁeld theory for examining
the human behavior. According to the ﬁeld theory, the human
behavior is related to both person and their environment. The
concept of group dynamics refers to the Lewins ﬁnding that a
group affects individual behavior while making decisions on
organizational change.
In order to keep ITSM programme sustainable and live,
one can apply organizational change models such as three
step model of change. Three step model of change consists
of three key stages: unfreezing, change and refreezing. During
the ﬁrst phase (unfreezing), one should ensure that the need
for the change is understood in the organization and people
desire the change. In other models, this is called creating ur-
gency of change. During the second phase (change), a change
is implemented by introducing, for example, creating new
policies and procedures in the organization or communicating
new values or attitudes to people working in the organization.
In the third phase (refreezing), the focus is on reinforcing
and supporting the change. The three step model of change
addresses that organizational commitment must occur not only
during the change but also before and after a change. In the
ITIL framework, programmes that aim at continuous improve-
ment of services are called Continuous Service Improvement
Programmes (CSIP). CSIP is an ongoing formal programme
undertaken within an organisation to identify and introduce
measurable improvements within a speciﬁed work area or work
process [5].
Only few academic studies have addressed the organiza-
tional change perspective in implementing IT service manage-
ment programmes. The study of Tan, Cater-Steel and Toleman
[6] emphasizes the role of the committed senior management
in the ITSM projects success, as well as the role of a project
champion and the recognition of the need for an appropri-
534
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

ate change management strategy. Additionally, in the study
of Pollard and Cater-Steel [7] key success factors of ITIL
implementations included top management support, training,
virtual project teams, careful tool selection and use of external
consults. Additionally, there are studies that have focused on
conceptualising the ITSM projects [8]. The literature of organi-
zational change management deals with the concept of change
agents. Ford et al. [9] discuss how change agents may affect
the resistance of change. They comment that change agents
can participate in change resistance from their side by not
legitimizing changes, misrepresenting changes and not calling
for action (carrying out required actions). First, legitimization
of changes refers to the action where change agents provide
justiﬁcation for changes, presenting clear rationale why the
change is needed in the organization, and enhance the readiness
for change adoption as well as increasing the likelihood of
change acceptance. Legitimization of an ITSM programme
might be, for example, a statement of required cost savings.
Additionally, one should pay attention how fast change shall
be adopted and what is extent of the change acceptance. The
schedule plays an important role for example, when two IT
service providers have agreed on merger by speciﬁed date.
Furthermore, Ford et al. [9], present that change resistance
should be seen as a resource instead of a negative issue. Three
types of value can be identiﬁed: existence value, engagement
value, and strengthening value. Existence value means that
change agents are able to keep conversation on change active
and may also attract new members to participate in discussion.
Conversation on ITSM programme may be started from service
desk workers and then extended to other service areas. This
conversation helps change agents to increase their understand-
ing of the change. Engagement value can appear when change
recipients engage in the change, for example, when they feel
that the change will affect them negatively or when they are
afraid of the organizations success. For example, a product
manager engages in creating service catalogues because he/she
feels that management does not understand the role of his / her
product within the product portfolio. The strengthening value
of resistance means that a conﬂict may strengthen recipients
commitment on the change. A conﬂict could be, for example,
a nature disaster or ﬁnding a common enemy, such as a tough
competitor.
A. Our Contribution
The main contribution of this study is to study
•
How change urgency related to ITSM programmes is
communicated in the IT service provider organization?
•
How IT service provider organizations introduce
changes related to ITSM processes?
•
How does change resistance occur in IT service man-
agement?
•
Which methods are used by organizations to decrease
the change resistance?
As results, this study provides new scientiﬁc knowledge
on means how ITSM-related change urgency is communicated
within an IT service provider, actions how organizational
change is introduced, evidence on how change resistance
occurs and methods how change resistance is decreased. The
results of this study can be used by continual service im-
provement managers, ITSM programme managers, portfolio
managers, service directors and other managers and team
leaders responsible for introduction of ITSM processes. The
remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2,
the research methods of this study are described. In Section 3,
the results of the study are presented. Section 4 is the analysis
of ﬁndings. The discussion and the conclusions are given in
Section 5.
II.
RESEARCH PROBLEM & METHODOLOGY
The research problem of this study is: How does change
resistance occur in IT service management programmes and
how can it be decreased systematically? The research problem
was divided into the following research questions:
•
How change urgency is communicated in the organi-
zation?
•
How IT service provider organizations introduce
changes related to ITSM processes?
•
How does change resistance occur in IT service man-
agement?
•
Which methods are used by organizations to decrease
the change resistance?
A. Data Collection Methods
Data was collected from ﬁve IT service provider com-
panies in Finland. Companies operated in various business
domains (healthcare, energy, miscallenous services, bank and
insurance). These organisations were selected for this study
because they were representative cases of IT organisations with
many year’s experience in ITIL and ITSM. The following data
collection methods/sources were used during the study:
•
Documentation (ITSM process descriptions)
•
Archives (incident records, change request records,
service request records, email records )
•
Interviews/discussions (service managers, directors,
development manager, product/service managers)
•
Participative observation (ITSM Awareness training
periods in two organizations)
•
Physical artefacts (Organization’s intranet, ITSM tool)
We used case study research and action research [10]
to collect the data on IT service management improvement
programmes and service management process improvement.
According to Yin [11], a case study is ”an empirical inquiry
that investigates a contemporary phenomenon within its real-
life context”. We used an exploratory case study with multiple
case design. However, we decided to keep organizations and
roles of respondents anoymous because it might be relatively
easy to combine a person to a role and because organizational
change management issues can be tricky and sensitive issues
within the organization. Results of the case study resulted in
change resistance-related information as by-product. Action
research was used because suits well to the studies of orga-
nizational change. In fact, the roots of action research are in
organizational change.
535
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Fig. 1.
Implementing ITSM Programmes
B. Data Analysis
The data of the case study were collected and analyzed
using a within case analysis technique [12] that focuses on
analyzing each case stand-alone before making any compar-
isons. Research ﬁndings were validated through discussions,
seminars and workshops with the representatives of case
organizations. In each case, the research team produced a case
study report which was delivered to the case organization’s
contact persons. A qualitative content analysis technique was
applied for case study material to build categories based on the
comments from IT service provider organizations’ managers
and employees.
III.
ITSM PROGRAMMES AS ORGANIZATIONAL
CHANGES
In this study, we apply Lewins three step model of change
and its phases (unfreezing, change and refreezing) to organiza-
tional changes where the context of change is adoption of IT
service management process frameworks (IT Infrastructure Li-
brary) and service management standards. In unfreezing phase,
we should ﬁrst identify what is the rationale behind the change,
what are the clear beneﬁts of change, how to communicate
the urgency of change to employees and managers of the IT
organization and how to identify skilled and motivated change
agents. Figure 1 shows an example of how ITSM programme
could be implemented.
The change management model of Lewin is a very useful
tool for organizing the ﬁndings from IT service provider or-
ganizations change efforts. During the study we observed that
the change urgency related service management improvement
is created in IT companies by addressing customers or owners
need for a change or bottlenecks in the current IT infrastruc-
ture. The case organization’s representatives reported following
factors that triggered the adoption of ITSM frameworks in their
organization:
•
“Our key customer would like to improve service level
management with us because they are not satisﬁed
with the current practices.”
•
“We need deﬁned service management processes be-
cause there have been plans on merging two organi-
zations together.”
•
“The owners of the company encourage us to increase
service quality.”
•
“IT customers are continuously requesting new types
of IT service reports. Producing those manually takes
a lot of time. The new tool should support effective
measurement and reporting.”
•
“Customers are not interested in buying our new
product because it lacks some speciﬁc features.”
•
“Our new management started a cost savings pro-
gramme. We need measurable processes in order to
improve, for example, the througtput times of pro-
cesses.”
A. How IT Service Provider Organizations Introduce Changes
Related to ITSM Processes?
During the second phase (change) of the three step model
of change, a change is implemented by introducing, for exam-
ple, creating new policies and procedures in the organization
or communicating new values or attitudes to people working
in the organization. In our study, we observed that the IT
service provider companies valued the following factors in
introducing ITSM processes. Many companies in our study
were implementing IT service change management processes.
•
All the employees in the service area were provided
a half day process training (TR)
•
Motivating employees why change management is
important (MT)
•
A short general information package on ISO/IEC
20000 and ITIL Change Management (TR)
•
Deﬁning the scope of the process (P)
•
Deﬁning the processes in general level (P)
•
Identifying the different types of changes: normal
change, standard change, emergency change (P)
•
Practicing identiﬁcation of changes with practical ex-
amples (E)
•
Publishing roles and responsibilities (RR)
•
Starting the Change Advisory Board practice (F)
•
Publishing the schedule, goals and monitoring (MN,
G)
•
Main focus should be in managing processes (P)
•
Mapping the process improvement goals to organiza-
tional goals.(G)
•
Meaningfullness of improvement work (ME)
•
Ensuring that the right direction has been selected
(MN)
•
Consistent human resource management plays impor-
tant role
•
Proceeding in understandable steps (S)
•
Integrated to annual goals (G)
536
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

•
Tailoring ITSM to organization’s own context (not just
copy the processes from ITIL) (TA)
•
Searching common good things (participative ap-
proach instead of orders) (PA)
•
The goal should be to learn together and on individual
level (L)
•
Inspire yourself and others (MT)
•
Finding the levels of freedom in developing processes
(P)
B. How Does Change Resistance Occur in IT Service Man-
agement?
The following comments that address the change resistance
were captured from our industrial partners:
•
“Change resistance occurs in coffee table discussions”
•
“Why should we change existing functioning prac-
tices?”
•
“This approach is not suitable for us. It is too unﬂex-
ible”
•
“ITSM is yet another new ISM”
•
“Does it make any sense to assign all the changes
including the minor ones to the Change Advisory
Board, it sounds very bureaucratic.”
•
“I am not interested in participating in service man-
agement training, I just try to make this work better.”
•
“I would say that the introduction of the new IT
service management system is painful because em-
ployees do not have enough knowledge on IT service
management processes.”
•
“We should introduce some new practices that pro-
mote the IT service management. For example, we
could market the problem management process for
application managers by launching a campaign: Start
your day with a problem.”
•
“I am little bit worried about how processed and daily
practices could be brought together.”
•
“Can you mention why should we learn these ITSM
things if the managers only goal is to decrease the
number of people?”
C. Methods for decreasing the change resistance related to
ITSM
During the study we observed that organizations had used
or expressed the need for the following methods:
•
“Why are they continously asking that how could we
improve things but they never tell us what has been
improved?”
•
“In order to ensure that employees do not go back to
old practices, I needed to communicate the beneﬁts of
release management in a weekly meeting during two
years. Sometimes, I felt a little bit frustrated, but at
the end I think it was worth it.”
•
Reinforcing the new practices and create conditions
for giving up from old practices
•
Training key persons and ensuring that they are com-
mitted in change
•
Training the personnel, for example providing them
ITSM Awareness training
•
Hiding the ITIL terminology to the background
•
Creating justiﬁcation for ITSM based on real service
operations, not based on ITIL framework.
IV.
ANALYSIS
The data analysis was carried out by using qualitative con-
tent analysis technique for the case study material. The purpose
of the analysis was to create meaningful categories that can
be exploited by future studies in the area of organizational
change management. Regarding the ﬁrst research question
(How change urgency is communicated in the organization?),
we identiﬁed that ITSM programmes are started because of
key customers’ requirements, management plans to outsource
or merge service operations, the company’s owners request to
increase the quality, dissatisﬁed customers or due to establish-
ment of cost savings programmes. The service improvement
programme may receive more negative comments and change
resistance if the reason behind the improvement is just to
outsource services to other parties.
Regarding the second research question (How IT service
provider organizations introduce changes related to ITSM
processes), we coded the ﬁndings and identiﬁed 11 categories:
Training (TR), Motivating (MT), Process (P), Examples (E),
Roles and Responsibilities (RR), Function (F), Monitoring
(MN), Meaningfulness of improvement work (ME), Goals (G),
Scope (S), Tailoring (TA) and Learning (L). Our ﬁndings
support earlier ﬁndings of Pollard and Cater-Steel [7] on
success factors in ITIL implementations. Common issues with
the study of Pollard and Cater-Steel were Process priority
and Training. The study of Pollard and Cater-Steel [7] and
Hochstein [13] also considered Top management support as
a success factor. In our case, Motivating category could have
been named as Top management category. Our Goals category
corresponds to Relevant and realistic objectives category in
the study of Stelzer and Mellis [14]. In this study, we did
not use the category Service culture but some categories, for
example, Learning could be part of the service culture. We also
established categories that were not visible in previous studies
such as the Function (based on a ﬁnding that service providers
tend to create new organizational structures to facilitate the
change) and Meaningfulness of improvement work (based on
a ﬁnding that management should empower employees to carry
out improvement).
Regarding the third research question (How does change
resistance occur in IT service management?), we observed that
change resistance occurs and is visible in daily events, such
as in coffee table discussions, not only after seminars held
by management. Employees may see the ITSM processes and
practices too bureaucratic, time consuming and unﬂexible. The
reason for this might be the large number of different types
of records (incidents, problems, changes, releases) the support
request may go through. In both training sessions and process
537
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

improvement discussions, we observed that employees were
afraid of that a Change Advisory Board function would cause
a bottleneck for processing small changes.
Regarding the fourth question (Which methods are used
by organizations to decrease the change resistance?) we estab-
lished the following categories:
•
Better communication: “Why are they continously
asking that how could we improve things but they
never tell us what has been improved”
•
Repeating the message: “In order to ensure that em-
ployees do not go back to old practices I needed to
communicate the beneﬁts of release management in
a weekly meeting during two years. Sometimes I felt
frustrated but at the end I think it was worth it.”
•
Reinforcing: “Reinforcing the new practices and create
conditions for giving up from old practices.”
•
Training: “Training key persons and ensuring that they
are committed in change; training the personnel, for
example providing them ITSM Awareness training.”
•
Terminology: “Hiding the ITIL terminology to the
background.”
•
Business-based justiﬁcation: “Creating justiﬁcation for
ITSM based on real service operations, not based on
ITIL framework.”
Our analysis can be constructed into following recom-
mendations how to communicate the ITSM programme as
an organizational change to employees and managers: 1)
analyze the received questions and comments on the ITSM
programme and build clear counterarguments, 2) ensure that
there is enough communication on ITSM programme (vision,
goals, urgency) and that communication is done frequently, 3)
use multiple channels (training, seminars, newsletters, social
media) for communicating the beneﬁts of ITSM programme
but ensure that the core message is always consistent and
clear, 4) explore whether change recipients (service personnel)
have understood the ITSM programme-related communication
correctly, 5) as a change agent use participative method to
invite people for planning the change and learning together, 6)
remember that talks do not necessarily lead to action. Thus,
one should deﬁne a clear action plan for the ITSM programme.
Action plan may cover improvements to processes, services or
employees’ competences.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The research problem of this study is: How does change
resistance occur in IT service management programmes and
how can it be decreased systematically? We used case study
methods to identify symptoms of IT service management -
related change resistance. Data was collected from case stud-
ies, ITSM seminars, ITSM training sessions and ITSM action
research periods with IT service provider organizations. Our
results contribute to the research ﬁeld of service science and
organizational change. We identiﬁed triggers for establishment
of ITSM programmes, studied how change resistance is vis-
ible in ITSM and how IT companies deal with the change
resistance.
There are certain limitations related to our study. First,
data were collected from ﬁve IT service provider organizations
in Finland by using qualitative methods. Quantitative data
collection and analysis could have provided new insights to
the research topic. Second, we used qualitative content analysis
only for case study material. The content analysis could have
been used also for article material related to ITSM as an
organizational change. Third, case study research method has
received criticism that results from case studies cannot be gen-
eralized to other organizations. However, the research method
literature indicates that they can still be used to improve and
extend the theory. Further research could explore deeper the
establishment of IT service management programmes and how
change resistance has been taken into account in planning the
programme.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the case organization’s represen-
tatives for valuable feedback and responses that helped us to
perform this study.
REFERENCES
[1]
Cabinet Ofﬁce, ITIL Service Strategy.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2011.
[2]
COBIT 5, Control Objectives for Information and related Technology:
COBIT 5: Enabling Processes.
ISACA, 2012.
[3]
ISO/IEC 20000:1, Part 1: Service management system requirements.
ISO/IEC JTC 1 Secretariat, 2010.
[4]
J. Helms-Mills, K. Dye, and A. J. Mills, Understanding Organizational
Change.
USA: Taylor & Francis, 2009.
[5]
OGC, ITIL Planning to Implement.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2002.
[6]
W.-G. Tan, A. Cater-Steel, and M. Toleman, “Implementing IT service
management: A case study focussing on critical success factors,”
Journal of Computer Information Systems, vol. 50, no. 2, 2009.
[7]
C. Pollard and A. Cater-Steel, “Justiﬁcations, strategies, and critical
success factors in successful itil implementations in u.s. and australian
companies: An exploratory study,” Information Systems Management,
vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 164–175, 2009.
[8]
J. Iden and T. R. Eikebrokk, “Understanding the ITIL implementation
project: Conceptualization and measurements,” in Proceedings of 2011
22nd International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems Appli-
cations.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE, 2011.
[9]
J. Ford, L. Ford, and A. D’Amelio, “Resistance to change: The rest of
the story,” Academy of Management Review, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 362–377,
2008.
[10]
R. Baskerville, “Investigating information systems with action re-
search,” Commun. AIS, p. 4.
[11]
R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage Publishing, 1994.
[12]
K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,” Academy
of Management Review, vol. 14, pp. 532–550, 1989.
[13]
A. Hochstein, G. Tamm, and W. Brenner, “Service oriented it manage-
ment: Beneﬁt, cost and success factors,” in Proceedings of the 2005
European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2005).
AIS
Electronic Library, 2005.
[14]
D. Stelzer and W. Mellis, “Success factors of organizational change
in software process improvement,” Software Process: Improvement and
Practice, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 227–250, 1998.
538
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

