 
 
An Agile Method for Model-Driven Requirements Engineering 
Grzegorz Loniewski, Ausias Armesto, Emilio Insfran 
ISSI Research Group, Department of Computer Science and Computation 
Universidad Politecnica de Valencia 
Camino de Vera, s/n, 46022, Valencia, Spain 
{gloniewski, einsfran}@dsic.upv.es, aarmesto@novasoft.es
 
Abstract - The complexity and pervasiveness of software 
applications has increased over the last few years. In this 
context, software development processes have also become 
complex and difficult to use. It is widely recognized that 
requirements engineering has become a critical activity within 
this process. In this paper, we aim to provide a methodological 
approach which focuses on requirements engineering within 
the Model-Driven Development (MDD) context. Our approach 
is an OpenUP extension in which the requirements discipline is 
placed in the model-driven context. We believe that the 
integration of requirements engineering and MDD into one 
consistent process will provide practitioners with the benefits 
of both. This paper presents the definition of the proposed 
process, OpenUP/MDRE, including its activities, roles, and 
work products. We also provide an example of its use in a 
SOA-based software development project. The use of our 
approximation 
guides 
the 
activities 
of 
requirements 
engineering and promotes automation by means of model 
transformations.  
Keywords - Model-Driven Development, Requirements 
Engineering, agile methodology, OpenUP. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Software systems are becoming more and more complex, 
and the success of their development should not depend on 
individual 
efforts 
and 
heroics. 
Successful 
software 
development can only be accomplished by using a well-
defined software development process. Requirements 
Engineering (RE) is recognized as being one of the most 
critical aspects of this process. Errors made at this stage may 
have negative effects on subsequent development steps, and 
on the quality of the resulting software. 
Several software development approaches with which to 
support the development of complex systems have been 
proposed, of which Model-Driven Development (MDD) is 
one of the most promising. MDD promotes the separation of 
concerns between the business specifications and the 
implementation of these specifications on specific platforms 
[4]. This separation is obtained by using models that allow 
the level of abstraction to be elevated [9]. In this context, 
Model-Driven Architecture (MDA) [13] is the best known 
realization of the MDD. It encourages the use of models and 
model 
transformations, 
among 
several 
models: 
the 
Computation Independent Model (CIM), the Platform 
Independent Model (PIM), the Platform Specific Model 
(PSM) and code. 
However, most MDA-based approaches focus on the 
transformation strategies from PIM to PSM and from PSM to 
code. Unfortunately, less attention is paid to the CIM to PIM 
transformations upon which requirements engineering places 
emphasis. Loniewski et al. [7] have shown that there is no 
systematized 
development 
process 
that 
applies 
RE 
techniques in the MDD context. Although various techniques 
for CIM to PIM model transformations exist, those software 
development projects which attempt to use them often fail 
owing to the lack of well-defined methods and processes 
describing the entire development life cycle.  
 
Another problematic issue as regards existing MDD 
supporting approaches is that the clear assignation of the 
methodology’s artifacts to the MDA abstraction levels is 
frequently impossible. This situation arises as a result of the 
unclear definition of CIM and PIM, which confuses 
developers. It is consequently very difficult to apply the 
MDA life cycle by starting from the CIM level, and thus 
obtain most of the benefits that the MDD process should 
provide, i.e., automation in model transformations and 
traceability management. 
In this paper, we introduce a methodology that provides 
MDD processes with an agile method which incorporates the 
RE activities. This method has been developed as an 
extension of OpenUP [2], an agile methodology, which is a 
minimally sufficient software development process that 
provides only fundamental content for small or medium size 
projects that deliver software as a main product. It mainly 
focuses on the collaborative nature of software development. 
The main extension is the replacement of the Requirements 
discipline with Model-Driven Requirements with which to 
elicit, model and manage requirements in the MDD context. 
Although OpenUP was not initially created to support MDD 
processes, it offers a flexible, agile and extensible means to 
introduce a model-driven process integrated with RE 
activities. This work may be an interesting contribution for 
those software process engineers who are faced with the 
challenge of guiding software development projects that 
follow an MDD approach from the requirements elicitation. 
Moreover, in projects already using the OpenUP method, the 
agility feature of our method makes the incorporation of the 
improved MDD-complaint OpenUP extension quite quick 
and smooth. 
The remainder of this work is as follows. Section 2 
provides an overview of the software process as an 
engineering process and also introduces some related 
approaches. Section 3 introduces the improved OpenUP-
based methodological approach, presenting details of the 
content and process elements of the new Model-Driven 
Requirements discipline. Section 4 puts this approach into 
practice, discussing an example of its application to a SOA-
570
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

 
 
based middleware platform development. Finally, Section 5 
contains some conclusions and future work. 
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
This section describes the background of software 
process engineering along with other important approaches 
related to OpenUP/MDRE. 
A. Software Process Engineering 
When methodologies first emerged, each software 
development process used its own concepts and notations to 
define the contents of the methodology. The need to unify all 
these concepts and notations therefore emerged. The OMG 
thus 
introduced 
the 
Software 
Process 
Engineering 
Metamodel (SPEM) [12] standard. SPEM provides a 
complete metamodel based on the Meta Object Facility 
(MOF) [11] to formally express and maintain development 
method content and processes.  
Various tools supporting this standard currently exist, 
one of which is the Eclipse Process Framework (EPF) [1]. 
EPF is a comprehensive process authoring tool which 
provides extensive method authoring and publishing 
capabilities. EPF uses the concept of a plug-in library to 
allow process engineers to define and extend methodologies. 
The fact that OpenUP is itself a plug-in library permits it to 
define new processes or extend existing ones. In this paper, 
this tool is used to extend OpenUP by incorporating a model-
driven requirements engineering approach. 
B. Related Work 
Various existing approaches provide model-based 
requirements specifications incorporated into an agile 
methodology. The Agile Unified Process (AUP) is a 
simplified version of the RUP which applies agile techniques 
to Agile Model-Driven Development (AMDD). This 
approach considers the model as the principal artifact of the 
requirements specifications. However, its use in the model-
driven context is not clear. There has been another attempt to 
create a lightweight methodology upon the MDA principles: 
OpenUP/MDD. However, its stable version has not been 
released. This proposal was focused solely on the 
transformations from the PIM to PSM level of the MDA 
framework. In this respect, our proposal and the 
OpenUP/MDD 
approach 
are 
complementary. 
The 
methodological approach presented in this work focuses on 
the CIM level transformations and generates the desired 
model at the PIM level. 
Several attempts to establish a methodology with model-
driven principles can be found in literature, but none of them 
focuses on the CIM-level requirements and a complete 
process to derive PIM-level specifications. Methods and 
techniques that describe particular transformations of 
requirements also exist (e.g., [5] or [15]), but they hardly 
ever possess a well-defined description of their use in a 
development process. 
III. 
OPENUP EXTENSION FOR THE MODEL-DRIVEN RE  
This section introduces an extension of OpenUP for 
model-driven requirements engineering - OpenUP/MDRE, 
signifying that it focuses on a discipline for requirements 
engineering based on models in the model-driven context.  
We believe that this new discipline will improve the 
effectiveness of requirements engineering and will also make 
a significant contribution towards supporting analysts and 
developers by providing a well-defined process.  
The first proposal of the methodology presented in [8] 
was defined on a base method adapted from the Rational 
Unified Process (RUP) [6]. This proposal was validated in a 
case study in an academic context and some of its 
weaknesses were identified. The RUP-based model-driven 
requirements engineering proposal was too strict and 
complex. This limitation has been solved by changing the 
base process of our approach to the agile OpenUP. Both 
RUP and OpenUP provide an iterative and incremental life 
cycle. However, OpenUP decreases the ceremony of the 
process, incorporating one of the strong points of agile 
methodologies such as Extreme Programming and Scrum. 
Our new method restricts neither the requirements elicitation 
methods, nor their specification form. The tasks provided in 
our approach allow an easy adaptation of any type of 
requirements specifications when using them in a model-
driven process leading to PIM definition.  
OpenUP is also available under the Eclipse Public 
License and is developed as a plug-in library of the Eclipse 
Process Framework (EPF) [2] tool, giving process engineers 
a powerful mechanism with which to provide content 
variability of its process elements by means of contribution, 
extension and replacement. 
Figure 1 illustrates the OpenUP hump chart in which the 
Requirements discipline is redefined by the Model-Driven 
Requirements discipline. 
 
 
Figure 1.  OpenUP Extension for Model-Driven Requirements  
As is depicted in Figure 1, the redefined Model-Driven 
Requirements discipline is a concern from the inception 
phase to the construction. Since the hump chart emphasizes 
the workload within disciplines, the diagram shows that the 
new discipline is particularly important during the inception 
and elaboration phase, in which the product vision is created 
and the architecture is established.  
In this new discipline, a CIM requirements model is first 
created on the basis of the stakeholders’ needs, and this is 
then transformed into an analysis model at the PIM level. 
Specifying the CIM to PIM transformations reduces the 
system analysts’ workload and responsibilities by including 
571
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

 
 
domain experts and stakeholders in the system modeling. 
The analyst’s workload therefore decreases, particularly in 
the elaboration phase. Since we are concentrating on model 
use in the MDD context, the workload in the Development 
discipline in the elaboration phase also decreases, depending 
on the degree of automation of the specification generation 
tasks in the Model-Driven Requirements discipline. 
The Architecture discipline (marked with a star) is only 
performed if the architecture (adequate architectural 
elements, models, or patterns) has not been defined. 
However, once this architecture has been defined, the 
Architecture discipline is optional and may be narrowed to 
refine the reference architecture provided. 
Owing to space constraints, we shall comment only 
briefly on each activity of the main extensions of the 
OpenUP 
methodology, 
which 
is 
the 
Model-Driven 
Requirements discipline, pointing out the roles responsible 
for each task, along with input and output artifacts. 
Our approach maintains the roles originally defined by 
OpenUP, but also introduces two roles related to the model-
driven 
context 
activities: 
Model 
Analyst 
and 
Transformations Specifier.  
A set of new activities has been provided and the 
workflow has been replaced. Figure 2 shows the Model-
Driven Requirements workflow represented through a 
tailored version of a UML activity diagram. It is based on the 
OpenUP’s Requirements workflow tasks, but also introduces 
new activities and tasks, which are crucial to the MDD 
process. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Model-Driven Requirements workflow 
The following subsections discuss each of the activities 
of the proposed workflow, including a description of the new 
activities, accompanied by a detailed diagram of tasks, their 
input and output artifacts, and responsible roles. These 
diagrams show not only the roles which are responsible for a 
particular task, but also the roles who participate in its 
realization. 
A. Capture and Analyze Requirements 
This activity, which is mainly composed of tasks taken 
from the original OpenUP requirements discipline, involves 
reaching an agreement on a statement of the problem to be 
solved, identifying the stakeholders and clearly defining the 
system’s boundaries and constraints.  
Stakeholders’ needs and potential features, which 
represent the high-level user or customer view of the system, 
are captured and documented in the Vision document. The 
potential for possible misunderstandings between the 
Analyst and the other different domain background 
stakeholders is minimized by establishing and maintaining a 
common vocabulary in the Glossary.  
The purpose of this activity is, amongst others, to identify 
and capture functional and non-functional requirements for 
the system. The idea is to initially understand and determine 
the requirements at a high-level, and then describe these 
requirements with enough detail to validate understanding of 
the requirements, to ensure concurrence with stakeholder 
expectations, and to permit software development to begin.   
The artifacts that result from the tasks performed 
constitute the principal input for further modeling tasks. The 
tasks defined in this activity are shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Roles, tasks and work products of the Capture and Analyze 
Requirements activity 
B. Identify a Candidate Architecture 
This activity is essential for the software development 
process. It determines the content of artifacts in the RE 
phase, which also conditions the MDD process to be 
followed. In this activity, the main architectural elements are 
identified and the metamodels for models at the CIM-level 
and PIM-level of the MDD process are established. This 
approach is architecture-centric, signifying that it is the 
architecture that demands a certain type of model to be 
created. The architectural pattern identified for the system 
becomes a basis from which to derive further analysis 
artifacts. For example, if the architecture chosen is Service 
Oriented Architecture (SOA), the model that describes 
requirements at the CIM-level may be given as Business 
Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) and it is supposed that 
the model at the PIM-level may be a service model. A 
detailed diagram of particular tasks, roles and artifacts for 
this activity is shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Roles, tasks and work products of the Identify a Candidate 
Architecture activity 
C. Develop Artifacts 
This activity, like the Identify a Candidate Architecture, 
is essential in our approach. The CIM-level requirements 
model (RM) is created in this activity, and this model 
572
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

 
 
conforms to the metamodel selected for this purpose in the 
previous activity. Model-driven transformations are also 
specified and planned. In particular, the transformation 
language is chosen, along with the transformation 
automation level and tool support that are specified. 
Transformation rules are described in a specially prepared 
Transformation Rules Catalog (TRC). This document is the 
principal artifact supporting transformation execution, but it 
is also essential for the requirements traceability, which is 
the means used to control changes in requirements, maintain 
agreements with the customer and set realistic expectations 
as to what will be delivered. This requirements traceability is 
performed in a new task, Manage Dependencies, and the 
Model Dependencies Specification document is produced as 
a result of this. 
A Transformation Iteration Plan (TIP) is created in this 
activity to describe not only the elements of a source model 
to which the transformation applies, but also the order of the 
transformation rule application. For example, if the 
architecture chosen is SOA, the CIM model contains BPMNs 
and the PIM model contains service models. An example of 
the transformation iteration plan could specify that the 
transformation rules between a BPMN of a higher level and 
a BPMN of a lower level should be executed before the 
transformations rules from a BPMN of a lower level to a 
service model. The tasks defined within this activity are 
shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Roles, tasks and work products of the Develop Artifacts activity 
D. Generate and Validate Model 
This activity concludes the entire requirements modeling 
process by generating the principal artifact of the 
requirements engineering process, which is the Generated 
Analysis Model (GAM). GAM represents requirements 
specification at the PIM-level of the MDA lifecycle. For 
example, GAM can be specified by a UML sequence 
diagram in the case of a client-server software project, or a 
service model in the case of SOA platform development. 
Artifacts, such as a requirements model (RM) or 
transformation rules catalog (TRC), developed as a result of 
the previously performed tasks, are the input artifacts for 
performing model transformations in order to create the 
GAM artifact. These transformations can be manual or 
automated, depending on their level of complexity. Their 
execution may be supported by appropriate tools. Although 
the GAM is systematically obtained by the transformation 
rules, we believe that it is necessary to validate it with regard 
to its consistency and correctness. This type of validation 
should be previously described while defining the 
transformation rules in a separate Model Validation Plan 
(MVP) document. The RM can also be validated against the 
specific conceptual standards of the domain in which it is 
applied. The validation result is stored in the Model 
Validation Record (MVR) document. The tasks defined in 
this activity are shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Roles, tasks and work products of the Generate and Validate 
Model activity 
IV. 
APPLYING OPENUP/MDRE  
The main objective of this section is to show the 
applicability and feasibility of the OpenUP/MDRE approach 
in the development process of a SOA-based system. In this 
example of methodology usage, the system specification is 
developed on the basis of user requirements, which were 
captured as user scenarios. We assume that the requirements 
scenarios and use cases defined in the Capture and Analyze 
Requirements activity have been correctly captured and 
documented in the initial stages of the project. These artifacts 
constitute the input for the subsequent model-driven process. 
Each of the main tasks of the OpenUP/MDRE 
application is commented on in the following subsections. 
A. Identify the System Architecture 
Our proposal for the OpenUP extension was applied to a 
domain in which current systems have to deal with many 
complex processes, multiple stakeholder views and users, a 
distributed environment, changing requirements and many 
other factors. These factors and the domain’s complexity 
lead to system specifications of the same complexity, and the 
principal issues to be considered are interoperability and 
distributed use of the software functionalities. These 
characteristics 
indicate 
that 
the 
Service-Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) is a primary candidate architecture. SOA 
strengthens such factors as reusability, scalability or 
interoperability. In this case, the Architecture Notebook 
(artifact from the architecture OpenUP’s discipline) contains 
the SOA reference architecture description adapted to this 
particular project. 
B. Define Meta-Models 
Since SOA is the selected architecture, it demands a 
certain type of functionality specification. It also implies the 
type of models that should be used in the RE process. The 
Architecture Notebook therefore includes the metamodels 
identified for the CIM-level requirements model and PIM-
573
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

 
 
level analysis model. In this example, requirements specified 
as scenarios and use case models provided by stakeholders 
and captured by the Analyst serve to create the requirements 
model that conforms to the features metamodel (Figure 7.A). 
The most important concept of this metamodel is the Service 
Feature, with one of three refinement types (Decomposition, 
Specialization, and Implemented-by). 
Since SOA was chosen as the reference architecture for 
the project, the PIM-level analysis models will cover the 
business process and service layers of the architecture. In this 
case, models that will be generated in the MDD process are 
established to conform to the BPMN process metamodel 
(Figure 7.B) and service metamodel (Figure 7.C). 
 
 
Figure 7.  Simplified metamodels used for requirements specification 
The most important concepts of these models are the 
service with its description containing operations, messages 
and exceptions, and also the process with the flow of 
activities. 
C. Define and Plan Transformations 
At this stage, the Transformations Specifier prepares the 
TRC, which documents transformations from the CIM model 
to the PIM-level model. In this case, these rules describe a 
transformation from the features model to reach target 
models such as BPMN and service specification. The 
transformation described in this example is not straight 
forward, but consists of two steps: one from the features 
model to BPMN, and one BPMN to the service specification. 
In this case, the TIP document describes the order of use of 
specified transformations.  
The transformations in this particular example are 
performed manually by the Model Analyst. However, in 
other cases they may be executed automatically through the 
use of tools that support a particular transformation. 
An example of this feature to BPMN transformation, 
which is described in detail by Montero et al. [10], is shown 
in Figure 8, in which the left-hand side of the transformation 
presents an element of the source model and the right-hand 
side presents a corresponding element of the target model.  
The service specification is then obtained from the 
BPMN model by applying one of existing techniques. In this 
case, the services and their operations were identified using 
the method described by Azevedo et al. [3]. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Example of transformation rules 
D. Develop Requirements Model 
Once the architecture and the metamodels have been 
identified, the Requirements Model is created. This is done 
manually. The features model, which constitutes the input for 
the CIM to PIM transformation, is created on the basis of 
scenarios and use-cases previously described by the 
stakeholders. Figure 9 shows an example of a features model 
for the system’s Actor Management functionality. This 
functionality contains three independent and optional 
functionalities with which to manage actors. 
  
 
Figure 9.  Example of the requirements model 
E. Run Transformations 
Once the transformations have been defined and planned, 
the Model Analyst generates the PIM-level models in order 
to produce the Generated Analysis Model artifact. The 
specification produced is the input for further design and 
implementation in the Development discipline. Figure 10 
shows a simplified specification of the Actor Management 
business process represented as BPMN (Figure 10.A), along 
with the Actor Management service specification (Figure 
10.B) that conforms to the aforementioned metamodels. 
The Model Dependencies Specification document, which 
is prepared during the aforementioned process, includes the 
traceability links between the requirements and all 
subsequent models that are created as intermediate or final 
products of the model-driven process. 
574
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Example of Generated Analysis Model for Actor Management 
The example presented here shows how the requirements 
specification process may be conducted for SOA-based 
systems development. Taking advantage of the model-driven 
requirements process signifies that it is systematized but also 
agile when preparing different kinds of specifications. The 
process is accompanied by a set of artifacts that provide 
well-documented guidelines for all interested project 
development members. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK 
This 
paper 
presents 
an 
extension 
of 
OpenUP, 
emphasizing 
the 
use 
of 
models 
as 
requirements 
specifications in the context of MDD. This extension 
redefines the original Requirements discipline in the 
OpenUP and proposes a new discipline called Model-Driven 
Requirements. Our methodological approach is an agile RE 
method for project managers who would prefer to adapt a 
MDD RE process to particular software architecture rather 
than using another general approach. We believe that this 
flexible MDD approach is a solution to the common "one 
method fits all" problem of generic methodologies. 
In our approach we apply model-driven techniques to 
extend OpenUP to support different architectures and project 
needs. It improves the development process defined by 
OpenUP in that it is not only model-based, but also model-
driven. This makes OpenUP/MDRE more compliant to 
maturity model approaches (such as that of the MDD 
Maturity Model [14]) needed in industry for the incremental 
adoption of MDD processes. The extension was developed 
as a plug-in library for EPF. It includes new content 
elements, such as: artifacts, roles, tasks, and process 
elements, i.e., activities and capability patterns, to guide 
software engineers who attempt to follow an MDD approach 
in their software projects.  
The application of this approach to an MDD project has 
been described, and shows that the use of a model-driven RE 
has an important influence on the entire development 
process.  
As further work, we plan to provide a tool support with 
which to easily create the artifacts defined for this model-
driven 
development 
process 
(transformation 
rules, 
transformations iteration plan, model validation plan, etc.). 
This will be addressed by providing document templates and 
creating artifacts with wizards.  
Finally, we are involved in the redefinition of the 
OpenUP/MDRE based on the artifact-driven approach 
which, in our opinion, better covers the different aspects of 
an MDD process definition. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research work is supported by the MULTIPLE 
project (with ref. TIN2009-13838) funded by the "Ministerio 
de Ciencia e Innovación (Spain)". 
REFERENCES 
[1] The 
Eclipse 
Process 
Framework 
(EPF) 
project, 
www.eclipse.org/proposals/beacon/ (last accessed 8/8/2011) 
[2] The OpenUP methodology web site (November 2010), 
http://epf.eclipse.org/wikis/openup/ (last accessed 8/8/2011) 
[3] L.G. Azevedo, F. Santoro, F. Baio, J. Souza, K. Revoredo, V. 
Pereira, and I. Herlain, A Method for Service Identification 
from Business Process Models in a SOA Approach. In: 
Enterprise 
Business-Process 
and 
Information 
Systems 
Modeling, Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, 
vol. 29, pp. 99-112. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2009) 
[4] M. Azoff, The Benefits of Model Driven Development. White 
paper, 
Butler 
Group 
(March 
2008), 
http://www.ca.com/us/products/detail/CA-Gen.aspx 
(last 
accessed 8/5/2011) 
[5] P. Jamshidi, S. Khoshnevis, R. Teimourzadegan, A. 
Nikravesh, and F. Shams, Toward Automatic Transformation 
of Enterprise Business Model to Service Model. In: PESOS 
'09: Proceedings of the 2009 ICSE Workshop on Principles of 
Engineering Service Oriented Systems, pp. 70-74, IEEE CS, 
Washington, DC, USA (2009) 
[6] P. Kruchten, The Rational Unied Process: an Introduction. 
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, 
USA (1999) 
[7] G. Loniewski, A. Armesto, and E. Insfran, Incorporating 
Model-Driven Techniques into Requirements Engineering for 
the Service-Oriented Development Process. In: ME’11: 
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Method Engineering, 
vol. 351, pp. 102-107, Springer Boston (2011) 
[8] G. Loniewski, E. Insfran, and S. Abrahao, A Systematic 
Review of the Use of Requirements Engineering Techniques 
in Model-Driven Development. In: Petriu, D.C., Rouquette, 
N., Haugen, (eds.) MoDELS. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 6395, pp. 213-227, Springer (2010) 
[9] T. 
Menzies, 
Editorial: 
Model-Based 
Requirements 
Engineering. Requirements Eng. 8(4), 193--194 (2003) 
[10] I. 
Montero, J. Pena, and A. Ruiz-Cortes, From Feature 
Models to Business Processes. In: Proceedings of the 2008 
IEEE Int. Conf. on Services Computing, vol. 2, pp. 605-608, 
IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA (2008) 
[11] OMG (Object Management Group): Meta Object Facility 
(MOF) 
Core 
Specification 
Version 
2.0 
(2006), 
http://www.omg.org/cgi-bin/doc?formal/2006-01-01 
[12] OMG (Object Management Group): Software Process 
Engineering Metamodel (SPEM) (January) 
[13] OMG 
(Object 
Management 
Group): 
Model 
Driven 
Architecture: The Architecture of Choice for a Changing 
World (2010), http://www.omg.org/mda 
[14] E. Rios, T. Bozheva, A. Bediaga, and N. Guilloreau, MDD 
Maturity Model: A Roadmap for Introducing Model-Driven 
Development. In: ECMDA-FA. pp. 78-89 (2006) 
[15] L. Zhang and W. Jiang, Transforming Business Requirements 
into BPEL: A MDA-Based Approach to Web Application 
Development. In: WSCS'08: IEEE Int. Workshop on 
Semantic Computing and Systems, 2008, pp. 61-66 (2008) 
575
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

