Proposal for Ground Shipping High Volume of Data Parameter in Supersampling 
Unmanned Aircraft Through Radio Modem 
 
Manuel Sánchez, Vicente Millet, Neves Seoane 
INTA – National Institute of Aerospace Technology, 
Madrid, Spain 
{sanchezrum;milletcv;seoanevn@inta.es}@inta.es 
 
Luis de-Marcos, José-Javier Martínez 
Computer Science Department 
 University of Alcalá 
 Madrid, Spain 
{luis.demarcos; josej.martinez}@uah.es 
 
Abstract—In an unmanned aircraft, large volumes of data are 
generated by the various sensors installed on the aircraft. At 
critical moments such as take-off, landing, parachute openings, 
or when the aircraft performs sudden maneuvers, additional 
parameters besides the default need to be sampled in order n 
to understand completely the behavior of the aircraft.  We 
propose different alternatives for sending multiple data to land 
at sampling frequencies of up to 10 Hz at critical times  
Preliminary results are presented for the most extreme case, 
that is using full RS-232 bandwidth for the six most important 
parameters resulting in 210 samples per second for each 
parameter. 
 
 Keywords-Information retrieval; unmanned aircraft; data 
processing; sensors; radio modem 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
INTA is the Institute for Aerospace Technologies in 
Spain and flight tests have been part of INTA’s activity 
since it was created in 1947. With the objective of 
upgrading such activities and modernizing its facilities, 
INTA created the Flight Test Area, Area de Ensayos en 
Vuelo (AEV) [1], AEV is responsible for providing flight 
test support for all current and future programs including 
RPV (Remotely Piloted Vehicle), Rocket Launches, 
Balloons and Missile Tests.  
    The problem is that that during critical moments, data 
from several sensors needs to be transmitted at rates in 
excess of 10 Hz which is not possible given the limitation of 
bandwidth that radio modem communications presents. To 
solve this problem, software alternatives are considered. 
These are one-dimensional array based on differentiated 
values, two-dimensional array with a fix number of rows 
and columns and time stamp, two-dimensional array with 
time stamp and parameter identification label, and finally 
two-dimensional 
array 
with 
time 
stamp, 
parameter 
identification label, controlling the last value sent. The 
paper starts with a description of the problem followed by 
the methodology used to arrive at the solution. Finally, a 
few preliminary results with the obtained conclusions are 
shown. 
II. 
STATE OF  THE ART 
Currently, INTA is working on various unmanned aircraft 
under development such as SIVA (Integrated System for 
Aerial Surveillance), ALO (Lightweight Observation Air 
Vehicle), DIANA (High speed target drone) and HADA 
(Morphing VTOL Aircraft) among others.  In large UAV´s 
like SIVA (weight 300 Kg and wing span 5.81 m), data 
acquisition systems (DAQ) allow sending thousands of data 
samples per second of any parameter to ground in pulse 
code modulation (PCM) [2] format by using S-band 
telemetry frequency. However, in smaller UAV’s like ALO 
shown in Figure 1 (weight 50 Kg and wing span 3.48 m), it 
is not possible to integrate a DAQ  due to small payload.  In 
such a case, it is necessary send data to ground using radio 
modems, with a frequency of ten samples per second for all 
sample parameters. The proposal presents alternatives to 
allow sending samples at a rate of more than ten times per 
second in critical periods for small UAVs that need ot use 
radio modems.  In such a way, it will be possible to know 
the aircraft behavior and validate it using simulation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Initially, the data types of parameters used for shipping 
are 32-bits floating points or 16-bits integers. The input data 
for each sensor is written in a memory buffer and then sent 
to earth using a specific frequency (ten samples per second). 
Parameters are not grouped hierarchically and each one is 
sent using the same sample rate [3]. Some data parameters 
are sampled by the onboard computer at frequencies up to 
450 samples per second, while other parameters are sampled 
at a lower rate (e.g., one per second for GPS). 
The idea of storing data on the aircraft is not feasible due 
to the process for managing interruptions used by the 
operating system that could result in a possible loss of data 
in real time. The final storage of data on land is the only 
Figure 1. ALO unmanned aircraft 
202
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

feasible option. Fig. 2 shows a block diagram representative 
of the various elements that act on the aircraft, with the 
central part based on a control computer, along with their 
input 
chains, 
demand 
measures 
and 
associated 
communications. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The objective is to investigate the features of the different 
models proposed, which will provide knowledge about what 
happens on certain aircraft sensors that suffer substantial 
alterations in its physical measures at critical moments. This 
process can be broken down into the following steps: 
 
A. 
Analyze 
the 
initial 
conditions: 
parameters, 
frequencies of transmission, limits of communications, data 
storage and display; 280 bytes were sent in parameters 32 
and 16 bits length, and 19 bytes of payload (camera) as the 
focus or zoom, which makes an approximate size of 300 
bytes, every 100 milliseconds. This is a guaranteed rate for a 
RS-232, modem, but for reasons of data loss in 
communications (distance, weather conditions, etc.), it is not 
advisable to exceed this rate. 
B. Identify critical moments and the variables 
concerned, establishing a proposal for grouping variables 
based on objective criteria. As an initial proposal, the 
parameters are grouped into three categories, the first (most 
important) contains those parameters that require a very 
high sampling and also with a high changing capacity on 
their values per time unit (e.g., acceleration and angular 
velocity). A second group includes those parameters that 
may require sampling rates of 10 Hz such as measured 
angles of attack, pitch, yaw and roll. The other parameters 
would be part of the group with lower necessities of 
sampling frequency.  
C. Define strategies to establish optimal mechanisms for 
approaching the desired goal, which is to obtain more 
information about certain parameters at critical moments. 
Experimental as well as quantitative methods will be used. 
A toolkit that approaches and solves the problem will be 
designed. Prototypes will be developed using a specific 
programming language for each alternative to allow for a 
comparative analysis of the different designs and 
techniques.  
     The techniques used for this proposal lie in the 
combination of the following fields or areas: 
•    Standards of measurement processes and data  
     acquisition [4]. 
•   Transmission of information via radio modem [5]. 
•   Mechanisms of compression techniques based on data 
compression standards [6]. 
According to CVT (Current Value Table) technology, 
each sensor stores the sampled value on a cell, overwriting 
the previous value, and each sensor has a different sampling 
frequency. A process is activated and traverses all the cells, 
building an image of the values found at that moment. 
Using pointers and information about the order of the 
parameters (32-bit floats or 16-bit integers), the pointer 
moves through all the parameters to capture in a one-
dimensional array the set of all values that are subsequently 
sent to land via radio modem, a transmission format of 8, n, 
1 (8 data bits, no parity and one stop bit). This process is 
repeated ten times per second; when information is received 
on land, decoding is simply done in an analogous way. The 
proposed approach entails replacing the one-dimension 
array with a two-dimensional array with a variable number 
of rows and columns, depending on the different types of 
techniques. This array will also contain time stamps that 
will indicate the moment corresponding with the value 
sampled by the sensor. This is concept missing nowadays, 
because of the linearity used for the land consignment of the 
resulting array. The variability of a two-dimensional array 
can be done in real time, either automatically, so that it can 
be integrated into the onboard computer program of the 
flight to be done by the aircraft, or manually, by sending 
signals from the ground through the radio modem. 
Independently of the format of the cell in rows and columns, 
land transmitting will be done in the same way as a PCM 
(Pulse Code Modulation) stream, going trough the array and 
sending the values byte by byte via RS-232. 
The approach will start in a basic form and progress to 
increasing levels of complexity, reaching the best solutions 
for specific needs. For the early stage, the value of the 
parameters of the most important category are sent as along 
with the average between time units using functions 
specifically designed for this purpose (with optional 
insertion of timestamps). We can then proceed to defining a 
different array, mixing several values of the three 
categories, adding more values of the first category and less 
parameters of the last category. Each parameter will have a 
time stamp (either the measured values or the average 
between instances). Finally, at more complex stages, 
compression-based techniques for sending data values will 
Figure 2. System onboard  
203
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

be considered (e.g., using differential values, similar to 
sending data using differential PCM). 
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
As preliminary results, we present a graph obtained in the 
initial tests performed on a simulation with data array 
generation which corresponds to angular acceleration on the 
aircraft x body parameter [7] (cataloged on the first class or 
category). Fig. 3 presents the variation of this parameter in a 
wide period of the flight. Data circled is the basis for Fig. 4 
that presents the values of the parameter every 10 
milliseconds, thus offering more detail. Finally the resulting 
graph (Fig. 5) is obtained in the most extreme case, that is, 
using full RS-232 bandwidth for the six more important 
parameters, resulting in 210 samples per second for every 
parameter. It can be observed, that some parameter 
variations are not obtained using 10 samples per second. 
And it is necessary to know that during post-processing, 
these unobserved variations can appear using an increased 
data rate. Information about 6 parameters has been sent but 
there are 33 and therefore, there is not information about the 
other 27. Subsequent proposals should have the goal of 
sampling all the parameters, at a frequency rate depending 
on the category of the parameter, trying to find a balance 
between information loss for every parameter and the 
additional data variations obtained for more sensitive ones.   
Further research is based on an approach using alternative 
methods, as to develop 2D array with different sample rate 
and timestamps, as explained earlier. At this second stage, it 
is necessary to use some techniques similar to those of a 
differential PCM for not-so-important important parameters: 
sending a first value with 32 bits of accuracy and the next 
ones using 16 or even 8 bits, not with the value but with an 
offset in relation to the first or previous record. In such a 
way some bits could be saved, so that more samples of 
important parameters could be obtained. 
A final approach could be two-dimensional array with a 
fix number of rows and columns. Each row will also contain 
timestamps that will indicate the instant that corresponds 
with the value sampled by the sensor.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Acceleration in the x-axis (full flight) 
Figure 5. Values obtained 
 
Figure 4. Extension of section marked in Figure 3 
204
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Gonzalez, R., Millet, V., and Leon, R. “Mobile telemetry 
acquisitions system”, International Telemetering Conference 1994, 
pp. 443-453. 
[2] U.S. Army, “IRIG Standard 106-86,” Telemetry Standard 
Appendix C, Secretariat. Range Commanders Council, U.S. Army 
White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico 88002, chapter 4 pp. 1-
12. 
[3] Parra, S. and Ángel, F. “Interfaz del NGFCS con la 
GCS.”Madrid SIV/SPE/51CO/028/INTA/02, 2002, pp. 8-12. 
[4] 
U.S. 
Army, 
“IRIG 
Standard 
119-06,” 
Telemetry 
Applications Handbook, Secretariat. Range Commanders Council, 
U.S. Army White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico 88002. 
chapter 8 pp 12-16. 
[5] Electronic Industries Association, “EIA232E”, Engineering 
Publications Office, pp. 32-45. 
[6] International Organisation for Standardisation MPEG-4 
Overview – V.21, ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG11, pp. 52-64. 
[7] Stevens, B. and Lewis, F. “Aircraft control and simulation”, 
2nd ed., Wiley-Interscience Publication, 1922, pp. 71-72. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
205
ICSEA 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-165-6

