Relationships Between Risks in an IT Project 
Development Portfolio 
Rob J. Kusters 
Depts. Of Management Science 
Open University 
Heerlen, The Netherlands 
Rob.kusters@ou.nl 
Jort J. Postema 
i-Dienst 
H2O 
Oldebroek, The Netherlands 
jortjp@gmail.com 
 
Jos J. M. Trienekens 
IE&IS 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
j.j.m.trienekens@tue.nl
 
Abstract— More and more it is seen that IT (Information 
Technology) projects are managed as a whole as part of a IT 
project portfolio. As one of the arguments for doing so, risk 
management at the portfolio level was identified as one of the 
advantages that could benefit from this. This was based on the 
notion that risks are not independent from each other and that 
an understanding of relationships between risks should 
support portfolio management. Given this origin it is 
somewhat surprising that the notion of relationships between 
risks does not play a part in IT portfolio literature. This 
prompted this research project aimed at investigating the 
existence and relevance of risk relationships in practice. A 
series of interviews with experienced IT project portfolio 
managers confirms both the existence and relevance of the risk 
relationships providing a basis for further research. 
Keywords-portfolio project management; risk management; 
risk relationships 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
IT projects are managed as a whole as part of a IT project 
portfolio. As a concept this was proposed as early as 1982 by 
McFarlan [17], who, as one of the arguments for doing so, 
identified risk management at the portfolio level as one of 
the 
advantages 
that 
could 
benefit 
from 
portfolio 
management. He based this on the notion that risks are not 
independent from each other and that an understanding of 
relationships between risks should support portfolio 
management.  
The importance of using risk management at the portfolio 
level is evident [21]. Interactions between projects, in terms 
of shared scarce manpower and usage of project results in 
other projects, are unavoidable. Ignoring these will lead to 
more problems than taking them into account. Even for small 
organizations that means someone should monitor risks 
across projects. In larger organizations part-time or even 
dedicated portfolio managers are seen to take up this task.  
Given the original argumentation by McFarlan, it is 
somewhat surprising that the notion of relationships between 
risks does not play any part in IT portfolio literature. This 
prompted this research project aimed at investigating the 
existence and relevance of risk relationships in practice. In 
this paper, we will first discuss the theoretical background of 
this study. Next, the research design used will be discussed, 
followed by the results of the study. Finally, a discussion of 
results and conclusions will be provided. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Risk, in the context of IT projects, can be defined as the 
possibility of an unfavorable outcome in terms of time, cost, 
or functionality of the final project deliverable [22]. There is 
an extensive body of literature on identifying risks for IT 
projects 
[19], 
and 
managing 
risk 
in 
IT 
projects 
[19][22][23][24][11].  
Risk can also be discussed at the IT development 
portfolio level. Turner & Müller [21] give the following 
definition of such a portfolio “a portfolio of projects is an 
organization, (temporary or permanent) in which a group of 
projects are managed together to coordinate interfaces and 
prioritize resources between them and thereby reduce 
uncertainty”. De Reyck et al [4] state that: “the selection of 
projects to compose a portfolio should ensure that all areas of 
the organization’s strategy are properly addressed and that 
the portfolio is well balanced”. Risk is an important aspect of 
this balance [11] and therefor plays an important role when 
managing a portfolio.  
This is also emphasized in the definition of portfolio 
management by McFarlan who states that within the context 
of a portfolio “assessing the risk of their projects, separately 
and in the aggregate, will help managers make more 
informed decisions and ensure more successful outcomes” 
[17]. He also states that risk analysis of individual projects 
should play a major part in selecting projects for such a 
portfolio since “risks in practical situations, of course, are 
not independent of each other; rather, they are closely 
related” [17]. McFarlan based his work on the still widely 
used financial portfolio theory as developed by Markowitz 
[16] who states: “Sometimes the addition of the risky 
security produces a more conservative portfolio than the 
addition of the conservative security. This illustrates a basic 
principle: the security which is risky or conservative, 
appropriate or inappropriate, for one portfolio may be the 
opposite for another. One must think of selecting a portfolio 
as a whole, not securities per se”.  
Identifying portfolio risk can start by identifying all 
individual project risks and adding these to a single portfolio, 
see e.g., [3]. This approach can already provide significant 
insight. However, it misses the notion contended by 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

Markowitz and McFarlan that risks themselves can have 
relationships. If risks of individual projects can influence 
each other (across projects) these interactions should also 
play a role when making decisions of additions to a project 
portfolio.  
When looking at literature for the management of a 
portfolio as a whole, attention has mainly be focused at 
interrelationships between projects. This relationship can be 
complementary, negative, or neutral [1][5]. Chien [1] 
identified four types of interrelationships among projects: 
outcome or technical, cost or resource-utilization, impact or 
benefit, 
and 
serial 
(present-value) 
interrelationships. 
Santhanam and Krypakis [18] identified three fairly similar 
types of interdependencies involving IT projects: resource, 
benefit, and technical. And in 2011 Kundisch & Meier [15] 
describe project interactions based in outcome or resource 
interaction. It is interesting to see that direct relationships 
between projects have received explicit attention, while 
relationships between risks receives no attention in this part 
of the portfolio literature.  
Also, a wider search for literature aimed at identifying 
these relationships between risks in a IT project portfolio 
context yielded no results. In other fields the notion does 
exist. For example, Fan, Suo & Feng [7], when discussing 
the related area of IT outsourcing identify the existence of 
risk relationships. They state: “in some situations, the 
interrelationships among risk factors can induce the 
transmission effect from one risk to another”. In their 
research they elaborate further on this statement and identify 
eight relevant risks and their relationships. The notion of 
relationships between risks is also known in other 
disciplines. Examples are engineering [13], finance [6], and 
medical science [20][25]. 
Given this, it was found worthwhile to investigate the 
existence of relevant relationships between risks in an IT 
project portfolio setting.  
III. 
APPROACH 
The objective of this study is to investigate if 
relationships exist in practice between risks of projects in an 
IT portfolio setting that are relevant at the portfolio level. 
The notion of relevance has been added to the original 
question since slight interactions between phenomena can 
always exist, but from a management point of view these are 
only worth investigating if they have a significant effect on 
the management of the portfolio. The notion of ‘relationship 
between risks’ can now be further detailed. An obvious form 
exist when occurrence of risk X will impact the likelihood 
and/or the impact of risk Y. This can be termed a direct 
relationship between risks X and Y and can be interpreted as 
“if risk X occurs, this can influence the likelihood and/or the 
impact of risk Y”. A second type of relationship occurs when 
an external event can influence both the likelihood and/or the 
impact of risks X and Y (see Figure 1). In both cases the 
impact on likelihood and / or impact can be positive or 
negative, resulting in either a mitigating of aggravating effect 
on the portfolio level. 
 
Figure 1.  types of relationships. 
 
Given the explorative nature of the research, and the 
fairly complex notions of ‘risk relationship’ involved it was 
decided to perform the research by interviewing a number of 
experts. This would provide the possibility of explaining the 
issues, seeing if these were understood and assessing the 
answers, also by asking additional questions if possible. 
These advantages of interaction, enabled by the interview 
format in our mind outweigh the more detailed and possibly 
more representative results that might be obtained from a 
survey. 
For the interviews persons with relevant experience as IT 
project portfolio manager in a sizeable organization were 
sought. Two years or more of experience was required, since 
the expectance was, that this would provide the required 
relevant experience from which to answer our questions. A 
sample of five respondents from different organizations was 
aimed at. A larger number would of course have increased 
the number of identified relationships. However, given the 
objective: give a proof of existence of these risk relationships 
across projects, this was deemed to be sufficient. For the 
search use was made of relevant groups in Linkedin. In the 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

end, five experienced IT-portfolio managers were found with 
the required profile who were willing to participate in the 
research (Table 1). 
TABLE I.  
 OVERVIEW OF RESPONDENTS 
Respondent 
Type of organization 
Size 
1 
Energy provider 
1.000-5.000 
2 
Government 
10.000+ 
3 
Insurance 
1.000-5.000 
4 
University 
5.000-10.000 
5 
Hospital 
5.000-10.000 
 
Respondents are supposed to provide concrete risk 
relationships they themselves have experienced. This is a 
fairly difficult questions to answer. To support their thought 
process it was decided to provide them with a short list of 
candidate risks to trigger them. To develop this list, an 
additional literature search was executed. The search was 
aimed at identifying 12 often used but dissimilar risks. The 
number of 12 was chosen as sufficiently small to be usable in 
an interview but also sufficiently large to be able to give 
material for discussion. For this, seven useful papers were 
selected: 
 
Risks that influence the risk profile of an IT project 
portfolio [17]. 
 
A structured overview of risks: [11]. 
 
Sources that can originate common risks: [19]. 
 
Twelve dominant risks [12]. 
 
A top 10 of software risks [9]. 
 
A number of risks derived from failed projects [2]. 
 
A recent publication containing critical risks [8]. 
The selection process of these papers took into account a 
number of quality criteria: an assessment of the methodology 
used and the number of times the paper was referenced.  
An overview of all risks identified in these papers was 
developed. Overlaps between papers were identified and the 
risks were sorted according to frequency of occurrence in the 
papers. This resulted in the following list (with between 
brackets the number of papers in which the risk is 
mentioned): 
 
incorrect or misunderstood requirements (6) 
 
insufficient project planning (6) 
 
lack of non-IT human and/or financial resources (6) 
 
inexperienced IS project team (5) 
 
unclear project scope (5) 
 
insufficient project approach (5) 
 
lack of end user participation (4) 
 
changes in team composition (4) 
 
changes in project scope and / or requirements (4) 
 
lack of man power (IS related) (4) 
 
unfamiliarity with hardware in the project team (4) 
 
unfamiliarity with software in the project team (4) 
 
In order to achieve results of sufficient quality a semi-
structured interview set-up was developed. The interview 
started with a question regarding the work experience of the 
respondent in order to confirm their level of experience. This 
was followed by an explanation of the issues involved and 
the notion of risk relationship types (Figure 1). The objective 
was to explain the objective of the interview and the 
concepts involved. Part of this was a check on 
comprehension of these concepts, preferably by having the 
respondent explaining them in their own words.   
This was followed by the key component of the 
interview: a discussion regarding possible risk relationships. 
To focus this discussion as a visual aid a (half) matrix was 
provided in which the risks identified were set off against 
each other. Also, a more detailed version of figure 1 was 
included as a memory aid. 
Using the resulting matrix, respondents were prompted to 
identify relationships (direct and based on a common 
external event) between risks and to provide concrete 
examples of occurrences of these relationships which  they 
personally encountered. The examples were required to 
ensure that only actually occurring risk relationships were 
identified and not just theoretical / hypothetical possibilities. 
No completeness in the discussion of all 66 possible 
combinations of risk was striven for. This would have been 
pointless in the limited time available for such an interview. 
Respondents could add risks on top of the twelve identified if 
this helped them in identifying additional risk relationships. 
These new risks were added to the risk matrix to be available 
for subsequent interviews. The basic question put to the 
respondents here was: do you have a specific relationship 
between risks from this matrix in mind which you want t 
discuss? 
After this part of the interview, results from previous 
interviews were presented. Respondents could indicate if 
they agreed with them in principle, providing a face value 
validation of previous results.  
The setup of the interview was tested beforehand with a 
test subject, who was not an active IT project portfolio 
manager but did have some experience with portfolio 
management. No changes were made to the set-up as a result 
of this test. 
All interviews were recorded. The recording were 
transcribed and then analyzed. The analysis was aimed at 
identifying actual risk relationships discussed and the 
examples provided by the respondents. In recording these 
results, as much as possible the original statements made by 
the respondents were used. The results were send back to the 
participants for approval. Based on their feedback, some 
minor changes were made in the results. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The interviews were carried out over a period of five 
weeks, allowing for sufficient time between interviews to 
have the results of a previous interview ready for the next. Of 
each interview an extended abstract was made, based on an 
audio recording. This abstract was sent back for confirmation 
to the respondents, who could make corrections.  
All respondents have the required two years of IT 
portfolio management experience, ranging up to 10 year. The 
organizations involved are sizeable, indicating that the 
respondents have to deal with a significant IT-portfolio. 
Respondent 4 is also active as a consultant specialized in 
portfolio implementation and director / owner of a company 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

specialized in portfolio management (> 20 employees). This 
indicates that a sufficient basis exists to accept the expertise 
of the respondents. 
During the interviews, all respondents indicated that after 
some discussion they understood the concepts of risk 
relationship and the associate types of direct relationships 
and those based on a common external event. This, then 
provided a solid basis for the further interviews. 
In the next step, all respondents were able to identify 
(direct and based on a common external event) risk 
relationships. They also were able to support this by 
providing concrete examples. As mentioned in the foregoing 
respondents were allowed to add risks if required for their 
discussion. All in all 5 additional risks were added to the 
matrix: 
 
Change in planning 
 
Benefits not achievable 
 
Portfolio out of control 
 
Common resource usage across projects 
 
Safety or security endangered 
All-in-all 15 relationships were found, of which 7 based on a 
common external event and 8 direct. Table 2 gives an 
overview of the portfolio risk relationships found. The first 
seven lines of the table contain situations where the 
relationship is based on a common external event (situation 
B in figure 1). The remaining eight lines contain situation 
where a direct relationship between risks across projects 
exists (situation A in figure 1). 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
This discussion will look at the validity and reliability of 
the results, and their degree of completeness. It will end with 
a discussion of the added value of this notion, set off against 
approaches already in use. 
Let us first look at the validity and reliability of the results. 
In this project five 2-hour semi-structured interviews were 
conducted with experienced IT project portfolio managers 
from fairly large organizations. These respondents all 
understood and recognized the phenomenon. Together they 
succeeded in identifying and validating fifteen risk 
relationships, of which eight direct and seven based on a 
common external event. All fifteen risk relationships were 
supported by concrete examples, based on their own 
experience. In consecutive interviews respondents were 
asked to confirm the existence of the earlier identified 
relationships. In interviews 2, 3 and 5 this was done. In 
interview 4 this proved not to be possible due to time 
constraints since discussion in the first part of the interview 
took too long. Interview 5 focused only on the validation of 
the previous results. In total this provided 27 options to 
confirm or deny a risk relationship. In 26 of these, existence 
of the relationship was confirmed, providing an additional 
face value support for its existence and relevance. In one 
case a relationship was accepted by one consecutive 
interviewee and denied by another. This is the relationship 
mentioned in the seventh row of the table in Table 2. 
Together this provides strong evidence of the existence of 
the phenomenon and the relevance of the relationships 
found. Together it can be concluded that the results are valid 
and reliable. 
As mentioned above, the research was explorative and 
not aimed at achieving any degree of completeness. An 
indication of the degree of completeness achieved can be 
judged from the overlap between the relationships identified 
by the individual respondents. This is possible, since results 
from previous interviews were not shown until at the end of 
the interview. Of the fifteen relationships identified only two 
were identified more than once. Each was identified twice in 
different interviews. That means that four independent 
drawings (interviews) from a population of risk relationships 
of unknown size resulted in only two doubles. This would 
indicate that the results are far from complete and (many) 
other risk relationships are still to be identified.  
When looking at the relevance of the results it is required 
to compare them with the approaches currently being used to 
see if any added value can be identified. In the background 
study two current approaches are identified. A first approach 
identified is adding individual risks to a portfolio risk profile 
see e.g., [3]. It is obvious that such an approach is likely to 
miss the additional insight in risk and benefit offered by the 
notion of risk relationship proposed here. The notion of risk 
relationship can be considered as a straight add-on to this 
approach. A second approach looks at describing project 
interactions e.g., in outcome or resource interaction (e.g., 
[15]. Such an approach is unlike to identify the common 
external events that are at the basis of some of the risk 
relationships identified in this study. The direct risk 
relationships could also be identified when looking at direct 
interactions between projects. However, the more detailed 
and forward looking approach enabled by the view on risk 
relationships is probably a useful addition to this approach. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Following this discussion, we conclude that the notion of 
risk relationship in the context of IT project portfolio 
management is a useful addition to the current state of the art 
and merits further research. Such relationships do appear to 
exist and are unlikely to be fully captured by existing 
approaches. This holds especially for the notion of external 
events impacting several risks across projects. Further 
research could be directed at providing a more complete 
overview of relationships as depicted in figure 1 and table 2. 
Extending the approach used in this research seems not 
feasible. There are not that many experienced project 
portfolio managers around willing to invest the large amount 
of time required for the required structural analysis.  
Given that a structured literature review would yield a list 
of risk factor far larger than the one used in this research 
such a set of interviews would need to discuss hundreds of 
risk combinations, each again in combination with dozens of 
possible external events, leading to thousands of items to be 
analyzed. 
 A more feasible approach might be found in the analysis 
risk documentation, e.g., as captured in risk repositories. 
That would also be more directed (looking at actual 
occurrences) while not trying to cover an extreme number of 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

combinations of which probably only a limited number yield 
results.
TABLE II.  
OVERVIEW OF  PROJECT RISK RELATIONSHIPS 
External event Z 
Risk X 
Risk Y 
Example 
Change in organization (culture) 
incorrect or misunderstood 
requirements 
changes in team composition 
This type of change can lead to outflow 
of current staff. This will then influence 
both the understanding of requirements 
by new staff and will immediately impact 
team composition, with the entailing loss 
of common project understanding. 
Change in organization (culture) 
lack of man power (IS related) 
benefits not achievable 
The change caused a difference in usage 
of the document management system 
which impacted the effectiveness of 
running projects. It also caused outflow 
of current staff. 
Market competition stronger 
changes in team composition 
change in planning 
Competitive pressure caused moving 
deadlines forward. Due to unreasonable 
pressure projects got out of hand. This 
also caused outflow of staff. 
Change in labor market 
lack of (non-IT) human and / or 
financial resources 
lack of man power (IS related) 
Staff with specific competences left for 
higher wages. This caused a lack of these 
competences within the organization. 
Similarly, hiring temporary replacement 
staff became too expensive. 
Change in (marketing) policy 
changes in project scope and / 
or requirements 
change in planning  
The  change resulted in new projects, 
resulting in delay and higher risk because 
of the delay for other projects. Also, other 
projects were required to change their 
scope to fit in with the new projects. 
New legal requirement 
changes in project scope and / 
or requirements  
safety (or security) endangered  
Decentralization of youth care to civic 
communities impacted the scope of 
projects for existing suppliers. Also, 
because of this decentralization, security 
risks increased. 
Downsizing due to external 
circumstances 
inexperienced IS project team &  
lack of (non-IT) human 
resources 
lack of man power (IS related) 
In a downsize situation the best staff had 
a tendency to leave (because they can). 
This resulted in lack of manpower and 
experience. 
 
changes in project scope and / 
or requirements 
changes in project scope and / 
or requirements 
When a project was faced with a change 
of scope, this directly impacted the scope 
an output related project. 
 
lack of financial resources 
changes in project scope and / 
or requirements 
When a project consumed too much 
resources, this directly impacted the 
availability of the (remaining) resources 
for the other / later projects. 
 
changes in project scope and / 
or requirements 
benefits not achievable 
When a project adjusted its scope, an 
output related project was unable to 
achieve its objectives. 
 
lack of man power (IS related) 
lack of financial resources 
Staff works on several projects. A 
specific project is put on hold. As a 
consequence, the capacity that became 
available was absorbed by the other 
projects, increasing their costs. 
 
change in planning 
lack of man power (IS related) 
A project required specific and scarce 
capabilities. When the project ran late, 
this capability was not available for other 
projects, who all ran late as well. 
 
portfolio out of control 
insufficient project planning 
A program with many dependencies 
between projects ran out of control. The 
result was that planning of these projects 
could not be maintained. 
 
common resource usage across 
projects 
insufficient project approach 
An organizations used configuration 
management tools of insufficient quality. 
This impacted the entire portfolio. 
 
lack of financial resources 
lack of financial resources 
A specific project had lack of funding. 
Portfolio management challenged all 
other projects to work more efficient in 
order to release the required funding. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Another field of research is the notion of external event. 
It could be envisaged to do further research into the type of 
events that could impact project risk and thus provide a 
reference that can be used by portfolio managers to support 
their work. Finally, it could be worthwhile to investigate the 
strength of the relationships identified and the likelihood of 
occurrence. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Chien, C.-F. (2002). Portfolio-evaluation framework for 
selecting R&D projects. R&D Management, 32(4), 359-368. 
[2] Chua, A. (2009). Exhuming it projects from their graves - an 
analysis of eight failure cases and their risk factors. Journal of 
Computer Information Systems / spring, 31-39. 
[3] De Giorgi, Enrico G., A Note on Portfolio Selection under 
Various Risk Measures (August 2002). Available at 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.762104> 21-08-2013. 
[4] de Reyck, B., Grushka-Cockayne, Y., Lockett, M., Calderini, 
S., Moura, A., & Sloper, A. (2005). The impact of project 
portfolio management on. International Journal of Project 
Management, 524-537. 
[5] Devinney, T. M., & Stewart, D. W. (1988). Rethinking the 
product portfolio: A generalized investment. Management 
Science, 34(9), 1080–1096. 
[6] Dhaene, J., & Denuit, M. (1999). The safest dependence 
structure 
among 
risks. 
Leuven, 
België: 
Katholieke 
Universiteit Leuven. 
[7] Fan, Z., Suo, W., & Feng, B. (2012). Identifying risk factors 
of IT outsourcing using interdependent information: An 
extended 
DEMATEL 
method. 
Expert 
Systems 
with 
Applications 39, 3832-3840. 
[8] Hajeer, S. (2012). Critical risk factors for IS projects IS 
project between sink and swim. International Journal of 
Communication Engineering and Technology / June, Vol 2, 
issue 6, 1270-1279. 
[9] Han, W., & Huang, S. (2007). An empirical analysis of risk 
components and performance on software projects. The 
Journal of Systems and Software 80, 42-50. 
[10] Heemstra, F.J. and Kusters, R.J. (1996). Dealing with risk: a 
practical approach, Journal of Information Technology, vol. 
11, pp. 333-346. 
[11] Heemstra, F.J., and Kusters, R.J. (2004). Defining ICT 
Proposals. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 
Special Issue on IS Evaluation, vol. 17, no. 4,  pp. 258-268. 
[12] Kappelman, L., McKeeman, R., & Zhang, L. (2006). Early 
warning signs of IT project failure: the dominant dozen. 
Information Systems Management / fall, 31-36. 
[13] Karningsih, P., Kayis, B., & Kara, S. (2007). Risk 
Identification in Global Manufacturing Supply Chain. 
International 
Seminar 
on 
Industrial 
Engineering 
and 
Management (pp. 8-15). Jakarta: ProdEff Technology. 
[14] Kumar, Ram , Haya Ajjan, and Yuan Niu (2008). Information 
technology 
Portfolio 
Management: 
literature 
review, 
framework, and research issues, Information Resources 
Management Journal, Volume 21, Issue 3. 
[15] Kundisch, D., & Meier, C. (2011). IT/IS Project Portfolio 
Selection in the Presence of Project Interactions – Review and 
Synthesis of the Literature. Proceedings of the 10th 
International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik - Volume 
1 (pp. 477 - 486). Zurich, Switzerland: Lulu.com. 
[16] Markowitz, H. (1959). Portfolio Selection - efficient 
diversification of investments. In H. Markowitz, Portfolio 
Selection - efficient diversification of investments. New York: 
John Wiley and Sons, inc. 
[17] McFarlan, F. (1981). Portfolio approach to information 
systems. Harvard Business Review, 142-150. 
[18] Santhanam, R., & Kyparisis, J. (1996). A decision model for 
interdependent 
information 
system 
project 
selection. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 89(2), 380–399. 
[19] Schmidt, R., Lyytinen, K., Keil, M., & Cule, P. (2002). 
Perceptions of IT project risk: A Delphi study. Information 
Systems Journal, 12(2), 103–119. 
[20] Sorrentino, G., Migliaccio, R., & Bonavita, V. (2008). 
Treatment of Vascular Dementia: The Route of Prevention. 
European Neurology, 217-223. 
[21] Turner, J., & Müller, R. (2003). On the nature of the project 
as a temporary organization. International Journal of Project 
Management 21, 1-8. 
[22] Wallace, L., & Keil, M. (2004). Software project risks and 
their impact on outcomes. Communications of the ACM, 
47(4), 68–73. 
[23] Westerman, G. (2005). What makes and IT risk management 
process effective. MIT Sloan School of Management Center 
for Information Systems Research, 5(3B), 1–3. 
[24] Westerman, G., & Walpole, R. (2005). Working article: 
PFPC: Building an IT risk management competency. CISR, 
1–13. 
[25] Wilson, P., Abbot, R., & Castelli, W. (1988). Arteriosclerosis 
thrombosis and vascular biology. Journal of the American 
Heart Association, 737-741. 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-304-9
ICSEA 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

