The ISO 27000 Family and its Applicability in LGPD Adaptation Projects for Small 
and Medium- Sized Enterprises 
How the ISO 27000 family standards can help with the challenge of complying with the General Data 
Protection law for small and medium-sized businesses 
André de Freitas Fernandes, Fabiano Camilo Santiago de Brito, Fátima Fernandes Periard, Grazielle A. Viana Matias, 
Mariana Sbaite Gonçalves, Reinaldo Gomes Baldoino Filho 
IESB University Center 
andre.fernandes@serpro.gov.br, fabianocamilos@gmail.com, fatima.periard@crmbrasil.com.br, grazielle@m2cloud.com.br, 
marianasbaite@gmail.com, reinaldo.baldoino@iesb.edu.br 
   
 
 
 
Abstract - This article describes the relationship between the 
Brazilian Data Protection Law (LGPD) - nº 13.709 / 2018 - with 
the information security through ISO Standards. The theme is 
extremely relevant, as it shows the difficulty for small and 
medium-sized companies to comply with current and 
applicable legislation on privacy and protection of personal 
data, as well as the need for security and investment, to protect 
the privacy of the holders of personal data and not suffer 
future damage, whether property or reputation. Some 
companies have already received fines for the irregular 
processing of personal data. Being adequate is the immediate 
answer for the evolution of their businesses and the protection 
of personal data. This article demonstrates the importance of 
complying with the LGPD and using security frameworks and 
investment 
in 
information 
security, 
improving 
data 
management and governance of associations. 
Keywords- LGPD; Adequacy; ISO; Security; Technology; SMEs. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 We live in a challenging environment when it comes to 
protecting personal data. On the one hand, personal data 
protection and privacy laws take shape, bringing changes in 
society. On the other hand, there is an epidemic of data 
exposures and breaches affecting businesses of all sizes and 
market segments globally. Companies are at the heart of this 
situation, which depends on technology and data to maintain 
their business continuity. 
 A survey conducted by Microsoft between September 
and October 2020 [1] indicated that for small and medium-
sized companies, technology was the best answer to get 
around the crisis. The study shows that, during the pandemic, 
42% of SMEs accelerated the adoption of new technologies, 
mainly medium-sized companies 
and, for 83% of 
respondents, these technologies lead the way towards 
economic recovery. 
      While these businesses need to use technology for their 
reinvention, they must comply with a series of regulations 
related to their performance, and now, they need to adjust to 
comply with current and applicable privacy and data 
protection laws. The matter would be simple if all companies 
had a vision of processes and budgets defined for the security 
and compliance areas. However, for most small and 
medium-sized Brazilian companies, the reality is quite 
different. 
     In a survival market, SMEs are focused on producing and 
delivering, in the famous so-called “turning the wheel.” With 
leaner structures and tight cash, the SME entrepreneur has 
not defined business processes, and many do not even 
consider information security necessary. Their concerns are 
precisely on product or service. 
     This article aims to demonstrate that one of the ways to 
achieve compliance with the LGPD – General Data 
Protection Law is the use of the frameworks of the ISO 
27000 standards as well as making room for small and 
medium businesses to evolve in their management, with 
information security as one of the pillars of this process. 
Some questions that guided the article: 
 
What is the need to adapt SMEs to the LGPD? 
 
What difficulties do SMEs face on a day-to-day basis? 
 
How to invest in Technology, Information Security and 
Compliance? 
 
Are these companies aware of the risks that non-
compliance with the Law brings to the continuity of their 
business? 
        In the following sections, we will see the purpose of the 
article and the questions that guided the work. In section II, 
we will talk about SMEs and citing examples from Brazil. In 
section III, we will talk about the General Data Protection 
Law and its impacts. In section IV, we will talk about the 
DPO career. In section V, we will talk about the LGPD and 
ABNT standards. In section VI, we will talk about ISO 
27000 standards. In section VII, we explain privacy 
management. In Section IV, we present our  final remarks. 
II. WHAT IS SMALL AND MEDIUM SIZE COMPANIES 
 SME is an acronym for Small and Medium Enterprise. It 
is an acronym often used to classify the size of a company as 
a function of the number of workers employed and the 
annual income earned. This type of company occupies an 
important place in the economy of countries through the 
generation of jobs. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 The classifications according to the number of workers 
employed are as follows: 
Industry: 
 
Microenterprise - up to 19 employe
 
Small Business - from 20 to 99 employees
 
Medium Company - from 100 to 499 employees
 
Large Company - 500 or more employees
Trade and Services: 
 
Microenterprise - up to 9 employees
 
Small Business - 10 to 49 employees
 
Medium Company - 50 to 99 employees
 
Large Company - more than 100 employees
 
According to Sebrae (Brazilian entrepreneur support 
service) [2], they can also be divided into four segments by 
revenue range, except for small rural producers. Briefly, 
small businesses are divided as follows: 
 
Individual Microentrepreneur –
to R$ 81 thousand. 
 
Microenterprise – Annual turnover up to R$360 
thousand. 
 
Small Business - Annual turnover between R$360 
thousand and R$4.8 million. 
 
Small Farmer - Property with up to 4 fiscal modules 
or annual sales of up to R$ 4.8million
 Segmentation by billing follows the criteria of 
Complementary Law 123/2006, also known as the General 
Law for Micro and Small Companies. 
According to Data Sebrae [2], there are approximately 19 
million companies in Brazil, and of this total, about 7.5 
million are into the SME categories. In 2020, these 
companies corresponded to around 29% of GDP. Regarding 
the volume of jobs, the same Data Sebrae indicates that in 
2018 SMEs generated about 17.79 million jobs with a salary
volume of around R$ 34.27 billion. Data from the PNAD 
(National survey by the sample of households) carried out by 
the IBGE show that between 2003 and 2013, there was a 
10% growth in the number of business owners in the 
country, from 21.4 million to 23.5 million people. In this 
same period, the number of highly computerized business 
owners almost quadrupled, from 3.9 million to 14.3 million 
people 
(an 
increase 
of 
10.4 
million 
individuals).
Figure 1. Distribution by sector of activity [3]
 
This data leads us to a potential market of millions of 
SMEs seeking to adapt to new data protection legislation and 
needing support for this task, mainly in the Commerce and 
Services sectors. 
The classifications according to the number of workers 
up to 19 employees 
from 20 to 99 employees 
from 100 to 499 employees 
500 or more employees 
up to 9 employees 
10 to 49 employees 
50 to 99 employees 
more than 100 employees 
According to Sebrae (Brazilian entrepreneur support 
service) [2], they can also be divided into four segments by 
revenue range, except for small rural producers. Briefly, 
 
– Annual turnover up 
Annual turnover up to R$360 
Annual turnover between R$360 
Property with up to 4 fiscal modules 
nnual sales of up to R$ 4.8million 
Segmentation by billing follows the criteria of 
Complementary Law 123/2006, also known as the General 
According to Data Sebrae [2], there are approximately 19 
l, and of this total, about 7.5 
million are into the SME categories. In 2020, these 
companies corresponded to around 29% of GDP. Regarding 
the volume of jobs, the same Data Sebrae indicates that in 
2018 SMEs generated about 17.79 million jobs with a salary 
volume of around R$ 34.27 billion. Data from the PNAD 
(National survey by the sample of households) carried out by 
the IBGE show that between 2003 and 2013, there was a 
10% growth in the number of business owners in the 
million people. In this 
same period, the number of highly computerized business 
owners almost quadrupled, from 3.9 million to 14.3 million 
people 
(an 
increase 
of 
10.4 
million 
individuals).
 
Figure 1. Distribution by sector of activity [3] 
 
us to a potential market of millions of 
SMEs seeking to adapt to new data protection legislation and 
needing support for this task, mainly in the Commerce and 
According to consulting firm Price Waterhouse Coopers: 
"The power of SMEs is evident in their 30% share in the 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of R$4.4 trillion in Brazil. 
The segment employs more people than any other: 10.1 
million employees in small companies and 5.5 million in 
medium ones" 
According to Disterer [20], a 2008 survey o
certificated companies found that 50 percent of the 
certificated organizations which responded had fewer than 
200 employees and were therefore in the SME category. 
Perhaps more surprisingly, around half
than 50 employees. The framework has used the ISO27002 
code of practice to define the elements considered within the 
ISMS. Each component is then developed through a maturity 
model life cycle to establish an ISO 27001
process.  
III. THE GENERAL PERSONAL DATA 
AND SMALL AND MIDSIZE 
 
The Brazilian Law No. 13.709/2018 
the Protection of Personal Data (LGPD) [4] provides for 
companies' processing of personal data throughout Brazil, 
without mentioning differences in the dealings of the small, 
medium large companies or self
is clear to establish equal guidelines for all figures.
The administrative sanctions provided for in the Law are 
effective from August 2021, and with less than two months 
to go before the scheduled date, few companies are 
complying. 
The purpose of the Law is to organize and structure 
organizations about privacy, preserve the dignity of the 
human person and allow holders to be able to exercise
rights. 
In addition to bringing principles and new rights to the 
holders of personal data, it needs to adopt technical and 
administrative measures to maintain the security and 
confidentiality of information. Furthermore, it requires a 
governance plan and the application of good practices to 
protect and preserve the safety of all personal data involved 
in business flows and processes. The problem is: it is neither 
easy nor cheap to adapt to the LGPD. Therefore, companies 
need to structure themselves t
resources to practice everything the law requires. In the case 
of SMEs, it turns out to be arduous, not only for lack of 
investment but also for lack of information.
The General Law for the Protection of Personal Data 
requires internal organization, the definition of roles and 
responsibilities, and increased budget to invest in training 
and tools, among other activities that most companies do not 
have in Brazil. It is essential to point out that the 
administrative sanctions of th
and few companies are in compliance, which can lead to 
financial and reputational losses. According to Almeida [20], 
"...we consider it fundamental to think of ways to make the 
application of the law by small businesses viable
can successfully fulfill their obligations." To believe that the 
According to consulting firm Price Waterhouse Coopers: 
vident in their 30% share in the 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of R$4.4 trillion in Brazil. 
The segment employs more people than any other: 10.1 
million employees in small companies and 5.5 million in 
According to Disterer [20], a 2008 survey of ISO27001‐
certificated companies found that 50 percent of the 
certificated organizations which responded had fewer than 
200 employees and were therefore in the SME category. 
Perhaps more surprisingly, around half of these had fewer 
than 50 employees. The framework has used the ISO27002 
code of practice to define the elements considered within the 
ISMS. Each component is then developed through a maturity 
model life cycle to establish an ISO 27001-compliant ISMS 
ERSONAL DATA PROTECTION LAW 
MALL AND MIDSIZE ENTERPRISES 
The Brazilian Law No. 13.709/2018 – General Law for 
the Protection of Personal Data (LGPD) [4] provides for 
companies' processing of personal data throughout Brazil, 
thout mentioning differences in the dealings of the small, 
medium large companies or self-employed professionals. It 
is clear to establish equal guidelines for all figures. 
The administrative sanctions provided for in the Law are 
, and with less than two months 
to go before the scheduled date, few companies are 
The purpose of the Law is to organize and structure 
organizations about privacy, preserve the dignity of the 
human person and allow holders to be able to exercise their 
In addition to bringing principles and new rights to the 
holders of personal data, it needs to adopt technical and 
administrative measures to maintain the security and 
confidentiality of information. Furthermore, it requires a 
n and the application of good practices to 
protect and preserve the safety of all personal data involved 
in business flows and processes. The problem is: it is neither 
easy nor cheap to adapt to the LGPD. Therefore, companies 
need to structure themselves to have the budget and human 
resources to practice everything the law requires. In the case 
of SMEs, it turns out to be arduous, not only for lack of 
investment but also for lack of information. 
The General Law for the Protection of Personal Data 
nternal organization, the definition of roles and 
responsibilities, and increased budget to invest in training 
and tools, among other activities that most companies do not 
have in Brazil. It is essential to point out that the 
administrative sanctions of the Law started in August 2021, 
and few companies are in compliance, which can lead to 
financial and reputational losses. According to Almeida [20], 
"...we consider it fundamental to think of ways to make the 
application of the law by small businesses viable so that they 
can successfully fulfill their obligations." To believe that the 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

LGPD, to be applied, must treat all companies equally, 
respecting their characteristics and enabling the actual 
applicability of its rules. 
One of the most important novelties is the need for the 
person in charge of Data Processing, corresponding to the 
Data Protection Officer of the General Data Protection 
Regulation and about which we will discuss below. 
 
 
IV. DATA PROTECTION OFFICER FIGURE ENTRY 
 
The General Data Protection Law introduced the figure 
of Data Protection Officer, the person responsible for the 
processing of personal data, who, in a simplified way, has 
the function of conducting the organization's compliance 
process, in addition to being the point of communication 
between the holders of personal data, the processing agents 
and the regulatory body National Data Protection Authority. 
To perform its role well, the Data Protection Officer needs 
to know much more than the Law. It must understand 
compliance, processes, technology, people management, 
and being familiar with security frameworks. The Data 
Protection Officer must be involved in all techniques or 
flows involving personal data to verify gaps and the best 
security controls to be applied to mitigate or eliminate the 
risks. 
 
The LGPD [4], in its article 46, brings to treatment 
agents the need to adopt technical and administrative 
security measures. However, the Data Protection Officer is 
responsible for making things happen and developing a 
culture of privacy within companies. And it is precisely at 
this point that the need to know and apply the requirements 
of the ISO 27000 family of standards comes into play. 
These standards, which address cybersecurity, bring clarity 
and structure to business processes that need to be revised 
but are not even known by small and medium companies. 
These businesses do not have process management and 
compliance budgets and cannot see value in their adoption. 
The standard brought by the ISO family adds both in the 
sense of assisting in information security, as it allows 
companies to improve their way of managing assets, flows, 
processes, and people. 
 
The requirement of compliance with the LGPD will 
bring these companies greater visibility into their processes, 
previously in the dark, leading to new approaches for all 
areas and more excellent organization in terms of 
management, 
improving the 
trust 
relationship 
with 
customers and business partners. 
 
 
 
 V. LGPD, ABNT AND THE ISO STANDARDS 
 
Chapter VII of the LGPD [4], addresses Security and 
Good Practices: Section I - Security and Data Secrecy; and 
Section II: Good Practices and Governance. In this sense, it 
determines the adoption of security measures and good 
practices to maintain confidentiality, when necessary, and 
for better governance; however, it does not clarify how 
companies can comply with these requirements. Then, the 
ISO 27000 family standards come into play to help 
businesses of all sizes to structure their compliance and 
governance processes, helping to adapt to the LGPD and 
allowing 
for 
a 
more 
comprehensive 
governance 
performance.      
The Brazilian Association of Technical Standards 
(ABNT) [19] is the National Forum for Standardization. The 
Brazilian Standards, whose content is the responsibility of 
the 
Brazilian 
Committees 
(ABNT/CB), 
Sectoral 
Standardization Bodies (ABNT/ONS), and Special Study 
Commissions (ABNT/CEE), are prepared by Study 
Commissions (CE), formed by the interested parties in the 
subject-object of the standardization. ABNT Technical 
Documents and International Standards (ISO and IEC) are 
voluntary and do not include contractual, legal, or statutory 
requirements. 
These ABNT Technical Documents do not replace Laws, 
Decrees, or Regulations, which users must comply with, 
taking precedence over any ABNT Technical Document. 
Therefore, the ISO standards and the technical documents 
developed by ABNT serve as a support tool for companies 
of different sizes to follow best practices and follow the 
guidelines and guidelines provided in the documentation. 
 
VI. A TURN THROUGH THE ISO 27000 FAMILY 
STANDARDS 
 The ISO 27000 set of standards constitutes complete 
security and privacy framework. Compliance takes place in 
continuous improvement, which, in addition to promoting 
improvement in internal processes, brings noticeable results 
to the end customer. Next, we will talk about each standard. 
According to Gillies [21], when companies use the ISO 
27000 standard, they can significantly improve information 
security management.  
 
 
A. ISO 27001 – Information Security and Management 
System 
 This standard covers the concept of information security 
in an integral way, dealing with various topics, such as 
protection of the physical environment, telecommunications, 
application security, human resources, business continuity, 
licensing, and other items that may vary according to the 
model business. 
As a general principle, it addresses the adoption of a set 
of requirements, processes, and controls, which aim to 
correctly identify and manage the Information Security risks 
present in organizations, helping to adopt an adequate model 
of establishment, implementation, operation, monitoring, 
review, and management of an Information Security 
Management System. 
The Information Security Management System (ISMS) 
is, following the principles of the ISO 27001 standard, a 
holistic model of approach to Security and independent of 
technological brands and manufacturers, as it is intended to 
establish processes and procedures that can be materialized 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

in each organization differently, according to the specificity 
of each technological and organizational environment [5].   
 
B. ISO 27002 – Information Security - Requirements 
 
ISO 27002 establishes a code of best practices to 
support 
implementing 
the 
Information 
Security 
Management 
System 
(ISMS) 
in 
organizations, 
complementing the previous standard. Its main objective is 
to establish guidelines and general principles to initiate, 
implement, maintain, and improve information security 
management in an organization, including selection, 
implementation, and management of controls, considering 
the identified risks. The items below make up the standard's 
approach [5] [6]: 
 
Information Security Policy 
 
Information Security Organization 
 
Asset Management 
 
Security in human resources 
 
Physical and environmental security 
 
Security of operations and communications 
 
Access control 
 
Acquisition, development, and maintenance of 
systems 
 
Information security incident management 
 
Business continuity management 
 
Conformity 
 
The objective of NBR ISO/IEC 27002:2013 is stated as 
follows [6], 
“Information security is achieved by 
implementing an adequate set of controls, including 
policies, processes, procedures, organizational structure and 
software and hardware functions. These controls need to be 
established, implemented, monitored, critically analyzed 
and improved as necessary to ensure that the organization's 
business and security objectives are met." 
 
C. ISO 27003 – Guidelines to Implementation the 
Security Management Information System 
 
 
While ISO 27001 provides the requirements for 
implementing the ISMS, ISO 27003 provides guidance on 
the process and recommendations, possibilities, and possible 
permissions. According to the standard, there are 5 phases 
of planning an ISMS project [5] [7]: 
1. Obtain approval from senior management (top 
management) to initiate the ISMS project. 
2. Define the scope, limits, and policy of the 
ISMS. 
3. Conduct analysis of information security 
requirements. 
4. Conduct risk analysis/assessment and plan risk 
treatment. 
5. Define the ISMS. 
 
D.        ISO27004– Information Security Management 
 ISO 27004 guides how to assess the performance of 
ISO 27001, providing a set of standards to guide the 
development, operation, and measurement of processes to 
evaluate and report the results of a set of information 
security metrics [5] [8]. 
The standard demonstrates how to build an information 
security measurement program, how to select what to 
measure and how to operate the necessary measurement 
processes, it also includes comprehensive examples of 
different types of measures and how can assess the 
effectiveness of those measures. 
Among the greatest benefits of adopting the law, we 
highlight: 
 
Greater responsibility 
 
Improved performance of information security and 
ISMS processes 
 
Evidence of compliance with the requirements of 
ISO / IEC 27001, as well as applicable laws, rules, 
and regulations.  
 
E. ISO 27005–Iformation Security Risk Management 
 
To provide guidelines for the management of 
information security (IS) risks, ISO 27005 supports the 
concepts specified in ISO 27001, in addition to assisting in 
the implementation and certification of such management 
systems[5] [9]. 
 
According to the standard, the IS risk management 
process comprises the following activities: 
 
Identify and assess risks. 
 
Decide what to do about risks (how to deal with 
them) 
 
Monitor risks, risk treatments etc., identify and 
respond appropriately to significant changes, 
problems/concerns, 
or 
opportunities 
for 
improvement. 
 
Keeping stakeholders (mainly the organization's 
management) informed throughout the process. 
 
F. ISO 27007–ISMS Audit Guidelines 
 The text of ISO 27007 discusses the management of an 
information security management system (ISMS) audit 
program, the performance of audits, and the competence of 
the ISMS auditors. It is an applicable standard for those who 
need to understand or conduct internal or external audits of 
an ISMS or to manage an ISMS audit program [10]. 
According to the standard, they constitute a management 
and auditing process: 
 
Audit principles 
 
Management and audit program 
 
Conducting an audit 
 
Competence and assessment of auditors 
G. ISO 27014 - Information Security Management 
 
ABNT NBR ISO/IEC 27014 (2013) points out that 
Information Security Governance should aim to [11]: 
 
Align business objectives with the Information 
Security strategy. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Ensure that information risks are elucidated and 
forwarded to those responsible. 
 
Add value to the business, senior management, and 
stakeholders. 
 
H.  
ISO 27031 - ICT Preparation (Information and 
Communication Technology) for business continuity 
 
The ISO 27031 standard guides the concepts and 
principles behind the role of ICT – Information and 
Communication Technology in ensuring business continuity 
[12]. 
 
By default, the norm: 
 
Suggests a structure or structure (a coherent set or 
set of methods and processes) for any organization 
- private, governmental, and non-governmental. 
 
Identifies and specifies all relevant aspects, 
including 
performance 
criteria, 
design, 
and 
implementation details, to improve ICT readiness 
as part of the organization's ISMS, helping to 
ensure business continuity. 
 
Allows an organization to measure its ICT 
continuity, security and therefore readiness to 
survive a disaster in a consistent and recognized 
manner. 
 
I. 
ISO 27032 – Cyber Security 
 
The ISO 27032 standard addresses basic security 
practices for stakeholders in cyberspace, providing [13]: 
 
Cybersecurity overview, 
 
Relationship between cybersecurity and other types 
of security, 
 
Definition of stakeholders and description of their 
roles in cybersecurity, 
 
Guidance for addressing common cybersecurity 
issues, and 
 
Framework to enable stakeholders to collaborate 
on solving cybersecurity issues. 
 
J. ISO 27037 – Preservation of Digital Evidence 
 
The content of ISO 27031 [14] makes up a relevant set 
of information for forensic professionals. It makes up an 
international standard for identifying, collecting, acquiring, 
and preserving digital forensic evidence at all stages of the 
investigation process. 
The standard standardizes the specific activities in the 
treatment of digital evidence, ranging from identifying, 
collecting, acquiring, and preserving digital evidence that 
may have evidential value. It assists organizations in their 
disciplinary procedures in facilitating the exchange of 
digital evidence between jurisdictions. 
ISO 27031 generally considers the following devices or 
functions that are used in various circumstances [14]: 
Digital storage media used in computers, such as HD, 
floppy disks, CD/DVD, pen-drive, smartphones, tablets, 
Personal Digital Assistants (PDA), Personal Electronic 
Devices (PED), Memory Cards, and Mobile navigation 
systems (GPS). 
 
Embedded systems. 
 
Digital video and photo cameras (including 
CCTV). 
 
Desktops, Notebooks. 
 
Networks based on TCP/IP and other digital 
protocols, and 
 
Devices with functions like those described above. 
 
K. ISO 27701 – Privacy Management 
 
As mentioned at the beginning of this article, almost all 
organizations handle personal data, whether employees or 
customers. In addition, the amount and types of personal 
data processed is increasing, as is the number of situations 
in which an organization needs to cooperate with other 
organizations regarding the processing of personal data. The 
protection of privacy in the context of the processing of 
personal data is a societal need and a topic of dedicated 
legislation and/or regulation around the world. 
ISO 27701 is an extension of ISO 27001 and 27002 [5] 
[6] [15] that specifies the requirements and provides 
guidance 
to 
establish, 
implement, 
maintain, 
and 
continuously improve an Information Privacy Management 
System (IPMS), the document specifies in detail the 
requirements related to the IPMS and the guidelines that 
must implement in companies that are responsible for the 
processing of personal data. 
The table below presents the mapping of the extension 
of the term information security for application and use of 
this document, it is possible to see how both are similar just 
adding the aspect of privacy in their content. 
 
TABLE I.    SECURITY AND PRIVACY APPROACH IN  ISO 
27001 AND ISO 27701STANDARDS 
ABNT NBR ISO/IEC 27001 
ABNT NBR ISO/IEC 27701 
Information Security 
Information Security and Privacy 
Information Security Policies 
Privacy and Information Security 
Policies 
Information Security Manage-
ment 
Information Security Management 
and Information Privacy 
Information Security Manage-
ment System (ISMS) 
Privacy Management System 
 
Information Security Objectives 
Information Security and Privacy 
Objectives 
Information Security Perfor-
mance 
Information Security and Privacy 
Performance 
Security Information Require-
ments 
Security Information and Privacy 
Requirements 
Information Security Risks 
Information Security and Privacy 
Risks 
Information Security Assess-
ment 
Security Risk Assessment of Informa-
tion and Privacy 
Treatment of Security Risks of  
Information 
Treatment of Security Risks of the 
Information and Privacy 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
From risk definition to business continuity and response 
plan, the ISO 27001 family provides a robust framework 
that allows understanding and applying the concepts of 
security and privacy. The standards guide how to identify 
risks related to the processing of personal data, in addition 
to reinforcing the need for policies, internal and external 
contractual agreements, items that are unknown to most 
small and medium-sized companies. When guided by the 
requirements of this set of standards, an organization tends 
to develop secure processes to manage the security of the 
information it handles. Therefore, privacy tends to be 
included in the process, becoming part of the business 
culture. 
Considering the recent arrival of the General Data 
Protection Law in Brazil, small and medium-sized 
companies should pay attention to information security and 
the protection of personal data collected and held in custody 
to comply with regulations and ensure the image and 
reputation of their businesses. Understanding that small 
businesses run the same risks as large corporations can be 
the starting point for a strategic vision regarding privacy and 
data protection. Small businesses in this regard are even 
more vulnerable, as the lack of investments in cyber security 
makes them an easy target for cybercrime. 
The biggest cost is the non-investment in information 
security. According to a recent survey carried out by First 
Data Corporation, about 90% of intrusions are directed to 
the systems of small and medium-sized companies. The 
average cost of vulnerabilities was enough to increase these 
companies' expenses by around U$D 36,000 annually. In 
that same survey, identified that the biggest impact is not the 
financial one. Still, the reputational one and in the scope of 
public relations, 31% of the clients and consumers said that 
upon discovering that the company was the target of data 
leakage due to malicious attacks, they would not return to 
doing business with the institution. 
In 
another 
article 
in 
the 
Brazilian 
magazine 
Gestão&Negócios PME (Management and Business SME), 
128 Edition/ 2019, November, was reiterated that despite 
investments in security systems, having a partner with vast 
expertise in the field of information security and data 
protection to help with this transition coupled with a 
mapping of personal data throughout the data lifecycle is a 
key part of greater protection in companies. 
As a practical guide on improving the maturity of 
information security and data protection in companies, the 
ISO 27000 Family Standards provides a series of tools that 
help implement Information Security policies, whatever the 
size and budget of the company. With the recent arrival of 
the General Data Protection Law (LGPD - Law 13.709) [4], 
the need for adaptation was even greater as sanctions related 
to the protection of personal data also need greater attention 
from now on, where before the arrival of the Law only 
corporate data had a relevant adequacy need due to trade 
and trade secrets. 
It is also important to highlight that the Law should not 
be seen as a hindrance or an obstacle in front of the 
commercial and technological evolution of companies, as 
many claim to be, as well stated by Leonardo Gondim, 
executive director of IT2S, in Gestão&Negócios PME 
Magazine, 128 Ed.: "The Law does not prevent the data 
from being used for one purpose or another, it only requires 
the user to be informed of this use and authorize it. It ends 
up giving back to the user the control of something that has 
always been his, allowing him to decide whether or not to 
provide the data and, also, knowing exactly what it will be 
used for”. 
In conclusion, the best thing to do going forward, both 
for the preservation of holders' privacy and for the business, 
is to have a security mindset in the first place. As explored 
in this article, not even small and medium-sized companies 
can assume risk-free, especially when much of the 
information is in an online environment. Changing the 
mindset is essential to avoid future losses and maintain the 
trust of customers and business partners. 
For future work, a study will be carried out in 
companies called SMEs. Still, this study will verify the 
applicability of the general data protection law and its 
impact in the information technology sector. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Microsof News, “Como as PMEs brasileiras enfrentaram a 
pandemia de COVID-19” - https://news.microsoft.com/pt-
br/82-das-pmes-brasileiras-pretendem-continuar-o-processo-
de-adocao-de-novas-tecnologias-apos-a-pandemia-segundo-
estudo/- Aug. 17, 2021. 
[2] Data Sebrae, https://datasebrae.com.br/ – Aug, 29, 2021 
[3]  B. A. Marcos, “Os donos de negócio no Brasil: análise por 
faixa de renda (2003-2013)”: Sebrae, 2015.  
[4] Presidência da República, Lei Geral de Proteção de Dados - 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2015-
2018/2018/lei/l13709.htm - Aug, 25, 2021 
[5]  International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27001: 2013, Information Technology--Security Techniques-
-Information Security Management Systems, 2013. 
[6] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27002:2013, Information technology-Code of practice for 
information security management, 2013. 
[7]  International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27003:2017 - Information technology — Security techniques 
— Information security management systems — Guidance, 
2017. 
[8] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27004:2016 - Information technology — Security techniques 
— Information security management — Monitoring, 
measurement, analysis and evaluation, 2016. 
[9] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27005:2018 - Information technology — Security techniques 
— Information security risk management, 2018. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

[10] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27007:2020 - Information security, cybersecurity and privacy 
protection 
— 
Guidelines 
for 
information 
security 
management systems auditing, 2020. 
[11] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27014:2020 - Information security, cybersecurity and privacy 
protection — Governance of information security, 2020. 
[12] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27031:2011 - Information technology — Security techniques 
— Guidelines for information and communication technology 
readiness for business continuity, 2011. 
[13] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27032:2012 - Information technology — Security techniques 
— Guidelines for cybersecurity, 2012. 
[14] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27037:2012 - Information technology — Security techniques 
— Guidelines for identification, collection, acquisition and 
preservation of digital evidence, 2012. 
[15] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 
27701:2019 - Security techniques — Extension to ISO/IEC 
27001 and ISO/IEC 27002 for privacy information 
management — Requirements and guidelines, 2019. 
[17] Ministério da Economia, “Especificação de Requisitos de 
Segurança da Informação em Contratações de Tecnologia da 
Informação”, Secretaria de Governo Digital, 2020. 
[16] PriceWaterHouseCoopers, “O poder das PMEs no Brasil”, 
2013. 
[17] Gestão & Negócios PME, “De olho na segurança do seu 
cliente”, Edição 128, 2019. 
[18] D. Almeida, Mirante contábil, “Proteção de dados e o papel 
dos pequenos negócios”, 2021.  
[19]  A. A. Bertini, J. C. Martins and E. Thomaz, "Desempenho de 
edificações habitacionais: guia orientativo para atendimento à 
norma ABNT NBR 15575/2013.", 2013. 
[20] D. Georg, "ISO/IEC 27000, 27001 and 27002 for information 
security management.", (2013). 
[21] G. Alan, "Improving the quality of information security 
management systems with ISO27000.", 2011. 
 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-894-5
ICSEA 2021 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

