An Exploration of the Application of Usability Evaluation Methods by Disabled Users 
 
Khalid Al-Nafjan 
Software Engineering Department  
King Saud University  
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia  
kalnafjan@ksu.edu.sa 
Mona Al-Zuhair 
Software Engineering Department  
King Saud University  
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia  
433203603@student.ksu.edu.sa 
 
Layla Al-Salhie 
Healthcare IT Affairs 
King Faisal Specialist Hospital &RC  
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia  
lalsalehi@kfshrc.edu.sa
 
 
Abstract— The involvement of system users during the system 
usability evaluation with the full awareness of their specific 
nature and characteristics is a key factor for achieving 
effective usability evaluation results. However, conducting 
usability evaluations for systems designed for disabled users is 
a challenging process that requires further considerations as 
compared to other ordinary usability evaluation procedures. 
This is due to the special needs and conditions of disabled users 
that must be considered while performing the usability 
evaluation. Therefore, it is essential to assess the effectiveness 
of different usability evaluation methods to help the evaluator 
selecting the most suitable ones for a particular system and a 
particular user group. The main contribution of this paper is 
to conduct an analysis of the effectiveness of applying several 
usability evaluation methods by disabled users. This analysis is 
based on the special characteristics of users with disabilities 
and on what adjustments should take place before the 
evaluation process begins. After conducting this exploratory 
analysis, we found that usability evaluation methods including 
inspection and testing methods can be applied to special needs 
users but many considerations should take place before 
selecting which methods are most effective. We believe that this 
work is particularly useful for the novice designers and 
usability engineers who have never conducted usability 
evaluations by disabled users before. 
Keywords-UEM; Disabled users; Usability evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There is a global agreement on that the usability is a key 
aspect of a software product’s success. System usability can 
be viewed as the studies conducted that aim to answer the 
question of whether the system is good enough to satisfy the 
user’s needs [2]. In order to properly acquire the desired 
level of usability in a software system, a disciplined 
approach should be followed. For that, usability engineering 
concept has emerged into software engineering to represent 
this disciplined approach [14]. Several usability engineering 
process models exist in literature that share an essential 
activity which is the usability evaluation [3]. Usability 
evaluation is an iterative process that encompasses a 
continuous measurement of the system's current usability 
level; this process continues to repeat until the desired 
usability level is reached. 
In literature, several techniques, methods and guidelines 
exist that shape the usability evaluation activity. A usability 
evaluation method (UEM) is a process for producing a 
measurement of usability: in evaluation, there is an object 
being evaluated and a process through which one or more 
attributes are judged or given a value [18]. The standard 
output for all UEMs is a list of the potential usability 
problems [7]. These UEMs can be classified in several ways; 
a common way is to classify them into empirical user testing 
methods and usability inspection methods, according to the 
user involvement. While the user testing category covers 
methods that involve representative users as participants, the 
usability inspection category, on the other hand, includes 
methods that can be applied without user involvement [16]. 
User testing also includes developing realistic scenarios of 
the tasks that the users are required to perform [17]. 
Assessing the effectiveness of different UEMs is essential to 
help the evaluator selecting the most suitable UEMs for a 
particular system and a particular user group. This 
effectiveness is related to several factors such as the type of 
the systems, the nature and time of the usability study among 
the development lifecycle, the characteristics of test 
participants, funding and other facilities [2]. Several 
measures can be used for assessing UEMs effectiveness such 
as: the ratio and severity of usability problems detected, the 
ratio of task success and number of comments elicited [6]. 
The main contribution of this paper is to conduct an 
analysis study of the effectiveness of applying several 
usability evaluation methods by disabled users based on the 
special characteristics of such users and the adjustments that 
should take place before the evaluation process begins. 
However, the study was based on analyzing the literature and 
reviewing the fields that focus on the application of different 
UEMs with different disabilities. And the results that we 
obtained during this study were based on our findings and 
experience after analyzing these fields. The following UEMs 
will be analyzed in this paper in regard to their application 
by disabled users: Inspection methods, thinking aloud, 
attention analysis, field observation, coaching method, 
questionnaires and interviews.  The rest of the paper is 
organized as follow: Section 2 presents the related works that 
studied the application of different UEMs by disabled users. 
Section 3 provides an exploratory review of applying 
different UEMs for users with specific disabilities along with 
the 
resultant 
considerations. 
Section 
4 
presents 
410
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

summarization of the analysis results. In Section 5, we 
concluded the paper with a summary and the expected future 
work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Most of the related work had discussed – as a part of a 
system development process- the results of conducting a 
specific UEM for evaluating the system’s usability by users 
with a specific type of disability. However, few works 
discussed the effectiveness of applying different UEMs by 
different disabled users and highlighted the challenges faced. 
Regarding the challenges of the recruitment of special – 
non regular- test users, Brush et al. [4] discussed the problem 
of the availability of user representatives. They found it 
difficult to find sufficient professional users of testing the 
usability of an urban planning tool locally because users 
were geographically distributed. They conducted both local 
and synchronous remote usability testing and found the 
results comparable. The effectiveness of applying remote 
evaluation by disabled users was evaluated by Petrie et al. 
[9]. They presented two usability evaluation studies with 
disabled users. One was remotely conducted and in 
asynchronous way while the other was ordinary local 
evaluation. In the remote evaluation, there were two cases; 
summative evaluation and formative one. The resulting 
quantitative data of the local and remote cases were 
comparable. However, there was a difference in the data 
amount and richness in the favor of local evaluation. 
Regarding usability evaluation by slow learning users, 
Abdollah et al. [1] developed a multimedia courseware 
learning tool for slow learners and performed a usability 
evaluation of the tool by the slow learners along with 
heuristic evaluation with teachers and one parent. Evaluation 
results showed that users with this disability were able to 
participate in the “efficiency” and “easy to learn” 
measurement testing while they were unable to participate in 
the “satisfaction” measurements testing considering their 
lack of respond abilities to written questionnaires. As for the 
deafness disability, Roberts and Fels [5] provided two 
studies that proved the viability of using the Think Aloud 
Protocol (TAP) method as a UEM in collecting gestures 
from deaf sign language users. Their study showed a similar 
success rate of using gestural TAP for deaf people and verbal 
TAP for hearing people. As for applying UEMs by blind 
users, Chandrashekar and Fels [8] assessed the applicability 
of conventional TAP method to blind users who uses a 
screen reader to access websites. They found that TAP 
cannot be used by such users in its popular form as a 
concurrent verbal protocol; it will instead require adjustment 
to be useful for blind users. However, the best approach for 
TAP adjustment wasn’t determined in the study. 
Regarding the usability evaluation by users with cognitive 
disabilities, Lepistö and Ovaska [20] performed a think aloud 
usability test and found that it didn’t work well with this user 
group. They also conducted an informal walkthrough and 
found that this method showed effectively which parts of the 
application interest the participants most. Their study 
concluded that for evaluating usability by users with 
cognitive disabilities, several complementary methods might 
be needed to collect data, and these methods should be 
adjusted to suit the characteristics of such participants. 
Another conclusion is that without the observational 
methods, many usability problems would have been missed. 
Authors also emphasized that evaluators should focus on 
gaining the participants’ trust before the evaluation sessions. 
Rømen and Svanæs [19] have studied the usability 
evaluation by users with several disabilities (blind, weak-
sighted, motor impaired and dyslexic) as a part of their 
validation of the usefulness of using Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) as a heuristic for website 
accessibility. Several techniques were used for the testing 
process: a “think aloud” was conducted at first; then a short 
interview was conducted after completing the test tasks in 
order to uncover further problems.  Evaluators also used a 
mobile usability lab which allowed the disabled users to be 
tested at their workplace and home using their own computer 
and technical aides. The study results showed that only 27% 
of the identified website accessibility problems could have 
been identified through the use of WCAG heuristics. 
The works reviewed above have addressed the application 
of specific types of UEMs by disabled users as part of 
presenting the development process of a software system. 
However, this paper contributes to explore the effectiveness 
of applying number of UEMs (Inspection methods, thinking 
aloud, attention analysis, field observation, coaching method, 
questionnaires and interviews) for users with disabilities and 
to present the related conditions and considerations that 
would customize these UEMs to fit a specific disability. 
Furthermore, this contribution has been conducted by 
analyzing and reviewing the literature and the fields that 
focus on the application of different UEMs with different 
disabilities; 
and 
the obtained 
recommendations 
and 
considerations were based on our findings after analyzing 
these fields. We think that this work will help novice 
designers and usability engineers by giving them deeper 
insight on the areas that they should consider during the 
usability evaluation for systems designed for disabled users. 
III. 
EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS OF APPLYING USABILITY 
EVALUATION METHODS BY USERS WITH DISABILITIES 
Based on the nature of systems designed for users with 
disabilities and based on the disabled users’ characteristics, 
the most effective UEMs can be selected in order to discover 
all the possible usability issues that impact the system’s users 
[10]. In this study, we analyzed and discussed the application 
of different UEMs by users with different disabilities 
focusing on the users’ special characteristics. The analysis 
study was based on reviewing the literature and the fields 
and the obtained result was based on our findings and 
experience after performing this analysis study. However, 
the result was a set of recommendations and considerations 
that should take place before conducting usability evaluation 
by disabled users.  
A. Inspection Methods and Disabled-Users 
Before testing the system by real disabled users, 
inspection methods such as heuristic evaluation, cognitive 
411
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

walkthrough and action analysis can be applied in order to 
find and resolve the general and common usability issues 
based on the expertise of usability and design. The system 
then becomes ready for testing by disabled users. Although 
there are many guidelines for designing accessible systems 
for users with different kinds of disabilities, usability 
engineers and the designers lack the experience with disabled 
people 
characteristics 
and 
their 
different 
assistive 
technologies. Therefore, many of the system’s accessibility 
criteria are missed. In this case, the involvement of 
specialized therapists during the analysis becomes important 
in order to improve the effectiveness of the inspection 
methods in order to find more disability-specific usability 
issues. For example, in analyzing system designed 
specifically for users with physical impairment; the physical 
therapist can be participated in order to define the specific 
limitations that such users may face during the interaction 
with the system. And when we speak about system designed 
specifically for children with disability, like for example 
slow learning children, the involvement of persons like 
parents or teachers who are interacting with the child very 
closely and aware with most of the issues that this kind of 
children have, this can add more value to the inspection 
method and it will also help finding more usability issues. 
Generally we can say that relaying only on these inspection 
methods can find some general usability problems, but in 
order to find more detailed problems and useful information 
on how to improve the usability, it is necessary to conduct 
the Usability Testing Methods by actual disabled users [9]. 
B. Test Methods and Disabled-Users 
Usability Testing methods are conducted by real system 
users and their main objective is to identify problems that 
users face when dealing with the system. These tests provide 
precise identification and description of the usability issues 
that may lead to system re-designing [11]. In particular, for 
disabled users, many considerations should take place before 
conducting the test and some of these considerations are 
common for all type of disabilities; while others are specific 
for certain disability. Generally, for all kinds of disabilities, 
the testing environment (either room or laboratory) should be 
prepared and organized for the disabled user. For example, in 
case of physical impairment users, testing place should allow 
enough area for a wheelchair to get in, move around and face 
the computer. Furthermore, an important thing to consider 
before conducting tests by disabled users is the different 
profiles within this user group, i.e. disabled user may be 
employed or unemployed; educated or under-educated; 
technology ‘power users’ or computer illiterate. Information 
about these differences should be gathered in order to deepen 
the obtained results. Moreover, it is important to select what 
system interfaces to be tested by the disabled users. 
Therefore, different test tasks can be prioritized based on 
their importance in the system and also based on the amount 
of user interaction involved. This is because the areas of a 
system that have the most usability problems are the ones 
involving the most user interaction [17]. 
There are many usability testing techniques such as: 
Thinking aloud, Attention Analysis, Field Observation, 
Questionnaires and others. Here, we will go through some of 
these techniques and analyze their effectiveness when being 
conducted by users of specific disabilities: 
 
Thinking aloud 
The Thinking aloud method requires the user to verbalize 
all his/her cognitions when interacting with the system. It is 
considered one of the most effective techniques in 
identifying usability problems [11]. When conducting this 
method by disabled users, the evaluator has to consider the 
participants’ disability before starting the test. For blind and 
visually impaired participants, they usually use a screen 
reader as their main assistive technology. However, the 
evaluator should focus on both the screen reader and the 
participant voice and expressions. And in this case, he/she 
has to position the audio recording equipment close enough 
to hear the screen reader. The evaluator can also use 
separate audio equipment for the participant's voice and for 
the screen reader, that way, when analyzing the data, the 
evaluator can combine between the two recordings [12]. 
Another case of disabled users are the deaf participants. In 
this case the evaluator has to record both the participant and 
the interpreter voice, depending on the situation. If the 
participant doesn't speak at all, the evaluator can record only 
the interpreter voice. If the participant speaks some, the 
evaluator probably want to record both of them. This 
technique will obviously put more stress on the participant 
because it is unnatural to his/her to express his thinking 
loudly and share it with others [11]. Therefore, we might 
say that think aloud method considered time-consuming and 
hard to apply for deaf participants since they have to share 
their thoughts with the interpreter who will give the answers 
to the evaluator. Also, Roberts and Fels [5] proved the 
viability of using this method in collecting gestural 
protocols from the sign language of deaf users and extract 
relevant usability issues and remarks. 
 
Attention Analysis 
Attention Analysis method includes two categories: 
Attention-tracking and eye-tracking. In the attention 
tracking, the participant is asked to click on the areas in the 
system interface that he/she finds most noticeable. The eye-
tracking method in the other hand requires special 
equipment in order to capture the users’ eyes movement so 
the evaluator can analyze it and gain useful information on 
the noticeable interface elements. As we can see, this 
technique is inapplicable for blind participants. While for 
other disabilities it can be helpful in finding and analyzing 
which elements of the system are most distracting and how 
long users remain in certain sections of the system. 
Furthermore, this technique can be used for evaluating 
systems designed for aiding children with Autism syndrome 
by examine and identify the types of interface elements (i.e., 
animation) that attract and retain child’s attention.  
 
412
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

 
Field Observation 
This method involve an investigator who is observing 
the users as they work in their work environment, and taking 
notes on the activity that takes place there. Observation may 
be either direct where the investigator is actually present on 
the observation area or indirect where the task is recorded 
using a video recorder and later on the investigator can 
analyze it [15]. Allowing the observer to view what users 
actually do in their context, especially in case of disabled 
users, will add great value to the process of finding usability 
issues.  Direct observation allows the investigator to focus 
attention on specific areas of interest and it will let him/her 
see how the disabled users use their assistive technologies, 
and which kind of daily practice they perform. And due to 
the nature of these users and their sensitivity to any new 
passive presence in their environment, the investigator 
should make sure that users are aware with the purpose of 
his/her presence and the main reasons of the observation. 
This is particularly important for mentally impaired and 
blind users who may be disturbed by a passive presence that 
they are not sure about. 
 
Coaching Method 
In this technique the evaluator serves as the coach, where 
participants are allowed to ask any questions to an expert 
coach who will answer to the best of his/her ability. The 
purpose is to discover the information needs of users and 
find out the limitations in the system design to possibly 
redesign the interface to avoid the need for the questions [2]. 
This technique would help in case of blind participants who 
most of the times need guidance in order to make sure that 
they are in the right direction. Furthermore, it would help in 
case of children with learning difficulties since they need 
continuous help; and the coach can respond to their 
questions and give them the needed assistance. 
 
Questionnaires 
Questionnaires are designed to help the evaluator in 
obtaining data about the users’ subject judgment of the 
system and reflecting their level of satisfaction. It can be 
used to evaluate entire system or only partial aspects of the 
system. This technique is applicable for all kinds of 
disabilities, except disabled children and slow learners [1]. 
However, it can be performed in a much simpler form which 
is the “Interview” [13] in order to simplify the technique for 
disabled users. The issue with this technique is that it needs 
enough number of participants, not less than 30, in order to 
make sure that enough opinions have been collected [13]. 
However, establishing cooperative relationships with 
organizations of disabled people may help in recruiting the 
required number of user participants [9]. 
 
C. Performing the Test Methods Locally or Remotely 
Finding 
and 
recruiting 
test 
users 
with 
special 
characteristics or specific demographics is a challenging 
task [9]. For example: it is not easy to find blind or deaf 
person who can be participated and committed to the system 
usability evaluation. This is obviously due to the special 
issues these users might have such as: transportation issues 
and the need for continuous assistance. As a result, finding 
test participants with disabilities is a problematic. Since 
their involvement is a key factor in usability tests, 
conducting the usability test remotely in the disabled user’s 
own environment would be a good practice. Disabled users 
usually use assistive software or hardware technologies such 
as: screen magnification programs for partially sighted 
people, single handed keyboards [9]. They also configure 
these technologies, in a way that fits their needs. Therefore, 
having remote evaluations which involve performing the 
test in the users’ areas is valuable, especially that the 
evaluator will be able to closely see how an assistive 
technology is being used by the disabled user and how this 
technology affects the usability of the system under testing. 
As a result, more detailed usability problems can be 
discovered. As mentioned by Petrie et al. [9], there are 
number of “remote evaluation techniques” such as: portable 
evaluation, local evaluation at remote site, remote 
questionnaire/survey, video conferencing and others. Each 
one of these techniques can be selected according to the 
users and the evaluators’ conditions. In contrast, going to 
each individual participants and perform the test in their 
environments is considered costly and time-consuming; 
especially when we are talking about large scale projects 
that need number of participants with different disabilities 
who may be located in different areas. Therefore, 
conducting the test locally in a usability laboratory by 
having the participants attend the test place is more effective 
and it can save time, cost and effort. As per what has been 
mentioned above, where to conduct the usability test either 
locally or remotely is an important dimension that should be 
considered to obtain effective usability evaluation by 
disabled users. 
D. Participants Independence 
One of the important issues that affect the effectiveness 
of the usability test results is the participants’ independence 
and the amount of their contact with the evaluator during the 
test. In most of the cases, disabled users need some 
guidance during the test from the evaluators. Such 
communication should be very well planned and organized 
in a way that will not affect the accuracy and validity of the 
test results, since intensive communication can distract the 
participants’ attention and prevent the evaluators from 
getting reliable results. Meanwhile, lack of help and 
guidance during the test could lead the disabled user to 
struggle in one task or become in the wrong direction. In 
case of deaf users who speech-reads, the evaluator should sit 
in a position in front of the test participant to allow him/her 
to read the evaluator’s lip and face expressions during the 
communication, this could be distracted to the user if it is 
not kept to the minimum during the test. As for slow 
413
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

learning children, communication has to be through the 
learning difficulties’ specialist who knows how to interact 
with children and provide the appropriate assistance. 
E. Synchronous or Asynchronous Tests 
Selecting among synchronous or asynchronous tests is 
about assessing the need to have the evaluator and the 
participant performing the usability test at the same time. In 
Asynchronous test, the evaluator can provide the participant 
the test details and manuals and leave him, and after 
finishing the test, the evaluator can collect the results data 
like video recording or screen recording tape. Synchronous 
tests in the other hand, implies having the evaluator 
participates with the user along the test time by observing 
him/her while performing the tasks. This way, the evaluator 
can explore more information like the non-verbal behavior 
of the participant can reveal more usability problems and 
their causes. In addition, one of the most important benefits 
of synchronous tests is that the evaluator will directly and 
carefully observe the disabled user and see how he/she 
interact with the system using assistive technology. This 
will ensure a deep understanding of different usability issues 
that should be considered in system design [9][11]. 
IV. 
SUMMARIZATION OF THE ANALYSIS RESULTS 
Generally, we can say that when evaluating the usability 
for systems designed for disabled users, combination 
between UEMs can be performed in order to find and 
discover most of the possible usability issues. Meanwhile, 
selecting the most effective UEMs should be done under 
many considerations like: the system goals, users’ disability 
type and the project’s time and cost constraints. Based on 
the previous section, results of analyzing the effectiveness 
of UEMs by disabled users are summarized in Table1. 
These results are depicted in the shape of considerations and 
recommendations along with the justifications behind the 
selection of these recommendations. 
 
TABLE I. ANALYSIS RESULTS OF THE EFFECTIVENESS OF UEMS BY DISABLED USERS
Disability 
Considerations/ Recommendations 
Justification 
Complete - Partial 
Deaf 
Involve sign language interpreter in the test. 
For effective communication with deaf users. 
Plan and manage the interaction during the test. 
To avoid any distraction during the test for speech-reads users in order to get accurate 
reliable test results. 
Combination of test methods: thinking aloud and 
questionnaire is recommended to apply. 
As per the review of previous works, these methods have shown effective results. 
Complete -Partial 
visual impairment Consider the screen reader assistive tool during the test. 
Visually-impaired users rely heavily on the screen reader. therefore to get accurate 
results, these tools should be considered during the test. 
Provide required assistance when needed. 
Based on the special nature and the difficulties faced by such users when using the 
different systems, immediate and direct assistance should be provided during the test. 
Omit the “task completion time” constraint. 
Visually-impaired users spend more time on performing tasks than other disabilities. 
Therefore, the time constraint should be removed during the test. This ensures more 
flexibility that helps them complete the tasks. 
Use automatic validation tools. 
These users use assistive technology heavily. Therefore, checking the compatibility of 
the developed system and the assistive technologies using these tools is important.  
Combination of inspection methods is recommended: 
heuristic evaluation and test methods (coaching method). 
As per the review of previous works, these methods have shown effective results by 
visual impairment users. 
Physical impairment Perform synchronous remote test (in the user 
environment). 
Due to the different obstacles these users may face to attend usability test lab, 
performing remote test allows more of them to participate in the test. 
Involve physical therapists for effective inspection 
method. 
Such therapists can define the impacts on such disabled users and their limitations 
during system interaction. 
Combination of inspection methods is recommended: 
heuristic and test methods (field observation, 
questionnaire or interview). 
As per the review of previous works, these methods have shown effective results by 
such users. 
Children with 
disabilities: Slow 
learning, Autism 
Involve parents and learning difficulties’ specialist for 
effective inspection methods. 
Involving them can reveal more usability issues and assist in communication. 
Provide clear simple guidance and instruction. 
Based their special nature and the difficulties they face when using computer 
applications, it is important to provide users with clear and simple guidance. 
Combination of inspection methods is recommend: 
heuristic evaluation and test methods (attention analysis, 
coaching method) 
As per the review of previous works, these methods have shown effective results by 
such users. 
Cognitive and 
Mental disabilities 
Involve cognitive and mental health specialist for 
effective inspection methods. 
Such involvement can reveal more usability issues and enhance the communication 
omng the test. 
Provide clear and simple guidance and instruction before 
the test. 
Based on their special nature and the difficulties they face when using computer 
applications, it is important to provide users with clear and simple guidance. 
Combination of inspection methods is recommended to 
apply: informal walkthrough and test methods (field 
observation). 
As per the review of previous works, these methods have shown effective results by 
such users 
The observer or test facilitator should build good 
relationship with the test participants and gain their trust 
before the test. 
Due to the special nature of these users and their sensitivity, it is important to gain 
their trust to facilitate the communication during the test. 
414
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, we analyzed and discussed the application 
of different UEMs by users with different disabilities 
focusing more on the users’ special characteristics. The goal 
was to explore the effectiveness of applying number of 
UEMs with users with disabilities; and to present the related 
conditions and considerations that would customize these 
UEMs to fit a specific disability. However, the study was 
based on analyzing the literature and reviewing the fields 
that focus on the application of different UEMs with 
different disabilities. And the results that we obtained 
during this study were based on our findings and experience 
after analyzing these fields.  We think that this work will 
help novice designers and usability engineers who have no 
prior experience with conducting usability evaluation with 
disabled users. However, this work will give them deeper 
insight on specific areas that they should consider during the 
evaluation. The future work will be conducting empirical 
evaluation with real disabled users in order to assess the 
effectiveness 
and 
accuracy 
of 
the 
obtained 
recommendations and results during this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. 
Abdollah, 
W.F.W. 
Ahmad, 
and 
E.A.P. 
Akhir, 
"Development and usability study of multimedia courseware 
for 
slow 
learners: 
‘Komputer 
Saya’," Computer 
& 
Information Science (ICCIS), 2012 Int. Conf. on, vol. 2, June 
2012, pp. 1110-1114, doi:10.1109/ICCISci.2012.6297192. 
[2] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, 1993. 
[3] B. Thurnher, “Usability engineering,” Course No.: 188.314. 
Quality Software Engineering (QSE) Research Group. 
Institute of Software Technology and Interactive Systems 
(IFS), Sept. 2004. 
[4] A J. Brush, M. Ames, and J. Davis, “A comparison of 
synchronous remote and local usability studies for an expert 
interface,” In CHI '04 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2004, 
pp. 1179-1182, doi:10.1145/985921.986018. 
[5] V. Roberts and D. Fels, “Methods for inclusion: employing 
Think Aloud Protocols in software usability studies with 
individuals who are deaf,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. 64, 
June 2006, pp. 489-501, doi:10.1016/j.ijhcs.2005.11.001. 
[6] A. Fernandez, S. Abrahao, and E. Insfran, "A systematic 
review on the effectiveness of web usability evaluation 
methods," Evaluation & Assessment in Software Engineering 
(EASE 2012), 16th Int. Conf. on, May 2012, pp. 52-56, 
doi:10.1049/ic.2012.0007. 
[7] H. R. Hartson, T. S. Andre, and R. C. Williges, “Criteria for 
evaluating usability evaluation methods,” Int. Journal of 
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 15, 2003, pp. 145-181, 
doi:10.1207/S15327590IJHC1501_13. 
[8] S. Chandrashekar, T. Stockman, D. Fels, and R. Benedyk, 
“Using think aloud protocol with blind users: a case for 
inclusive usability evaluation methods,” In Proc. 8th Int. 
ACM 
SIGACCESS 
Conf. 
on 
Computers 
and 
accessibility (Assets '06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2006, 
pp. 251-252, doi:10.1145/1168987.1169040. 
[9] H. Petrie, F. Hamilton, N. King, and P. Pavan, “Remote 
usability evaluations with disabled people,” In Proc. SIGCHI 
Conf. on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '06). 
ACM, 
New 
York, 
USA, 
2006, 
pp. 
1133-1141, 
doi:10.1145/1124772.1124942. 
[10] A. Al-Wabil, and H. Al-Khalifa, "A framework for 
integrating usability evaluations methods: The Mawhiba web 
portal case study," In Current Trends in Information 
Technology (CTIT), 2009 Int. Conf. on the, IEEE, Dec. 2009, 
pp. 1-6, doi:10.1109/CTIT.2009.5423128. 
[11] A. Blecken, D. Bruggemann, and W. Marx, "Usability 
evaluation of a Learning Management System," System 
Sciences (HICSS), 43rd Hawaii Int. Conf. on, Jan. 2010, pp. 
1-9, doi:10.1109/HICSS.2010.422. 
[12] “Just ask: integrating accessibility throughout design. 
Preparing for usability testing” - [online] Available at: 
http://www.uiaccess.com/accessucd/ut_prep.html. [Retrieved: 
Sept., 2014]. 
[13] M. Rowan, P. Gregor, D. Sloan, and P. Booth, “Evaluating 
web resources for disability access,” In Proc. 4th ACM Int. 
Conf. on Assistive technologies (Assets '00), 2000, pp. 80-84, 
doi:10.1145/354324.354346. 
[14] D. J. Mayhew, The usability lifecycle. A practitioner's 
handbook for user interface design, Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, 1999. 
[15] “UsabilityNet. User observation/field studies” – [online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.usabilitynet.org/tools/userobservation.htm. 
[Retrieved: Sept., 2014]. 
[16] S. Riihiaho, "Experiences with usability evaluation methods," 
Licentiate thesis. Helsinki University of Technology. 
Laboratory of Information Processing Science, 2000. 
[17] “Webbism - Web accessibility (Brisbane). The benefits of 
user testing with disabled users” - [online] Available at: 
http://webbism.com/2012/07/06/the-benefits-of-user-testing-
with-disabled-users. [Retrieved: Sept., 2014]. 
[18] J. Karat, “User-centered software evaluation methodologies,” 
In M. Helander, T.K. Landauer, P. Prabhu (Eds.) Handbook 
of human-computer interaction, 2nd ed. Elsevier Science. pp. 
689-704, 1997. 
[19] D. Rømen and D. Svanæs, “Evaluating web site accessibility: 
validating the WAI guidelines through usability testing with 
disabled users,” In Proc. 5th Nordic Conf. on Human-
computer interaction: building bridges (NordiCHI '08). ACM, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
2008, 
pp. 
535-538, 
doi:10.1145/1463160.1463238. 
[20] A. Lepistö and S. Ovaska, “Usability evaluation involving 
participants with cognitive disabilities,” In Proc. 3rd Nordic 
Conf. on Human-computer interaction. ACM, NY, USA, 
2004, 
pp. 
305-308, 
doi:10.1145/1028014.1028061.
 
 
  
415
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-367-4
ICSEA 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Software Engineering Advances

