Asynchronous Sequential Symbol Synchronizers based on Pulse Comparison by 
Positive Transitions at Bit Rate 
Antonio D. Reis1,2 and José P. Carvalho1 
Dep. Física / Unidade D. Remota 
1Universidade da Beira Interior, 6200 Covilhã, Portugal 
adreis@ubi.pt, pacheco@ubi.pt 
José F. Rocha2 and Atilio S. Gameiro2 
Dep. Electrónica e Telecom. / Instituto Telecom. 
2Universidade de Aveiro, 3810 Aveiro, Portugal 
frocha@det.ua.pt, amg@det.ua.pt 
 
Abstract- This work studies the asynchronous sequential symbol 
synchronizers based on pulse comparison by positive transitions 
at rate (ap). Their performance will be compared with the 
reference asynchronous symbol synchronizers based on pulse 
comparison by both transitions at rate (ab). For the reference 
and proposed variants, we consider two versions which are the 
manual (m) and the automatic (a). The objective is to study the 
four synchronizers and evaluate their output jitter UIRMS (Unit 
Interval Root Mean Square) versus input SNR (Signal Noise 
Ratio). 
Keywords - Synchronism; Digital Communications 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This work studies the asynchronous sequential symbol 
synchronizer based on pulse comparison operating by positive 
transitions at rate (ap). Their jitter is compared with the 
reference asynchronous synchronizers operating by both 
transitions at rate (ab) [1, 2]. 
For both, reference and proposed variant, we consider the 
versions manual (m) and automatic (a) [3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. 
The difference between the reference and proposed 
synchronizer is in the symbol phase comparator since the 
others blocks are similar. The phase comparator compares the 
input variable pulse duration Pv with the intern reference 
fixed pulse duration Pf and the error pulse Pe synchronizes 
the VCO (Voltage Controlled Oscillator) [8, 9]. 
The synchronizer regenerates the data, recovering a clock 
(VCO) that samples and retimes the data  [10, 11, 12, 13].  
Fig. 1 shows the blocks of the general symbol synchronizer. 
 
 
Figure 1. Synchronizer based on pulse comparison 
 
Following, we present the reference variant, asynchronous 
sequential symbol synchronizers based on pulse comparison 
by both transitions at rate, with versions manual (ab-m) and 
automatic (ab-a). Next, we present the proposed variant, 
asynchronous sequential symbol synchronizer based on pulse 
comparison by positive transitions at rate, with versions 
manual (ap-m) and automatic (ap-a).  
After, we present the design and tests. Then, we present the 
results. Finally, we present the conclusions. 
II. ANTERIOR WORK AND NEW CONTRIBUTIONS 
While various types of synchronizers were developed, very 
little has done on evaluating their quality. 
The motivation of this work is to create new synchronizers 
and to evaluate their performance with noise. This 
contribution increases the knowledge about synchronizers. 
Before, we presented various synchronous synchronizers, 
now, we will present the asynchronous synchronizers [1,2,3]. 
 
III. REFERENCE BY BOTH AT RATE 
The 
reference, 
asynchronous 
sequential 
symbol  
synchronizers based on pulse comparison operating by both 
transitions at bit rate has two versions which are the manual 
(ab-m) and the automatic (ab-a) [1, 2]. 
The versions difference is in the phase comparator, the 
variable pulse Pv is common but the fixed Pf is different. 
 
A. Reference by both at rate manual (ab-m) 
The block Pv, shown below, produces a variable pulse Pv 
between the input bits and VCO. The manual adjustment 
delay with Exor produces a manual fixed pulse Pf (Fig. 2). 
 
 
 Figure 2 Asynchronous by both at rate and manual (ab-m) 
 
The comparison between the pulses Pv and Pf provides the 
error pulse Pe that forces the VCO to synchronize the input. 
The block Pv is an asynchronous circuit (Fig. 3). 
 
 
 Figure 3. Intern aspect of the block Pv 
 
Fig. 4 shows the waveforms of the reference manual (equal 
to the corresponding synchronous by both at rate) [3]. 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 Figure 4. Waveforms of the asynchronous by both at rate manual  
 
The error pulse Pe diminishes during the synchronization 
time and disappear at the equilibrium point. 
 
B. Reference by both at rate automatic (ab-a) 
 
The block Pv, common with anterior, produces the variable 
pulse Pv between input and VCO. The block Pf, shown 
below, produces the comparison fixed pulse Pf (Fig. 5). 
 
 Figure 5. Asynchronous by both at rate and automatic (ab-a)  
 
The comparison between the pulses Pv and Pf provides the 
error pulse Pe that forces the VCO to follow the input. The 
block Pf is an asynchronous circuit (Fig. 6). 
 
 
 Figure 6. Intern aspect of the block Pf 
 
Fig. 7 shows the waveforms of the reference automatic 
(equal to the corresponding synchronous by both at rate) [3]. 
 
 
 Figure 7. Waveforms of the asynchronous by both at rate automatic 
 
The error pulse Pe does not  disappear, but the variable area 
Pv is equal to the fixed Pf at the equilibrium point.  
 
IV. PROPOSED BY POSITIVE AT RATE 
The 
proposed, 
asynchronous 
sequential 
symbol 
synchronizers based on pulse comparison operating by 
positive transitions at bit rate has also two versions namely 
the manual (ap-m) and the automatic (ap-a) [3, 4]. 
The versions difference is in the phase comparator, the 
variable pulse Pvp is common but the fixed Pfp is different. 
 
A. Proposed by positive at rate manual (ap-m) 
 
The block Pvp produces the variable pulse Pvp between 
input positive transitions and VCO. The manual adjustment 
delay T/2 with AND produces a fixed pulse Pfp (Fig. 8). 
 
 
 Figure 8. Asynchronous by positive at rate and manual (ap-m) 
 
The comparison between pulses Pvp and Pfp provides the 
error pulse Pe that forces the VCO to synchronize the input. 
The block Pvp is an asynchronous circuit (Fig. 9). 
 
 
 Figure 9. Intern aspect of the block Pvp 
 
Fig. 10 shows the waveforms of the proposed manual (equal 
to the corresponding synchronous version) [3]. 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 Figure 10. Waveforms of the asynchronous positive at rate manual 
 
The error pulse Pe diminishes during the synchronization 
time and disappear at the equilibrium point. 
 
B. Proposed by positive at rate automatic (ap-a) 
 
The block Pvp, common, produces the variable pulse Pvp 
between input and VCO. The block Pfp, shown below, 
produces the comparison fixed pulse Pfp (Fig. 11). 
 
 
 Figure 11. Asynchronous by positive at rate and automatic (ap-a) 
 
The comparison between the pulses Pvp and Pfp provides 
the error pulse Pe that forces the VCO to follow the input. 
The block Pfp is an asynchronous circuit (Fig. 12). 
 
 
  Figure 12. Intern aspect of the block Pfp 
 
Fig. 13 shows the waveforms of the proposed automatic 
(equal to the corresponding synchronous version) [3]. 
 
 
Figure13. Waveforms of the asynchronous positive at rate automatic 
The error pulse Pe does not  disappear, but the variable area 
Pv is equal to the fixed Pf at the equilibrium point. 
 
V. DESIGN, TESTS AND RESULTS 
We present the design, tests and results of the various  
synchronizers [5]. 
 
A. Design 
 
To have guaranteed results, is necessary to dimension all the 
synchronizers with equal conditions. Then, the loop gain 
Kl=KdKo=KaKfKo must be equal in all the synchronizers. 
The phase detector gain Kf and the VCO gain Ko are fixed. 
Then, the loop gain amplification Ka controls the root locus 
and consequently the loop characteristics. 
For analysis facilities, we use normalized values for the 
transmission rate tx=1baud, clock frequency fCK=1Hz,  
extern noise bandwidth Bn=5Hz and loop noise bandwidth 
Bl=0.002Hz. Then, we apply a signal power Ps= A2
ef and a 
noise power Pn= No= 2σn2.∆τ, where σn is the noise 
standard deviation and ∆τ =1/fSamp is the sampling period. 
The relation between SNR and noise variance σn2 is 
SNR= A2
ef/(No.Bn) = 0.52/(2σn2*10-3*5)= 25/σn2        (1) 
Now, for each synchronizer, is necessary to measure the 
output  jitter UIRMS versus the input SNR  
- 1st order loop: 
We use a cutoff loop filter F(s) = 0.5Hz, is 25 times greater 
than Bl= 0.002Hz, what eliminates the high frequency but 
maintain the loop characteristics. The transfer function is 
H(s)= G(s)
1
+ G(s)
=
+
=
+
KdKoF s
s
KdKoF s
KdKo
s
KdKo
( )
( )
                   (2) 
the loop noise bandwidth is 
Bl = KdKo
Ka KfKo
4
4
=
 = 0.02Hz                                   (3) 
So, with (Km=1, A=1/2, B=1/2, Ko=2π) and loop bandwidth 
Bl=0.002, we obtain respectively the Ka, for analog, hybrid, 
combinational and sequential synchronizers, then 
Bl=(Ka.Kf.Ko)/4 = (Ka.Km.A.B.Ko)/4 -> Ka=0.08*2/π      (4) 
Bl=(Ka.Kf.Ko)/4 = (Ka.Km.A.B.Ko)/4 -> Ka=0.08*2.2/π   (5) 
Bl=(Ka.Kf.Ko)/4 = (Ka*1/π*2π)/4 -> Ka=0.04              (6) 
Bl=(Ka.Kf.Ko)/4 = (Ka*1/2π*2π)/4 -> Ka=0.08              (7) 
For the analog PLL, the jitter is 
σφ
2=Bl.No/Aef2=0.02*10-3*2σn2/0.52=16*10-5.σn2           (8) 
For the others PLLs, the jitter formula is more complicated. 
- 2nd order loop: 
Is not used here, but provides similar results. 
 
B. Tests 
 
We used the following setup to test synchronizers (Fig. 14) 
 
 Figure 14. Blocks diagram of the test setup 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

The receiver recovered clock with jitter is compared with 
the emitter original clock, the difference is the jitter. 
 
C. Results 
 
We present the results in terms of output jitter UIRMS 
versus input SNR. Fig. 15 shows the jitter - SNR curves of the 
four synchronizers which are the both manual (ab-m), the 
both automatic (ab-a), the positive manual (ap-m) and the 
positive automatic (ap-a). 
 
Figure15. Jitter-SNR curves of  the 4 synchronizers (ab-m,ab-a,ap-m, 
ap-a) 
 
We observe that, in general, the output jitter UIRMS 
decreases gradually with the input SNR increasing.  
We verify that, for high SNR, the four jitter curves tend to 
be similar. However, for low SNR, the variant asynchronous 
both at rate manual (ab-m) and automatic (ab-a) are better 
than the variant asynchronous positive at rate manual (ap-m) 
and automatic (ap-a). 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We studied four synchronizers involving the reference 
variant asynchronous by both transitions at rate with versions 
manual (ab-m) and automatic (ab-a) and the proposed variant 
asynchronous by positive transitions at rate with versions 
manual (ap-m) and automatic (ap-a). Then, we tested and 
compared their jitter - SNR curves. 
We observed that, in general, the output UIRMS jitter 
curves decrease gradually with the input SNR increasing. 
We verified that, for high SNR, the four synchronizers jitter 
curves tend to be similar, this is comprehensible since all the 
synchronizers are digital, with equal noise margin. However, 
for low SNR, the variant asynchronous by both at rate with its 
versions manual (ab-m) and automatic (ab-a) is better than the 
variant asynchronous by positive at rate with its versions 
manual (ap-m) and automatic (ap-a), this is comprehensible 
because the variant by both transitions has more transitions 
(double) than the variant by positive transitions and then, the 
going time from the error state to the correct state is lesser. 
In the future, we are planning to extend the present study to 
other types of synchronizers. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 The authors are grateful to the program FCT (Foundation for 
sCience and Technology) / POCI2010. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Jean C. Imbeaux, “performance of the delay-line multiplier circuit for 
clock 
and 
carrier 
synchronization 
in 
Digital 
Satellite 
Communications”, 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications pp. 82-95 Jan. 1983. 
[2] Werner Rosenkranz, “Phase Locked Loops with limiter phase detectors 
in the presence of noise”, IEEE Transactions on Communications com-
30 Nº10 pp. 2297-2304. Oct 1982. 
[3] Hans H. Witte, “A Simple Clock Extraction Circuit Using a Self 
Sustaining Monostable Multivibrator Output Signal”, Electronics 
Letters, Vol.19, Is.21, pp. 897-898, Oct 1983. 
[4] Charles R. Hogge, “A Self Correcting Clock Recovery Circuit”, IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices pp. 2704-2706 Dec 1985. 
[5] Antonio D. Reis, Jose F. Rocha, Atilio S. Gameiro and Jose P. 
Carvalho “A New Technique to Measure the Jitter”, Proc. III Conf. on 
Telecommunications pp. 64-67 FFoz-PT 23-24 Apr .2001. 
[6] Marvin K. Simon and William C. Lindsey, “Tracking Performance of 
Symbol 
Synchronizers 
for 
Manchester 
Coded 
Data”, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Communications Vol. com-2.5 Nº4, pp. 393-408, 
April 1977. 
[7] Jeffrey B. Carruthers, D. D. Falconer, H. M. Sandler and L. 
Strawczynski, “Bit Synchronization in the Presence of Co-Channel 
Interference”, Proc. Conf. on Electrical and Computer Engineering pp. 
4.1.1-4.1.7, Ottawa-CA 3-6 Sep. 1990. 
[8] Johannes Huber and Weilin Liu “Data-Aided Synchronization of 
Coherent CPM-Receivers” IEEE Transactions on Communications 
Vol.40 Nº1, pp. 178-189, Jan. 1992. 
[9] Antonio A. D’Amico, Aldo N. D’Andrea and Ruggero Reggianni, 
“Efficient Non-Data-Aided Carrier and Clock Recovery for Satellite 
DVB at Very Low SNR”, IEEE Jou. on Sattelite Areas in Comm. 
Vol.19 Nº12 pp. 2320-2330, Dec. 2001. 
[10] Rostislav Dobkin, Ran Ginosar and Christos P. Sotiriou “Data 
Synchronization Issues in GALS SoCs”, Proc. 10th International 
Symposium on Asynchronous Circuits and Systems, pp. CD-Ed., 
Crete-Greece 19-23 Apr. 2004. 
[11] N. Noels, H. Steendam and M. Moeneclaey, “Effectiveness Study of 
Code-Aided and Non-Code-Aided ML-Based Feedback Phase 
Synchronizers”, Proc. IEEE Intern. Conference on Communications 
(ICC’06) pp. 2946-2951, Istambul-TK, 11-15 Jun 2006. 
[12] Antonio D. Reis, Jose F. Rocha, Atilio S. Gameiro and Jose P. 
Carvalho “Sequential Symbol Synchronizers based on Clock Sampling 
of Discrete Pulses”, Proc. VIII Symposium on Enabling Optical 
Network and Sensors (SEONs) pp. CD-Edited, Porto-PT 25-25 June 
2010.  
[13] Antonio D. Reis, Jose F. Rocha, Atilio S. Gameiro and Jose P. 
Carvalho “Carrier Phase Lock Loop and Bit Phase Lock Loop”, Proc. 
IX Symposium on Enabling Optical Network and Sensors (SEONs)  
pp. CD-Edited, Aveiro-PT 1-1 July 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

