The K-means and TSP Based Mobility Protocol Modeling as a Probabilistic 
Combinatorial Optimization Problem  
 
Monia Bellalouna1, Afef Ghabri2, Walid Khaznaji3   
13Laboratory CRISTAL POLE GRIFT, 2Laboratory RIADI-GDL 
University of Manouba, National School of Computer Sciences (ENSI), 2010 
Manouba, Tunisia 
e-mail: 1monia.bellalouna@ensi.rnu.tn, 2afef2108@hotmail.com, 3mwkhaznaji@yahoo.fr 
 
 
Abstract— Fault tolerance is considered as a critical issue and a 
very interesting subject of research in Wireless Sensor 
Networks (WSN). Some sensors may be blocked or may fail 
due to a lack of energy or because of their manufacture. The 
external interactions (interferences, malicious attacks) can also 
be the source of malfunctions. The failure of sensors should not 
affect the network performance. This is a problem of reliability 
or fault tolerance which is the ability to maintain network 
functionality without interruptions due to a failure of a sensor 
node. It therefore aims to reduce the influence of these failures 
on the overall task of a wireless sensor network. Protocols and 
fault- tolerant approaches must be used to ensure reliable 
delivery of data packets to the base station and to guarantee 
reliable functioning even after the vulnerability of some 
network components. In this paper, we describe the K-means 
And Traveling Salesman Problem-based mobility protocol 
used to assure the proper functioning of the networks; we also 
propose a theoretical modeling of a probabilistic combinatorial 
optimization problem, which is explored through this method 
in order to minimize the energy consumption and improve 
fault tolerance for WSN. 
Keywords- Wireless sensor networks; failure; fault-tolerance; 
modeling; probabilistic. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wireless sensor networks represent a very promising 
domain that has become a new research focus in 
communication and computer fields. They can be used in 
different environments in a random way and in a large 
variety of applications due to their easy deployment and their 
low cost of construction. To achieve some applications, such 
as medical care, military surveillance, disaster relief and 
environmental monitoring, reliability is fundamental and 
essential. A wireless network is composed of plenty of 
sensors that are deployed in the monitoring field, and that 
have perception, processing and communication ability. 
However, the limitation of energy in wireless nodes, and 
hostile environments in which they could be used, are factors 
that make such networks very vulnerable [1][2]. In fact, they 
are subject to different forms of breakdowns that affect their 
reliability. These problems include computer attacks and 
hardware failures which are, nowadays, a real threat 
constantly growing. The failures of sensors can be caused by 
different reasons, including the physical damages, malicious 
attacks, environmental interferences, communication link 
errors or the depletion of energy [2]. Without successful 
transmission and secure routing, many applications of 
wireless sensor networks cannot work.  
Because of their sensitivity, several research projects 
have been conducted in order to find solutions to these 
networks in the presence of failures and intrusions [3]. In 
fact, a sensor network must be able to maintain and keep its 
functionality without interruptions caused by the failures of 
nodes. In other words, these breakdowns should not affect 
the overall functioning of the network. This problem of fault 
tolerance has seen a great significance among various fields 
of research in wireless sensor networks. So, one of the basic 
challenges is to guarantee the safety and the proper 
functioning of equipments by developing fault-tolerant and 
robust algorithms that offer reliability of transmitted data. 
The purpose of this paper is to propose a possible direction 
of future researches by including a probabilistic modeling of 
the K-means And Traveling Salesman Problem-based 
mobility protocol [4], which is a fault tolerant protocol in 
wireless sensor networks. The rest of the paper will be 
organized as follows: In the second Section, we will present 
an overview of the fault tolerance problem. Section 3 will 
describe the principle of this relevant a priori protocol. A 
theoretical probabilistic modeling of it will be also proposed 
in Section 4. Section 5 presents the simulation results and 
analysis. Finally, we will conclude the paper in Section 6. 
II. 
FAULT TOLERANCE IN WSN : PROBLEM 
PRESENTATION 
The communications between the collector node and the 
other sensors of a network need the implementation of 
routing 
protocols 
that 
are 
based 
on 
multi-hop 
communication. Each sensor then acts as a router in addition 
to its role as a data source. However, faults can happen 
because of some problems such as the lack or the loss of 
energy, the interferences of the environment (heat, rain) or 
by a destructive agent (like animals), attacks (Sybil, 
Wormhole, Selective forwarding, sinkhole, etc.) and also the 
physical damages. In this case, it will be possible that one or 
many sensors do not operate. This causes the loss of 
communication links that leads to a significant change in the 
entire network topology. The fault is the primary source of 
an error that causes the system failure [5]. So, the network 
connectivity can be affected and its life will be decreased. In 
this case, it must be able to detect this error and to remedy it, 
by finding another way to transmit information and to 
maintain the network always operational.  
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

We can say that the goal of fault tolerance is to avoid the 
total flaw of the system despite the existence of errors in a 
subset of its elementary components. The tolerance degree 
depends on the nature of the application, its degree of 
criticality and on the exchanged data. Then, it is essential to 
provide fault tolerant protocols that allow us to choose the 
best paths in order to route information from the source to 
the collector. They also permit the selection of an alternative 
path if there was a failure while sending data on the initial 
route, in case of an interruption at one or several sensor 
nodes of it. In addition, the implementation of fault tolerant 
clustering protocols is useful in order to provide a better 
routing management [6]. Then, there are algorithms used to 
determine many routes from each node to the sink, which 
guarantees the presence of more than one reliable path for 
transmission. This provides a fast transfer resumption in case 
of failure on the first selected route (selecting one of the 
remaining routes). Other protocols realize a better 
management of energy use, with the aim of increasing the 
network lifetime [7]. Many works in the literature suggest 
fault tolerant methods in sensor networks, such as the Energy 
Aware Routing "EAR" protocol [8] and the Periodic, Event-
driven, Query-based "PEQ" protocol [8], for many 
objectives. As each has been developed to achieve a specific 
purpose, they vary widely in many settings, including 
security, accuracy, configurability, cost and reliability. In 
this work, a probabilistic derivation of the reliability problem 
is considered.  
Actually, although there are a large number of theoretical 
models for problems coming from the real world, the 
application of these models, in a direct way, is difficult and 
sometimes impossible due to the vagueness, the inaccuracy 
or the lack of data. In some contexts, based on estimations or 
statistical measures, a solution may be required even before 
the specification of information. In fact, there are several 
applications where obtaining current data in a certain way is 
not possible due to the volatile nature of data. The 
community of operational research has introduced several 
optimization frameworks to address these constraints [9]. In 
our work, a sensor network is modeled by a graph, and we 
are operating in a situation where the vertices do not exist in 
a deterministic way in this graph, but they are present in a 
probabilistic manner. In other words, a probability of 
presence will be associated with each vertex. This work is 
located in a study framework of combinatorial optimization 
problems when their proceedings are changing in a 
probabilistic way [10].  
The aim is to present a priori strategy which ensures the 
reliability of data transmission in the presence of faults: on 
any instance of the problem, we avoid the total flaw of the 
system by changing the graph structure (transformation in a 
subgraph) according to a modification strategy that will be 
specified in advance. Fault tolerance in wireless sensor 
networks can then be presented as a probabilistic 
optimization problem that will be modeled based on different 
protocols and particularly the K-means And Traveling 
Salesman Problem-based mobility protocol, in which we will 
be interested in the following sections.   
III. 
K-MEANS  AND TSP-BASED MOBILITY "KAT-
MOBILITY" PROTOCOL  
Nakayama et al. [12] proposed the K-means And TSP-
based 
mobility 
"KAT-mobility" 
protocol 
based 
on 
optimization algorithms of routing and aggregation. It is a 
model of mobility of sinks that can effectively collect 
detected data used in a wireless sensor network, even if some 
sensors are destroyed [11]. The system is composed of two 
modules: the clustering algorithm and the approximate 
solution for the TSP "Traveling Salesman Problem" [12]. 
The sensors are firstly divided into groups by using the 
clustering algorithm, from which the centers of the groups 
are determined as anchor points. The route of the mobile sink 
is determined as an approximate solution of the TSP. Here, it 
is assumed that an administrator distributes sensors to 
supervise the targeted area, and the sensors are scattered at 
random positions and do not move afterwards. After the 
grouping of sensor nodes, this method reaches the mobile 
sink to make a course through the centers of groups 
according to the trajectory of an optimized path. The mobile 
sink collects then the data coming from sensors on the level 
of the visited groups. Its trajectory is assumed to be random 
in order to mitigate malicious attacks. The compromise 
between the flow rate and the energy consumption is 
regarded as the efficiency metric during the evaluation. 
During this time, the KAT-mobility protocol can calculate 
the migration route for the sink in order to get around the 
damaged area or malfunctioned sensors due to attacks while 
preserving its random behavior. In other words, after the 
reorganization of the network into groups, the proposed 
approach pilots the mobile collector to move through the 
centers of the groups by taking the optimal route. Thus, the 
mobile collector recovers the information from the sensors of 
the visited groups. The principle of this protocol is 
summarized in these two procedures: the optimization of the 
routing path and the clustering. Figure 1 shows this principle 
[12]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. KAT-mobility protocol 
 
* 
* 
* 
* 
A 
M 
M 
M 
M 
   : Base Station   
      
     : Mobile sink 
    
     : Sensor node 
  
     : Mobile sink 
route 
    
  : Cluster 
centroids (centers) 
A 
M 
* 
                                  
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

A. Clustering Procedure 
A sensor network is often composed of several thousands 
sensor nodes. To reduce the complexity of the routing 
algorithms, to facilitate data aggregation, to simplify the 
network management and to optimize energy consumption, 
sensors are grouped into clusters. The nodes that are grouped 
together in a cluster will be easily able to communicate with 
each other. A cluster head is elected to carry out several 
tasks, such as filtering, fusion and aggregation, with the 
possibility to be changed if it fails or if it reaches its power 
limit [13]. All communications of all nodes will be made 
through the head of the cluster to which they belong. The 
KAT-mobility protocol is based on clustering and especially 
on the K-means method [14][15], in which the cost of a 
group is estimated by the approximation error between the 
nodes and the collector. This algorithm divides the set of 
sensors virtually into K clusters (C1, C2 … CK) 
geographically close. We denote by N the number of nodes 
in the network, usually N >> K. Let mj (j = 1, 2 ... K) be a 
collector and xi (i = 1, 2 ... N) be a sensor node, which is 
represented by a 2-dimensional vector (i.e., position of the 
node). d (xi, mj), which is indicated by the Euclidian distance 
between the collector (group center) and the sensor, 
represents the approximation error. The goal is to assign each 
node to a cluster Cj by reducing the total error of the clusters 
in order to reduce energy consumption [16]. The sum of 
approximate errors is expressed in the following formula:  

  



K
i
C
x
j
i
K
K
j
i
d x m
m
C
m
C
C m
DT
1
2
2
1
1
)
,
(
)
(
),....,
(
),
(
 
The goal is to minimize the energy of communications by 
clustering in order to reduce the battery consumption of each 
sensor, which is proportional to d (xi, mj) [17]. The final 
objective is to assure the configuration of Cj such that DT is 
minimized. The clustering module of the KAT-mobility 
protocol can be summarized as follows [4]: 
1.   Initialize the location mj randomly, t=0. 
2. Define the threshold "THR" which is the stopping 
criterion   of the following iterative process. 
 
When d(t) (xi, mj) < d(t) (xi, mj*), ∀ j ≠ j*, assign a 
node xi ∈ Cj(t). 
 
Set the collector positions at the center of each 
group. 




( )
)
(
( 1)
1
t
j
i
C
x
i
t
j
jt
x
C
m
 
 
Calculate the sum of approximation errors DT(t+1) 
at time (t+1), and if 
THR
DT
DT
DT
t
t
t



)
(
( )
1)
(
 
is true, t can be updated and the iteration will be 
continued. Otherwise, the iterative process is 
stopped and the final center is set to mj
(t+1). 
After the realization of the clustering procedure, the 
second module of the KAT-mobility protocol begins. 
B. Routing Path Optimization 
Finding the best route for the mobile node is analogous to 
the TSP. A sink represents then the traveling salesman and 
the cluster centroids define cities. The mobile sink passes 
through the clusters and gathers data coming from various 
nodes. As it is possible to increase efficiency by reducing the 
travel time, it is preferable that the sink traces the shortest 
route through the cluster centroids. The path optimization of 
the mobile collector to visit once and only once every cluster 
centroid is equivalent to searching for the shortest trip of the 
traveling salesman in order to visit each city once [4]. 
However, this problem is NP-hard [18]; therefore, the 
conclusion of the optimal trajectory can not be realized in an 
easy way. In fact, it is one of the most studied combinatorial 
optimization problems that its difficulty reveals especially 
through the large number of solutions. In order to solve this 
problem, a particular family of algorithms called the 
heuristics, ensuring the obtaining of almost optimal 
solutions, is proposed. For the KAT-mobility protocol, the 
local search algorithms Or-Opt and 2-Opt, based on the 
modification of a current solution to TSP by heuristics, are 
implemented [19][20]. Fortunately, for wireless sensor 
networks, nodes can communicate together, and the mobile 
sink does not need to visit all the nodes. After clustering the 
nodes, we only need to optimize the paths among cluster 
centroids. The mobile sink traces then the trajectory of the 
optimal TSP solution. Using the same formula mentioned in 
[21], the objective is finding the Hamiltonian path π that 
reduces the tour lengths. 



(0) 
)
(
1
0
1)
(
( )
,
,









m
d m
m
d m
k
k
j
j
j
 
where the initial location of the mobile sink is m0. This 
quantity mentioned in (4) denotes the tour length of a sink 
that will be carried out by visiting the centers in the specified 
order according to the permutation and while returning to the 
starting position [21]. The KAT-mobility method assumes 
that the mobile collector has a priori knowledge of the 
locations of its member sensors [4]. It is possible that the 
collector lose communications with its blocked or faulty 
member nodes. In this case, it can stay at the center of its 
cluster to discover broken nodes and its trajectory can then 
be recalculated as soon as it reaches the access point. 
Updating this path is preceded by a modification of the 
centers positions in the network, i.e., a new clustering 
procedure through the subset of functional nodes is 
performed [4]. Consequently, it will be more interesting to 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

(5) 
model the KAT-mobility method as a probabilistic 
combinatorial optimization problem. 
IV. 
PROBABILISTIC MODELING 
We model the wireless network by a graph G (V, E), 
where V is the set of cluster centroids and E ⊆ V2 represents 
the set of edges reflecting the possible communications 
between these points. The pair (m1, m2) belongs to E if and 
only if m2 is the neighbor of m1. We denote by K the 
number of vertices in the graph (|V| = K), which is 
considering here as the problem size. In wireless sensor 
networks, one or several sensors may not function correctly 
and in order to avoid the total flaw of the system despite the 
presence of faults in a subset of its elementary components, 
two approaches can be used: the re-optimization strategy 
treated by Nakayama et al. [4] and the a priori strategy that 
represents our proposal through this paper. 
A. Re-optimization Strategy 
Frequently in applications, after having solved a 
particular exemplary of a given combinatorial optimization 
problem, we must solve repeatedly many copies of the same 
problem. These additional copies are generally simple 
variations of the original problem; however, they are 
sufficiently different to require an individual treatment [8]. 
The most natural approach used to address this kind of 
situation consists in solving in an optimal way the different 
potential copies. We call this strategy "the re-optimization 
strategy" [22]. However, it has many disadvantages and the 
most important one is the high cost. This is the case of the 
KAT-mobility method consisting of repeating the clusters 
configuration and calculating the new solution through the 
set of surviving nodes after detecting failures in any part of 
the network. It is therefore necessary to adopt a different 
strategy. 
Rather 
than re-optimizing 
each 
successive 
exemplary, we can try to determine a priori solution of the 
initial problem that can be successively modified in a simple 
way to solve the following copies. We call this strategy "a 
priori strategy" [23].  
B. Proposed a priori Strategy 
A sensor network is modeled by a graph G, and we are 
operating in a situation where the vertices do not exist in a 
deterministic way in this graph, but they are present in a 
probabilistic manner. In other words, a probability of 
presence will be associated with each vertex. This work is 
located in a study framework of combinatorial optimization 
problems when their proceedings are changing in a 
probabilistic way [10][24]. The aim is to present a priori 
strategy which ensures the reliability of data transmission in 
the presence of faults: on any instance of the problem, we 
avoid the total flaw of the system by changing the graph 
structure (transformation into a subgraph) according to a 
modification strategy that will be specified in advance. In 
fact, we associate the probability pi to each vertex mi ∈ V 
(the probability of remaining operational) taking into account 
that a center is considered as absent when all its cluster 
members are faulty.  By applying the KAT-mobility 
protocol, finding a route for the mobile sink is analogous to 
the traveling salesman problem. A very natural probabilistic 
extension of this problem was introduced in 1985 for the first 
time by "Jaillet", when he assumed that the number of cities 
is a random variable [10]. Concerning the routing path 
optimization, we propose that only some centers among the 
K vertices will really require a visit according to their 
probabilities of occurring. In other words, we specify a 
strategy µ, called modification strategy, which removes 
absent centers from the initial a priori tour. Our purpose is to 
obtain a tour among the initial vertices such that the graph G 
is transformed into the subgraph G'= G [V'] where V' ⊆ V is 
the set of present cluster centroids and the new route through 
its vertices will be in the same order as that established by 
the a priori tour [25]. This route is illustrated in Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. New routing path  
This is a problem of finding a priori tour that minimizes 
the functional of covered distances [18]. Given the 
probability law ℙ, the set of cluster centroids, the set of all 
the subsets of V, i.e., each instance V' ⊆ V has a probability 
of presence ℙ (V'). For a given tour R through the vertices 
defined on V, the modification method µ consists in deleting 
or gumming those who are absent from the a priori tour. Let 
L(R,µ) be the random variable defined on 2V, which for all V' 
of 2V and with a tour R, associates the length L(R,µ) (V') 
through V', induced of the tour R by the modification 
method. Consequently, the path optimization of the mobile 
collector to visit once and just once every sensor is 
equivalent to find the trajectory that minimizes the functional 
of L(R,µ) [26][27].   
 








 

)'
(
)'
(
)
(
min
, )
(
'
( , )
V
L
V
L
R
V
V
R
R


 
The use of this a priori strategy allows the wireless 
sensor network to collect effectively detected information 
from external environments and deliver it to the required 
applications with reducing energy consumption, even if 
* 
* 
* 
* 
A 
M 
M 
X 
M 
    : Base Station   
      
     : Mobile sink 
    
     : Sensor node 
 
     : Failed node 
 
     : Mobile sink 
route 
    
     : Cluster 
centroids (centers) 
A 
M 
* 
                                   
  
  
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

some nodes are destroyed. It was proposed to ensure 
transmission reliability, to increase the network lifetime and 
also to offer a real time solution, valid in all situations. To 
ameliorate this work, we propose the improvement of the 
route optimization in a particular case of this probabilistic 
problem which is the deterministic case (pi=1) by 
implementing the local search method "Tabu" instead of the 
used algorithm 2-Opt.  
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
In this section, simulation results are presented and 
analyzed. We simulated the KAT-mobility protocol and the 
proposed approach, based on the optimization of the routing 
path by using the Tabu algorithm, to evaluate their 
performance. We deploy 100 sensor nodes which are 
uniform-randomly distributed inside the simulation area. We 
consider the metric trajectory cost (expressed in meter) for 
evaluating the tour lengths. To perform our simulations, we 
used the software Java. 
 Figure 3. Trajectory cost  
As can be seen from the simulation results of Figure 3, 
which presents the trajectory cost depending on the number 
of sensor nodes, randomly distributed, that varies from 19 to 
100, our improved algorithm achieves better performance 
than the KAT-mobility algorithm because it guarantees the 
minimization of the tour length for any employed 
distribution.  
Since the number of nodes may be disturbed and can 
vary from day to the other, we have proposed our a priori 
strategy shown at the previous section and to confirm the 
performance of this probabilistic model, we realized the 
comparison of the two algorithms. 
Figure 4. Execution time 
It is shown in the simulation results of Figure 4, which 
presents the time execution (expressed in nanoseconds) 
depending on the probability of presence of the vertices, that 
our proposed strategy ensures the obtaining of solutions in 
real time once the problem is disturbed by the breakdowns of 
some sensors (the probability of remaining operational is less 
than 1). This proposed model is much more realistic and 
provides less execution time than the conventional strategy.  
It is clear from our simulations that the improvement 
provided by this new strategy is effective and that this new 
algorithm is valid in all situations. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
The data routing in wireless sensor networks is 
considered as a complex problem because it is essential to 
ensure reliable delivery of information while consuming less 
energy. We have presented then in this paper the fault 
tolerant KAT- mobility protocol, as well as a proposed 
theoretical probabilistic modeling by considering the fault 
tolerance as a probabilistic combinatorial optimization 
problem. Our proposed strategy aims to provide not only 
better energy efficiency within the wireless network, but also 
better reliability compared with the conventional approach 
based on K-means clustering and the approximate solution 
for Traveling Salesman Problem, especially in the presence 
of faults. It is shown in the simulation results that this 
strategy was proposed to provide a better and practical 
solution by improving the route optimization of the collector. 
To accomplish this work, we aim to use new methods that 
navigate the mobile sink to go through the cluster centers 
according to the optimized route by implementing the 
"branch & bound" technique instead of the used algorithm 2-
Opt, and it will be so interesting when the risk of sensor 
failures becomes important. Our goal is to propose strategies 
that guarantee the obtaining of solutions in real time once the 
problem is disturbed by the failures of some nodes.  
REFERENCES 
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, 
“Wireless sensor networks: a survey,” Computer Networks. vol. 38, 
issue 4, 2002, pp. 393–422, doi: 10.1016/S1389-1286(01)00302-4. 
[2] M. Abdallah, J. Bahi, and A. Mostefaoui, “Sensor Networks: 
localization, coverage and data fusion,” Franche-Comté, 14 -11-2008. 
[3] C. Karlof and D. Wagner, “Secure routing in wireless sensor 
networks: attacks and countermeasures,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 1, 
2003, pp. 293–315, doi: 10.1016/S1570-8705(03)00008-8. 
[4] H. Nakayama, N. Ansari, A. Jamalipour, and N. Kato, “Fault-resilient 
sensing in wireless sensor networks,” Computer communications 
archive, vol. 30, issues 11–12, 2007, pp. 2375–2384, doi: 
10.1016/j.comcom.2007.04.023 
[5] S. Mishra, L. Jena, and A. Pradhan, “Fault tolerance in wireless 
sensor networks,” International Journal of Advanced Research in 
Computer Science and Software Engineering, vol. 2, issue 10, 
October 2012, pp. 146-153. 
[6] S. Meguerdichian, F. Koushanfar, M. Potkonjak, and M. B. 
Srivastava, “Coverage problems in wireless ad-hoc sensor networks,” 
IEEE Infocom2001, Ankorange, Alaska, April 2001, pp. 1380-1387, 
doi: 10.1109/INFCOM.2001.916633. 
[7] Y. Challal, A. Ouadjaout, N. Lasla, M. Bagaa, and A. Hadjidj, 
“Secure and efficient disjoint multipath construction for fault tolerant 
routing in wireless sensor networks,” Journal of network and 
computer applications, vol. 34, issue 4, July 2011, pp. 1380-1397, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jnca.2011.03.022. 
[8] M. Bellalouna and A. Ghabri, “A priori methods for fault tolerance in 
wireless sensor networks,” World Congress on Computer and 
Information Technologies (WCCIT), IEEE, Sousse, June 2013, pp. 1-
6, doi: 10.1109/WCCIT.2013.6618654. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[9] W. Tekaya, V. T. Paschos, and C. Murat, “Minimim probabilistic 
spannig tree problem,” Université Paris Dauphine, 2008. 
[10] M. Bellalouna, “Probabilistic combinatorial optimization problems,” 
Ph.D thesis, Ecole nationale des ponts et chaussées, Paris, 1993. 
[11] J. P. Jafrin and P. A. Christy Angelin, “A comparative study of data 
gathering algorithms for a mobile sink in wireless sensor network,” 
International journal of advanced research in computer engineering 
and technology, vol. 1, issue 9, November 2012, pp. 250-255. 
[12] H. Nakayama, N. Ansari, A. Jamalipour, Y. Nemoto, and N. Kato, 
“On data gathering and security in wireless sensor networks,” 
University of Sydney, Sarnoff symposium, IEEE, 2006, pp. 1-7, doi: 
10.1109/SARNOF.2007.4567337. 
[13] J. Kogan, “Introduction to Clustering Large and High-Dimensional 
Data,”  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2007.  
[14] Z. Guellil and L. Zaoui, “Proposition of a solution to the initialization 
problem K-means Case,” CIIA, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 
CEURWS. Org, vol. 547, 2009, pp. 1-9. 
[15] P. Mathur, S. Saxena, and M. Bhardwaj, “Node clustering using K 
Means Clustering in Wireless Sensor Networking,” 2nd National 
Conference in Intelligent Computing Communication, Dept. of IT, 
GCET, Greater Noida, INDIA, 2013, pp. 1-6. 
[16] T. Fukabori, H. Nakayama, H. Nishiyama, N. Ansari, and N. Kato, 
“An efficient data aggregation scheme using degree of dependence on 
clusters in WSNs,” Communications (ICC), IEEE International 
Conference, May 2010, pp. 23-27, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2010.5502285. 
[17] M. A. Chikh, M. Feham, H. Guyennet, A. Benyettou, and M. 
Lehsaini, “Diffusion and coverage based on clustering in sensor 
networks,” Université de Franche-Comté, 2009. 
[18] P. Jaillet, “The Probabilistic Traveling Salesman Problems,” 
Technical report 185, Operations research center, MIT, Cambridge, 
Mass, 1985. 
[19] D. S. Johnson, L. A. Mcgeoch, and E. E. Rothberg, “Asymptotic 
experimental analysis for the held-karp traveling salesman bound,”  in 
proceedings of the 7th annual ACM-SIAM symposium on discrete 
algorithms, Atlanta, Georgia, January 1996, pp. 341-350, doi: 
10.1.1.47.7327. 
[20] I. Or, “Traveling salesman-type combinatorial problems and their 
relation to the logistics of regional blood banking,” Ph. D. thesis, 
Northwestern University, Evanston. 
[21] D. Johnson and L. McGeoch, “The Traveling Salesman Problem: A 
Case Study in Local Optimization,”  John Wiley & Sons, 1997. 
[22] N. Boria, C. Murat, and V. Th. Paschos, “An emergency management 
model for a wireless sensor network problem,” CAHIER DU 
LAMSADE 325, Juillet 2012, pp. 1-23. 
[23] D. Bertsimas, P. Jaillet, and A.Odoni, “A priori Optimization,” 
Operations 
Research, 
vol. 38, 1990, pp. 
1019-1033, doi: 
10.1287/opre.38.6.1019. 
[24] M. 
Bellalouna, C. Murat, 
and 
V. 
Paschos, 
“Probabilistic 
combinatorial optimization problems on graphs: A new domain in 
operational research,” European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 
87, issue. 3, 1995, pp. 693-706, doi: 10.1016/0377-2217(95)00240-5. 
[25] C. Murat and V. Paschos, “probabilistic combinatorial optimization 
on graphs,” Wiley- ISTE, London, 2006. 
[26] P. Jaillet, “A priori solution of a Travelling Salesman Problem in 
which a random subset of the customers are visited,” Operations 
research, vol. 36, issue 6, 1988, pp. 929-936. 
[27] W. J. Cook, W. H. Cunningham, W. R. Pulleyblank, and A. Schrijver, 
“The Traveling Salesman Problem,” John wiley & sons, 2011, doi: 
10.1002/9781118033142.ch7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

