Development of an IoT-based System for Real Time Occupational Exposure 
Monitoring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—A large number of air pollutants have known or 
suspected harmful effects on human health and the 
environment. The objective of CAPFEIN (CAPteur de 
FormaldEhyde INtelligents) project funded by the French 
National Research Agency is to develop smart system enabling 
to estimate personal air pollution exposure of employers 
working in closed environment. In this paper, the development 
of an Internet of Things-based real time occupational air 
pollution exposure monitoring system is described. The system 
combines user indoor location provided by a wireless indoor 
positioning device with real time pollutants concentrations 
provided by a multi-pollutant sensing unit deployed in each 
indoor microenvironment. The system was tested for real time 
occupational exposure assessment to formaldehyde and CO2
 
air pollutants. The system provides accurate and real time 
occupational exposure assessment.  The real time and 
continuous monitoring capability makes it possible to better 
predict worker health risks and protect them from 
occupational overexposure to air pollution. 
Keywords-Air quality; sensor networks; Internet of Things; 
personal exposure;  real time monitoring. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The human health consequences of air pollution are 
considerable. The world health organization (WHO) 
estimates that 800 000 people per year die from the effects of 
air pollution [1]. In addition to posing a serious public health 
problem, poor 
indoor 
air 
quality 
impacts 
worker 
productivity. Human exposure was defined as the interface 
between humans and the environment; the impacts of air 
pollution on an individual’s health are related to their 
exposure concentrations in the different locations in which 
they spend time. In general, occupational environment is a 
space which worker exposure can be assessed with difficulty. 
Two fundamental information are necessary to estimate 
personal exposure; the concentration of pollutant in different 
environments and individual time activity. Last, recent 
development in communication and information technology 
allows occupational exposure monitors to be ubiquitous and 
part of everyday activities without significantly impact 
personal daily function. Real time environmental sensing is 
the integration of different micro environmental detection 
sensors with data communication device into one system, in 
which the data acquired can be used for further processing 
and visualization [2][3]. Ubiquitous sensing enabled by 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) technologies offers the 
ability to measure, infer and understand environmental 
indicators. A WSN consists of autonomous sensor nodes that 
sense some physical phenomena in their surroundings and 
transmit the sensed data to a centralized unit, through single 
or multi-hop connectivity. WSNs have gained more 
significance as the foundation infrastructure for a new and 
interesting technology era: the Internet of Things (IoT). IoT 
can be represented as a main enabling factor of promising 
paradigm for integration of several technologies for 
communication solution. As defined by European Research 
Cluster on the Internet of Things (IERC) [4] IoT is "A 
dynamic global network infrastructure with self-configuring 
capabilities 
based 
on 
standard 
and 
interoperable 
communication protocols where physical and virtual 
“things” have identities, physical attributes, and virtual 
personalities and use intelligent interfaces, and are 
seamlessly integrated into the information network". IoT has 
emerged to be attractive in many applications such as, health 
care, target tracking and surveillance. This paper proposes 
the implementation of an IoT-based real time occupational 
exposure monitoring system using multi-pollutant sensors 
nodes to measure air pollutants concentrations in different 
indoor microenvironments and wearable tags for real time 
indoor personal tracking. The remainder of this paper is 
organized as follows. In Section II, the related work and an 
overview of previous personal exposure monitors are 
discussed. Section III, Presents an overview about air 
pollution monitoring in the context of occupational exposure 
assessment Section IV, describes the architecture and 
implementation of an IoT-based real time occupational 
exposure monitoring system and provides experimental 
results. Finally, Section V reports our conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Several wearable systems for personal monitoring have 
been developed and tested [5]-[13]. WearAir is a low-cost 
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) sensor embedded       
T-shirt indicates VOCs levels with light-emitting diodes 
(LEDs) [5]. However, because WearAir does not have real 
Houssem Eddine Fathallah1,2, Vincent Lecuire1, Eric Rondeau1, Stéphane Le Calvé2 
1CRAN UMR 7039, University of Lorraine, Nancy, France 
             2ICPEES UMR 7515, University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France 
Email: {Houssem-eddine.fathallah, Vincent.lecuire, Eric.rondeau}@univ-lorraine.fr, slecalve@unistra.fr 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

time locations recording module, the exposure measures 
cannot be connected to personal activity context directly. 
Recently, several studies and projects in literature take 
advantage of global positioning system (GPS) receivers as a 
tool for people tracking combined with air quality sensors. In 
Negi et al. [6], a wearable monitor with real-time and 
continuous personal monitoring was developed to measure 
concentrations of total hydrocarbons and total acids in real-
time, and send the data to a cell phone using wireless 
communication. The same approach is used in Brown et al. 
[7].  Adams et al. [8] developed a particulate matter (PM) 
exposure monitoring system. The system includes a portable 
GPS receiver to track individual time and location, and air 
quality sensors to record temperature and PM exposure level. 
Rudman et al. [9] implemented “THE eGS SYSTEM” 
project on measuring air quality using a carbon monoxide 
CO sensor associated with GPS receiver. Recent project such 
as N-SMARTS [10] integrates CO, NO2 and SO2 sensors 
with GPS-embedded phone into a single pack, using 
Bluetooth as the communication support between sensors 
and smartphone. Area's Immediate Reading (AIR) project 
[11] uses real time portable GPS-air monitoring devices. 
Individual air pollutants exposure are measured and 
transmitted to the network database center. Common Sense 
[12] developed a portable handheld device that measured 
CO, NO, O3, temperature and humidity data associated with 
GPS location using mobile phone chip. These data were 
uploaded to a database server through GPRS [12]. GPS 
receivers have been applied successfully in human exposure 
studies [6]-[12] but there are limits to the general 
applicability of this technology. The main problem when 
using GPS devices is the poor coverage of satellite signal 
inside buildings or near certain materials such as body panels 
and metals decreases its accuracy and makes it unsuitable for 
indoor location estimation. GPS spatial resolution is around 
3 m in outdoors and 5 m inside buildings [13]. Furthermore, 
these wearable systems may not be used to detect all air 
pollutants or as a multi-pollutant monitors, due to sensor 
size, weight and cost constraints. These approaches are 
limited to a number of air pollutants where its concentrations 
can be measured using small integrated sensors. It is for 
these reasons that there is an urgent need to develop a real 
time occupational exposure monitoring system for the indoor 
environments integrating more accurate real time indoor 
positioning system and multi-pollutant sensors nodes.  
III. 
AIR QUALITY MONITORING 
A. Real time occupational exposure monitoring model 
The proposed model estimates occupational exposures by 
combining the information on the measured concentration of 
pollutants, the movements of a worker in various 
microenvironments and the time duration a worker spent in 
each microenvironment. In order to protect the occupational 
safety and health, Time-Weighted Average Individual 
Exposure ETWAI (Represents the allowable average individual 
air pollution exposure for a given period of time in relation 
to guidelines values duration) is updated periodically and 
compared with the ETWAI Limit based on guidelines values and 
country regulations. In case of exceeding individual exposure 
limits, the alert management unit triggers the appropriate 
action (warning, ventilation, ask worker to take a break time, 
etc…) to ensure personal health and risk prevention. An 
overview of real time occupational exposure monitoring 
model is shown in Figure 1, where CMEj is air pollutant 
concentration in microenvironment j and Ej is individual 
exposure to air pollutant in microenvironment j. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual model for real time occcupational exposure 
monitoring 
 
B. Formaldehyde 
The classification of formaldehyde as a known human 
carcinogen by IARC is based on previous studies of workers 
exposed to formaldehyde [14]. Additional health effects of 
exposure to formaldehyde include respiratory and eye 
irritation and contact dermatitis. Formaldehyde is a major 
industrial chemical for numerous industrial processes. It has 
three basic industrial uses: as an intermediate in the 
production of resins, as an intermediate in the production of 
industrial chemical and as a bactericide or fungicide. 
Formaldehyde is present in consumer and industrial products 
as preservatives or bactericides (e.g., shampoos, hair 
preparations, deodorants, cosmetics and mouthwash). 
Several international safety and occupational health 
organizations proposed guideline and reference values of 
formaldehyde exposure by inhalation. Indoor guideline 
values are classified according to duration of exposure as 
shown in Table I.  
TABLE I.  GUIDELINE VALUES FOR FORMALDEHYDE IN INDOOR AIR 
Duration 
Value (μg. m-3) 
Source 
30 min 
100 
Australia -Japan-Norway-
U.K.-WHO 
2 H 
50 
AFSSET France 
8 H 
33 
USA 
50 
Canada 
120 
Singapore-Korea 
24 H 
50 
Poland 
60 
Norway 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

A guideline value of (100 μg m-3, 30 min) was defined as 
a safe concentration as regards the carcinogenic effect of 
formaldehyde in the human organism [15].  France discusses 
guideline value of the order of 50 μg m-3 for a 2h exposure 
[16]. Long-term exposure values in indoor guidelines are 
based on 8h and 24h time duration, guideline values between 
33 μg m-3 and 120 μg m-3 are proposed for 8h exposure. In 
Poland and Norway guideline values of 50 μg m-3 and 60 μg 
m-3 are respectively proposed for 24h exposure.  
C. Carbon Dioxide (CO2) 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a good indicator of proper 
building ventilation and indoor air exchange rates. 
Consequently, it is measured in buildings to determine if the 
indoor air is adequate for humans to occupy the building.  
CO2 is considered to be a potential inhalation toxicant and a 
simple asphyxiate [17]. This is why the concentration of 
CO2 in indoor air is a criterion on which regulations for 
building ventilation are based. In France, the current 
regulatory and normative limit values usually vary from 
1000 to 1500 ppm.  
IV. 
SYSTEM DESIGN AND EVALUATION 
We introduce the architecture of an IoT-based real time 
occupational exposure monitoring system in Sec. A. We 
then discuss the implementation of the system in Sec. B. 
Sec. C provides experimental results. 
A. System architecture 
The architecture of an IoT-based real time occupational 
exposure monitoring is shown in Figure 2. Indirect estimates 
of exposure may be made by combining measurements of 
pollutant concentrations at fixed sites with information on 
personal real-time indoor coordinates. The workplace is 
divided into microenvironments. Each microenvironment is 
equipped with a multi-pollutant sensors node, for measuring 
air pollutants concentrations, and a positioning system (zone 
locator and wearable tag) to identify in real time worker’s 
localization. Pollutants concentrations and real time personal 
coordinates data are remotely collected in a data center in 
which data are processed and made available to users. IoT is 
implemented as a network of interconnected “things” (Tags 
and multi-pollutant sensors nodes), each of which can be 
addressed using unique id and communicates based on 
standard communication protocols.  
1) Wireless Sensor Network 
Wireless sensor network can be divided into two parts: 
air pollution sensors nodes for real time indoor air pollutants 
concentrations and indoor positioning system for real time 
personal tracking.  
a) 
Multi-pollutant sensor node: Indoor air pollutants 
concentrations are measured using the concept of 
microenvironments [18]. The workplace is decomposed into 
microenvironments; 
air 
pollutants 
concentrations 
are 
measured using a multi-pollutant sensors node placed in 
each homogeneous microenvironment. Each node monitor 
the indoor air quality and sends periodically and wirelessly a 
message <Node_Id, Cp1, … Cpn, t> , which contains  the 
node identifier, pollutants concentrations Cpn and the 
measured time t  through the gateway to a central storage 
system in which data are processed.  
b) Indoor positioning system: To measure a personal 
indoor air pollution exposure, locations and time spent in 
each location are two critical factors. Zone locator combined 
with wearable tag is used as a solution to provide worker’s 
time activity information. Each employee wears a tag with a 
unique Id. The tag sends periodically a message contains its 
Id and the location_Id provides by the zone locator 
<Tag_Id, Location_Id> through the gateway to a central 
system.  
2) Data Center: central system 
Data center is the server of whole system. It stores and 
processes the data. This is the central system which 
integrates three software components: multi-pollutant 
sensors node and wearable tag configuration function, data 
collection function and data management system. Data 
collection process is based on the event-driven paradigm. 
Data management is the process of real time displaying air 
pollutants concentrations and indoor positioning coordinates 
generated respectively by the multi-pollutant sensors nodes 
and wearable tags, synchronizing and combining data, 
storing the data into a database, and then archiving the data 
for later analysis.  In case of exceeding individual exposure 
limits the central system trigger in real time the appropriate 
action (Warning, ventilation, ask worker to take a break 
time etc…) to ensure risk prevention and to avoid any 
personal health. 
B. System implementation 
In this section, a worker exposure to formaldehyde and 
CO2 in workplace scenario was developed and tested. In our 
architecture, the system design and implementation is 
divided into three phases: multi-pollutant sensors node 
implementation, indoor positioning system implementation, 
and the central system, includes web services for data 
collection and data management, implementation. As shown 
in Figure 3, multi-pollutant sensors node is an integrated 
platform for air quality sensing, which is constructed from 
combination of an Olimex PIC32-MAXI-WEB board [19] 
and microchip MRF24WG0MA IEEE 802.11 b/g Wi-Fi 
transceiver module [20] and environmental sensors including  
SHT11 temperature and relative humidity sensor [21], 
T6613C CO2 sensor [22] and Grove-HCHO formaldehyde 
sensor[23]. 
The Olimex 
PIC32-Maxi-Web 
is 
a 
microcontroller network development board based around a 
32-bit microcontroller PIC32MX795F512L and featuring a 
color touch screen LCD and extension connectors for 
external module like Wi-Fi module and environmental 
sensors. 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Wireless network is built by the combination of node 
Wi-Fi module in the Olimex PIC32 board and a sink node 
constructed by configuring the Wi-Fi gateway. Each node 
reads connected sensors values and sends periodically a 
message <Node_Id, T, H, CCO2, CHCHO, Date, Time> to the 
central system through the Wi-Fi network.  
RF code wearable tag and zone locator are used for real 
time personal tracking. As shown in Figure 4, the IR signals 
used to locate people are combined with RF signals, which 
perform synchronization and coordination in the positioning 
systems and increase the system coverage area. In each 
located place or microenvironment, one or more room 
detectors (zone location) are fixed and continually 
transmitting a unique identification IR signal Location_Id. 
Each personal wearable tag hears the room detectors signals 
and transmits the microenvironment id (Location_Id is the 
same id as Node_Id) combined with the unique Tag_Id to 
the 
central 
indoor 
receiver 
(Gateway) 
using 
RF 
communication. The tracking and location information data 
are transmitted periodically to the central system via 
internet. By estimating the location of the tag taken along 
with the person, the indoor positioning system can locate 
persons in its coverage area with microenvironment 
accuracy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The central system is a back-end server that stores 
gathered data and provides those data for several services. 
The supervisor can remotely configure the measurement 
period of the multi-pollutant sensors node and the wearable 
tag.    A web application includes web server and web 
interface, which is constructed based on PHP compliant 
Apache 
web 
server 
with 
MYSQL 
database 
was 
implemented in the central system side. Received data are 
stored into the MYSQL database in the following form: 
<Node_Id, T, H, CCO2, CHCHO, Date, Time> and <Tag_Id, 
Location_Id, Date, Time> respectively for air pollutants 
concentrations and indoor personal location. Personal indoor 
locations have been combined with real-time air pollutants 
concentrations using an occupational exposure assessment 
algorithm in order to calculate time-weighted average 
individual exposure ETWAi.  Figure 5 shows the flowchart of 
the algorithm. Occupational exposure estimation process 
would be triggered by one of these two events: (1) The 
reception of new air pollutants measurement or (2) A 
change in a person’s physical location. In the first case, the 
process 
detects 
all 
workers 
locations 
<Tag_Id, 
Location_Id> and combines location data with the newest 
air pollutants concentrations. Then, the process updates each 
individual air pollutant concentration Ci(tn) with the new 
received air pollutant concentration Cj(tn) where j is the 
microenvironment j where participant is located. In this case 
the time spent in the microenvironment is Ti = tm – tlast 
where tm is the new air quality measurement time and tlast is 
the last event trigger time. When a new worker location is 
received, the process receives <Tag_Id, new_Location_Id> 
message from worker’s tag and updates the individual air 
pollutants concentrations Ci(tn) with the last received air 
pollutants concentrations Cj(tn-1). In this case, the time spent 
Figure 3. Multi-pollutant sensors node demonstration 
CO2 sensor 
T and H 
sensor 
Wi-Fi Module 
Grove-HCHO 
sensor 
Olimex Board 
PIC32 
microcontroller 
Figure 4. Overview of the indoor positioning system 
Figure 2. System architecture 
Central system 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

in the microenvironment is Ti = tmo – tlast where tmo is the 
time when new location event is received.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finally the process updates tlast and calculates the time-
weighted average individual exposure ETWAi for each worker 
in real time bases on mathematical model to make the link 
between individual air pollutant concentration Ci and 
exposure time duration Ti. 
 
 
Where k is the number of event trigger during the exposure 
period.
C. Results and discussion 
Poor ventilation and air quality inside indoor workplaces 
are leading causes of serious illness and loss of productivity 
in these workplaces. Continuous monitoring of air pollution 
is therefore an essential part of health and safety that could 
make a significant impact. We demonstrated that the IoT-
based real time occupational exposure monitoring could 
provide effective monitoring of personal air pollution 
exposure at these sites. Figure 6 and Figure 7 show the 
levels of formaldehyde and CO2 monitored by multi-
pollutant sensors nodes in 4 microenvironments: office_1, 
office_2, open office area and copy room.  Formaldehyde 
and CO2 concentrations are taken every 5 minutes between 
8:00AM and 12:00AM. As shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7 
the levels of formaldehyde and CO2 are very high in copy 
room. Insufficient ventilation and photocopier was often 
found to be the cause. A good air quality was detected in the 
open office area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8 shows the real time occupational exposure levels 
and ETWAi (with 30 min averaging time) to formaldehyde 
and CO2. The levels of personal formaldehyde and CO2 
exposure increase sharply every time when the worker 
entered the copy room.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Flowchart of real time occupational exposure assesment 
process 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 6.  Formaldehyde levels in (a) office_2 (b) office_1 (c) open office 
area (d) copy room 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 7.  CO2 levels in (a) office_2 (b) office_1 (c) open office area (d) 
copy room 
(d) 
(a) 
(1) 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As shown in Figure 8, the ETWAI Limit of CO2 fixed to 1000 
ppm was exceeded a couple of times during the experiment 
period and alert message was sent to the occupational health 
and safety administration.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
High level of air pollution can cause health problems for 
workers. Quantifying human exposure to air pollutants in 
real time is a challenging task as worker time-activity 
patterns effect exposure to air pollution over time and space. 
Also, the variation of ambient pollutants concentrations in 
space and time make the quantification difficult. The 
development of an IoT-based real time occupational 
exposure monitoring for real time workers health and safety 
monitoring will help to be able to see high level workers 
exposure and their relation to specific microenvironments, 
sources and work tasks. The measurement of time, location 
and concentration allows the determination of worker’s time 
weighted average exposure. This novel indoor monitoring 
approach allows real time analysis of occupational air 
quality problems and making decision and action with 
regard to pollutants concentrations control policies and 
worker health protection. This approach can be extended to 
other type of pollution monitoring such as noise pollution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is a part of CAPFEIN project funded by the 
French National Research Agency (ANR-11-ECOT-013). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] WHO the World Health Report - Reducing Risks, Promoting 
Healthy Life, 2000.   
[2] S. J. Oh and W. Y. Chung, “Room environment monitoring 
system from PDA terminal”. International Symposium on 
Intelligent Signal Processing and Communication Systems, 
Seoul, Korea 2004, pp. 497–501. 
[3] A. AL-Ali and I. A. Zualkernan, “mobile GPRS-sensors array 
for air pollution monitoring”. IEEE Sens. J. 2010, pp. 1666–
1671. 
[4] O. Vermesan, et al., “Internet of Things Strategic Research 
Agenda”, Chapter 2 in O. Vermesan and P. Friess (Eds.), 
Internet of Things—Global Technological and Societal 
Trends, River Publishers, Aalborg, Denmark, 2011, ISBN 
978-87-92329-67-7. 
[5] S. Kim, E. Paulos and M. D. Gross, “WearAir: Expressive t-
shirts for air quality sensing”. In TEI’10, Cambridge, USA, 
2010, pp. 295-296. 
[6] Negi I, et al., “Novel monitor paradigm for real-time exposure 
assessment” Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental 
Epidemiology, 2011, pp. 419-426.  
[7] K. Brown, et al., “Reading Chemical Exposure Assessment 
Method with Real Time Location System”, DREAM-RTLS, 
Cincinnati, ISES 2014  
[8] C., P. Adams, Riggs and J. Volckens, “Development of a 
method for personal,spatiotemporal exposure assessment.” 
Journal of Environmental Monitoring,2009, pp. 1331-39. 
[9] P. Rudman, S. North and M. Chalmers, “Mobile pollution 
mapping in the city.” UK-UbiNet workshop on eScience and 
ubicomp, Edinburg, UK,  2005.  
[10] R. Honicky, E. A. Brewer, E. Paulos and R. White, “N-
smarts: networked suite of mobile atmospheric real-time 
sensors.” the second ACM SIGCOMM workshop on 
Networked systems for developing regions, Seattle, WA, 
USA, 2008, pp. 25–30.  
[11] AIR; 
Area’s 
Immediate 
Reading. 
Available 
online: 
http://www.pm-air.net  (accessed on 10 March 2015).  
[12] P. Dutta, et al., “Common sense: Participatory urban sensing 
using a network of handheld air quality monitors.” ACM 
conference 
on 
embedded 
networked 
sensor 
systems, 
Berkeley, CA, USA,  2009, pp. 349–350.  
[13] K. Elgethun, R. A. Fenske, M. G. Yost and G. J. Palcisko, 
“Time-location analysis for exposure assessment studies of 
children using a novel global positioning systeminstrument.” 
Environ Health Perspect 2003, pp. 111-115. 
[14] M. Hauptmann, et al., “Mortality from solid cancers among 
workers in formaldehyde industries”, Am. J. Epidemiol.2004, 
pp. 1103-1117. 
[15] WHO Development of WHO Guidelines for Indoor Air 
Quality. 
WHO 
Regional 
Office 
for 
Europe, 
Copenhagen.2006b 
[16] AFSSET Working Group on Indoor Air Quality Guideline 
Values. Indoor Air Quality, Guideline Value Proposals 
(Formaldehyde), 2007. 
[17] L. Nelson, “Carbon Dioxide Poisoning. Summary of 
physiological effects and toxicology of CO2 on humans.” 
Emerg. Medicine, 2000, pp. 36-38 
[18]  N. Duan, “Microenvironment Types: A Model for Human 
Exposures to Air Pollution.” SIMS Technical Report. 
Stanford, Cal.: Stanford University, Department of Statistics, 
1981 
[19] Olimex PIC32-MAXI-WEB user’s manual . Available online: 
https://www.olimex.com/Products/PIC/Development/PIC32-
MAXI-WEB/  (accessed on 2 April 2015).  
[20] Olimex MOD-WIFI user’s manual . Available online: 
https://www.olimex.com/Products/Modules/Ethernet/MOD-
WIFI/ (accessed on 2 April 2015).  
[21] Datasheet SHT1x. Available online: 
http://www.sensirion.com/en/products/humidity-temperature-
sensor-sht1x/  (accessed on 10 April 2015).  
[22] Datasheet T6613C CO2. Available online: http://www.ge-
mcs.com/download/co2-flow/920-448G-LR.pdf          
(accessed on 10 April 2015).  
[23] Grove-HCHO sensor. Available online: 
http://www.seeedstudio.com/wiki/Grove_-_HCHO_Sensor       
(accessed on 10 April 2015).   
 
Figure 8.  Personal exposure levels and ETWAI to (a) formaldehyde 
and (b) CO2 
(b) 
(b) 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

