Design Method of Wireless Sensor Networks in Railway Environments 
 Considering Power Consumption 
Tomoki Kawamura and Nagateru Iwasawa 
Telecommunications and Networking Laboratory, Signaling Transport Information Technology Division 
Railway Technical Research Institute 
Kokubunji-shi, Japan 
e-mail: kawamura.tomoki.41@rtri.or.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In recent years, various researches have been condu-
cted for the purpose of applying Wireless Sensor Networks 
(WSNs) to monitoring the condition of railway facilities. In 
designing WSNs, it is important to effectively arrange the 
nodes that compose WSNs. In railway environments, it is 
necessary to design WSNs in consideration of the presence of 
obstacles and constraints on the placement. In this paper, we 
propose a method of calculating an optimal relay nodes place-
ment and a routing method of WSNs in railway environments 
by combining the mathematical optimization method and Seq-
uential Monte Carlo method. 
Keywords-Wireless sensor network; Optimization method; Power 
consumption; Sequential Monte Carlo method. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, with the development of the ICT, researches 
on the condition monitoring system by mean of a Wireless 
Sensor Network (WSN) are proceeding. In the railway field 
as well, various condition monitoring systems by means of  
WSNs are being researched in order to apply them to such 
cases as the monitoring of structures along tracks [1], the 
monitoring of trains [2], and so on [3]. Most of the WSNs 
consists of sensor nodes for acquiring data of monitored 
objects, gateways for aggregating data, and relay nodes for 
transferring data when the sensor nodes and the gateway can-
not communicate directly. In designing a WSN, it is import-
ant to effectively arrange these nodes. In WSNs for condition 
monitoring, the locations where sensor nodes and gateways 
are installed are often predetermined in advance. For this rea-
son, how to efficiently arrange relay nodes is important in 
designing WSNs, and various researches have been conduc-
ted on methods for determining effective placements of relay 
nodes [4]-[7]. 
The railway facilities spread long over urban areas and 
mountainous areas, and there are many obstacles that inter-
rupt wireless communication. In addition, the placement of 
nodes may be restricted due to safety and physical conditi-
ons. Therefore, it is necessary to design WSNs considering 
these characteristics when introducing WSNs in railway 
environments. 
In this study, we propose a method of calculating an opti-
mal relay nodes placement and the routing of the WSN 
considering the presence of obstacles and impossible 
placement in railway environments by combining a 
mathematical optimization method and Sequential Monte 
Carlo method. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we present the related work. Section III presents the 
envisioned WSN in railway environments. In Section IV, we 
present the proposed design method of WSN. Section V 
provides the numerical results of the proposed method. 
Finally, the paper is concluded in Section IV. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Research on the relay nodes placement in WSNs is 
widely conducted and various methods have been proposed 
such as methods of determining the relay nodes placement so 
as to maximize the communicable range [4], methods with a 
focus on fault tolerance [5], methods of determining the 
efficient relay nodes placement from the viewpoint of netw-
ork lifetime [6] and methods of determining the placement 
considering communication cost [7]. However, these metho-
ds are targeted at environments without obstacles, and it is 
assumed that there is no restriction on the node placement.  
Therefore, these methods are not suitable for environments 
in which many obstacles exist like railway environments.  
In [8], a method for determining the relay nodes place-
ment in consideration of constraints on node placement 
locations has been proposed.  However, even in this method, 
the presence of obstacles is not taken into consideration, and 
it is difficult to apply it to railway environments. 
Also, in [9], a method of determining the relay nodes 
placement for the WSN on roads considering the influence of 
obstacles has been proposed. In this method, the node place-
ment is calculated for the WSN on roads considering the inf-
luence of obstacles by using digital maps. Furthermore, in 
this method, whether or not the intermodal visibility is 
hindered by obstacles is determined by utilizing the fact that 
nodes are placed on the road. Therefore, it is difficult to 
apply this method when nodes are not placed on the road but 
placed in railway environments. 
III. 
ENVISIONED WSN IN RAILWAY ENVIRONMENTS 
In this study, we envision the situation where the WSN 
consisting of sensor nodes, relay nodes, and a gateway is ins-
talled in railway environments. Here, the gateway is a device 
that gathers data from each sensor node, and the sensor node 
measures data from monitored objects and transmits the data 
to the gateway wirelessly. The relay node is a device having 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

a function of relaying sensor data and in cases where data 
cannot be transmitted from a sensor node directly to a 
gateway, data is transmitted by multi-hop wireless 
communication via relay nodes. Additionally, the sensor 
nodes and the relay nodes are assumed to be driven by 
batteries. For this reason, it is necessary to replace these 
batteries before they become empty in order to operate the 
WSN continuously. 
Furthermore, the characteristic of railway environments 
is that railway facilities spread long over urban areas and 
mountainous areas, and there are many obstacles that 
interrupt radio wave propagation. In addition, the placement 
of nodes may be restricted due to safety and physical condi-
tions in railway environments. In this study, we propose a 
design method for the WSN to be constructed in railway 
environments where there are many obstacles and there are 
constraints on the location of nodes as described above. 
IV. 
PROPOSED DESIGN METHOD OF WSN 
In railway environments, it is necessary to monitor a long 
distance section along railway tracks depending on the 
objects monitored. Therefore, it is important to construct a 
WSN in railway environments in such a way that the data 
can be relayed from each sensor, in which case, as long as 
each sensor data reaches the gateway, the smaller the number 
of relay node is, the more economical the WSN is. Also, 
since the power consumption of each node in the WSN 
affects battery replacement frequency, the lower the power 
consumption is, the lower the cost of replacing the batteries. 
In this study, we propose a method of calculating the 
optimal number of relay nodes, the relay node placement and 
the routing of the WSN considering the presence of obstacles 
and impossible placement in railway environments by 
combining a mathematical optimization method and 
Sequential Monte Carlo method.  
The procedure of the method proposed in this paper is 
shown in Figure 1. In the proposed method, we first optimize 
the number of relay nodes of the WSN considering the 
presence of obstacles and places where node placement is 
impossible in the railway environments. Next, based on the 
result of the above optimization, we perform the operation 
simulation of the WSN using time series Monte Carlo 
method, and calculate the power consumption and data 
arrival rate of the WSN. Then, we calculate a combination of 
the optimal relay node placement and the routing method by 
optimizing from the viewpoint of power consumption of 
relay nodes based on the power consumption and data arrival 
rate calculated. The detail of each item in Figure 1 are 
described below. 
A. Minimizing the number of relay nodes 
Regarding minimizing the number of relay nodes, the 
relay nodes placement in which it is minimized is calculated 
provided that communication can be established considering 
the presence of obstacles and places where node placement is 
impossible in the railway environments. More specifically, 
the relay nodes placement is calculated by the following 
optimization setting the minimization of the number of relay 
nodes as the objective function [10]. 
[Objective function] 
 
min(Rnum) 
(1) 
[Constraints] 
 
ri,gat = 1 
(2) 
 
Pi(x,y) ≠ Nj(x,y) 
(3) 
In the above equations, Rnum is the number of relay 
nodes, and ri,j is the reachability matrix. ri,j＝1 if there is a 
route by which data can reach node j from node i, and ri,j＝0 
if there is no reachable route. Also, Pi(x,y) is the position (x 
coordinate, y coordinate) of the relay node i, and Nj(x,y) is 
the position (x coordinate, y coordinate) where the relay 
node cannot be installed. Equation (2) represents the const-
raint relating to the arrival of data from each sensor node to 
the gateway, and ri,gat represents the reachability of data 
from the sensor node i to the gateway. Equation (3) repre-
sents the constraint relating to the position of the relay node. 
Here, the position Nj(x,y) where the relay node cannot be 
installed included in the constraint condition is given as 
input, and it shall be set according to the conditions of the 
environment where the WSN is installed. In addition, the 
reachability matrix ri,j is calculated according to the 
following procedure by giving as input such conditions as 
the position of the gateway, the number of sensor nodes, the 
position of each sensor node, the communication distance of 
each node, and the position of the obstacles. 
STEP1 Generation of the adjacency matrix based on the 
communication distance. 
STEP2 Updating the adjacency matrix based on the 
internodal visibility. 
STEP3 Calculation of the reachability matrix based on the 
adjacency matrix. 
Details of the above procedure are shown below. 
1) Generation of the adjacency matrix based on the 
communication distance  
 In this paper, we consider the reachability matrix show-
ing the reachability of one of the nodes from another by data 
using the adjacency matrix in the graph theory. The adjacen-
cy matrix expresses the presence or absence of the relation-
ship between nodes in the graph, and the adjacency matrix 
of the graph consisting of n nodes is an n × n square matrix.  
 
Figure 1.  Proposed Design Method of WSN 
 
 
 
 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Here, on the premise that the adjacency matrix is ai,j, 
• if there is an edge from node i to node j, ai,j = 1. 
• if there is no edge from node i to node j, ai,j = 0. 
In this paper, the gateway, the wireless sensors, and the 
relays are assumed to be the nodes in the adjacency matrix, 
and the availability of communication between each node is 
expressed as an edge. That is, ai,j = 1 when communication 
from node i to node j is possible, and ai,j = 0 when 
communication from node i to node j is impossible. 
Here, the determination of whether or not communi-
cation is possible between the nodes is made as follows 
using the communication distance of the wireless devices of 
the wireless sensor or relay given as the input condition.  
• if Di,j <= Ci : Communication is possible (ai,j = 1), 
• if Di,j > Ci : Communication is impossible (ai,j = 0) 
Where, Di,j is the distance between nodes, Ci is the 
communication distance of each wireless device. 
By performing the above judgment between any pair of 
all the nodes, the adjacency matrix is generated here. 
2) 
Updating the adjacency matrix based on visibility 
Here, the adjacency matrix generated in STEP1 is 
updated based on the presence or absence of the internodal 
visibility. The presence or absence of the internodal 
visibility is determined based on the position of the 
obstracles given as input. As shown in Figure 2, the position 
of the obstacles is input as the coordinates of a line segment 
constituting the area where the obstacles exist like Li (x1, y1, 
x2, y2). In this paper, the presence or absence of the 
internodal visibility is judged by the possibility of the 
intersection of a line segment constituting a certain area of 
the obstacles and a line segment connecting the nodes. Here, 
assuming that the two line segments are L1 (x1, y1, x2, y2) 
and L2 (x3, y3, x4, y4), the two line segments intersect when 
the following (4) is satisfied. 
 
tc × td < 0 
(4) 
Where, tc = (x1 - x2)(y3 - y1)+(y1 - y2)(x1 - x3), 
td = (x1 - x2)(y4 - y1)+(y1 - y2)(x1 - x4). 
Here, the intersection determination is made based on 
(4), and if any two of the line segments intersect each other 
as a result of the judgment, it is determined that there is non-
line of sight and the adjacency matrix is updated as ai,j = 0 
(communication is impossible). 
3) 
Calculation of the reachability matrix based on the 
adjacency matrix 
Here, the reachability matrix is calculated based on the 
adjacency matrix calculated above. The reachability matrix 
can be calculated by the following procedure.  
STEP1 Add unit matrix I to adjacency matrix A 
STEP2 Under the Boolean algebra operation, A + I is 
repeatedly multiplied by itself r times until the state 
represented by the following (5) is obtained 
 
(A+I)r-1 ≠ (A+I)r = (A+I)r+1 
(5) 
(A+I)r+1 obtained by the above calculation is a 
reachability matrix. In this way, in the method proposed, the 
reachability 
matrix 
is 
calculated 
based 
on 
the 
communication distance of the wireless devices and the line 
of sight between the nodes. 
B. Simulation of WSN operation 
In simulation of WSN operation, power consumption and 
data arrival rate of the WSN are calculated based on the 
number of relay nodes and the arrangement of relay nodes 
obtained in Section IV-A. At this time, if there are multiple 
relay nodes placement candidates as a result of the 
calculation described in Section IV-A, simulation is perfo-
rmed for the plural placement candidates. In this study, we 
estimate the power consumption and data arrival rate of each 
node of the WSN in railway environments using sequential 
Monte Carlo method, which is a method of obtaining 
approximate solutions by repeatedly performing time series 
simulation using random numbers. In the proposed method, 
sequential Monte Carlo method was used to perform 
simulation considering the routing method, retransmission of 
data, and communication uncertainty. The configuration of 
the WSN operation simulation is shown in Figure 3. 
The proposed method consists of a WSN evaluation 
program and routing simulation, and by combining the above 
two, the power consumption and data arrival rate of sensor 
nodes and relay nodes are predicted in consideration of the 
routing methods of the WSN. In the WSN evaluation 
program, the timing of routing is determined, and the 
operation of the WSN is simulated based on the result of the 
routing simulation, and the power consumption and data 
arrival rate of the WSN are calculated. In the routing simula-
tion, the routing operation is simulated based on the routing 
method of the WSN to be evaluated, and the routing table is 
generated. Here, the routing table is a collection of informa-
tion about routing to the destination contained in each node, 
and is used to deliver the data. As routing methods used in 
the WSN, there are a reactive type in which a route is 
determined immediately before data transmission, a proac-
tive type in which a route is determined in advance before 
communication, a hybrid type in which both the types are 
combined, and the like. In railway environments, various 
monitoring targets exist, but in general, a suitable routing 
method differs according to the monitoring target. Therefore, 
when applying the WSN in railway environments, it is impo-
rtant that the design of the WSN includes the routing method. 
In the proposed method, we estimated the power consum-
ption and data arrival rate of the WSN, including the routing, 
so that we can examine what kind of routing is desirable. 
Next, the flow of the simulation of the WSN is shown in 
Figure 4. In Figure 4, “time” is the time frame which is being 
calculated, Δt is the time step width of the simulation. In the 
simulation of WSN operation, the communication environ-
X-axis
Y-axis
Obstacle
(x1,y1)
(x2,y2)
(x3,y3)
(x4,y4)
L1(x1,y1,x2,y2)
 
Figure 2.  The coordinates of the line segment 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

ment at each time frame, and the routing method of the WSN 
are provided, and the power consumption and the number of 
communications at each time frame and the data arrival rate 
of the WSN in railway environments are calculated. To do 
this, we probabilistically simulated the occurrence of packet 
loss by a pseudo random number. We ultimately calculated 
the power consumption and data arrival rate during a 
stipulated period by repeating the calculations while 
updating the time frame. Details of each item shown in 
Figure 4 are discussed below.  
1) Input data 
In the simulation of WSN operation, the following data 
are provided as inputs for calculating the power consumption 
and data arrival rate.  
• 
Routing method of the WSN 
• 
Transmission timing of sensor data 
• 
Number of retransmissions of sensor data 
• 
Position of each node 
• 
Specifications of each node (power consumption, 
transmission time, etc.) 
• 
Battery capacity 
• 
Communication 
environment 
(communicable 
distance, packet loss rate, etc.) at each position 
• 
Time step width and duration of the simulation  
2) Settings of various conditions 
In the settings of various conditions, we set the 
communication environment, and battery health at each time 
frame in order to calculate the power consumption and data 
arrival rate at each time frame. 
3) Routing simulation 
Here, the network is constructed based on the routing 
method used in the target WSN, and the routing table is 
generated. In the proposed method, the routing method is 
simulated by utilizing a network simulator or the like, the 
routing timing is judged by the WSN evaluation program, 
and routing simulation is performed when it is judged as the 
routing timing. The inputs and outputs in the routing 
simulation are shown below. 
[Inputs] 
• Position of each node 
• Number of retransmissions of data 
• Communication environment 
[Outputs]  
• Number of transmissions and receptions of each node 
• Routing table 
4) Simulation of data transmission 
Here, we calculate the number of communications of 
each node and the data arrival rate when data are transmitted 
from the sensor nodes to the gateway. The calculations are 
performed on the basis of the conditions set according to 
various situations. To do this, we probabilistically simulate 
the occurrence of packet loss by a pseudo random number. 
Additionally, when packet loss occurs, each node retransmits 
data until the number of retransmissions reaches the 
predetermined number of times given as input and calculate 
the data arrival rate at the gateway and the number of 
communications (the number of data transmissions and the 
number of data receptions) of each node in each time frame. 
5) Calculation of power consumption in each time frame 
Here, we calculate the power consumption of each node 
in each time frame on the basis of the number of 
communications 
calculated 
in 
4). 
Additionally, 
the 
remaining capacity of each sensor node battery is updated on 
the basis of the calculated power consumption. 
In this study, we calculate the power consumption in 
each time frame using (6) in consideration of the number of 
transmissions and the number of receptions of each node in 
each time frame. 
 
Wi(t)=Pt･Tt･Nti(t)+Pr･Tr･Nri(t)+Pw･Twi(t) 
 (6) 
Here, Wi(t) is the power consumption of sensor node i in 
time frame t, Nti(t) is the number of transmissions of the 
sensor node i in time frame t, Nri(t) is the number of 
receptions of the sensor node i in time frame t, and Twi(t) is 
the standby time of the sensor node i in time frame t. 
6) Calculation of power consumption and data arrival 
rate 
Here, we calculate the power consumption and data 
arrival rate during the stipulated period on the basis of the 
results obtained by repeating the calculations shown in 2) to 
5) while updating the time frame. Specifically, we calculate 
the power consumption of each sensor node up to the stipu-
lated period as the sum value of the power consumption in 
each time frame. Likewise, we calculate the data arrival rate 
during the stipulated period of each sensor node on the basis 
of the sum of the data arrival rates in each time frame. 
WSN evaluation program
Sequential Monte Carlo 
method
Routing simulation
・Network construction
・Generation of routing table
Position of each node
Communication environment
Power consumption of each node
Data arrival rate
Input data
Data transmission simulation
Power consumption calculation
Data arrival rate calculation
Number of transmissions 
Number of receives
Routing table
 
Figure 3.  Configuration of WSN operation simulation 
 
(6)Calculation of power consumption 
and data arrival rate
(1)Input data
(2)Setting of various conditions
time=time+Δt
time > simulation period?
(3)Simulation of sensor operation
Yes
No
(4) Simulation of data transmission
(5)Calculation of power consumption 
in each time frame
 
Figure 4.  Flowchart of WSN operation simulation 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

C. Optimization of WSN considering power consumption 
In the optimization of WSN considering power 
consumption, optimization is performed from the viewpoint 
of the power consumption of the relay node based on the 
optimum number of relay nodes calculated according to the 
description in Section IV-A and the node placement 
candidate, the power consumption of the WSN calculated 
according to the description in Section IV-B, and the data 
arrival rate. 
The power consumption of the relay node will affect the 
capacity of the relay node's battery and the network lifetime 
when operating the WSN. Assuming that the battery 
capacities of all the relay nodes are the same, the battery of 
the relay node having the largest power consumption is 
exhausted first. Therefore, the lifetime of the network 
depends on the maximum value of the power consumption 
amount of the relay node. In this study, the WSN was 
optimized from the viewpoint of the maximization of 
network lifetime. The objective function can be defined as 
(7) as the minimization of the maximum value of the power 
consumption of the sensor node. 
[Objective function] 
 
min(max(W1,..,Wi)) 
 (7) 
In the optimization of WSN considering power 
consumption, it can be formulated as an optimization 
problem intended for the minimization of the objective 
function of (7) while satisfying (8) and (9). 
[Constraints] 
 
Ai ≥ Amin 
 (8) 
 
Rnum = Rnum_min 
 (9) 
Where, Wi is the power consumption of node i, Ai is the 
data arrival rate of node i, Amin is the lower limit value of the 
data arrival rate, and Rnum_min is the number of relay nodes 
obtained by minimizing the number of relay nodes consider-
ing railway environments described in Section IV-A. 
Equation (8) is a constraint on the data arrival rate, and (9) is 
a constraint on the number of relay nodes and consider 
limiting the solution to the same number of relay nodes as 
that obtained in Section IV-A. 
Here, Amin included in the constraint condition shall be 
given as input. For Wi and Ai, the node placement, the 
routing method, and the number of data retransmissions are 
given as input, and values are calculated by the simulation of 
power consumption and data arrival rate described in Section 
IV-B. In this optimization, the combination of the relay 
nodes placement, the routing method, and the number of data 
retransmissions in which, provided that the constraints are 
satisfied, the objective function is minimized is calculated. 
This makes it possible to design optimum relay node 
placement, routing method and the number of date 
retransmissions from the viewpoint of power consumption. 
V. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENT 
In this section, we performed numerical experiments to 
verify the usefulness of the proposed method in regard to a 
WSN installed along a railway line. 
A. Calculation condition 
We have built a WSN for monitoring a slope condition 
along a railway line and have carried out demonstration tests 
[11]. In this study, numerical experiments were carried out 
for the WSN along the above mentioned railway line. The 
conditions of the numerical experiments are as follows. 
• Figure 5 shows the WSN for monitoring a slope condition 
in the railway line environment targeted for the numerical 
experiments. In the targeted WSN, it is assumed that the 
data is aggregated from two sensors. The monitoring 
positions of the slope is fixed. In Figure 5, the positions of 
the sensor nodes are indicated as S, the position of a 
gateway is indicated as G. Further the positions of places 
where the nodes cannot be installed are denoted as N, and 
the positions of the obstacles along the railway line based 
on the terrain data is denoted by O, and the positions of the. 
In the numerical experiments, it was studied to select 
effective relay nodes placement and routing method to 
make sensor data reach from the sensor nodes to the 
gateway in the Figure 5. We conducted the numerical 
experiments under the condition of the communication 
distance of wireless devices of the sensor nodes and the 
relay nodes as 170 m with which stable communication can 
be made in the environment without obstacles according to 
the measurement result of the wireless device. 
• The routing method of WSN is performed by checking the 
nodes that can communicate by flooding and generating 
the shortest route. In addition, we examined two patterns of 
candidates for routing: reconstructing the route every time 
data is transmitted (reactive type) and reconstructing the 
route at 0 o'clock every day (proactive type). In addition, 
the range of 0 to 3 times of data retransmissions was 
assumed as the candidate. 
• The power consumption of the sensor nodes and the relay 
nodes was assumed to be 69.3 mW when transmitting, 52.8 
mW when receieving, and 0.002 mW when standing by, 
based on the specifications of a commercially available 
wireless device. 
• The transmission cycle of sensor data was set to once per 
10 min, and the time step width of the simulation was set to 
10 min. Also, it is assumed that power consumption and 
data arrival rate are calculated as values when WSN is 
operated for one year. 
• The lower limit value of data arrival rate used for the 
calculation of Section IV-C was set to 95%. 
B. Calculation result 
Figure 6 shows an example of the result of calculating 
the relay nodes placement by the proposed method based on 
the above experiment conditions. As shown in Figure 6, as a 
result of minimizing the number of relay nodes considering 
the railway environment, the minimum number of relay 
nodes was three. In addition, the position indicated by Ri in 
Figure 6 was obtained as one of the relay node positions 
which can make all sensor data reach the gateway taking into 
consideration the obstacles and the positions where the nodes 
cannot be installed.  
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Next, we optimized the WSN from the viewpoint of 
power consumption and data arrival rate based on the result 
of minimizing the number of relay nodes. As a result, it was 
found out that the optimal solution is setting the routing 
method to the proactive type and retransmission number to 1 
time. Also, the power consumption and data arrival rate of 
the WSN of the optimal solution are shown in Table I.  
Furthermore, for comparison, Table II shows the results 
in the case where the routing method is different from the 
conditions in Table I, and Table III shows the results in the 
case where the number of retransmissions is different from 
the conditions in Table I. Here, Ret in Table III indicates the 
number of retransmissions. It can be seen that although the 
data arrival rate of the two routing methods are not different 
from each other, the reactive type has higher power 
consumption from Table II. This is probably because the 
frequency of the reactive type routing is larger than that of 
the proactive type under the set condition, and the power 
consumption by routing is increased.  
Next, regarding the number of retransmissions, it can be 
seen from Table III that increasing the number of retrans-
missions increases the data arrival rate and also increases the 
power consumption. Since the data arrival rate is set to 95% 
as the condition of the optimization this time, it is considered 
that one time, the minimum number of retransmissions was 
selected within the range that satisfies this condition. 
Finally, we compare the conventional method for 
determining the relay nodes placement that does not consider 
the influence of obstacles with the proposed method. Here, 
we calculated the relay nodes placement by a method not 
considering the influence of obstacles by calculating the 
determination of the relay nodes placement that minimizes 
the number of relay nodes in Section IV-A without 
considering the influence of obstacles. Figure 6 shows the 
result of determining the relay nodes placement by a method 
not considering the influence of obstacles. In Figure 6, the 
number of relay nodes is two, and it is smaller than the result 
by the proposed method. However, with the placement of the 
relay nodes in Figure 6, data from S2, S3, S5 cannot reach 
the gateway due to the influence of the obstacles. 
O O O O O O O
N N N N O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
S1
N N N N N N N N O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O N N N
N N
S4
N N N N N N N N N
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
S5
N N N N N
O
G
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
N N N N N
O O O O
O O
O O O O O O
S3 S2
N N O O O O O O O O
O O
O O O O O O
 
Figure 5.  WSN for the numerical experiment (top view of monitoring area) 
O O O O O O O
R1
N N N N O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
S1
N N N N N N N N O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O N N N R3
N N
S4
N N N N N N N N N
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
S5
N N N N N
O O G
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
N N N N N
O O O O O
O O
O O O O O O
S3 S2
N N O O O O O O O O
O O
R2
O O O O O O
 
Figure 6.  Calculation result of relay nodes placement by the proposed method (top view of monitoring area) 
O O O O O O O
N N N N O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
S1
N N N N N N N N O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O N N N
N N
S4
N N N N N N N N N
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
S5
N N N N N
O O G
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N
N N N N N
O O O O O
O O
R1
R2
O O O O O O
S3 S2
N N O O O O O O O O
O O
O O O O O O
 
1cell = 10m × 10m, N: the relays installation impossible, O: the obstacles, S: the wireless sensors’ location 
Figure 6.  Calculation result of relay nodes placement by the conventional method (top view of monitoring area) 
 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION RESULT OF OPTIMUL WSN 
  
S1 
S2 
S3 
S4 
S5 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Power 
consumption (Wh) 
1.13 
1.12 
1.12 
1.13 
1.13 
5.56 
3.77 
3.77 
Data arrival 
rate (%) 
99.7 
97.8 
97.7 
99.8 
99.3 
- 
- 
- 
TABLE II.  
SIMULATION RESULT OF REACTIVE ROUTING 
  
S1 
S2 
S3 
S4 
S5 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Power 
consumption (Wh) 
10.2 
9.16 
9.16 
10.2 
10.2 
24.7 
22.9 
19.8 
Data arrival 
rate (%) 
99.7 
97.8 
97.7 
99.8 
99.3 
- 
- 
- 
 
TABLE III.  
SIMULATION RESULT OF DIFFERENT RETRANSMISSIONS 
  
S1 
S2 
S3 
S4 
S5 
R1 
R2 
R3 
Ret=0 
Power consumption (Wh) 
1.08 
1.07 
1.07 
1.08 
1.08 
4.89 
3.35 
3.50 
Data arrival rate (%) 
95.0 
81.5 
81.5 
95.0 
90.3 
- 
- 
- 
Ret=2 
Power consumption (Wh) 
1.13 
1.13 
1.13 
1.13 
1.13 
5.64 
3.80 
3.79 
Data arrival rate (%) 
99.9 
99.8 
99.8 
99.9 
99.9 
- 
- 
- 
Ret=3 
Power consumption (Wh) 
1.13 
1.13 
1.13 
1.13 
1.13 
5.64 
3.81 
3.79 
Data arrival rate (%) 
99.9 
99.9 
99.9 
99.9 
99.9 
- 
- 
- 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

It is considered that in this way, the number of relay 
nodes, the nodes placement, and the routing method can be 
designed considering the influence of the obstacles in 
railway environments on the radio communication by using 
the proposed method.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed a method to calculate the 
optimal relay nodes placement and routing of the WSN 
considering the presence of the obstacles and the positions 
impossible for installment in railway environments by 
combining a mathematical optimization method and 
Sequential 
Monte 
Carlo 
method. 
Additionally, 
we 
demonstrated the usefulness of the proposed method by 
performing numerical experiments using the proposed 
method for WSN installed along a railway line. 
In the future, we plan to proceed with the verification of 
the proposed method, and consider effective nodes place-
ment and routing method of WSN in railway environments 
under various conditions using the proposed method. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Bischoff, J. Meyer, O. Enochsson, G. Feltrin, and L. 
Elfgren, “Eventbased strain monitoring on a railway bridge 
with a wireless sensor network,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Struct. 
Health Monitor. Intell. Infrastructure, Zurich, pp. 1-8, 2009. 
[2] A. L. Schiavo, “Fully Autonomous Wireless Sensor Network 
for Freight Wagon Monitoring,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 
16, no. 24, pp. 9053-9063, 2016. 
[3] V. J. Hodge, S. O'Keefe, M. Weeks, and A. Moulds, 
“Wireless Sensor Networks for Condition Monitoring in the 
Railway Industry: A Survey,” IEEE Trans. Intell Transp., vol. 
16, no. 3, pp. 1088-1106, 2015. 
[4] W. Guo, X. Huang, W. Lou, and C. Liang,”On relay node 
placement and assignment for twotiered wireless networks,” 
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol.13, no.1-2, pp.186-
197, 2008. 
[5] D. Yang, S. Misra, X. Fang, G. Xue, and J. Zhang, “Two-
tiered constrained relay node placement in wireless sensor 
networks:Computational 
complexity 
and 
efficient 
approximations,” IEEE Trans. Mob Comput., vol. 11, no. 8, 
pp. 1399-1411, 2012. 
[6] X. Cheng, D. Du, L. Wang, and B. Xu, “Relay sensor 
placement in wireless sensor networks,” ACM/Springer 
Wireless Netw., vol. 14,no. 3, pp. 425-443, 2007. 
[7] M. Nikolov, and Z.J. Haas, “Relay Placement in Wireless 
Networks: Minimizing Communication Cost,” IEEE Trans.  
Wireless Commun., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 3587-3602, 2016. 
[8] M. Bagaa, A. Chelli, D. Djenouri, and T. Taleb, “Optimal 
Placement of Relay Nodes Over Limited Positions in Wireless 
Sensor Networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 16, 
no. 4, pp. 2205-2219, 2017. 
[9] H. Imai, K. Mase, H. Okada, and K. Nakano, “Relay Node 
Placement of Wireless Multi-hop Networks Using Line-of-
Sight Spaces over Road Surface”, IEICE Trans. B, Vol.J99-B, 
no.10, pp.871-880, 2016. (in Japanese) 
[10] N. Iwasawa, T. Kawamura, M. Nozue, S. Ryuo, and N. Iwaki, 
“Design of Wireless Sensor Network in the Railway”, 7th 
International Conference on Sensor Networks, pp.122-127, 
2018. 
[11] M. Nozue et al.,” Wi-SUN Monitoring System for Railway 
Facilities”, IEICE Technical Report, vol.117, no.352, pp. 41-
46, 2017. 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

