 
Utility-based Approach for Video Service Delivery Optimization 
  Mamadou Tourad Diallo, Frédéric Fieau                Emad Abd-Elrahman                                  Hossam Afifi        
                   Orange Labs                               National Telecommunication Institute                  Institut Mines-Telecom       
Audiovisual Network Delivery                                 Computer & Systems Depatement                           Departement RST  
       Issy les moulineaux, France                                             Cairo, Egypt                                                   Saclay, France 
{mamadoutourad.diallo,frederic.fieau}@orange.com     emad.abd_elrahman@telecom-sudparis.eu        hossam.afifi@telecom-sudparis.eu 
 
 
Abstract—This work aims to introduce an Utility-based 
approach for Video Service Delivery Optimization (U-VSDO). 
Through this optimization, a global utility function is 
calculated based on different constraints. Those constraints are 
considered based on separate utility function for each actor in 
the video service delivery chain (Content Provider (CP), 
Operator (OP) and Client (CL)). However, each actor has a 
global score for his vision, the overall optimization aims to 
satisfy the three actors. Our proposed methodology for this 
optimization is validated through different types of evaluation. 
First, a simulation based utility function is done for obtaining 
the optimal values of our optimization problem. Then, a 
complete GUI (Graphical User Interface) interface is built 
based on the main parameters for each actor. Finally, a test-
bed is conducted to differentiate between two types of flows 
using open source Software Defined Network (SDN) controller. 
This part considered the standard use case for ETSI 
(European Telecommunications Standards Interface) in CDN 
(Content Delivery Network) as a Service. 
Keywords- CDN optimization; video service delivery; utility 
function, quality QoS/QoE. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
New video service delivery strategies face two 
challenges: pricing plan for the overall chain elements and 
the innovation for new added services. Many operators are 
struggling to maintain the Average Revenue per User 
(ARPU) and margins in revenues despite the high 
competition in market. They are searching for new 
optimizations that can achieve the balance between the main 
three actors in the chain (content providers, operators and 
consumers). But, the massive deployment of Over-The-Top 
(OTT) technology [1] is really representing a big threat for 
managed video services. Moreover, new opportunities 
brought by clients need to be studied in order to build a good 
utility between users needs and service requirements. 
Therefore, searching optimization algorithms and tools for 
managed video delivery networks is required.  
The traditional Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) are 
not defined mainly for data centers virtualization but for data 
caching and services acceleration. Akamai is one of the most 
famous CDN multi providers over Internet as it handles 
almost 30% of global Internet traffic all over the world [2]. 
Hereinafter, we will explain the main challenges in video 
data centers in general and conduct a subjective comparison 
between the main actors in video service delivery. 
A. Video Data Centers Issues 
Online video uses a very large amount of storage in data 
centers and bandwidth (BW) over the Internet. In USA only, 
almost 50% of Internet BW is consumed by online videos 
[3]. Globally, one of the main issues in data centers is the 
movement of contents. We tried in a previous work to study 
the issue of content movement and video file optimization in 
terms of access cost from user perspective [4]. While, in 
another work, we focused on the QoE aspects and their 
effects on data retrieval or caching costs [5], the overall 
control performance especially in video services is still 
insufficient due to the main bottlenecks in data centers 
interconnections. Moreover, the more famous data centers 
over Internet proposed by Amazon [6] or Google [7] are 
suffering from the same problem of bottlenecks as reported 
in [3]. So, until the cloud solutions bring an improvement, 
there are still some drawbacks in content movements either 
within single data centers or between data centers. So, there 
are high incentives to search an optimized solution for big 
data movements and its optimization. New trends consider 
the Software defined network (SDN) solutions as a 
movement tool and enabler.  
B. Comparison for the Three Actors 
It is important to analyze the main actors in video service 
delivery chain. Then, we can describe the objectives of each 
actor in order to introduce his utility and the overall work 
motivations. Here, two comparisons are mandatory in order 
to build our utilities and have clear problem statements as 
follows: 
1) Agility Comparison 
The Agility is defined as the number of parameters and 
the ability of adaptation for the proposed system 
dynamically. So, the flexibility of service planning either for 
content adaptation or server placement is considered as an 
important factor in any video streaming chain. Thus, either 
for live streaming or VoD (Video on Demand), the easy 
adaptation and simple configuration of networks will 
enhance the overall system performance and users 
satisfactions at same time. Moreover, the correlation between 
the three actors in the video chain will lead to an optimal 
identification for both network capacities and users densities. 
Table I compares the Agility of the three actors effects in 
terms of some major attributes as follows: 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

TABLE I.  
AGILITY COMPARISON FOR THE THREE ACTORS 
Attribute 
Content 
Provider 
Operator 
Client 
Video 
Coding 
The number of 
layers that can be 
available for each 
content like 
DASH layers or 
HLS for mobile 
users 
The carrier has 
to support 
different 
tunnels of 
traffic and 
with different 
rates of 
playing videos 
The client 
application 
capacity for 
accommodating 
different 
coding layers 
and buffers 
required 
Line 
Speeds 
Cost 
consumptions for 
high speed 
deployment lines 
to contents 
hosting  
Fast 
adaptations 
and scalable 
networks for 
highly on 
demand 
services  
Line speed 
constrains 
either for fixed 
rates cost or on 
demand 
bandwidth  
Capacity 
Maximizing the 
throughputs 
Minimizing 
the network 
load 
Maximizing the 
number of 
clients 
Quality 
QoS SLA/TCA 
between CP & 
OP for an 
efficient content 
delivery with min 
and max 
thresholds of 
quality  
Quality of 
service 
measures for 
adaptive bit 
rates  
Participating in 
QoS/QoE 
reports for 
enhancing the 
overall service 
delivery 
Devices 
Hardware or 
Software 
consumed for 
contents 
virtualizations or 
services on 
demand 
Dynamic 
allocations for 
resources and 
network 
virtualization 
to cope with 
on demand 
servers 
caching or 
placements 
Device 
capabilities to 
fit with 
different access 
networks and 
with virtual 
applications   
 
2) Cost Comparison 
Table II gives an overall cost comparison from each actor 
view as follows: 
TABLE II.  
 COST COMPARISON FOR THE THREE ACTORS 
Attribute 
Content 
Provider 
Operator 
Client 
CAPEX 
cost 
Min cost for 
content 
adaptations 
Min 
transmission cost 
for each content 
Min cost for 
required 
bandwidth 
line 
OPEX 
cost 
Hosting servers for 
different layers of 
same content 
Running cost for 
QoS SLA/TCA 
between CP & 
OP 
Running cost 
for additional 
Bandwidth 
 
Based on the previous two proposed comparisons and 
main issues in service delivery, we can formulate our 
problem statements as follows: 
C. Problem Statement 
We propose a global optimization utility function for 
each one of the three actors in the video chain. As shown in 
Figure 1, the three actors in the chain are in collaboration for 
the best service delivery. Actor 1, the content provider asks 
Actor 2 (the operator) to deliver some video content 
requested by the third Actor 3 (client). We assume that the 
system is real time so requests can be handled through some 
controller unit that manages sessions and handover decisions 
between CDNs based on our optimization function. 
 
Figure 1.  Main three actors in the video chain 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
highlights the relevant work to this optimization and presents 
the 
different 
categories 
in 
video 
service 
delivery 
optimization. Then, Section III introduces our proposed 
methodology based on the new utilities constrains. The 
evaluation for our proposal is conducted in Section IV. 
Finally, this research is concluded with some future 
directions in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
We can divide contributions for optimizing video 
delivery into three main methods: i) the network-centric 
approach, in which decisions are made at the network side 
(mainly by network operators), ii) the user-centric approach 
making the decision based on the user's benefit, and iii) the 
context-centric approach, where the switching decision is 
made by considering different context information.  
 
i) 
The network-centric: 
In this approach, decisions are made by the operators and 
they are principally based on their benefits.  
Sylvia et al. [8] propose a distributed strategy to get 
network topology information, and use Internet Control 
Message Protocol (ICMP) ping method to measure Round-
Trip Time (RTT), in order to switch to a network which has 
the lowest RTT. Xueying et al. [9] work on the load 
balancing algorithm which automatically selects network 
candidate based on local resource conditions.  The main 
advantage of this method is the network resources 
optimization. But these techniques do not consider content 
provider expectations and users Quality of Experience 
(QoE). 
 
ii) 
The user-centric: 
Network switching is made in order to satisfy user’s 
benefits, without considering network load and content 
provider expectations. Ksentini et al. [10] consider Quality of 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Experience measurements over different access types. After 
predicting a Mean Opinion Score (MOS) with Pseudo 
Subjective Quality Assessment (PSQA), a vertical handover 
(change in access network) is carried out towards the 
network offering the best MOS. It can be noticed that the 
user-centric approach has the main drawback from a load 
balancing perspective, since users generally consider only 
their own benefits while making decisions and letting the 
Operator and Content Provider benefits.  
 
iii) 
The context-centric approach: 
In this approach, the delivery decision optimization is 
made by considering different contexts (Content Provider, 
Operator, and Client). Bogdan et al. [11] propose an 
algorithm, 
called 
Smooth 
Adaptive 
Soft-Handover 
Algorithm (SASHA). Its goal is to improve the user 
perceived quality while roaming through heterogeneous 
wireless network environments. The score of each 
connection is evaluated based on a comprehensive Quality of 
Multimedia Streaming (QMS) including the following 
metrics: QoS (Quality of Service), QoE (Quality of 
Experience), Cost, Power efficiency and user preferences. 
The idea is to adapt delivery in the network that has the best 
(QMS) score. The disadvantage is the no consideration of 
content provider expectations in the adaptation process.  
Suciu et al. [12] propose Hierarchical and Distributed 
Handover (HDHO) method, a distributed handover decision 
framework which takes into account the objective of Content 
Provider  by considering the content requirements in terms of 
resources, Operator in terms of network load and user 
preferences by considering cost sensibility. Even if, this 
proposal takes into account the aim of each actor on the 
delivery chain, some relevant parameters are omitted. In 
content provider side the cost of transmitting the content in a 
network is missed, in network side the cost and hardware 
status are absent, in client side the perceived quality of 
experience is not taken into account.  
In order to maximize a perceived quality of experience in 
users’ side, respect conditions of content providers and the 
operators’ benefits, we need to define a new video delivery 
optimization which takes into account the objective of each 
actor.  Moreover, in such a dynamic environment composed 
by different devices with different characteristics, variables 
network conditions with different cost/load and content 
providers with different expectations, we propose the U-
VSDO algorithm that handles all those parameters as 
explained in the next section. 
III. 
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 
The purpose of this section is to explain the steps of the 
optimization approach which takes into account the objective 
of Content Provider (CP), Operator (OP) and the User. Our 
approach is based on the definition of three entities, each 
with their goals as follows: 
 
The objective of Content Provider is to send the 
Content in the network with a minimum cost and still 
manage the Content expectations in terms of 
requirements (for example the minimum required 
throughput for the content).    
 
The objective of the Operator is to transmit content on 
its network (CDN1 or CDN2 in our example) while 
keeping the load as lower as possible. 
 
The objective of the client is to improve the Quality of 
Experience besides the QoS. 
The Utility-based Video Service Delivery Optimization 
(U-VSDO) will take into account the goals of each actor in 
addition to the main constrains. As shown in Figure 1, the 
optimization decision will be managed by the Main 
Controller after solving the optimization problem. This 
controller can be for example an SDN controller as will be 
explained in Section IV for SDN Network Function 
Virtualization NFV [13]. So, we can solve the problem by 
the following steps: 
 
A. Problem Formulation 
We used the utility functions to calculate the scores of 
each actor; this is very useful to characterize the satisfaction 
derived from a parameter. 
The function must have the following characteristics:  
 
The function increases with parameter x and has 
a maximum of  1,  
 
When x is “low”, the function tends to zero.  
 
The possibility to have normalized results 
between [0, 1].  
 Several functions meet these criteria. Moreover, we 
decided to use the utility function: (1-    ), as the work in 
[12] [14], where x is a parameter of the function. In future 
work, we will further investigate the influence of others 
utility functions in our optimization problem.  
Hereinafter, we introduce the details of each actor utility 
function based on the previous propositions either for utility 
type or normalization way.  Then, a global score utility will 
be calculated under the main constrains defined for each 
actor as follows.  
As the work in [12], we have two types of parameters: 
 
The positives parameters: High values are 
better, example (throughput, available hardware, 
etc.), then for an utility function we took the 
parameter directly. 
 
The negatives parameters: Low parameters are 
better, example (cost, network load, etc., then 
for these parameters we choose 
 
      for 
example. 
 
For Content Provider:  
                      = (1 -  
    
 
        + 1 -          )       . Ds        (1) 
         = (2 -  
    
 
       -         )       . Ds                     (1) 
where:  
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

o 
         , is the score related to Content Provider (CP) 
for flow j in network i.  
o 
    = UNIT cost per Mbyte, is the cost of transmitting 
the content in the network (CDN1 or CDN2) in our 
example). 
o 
     = (      (j),      ) = 0, when         <     ,      = 0. 
o 
          is the maximum cost that the content provider 
is ready to pay.  
o 
  , is the available throughput.  
o 
Ds = (          ,        =0, when       <    
o 
       is the required video throughput.  
Note that: (     means that; when   < B then ( ,B) =0 and 
1 otherwise. 
 
For Operator:  
       = (3   
   
 
          
  
 
              ).NLs.Cops.Hs (2) 
 
where:    
 
o 
      , is the score related to Operator in network i.  
o 
                 ; is the cost from the operator 
side.  
o 
     is the network load.  
o 
NLs=         , NL (i)) =0, when       <  NL 
o 
       is the maximum acceptable network load. 
o 
Cops= (         ,Cop(i))=0, when       < Cop 
o 
        is the maximum price that the operator is 
ready to invest. 
o 
H is the required hardware threshold. 
o 
Hs= (H(i),      i)) = 0, when        
o 
      is the minimum required hardware for considered 
service.  
 
For Client : 
                                                   =  
               
     
           (3) 
where: 
o 
           ) corresponds to the satisfaction obtained 
by users in network i for flow j. It is a parametric model 
which computes the Quality of Experience function of 
contexts information (environment) [15], the model 
takes into account parameters such as the device type, 
the video content type and the quality of the network 
link in order to predict the Quality of Experience. The 
analytical function is called        and is presented in 
the equation below:  
                                                =       
        
          (4) 
o 
A, B and C: are the model parameters calculated by 
using subjective test data from different experiments. 
o 
     , is the maximum value of        which 
correspond to the normalized factor  
So, the general optimization problem can be formulated as 
follows by total score: 
   =α *     + β *    +  *       (5)  
 
where         are the weights of entities in the global 
optimization and       =1 
The weighting parameters define the importance of each 
actor in the optimization decision. In our work we decided 
that the Content Provider, the Operator and Users have the 
same weight, then:        = 
 
  
 
B. Optimization Problem Constraints 
In this section, we summarize the main utility functions 
for the computed scores and their constraints that will be 
implemented in the next section and appeared in the GUI 
interface as follows:  
                                    2   
    
 
                
 
                   = 3     
    
 
          
  
 
                
 
Client :                     
        
         
        
       
 
 
         Objective: maximize (                  ) 
 
       Subject to :       <         
                               <         
                      Dr < Dref 
                         NL<       
                          < H  
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION AND  EVALUATION 
To validate our work, we propose two ways. First, we are 
going to optimize the utility function parameters through a 
simulation tools using Matlab. Then, the decision output of 
this optimization will take the form of graphical interface for 
doing many scenarios. Second, we will do a testbed for 
decision making based software defined network (SDN) 
solution to differentiate between CDNs caching. This 
solution conforms to the ETSI solution use case 8 for virtual 
CDN-as-a-service [13].  
 
A. Validation Based Simulation 
The validation based simulation has been conducted based 
on some real test captured from last championship Roland 
Garros (RG) [16]. Roland Garros is a major tennis 
tournament held over two weeks between late May and early 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

June 2013 at the Stade Roland Garros in Paris, France. Some 
analysis has been proposed in our previous work [17]. In this 
work, we studied and analyzed users engagement during this 
event based on some real time measures done based on the 
Orange platform. Then, we will extend the study and the 
analysis to conform to the three actors in video. Samples 
from the RG tests are shown in the following Table III.  
Parameters such as buffering time, startup time and playing 
time are considered. 
TABLE III.  
SAMPLES FROM ROLAND GARROS  MEASURES 
Buffering ratio 
(%) 
Startup time 
(Seconds) 
Average encoding 
(kbps) 
Playing time 
( seconds) 
0,84375 
2,671875 
807,0869565 
446,85 
1,1761176 
0,8860886 
973,3505747 
3600,33 
0,785625 
0 
970,070922 
1521,11 
1,15 
0 
963,8943089 
1356,33 
2,734375 
0,59375 
2040,769811 
2791,39 
0,682039 
0,6560375 
945,2185792 
1938,35 
0,5624928 
0,8281144 
955,7608696 
455,50 
 
We implemented a complete Graphical Tool (GT) to be 
used by the operators in their networks design and 
optimization. This graphical tool is built based on Matlab 
code. 
Figure 2 illustrates the main construction steps as divided 
into two parts: 
 
Creating general parameters: which means defining 
the basic topology elements and factors in the three 
actors (CP, OP and CL) i.e. the main profiles for 
each video and CDN. 
 
Calculating results: Calculating the general score 
for all actors and show the selected CDN as best 
path for video profile.  
Actually, we simulate the global utility function and 
calculate the scores for different networks for our approach 
U-VSDO. Moreover, and in order to facilitate the decision 
making output by each operator running our methodology, 
we developed a GUI interface to cope with the three utility 
functions for the three actors main parameters as shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  GUI interface for U-VSDO approach 
After finishing this simulation, we conducted a brief 
comparison between our approach U-VSDO and other 
similar techniques that used utility functions for decision 
making based multimedia handover like SASHA [11] and 
HDHO [12]. The results indicated in Table IV highlighted 
the main parameters considered as supplementary by our 
approach U-VSDO over other ways. 
TABLE IV.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN U-VSDO TO OTHER APPROACHES 
 
SASHA 
HDHO 
U-VSDO 
OP cost 
x 
x 
√ 
CP cost 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Content Type 
x 
x 
√ 
Device Type 
x 
x 
√ 
Client Type 
x 
x 
√ 
Network Load 
√ 
√ 
√ 
H/W Status 
x 
x 
√ 
 
Finally, Figure 3 represents the correlation between this 
work and our previous work [17] for different types of media 
tested under our approach. Figure 3 handled different types 
of videos (News, Sport, Music and Animation) in terms of 
which CDN can achieve high scores in order to satisfy user 
engagement 
and 
all 
actors’ 
satisfactions 
for 
our 
methodology.  
 
 
Figure 3.   User score for different types of media to different CDNs 
 
B. Validation Based Testbed 
In this part, we try to validate our approach using 
software defined network controller through the SDN 
implementations based testbed. The testbed architecture is 
shown in Figure 4. We simulate the traffic source as video on 
demand servers by VOD1 & VOD2 (using VLC Servers for 
same contents but on different format: one Standard 
Definition (SD) and the other High Definition (HD)) and the 
client will also use a VLC client. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
Figure 4.  Proposed testbed architecture 
The experiment for simulating SDN controller is done 
using Mininet open source package [18]. Using this package, 
we can build a complete architecture of virtual topology 
(including VM clients, VM servers, Virtual Open switch and 
the session controller based an OpenFlow [19]). 
As SDN offers Networking-as-a-Service (NaaS) and 
Network Function-as-a-Service (NFaaS), the main objective 
is to measure the performance in case of obtaining the 
contents from VOD1 (SD) and due to the QoE index; the 
session will be transferred to VOD2 (HD) for same contents. 
Also, we can see that this is a type of session based hijacking 
using SDN controller. The response time for sessions 
hijacking is calculated for different types of video bit rates as 
shown in Figure 5. As shown in this figure, the switching 
time is acceptable for different types of videos and is 
conform with the ITU recommendations for quality of 
streaming. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The response time for sessions hijacking against VBR (video bit 
rate) as measured during the experiment. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
An optimization mechanism is presented and evaluated. 
It solves the utility function optimization for the three 
common actors in video streaming chain (CP, OP and CL) 
for any data centers, including their roles and objectives in 
video chain. The proposed methodology U-VSDO is 
evaluated by two ways. First, through a simulation for global 
utility function and our approach gave good results 
compared to other methods like HDHO or SASHA in terms 
of value added parameters in decision making. Secondly, a 
testbed is evaluated to validate the CDN-as-a-Service 
controlled by an SDN controller and the consumed time for 
sessions hijacking is measured for different video bitrates. 
In the next work directions, we will consider the real-
time video service optimization based on adaptive technique 
suitable for the real-time nature. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Over The Top ( OTT) :  
http://www.pace.com/Documents/Investors/Presentations/100
609_TechnologyBriefing.pdf, last visit: May 2014. 
[2] Akamai: http://www.akamai.com/ , last visit : May 2014. 
[3] Fierce online video Report: 
http://www.fierceonlinevideo.com/special-reports/moving-
big-data-video-transport-providers-keep-sporting-events-
hollywood-pa#ixzz2nBe1xrds: December 11, 2013.  
[4] Abd-Elrahman E. and Afifi H., “Optimization of File 
Allocation for Video Sharing Servers”, NTMS 3rd IEEE 
International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility and 
Security (NTMS),Cairo-Egypt , 20-23, pp.1-5, Dec. 2009. 
[5] Abd-Elrahman E., Rekik T., and Afifi H., ‘‘Optimization of 
Quality of Experience through File Duplication in Video 
Sharing Servers”, EuroITV2012, UP-TO-US workshop, 
Germany: July 2012. pp.286-291 
[6] Amazon Web Services: http://aws.amazon.com/, last visit: July 
2014.  
[7] Google: http://www.google.com, last visit: Augest 2014. 
[8] Sylvia R., Marc H., Richard Maning K., and Scott S., 
“Topologically-Aware Overlay Construction and Server 
Selection” INFOCOM 2002, pp. 1190-1199.  
[9] Xueying J., Shiyao L., and Yang Y., “Research of Load 
Balance Algorithm Based on Resource Status for Streaming 
Media Transmission Network” CECNet, 2013,pp.503-507 
[10] Ksentini A., Viho C., and Bonnin JM., “QoE-aware Vertical 
Handover in Wireless Heterogeneous Networks”, IEEE, 2011, 
pp.95-100. 
[11] Bogdan C. and Gabriel M., “A Quality-Oriented Handover 
Algorithm for Multimedia Content Delivery to Mobile Users”  
Broadcasting IEEE Transactions on, pp. 437-450   
[12] Suciu LL. and Guillouard K., “A Hierarchical and Distributed 
Handover 
Management 
Approach 
for 
Heterogeneous 
Networking Environments”, ICNS 2007, vol., no, pp.77,77, 
19-25 June 2007. 
[13] ETSI GS NFV 001 v1.1.1 ,“Network Functions Virtualization 
NFV; Use Cases”, October 2013. 
[14] Penhoat J., Guillouard K., Lemlouma T., and Mikaël S., 
“Analysis of the Implementation of Utility Functions to 
Define an Optimal Partition of a Multicast Group”, ICN 2011, 
The Tenth International Conference on Networks. 2011. 
[15] Diallo M.T., Marechal N., and Afifi H., “A Hybrid Contextual 
User Perception Model for Streamed Video Quality 
Assessment”, Multimedia (ISM), 2013 IEEE International 
Symposium on , vol., no., pp.518,519, 9-11 Dec. 2013.  
[16] Roland Garros: http://www.rolandgarros.com/, last visit: 
February 2014. 
[17] Diallo M.T., Fieau F., and Hennequin J.B., “Impacts of Video 
Quality of Experience on User Engagement in a Live Event” 
ICME EMSA 2014. 
[18] Mininet: http://mininet.org/, last visit: January 2014. 
[19] https://www.opennetworking.org/, last visit: January 2014. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

