Multipath Route Construction Using Cumulative Residual Energy for Wireless 
Sensor Networks 
 
Saad Rizvi 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Manitoba 
Winnipeg, Canada 
umrizvi@cc.umanitoba.ca 
Ken Ferens 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Manitoba 
Winnipeg, Canada 
ferens@ee.umanitoba.ca
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a novel method for constructing 
multiple routing paths based on paths which have highest 
cumulative residual energy. An advantage of selecting the path 
with highest cumulative residual energy is that it minimizes the 
probability that nodes along the path will deplete their energy 
and thus minimizes path failures in the network. The 
algorithm incorporates a multipath discovery phase without 
incurring any overhead by “piggybacking” the cumulative 
residual energy data to existing reinforcement packets of 
directed diffusion. The algorithm also updates residual energy 
at the highest rate supported by the network. Simulations show 
that the proposed method has lower residual energy variance 
(38%, 30% less) and longer network lifetime (85%, 32% 
longer) than basic directed diffusion and a load-balanced 
directed diffusion version which does not implement multipath 
routes, respectively.  
Keywords-wireless sensor network; energy efficient; directed 
diffusion; load balancing; cumulative residual energy; braided 
multipath; network lifetime. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) (due to their low 
power operation, ease of deployment) have been used for 
different 
applications 
like 
environmental 
monitoring, 
healthcare applications and target tracking [1]. In wireless 
sensor networking, design of a suitable routing protocol is 
challenging. In most of its applications the main goal is to 
maximize lifetime of the nodes in the network. One approach 
to this problem is to balance the load among all nodes in the 
network. Since a battery is the only source of energy nodes 
have, the challenge is to design an effective routing 
algorithm keeping in mind the goal of maximizing lifetime 
of the sensor nodes and balancing the load of nodes network 
wide. Thus, nodes should consume lower energy and load 
must be balanced to increase network lifetime. 
A load balancing algorithm aims to achieve an energy 
efficient solution for such networks by balancing the work 
load equally among the nodes in the network. By judicious 
use of limited available energy, network life time can be 
extended to the fullest. By considering the network lifetime 
as the time the first node in the network fails (dies), with 
load balancing we can think of all nodes being depleted of 
energy slowly and uniformly causing all nodes to die nearly 
at the same time. By doing this, one can lower maintenance 
cost and improve overall performance.  
The proposed algorithm utilizes multiple paths between 
the sink and source nodes to extend the network lifetime by 
efficiently balancing the traffic load of nodes within the 
network. Dynamically switching to best path, for routing 
data towards the sink, not only helps in load balancing but 
also allows avoiding network failures that may occur at an 
early stage. This paper attempts to overcome the problem of 
limited energy resources and unequal energy distribution 
across the network by proposing this multiple path energy 
efficient routing algorithm. 
The proposed method can be applied to basic directed 
diffusion (DD) [2] for a large distributed sensor network. 
Using the basic DD’s reinforcement phase, we find the two 
best paths that have the highest residual energy without 
incurring any significant overhead. By simply reinforcing the 
two high cumulative energy nodes, the sink initializes the 
path discovery phase. Similarly, the reinforced nodes relay 
the reinforcement by reinforcing their two highest 
cumulative energy upstream neighbors. This continues until 
he reinforcement messages reach a source node. Thus, two 
paths which have the highest cumulative energy from the 
source to the sink can be constructed. 
This paper presents an efficient approach which 
considers hop count and cumulative residual energy during 
the data transmission process. The reinforcement message 
packet (RMP) contains a “cumulative residual energy” field. 
Each intermediate node during the reinforcement phase adds 
its own residual energy to the value in this field. When 
RMPs find the source, the source selects the path with the 
highest CRE. The rationale behind selecting the path with 
high CRE is to select a path to support the goals of load-
balancing and fault tolerance. This paper implements a 
multipath routing strategy and incorporates decision making 
in the source nodes to select a path to provide resilience 
against node failures. By doing this it was found that load 
balancing can also be achieved and network lifetime was 
extended. 
The remaining parts of the paper are organized as 
follows: Section II discusses related work and identifies the 
extensions and contributions of this work. Section III gives 
the details of the methods to improve load balancing and 
fault tolerance among nodes in the network. Section IV 
discusses the simulation experiments performed to compare 
the proposed algorithms with other leading algorithms. 
Finally, conclusions and future work are given. 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

II. 
RELATED WORK 
For a flat network with high density of homogeneous 
nodes (i.e., all nodes have same capabilities), the problem of 
energy consumption and unequal load distribution can be 
resolved using energy efficient routing protocols. Among the 
classification of flat, query based routing protocols, Directed 
Diffusion (DD) has gained importance due to its flexibility, 
fault tolerance and energy efficiency. Although in its basic 
form the protocol does not guarantee load balancing, but 
extensions have been made [3] to make it more efficient. The 
initial work in [2] has provision for multipath routing to 
provide protection from path failures but it does not discuss 
detailed implementation. Since the algorithm constructs path 
with least-delay, an approach to implement multipath routing 
can be to construct multiple least delay paths. These multiple 
paths can then be used either for concurrent data 
transmission or by selecting the best path for transmitting 
data. Using a least-delay path, it is not feasible to incorporate 
load-balancing in the network. Since the least-delay path will 
have a minimum number of nodes between sink and source, 
the energy will be consumed at a greater rate by the nodes 
along this path than others and they will die prematurely. In 
most routing protocols, a single-path routing strategy is used 
for data transmission which is not robust against node or link 
failures. Considering characteristics of wireless sensor 
networks (unreliable wireless links, energy resources) a 
single-path routing strategy cannot meet the requirements of 
various applications. A multipath routing strategy is an 
obvious approach to overcome the shortcomings of a single-
path routing strategy.   
One of the first works on multipath routing for packet 
switching networks was done by [4, 5], which they called 
“dispersity routing”. The goal of their work was to distribute 
the data over multiple paths rather than concentrating on 
single paths. Following the same basic idea, recently, a lot of 
work has been done applying multipath routing in WSNs. In 
[6], load balancing has been achieved using multipath 
directed diffusion. The protocol creates multiple disjoint or 
braided paths for distributing traffic along these paths. The 
protocol also considers reducing overhead in basic directed 
diffusion 
(interests, 
exploratory 
data 
packets) 
by 
probabilistically 
forwarding 
packets 
and 
setting 
up 
forwarding threshold parameters. It considers minimum node 
energy along a path and length of the path to select a path 
for routing data. By probabilistic decision, it first utilizes 
shorter paths with high energy and then switches to longer 
paths. The paper focuses on load balancing and achieving 
desired network capacity using several paths, although 
constructing multipaths will help in making communication 
more robust against failures. Also, in a multipath routing 
strategy, paths formed can be braided, i.e., they share nodes 
with other paths or can be node-disjoint. To setup node-
disjoint paths, there is some overhead involved as a node 
along a currently reinforced path can respond negatively to 
reinforcement messages, which try to reinforce it for other 
paths. In Multipath routing, after multiple path selection, 
data can be transmitted either concurrently along these paths 
to provide even traffic distribution [6, 7] or using the best 
path for data transmission and keeping additional paths for 
fault tolerance purposes [8].  
Also, multipath routing has been proposed to combat 
topological instability (e.g., link failures) due to nodal 
mobility and changes in the wireless environment [9]. The 
work in [10] aims to develop multiple node-disjoint paths for 
robust data delivery. It proposes a deployment strategy that 
provides robustness to both short and long term node failures 
in ad hoc networks. 
Multipath routing has been employed to improve quality 
of service (QoS) by reducing delays [11]. An important issue 
associated with sensor networks is the reliability and security 
of data [12, 13]. One important use of multipath has been 
proposed in [12] where the authors have proposed a 
multipath routing algorithm which delivers messages from 
the source by maintaining data confidentiality. The algorithm 
shares a secret message, first by creating its multiple shares, 
and then by distributing the shares along multiple paths, such 
that, even if a fewer number of nodes are compromised, the 
secret message will be secure.  
The work proposed in the present paper takes the 
approach of using high-quality single path for data 
transmission, as using multiple paths for data dissemination 
might not be a good idea due to unreliable wireless links and 
interference between nodes in a dense WSN environment. 
The main idea behind the proposed method is to provide path 
resilience (against node failures) along with load balancing 
by constructing multiple paths using cumulative residual 
energy. It also incorporates multipath discovery without any 
overhead, since this approach does not explicitly try to 
achieve disjoint multipaths. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY AND DESCRIPTION OF STAGES 
The proposed method of constructing routing paths using 
cumulative residual energy was applied on directed 
diffusion. Before implementing multipath routing in DD, we 
improved the basic DD by incorporating load-balancing. 
This was done by updating residual energy values of the 
nodes, network wide, periodically at a low-rate as well as at 
a high-rate and by reinforcing nodes based on their residual 
energy values. The main contribution of this work is to 
implement multipath routing to improve load-balancing and 
to minimize path failures so that the network lifetime can be 
extended. 
While various definitions of network lifetime have been 
used in the literature [14], we decided to define “network 
lifetime” or the termination of the simulation when the first 
node fails (dies). This definition seems appropriate for load 
balancing algorithms, since an ideal load balancing would 
have all the nodes loose energy at the same rate, so that they 
all die at the same time. 
A. Neighbor Discovery and Interest Propagation 
At the beginning, the network enters the neighbor 
discovery phase, in which each node tries to register its one-
hop neighbors within its radio range. After this phase, each 
node has a Neighbor_List in its memory which is used for 
interest propagation. An ‘Interest’ is a query by the operator 
which can be diffused into the network at any node. This 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

node which initializes interest propagation is called the 
‘sink’. The sink broadcasts the interest message with its 
desired event type towards its neighbors. Whenever a node 
receives an interest message (not received previously from 
the sending node), it makes a new entry in its 
‘Interest_Table’ along with a gradient for that interest. Each 
interest 
in 
the 
interest 
table 
has 
an 
associated 
‘Gradient_List’, having IDs of nodes which sent the same 
interest to the current node. The gradient list is used to 
selectively route back exploratory data packets towards the 
sink. Interest message also has an ‘interval’ field, which 
specifies the data rate for the next event. The proposed 
method unlike many extensions to DD does not try to reduce 
overhead (by suppressing interest propagation setting up 
thresholds) as it maintains original characteristics of DD.  
B. Exploratory Data and Energy Updates 
Eventually the interest message will reach a node which 
can serve the sensing task specified in the interest message 
and this node is called the ‘source’ node, which will initiate 
exploratory data (ED) sending process periodically. The 
period of sending exploratory data is extracted from the 
interest message. ED is then forwarded from the source 
towards the sink using established gradients through multiple 
paths. Exploratory data packets (EDPs) are sent out 
periodically by the source at a lower frequency compared to 
interest message propagation. To incorporate load-balancing, 
this method allows each node to have information about the 
residual energy values of its neighbors and updates it 
periodically during each ED propagation phase. This is 
simply done by piggybacking (including) the residual energy 
value of the sending node on to its ED packet which is sent 
out to nodes on its gradient list. When this ED packet is 
received by a node, it will extract the energy update about 
the sender, and will store it in its ‘Senders_List’ along with 
its residual energy value. In the basic directed diffusion, only 
the timestamps of ED senders are recorded and updated. 
After the ED phase, nodes will be having complete residual 
energy information about their neighboring nodes. 
C. Multipath Discovery using Reinforcements 
The proposed method reinforces two best paths at every 
Reinforcement phase for each interest. The sink initiates the 
Reinforcement phase after it has complete information about 
the residual energy values of its neighboring nodes. Sink 
sends out Reinforcement message packets (RMPs) to two of 
its nodes having highest residual energy. Reinforcing nodes 
based on residual energy introduces load-balancing in the 
network.   Each node has an ‘RMP_List’ which stores the 
rmp_ID, hop_Count, CRE values for each sender sending an 
RMP. 
The two paths formed in our case can be braided i.e., 
they can be have common nodes along these paths. We do 
not use disjoint multipath formation due to overhead 
involved. The reason for reinforcing two paths is just the 
energy overhead involved with several paths. As RMPs 
propagate along reinforced paths, each node appends its 
residual energy value to the CRE field of an RMP. 
Eventually, these RMPs will find a source node which will 
then have information about each path’s cumulative residual 
energy. This CRE for each path will specify the health of the 
path and source selects the one which has highest cumulative 
residual energy. By doing this, we can avoid bad paths which 
can fail any time. Also during RMP propagation, each node 
adds to the ‘hop_Count’ field which is used by the source for 
estimating energy consumed by the path and updating its 
CRE during data transmission in between two RMP intervals 
(described in the next section).  
D. Reinforced Data Propagation  
Once the source receives reinforcement message packet, 
it arranges for the reinforced data packet (RDP) to be sent 
back at a higher rate towards the sink. Source in its 
RMP_List has information about each path’s CRE and 
number of hops taken (hop_Count). CRE is given by (1): 




n
i
iR
CRE
1


The Ri is the node i’s residual energy along the reinforced 
path. The source node will select the path with the highest 
CRE and will forward the reinforced data packet (RDP) 
using this path. The proposed method piggybacks the 
residual energy value of the sender node onto the RD packet. 
This value is extracted by the node receiving the RDP and it 
will update its Senders_List with this residual energy value 
for the sender node. In this way, residual energy values are 
updated across the network at a higher rate compared to 
slower ED updates. Since the source node does not get any 
update about the CRE (before the next reinforcement) of the 
selected path while it’s transmitting data through it, it 
estimates the CRE value of the path in use by simply using 
the hop count along that path and the energy consumed for 
transmission. While sending data along a chosen path the 
source node estimates the CRE using: 


Energy
tx
Count
hop
CRE
CRE
_
*
_




In case, if source node finds the second path higher in 
CRE than the one being used, it will route data through this 
alternate path. By doing this the source can insure that it 
selects a healthy path every time for data transmission and 
can switch to another path dynamically if it finds degradation 
along the used path. With different paths being formed every 
time during the reinforcement phase and by utilizing the path 
high in energy resources, the proposed method provides 
load-balancing along with fault tolerance.  
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
A Java simulator was developed to simulate the 
effectiveness of the proposed cumulative residual energy 
(CRE) for creating multiple paths in directed diffusion. A 
Java simulator was chosen to enable comparison of the 
results of this work with previous work done by the authors 
[3]. Our next step will be to port the preliminary Java-based 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

simulations to ns2 for validation and comparison with other 
work in the field. This will be followed by applying the CRE 
method to real sensor nodes. 
The three variants are referred to as: “Basic DD”, “Load 
balanced DD with ED & RD energy-piggyback” and 
“Multipath DD with CRE piggyback”. The network was 
simulated for different number of nodes from N=300, 400, 
..., 600. Initial residual energy for each node was equal to 
2x104 Joules; radio range = 4 m. The energy consumption by 
a transmitting node was set to 2 J and 1 J for a receiving 
node, establishing a ratio of 2:1, as was done in [15]. In the 
simulations of the proposed CRE method, the ratio of 
transmission to reception energy consumption was not 
significantly sensitive to the exact ratio. For instance, the 
ratio was changed to 1.5:1, and it was found that the net 
effect on results was almost identical. The event triggering 
times for interests, exploratory data, reinforcements and 
reinforced data were 5 s, 10 s, 15 s and 1s respectively.  
A. Residual Energy Variance  
As we can see from Fig. 1, the proposed method has a 
lower variance (38%, 30%) in residual energy than that of 
the basic DD and load balanced DD respectively. By 
reinforcing paths based on high residual energy, instead of 
least-delay, and updating residual energy values at a higher 
opportunistic rate we can improve the energy variance of the 
basic directed diffusion, as shown by the result of “Load 
balanced DD with ED & RD energy-piggyback”. However, 
by using the multipath DD scheme with proposed CRE based 
route construction we can see a significant improvement in 
terms of energy variance as well as network lifetime. This is 
because of the fact that the proposed method “Multipath DD 
with CRE piggyback” not only has the load-balancing 
capability which is implemented in a similar way to “Load 
balanced DD with ED & RD energy-piggyback” scheme but 
it also has source selective routing in which source tries to 
identify the high-quality path every time it send reinforced 
data. By switching traffic across different paths which are 
discovered every reinforcement phase, the network achieves 
more load-balancing than the previous improvement along 
with a measure to minimize node failures.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Variance of residual energy vs. average number of reinforced 
data events generated within the network (for 600 nodes). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Residual energy and mean residual energy presentation of each 
node for the basic directed diffusion (four phases of network life). 
 
Figure 3.  Residual energy and mean residual energy presentation of each 
node for the Multipath DD with CRE-piggyback (four phases of network 
life). 
B. Load Balancing 
In four phases of network life, the network’s residual 
energy distribution for each node is plotted (before any one 
node died) for both cases of DD and the proposed multipath 
DD. Figures 1 and 2 compares the two schemes for 600 
nodes. By comparing Fig. 2d (basic DD) with Fig. 3d 
(proposed method), it is clear that the proposed method was 
able to live longer by constructing quality paths using CRE, 
judiciously choosing nodes based on their residual energy 
and by gracefully lowering the average variance of residual 
energy near the “death floor” much better than basic DD.  
 
C. Network Lifetime  
In Fig. 4, we plot node density versus the number of 
reinforced data that were passed before any one node in the 
network died (Ri = 0). It is clear from the figure that the 
proposed method delivers more RD packets than the basic 
directed diffusion. The proposed method has a longer 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

network lifetime (85 %, 32%) than the basic directed 
diffusion and load-balanced directed diffusion respectively.   
 
 
Figure 4.  Average number of reinforced data generated within the 
network vs. number of nodes. 
D. Operation  
Fig. 5 illustrates the operation of the two main stages 
(reinforcement and reinforced data propagation) of the CRE 
method of constructing multiple paths. The Sink node 
reinforces two nodes with highest residual energy (node X 
and node Y), which, in turn, will reinforce those upstream 
nodes having the highest residual energy for any one 
reinforcement round. Each node along the paths thus formed 
includes its residual energy when reinforcing its upstream 
neighbor, and, thus, the cumulative residual energy readings 
accumulate along the paths. Eventually, the RMPs propagate 
through two paths and find the Source node. The source node 
(node Z) will determine the path with the highest cumulative 
residual energy (CRE1=24800 J), and will select that path 
for transmitting reinforced data for that reinforcement round. 
Reinforced data is sent along the selected path till the new 
reinforcement phase and the CRE value in the source is 
dynamically updated using (2). 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Illustration of the proposed CRE method. The Reinforcement 
and Reinforced Data propagation stages of the algorithms are shown. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented an energy efficient method of load 
balancing and fault tolerance for wireless sensor networks. 
The proposed method constructs multiple paths using 
cumulative residual energy of the nodes along the path. The 
proposed method was added to and tested on the Load-
balanced Directed Diffusion algorithm [3] to compare its 
performance. The simulation, analysis, and comparison with 
load-balanced Directed Diffusion and basic Directed 
Diffusion show that the proposed method has a lower 
variance in residual energy and a longer lifetime than both. 
The proposed method shows 30% improvement in residual 
energy at the time of network death and an average 
improvement of 32% in extending the lifetime of the 
network as compared with load-balanced Directed Diffusion. 
As compared with Directed Diffusion, the proposed method 
shows 38% improvement in residual energy at the time of 
network death and 85% improvement in extending the 
lifetime of the network.  
Our future work includes evaluating multiple sinks and 
sources to verify its scalability. Also, by simulating the 
network with patterned failures we can testify its multipath 
advantage of recovery from bad paths. 
A limitation (challenge) of the proposed CRE algorithm 
is that by considering only residual energy in the path 
establishment, this increased the latency and delay. The 
challenge here lies in optimizing the algorithm, so that it can 
balance between the latency and residual energy to construct 
optimized paths. Also, the simulation results (Fig. 3d) show 
that, although the network achieves a good load-balancing; 
there are still some nodes with high residual energy left, 
when the network dies. The challenge here is to utilize these 
nodes and improve load-balancing. Also, work is in progress 
to implement repair-mechanism to recover from disruptions 
caused by a node that goes down. 
 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] J. Yick, B. Mukherjee, and D. Ghosal, “Wireless Sensor 
Network Survey”. Comput. Netw. , 52, pp. 2292–2330, 2008. 
[2] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, J. Heidemann, 
and F. Silva, “ Directed diffusion for wireless sensor 
networking,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 
11, no. 1, pp. 2-16, Feb. 2003. 
[3] S. Wijedasa, S.  Rizvi, and K. Ferens, “Load balancing 
algorithms for wireless sensor networks”, Proc. The 2012 
International Conference on Wireless Networks (ICWN'12), 
Las Vegas, Nevada, USA , pp. 61-67, 2012. 
[4] N. F. Maxemchuk, “Dispersity routing in high speed 
networks”, Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, 25(6), 
pp. 645-661, 1993. 
[5] N. F. Maxemchuk, “Dispersity routing on ATM networks”, 
IEEE INFOCOM’93, vol.1, pp.347-57, San Francisco, CA, 
Mar 1993. 
[6] A. N. Eghbali and M. Dehgan, “Load-balancing using multi-
path directed diffusion in wireless sensor networks”, Proc. of 
3rd international conference on mobile ad-hoc and sensor 
networks, pp. 44-55, 2007. 
[7] S. Li, R. K. Neelisetti, C. Liu, and A. Lim, “Efficient multi-
path protocol for wireless sensor networks”, Int. Jr. of 
Wireless and Mobile Networks, vol. 2, No.1, pp. 110-130 , 
Feb. 2010.  
[8] D. Ganesan, R. Govindan, S. Shenker, and D. Estrin, “Highly 
resilient energy efficient multipath routing in wireless sensor 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

networks”, ACM mobile comput. and commun. Review, 5(4), 
pp. 11-25, Oct. 2001. 
[9] A. Tsirigos and Z. J. Haas, “Multipath routing in the presence 
of frequent topological changes”, IEEE Communication 
Magazine, 39(11),pp. 132-138, November 2001. 
[10] Z. Ye, S. V. Krishnamurthy, and S. K. Tripathi, “A 
framework for reliable routing in mobile ad hoc networks”, 
IEEE INFOCOM 2003, Sanfrancisco CA,vol. 1, pp. 270-280, 
Mar 2003. 
[11] S. K. Das and A. Mukherjee, et al, “An adaptive framework 
for QoS routing through multiple paths in ad hoc wireless 
networks”, J. Parallel Distributed Computing, 63(2003), pp. 
141-153, 2003. 
[12] W. Lou, W. Liu, and Y. Fang, “SPREAD: Enhancing data 
confidentiality in mobile ad hoc networks”, IEEE INFOCOM 
2004, Hong Kong, China, vol. 4, pp. 2404-2413, March 2004.  
[13] W. Lou, Y. Zhang, W. Liu, and Y. Fang, “A multipath 
protocol for secure and reliable data collection in wireless 
sensor networks”, technical report, ECE department, 
Worcester Polytechnic Institute, June 2004. 
[14] Y. Chen and Q. Zhao, “On the lifetime of wireless sensor 
networks,” IEEE Commun. Lett. , vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 976–978, 
Nov. 2005. 
[15] E. Niewiadomska-Szynkiewicz, P.  Kwaśniewski, and I. 
Windyga, “Comparative study of Wireless Sensor Networks 
energy- efficient topologies and power save protocols”, 
Journal of Communications and Information Technology, vol. 
3, pp. 68- 75, 2009. 
 
 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

