Distance-Adaptive Routing and Spectrum Assignment of Deadline-Driven Requests in 
Reconfigurable Elastic Optical Networks 
Jared Morell and Gokhan Sahin 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department 
Miami University 
Oxford, OH, U.S.A. 
e-mail: morellja@muohio.edu, sahing@muohio.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Spectrum-sliced elastic optical networks, enabled by 
technological advances such as CO-OFDM, bandwidth-variable 
transponders, bandwidth-variable optical cross-connects, and 
optical multi-level modulation, provide a means to divide the 
spectrum on a finer granularity than WDM and to slice-off just 
the adequate amount for each connection. It is envisioned that 
these networks will carry various types of traffic with different 
service level guarantees, including deadline-driven requests 
(DDRs) that require the data to be transferred by a given 
deadline without imposing a specific constant bandwidth 
requirement.  As a result, DDRs can be provisioned with variable 
transmission rates between their arrival times and deadlines. We 
consider the DDR-provisioning problem in a reconfigurable 
elastic 
optical 
network 
that 
supports 
such 
bandwidth 
readjustments through minimal reconfiguration in the network, 
and develop a distance-adaptive routing, spectrum assignment, 
and reconfiguration algorithm for this purpose. Our results show 
major 
improvement 
in 
performance 
due 
to 
bandwidth 
reallocation of DDRs in elastic networks over a range of 
reconfiguration delay parameters.   
Keywords - deadline-driven traffic; elastic optical network; 
optical OFDM; routing modulation level and spectrum assignment; 
network reconfiguration. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
In high capacity optical transport networks, wavelength 
division multiplexing (WDM) has allowed for the spectrum 
division of channels into wavelengths of smaller bandwidth on 
a fixed-grid. Its rigidity and coarse granularity pose drawbacks, 
however, for clients and service providers. These wavelength-
routed networks require full allocation of a wavelength even 
when the transmission across the channel is not sufficient to fill 
the wavelength’s capacity. Similarly, if a connection needs 
more than a wavelength’s worth of spectrum, it must occupy at 
least another wavelength to be accepted. This results in poor 
spectrum utilization.  
Over the past few years, a substantial amount of effort has 
been put forth in designing and developing elastic optical 
networks based on spectrum slicing [1]. This network type has 
become known as spectrum-sliced elastic optical path network, 
or SLICE. Spectrum slicing is a means to divide the spectrum 
on smaller levels and “slice-off” just the amount necessary for 
an end-to-end connection request.  Technological advances 
such as the bandwidth-variable (BV) optical cross-connect 
(OXC), BV transponder, optical multilevel modulation, and 
optical orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) 
have enabled an optical fiber to be transformed into a much 
more manageable and effective data transport [1], [2]. Fig. 1 
shows the spectrum usage difference in WDM and OFDM 
networks. 
In optical OFDM networks, data is taken and spread over 
the necessary number of overlapping, low data rate subcarriers. 
The subcarriers are able to overlap within a connection and be 
fully recovered at the receiver due to their orthogonal nature. 
Being able to pack the subcarriers into a much smaller area 
than would be possible with WDM enhances the spectrum 
utilization greatly [3]. 
There are a number of different traffic types that optical 
networks support, e.g., best-effort and minimum bandwidth 
that require various quality-of-service guarantees. An emerging 
class of applications that need on-demand and flexible 
bandwidth allocation are deadline-driven applications [4]. As 
the name suggests, these are applications that require data be 
transferred by a given deadline. Because these applications do 
not require a strict, specified bandwidth, variable transmission 
rates can be used to accommodate the requests. Traffic such as 
this arises in such cases as eScience and grid-computing [5]. 
Because these fields utilize a distributed network of computers 
to perform a task, various parts are needed by certain times for 
everything to run smoothly. They therefore could benefit from 
deadline-aware service. Other systems that do not need 
immediate updates could make use of a deadline-driven service 
as well.  
In this paper, we address the issue of routing, modulating, 
and dynamically allocating spectrum to deadline-driven 
requests (DDR) in reconfigurable elastic optical networks. The 
capability of elastic optical networks to dynamically adjust the 
spectrum allocated to connections makes them a suitable 
candidate for carrying DDRs due to their flexible bandwidth 
requirement.  Although various aspects of routing and spectrum  
  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Comparing the spectrum of a WDM network with its fixed grid and 
that of an OFDM network with overlapping subcarriers. 
 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

assignment in elastic optical networks have been considered in 
recent work (see for instance [1-3, 6-8, 10]), we are not aware 
of prior research that addresses deadline-driven traffic in these 
networks. The problem that we consider is also different from 
earlier DDR work in WDM networks [4] due to the 
fundamental architectural differences between WDM-based  
and elastic optical networks.  We explicitly consider various 
aspects of the problem that are specific to elastic optical 
networks, such as the need to allocate a contiguous band of 
subcarriers to a connection; the ability to choose a distance-
adaptive modulation format for each sub-carrier, and the delay 
associated with reconfiguring the BV transponders and the BV 
OXCs in order to adjust the rates of an existing connection.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
formally presents the problem we are concerned with and the 
model we will be using. In Section III, we describe the method 
by which we accomplish the issue. Section IV delivers the 
results of our simulation. Finally, Section V concludes the 
paper and notes possible future work. 
II. PROBLEM DEFINITION AND MODEL 
Establishing a connection in an OFDM-based network is 
substantially different from that in WDM networks. What was 
a wavelength continuity concern between links in a WDM 
network becomes an issue of subcarrier continuity in an OFDM 
network. In addition, in order to make use of the orthogonality 
of the subcarriers and maintain other architecturally desirable 
characteristics, they should be assigned in a contiguous manner 
within the link. Subcarriers from different connections should 
never overlap on a link. Fig. 2(a) illustrates this.  
Each OFDM subcarrier can be modulated using, e.g., 
binary phase-shift keying (BPSK, 1 bit per symbol), quadrature 
phase-shift keying (QPSK, 2 bits per symbol), quadrature 
amplitude modulation  (8QAM, 3 bits per symbol), and so on, 
to determine the data rate that each subcarrier can deliver. It is 
desirable to select the highest modulation level while still 
maintaining acceptable quality of transmission.  
Additionally, 
because 
DDRs 
are 
allowed 
flexible 
bandwidth, spectrum allocation is not restricted to its 
availability at the time of arrival. Instead, reallocation may 
occur between the time of arrival and the deadline. Decreasing 
the bandwidth of an ongoing connection to accommodate an 
incoming request was first proposed in [4] for use in WDM 
networks. In this paper we will expand upon their ‘Changing-
Rates’ method and apply it to an elastic network model. In our 
model, transmission of data can resume only after a delay 
following the bandwidth adjustment of an existing connection 
in order to accommodate the necessary reconfigurations, 
whereas an instantaneous bandwidth adjustment was assumed 
in [4]. 
The model that we are using for the elastic spectrum is a 
common one used for optical OFDM networks [2], [6], [7], [8]. 
Rather than looking at the spectrum as an open resource where 
subcarriers can be placed at any frequency, it can be thought of 
as divided into frequency slots, of width, F GHz, able to 
transmit at capacity  
 
 
T = MC,  
(1) 
 
where T is in Gbps, M is the modulation multiplier, equal to 1 
for BPSK modulation, 2 for QPSK modulation, etc., and C is 
the base capacity of a subcarrier using BPSK modulation (in 
Gbps). Fig. 2 (b) shows how the frequency slots relate to the 
actual overlapping subcarriers on the spectrum. To avoid  
interference, a guardband, G, of a certain number of frequency 
slots is required between connections. 
Once a request arrives at the network, we are tasked with 
finding a path from its source to destination node with at least 
enough contiguous subcarriers to transfer its total file size by 
the deadline. If such a path is not immediately available, we 
attempt to perform a reallocation algorithm which would adjust 
the bandwidth of the smallest number of ongoing connections 
to make room for the incoming request. The next section 
describes the algorithm by which this is done. 
III. PROVISIONING DEADLINE-DRIVEN REQUESTS IN 
RECONFIGURABLE ELASTIC OPTICAL NETWORKS 
A request, R, arrives at the network and is defined by the 
following parameters 
 
 
R = (σ, δ, S, D),  
(2) 
 
where σ is the source node, δ is the destination node, S is the 
size of the file to be transferred (Gb), and D is the deadline of 
the request. Requests arrive uniformly across the network with 
arrival rate, λ requests per second. Upon arrival, the K shortest 
paths are computed for the request, without regards to spectrum 
availability at the time. We then iterate over the K shortest 
paths, searching for a void of frequency slots. To do so, we 
must first characterize each link in the network by a subcarrier 
availability vector, of size maxSub, equal to the number of 
subcarriers on a link [2].  
 
 
ul = [uli] = (ul1, ul2, …, ulmaxSub).  
(3) 
 
The variable l designates the particular link. The value of each 
uli is equal to 1 if that subcarrier is available on that link, and 0 
if it is not. It is possible to compute the path, p, subcarrier 
availability vector, Up, by using the Boolean AND operation 
over all l ϵ p. This is what is used to first search for a sequence 
of unoccupied subcarriers on each path. Applying the 
subcarrier contiguity constraint, we search for the smallest 
spectrum void (free sequence of frequency slots) that can 
occupy the incoming request. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Relationship between the overlapping subcarriers (a) of several 
connections and an equivalent frequency slot model (b).  
 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

To figure out how many frequency slots are necessary, we 
must also determine the highest modulation level that is 
acceptable to apply to each subcarrier. It is a common 
simplifying assumption for such studies that the sole quality of 
transmission factor is the distance traversed [2]. For distances 
up to 6000 km, BPSK modulation can be used. For every 
halving of the transmission distance, the signal quality 
improves enough to increase the modulation level by 1 bit per 
symbol [9]. Thus, each path has its own Mp modulation level 
multiplier, and as a result, its own frequency slot transmission 
capacity, Tp, and necessary number of subcarriers used to 
transmit data,  
 
 
Xp_min = ceil[ S / ( (D – A)Tp ) ], 
(4) 
 
where A is the arrival time of the request. However, not only is 
it necessary to find Xp_min, but there must be a guardband 
between neighboring connections. Therefore, the total 
minimum number of frequency slots required by incoming 
request, R, is  
 
 
Yp_min  = Xp_min + G.  
(5) 
 
Iterating from the shortest to the longest of the K paths, we 
search for the smallest void, minVoid, of frequency slots in Up 
that is greater than or equal to Yp_min. If found on p, we are able 
to accommodate the incoming request. We then set the total 
frequency slots occupied by this request, YR = minVoid, note its 
starting index, compute its departure time, 
 
 
depR = S / ( (YR – G)Tp ) + t,  
(6) 
 
with t being the current time in the system, update the ul 
vectors, and add the connection to the list of those currently in 
the network. If no void large enough was found on any path, 
we go to the reallocation phase. 
In reallocation, we attempt to shrink the bandwidth of 
ongoing connections in order to accommodate the incoming 
request, while still being able to complete data transfer by their 
deadlines. We attempt reallocation with the shortest path first, 
and then move to each successive path from there. While 
attempting reallocation, we are always looking for a section of 
frequency slots that will affect the smallest number of ongoing 
connections.  
For path, p, we first determine a new Xp_min and Yp_min. 
These are determined by including a time penalty in the 
calculation in Equation 4, as follows.  
 
 
Xp_min = ceil[ S / ( (D – A –  tPen)Tp ) ], 
(7) 
 
where tPen is a constant penalty time to account for 
reconfiguration. Yp_min is computed in the same way as in 
Equation 5. We then locate any connections that interfere on at 
least one link of the incoming request’s path, and add them to a 
list, List. These are the connections that will be checked for 
reallocation at each step in the process. 
We iterate over Up, starting from index 0, up to maxSub – 1, 
examining each frequency slot, s, and the possibility of 
reallocating connections around it. Void sizes are kept track of 
in the same manner as the original search for free frequency 
slots. If the frequency slot we are examining is: 
A. The start of a new void (Ups = 1 and Ups-1 = 0) 
Simply set the void counter, void, to 1. 
B. Still in the void (Ups = 1 and Ups-1 = 1) 
Increase void. 
If s = maxSub – 1, we iterate over List, checking what 
connections lie in the range of (s – Yp_min, s). Those that do 
would need to be reallocated by enough subcarriers so that 
they no longer are in that range. If each connection in List is 
either able to be reallocated or does not fall in that range of 
subcarriers, we have arrived at a possible reallocation scenario 
and make note of the connections that need adjusted and by 
how much. 
C. Occupied (Ups = 0) 
If: 
1) This is the first frequency slot (s = 0) 
Perform a similar attempt to reallocate as in (B.), but 
check in the range, [0, Yp_min). 
2) This is the end of a void (Ups-1 = 1) 
Iterate over a block of frequency slots encompassing 
the void in an attempt to reallocate connections within that 
block. The block is of size Yp_min, and is initially placed 
with its starting index at s – Yp_min, and its last index at s – 
1. Within that block, connections are attempted to be 
reallocated in a similar means as above. Then the block is 
moved forward one frequency slot and the process starts 
over. This continues until the block’s last index reaches s + 
Yp_min – void.  
3) Otherwise 
Attempt to reallocate connections as done in (B.), but in 
the range, [s, s + Yp_min). 
 
Once the frequency slot iteration has completed, we check 
if any possible connection reallocations were found. If they 
were, the section with the minimum number of connections 
being affected was selected. From there, those connections 
would be reduced and their parameters changed as follows,  
 
 
SR = SR – (YR – G)Tp (t – AR), 
 (8) 
 
 
AR = AR + tPen, 
(9) 
 
 
YR = YR – red, 
(10) 
 
 
depR = S / ( (YR – G)Tp ) + AR, 
(11) 
 
where red is the amount by which that connection needs 
reduced. SR now becomes the file size left to transfer, and AR 
becomes the time at which connection resumes. Also, if any 
connections were reduced from their front, their initial indices 
would need shifted as well. The ul vectors are updated as well, 
indicating free slots where the connections were reduced. 
Now the incoming request can be added to the network 
where other connections have made space available. Its 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

selected path and starting index are noted, departure time set, 
as in Equation 11, and YR set to Yp_min. The ul vectors are once 
again adjusted to account for the incoming connection. 
If it is not possible to reallocate connections on any path, in 
order to make room for the incoming connection, the request 
is blocked.  
IV. RESULTS 
Two different networks were used for this simulation. They 
were the US NSFNET topology, consisting of 14 nodes and 21 
links, and the pan-European COST 266 network, made up of 
28 nodes and 41 links [10]. Using F = 5 GHz, C = 2.5 Gbps, G 
= 2, tPen = 0.05 s, maxSub = 600, we evaluated the 
performance of our algorithm based on the fraction of blocked 
requests, while varying λ, D and S. On each simulation run, we 
held a different value of λ constant for use on all nodes in the 
network and uniformly distributed the values of D and S 
between set limits. Fig. 3 shows the algorithm’s performance 
on both optical networks when compared to the scenario when 
no reallocation is considered. Here, the ranges of D and S are   
3 – 100 s and 30 – 500 GB, respectively. 
We also examined the case of having similar file sizes, but 
tighter deadlines, in the range of 2 – 5 s. This can be seen in 
Fig. 4.  
In both cases, it is shown that the reallocation algorithm 
allows the network to service a far greater percentage of 
connection requests than if no reallocation were considered. 
There is a 20 – 35% difference in blocking probability between 
using and not using reallocation, over the simulated arrival 
rates for the relaxed deadline scenario and a 16 – 31% 
difference for the tight deadline case. This clearly demonstrates 
better spectrum utilization, as more connections can be placed 
into equivalent spectrum space.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Comparing the routing and spectrum assignment algorithm with 
and without the reallocation phase 
 
Figure 4.  Comparing the routing and spectrum assignment algorithm for 
tight deadlines with and without the reallocation phase 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have developed an algorithm that allows a 
reconfigurable elastic optical network to accommodate 
deadline-driven requests with possibility of changing data 
rates. The method for reallocation allows the network to 
reconfigure ongoing connections in order to make room for a 
new request. In the future, it would be worth looking into 
reallocating and/or shifting connections at times other than 
request arrivals. Also, the means by which a void is chosen 
could be altered and different network and traffic scenarios 
could be analyzed. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Kozicki, H. Takara, Y. Tsukishima, T. Yoshimatsu, K. 
Yonenaga, and M. Jinno, “Experimental demonstration of 
spectrum-sliced elastic optical path network (SLICE),” Optics 
Express, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 22105-22118, October 2010. 
[2] K. Christodoulopoulos, I. Tomkos, and E. A. Varvarigos, 
“Elastic bandwidth allocation in flexible OFDM-based optical 
networks,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 
1354-1366, May 2011. 
[3] J. L. Vizcaino, Y. Ye, and I. T. Monroy, “Energy efficiency 
analysis for flexible-grid OFDM-based optical networks,” 
Computer Networks, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 2400-2419, July 2012. 
[4] D. Andrei, M. Tornatore, M. Batayneh, C. U. Martel, and B. 
Mukherjee, “Provisioning of deadline-driven requests with 
flexible transmission rates in WDM mesh networks,” 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 353-
365, April 2010. 
[5] I. Foster, M. Fidler, A. Roy, V. Sander, and L. Winkler, “End-
to-end quality of service for high-end applications,” Computer 
Communications, vol. 27, no. 14, pp. 1375-1388, September 
2004. 
[6] M. Jinno et al, “Distance-adaptive spectrum resource allocation 
in spectrum-sliced elastic optical path network,” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 138-145, August 
2010. 
[7] G. Zhang, M. De Leenheer, and B. Mukherjee, “Optical 
grooming in OFDM-based elastic optical networks,” Proc. 
OFC/NFOEC, Paper OTh1A, March 2012. 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[8] T. Takagi et al, “Dynamic routing and frequency slot assignment 
for elastic optical path networks that adopt distance adaptive 
modulation,” Proc. OFC/NFOEC, Paper OTuI, March 2011. 
[9] A. Bocoi, M. Schuster, F. Rambach, M. Kiese, C. Bunge, and B. 
Spinnler, “Reach-dependent capacity in optical networks 
enabled by OFDM,” Proc. OFC/NFOEC, Paper OMQ4, March 
2009. 
[10] A. Betker et al, “Reference transport network scenarios,” 
MultiTeraNet Report, July 2003, retrieved: September, 2012, 
http://wall.ikr.uni-stuttgart.de/en/Content/Publications/Archive/ 
Ko_ITGPhotNetze04_36322.pdf. 
 
 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

