Dust Monitoring Systems 
 
Mokhloss I. Khadem, Valentin Sgarciu 
Faculty of Automatic Control and Computer Science 
“Politehnica” University of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
sml_ka@yahoo.com, vsgarciu@aii.pub.ro  
 
 
Abstract— In order to monitor dust in a city or on a large plant, 
we have designed a distributed network of nodes, which consists 
of smart sensors that detect dust. Such a network design must be 
scalable, to allow additional nodes to be added at any time. Each 
node should operate as a Plug-and-Play device, in order to 
provide minimal downtime for the network. With the help of 
microcontrollers embedded in each node it is possible for each 
sensor to upload measurement results directly to a server within 
the network. In order to keep a high compatibility of the sensor 
network and the associated network protocol requirements, an 
IEEE 1451 standard should be used, to provide a generic 
interface between a sensor and the outer network, regardless the 
network protocols. We have obtained new practical results, 
which we show as comparison between different dust 
measurement methods. 
Keywords- dust monitoring system; smart sensor; wireless 
network sensors 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Dust measurement has considerable significance and 
applications in modern life, depending on each field of 
application. Dust has impact on the environment, climate 
control, aviation, and health. We need to monitor the presence 
of dust in these fields and trigger an alarm system based on the 
specific levels of dust, in order to prevent accidents or 
malfunctions. Dust from outer space has a big effect on the 
climate of the planet. Ambient radiation heats dust and re-emits 
radiation into the microwave band, which may distort the 
cosmic microwave background power spectrum. In industrial 
applications 
for 
various 
plants 
and 
factories, 
where 
combustible dust or dust containing goods are produced, 
processed or stored, dust explosions may be expected if dust is 
not put under control. 
   To monitor dust in a city in particular or in any area in 
general, we have designed a distributed network of nodes, 
which consists of smart sensors that detect dust. Such a 
network design has to be scalable to allow additional nodes to 
be included at any time. Each node should operate as a Plug-
and-Play device used to provide minimal downtime for the 
network. Through microcontrollers embedded in each node, 
each sensor can upload measurement results directly to a server 
within the network.  In order to keep high compatibility 
between the sensor network and the associated network 
protocol requirements, an IEEE 1451 family of standards [4] 
should be used to provide a generic interface between a sensor 
and the outer network, regardless of the network protocols.  
By networking and deploying an array of sensors, we 
obtain several benefits such as area coverage and connectivity. 
A distributed network incorporating sparse network properties 
will enable the sensor network to span a greater geographical 
area without adverse impact on the overall network cost. We 
will use wireless sensor networks and connect them together at 
sink nodes. The clustering of networks enables each individual 
network to focus on specific areas and shares only relevant 
information with other networks, enhancing the overall 
knowledge base through distributed sensing and information 
processing. 
All the nodes shall transmit information through the 
network to the main server to process and record into a 
database the monitoring information. Based on the configured 
dust acceptance levels on the server, an alarm can be triggered 
from the server and sent back through the network to the 
corresponding devices. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
presents the state of the art in dust measurement, Section 3 
describes the architecture of the system we propose, Section 4 
analyses some experimental results, and Section 5 draws the 
conclusions of this work.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART IN DUST MEASUREMENT 
Several measurement principles for dust detection are used, 
among which we can mention: the Gravimetric measurement 
[1], Triboelectric measurement [2] and Optical measurement 
[10]. Each of these enumerated measurement principles is 
suitable for a specific application based on the intensity of 
dust pollution, water vapor proportion and dimensions of the 
measurement zones [1, 2]. 
The gravimetric principle describes a set of methods in 
analytical chemistry for the quantitative determination of an 
analysis based on the mass of a solid. A simple example is the 
measurement of solids suspended in a water sample: A known 
volume of water is filtered, and the collected solids are 
weighed [2, 9]. 
The triboelectric effect (also known as triboelectric 
charging) is a type of contact electrification in which certain 
materials become electrically charged after they come into 
contact with another different material and are then separated 
(such as through rubbing). The polarity and strength of the 
charges produced differ according to the materials, surface 
roughness, temperature, strain, and other properties. We can 
use this effect to measure the quantity of dust [2, 9]. 
68
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

The optical measurement of dust implies measuring the 
light transmission using optoelectronic techniques. The 
measuring principle is based on the attenuation of the intensity 
of a light beam, penetrating a cloud with solid particles, by 
absorption and dispersion. The ratio between the resulting and 
the initial intensity is defined as transmission [1, 8, 9].  
There are several applications implying the measurement of 
dust in liquids, and the most suitable method to be used is the 
gravimetric principle. The triboelectric dust measurement 
devices can be used for bag, ceramic and cartridge filters or 
cyclones where indicative monitoring is required. Dust 
detectors using the optical measurement principle are usually 
used for continuous measurement of medium and high dust 
concentration on industrial plants as well as for monitoring 
limited values, as required by the applicable directives and 
regulations. The optical principle is also used to measure the 
concentration of dust in saturated gas downstream of 
desulfurization plants, downstream of wet scrubbing plants 
and wet exhaust gas. This last method of dust measurement is 
used in the development of the wireless monitoring system 
described in this paper. Figure 3 shows the advantage of using 
this system compliant sensors and devices to communicate 
wirelessly, eliminating the monetary and time costs of 
installing cables to acquisition points. This document explains 
not only how to setup system, but also how to compare the 
dust sensor according application and dust type. Also the user 
of this system can make configuration threshold according to 
the specific application for which the dust detection sensor 
network is used. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
To measure and monitor the dust level in a city or on a 
plant, we propose the distribution of several nodes, from N1 to 
Nn. Each node is a smart sensor operating in a Plug-and-Play 
mode and each node communicates to a server, over a wireless 
network by using the IEEE 1451.5-802.11 standard [4]. 
 
Figure 1. Dust Smart Sensor. 
This standard will enable 1451 compliant sensors and 
devices to communicate wirelessly, eliminating the monetary 
and time costs of installing cables to acquisition points. IEEE 
is currently working on three different standards, 802.11, 
Bluetooth and Zigbee [4]. 
The server acquires the monitoring information from the 
distributed network of smart sensors and processes this data 
via specialized software. Based on the user configured 
thresholds, the server will either take no action, but to record 
the data for statistic purposes, or send a signal to other devices 
for specific tasks, such as air trap shutdown or activating air 
recirculation systems, in case the configured thresholds have 
been surpassed to a critical level. This depends on the specific 
application for which the dust detection sensor network is 
used.  
Each node connects with a smart sensor, namely: a dust 
detection device, transducer interface model (TIM) and 
Network Capable Application processor (NCAP) as shown in 
Figure 1.  
A TIM (Transducer Interface Module) is a module that 
contains the interface, signal conditioning, Analog-to-Digital 
and/or Digital-to-Analog conversion and in many cases, it also 
contains the transducer. A TIM can range in complexity from 
a single sensor or actuator to a module containing many 
transducers including both sensors and actuators. 
An NCAP is the hardware and software that provides the 
gateway function between the TIMs and the user network or 
host processor (the transducer channel). The IEEE 1451 
standard defines the communications interface between an 
NCAP or host processor and one or more TIMs. An NCAP or 
a host processor controls a TIM by means of a dedicated 
digital interface medium. The NCAP mediates between the 
TIM and a higher-level digital network. The NCAP may also 
provide local intelligence.   
Figure 2 shows the implementation of a Wireless Sensor 
Network (WSN) based on IEEE 1451.0 and 1451.5-802.11, 
using IEEE 1451.2 sensors. This WSN consists of one NCAP 
node and one WTIM node. An IEEE 1451.2 sensor is 
connected to the WTIM via a serial port.  
 
 
Figure 2. WSN based on IEEE 1451.0 and 1451.5-802.11. 
The NCAP can communicate wirelessly with WTIM 
through IEEE 1451.0 and 1451.5 protocols using the client-
server and publisher-subscriber communication models. The 
client-server 
and 
publisher-subscriber 
communications 
between the two nodes can be implemented using 
69
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) 
and Transmission Control Protocol / User Datagram Protocol 
(TCP/UDP), respectively. 
We can integrate a dust smart sensor node into a network 
of smart sensors, as shown in Figure 3, from Node 1 to Node 
N, according to the application requirements and the number 
of sensors needed.  
The Server monitoring software can be implemented with 
the Java programming language, for full flexibility and 
compatibility.  
By using Java, we will also have the advantage of 
portability, having standardized libraries that provide a generic 
way to access host-specific features such as threading, 
network access and automatic memory management. 
 
  
Figure 3. Dust monitoring network. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Each 
node 
was 
implemented 
using 
a 
Sharp 
GP2Y1010AU0F dust sensor that is based on the optical 
principle [8].  The sensor was tied to a Sun SPOT (Sun Small 
Programmable Object Technology) device, which is an open 
source wireless sensor network (WSN) mote developed by Sun 
Microsystems. The device is built upon the IEEE 802.15.4 
standard and on the Squawk Java Virtual machine [7]. This 
allowed us to use the Java programming language to control 
the data acquisition from the Sharp sensor. The connection 
from the Sun Spot to the server was assured by a standard 
wireless connection. 
The following lines of code were used to acquire data from 
the Sharp dust sensor: 
“byte[] buffer = new byte[64];  
try {  
demoBoard.readUART(buffer, 
0, 
buffer.length); 
returnString 
= 
returnString +  
new String(buffer, "US-ASCII").trim();  
dustLevel 
= 
Integer.parseInt(returnString);  
} 
The first line of code in the try clock reads the serial port of 
the dust sensor and returns the value as an array of bytes. .  
The results are sent to the server through the following 
simple lines of code: 
 “System.out.print(dustLevel); 
System.out.println(", 
" 
+String.valueOf(dustLevel)); 
leds.getLED(0).setOff();” 
The experimental results were obtained by using several 
types of dust: sand dust with high granularity, plaster dust and 
smoking ash. Another dust detector has been used as a 
reference, based on the gravimetric principle “D-RC80 
Automatic 
sampling 
device 
for 
Gravimetric 
Dust 
measurements”, used as reference measuring system. The 
output of the sensor is sent through the Sun Spot to the server, 
where we used the LiveGraph program to plot the results. 
During the experimental phase, modern test methods were 
taken in to account, such as they are described in the dedicated 
literature [5, 6]. 
For the smoking ash, we obtained a fluctuation in the 
results, as shown in Figure 4, but with a solid average, which 
was within the values obtained by using the dust detector with 
gravimetric principle.  
 
Figure 4. Live Graph plot of smoking ash measurement. 
TABLE I.  
MEAN EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Type of dust 
Mean measurement 
with our setup 
Gravimetric 
measurement 
Sand 
3.2 mg/s 
3.6 mg/s 
Plaster 
2.4 mg/s 
4 mg/s 
Smoking Ash 
1.23 mg/s 
1 mg/s 
 
The experimental results depicted in Table 1 are 
encouraging 
regarding 
the 
accuracy 
of 
the 
optical 
measurement, compared to the ones made with a gravimetric 
device. The mean values were calculated based on 20 
measurements.  
We also conducted tests with two sensors sending data 
simultaneously to the server and we obtained satisfactory 
70
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

results. The server was configured with a service, programmed 
in Java, which allowed multi threaded communication. Our 
tests were made only at a distance of maximum 30 meters, 
between the node and the server, due to the wireless 
technology limitations, but this could be easily improved for 
higher distances by using a signal repeater. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
By using a smart sensor network we can monitor and 
measure the dust in any environment: urban or industrial. The 
area coverage of a dust monitoring network can be expanded 
depending on the needs, without any adverse impact to the 
overall network cost. 
Each dust sensing device can focus on a specific area and 
by managed as a single entity or in turn it can be used as only 
one point of presence in an area, contributing to the overall 
accuracy of the measurement. The more nodes we will use for 
a dust monitoring network, the greater the accuracy of the 
gathered information will be.  
The human interaction will be greatly reduced by using 
such a network. Also, compared to human observation, the 
introduction of a smart sensor network is more flexible when it 
comes to dangerous and hostile environments where humans 
can’t penetrate, allowing access to information previously 
unavailable from such close proximity.  
Sensor scheduling can be obtained by enabling the sensor 
nodes to modify communication requirements in response to 
network conditions and events detected. 
The optical sensor that we used can easily become a node 
in a multi node network, and connect to a server over a wireless 
network. 
From the experience of already existing devices, we can 
expect that in the coming decade a large number of monitoring 
systems for all physical phenomena will emerge, with great 
application in the human health sector, industrial sector and the 
environment. 
The 
monitoring 
system 
gives 
excellent 
opportunities to design and configure many types of sensors to 
monitor and control all physical phenomena for many 
applications based on people demands. Like example use 
similar systems to compare the accuracy and application by use 
tripoelectric device and compare with optical sensor and 
gravimetric sensor. Due to the large dust in Iraq, there is an 
intention to set up a system for monitoring the dust in Baghdad 
and I am now on the agreement with the relevant authorities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Jacob Fraden,  “Handbook of modern sensors physics , designs and 
applications”, Springer, Third edition, 2004. 
[2] Grard C.M. Meijer, “Smart sensor systems”, Delf University of 
Technology, 1st Edition, 2008,   Netherlands. 
[3] Occupational 
safety 
and 
health 
administration 
(OSHA), 
the 
Massachusetts Office of the State Fire Marshall  and the Springfield 
Arson and Bomb Squad, "Joint Foundry Explosion Investigation Team 
Report.", Springfield, MA, Safety and Health Information Bulletin, 
31.07.2005. 
[4] IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Society “IEEE 1451.5, 
Standard for a Smart Transducer Interface for Sensors and Actuators–
Wireless Communication and Transducer Electronic Data Sheet (TEDS) 
Formats”, TC-9, The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Inc., New York, N.Y. 10016. 
[5] Richard Bono, Mike Dillon, Kevin Gatzwiller and David Brown, “New 
developments in multichannel test systems, sound and vibration 
magazine”, August 1999. 
[6] Pan Fu, A.D. Hope and G.A.King, “An intelligent tool condition 
monitoring system”, The 52nd meeting of the society for machinery 
failure prevention technology, pp.397-406 (1998). 
[7]  Sun SPOT Programmer’s Manual rel. 6.0, Sun Labs, November 2010. 
[8] Sheet No.: E4-A01501EN GP2Y1010AU0F Compact Optical Dust 
Sensor, SHARP Corporation, 2006. 
[9]   Jong-Won Kwon; Yong-Man Park; Sang-Jun Koo; Hiesik Kim, “Design 
of Air Pollution Monitoring System Using ZigBee Networks for 
Ubiquitous-City”, 
Convergence 
Information 
Technology, 
2007. 
International Conference on , vol., no., pp.1024-1031, 21-23 Nov. 2007. 
[10] John Webster (editor-in-chief), “The Measurement, instrumentation, and 
Sensors Handbook”, CRC Press, 1999. 
 
71
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

