An Approach to Estimate Regulatory Performance
Kemal Huseinovic, Mirko Skrbic, Zlatko Lagumdzija
Communications Regulatory Agency, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Economy - University of Sarajevo
Bosnia and Herzegovina
khuseinovic@rak.ba, mirko.skrbic@etf.unsa.ba, zlatko.lagumdzija@efsa.unsa.ba
Abstract—In  order  to  follow  the  trends  imposed  by 
globalization, the regulation should be based on technological 
neutrality and market orientation. The aim is to protect the 
interests  of  users,  strengthen  the  competition,  support 
involvement  of  new  participants  on  the  market  and  exert 
positive  influence  on  the  economic  growth.  Technological 
convergence enables all types of networks to provide almost 
any service, thus imposing the need for the regulation to follow 
the same trend.  In order to minimize the differences among 
communication  market  beneficiaries,  it  is  necessary  to 
harmonize the communication market legislative framework 
among countries. In our view, the most efficient harmonization 
is  achieved  with  support  from  convergent  regulatory 
authorities  of  the  communications  market.  The  regulatory 
performance is measured using statistical techniques on data 
obtained from interviewing relevant European institutions and 
authorities.
Keywords - Regulation; Organization; Competition
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
In the world of increased global competitiveness, where 
the  competitors  are  no  longer  limited  only  to  the  local 
market,  the  countries  can  no  longer  risk  losing  the 
opportunities and advantages brought on by the convergence 
of markets, technologies and services for the sake of artificial 
barriers of their regulatory frameworks.
   These regulatory frameworks were set up at a time before 
the strong and aggressive wave of convergence struck all 
forms  and  spheres  of  the  communications  market. 
Consequently, one must come to a conclusion that they were 
not designed for this era of overall convergence.
   In order to follow the trends imposed by globalization, 
regulation should be based on technological neutrality and 
market  orientation,.  This  is  all  aimed  at  protecting  the 
interests  of  users,  strengthening  competition,  supporting 
involvement of new participants on the market and exerting 
positive influence on the economic growth.
   Technological convergence enables all types of networks 
to provide almost  any  service,  thus imposing the need for 
the regulation to follow the same trend..In such a situation, 
it would be almost impossible to have fair market services 
in  different  types  of  networks,  where  the  subjects  have 
different  sets  of  regulatory  rules  and  are  under  the 
jurisdiction of different regulatory authorities. 
 In  case  of  separated  regulatory  authorities  for 
telecommunications and media, there is a potential danger 
of the so called regulatory uncertainty (EC [6]). That is a 
situation when one service provider (e.g. «triple play») has 
to obtain a work permit from both regulatory authorities, 
which makes the process of its marker entry more complex, 
longer  and  more  expensive.  Quite  frequently,  but  not 
necessarily, their market approach rests upon the concept of 
one bill per one user. One bill containing costs of transfer of 
data,  voice,  television  and  video  presents  a  significant 
saving  for  the  user.  With  a  higher  number  of  services 
included,  the  price  of individual  service  in  the  package 
usually decreases. Somewhere, nevertheless, all obstacles 
have been removed and the operators may freely offer their 
type of television subscription.
As well as big media houses, the cable and telephone 
operators  have  shown  significant  interest  in  technology, 
creating the opportunity for the transmission of all three 
media through one network. Their goal is to seize upon the 
market potential offered by the service and to maintain the 
existing  subscribers  of  the  basic  telecommunication 
services. In order to minimize the differences among the 
communication  market  beneficiaries,  it  is  necessary  to 
harmonize the communication market legislative framework 
among  countries.   The  most  efficient  harmonization  is 
achieved  with  support  from  convergent  regulatory 
authorities of the communications market. The convergent 
has been present in Bosnia and Herzegovina since 2003.
This  paper  includes  a  clearly  stated  research  goal 
followed by the description of the statistical techniques and 
interview  design.  It  finishes  with  results  confirming  the 
organization of operators in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
II.
THE RESEARCH FRAMEWORK
The conducted research proved the following hypotheses:
(1) the convergent form of communication market regulatory 
authorities improves the country’s competitiveness; 
(2) convergent rather than separate regulatory authorities are 
a more appropriate model for ensuring development of the 
communication market on the territory of a country; 
(3) organizational form affects the ability of a regulator to 
implement European directives in the telecommunications 
sector.
155
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

The importance of research is established from the need to 
implement the standardization of regulatory practices on the 
international level and the influence of the practices on the 
competitiveness of national economies on a global scale.
It is quite clear why competitiveness has become one of the 
main  preoccupations  of  governments  and  industries  of 
almost every nation in the world (Porter [19]).
 Development strategies of modern countries, this way or 
the other, are basically measured by the economies’ achieved 
degree  of  competitiveness.  According  to  the  definition 
presented by the USA Economic Advisory Board, which was 
in  a  later  stage  accepted  within  the  European  Union, 
competitiveness in its essence has a goal to improve the 
living standard (Michalis [18]).
M.  Porter  [19]  claims that  the only importance of the 
concept of competitiveness at the national level is national 
productivity. The living standard progression depends on the 
capacity of national companies to achieve a high level of 
productivity and to increase this productivity in time (Porter 
[19]). Due to all-present information in the value chain, a fast 
change in ICT has an enormous influence on the competitive 
advantage and competitiveness (Porter [19]). New related 
technologies and are being taken as the main resource and a 
good indicator for global competitiveness (Castells [4]). 
   There are numerous models of measuring competitiveness 
in the world some of which include: Global Competitiveness 
Index  –  GCI,  Network  Readiness  Index  –  NRI,  ICT 
Development Index- IDI, etc.
The trend of convergence of regulation is also a form of 
accelerated  and  forced  standardization.  Namely,  each 
country, particularly those in transition, are witnessing the 
integration of the communication sector and broadcasting, 
together with forced stimulation of modernization of these 
spheres at the level of the regions within the country itself. 
The optimal model of organization of regulatory authorities 
stimulates  internationalization  of  standards,  local 
development  of  these  sectors,  maximal  degree  of 
development of competition on the communication market, 
promotes foreign investments and, triggers the growth of 
living standard of citizens.
Figure l. Trend of convergence of telecommunication and
broadcasting services
The model of a „convergent regulator“ is being imposed as 
an optimal organizational structure from the point of view of 
convergence of technology and stimulation of technological 
and communication market development. The technological 
analysts have been stating for quite some time that all forms 
of electronic communications will merge into one.
   In this view, radio and television broadcasters and telecom 
operators will extensively keep entering into each others' 
markets,  directing  them  towards  convergent  approach  to 
market/consumers (joint service packages), with a tendency 
towards the so called “free” services, so that costs of these 
services get redirected to advertisers and direct marketing 
clients.
III.
THE METHODOLOGY 
Both primary and secondary data sources were used for 
the paper design. The following competitiveness models and 
indicators were applied: Global Competitiveness Index – 
GCI,  Network  Readiness  Index  –  NRI  and  ICT 
Development Index- IDI.
The  research  of  regulatory  authorities  in  Europe  was 
conducted  on  a  sample  of  79  regulators,  based  on  the 
designed survey, close-end questions. Responses from 61 
regulatory  authorities,  or  77%  of  the  total  number  of 
respondents,  have  been  obtained.  Out  of  this  number, 
responses were obtained from 8 convergent regulators, 27 
media regulators and 26 telecommunication regulators. The 
methods  of response  collection  included  electronic  mail, 
direct  contacts  of  authors  with  the  officials  of  other 
regulators on international gatherings, and by fax. During 
the design of survey questions, the system of Likert scale 
was used, with offered responses rated from 1 to 5 (Kukić 
and Markić [15]). The survey questions have examined the 
regulatory bodies’ stances on the influence of a convergent 
regulator  onto  the  quality  of  technological  neutrality 
implementation  and  effects  exerted  by  the  regulatory 
authorities  on  the  telecommunication  and  broadcasting 
development. In order to analyze the data, the structural 
analysis and descriptive statistics were used together with 
the application of „chi square“ and „t“ tests. The data was 
processed using the software package „Excel” and statistical 
package SPSS14, and the results were presented in tables 
and  figures.  Options  of testing  and  descriptive  statistics 
were used at the same time to examine the significance of 
the sample interval, as well as deduction on the basis of the 
achieved results.
The interview was also conducted on a sample of 51 
experts in the fields of telecommunication, broadcasting and 
regulation  services.  The designed  survey questions were 
related to organizational form of a regulator and its capacity 
to implement the European directives.
IV.
THE RESULTS
USA and Canada have had combined regulatory agencies 
for telecommunication and broadcasting for decades. Within 
the last fifteen years, some other countries have started to 
establish single, merged regulatory authorities that regulate 
both broadcasting and telecommunication segments. In the 
recent years, a noticeable progressive trend in the number of 
convergent  regulatory  agencies  has  been  present.  It  is 
156
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

obvious  that  more  and  more  countries  have  decided  to 
choose  this  institutional  form  of  the  state  regulatory 
authorities whose jurisdiction covers regulation of all forms 
of  communication  technologies,  including  both  the 
broadcasting and telecommunications sectors.
It  is  more  cost  effective  for  countries  to  finance  and 
maintain  the  work  of  one  agency  instead  of  several 
regulatory authorities.
The  new  regulatory  framework  of  European  Union 
provides for regulatory treatment of service convergence. 
The  framework  introduces  the  notion  of  ”electronic 
communication  services”  instead  of  the  previously  used 
”telecommunication  services  +  broadcasting  services”, 
pointing to a clear signal of convergent regulatory approach 
to a wider spectrum of communication services. Italy was the 
first  country  in  Europe  that  has  established  convergent 
regulatory authorities for communications. It was followed 
by Finland, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovenia, Switzerland, 
and  others.  Following  the  introduction  of  the  new  EU 
framework,  Great  Britain  responded  by  forming  a 
convergent  communication  regulator  in  2003,  which 
replaced the previous five separate regulatory authorities in 
charge of telecommunication, radio-frequency spectrum and 
broadcasting. 
Malaysia has had a convergent regulation in force since 
1999,  introducing  a  regulatory  framework  exclusively 
designed  to  adjust  to  the  phenomenon  of  convergence. 
Malaysian convergent regulator (Malaysian Commission for 
Multimedia and Communications (MCMC) was among the 
first in the world to introduce a technologically and service-
wide neutral system of issuing permits. Singapore was also 
one of the first in Asia who chose a convergent model of 
regulatory authorities. Brazil was the first in South America 
to introduce a convergent regulator (ANATEL), as early as 
in 2001. In Africa, it was South Africa that established a 
convergent  regulation  (ICASA)  in  2000.  During  the  last 
decade  some  of  the  developing  countries  have  also 
established convergent regulators (ITU [11]).
Figure 2. The formation trend and growth in the number of convergent
regulators
The  following  results  are  based  on  the  analysis  of 
positions  of  the  countries  which  have  introduced  a 
convergent  form  of  communication  market  regulatory 
authorities  from  the  aspect  of  different  measures  of 
competitiveness:  Global  Competitiveness  Index  –  GCI, 
Network Readiness Index – NRI, ICT Development Index- 
IDI.
   Table 1 presents the position of the countries with a 
convergent regulator against GCI index in the period 2004-
2009  -  the  ranking  list  of  countries  with  convergent 
regulators according to GCI, sources: [5] and [16] p. 13). 
According to the ITU  research,  there are 254 regulatory 
bodies in the world, with 21 countries, or less than 8% of the 
total  number  of  countries,  having  a  convergent  form  of 
regulatory authorities, According to GCI, on the top-ten list 
of countries in the world in the last five years, there are seven 
countries, or 70%, with a convergent form of regulatory 
authorities. Consequently, 8% of countries with a convergent 
regulator participate with 70% among the top ten ranked 
countries according to GCI. 
This significant piece of data opens some dilemmas and 
raises  a  number  of  questions.  Is  the  high  ranking  of 
countries, according to GCI index, the result, among other 
things, of their decision to choose a convergent form of a 
regulator? The fact that seven out of ten countries with most 
competitive  economies  in  the  world  chose  a  convergent 
regulation may indicate that this is a trend to be followed. It 
can be stated that this analysis adds value to the claim that a 
convergent  form  of  regulatory  authorities  has  a  positive 
impact on the development of a communication market and 
increases the level of competitiveness of a country.
TABLE I. 
THE RANKING OF CONVERGENT REGULATORS
   Table 2 presents global rankings of countries in the period 
2005-2009  according  to  NRI index  [5].  Among  the top 
twenty countries in the last five years according to NRI 
index,  there are  twelve that  have a convergent  form  of 
regulatory authorities, which makes 60% of the countries 
taking up the top-twenty positions.
157
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

TABLE II. 
RANKINGS ACCORDING TO NRI INDEX
Having  in  mind  that  the  NRI  index  rests  upon  three 
assumptions – environment, readiness and ICT use, it is 
obvious that well-developed countries which have enabled 
the convergence, have a stimulating regulatory framework 
of  communication  technologies  which  enhances  the 
influence of ITC on economic development together with 
the level of development of the communication market. This 
information can also serve as contribution to the statement 
that  a  convergent  form  of  regulatory  authorities  has  a 
positive impact on competitiveness.
   Table 3 presents the global rankings of countries in 2002 
and 2007 according to the IDI index. It is evident that, out 
of the twenty highest ranked countries according to this 
index, twelve of these, or 60% have a convergent form of 
regulator. Therefore, according to the analysis of results of a 
relevant research conducted by the World Economic Forum 
and the International Telecommunication Union [5] [10], it 
can be stated that, among the top twenty countries in the 
world  in  terms  of  competitiveness,  over  50%  of  the 
countries have convergent regulators.
   These results contribute to proving a part of the main 
hypothesis, that a convergent regulatory authority is optimal 
from the point of view of achieving a maximal degree of the 
communication market development, protection of users and 
raising  the  level  of  competitiveness  of a  country.  Most 
regulators  also  believe  that  a  convergent  rather  than  a 
separate  organizational  form  of  regulatory  bodies  has  a 
positive influence on the development of telecommunication 
and broadcasting fields. What is significant is that although 
less than 10% of the countries in the world have convergent 
regulatory authorities, these countries are extremely highly 
ranked on all competitiveness measuring scales.
TABLE III:
THE RANKING ACCORDING IDI INDEX
Convergence of infrastructure based on the next generation 
of  networks  provides  for  access  to  a  wide  spectrum  of 
services, requires convergence of regulation and, presents the 
optimal option from the perspective of the end user. In order 
to analyze and prove this auxiliary hypothesis we used   an 
interview of regulatory authorities. 
Table 4 presents the attitudes of the European regulatory 
bodies based on the question whether a convergent form of 
regulators provides a better quality implementation of the 
principle of technological neutrality in regulatory processes 
than separate regulatory authorities. A positive reply to this 
statement has been provided by 34 respondents, or 56% of 
the  overall  respondents.  Eleven,  or 18%  of  respondents, 
provided a neutral reply. Sixteen respondents, or 26% of 
them, expressed their disagreement with this statement, with 
only three respondents who fully disagreed with it. 
Figure  3 provides  a graphic structure  of the expressed 
attitudes of regulatory authorities in percentage.
TABLE IV
:
THE INFLUENCE ON NEUTRALITY
158
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Figure 3. Influence of convergent regulator on implementation of
technological neutrality
TABLE V:
THE INFLUENCE ON DEVELOPMENT
Figure 4. Influence of organizational form of regulatory authorities
on development of telecommunications and broadcasting
   
Table 5 gives an overview of results of the interview with 
European  regulatory  authorities  based  on  the  question 
whether a convergent form of a regulator has more positive 
influence  on  the  development  of  broadcasting  and 
telecommunication services than separate authorities. Out of 
61  stated  opinions  of  regulators,  31  assessed  that  a 
convergent form has a more positive influence, 16 viewed 
that its influence is neutral, whereas 14 evaluated that it does 
not have any more positive influence on development of 
telecommunication and broadcasting than separate regulatory 
authorities. It is obvious that the weight is on the side of 
convergent  regulatory  authorities  in  comparison  to  the 
separate ones.
   Since  p  value  of  chi-square  test  of  equivalence  of 
proportion is higher than 0.01, we conclude that, according 
to the given rank, for the question or attitude «a convergent 
form of a regulator has a more positive influence on the 
development  of  broadcasting  and  telecommunication 
services  than  separate  authorities» there is no significant 
difference  among  the  observed  groups,  i.e.,  there  is  a 
dispersion of the given ranks on this attitude for all types of 
regulatory authorities.
   Figure 4 presents a graphical overview of the expressed 
attitudes of regulatory authorities in percentage. Convergent 
regulators and regulators for telecommunications assess in 
over  50%  the  influence  of  convergent  regulators  more 
positive than  the separate  ones,  while in  case  of  media 
regulators this percent is somewhat lower, but the attitude 
that a convergent regulator has more positive influence is 
still slightly prevalent.
   On the grounds of a conducted analysis, a conclusion can 
be  drawn  that  the  hypothesis  that  convergent  regulatory 
authorities  ensure  better  quality  implementation  of  the 
principle  of  technological  neutrality  than  the  separate 
authorities has been proven.
(1) convergent form of communication market regulatory 
authorities improves competitiveness of a country.
(2)  unlike the separate regulatory authorities, a convergent 
regulatory body is a more appropriate model for ensuring 
development of the communication market at the territory of 
a country.
(3)  the  organizational  form  affects  the  capacity  of  a 
regulator  to  implement  the  European  directives  in  the 
telecommunication sector.
V. CONCLUSION
   One of the main features of convergent regulation is the 
institutional  simplicity  of  implementing  technologically 
neutral  regulations.  The  need  for  technologically  neutral 
regulation lies in the fact that companies providing similar 
services  or  using  similar  technologies  face  different 
regulation in their service provision, thus taking up a less 
favorable  competitive  position.  The  principle  of 
technological  neutrality  becomes  markedly  critical  in the 
context of regulating the NGN networks. Regulators all over 
environment for promoting development and implementation 
of  the  NGN  networks  as  an  important  element  of 
communication market development [10].
   All this has prompted governments across the world to 
consider  options  of  merging  regulatory  authorities  for 
broadcasting and telecommunications. It is very important 
for  all  governments  to  carefully  consider  the  issue  of 
establishing their regulatory authorities. In order to do this, it 
to the primary task is to precisely and legally formulate a set 
of duties these authorities would have within the scope of 
their competences, the power of authorities they can practice 
in their work, and their legal and institutional relations with 
other  state  institutions.  Under  such  circumstances, 
institutional convergence, implying convergence or merging 
of institutions, makes for one of the most logical solutions.
159
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

REFERENCES
[1] Baldwin, R.et al.:  “A Reader on Regulation”, Oxford, Oxford University 
Press p. 3, (1998):
[2] Bezzina J. & Sanchez, B.:  „Technological convergence and regulation, 
Challenges  facing  developing  countries“,  The  Economic  Journal  on 
Telecom,  IT  and  Media  Communications  &  Strategies  (special  issue), 
November 2005, Tunis, p. 19, (2005)
[3] Brown, A. C., et al.: „Handbook for Evaluating Infrastructure Regulatory 
Systems“, The World Bank, Washington DC, USA, p. 5, (2006)
[4] Castells, M.:” Informacijsko doba Ekonomija, društvo i kultura, Uspon 
umreženog društva (Information age – Economy, society and culture, The 
Rise of network society)”,  Golden marketing Zagreb, Croatia, p. 99, (1998)
[5] Dutta, S. and Mia, I.:  „The Global Information Technology Report 
2006-2007, Connecting  to the  Networked  Economy“,  World  Economic 
Forum & INSEAD, Geneva, p. 10, (2007)
[6]  European  Commission:  Green  Paper  on  the  Convergence  of  the 
Telecommunications, Media and Information Technology Sectors, and the 
Implications  for  Regulation  Towards an Information  Society  Approach, 
Brussels, (1997)
[7] Gates,  B.: „Adoption-and prosperity-trough public-private partnership, 
article in Publication“, Connect- World, London, UK, Global issue 2008, p. 
16, (2008)
[8]  Haqqani,  A.B.:  „The  Role  of  Information  and  Communication 
technologies  in  Global  Development  Analyses  and  Policy 
Recommendations“, - ICT Task Force Series 3, United Nations, New York, 
p. 95, (2003)
[9] Hudson, H.E.: „Global Connections, International Telecommunications 
Infrastructure and Policy“, Wiley, New York, p. 1, (1997)
[10]  International  Telecommunication  Union  –  ITU   :  “Trends  in 
Telecommunications Reform, Convergence and Regulation”, Geneva, p. 8, 
(1999)
[11]  International  Telecommunication  Union  –  ITU:  “Trends  in 
Telecommunication  Reform  2002-Effective  Regulation,  Geneva,  p.  42, 
(2002)
[12]  International  Telecommunication  Union  –  ITU:  “Measuring  the 
Information Society,  The ICT Development Index”, Geneva, p. 32, (2009)
[13]  Jenkins,  H.: “Convergence  Culture”, Where  Old and New Media 
Collide, New York University Press, New York and London, p. 2, (2006)
[14] Jordana, J., Levi and Faur, D.: “The Politics of Regulation, Institutions 
and Regulatory Reforms for the Age of Governance”, p. 1, (2004)
[15] Kukić, S. and Markić, B.: „Metodologija društvenih znanosti – metode, 
tehnike, postupci i instrumenti znanstvenoistraživačkog rada (Methodology 
of social sciences – methods, procedures and instruments of science and 
research papers)“, Ekonomski fakultet Sveučilišta u Mostaru, p. 192, (2006)
[16]  Lagumdžija,  Z.:  „Kompetitivnost  Bosne  I  Hercegovine  i  regiona 
Jugoistočne Evrope 2007-2008“ (Competitiveness of BiH and region of 
South  East Europe  2007-08), Regionalni  ekonomski  forum  Jugoistočne 
Evrope i MIT Centar za menadžment i informacione tehnologije, Ekonomski 
fakultet Univerziteta u Sarajevu, p. 18, (2007)
[17] Lagumdžija, Z.: „Komptetitivnost zemalja i regiona Jugoistočne Evrope 
2008-2009 (Competitiveness of BiH and region of South East Europe 2008-
09)“ Regionalni  ekonomski  forum Jugoistočne  Evrope  i MIT  Cetar  za 
menadžment i informacione tehnologije, Ekonomski fakultet Univerziteta u 
Sarajevu, p. 13, (2008)
[18] Michalis, M.: “Governing European communications, from unification 
to co-ordination”, Lexington, Lanham, USA, p. 193, (2007)
[19] Porter, M. E.: “The Competitive Advantage of Nations”, First Free 
Press Edition, New York, USA, p. 1, (1990)
[20]  Porter,  M.E.:  “Konkurentska  prednost:  ostvarivanje  i  očuvanje 
vrhunskih poslovnih rezultata (The competitive Advantage and Presearving 
of Top Businesss Results)”, Asee, Novi Sad, 2007, p. 176, (2007)
[21] Richards, E. et al.: „The International Communications Market 2008“, 
OFCOM, London, p. 166, (2008)
[22] Serentschy, G.: „Regulation in the Light of Convergence“, the Twenty 
Sixth Symposium on Novel Technologies in Postal and Telecommunication 
Traffic (PosTel), Slide2, Belgrade, (2008)
[23]  Stanford  Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy:  “Globalization,  The 
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford”, California, p. 4, (2006)
[24]  The  World  Bank  :  „Information  and  Communications  for 
Development“, Extending Reach and Increasing Impact 2009, Washington 
DC, USA, p. 19, (2009)
[25] World Economic Forum: „The Global Competitiveness Report 2005-
2006“, Davos www.weforum.org/en/  [Accessed 27/04/2009], (2006)
160
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

