Failure Analysis and Threats Statistic to Assess Risk
and Security Strategy in a Communication System
Aurelio La Corte, Marialisa Scata’
Department of Electrical, Electronics and Computer Science Engineering
Faculty of Engineering, University of Catania
viale A.Doria 6, 95125, Catania, Italy
Email:lacorte@dieei.unict.it, lisa.scata@dieei.unict.it
Abstract—The paper presents and evalutes one of the
most important aspects in an information and communication
technology system that is to preserve the information from
any attacks trying to ensure the protection of data while
maintaining quality of service, conﬁdentiality, availability and
integrity. In recent years, the process towards convergence
has been devoloped to take into account several evolving
trends and new challenges. Most of this is about security. New
security issues make it necessary to analyse and manage the
safety of the information and communication systems. Thus,
an economic investment can not ignore the technical evaluation
of the system, vulnerabilities analysis, threats taxonomy, and
the estimate of expected risk, in order to ensure proper coun-
termeasures to limit the technological and economic damage
over time. Risk analysis involves the technical, human and
economic aspects, to guide strategy of investment. Following a
bio-inspired approach, this analysis requires knowledge of the
failure time distribution and survivor analysis to estimate risk.
With this paper, we propose a step-by-step analysis based on
bio-inspired models, showing and validating that the risk in
the absence of explanatory variables that inﬂuence the impact
of threats, and neglecting the possible relationships between
them, does not change shape.
Keywords-ICT; Security; Survivor Analysis; Bio-Inspired;
VoIP.
I. INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is the
set of technologies to develop, communicate and share
information through digital mean ICT represents the design,
development, implementation, support and management of
information systems through the use of telecommunications
systems. The ICT links two components, the information
technology (IT) with the Communication Technology (CT),
and at the same time it is an essential resource in modern or-
ganizations, within which it becomes increasingly important
to be manage to operate quickly and efﬁciently the use of
data and the increasing volume of information. Information
is deﬁned in [1][7][8], as an important business asset, that
can exist in many forms. Information can be managed,
manipulate to be available to the users at any time. Then, we
must take note of the means available to analyze the risk and
issues to information security. In many processes the security
risk has recently gained in signiﬁcance. Risk analysis is im-
portant such as the planning phase of the information system
architecture. The objective is to protect the infrastructure,
and information from attacks that can compromise the safety
requirements, such as conﬁdentiality, integrity and availabil-
ity. In recent years, technological evolution is faced with the
problem of security methodologies that propose remedial
actions, and not with estimates and analysis to assess the
expected risk. From the Internet network to the future next
generation network (NGN), switching to new concepts such
as opportunistic communication networks and green, these
networks arise from the interaction and the strong conceptual
link that exists between the world of technological networks
and biological networks. Many devices are now mobile
and autonomous and must adapt to its surroundings in a
distributed way, even in the absence of coordination central
unit. In literature, there are many approaches and models
inspired by biological processes as a strategy to design and
manage modern networks. Many of these, however, focused
only in certain areas. With this paper, we want to address the
risk issue of a generic communication system such as voice
over IP (VoIP), inspired by bio-inspired models, and making
use of survivor analysis. We want to demonstrate, through
case study and evaluation of the main threats facing it, that
risk is not the shape function depends on the distribution of
failure events due to an attack was successful.
After a brief introduction and related work, presented
in Section I and Section II, in Section III and Section
IV, we discuss about the security issues on communication
systems and about the bio-inspired approach. In Section V,
we introduce the survivor analysis for ICT security and the
model to evaluate the failure time distrubutions. In Section
VI, we present the model to estimate risk and failure in
a VoIP system, and the test that we have done about three
common threats. Finally, we present a conclusion and future
works.
II. RELATED WORK
A general consolidated study on the degree of security
of an ICT system is still lacking [1]. There is a general
tendency to treat the issue of security in communications
through taxonomies of vulnerabilities and threats [2][3][4].
149
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

About risk analysis and management for information system
security [9][10][11][13] and statistical methods [5][6][14],
there are some papers that deal with the relationship that
exists between the two disciplines. About VoIP security
we surveyed many research papers, such us [2][3][4]. Most
current treatments concerning taxonomies, or security mech-
anism concerning particular aspects of communication. Rec-
ognizing the work presented in many papers also about bio-
inspired approach [15][16][19][20], about risk perception
and statistical models biologically inspired [12][13][14], and
about comparison among computer virus and biological
virus [17][18], we believe we can advance the hypothesis
to investigate the security issue in a broader vision, to
estimate the economic risk as a result of an investment
in security, obviously linked to the technological risk of
a communication system. This is important to assess in
the future the best countermeasures to limiti the damage,
to change the shape of risk, minimising the losses about
information and about economic investments [21].
III. BIO-INPIRED MODELS FOR ICT SECURITY
In examining some of the most common structures or
algorithms used today in telecommunications networks,
we can ﬁnd striking similarities with biological systems
[13][14][15][16]. Evidence suggests that the nature and the
designers of the networks have had to not only solve similar
problems, but they are also arrived at similar solutions.
Seems entirely reasonable, then, to think that the new prob-
lems in systems communication may have much in common
with biological issues already known and have been resolved
long ago. With the increase in size, interconnectivity and
number of access points, computer networks have become
increasingly vulnerable to various forms of attack. Similarly,
biological organisms can be considered as interconnected
complex systems with a high number of access points,
subject to attacks by microorganisms [17][18]. However,
during evolution, biological organisms have successfully
developed the immune system that allows them to detect,
identify and destroy pathogens outside. The technological
challenges is leading us towards a world where myriad
devices, ﬁxed or mobile, interact with each other in many
ways. Many of these devices are mobile and autonomous,and
they must then adapt to its surroundings in a distributed way
and without a coordination of a central entity. Recently,
a number of approaches have been proposed, inspired by
biological processes and mechanisms as a strategy to manage
the complexity of distributed systems like Internet, sensor
networks, wireless and ad hoc networks. The aim of bio-
inspired approaches is to discover and adapt traditional
principles of biological systems to technical solutions, which
have characteristics of stability, adaptability and scalability.
Many studies aim to highlight the achievements under the
new Bio-Inspired Networks [19][20]. In particular, the topic
that focuses identiﬁcation of mechanisms and models appli-
cable to biological technical solutions for ICT systems. This
is the attempt to compare directly the technical solutions,
the theoretical principles and mathematical models used by
biological systems and the challenges of communication sys-
tems and information systems. We can summarize the main
aspects of networking and communications systems that are
addressed using an approach Bio-Inspired as follows:
• Self-organizing communication systems.
• Evolutionary and adaptive systems and protocols.
• Scalable and adaptive protocols and network architec-
tures.
• Self-learning algorithms.
• Self-healing systems and protocols.
• Security mechanisms.
• Network algorithms and protocols.
• Congestion control mechanisms.
• Performance evaluation of bio-inspired networks.
The similarity between the defense mechanisms of living
organisms and security problems of telecommunications net-
works has attracted great interest among researchers, who al-
ready have long studied the similarities. The thinking behind
these efforts is to capture the dynamics that rule biological
systems and understanding the foundations, to develop new
methodologies and tools for the design and management of
the information and communication systems. Communica-
tion systems such as biological systems are characterized
by high complexity, high connectivity and dynamics. Both
allow for extensive interaction between the components,
and heterogeneity in terms of capacity. They have both
vulnerability to external intrusion, intentional or not, which
can cause system failures resulting in degradation of safety
requirements. Thus the similarities are not limited to those
between pathogenic agents that can infect a organism, and
malicious code that can infect communication system. There
is also similarity between the process of safety management,
and global view of relationships between vulnerability, threat
and asset, just like the relation between biological viruses,
vulnerabilities, and people in a population. The ﬁnal result is
a risk of failure and impairment of conﬁdentiality, integrity
and availability in an ICT system, such as the risk of
the occurrence of a disease in a biological organism. The
analysis of risk requires knowledge of the probability and
its distribution and the probability that an attack occurs
[5][6][9][11]. We can asses the degree of the system security
and analyse the existing countermeasures to try to decrease
the risk and minimimise the losses, maintainng the security
requirements for an ICT systems:
• Conﬁdentiality
• Availability
• Integrity
IV. OVERVIEW OF SURVIVOR AND FAILURE ANALYSIS
In many biomedical applications, the variable is the time
it takes a certain event to occur, that is, how much time
150
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

elapses from the beginning of the study of the ”system”
so that a given event occurs. For example, the event may
be the death of an organism, from the time it takes for a
patient to show signs of reaction to a therapy or the time
to recurrence of a disease. In practical cases we may be
interested in determining a statistical distribution of the times
of occurrence of events for a population of individuals, or
to compare the times of occurrence between distinct popula-
tions (for example the case of two populations, a subject to
a therapy clinic another and not receiving any treatment), or
to determine a relationship between the times of occurrence
and other variables that may affect the entities in question.
Both in biomedical applications as the observation of a
telecommunications system, measurements of the times of
occurrence of the events are carried out within a period of
limited extent. A consequence of this limitation is that not
all individuals will be affected by the occurrence of an event.
All this characterizes what is called Survival Analysis [5][6].
We indicate with T a positive random variable representing
the time of occurrence of our events. Thus, we can deﬁne the
survival time as the interval between the birth of an individ-
ual after his death. For obvious reasons, the survival is linked
to the notion of failure. A failure event in general, could
be due to an attack by malevolent individuals or groups
that want to damage the security system. A failure doesn’t
meaning the total distruction of the system, but even the
impairment of the informations that it holds. Ryan and Ryan
in [9][10][11] models a general information infrastructure in
number of ﬁnite information systems {Si : i ∈ I}, where,
Si ̸= Sj if i ̸= j, and the set I= {0,1,2,3,.....}. Each
system, which purpose is to preserve the information, can be
thought as a ﬁnite collection of information assets Si={αk:k
∈ I }. Threats can destroy or only degrade information,
compromising the security requirements. For each individual
asset and for the entire system it is possible to deﬁne the
following functions:
• Survivor Function S(t), which is the probability of being
operational at time t :
S[t] = Pr[T ≥ t] = 1 − F(t)
(1)
where F(t) is the Failure function, which tell us the
probability of having a failure at time t.
• Failure Density Function f(t), which is the probability
density function:
f(t) = dF(t)
dt
= −dS(t)
dt
(2)
• Hazard Function h(t), which is the probability that an
individual fails at time t, given that the individual has
survived to that time:
h(t) = lim
δ→0+ Pr(t ≤ T < t + δ | T ≥ t)/δ
(3)
where h(t)δt is the approximate probability that an
individual will die in the interval (t, t + δt), having
survived up until t
• Cumulative hazard function H(t):
H(t) = − log S(t)
(4)
V. RISK AND FAILURE IN A VOIP SYSTEM
The VoIP system, in this case we will discuss in this
paper, is the ”population” under observation and individuals
of that population are so-called information assets. Each
asset is involved in the processes that regulate VoIP, and
each is vulnerable to a range of possible threats. An attack
occurs when a threat occurs, using the right vulnerability and
causing a failure. The risk is simply the probability that this
event occurs. The damage is the impact on the system. In this
case we do not consider the inﬂuence of an asset attacked
to another asset not attacked, and how the spreading of risk
within the system itself. In this paper we consider the global
system failure and the events affecting it.
A. VoIP and Threats Taxonomy
The new trends of the communication is the move towards
the transmission of voice over traditional packet switched IP
network, voice over IP. VoIP is the rst step for the future con-
vergence.The large-scale deployment of VoIP infrastructures
has been determined by high-speed broadband access. This
technology of communication includes a large variety of
methods enabling the transmission of voice directly through
the Internet and other packet-switched networks. VoIP is
an attractive alternative compared to traditional telephony
for several reasons, such as seamless integration with the
existing IP networks, low cost phone calls not expensive
end-users. The main advantages of VoIP are ﬂexibility and
low cost. The ﬁrst comes from an open architecture and
a software implementation, while the second is due to the
emergence of a new business model, the uniﬁcation of
devices and network links for the transport voice and data.
Thanks to these beneﬁts, VoIP has seen a rapid spread in
both enterprise that among private users. A growing number
of companies has already converted or are being converted
to VoIP, to allow the implementation of new features, both
to reduce management costs. Among the private account, the
main point of attraction of VoIP is the low cost service. To
offset the high ﬂexibility of VoIP we have an equally high
complexity, due to architectural and protocol factors. The
rapid adoption of VoIP introduced new weaknesses and more
attacks, whilst new threats of networks have been recorded
which have not be reported in traditional telephony[2][3][4].
The VoIP infrastructure is characterised by several assets:
• Network and Service Access.
• Protocols.
• Processes.
• Service Infrastructure.
• Physical Component Architectures.
• APIs and Network Peering.
151
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Threats
C
I
A
Eavesdropping
x
DoS
x
Vishing
x
x
Fraud
x
Masquerading
x
x
Physical Intrusion
x
x
x
Service Abuse
x
x
Social Threats
x
x
Table I
THREATS IMPACT ON CIA REQUIREMENTS
• Business Areas.
Although it is a technology that is being rapidly deployed,
there are many security challenges and the benets of VoIP
are as strong as security issues. We briey listed the main
threats associated with this technology [2]:
• Eavesdropping.
• DoS.
• Vishing.
• Fraud.
• Masquerading.
• Physical Intrusion.
• Service Abuse.
• Social Threats.
In Table I, we listed the principal threats and the assessment
of the impact on conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability,
that are the most important security requirements also called
CIA requirements.
B. Analysis Model
A VoIP system, such as any other information systems
or network communication can be compared to a biological
system. Each of its constituent elements can be seen such
as a individual of a population. From the perspective of the
study of threats and resistance to their attacks, a VoIP system
can be studied following the models and mathematical
principles of Survival Analysis, which is widespread in the
study of the effectiveness of therapies clinical population
suffering from certain diseases. For this reason it is possible
to characterize a VoIP system through its survival function,
or through its hazard function. We have simulated a VoIP
system under stressful conditions. The test is stopped after
a ﬁxed amount of time, Toss. As results, some items fail
during the test, while other survive. We considered three
types of threats during a ﬁxed period of 100 days. The
threats considered are those that statistically, are the most
frequent: Denial of Service (58%), Eavesdropping (20%) and
Social Threats (18%). These threats have a relapse rate of
respectively cases of failure of a VoIP system. By hypothesis
each of these threats gave rise to the failure of system that
were distributed along the 100-day period and each of these
threats acting on the system, and causes of failure, exploiting
the vulnerability. We assume an observation time 100 days,
and three possible cases of distribution:
• Case 1: The failure events caused by the three threats
are distributed according to a Weibull distribution, with
equal parameters, scale factor A=50, shape factor B=10,
as in Figure 1.
• Case 2: The failure events caused by the three threats
are distributed according to Weibull distribution, but
are considered different values for each,DoS (A=50,
B=3) Eavesdropping (A=50, B=5), Social Threats
(A=50,B=10), as in Figure 2.
• Case 3: The failure events caused by the three threats
are distributed according to 3 different distributions,
Weibull, Exponential and Rayleigh, as in Figure 3.
Each of these distributions are ”weighted” according to a
coefﬁcient given by the statistical impact of the threat.
Ftot[t] = th1%F1[t] + th2%F2[t] + ...thn%Fn[t]
(5)
Htot[t] = −log(1 − Ftot[t])
(6)
The trend of the function of the total hazard is independent
of the particular case. From the viewpoint of security coun-
termeasures to be taken in a VoIP system, it is not important
to know in advance the distribution of failure associated
with threats. This assertion is supported by the evidence
that changing characteristic parameters of the distributions
involved, the total hazard function did not show signiﬁcant
changes in its trend. This result shows that, with random
distribution of possible threats, the distribution of failures
and the shape of the risk remains unchanged at less than a
constant. This suggests that the shape of the risk function is
not depends on the timing distributions of failures. The risk
increases dramatically if you do not act in any way with se-
curity investment. In this case, we can see the change of the
survival distribution with different distributions. The curve
move to the right if we change the distributions. This tells
us that the only inﬂuence is in the delay of the distributions
of failure events so this allows an extension of time for
decisions and managing security in an information system.
In this case we considered the total absence of security
investment [21]. We showed that the risk in the absence
of explanatory variables that inﬂuence the impact of each
threat, and neglecting the possible relationships between the
different threats, does not change shape. A good economic
investment then applied in order to improve security, must
take into account these claims. This is important for future
consideration of countermeasures and the choice of strategy
to use when referring to safety action to be taken.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we introduced and proposed a different bio-
inspired approach for the security of information systems.
The bio-inspired in the ICT should help inspire the design
of a system for managing network security measure to
152
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Figure 1.
Weibull distribution
Figure 2.
Weibull distribution with different parameters
Figure 3.
Weibull distribution, Exponential distribution, Rayleigh distribution
153
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

prevent the attack, and to estimate the risk, to assess the
expected risk, to decide strategically technological and eco-
nomic investments,maintaining good relationship between
the quality of service, security and network reliability.
Following the study of the behavior of a VoIP system in
against a combination of these threats, each with a well
deﬁned distribution function of failure times within a 100-
day period, the results allow us to say that in terms of
countermeasures to be implemented for the protection of
a VoIP system against threats how Denial-of-Service, Social
Eavesdropping Threats, is not essential to know in advance
distribution time of failure associated with them. In future
the intention is to study the impact of a threat in terms
of technological and economic risks, and the inﬂuence that
an attacked asset, within a VoIP system, can have on asset
logically associated with it. The study is a starting point for a
deeper analysis of the risk in a VoIP system upon application
of Bio-Inspired approach.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Leveque, 2006, Information Security: A Strategic Approach,
IEEE Computer Society, J. Wiley and Sons.
[2] VoIP Security Alliance, VoIP Security and Privacy Threat Tax-
onomy, available at www.voipsa.org, [accessed: Oct., 2011].
[3] A. D. Keromytis, 2010, Voice-over-IP Security: Research and
Practice, IEEE Computer and Reliability Societies, Secure
Systems, Vol. 8, Issue 2, pp. 76-78.
[4] A. D. Keromytis, 2009, Voice over IP: Risk, Threats and
Vulnerabilities, In Proc. of the Cyber Infrastructure Protection
(CIP) Conference, New York, NY.
[5] D.Roxbee Cox and D. Oakes, 1984, Analysis of Survival data,
CHAPMAN & HALL/CRC.
[6] D. Roxbee Cox, 1972, Regression Models and life-tables,
Journal of the Royal Society, Series B (Methodological), Vol.
34, No. 2, pp. 187-220.
[7] International Standard ISO/IEC 27002:2005, Information Tech-
nology Security techniques. Code of Practice for information
security management.
[8] International Standard ISO/IEC 27005:2008, Information Tech-
nology Security techniques. Information Security Risk Manage-
ment.
[9] J. C. H. Ryan and D. J. Ryan, 2008, Performance Metrics
for Information security Risk management, IEEE Computer
Society, Security and Privacy, Vol. 6, Issue 5, pp. 38-44.
[10] J. C. H. Ryan and D. J. Ryan, 2008, Biological System and
models in information Security, Proceedings of the 12th Collo-
quium for Information System Security Education, University
of Texas, Dallas.
[11] J. C. H. Ryan and D. J. Ryan, 2006, Expected beneﬁts of infor-
mation security investments, Computer and Security, Vol. 25,
Issue 8, pp. 579-588. ScienceDirect, www.sciencedirect.com.
[12] Stephan Kitchovitch and Pietro Li´o, 2010, Risk perception
and disease spread on social networks, International Confer-
ence on Computational Science, Vol. 1, Issue 1, pp. 2339-2348.
[13] J. M. Lachin, 2000, Biostatistical Methods: The Assessment
of Relative Risks, John Wiley & Sons.
[14] J. D. Kalbﬂeish and R. L. Prentice, 2002, The Statistical
Analysis of Failure-Time Data, 2nd edition, Wiley.
[15] W. H. Murray, 1988, The application of epidemiology to
computer viruses, Computer & Security, Vol. 7, Issue 2, pp.
139-145.
[16] Falko Dressler and Ozgur B. Akan, 2010, A Survey on Bio-
Inspired Networking, Elsevier Computer Networks, Vol. 54,
Issue 6, pp. 881-900.
[17] Jun Li and Paul Knickerbocker, 2007, Functional similarities
between computer worms and biological pathogens,Elsevier
Computer & Security, Vol. 26, Issue 4, pp. 338-347.
[18] Michael Meisel, Vasileios Pappas, and Lixia Zhang, 2010,
A taxonomy biologically inspired research in computer net-
working, Elsevier Computer Networks, Vol. 54, Issue 6, pp.
901-916.
[19] M. Wang and T. Suda, 2001, The Bio-Networking Archi-
tecture: A Biologically Inspired Approach to the Design of
Scalable,Adaptive, and Survivable/Available Network Applica-
tions, in 1st IEEE Symposium on Applications and the Internet
(SAINT), San Diego, CA, pp. 43-53.
[20] C.
Lee,
H.
Wada,
and
J.
Suzuki,
2007,
Towards
a
Biologically-inspired Architecture for Self-Regulatory and
Evolvable Network Applications, in: F. Dressler, I.Carreras
(Eds.), Advances in Biologically Inspired Information Systems
- Models, Methods, and Tools, Studies in Computational In-
telligence (SCI), Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, Vol.
69, pp. 25.
[21] Aurelio La Corte, Marialisa Scat´a, and Evelina Giacchi, 2011,
A Bio-Inspired Approach for Risk Analysis of ICT Systems,
Computational Science and Its Applications - ICCSA, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, pp.
652-666.
154
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

