High Spectrum Eﬃciency Delay Tolerant
Scheduling and Resource Allocation of Diverse
Traﬃc in LTE Networks
Tengfei Xing, Xiaoming Tao and Jianhua Lu
State Key Laboratory on Microwave and Digital Communications
Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology
Dept. of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Email: {xingtf, taoxm, lujh}@wmc.ee.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a multiuser scheduling
scheme for traﬃc with diverse delay constraints in the downlink
of 3GPP UMTS/LTE. Traditional scheduling algorithms applied
in Long Term Evolution (LTE) do not take much consideration
of various delay tolerances of data packets, and most of them
are on a slot-to-slot basis, which limits the ability to share
spectrum and power resources among time. This would cause
the network failing to deliver some packets or declining certain
requests with longer delay tolerances, thereby lowering the
eﬃciency of limited spectrum resources. Our proposed scheme
schedules packets from multiple users by gathering information
including service QoS, channel conditions and available resources
in a preset time window, whose length equals the typical delay
tolerance of multimedia data packets. The gathering of those
information could be aided by channel/traﬃc estimations and
predictions. By doing so, the algorithm achieves notably higher
eﬀective throughput than conventional schemes, thereby boosting
spectrum eﬃciency. Simulation results show that our scheduling
and resource allocation strategy can achieve 200% to 400% times
of spectrum eﬃciency under typical system parameters.
Index Terms—delay tolerant scheduling, resource allocation,
LTE, spectrum eﬃciency
I. Introduction
In the next decade, rapid growth of cellular communication
service demands are expected to come. Applications with
diverse Quality of Service (QoS), including high data rates,
diﬀerent real-time and interactive features, etc., will take
up most of the traﬃc loads in cellular networks. Thereby,
scheduling and allocation of radio resources is an area that
deserve much attention in cellular systems such as LTE, since
it is widely recognized as an element which can greatly aﬀect
the performance and spectrum eﬃciency of the network.
Due to the important role of scheduler in determining the
overall system performance, there have been many studies on
LTE scheduling in open literatures. The fundamental idea of a
scheduler is to allocate each resource block to the user who can
best make use of it according to some utility, and the schedul-
ing problem is to determine the allocation of all the resource
blocks to a subset of users in order to maximize some objective
function, such as network throughput. [1]-[5] proposed dif-
ferent scheduling schemes considering heterogeneous traﬃc,
especially their delay constraints. The delay constraints are
often transformed into various instantaneous rate constraints.
Moreover, [6] focused on energy eﬃciency when dealing with
delay constrained traﬃc. However, to the best of the authors’
knowledge, the existing studies rarely take delay tolerance of
scheduling into consideration when designing algorithms since
they are on a slot-to-slot basis. Thereby they are ineﬀective in
dealing with heterogeneity/bursty of services. Our paper gives
a possible solution to this problem, trying to make better use
of spectrum resource to support various traﬃc by designing a
delay-tolerant scheduling method.
  We will ﬁrst introduce the framework of delay tolerant
scheduling, and formulate an optimization problem to repre-
sent the scheduler. To eﬃciently solve the problem, we will
provide a two-stage heuristic algorithm consists of packet
selection/subchannel allocation and power allocation with low
complexity. The scheduler fully exploits the delay tolerance
and jointly processes QoS and channel quality information
within a certain period to get the optimal scheduling decision.
Simulation results will be given to demonstrate the better per-
formance with respect to spectrum eﬃciency. The advantage
is that our algorithm prioritize the transmissions of the right
packets, not the early packets, thereby achieves the overall
optimal eﬀect and eﬃciency of resource allocation.
In this paper, we ﬁrst present the system model and for-
mulate the delay tolerant sum eﬀective rate maximization
scheduling and resource allocation problem in Section II.
This leads to a nonlinear hybrid-binary integer program. We
then use a heuristic method to solve the problem in Section
III to solve the resource allocation problem eﬃciently. Next
we give simulation results in Section IV that compare our
proposed delay tolerant scheduler with existing ones in terms
of throughput. Concluding remarks will be provided in Section
V.
II. System Model and Problem Formulation
Fig. 1 illustrates the downlink of an OFDMA single antenna
(SISO) multiuser LTE network.   A delay tolerant scheduling
server (DTSS) is attached to the eNB, and it carries out
RB scheduling and power allocation in a centralized manner
through information exchange with the eNB. Let N be the
15
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Delay Tolerant
Scheduling Server (DTSS)
...
UE1
UE2
UEK
Channel State Information
 
!
"
Service QoS Requirements
...
Available Resource
Service QoS (Packets)
UE1
UEK
...
Scheduling and Resource 
Allocation Results
(*)
(*)
Space
RB (Frequency)
...
...
Core
Network
eNodeB
TTI (Time)
...
S11,A11
S1J1,A1J1
...
SKJK,AKJK
SKJ1,AKJ1
...
RB1
T2
RB2
T1
RB2
T3,4
RBN
TD
TTI (Time)
Scheduling Period (TD)
Scheduling Period (TD)
Fig. 1.
System Architecture of Delay Tolerant Scheduling in the Downlink
of 3GPP LTE
number of RBs and K be the number of UEs in a sector. The
CSI is sent back from each UE to the eNB through a delay-free
and error-free feedback channel, in order to let the DTSS do
adaptive RB/power allocation and select suitable UE to serve.
For the sake of analyzing spectrum eﬃciency, this paper does
not involve speciﬁc modulation and coding. Suppose that all
the users are pedestrians, so the factor of hand-over is not
included here since the time scale of scheduling period is
hundreds of milliseconds.
Let us consider that each UE generates data traﬃc in a
Poisson manner. The average arrival interval is TS TTIs. Each
TTI is a basic subchannel scheduling block, and its length is
conﬁgured due to the fast fading property of the propagation
channel, commonly 1 ms. However, for the sake of reducing
algorithm complexity, we use a larger TTI value. Here we use a
non-causal hypothesis, which gathers all the service QoS, CSI
and available resources (including RBs and power in all TTIs)
information within the scheduling period for the scheduler. Let
TD TTIs (the unit TTI to describe time will be omitted from
here on for simplicity) be the delay tolerance (or scheduling
period) of the scheduler, which starts from an arbitrary packet
transmission request. Thereby, we would get all the packet
arrival time, packet sizes, delay tolerances of each packet, CSI,
available RBs and total available power in TD. Then we do
RB scheduling and power allocation in the scheduling period
TD.
Suppose the duration of an RB is TRB, and 1TTI = NRB·TRB.
We suppose that all the RBs within a scheduling block is
allocated to a single user. This is reasonable since the channel
state does not vary much with in a TTI, and it also lowers the
complexity of the algorithm. Then we put all the RBs on the
same frequency into groups of NRB, and the number of groups
is TD. Denote the number of RBs on the frequency dimension
NF. Thereby, the number of RB scheduling units within a
scheduling period is TD · NF. Let Ak j and S k j be the arrival
TTI index and size of the j th data packet of the k th UE (j =
1, · · · , Jk) within the scheduling period. Certain distribution
among a ﬁnite set of values for S k j is used to model dﬀerent
types of traﬃc. Also, the delay bounds of all packets is set to
be the end of the scheduling period, which is the instant at TD.
Then reshape all the Ak j and S k j to be a column vector ˆA and
ˆS with elements ˆAl and ˆS l (l = 1, · · · ,
KP
k=1
Jk), with ascending
orders of user ﬁrst and then data packets. Let Bl be a binary
matrix indicating which RB groups are allocated to the l th
data packet,
Bl (m, n) = 1, (m = 1, · · · , NF, n = 1, · · · , TD) ⇔
RB at (m, n) position is allocated to packet l
(1)
with Bl(m, n) denoting to the (m, n) th value of Bl. Reshape Bl
into a column vector bl in a column-by-column manner, i.e.
bl(mNF +n) = Bl(m, n). In a SISO system, each RB at a certain
time can only be allocated to a single UE’s single packet, in
order to avoid interference. Thereby the RB allocations are not
overlapping, meaning that
bT
s · bt = 0
∀s , t
(2)
which is not a necessary assumption in a multiuser MIMO
system. The power allocated onto RB group m in TTI n is
denoted by Pmn. We deﬁne an eﬀective packet transmission
as the packet is successfully transmitted with its full length
and without going over its delay limit. The design goal of
our scheduling algorithm is to maximize the throughput of
eﬀective packet transmissions given the delay tolerance of the
scheduler and available system resources.
Let α(l) be the UE index of packet l. The achievable
transmission rate of packet l in RB group m and TTI n can
be expressed as:
rl
mn = Bl (m, n)
"
WRB log2
 
1 + PmnHα(l) (m, n)
N0WRB
!#
(3)
where Hα(l) (m, n) denotes the channel gain for user αl in RB
group m and TTI n, WRB denotes the bandwidth of an RB and
N0 denotes the power spectrum density of noise.
Finally, the delay tolerant scheduler can be formulated as
an sum rate maximization problem:
max
bl,Pmn
( LP
l=1
Cl
)
where Cl =

ˆS l, if
 P
m,n rl
mn
!
· TTI ≥ ˆS l
0, else
(4)
s.t.
bl(n) ∈ {0, 1}
∀l, n
(5)
bl(mNF + n) = 0
∀n = 1, · · · , ˆAl − 1, m
(6)
bT
s · bt = 0
∀s , t
(7)
X
m,n
Pmn ≤ Pmax · TD
(8)
where Pmax is the total transmit power limit of the eNB. (6)
means that no RBs is allowed to be allocated to a packet
before its arrival. Clearly this is a highly non-linear hybrid-
binary integer program, for which no eﬃcient solution exists.
16
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

As an NP-hard problem, exhaustive searching algorithm with
high complexity can solve the problem. In the next section, a
low-complexity allocation scheme based on heuristic methods
is proposed.
It is worth mentioning that the heterogeneity and bursty of
services is embodied through the above modeling of packet
arrival and QoS (size and delay tolerance). Speciﬁcally, with
independent arrivals, the possibility of bursty packet arrivals
is increased with the number of users. Also with diﬀerent
arrival and same deadline, various levels of delay tolerance is
presented for each packet. Moreover, the diﬀerence in packet
sizes represents heterogeneity of services.
III. Maximum Effective Rate Scheduler and Resource
Allocation
We propose a heuristic scheme that achieves sub-optimal
solution to the proposed delay tolerant scheduling problem.
The scheme is divided into iterations of the following two
stages. In the ﬁrst stage, the algorithm selects a packet to serve,
and the RBs are assigned to this packet under the assumption
that the eNB’s total transmission power left (initially Pmax)
is equally distributed among every RB left in both frequency
and time dimensions, i.e. Pmn =
Pmax·TD
NF·TD
initially. This stage
only implements RB selection and allocation. In the second
stage, power are allocated to the RBs assigned in the ﬁrst step
in order to save as much transmission power as possible and
potentially lowers the number of RBs required. The allocated
RBs and power are excluded from the resource left for the
next iteration. The exit condition of the iterations is that
none of the packets can be served with the RBs and power
left. The step-by-step iterations to determine the packets to
serve and the separation of subchannel allocation and power
allocation enable a suboptimal algorithm; however, it makes
the complexity signiﬁcantly lower than the exhaustive search.
A. Throughput-oriented Packet Selection and RB Allocation
Due to the target of maximizing the sum rate of eﬀective
packet transmissions and our assumption that each packet have
diﬀerent arrival time and the same deadline, it is reasonable
to use the following criteria to select which packets should be
scheduled with a higher priority:
1) For packets with the same sizes, the one with a longer
delay tolerance should be scheduled ﬁrst.
2) For packets with the same delay tolerances, the one with
a smaller size should be scheduled ﬁrst.
3) For any packets, the one with a smaller average rate
requirement (its size divided by its delay tolerance)
should be scheduled ﬁrst.
The main idea behind these criteria is to consume as
few resources (including RBs and power) per unit of data
as possible, in order to serve more packets with the same
total resources. Firstly, due to the principle of diversity, the
possibility to have an RB with good channel quality within a
longer period of time is higher. Therefore, the packet with a
longer delay tolerance may consume less resources, making it
a favorable choice. Also, within the same period, the packet
TABLE I
Packet Selection/RB Allocation of Delay Tolerant Scheduler
0. Preliminary Process (only execute once at the beginning of a
scheduling period):
Calculate the average rate requirements for every packet, Rl
=
ˆS l
TD−( ˆAl−1).
Set bl(mNF + n) = 0
∀m, n, l. P0 = Pmax · TD.
Create an empty queues Q1, storing the indexes of packets selected to
serve.
1. Initialization:
a) Let Φ be the set of the index of packets left un-selected, ΘRB be
the set of the index of RBs left un-allocated, and P0 the power left
un-allocated.
b) Do a sorting of Rl (l ∈ Φ) in ascending order, and store the index
of the results in a queue Q.
c) Set Pmn =
P0
∥ΘRB∥ . ˆCl = ˆS l (l ∈ Φ).
2. Packet Selection and RB allocation:
a) Select a packet l1 with the smallest Rl from Q. Exclude l1 from Q.
Create an empty queue QS to store the indexes of RBs that will be
allocated to packet l1.
b) Do a sorting of Hα(l1) (m, n)

u = mNF + n ∈ ΘRB, n ≥ ˆAl1

in
descending order, and store the index of the results u in a queue QH.
c)
Select
an
RB
whose
index
is
u0 = m0NF + n0
with
the
largest
Hα(l1) (m, n) value.
This is equivalent
to ﬁnding u
=
arg maxu∈ΘRB rl1mn

n ≥ ˆAl1

. Exclude u0 from ΘRB. Add u0 to QS .
d) Allocate RB u0 to packet l1, and calculate the unserved data size,
ˆCl1 = ˆCl1 − rl1m0n0 · TT I.
e) If ˆCl1 ≤ 0, exclude packet l1 from Φ and add it to Q1, exclude all
elements in QS from ΘRB, mark the corresponding elements of bl1 to
1, and ﬁnish allocation. Go to power allocation.
f) If ˆCl1 > 0 and QH is not empty, go to step c).
g) If ˆCl1 > 0 and QH is empty, which means that this packet cannot
be served with the resource left, exclude packet l1 from Φ, and go to
step a).
with a larger size generally requires more RBs or power.
However, the possibility to have more RBs with better channel
quality is less for a ﬁxed user. This also leads to a smaller
eﬃciency of resource utilization. Hence, the packet with a
smaller size is favorable among the ones with the same delay
tolerance. Last but not least, the third criterion is a combination
of the ﬁrst two.
We propose a throughput-oriented packet selection and RB
allocation scheme in Table I, based on the criteria above. First,
we calculate the average rate requirements of all the packets.
Then we select the packet with the lowest rate requirements,
l1, as a candidate to be scheduled in this scheduling period.
Among all the RBs that are valid to be allocated to l1 (meaning
that they are not allocated to other packets, and their time
index has to be larger or the same as ˆAl1), the ones with better
channel quality regarding UE α(l1) are allocated to l1 one by
one. Once the total data size provided by the allocated RBs
exceed ˆCl1, l1 is successfully scheduled, and the algorithm
goes to the next stage of power allocation. The elements of the
indicator vector bl1 are also marked to 1 correspondingly, and
the allocated RBs from the set of available RBs are excluded
for further scheduling. If all the RBs are allocated to l1 and
the total data size still cannot exceed ˆCl1, then l1 cannot be
17
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

served. This will lead to another packet selection with the next
lowest rate requirements.
B. Resource Eﬃcient-oriented Power Allocation
After packet l1 is selected in the ﬁrst stage, we can further
optimize the consumption of transmit power and number of
RBs. In the RB allocation process, equal power allocation is
assumed. Now we use an inverse-waterﬁlling (IWF) method
to minimizing power subject to a rate constraint (meaning that
the packet needs to be delivered at its full size), which is a
dual problem of conventional waterﬁlling [6].
Suppose the indexes in QS is ui = miNF + ni (i = 1, · · · , d),
where d is the number of allocated RBs. The IWF method can
be formulated as an convex optimization problem:
min
r
l1
u1,···,r
l1
ud
dP
i=1
Pui
where Pui = N0WRB · 2
 
rl1
ui
,
WRB
!
−1
Hα(l1)(mi,ni)
(9)
s.t.

d
X
i=1
rl1ui
 · TTI = ˆS l1
(10)
rl1ui ≥ 0
∀i = 1, · · · , d
(11)
where rl1ui = rl1mini is the achievable rate on RB u and Pui is the
power allocated on RB u. After the optimal rui is solved, Pui
can be simply calculated. This problem can be easily solved
using the Lagrangian method:
rl1ui = WRB ·
*
log2
 Hα(l1)(mi, ni)
Hth
!+∞
0
(12)
where Hth is the water level and the solution to
d
X
i=1
*
log2
 Hα(l1)(mi, ni)
Hth
!+∞
0
=
ˆS l1
WRB · TTI
(13)
We can see that an RB is utilized only if a positive energy is
scheduled on it, i.e., rl1ui ≥ 0 or equivalently Hα(l1)(mi, ni) > Hth.
Then we calculate the total energy consumed, and subtract
it from P0, the total energy left for the other un-scheduled
packets. For all ui that rui ≤ 0, meaning that these RBs are
not needed for transmitting packet l1 and thereby can be re-
allocated to other packets, add them back to ΘRB. It is obvious
that this power allocation step not only optimizes the power
consumption for the packet transmission, but also potentially
saves some spectrum resource blocks for further scheduling of
more packets.
C. Brief Summary and Performance Metric of Delay Tolerant
Scheduling
Combing the above two stages, we summarize the solution
to the delay tolerant scheduling problem in Table II. After
the scheduling is done for as many packets as possible, the
maximized sum data size served is P
l∈Q1
ˆS l1. It is easy to see
that the complexity of the above method is much lower than
exhaustive search.
TABLE II
Solution to Delay Tolerant Scheduling
While Φ is not empty, where Φ is the set of the index of packets left
un-selected:
1) Follow the process in Table I, select a packet l1 to serve, and
allocates RBs in QS to l1.
2) Do power allocation among RBs in QS by solving the convex
optimization problem in (9); go back to step 1).
IV. Simulation Results and Performance Analysis
In order to compare the proposed scheduling scheme with
existing ones, we use a standard compliant LTE system
level simulator [7] that is publicly available, based on which
necessary modules are further developed.
The simulation parameters are summarized in Table III.
We use a microscale fading channel model with channel gain
constant during a 20ms TTI and independent among all TTIs.
Due to the delay-free and error-free CSI feedback assumption,
the DTSS gets the CSI information before transmissions. The
packets have sizes and delay properties as typical multime-
dia traﬃc (including audio, video streaming, etc.), and the
scheduling period is set to be 10 or 20 TTIs. The delay
tolerance of packets span from 1 TTI (20ms) to 20 TTIs
(400ms), which corresponds to the QoS demands of most
typical services. All the packets can be viewed as non-realtime
(NRT) service requests, which have average rate constraints
within their own valid periods. Thereby, the heterogeneity of
services are embodied through the diﬀerence of packet sizes
and delay tolerances.
First, we consider the case with a ﬁxed number of ﬁve
users and compare the performance of diﬀerent schedulers.
Fig. 2 shows the sum throughput of all the users versus their
average signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) when applying diﬀerent
schedulers. Our proposed DTS with scheduling period (delay
tolerance) of 10 and 20 TTIs are shown with three typical
scheduling algorithms, including Round Robin (RR), MaxMin
(MM) and Proportional Fair (PF) scheduling. A best eﬀort
(BE) upper bound, which is the capacity limit of ﬁve users
with all full buﬀer Best Eﬀort (BE) traﬃc without considering
packet arrivals and delay constraints, is simulated and shown
for comparison.
It is shown that DTS can achieve up to 2 to 4 times of
throughput than existing schedulers at normally used common
SNR region (0 to 10 dB). The throughput gain is larger
for lower SNR values and diminishes gradually as the SNR
increases. This gain is achieved since under low SNR, existing
schedulers may not successfully serve packets at its full size
or accept certain requests, due to both the tighter constraints
of frequency and power resources within a shorter period and
lack of utilization of QoS and CSI to make proper scheduling
decisions. On the other hand, DTS is able to jointly utilize the
resources within a longer period and optimize the schedul-
ing decisions, by collecting the QoS and CSI information
within the delay tolerance, thereby achieving more successful
transmissions of packets and higher throughput. Other than
18
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

TABLE III
Simulation Parameters
Parameter
Value
System Bandwidth
1.4MHz
Number of subcarriers
72
Number of RBs N
12
Number of user K
5 per sector
Packet Arrival Interval (Poisson)
1 TTI
Channel Model
ITU-T PedB [10]
eNodeB Settings
distance 500m, tx power 20W
Large-Scale Fading
3GPP TS25.814
Shadowing
R9-Claussen, 10dB variance
−10
−5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Sum Throughput obtained of UE1~5
SNR [dB]
Throughput [MBit/s]
 
 
BE Upper Bound(BE)
DTS 20 TTIs
DTN 10 TTIs
Proportional Fair(PF)
MaxMin(MM)
Round Robin(RR)
Fig. 2.
Sum Throughput versus SNR with diﬀerent schedulers
a ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out manner, DTS prioritize the transmissions
of the right packets, not simply the early packets. With a
higher throughput, the spectrum eﬃciency is also times higher.
Moreover, by increasing delay tolerance, the throughput of
DTS is further boosted and thereby the gap between it and
the BE upper bound decreases.
Then, we show the beneﬁts of multiuser diversity in the
scheduling process. Fig. 3 shows the sum throughput of
diﬀerent schedulers versus diﬀerent number of users under
a ﬁxed average SNR of 10dB. It is shown that as the number
of users increases in the same cell, the throughput gradually
increases. This is due to the eﬀect of multiuser diversity.
Similar application of this concept can be found in [8]. Also,
we can observe that the increasing rate of throughput of DTS
is larger than the ones of other schedulers. The reason is that
our algorithm can better collaborate multiuser diversity with
frequency and time diversity of channel fading.
V. Conclusions
In this paper, we proposed a delay tolerant scheduling
scheme for real-time traﬃc of multiple users in an OFDMA-
based LTE downlink network. We introduced the framework
of delay tolerant scheduling, and formulate the target of
maximizing spectrum utilization in supporting heterogenous
traﬃc as an optimization problem. To eﬃciently solve the
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Sum Throughput obtained of all UE
Number of UEs
Throughput [MBit/s]
 
 
BE Upper Bound(BE)
DTS 20 TTIs
DTN 10 TTIs
Proportional Fair(PF)
MaxMin(MM)
Round Robin(RR)
Fig. 3.
Sum Throughput versus number of UEs with diﬀerent schedulers
problem, a two-stage heuristic algorithm consists of packet
selection/subchannel allocation and power allocation with fair
complexity is given. This algorithm embodies the essence of
DTS, which is to utilize all the spectrum and power resources
onto the most proper packets. This is done by exploiting the
delay tolerance of the scheduler and jointly processing QoS
and channel state information within a longer period to get
the optimal scheduling decision. Simulation results show that
our scheduler outperforms existing algorithms with respect to
system throughput and spectrum eﬃciency.
Acknowledgment
This research work was supported by National Basic Re-
search Program of China (No. 2007CB310601) and NSFC
(No. 60972021).
References
[1] M. Tao, Y. Liang, and F. Zhang, Resource Allocation for Delay Dif-
ferentiated Traﬃc in Multiuser OFDM Systems, ;IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Coomunications, ;vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2190 - 2201, Jun. 2008.
[2] R. Zhang, Optimal Dynamic Resource Allocation for Multi-Antenna
Broadcasting With Heterogeneous Delay-Constrained Traﬃc, IEEE Jou.
on Sel in Sig. Proc, ;vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 243 - 255, Apr. 2008.
[3] R. Zhang, Optimized Multi-Antenna Broadcasting for Heterogeneous
Delay-Constrained Traﬃc, ;IEEE ICC 2008, May. 2008.
[4] T. Girici, and A. Epl, Practical Resource Allocation Algorithms for QoS
in OFDMA-based Wireless Systems, ;IEEE CCNC 2008, Jan. 2008.
[5] T. Girici, and A. Epl, A channel-aware queue-aware resource allocation
algorithm for OFDMA system with heterogenous delay requirements,
;ICPCSPA 2010, Jul. 2010.
[6] J. Lee, and N. Jindal, Energy-eﬃcient Scheduling of Delay Constrained
Traﬃc over Fading Channels; IEEE Transactions on Wireless Coomuni-
cations, ;vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 1866-1875, Apr. 2009.
[7] [Online]. Long Term Evolution (LTE) System Level simulator. Available:
http://www.nt.tuwien.ac.at/ltesimulator/
[8] B. Niu, O. Simeone, O. Somekh and A. M. Haimovich, Ergodic and
Outage Sum-Rate of Fading Broadcast Channels with 1-Bit Feedback,
;IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, ;vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 1282 -
1293, Mar. 2010.
19
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

