Ambient Intelligence for Outdoor Activities Support 
Possibilities for Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Networks Applications 
 
Peter Mikulecky, Petr Tucnik 
Faculty of Informatics and Management 
University of Hradec Kralove 
Hradec Kralove, Czech Republic 
peter.mikulecky@uhk.cz; petr.tucnik@uhk.cz 
 
 
Abstract— This paper is devoted to a recently running project 
with a purpose of getting some useful feedback from the 
interested community. The main point of the project is an 
attempt to apply approaches developed in the scope of the 
Ambient Intelligence area and usually implemented indoor 
(eg., intelligent homes) also in various fields suitable for large-
scale outdoor activities (esp. working) applications, like water 
resources management, forestry, etc.  The paper is oriented on 
investigation and sketching of some possibilities of large scale 
intelligent sensor network solutions for multi-agent based 
application in various areas where outdoor activities are 
frequent, but also where people working outdoor might need 
some more support because of possible hazardous situations 
that could appear. All the presented ideas are based on our 
recent project SMEW: Smart Environments at Workplaces that 
is oriented on bringing more intelligence to workplaces in 
general, but it has been oriented prevailingly on indoor 
working 
activities. 
Extending 
the 
approaches 
already 
developed in its scope to selected outdoor activities seems to be 
very challenging and useful. 
Keywords-wireless sensor networks; large-scale applications; 
ambient intelligence; outdoor activities 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When speaking about outdoor activities from the point of 
view of possible Ambient Intelligence (AmI) applications 
intended to provide certain support to the people working or 
simply situated in an outdoor environment, it is impossible to 
omit recent achievements in the area of large-scale wireless 
sensor networks. Related to the Ambient Intelligence 
research, we have to mention the notion of Large-scale 
Ambient Intelligence [1].  
The notion Large-scale Ambient Intelligence was firstly 
used in [1]. Here, true large-scale AmI realization meant that 
the users were able to acquire whatever, whenever and 
wherever. In this concept it is understood, that the AmI 
vision would be extended from anytime-anywhere to 
anytime-anywhere-anything. In addition to incorporating 
intelligence in sensor nodes within a sensor network, Iqbal et 
al. [1] proposed to upgrade this vision to the next level where 
these geographically distributed intelligent sensor networks 
would become intelligent sensor resources accessible to the 
users anytime-anywhere. 
In our earlier papers [2][3][4], we started with some 
contemplations related towards possibilities of using ambient 
intelligence approaches in 
an outdoor environment, 
especially for river basin management. Here some 
approaches based on knowledge-based system applications 
for a particular river basin control were described. The 
purpose of the knowledge-based system deployed was in 
supporting decision making processes of the river basin 
managers. Nevertheless, the approaches used were a bit 
narrowly focused, intending to support just decision making 
of several persons responsible for the river basin control. 
Other people in the vicinity of the river have not been 
involved. In the case of, e.g., flooding threats the only 
informed people were the river basin managers, but not the 
other people potentially endangered by the threading 
situation. Therefore we started to think about the possibility 
of enhancing in this particular case the river basin area by a 
wireless sensor network with some new functionality, 
involving also the people working or located in the area, 
potentially endangered by flash floods, forest fire, or other 
possible environmental catastrophes.  In this paper, we 
intend to go further with the ideas how ambient intelligence 
used in “large-scale” over a wireless sensor network 
throughout the open natural environment could be beneficial 
in supporting various important activities, performed 
outdoor, in nature. We present here some ideas about 
possibilities for outdoor large-scale ambient intelligence 
focused 
also 
on 
such 
areas, 
where 
environmental 
catastrophes with disastrous effects could appear.  
The structure of the paper is as follows:  
After the introduction, the second part is devoted to 
related work in the area. Here, we mention several 
interesting papers trying to deploy wireless sensor networks 
for environmental applications. However, these applications 
lack the ambient intelligence functionality so far, they are 
just oriented on data collection and processing from a large 
environmental area. The collected data are broadcasted to a 
central point, where they are used as support for decision 
making of certain persons with various responsibilities 
related to the area monitored. At the end of the second part, 
we explain importance of ambient intelligence applications 
for certain types of outdoor activities and we describe a 
scenario how ambient intelligence applications over a large-
scale wireless sensor networks can be beneficial there. 
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

The third part of the paper sketched briefly some ideas 
for 
functionality of large-scale ambient 
intelligence 
applications for outdoor activities support. Fourth part of the 
paper is a summary of presented ideas with a view towards 
further research.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Outdoor-oriented applications of Ambient Intelligence 
approaches should be undoubtedly based on recent 
achievements in the area of wireless sensor networks. Let us 
describe shortly a few representative related works in this 
area, in the second part of this chapter we shall bring an 
overview of true large-scale outdoor (or environmental) 
applications based on sophisticated wireless sensor networks. 
A. Wireless Sensor Networks 
Tremendous effort has been devoted recently to the area 
of sensor networks and their important applications, as 
mentioned in [5]. A wireless sensor network is usually a 
combination 
of 
low-cost, 
low-power, 
multifunctional 
miniature sensor devices consisting of sensing, data 
processing, and communicating components, networked 
through wireless links [5]. In a typical application, a large 
number of such sensor nodes are deployed over an area with 
wireless communication capabilities between neighboring 
nodes.  
There is a number of works dealing with technical 
possibilities of sensor networks. The book [5] lists a number 
of results, oriented on context-awareness of sensors and 
sensor networks. The idea behind context-awareness is, that 
if sensors could know more about their own context, then 
they could adapt their behavior and function only when 
needed and to the extent adequate to the current 
circumstances. This aspect can be important also for power 
consumption by the sensor. A lot of work has been done by 
[6][7][8], interesting survey [9][10]. These works are mainly 
surveys of recent results in the wireless sensors area and their 
applications in wireless sensor networks. An excellent survey 
of environmentally-oriented wireless sensor networks has 
been written by Corke and his colleagues [11]. They review 
recent experiments with wireless sensor networks for 
environmental and agricultural applications; they also 
provide an interesting critical review of recent research and 
considers future challenges and opportunitiesin the area of 
environmental monitoring. A comprehensive, yet bit older, 
survey of wireless sensor networks applications was written 
by Arampatzis, Lygeros, and Manesis [12]. They try to 
survey the numerous applications that utilize wireless 
sensors, or wireless sensors networks and classify them in 
five appropriate categories, such as military applications, or 
environmental monitoring. 
B. Large-Scale Environmental Applications 
Among a number of recent interesting large-scale 
environmental applications, we can mention the FieldServer 
Project [13], and the Live E! Project [14]. 
The FieldServer Project is oriented on development and 
networked applications of so-called Field Servers. A Field 
Server [13] is a wireless sensor network that will enhance the 
monitoring of environmental factors by allowing sensing 
nodes to be located at precise locations in fields, reducing 
overhead installation costs, and allowing for real-time data 
collection. In Japan, Field Servers were developed for 
applications at farms. They produce real-time images for 
security guards, and environmental data for farming. 
Scientists such as agronomists, physiologists and ecologists 
can exploit high-resolution real-time images in order to react 
on any specific situation that deserves or requires some 
intervention in the environment. Many types of Field Servers 
have been developed up to now. 
The Live E! Project [14] is an open research consortium 
focused on sharing the digital information related to the 
living environment. Using the low cost weather sensor nodes 
with Internet connectivity, a nationwide sensor network was 
deployed [14]. The network has accommodated more than 
100 stations. The application of this weather station network 
is intended for disaster protection/reduction/recovery and 
also as educational material for students. 
According to Yang [15], watershed management 
administers water resources within a watershed for different 
water users.  The ultimate purpose of watershed management 
plan is to maximize the profits of different users meanwhile 
reducing the possible conflicts that might occur between 
them.  Watershed management can be very efficiently 
modelled using multi-agent systems, nevertheless, there is 
just a few works taking into account also catastrophic 
situations [16].  
Some attempts to apply the Ambient Intelligence 
approaches to disaster management in general are presented 
in [17], where an architecture is proposed aiming to help in 
decision-making processes in disaster management. Here, 
several different environments are considered, namely a 
smart house, an airport and a paramedics unit assessing a 
victim of a nuclear disaster. 
One of the most significant drivers for wireless sensor 
network research is without any doubt environmental 
monitoring. Its potential will not only enable scientists to 
measure properties that have not previously been observable, 
but also by ubiquitously monitoring the environment and 
supplying the related data to relevant supervising bodies they 
can create a basis of early warning systems for various 
environmental disastrous situations and their management. 
As Ruiz-Garcia et al. [18] point out, the relatively low cost 
of the wireless sensor networks devices allow the installation 
of a dense population of nodes that can adequately represent 
the variability present in the environment. They can provide 
various risk assessment information, for example alerting 
farmers to the onset of frost damage. Wireless sensor 
networks based fire surveillance systems were designed and 
implemented, as well. They can measure temperature and 
humidity, and detect smoke followed by early warning 
information broadcasting [19]. Sensors are able to consider 
certain dynamic and static variables such as humidity, the 
type of fuel, slope of the land, the direction and the speed of 
the wind, smoke, etc. They also allow determining the 
direction and possible evolution of the flame front. 
However, 
apart 
from 
other 
similarly 
serious 
environmental disasters, floods are responsible for the loss of 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

precious lives and destruction of large amounts of property 
every year, especially in the poor and developing countries. 
A lot of effort has been put in developing systems which 
help to minimize the damage through early disaster 
predictions [20]. On the other hand, as drought periods, 
opposite to floods, cause lot of damage every year as well 
[21], also this problem deserves high effort. Interesting 
solutions to the problems can be found in [22][23] [24]. 
Cardell-Oliver and her colleagues [6] proposed a novel 
reactive soil moisture sensor network that reacts to rain 
storms in such a way,  that frequent soil moisture readings 
were collected during rain (approx. every 10 minutes), but 
less frequent readings (once a day) were collected when it is 
not raining. The network includes a node with a tipping 
bucket rain gauge sensor and, in another part of the 
landscape, a group of nodes with soil moisture sensors. The 
node monitoring rain is separated from the nodes monitoring 
soil moisture, and yet these nodes need to share information, 
whilst minimizing the time spent sending, receiving and 
listening to messages. 
C. Outdoor Activities Support 
In order to support a person’s activities outdoor, the 
geographic location must be identified as important 
contextual information that can be used in a variety of 
scenarios like disaster relief, directional assistance, context-
based advertisements, or early warning the particular person 
in some potentially dangerous situations. GPS provides 
accurate localization outdoors, although is not very useful 
inside buildings. Outdoor to indoor and vice versa activities 
localization was investigated, e.g. in [25], by a coarse indoor 
localization approach exploiting the ubiquity of smart phones 
with embedded sensors. 
Outdoor acting person’s support should provide relevant 
and reliable information to users often engaged in other 
activities and not aware of some hazardous situations that he 
or she could possibly encounter. There are only a small 
number of attempts to solve the related dangerous situations 
that can be described using the following scenario: 
A user appears in a natural environment performing 
her/his working mission, a kind of leisure time activity 
(hiking tour, mountaineering, cycling, etc.), or because of 
being an inhabitant of the area. A sudden catastrophic 
situation (storm, flash flood, debris flow, etc. could put the 
person in a risky, if not a life endangering situation. A 
federated wireless sensor network is ubiquitously monitoring 
the area and estimating the possible appearance of a 
dangerous situation. If necessary, the network will 
proactively broadcast an early warning message to the user, 
offering her/him related navigation services supporting 
escape from the dangerous situation. 
In the literature, there is only a handful of articles 
oriented towards a kind of a service to the potentially 
endangered persons in a natural environment; however, the 
helpful information to the potentially endangered person is 
never such complex as we intend to provide in our approach. 
For instance, there are some attempts of preventing 
children from potentially dangerous situations in an urban 
environment. Probably the first ubiquitous system to assist 
the outdoor safety care of the schools kids in the real world is 
described in [26]. The research described there was focused 
on designing a ubiquitous kid’s safety care system capable of 
dynamically detecting possible dangerous situations in 
school routes and promptly give advice to kids and/or their 
parents in order to avoid or prevent some possible dangers. 
To detect the dangerous situations, it is essential to get 
enough contexts of real environments in kids’ surroundings. 
This is based on two basic assumptions: (1) a big number of 
sensors, RFID tags (Radio Frequency Identification tags), 
and other information acquisition devices are pervasively 
distributed somewhere in and near school routes, and (2) a 
kid should carry or wear some devices that can get 
surrounding context data from the above pervasive devices. 
A number of papers are devoted to various solutions for 
tourist assistance, mainly oriented on context-aware tourist 
navigation on their routes. The usual approach [27][28] is in 
deployment of intelligent agents, which collectively 
determine the user context followed by retrieving and 
assembling 
simple 
information 
that 
are 
wirelessly 
transmitted and displayed on a Personal Digital Assistant 
(PDA). However, these tourism oriented applications are 
usually deployed for navigational purposes, without having 
capabilities of warning the user from potentially dangerous 
situations that can appear during their routes. 
III. 
RESEARCH TO BE PERFORMED 
The environmentally-oriented wireless sensor networks 
[29] are mature enough to become a basis for more complex 
support of various outdoor activities. As Efstratiou [30] 
pointed out, wireless sensor networks are more and more 
seen as a solution to large-scale tracking and monitoring 
applications, but, these networks are usually designed to 
serve a single application and collected information is 
commonly available to one authority, usually to the owner of 
the sensor network.  
The usual situation in wireless sensor networks 
applications is that these networks are just collecting - 
although usually on a very advanced sophisticated level - 
data from the environment, with further broadcasting them 
into some central office for decision support of certain 
specialists responsible for the area monitored by the sensor 
network. We believe that we can and must want more from 
them. For instance, if an intelligent system is deployed over 
the sensor network with the purpose not only to broadcast 
the collected data somewhere, but also to provide some 
processing of the data, evaluation of certain patterns in them 
significant for certain typical or even unexpected situations 
in the monitored environment, the whole system would be 
able to provide at least some early warning messages for 
people located in the monitored area in order to prevent them 
from potential endangerments. 
According to Efstratiou [30], the vision for the future 
generation of sensor networks is of a world where sensing 
infrastructure is a shared resource that can be dynamically 
re-purposed and re-programmed in order to support multiple 
applications. 
Furthermore, 
multiple 
sensor 
networks 
(possibly owned by different authorities) can be combined in 
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

a federated fashion in order to create a more complete 
picture of the world. 
We certainly share this opinion and propose a research, 
oriented not only on certain combination of sensor networks, 
as Efstratiou proposes, but also on a design and deployment 
of an ambient intelligence system over a large-scale 
environmental wireless sensor network in a potentially risky 
natural environment that will perform the following tasks: 
 
Monitoring 
the 
usual 
hydro-meteorological 
parameters of the environment (air pressure, 
temperature, humidity, soil moisture, etc.), 
 
Monitoring indications of possible dangerous 
situations (seismoacoustic signals, smoke, water on 
unusual places, etc.), 
 
Monitoring appearance and movement of animals 
and human beings in the area, 
 
Evaluating the data collected from the sensor 
network 
and 
identifying 
possibly 
dangerous 
situations, 
 
Identification of possibly endangered human beings 
in the area under monitoring, 
 
Attempting to contact the persons in danger possibly 
via their mobile devices and starting to provide all 
the necessary information and knowledge support  
aiming to help them escape from the dangerous 
situation (including eventual alarming of a rescue 
squad.) 
As an example of a system that is in a sense a good 
candidate to be enhanced according to our just mentioned 
ideas, we could refer to [31]. The deployed sensor network 
aimed to assist the geophysics community preventing them 
from possible dangerous situations. In contrast with at that 
time existing volcanic data-acquisition equipment the used 
nodes of the sensor network were smaller, lighter, and 
consumed less power. The resulting spatial distribution 
greatly facilitated scientiﬁc studies of wave propagation 
phenomena and volcanic source mechanisms. Certainly, we 
can imagine a number of potentially dangerous situations 
that can endanger people working closely to the volcano. 
Enhancing the purely geophysical sensor networks by the 
features mentioned above could improve the safety of 
working near the volcano.  
Another example belongs also to the area of potentially 
dangerous workplaces. The result of [32] seems to be one of 
those attempts that aimed directly at developing a sensor 
networks for monitoring possible dangerous situations in a 
large yet closed environment - a coal mine. Nevertheless, the 
experience with early warning sensor network in a Chinese 
coal mine is very good and inspirational [32].  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Our recent project SMEW: Smart Environments at 
Workplaces is oriented on bringing more intelligence to 
workplaces in general, but it has been oriented prevailingly 
on indoor working activities. Extending the approaches 
already developed in its scope to selected outdoor activities 
seems to be very challenging and useful. 
Implementation of the ideas sketched in the paper still 
needs a lot of future work. We are working recently on a 
multi-agent architecture capable to process data provided by 
the underlying wireless sensor network in such a way that a 
model of the monitored environment will be created as a 
basis for further steps of the whole systems. Based on the 
created model, the multi-agent architecture should by 
capable to identify any deviation from the expected state of 
the environment, decide about possible action to be 
launched, and communicate with any person appearing in the 
potentially dangerous situation throughout the environment. 
Of course, at least the following research tasks must be 
solved:  
 
Design of the multi-agent architecture over the 
wireless sensor network implemented throughout the 
outdoor environment; 
 
Employment 
of 
a 
suitable 
decision-making 
mechanism that will serve in selecting the most 
appropriate actions to be possibly launched; 
 
Decide about the most appropriate way of 
communication with potentially endangered persons 
appearing in the monitored environment; 
 
Implement  the multi-agent architecture over a real 
and carefully chosen large-scale wireless sensor 
network in  a real outdoor environment (a forest, a 
watershed, or any other suitable environment) and 
evaluate it. 
Ambient intelligence approaches have recently proven 
their usefulness when implemented indoor (intelligent homes 
or 
households). 
We 
are 
convinced 
that 
outdoor 
implementations have a large applicability as well and can be 
at least equally useful.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Czech Science 
Foundation project  GACR  P403/10/1310 „SMEW  –  Smart 
Environments at Workplaces“. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Iqbal, H. B. Lim, W. Wang, and Y. Yao, “A sensor grid 
infrastructure for large-scale ambient intelligence”, in 2008 Ninth 
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing, 
Applications and Technologies, pp. 468-473, IEEE, 2008. 
[2] P. Mikulecky, K. Olsevicova, and D. Ponce, “Knowledge-based 
approaches for river basin management”, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. 
Discuss., 4, pp. 1999–2033, 2007. 
[3] P. Mikulecký, D. Ponce, and M. Toman, “A knowledge-based 
decision support system for river basin management”, in River Basin 
Management II, C.A.Brebbia, Ed., Southampton: WIT Press, 2003, 
pp. 177-185. 
[4] P. Mikulecký, D. Ponce, and M. Toman, “A knowledge-based 
solution for river water resources management”, in Water Resources 
Management II, C.A. Brebbia, Ed., Southampton: WIT Press, 2003, 
pp. 451-458. 
[5] S. Loke, Context-Aware Pervasive Systems, Boca Raton: Auerbach 
Publications, 2007. 
[6] R. Cardell-Oliver, K. Smettem, M. Kranz, and K. Mayer, “A reactive 
soil moisture sensor network: Design and field evaluation”, Int. 
Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks 1, pp. 149-162, 2005. 
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[7] E. Elnahrawy and B. Nath, “Context-aware sensors”, in Proc. 1st 
European Workshop on Wireless Sensor Networks, pp. 77-93, 2004. 
[8] Q. Huaifeng and Z. Xingshe, “Context-aware Sensornet”, in Proc. 3rd 
International Workshop on Middleware for Pervasive and Ad-Hoc 
Computing, Grenoble, ACM Press,  pp. 1-7, 2005. 
[9] I. F. Akyldiz, W. Su, Z. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayrici, “A 
survey on sensor networks”, IEEE Communications Magazine 40, pp. 
102-114, 2002. 
[10] D. Puccinelli and Haenggi, M., “Wireless sensor networks: 
Applications and challenges of ubiquitous sensing”, IEEE Circuits 
and Systems Magazine, pp. 19-29, 3rd Quarter 2005. 
[11] P. Corke, T. Wark, R. Jurdak, W. Hu, P. Valencia, and D. Moore, 
“Environmental wireless sensor networks”, Proceedings of the IEEE, 
Vol. 98, No. 11, pp. 1903-1917, November 2010. 
[12] Th. Arampatzis, J. Lygeros, and S. Manesis, A Survey of 
Applications of Wireless Sensors and Wireless Sensor Networks, in 
Proc. of the 13th Mediterranean Conference on Control and 
Automation, Limassol, Cyprus, pp. 719-724, June 2005. 
[13] S. Ninomiya, T. Kiura, A. Yamakawa, T. Fukatsu, K. Tanaka, H. 
Meng, M. Hirafuji, Seamless Integration of Sensor Network and 
Legacy Weather Databases by MetBroker, In 2007 International 
Symposium 
on 
Applications 
and 
the 
Internet 
Workshops 
(SAINTW'07), IEEE, p. 68, 2007. 
[14] S. Matsuura, et al., LiveE! Project: Establishment of Infrastructure 
Sharing 
Environmental 
Information. 
In 
2007 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Applications 
and 
the 
Internet 
Workshops 
(SAINTW'07), IEEE, p. 67, 2007. 
[15] I.-C. Yang, Modeling Watershed Management with an Ecological 
Objective - A Multiagent System Based Approach. PhD Dissertation, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2010. 
[16] L. Brouwers, K. Hansson, H. Verhagen,  and M. Boman, Agent 
Models of Catastrophic Events. In Proceedings of Modelling 
Autonomous Agents in a Multi-Agent World, 10thEuropean 
workshop on Multi Agent Systems, Annecy, 2001. 
[17] J.C. Augusto, J. Liu, and L. Chen, Using Ambient Intelligence for 
Disaster Management. In  Knowledge-Based Intelligent Information 
and Engineering Systems, Proc. KES 2006, LNCS 4252, Berlin and 
Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 171-178, 2006. 
[18] L. Ruiz-Garcia, L. Lunadei, P. Barreiro, and J.I. Robla, A Review of 
Wireless Sensor Technologies and Applications in Agriculture and 
Food Industry: State of the Art and Current Trends. Sensors 9, pp. 
4728-4750, 2009. 
[19] J. Lloret, M. Garcia, D. Bri, and S. Sendra, A Wireless Sensor 
Network Deployment for Rural and Forest Fire Detection and 
Verification. Sensors 9, pp. 8722-8747, 2009.  
[20] V. Seal, A. Raha, S. Maity, et al., A Simple Flood Forecasting 
Scheme Using Wireless Sensor Networks. International Journal of Ad 
hoc, Sensor & Ubiquitous Computing (IJASUC) Vol.3, No.1, pp. 45-
60, 2012. 
[21] H. - Y. Kung, J.-S. Hua, and C.-T. Chen, Drought Forecast Model 
and Framework Using Wireless Sensor Networks. J. of Inf. Science 
and Engineering 22, pp. 751-769, 2006. 
[22] R. Marin-Perez, J. García-Pintado, and A. Skarmeta Gómez, A real-
time measurement system for long-life flood monitoring and warning 
applications. Sensors 12, pp. 4213-4236, 2012. 
[23] Y. Zhang, L. Luo, J. Huo, and W. Zhu, An Eco-Hydrology Wireless 
Sensor Demonstration Network in High-Altitude and Alpine 
Environment in the Heihe River Basin of China. Wireless Sensor 
Network, Vol. 4 No. 5, pp. 138-146, 2012. 
[24] E. Basha and D. Rus, Design of Early Warning Flood Detection 
Systems for Developing Countries, in Proceedings of the Conference 
on Informations and Communication Technologies and Development, 
Bangalore, India,  2007. 
[25] A. Parnandi, K. Le, P. Vaghela, A. Kolli, K. Dantu, S. Poduri, and G. 
S. Sukhatme, Coarse In-Building Localization with Smartphones, 
Proc. of the MobiCASE 2009, pp. 343-354, 2009. 
[26] K. Takata, Y. Shina, H. Komuro, M. Tanaka, M. Ide, and J. Ma, 
Designing a Context-Aware System to Detect Dangerous Situations 
in School Routes  for Kids Outdoor Safety Care, in L.T. Yang et al. 
(Eds.): EUC 2005, LNCS 3824, pp. 1016-1025, Berlin: Springer, 
2005. 
[27] G.M.P. O’Hare and  M.J. O’Grady, Gulliver’s Genie: a multi-agent 
system for ubiquitous and intelligent content delivery, Computer 
Communications 26, pp. 1177–1187, 2003. 
[28] O. Krejcar, Threading Possibilities of Smart Devices Platforms for 
Future User Adaptive Systems, in Intelligent Information and 
Database Systems, Berlin: Springer, pp. 458-467, 2012. 
[29] J. K. Hart and K. Martinez, Environmental Sensor Networks: A 
revolution in the earth system science?, Earth-Science Reviews 78, 
pp. 177 – 191, 2006. 
[30] Ch. Efstratiou, Challenges in Supporting Federation of Sensor 
Networks, in NSF/FIRE Workshop on Federating Computing 
Resources, 2010. 
[31] G. Werner-Allen, K. Lorincz, M. Welsh, O. Marcillo, J. Johnson, M. 
Ruiz, and J. Lees, Deploying a wireless sensor network on an active 
volcano. IEEE Internet Computing, 10(2), pp18-25, 2006. 
[32] X. Wang, X. Zhao, Z. Liang, and M. Tan, Deploying a Wireless 
Sensor Network on the Coal Mines, in Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE 
International Conference on Networking, Sensing and Control, 
London, UK, pp. 324-328, April 2007. 
 
 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

