Categorization of Technologies used for Fingerprint-Based Indoor Localization
M´ario Andrade Vieira de Melo Neto and Gibeon Soares de Aquino J´unior
Department of Informatics and Applied Mathematics
Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte
Campus Universit´ario, Lagoa Nova, 59078-900
Natal, RN, Brazil
Email: mariovmelo@gmail.com, gibeon@dimap.ufrn.br
Abstract—Indoor localization systems have become very popular
in recent years. These systems provide a new automation layer
for the localization of people or objects in indoor environments,
which makes them crucial for many applications. The indoor
localization techniques can be classiﬁed in the following classes:
proximity, ﬁngerprint, triangulation and vision analysis, being
the ﬁngerprint class the most used. This paper presents the
results of a literature systematic mapping on ﬁngerprint-based
indoor localization, aiming to identify the technologies used for
this purpose. The selected search strategy returned 1003 papers,
which underwent a series of inclusion and exclusion criteria that
resulted with 539 articles being accepted. This work identiﬁed
that the main technology used for indoor localization is the WIFI,
followed by ZigBee. As a contribution, this study is intended
to provide an overview of the indoor location area and the
technologies used in others studies.
Keywords–indoor localization;ﬁngerprint; technologies;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Indoor localization systems have become very popular in
recent years. These systems provide a new automation layer for
the localization of people or objects in indoor environments,
which makes them crucial for many applications. According
to [1] after more than one decade in this area, the indoor
localization problem remains unsolved. There does not seem
to exist a technology or a combination of technologies that can
solve this problem in an acceptable manner and at a low cost.
For outdoor location, the most popular technology is the
Global Positioning System (GPS) [2], which works based on
satellites, making it quite accurate in external locations but
inappropriate for indoor spaces. This limitation is caused by
the inability of the satellite’s signals to propagate in areas that
are full of obstacles, causing failures or the impossibility to
calculate the target’s position. Aiming to achieve the same
success as the GPS, indoor localization systems have been
increasingly gaining space, providing new strategies for the
detection of people and objects. There are many real world
situations in which these systems can be used, such as: detec-
tion and control of products stored in a warehouse, location
of medical personnel or equipments in a hospital, location of
ﬁremen in a building on ﬁre, location of police dogs trained to
ﬁnd explosives in a building and ﬁnding tagged maintenance
tools and equipment scattered all over a plant [3].
Currently, large companies [4][5] are investing in research
and development of solutions for indoor localization. Neverthe-
less, there is still no localization solution proven effective on
indoor environments at the same scale that GPS is for outdoors.
One of the reasons for this is the high complexity of indoor
environments, which are always associated with a number of
challenges such as the inﬂuence of obstacles (walls, equipment
and people), overlap of signals emitted by various types of
equipments present in the locations, variety of buildings types
and dimensions that are considered small when compared to
outdoors.
According to [6], the indoor localization techniques are
classiﬁed using the following classes: triangulation, proximity,
ﬁngerprint and vision analysis. The ﬁngerprint technique was
chosen for this study because according to [7][8], is the
most widely used approach for indoor localization [9][10].
The ﬁngerprint-based indoor localization is deﬁned as the
determination of a position through the process of mapping
the environment’s aspects, such as the strength of the received
signal, the magnetic ﬁeld present at a location or any other
characteristic that can identify a position. With the result of
this mapping and the position where it was done, it is possible
to make an inference to get approximate location of people or
objects without the need of any specialized equipment.
This paper aims to perform a literature review on the
ﬁngerprint-based indoor localization subject in order to assist
researchers providing an overview of the indoor location
area and the technologies used in others studies. Therefore,
a systematic mapping was performed using the guidelines
deﬁned by [11][12]. The purpose of this review was to identify
the most used technologies, the types of researches that are
being conducted and the resultant contributions to the area.
It is important to obtain an overview so that researchers can
identify the most promising technologies present in the area
or propose the use of new technologies in this context.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
describes the protocol used to perform the mapping. Therefore
it presents research questions, search terms used, classiﬁcation
scheme and paper selection process. Section III presents the
main results, their implications and threats to validity. Section
IV concludes the study and indicates future trends on the
subject.
II.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In this paper, we present a systematic mapping review
based on guide written by [11]. Figure 1 shows an overview
of the systematic mapping process used in this study.
Following the process, the ﬁrst step was to deﬁne the
research questions, which are presented as follow: Which
technologies are used in ﬁngerprint-based indoor localization?
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 1. Systematic Mapping Process deﬁned by [11]
(RQ1); How are the papers distributed over time?(RQ2); In
the papers found, which types of researches were used? (RQ3);
What are the main type of contribution described in each work?
(RQ4).
A. Search Strategy
The research started by identifying the key terms used in
the proposed subject. For this, several searches were conducted
on the research databases in order to identify possible syn-
onyms and keywords that could return the highest number
of relevant papers. As a result of these pilot searches, the
following terms were chosen:
(”indoor location” OR ”indoor localization” OR ”indoor
positioning”) AND (ﬁngerprint)
Our search strategy used the most well-known academic
work databases in the science computer area, which are:
IEEEXplore, ACM digital library, Springerlink.
In order to obtain all the relevant works, we used the
meta-search engine Scopus [13], since it covers all the sources
that are relevant to our study. It was performed a solo search
resulting with 1003 papers for evaluation.
B. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Every recovered paper was manually evaluated using a set
of criteria in order to identify whether it would be included
or not in the mapping. For this purpose, we evaluated title,
abstract, keywords and, when necessary, introduction and
conclusion.
The inclusion criteria used to indicate whether a paper
would be part of the mapping or not are: propose or evaluate
an indoor localization technology and the paper was already
reported, only the latest will be considered.
For a paper to be excluded from the mapping, it needed to
ﬁt into at least one criterion as follows: papers not written in
English and papers that do not have full versions available.
C. Selection Process
This stage of the protocol was divided into two phases.
First, we applied the inclusion and exclusion criteria, which
resulted in papers that were relevant for the mapping process.
Table I shows this result. The second phase was responsible
for analyzing and classifying the papers based on the deﬁnition
of the categories identiﬁed during the development of the
classiﬁcation system described in Section II-D.
In the process of selection and classiﬁcation of works, no
inclusion criteria using quality levels were applied. This way,
we tried to avoid the discard of studies relevant to the research
because we could compromise the overview of the area, which
we wish to obtain.
TABLE I. SELECTION PAPERS STAGE
Stage
Description
n
1
Identiﬁed relevant papers
1003
2
Excluded inaccessible papers
1003
3
Excluded based on language
996
4
Excluded duplicated papers
954
5
Excluded based on title
946
6
Excluded based on abstract
829
7
Relevant papers
539
D. Classiﬁcation Scheme
The papers were classiﬁed based on three different facets.
Each facet consists of a set of categories in which papers can
be mapped. The facets are: technology, main contribution and
research type.
Technology Facet: Determines the technologies used in
the research. This classiﬁcation was obtained through the
keywording process [14]. Figure 5 presents this result.
Contribution Facet:This classiﬁcation determines the main
type of contribution achieved by the researcher. In other
words, the improvements proposed for the subject. These
contributions have been obtained using the keywording process
and are presented in Table II.
Research Type Facet: This classiﬁcation was suggested by
Wieringa et al. [15] and deﬁnes six categories, which are
brieﬂy described in Table III.
E. Data Extraction
During this phase, all necessary data for our mapping study
of the 1003 papers obtained in stage 1 of the selection process
was extracted based on a predeﬁned extraction form. This form
allowed the extraction of all data with all of the details needed
for the research questions analysis. Since our focus was to
obtain a list of technologies used for indoor localization, the
data extraction was performed individually for each paper.
III.
MAIN FINDINGS
In this section, we summarize and structure the results
according to the research questions deﬁned in Section II. For
each set of results, we will make a brief interpretation and
name some of the reviewed papers.
A. Results of Literature Mapping
In order to answer RQ2, Figure 2 presents the number
of included papers separated by year, with the higher value
occurring in 2013 with 141 papers. We noticed a small
decrease in the amount of included papers in 2014. This can
be explained because the mapping execution took place in
January/2015, so many papers were still not available in the
research databases. It is noticed that in the last three years, the
featured subject has received more attention in the 2012-2014
period, obtaining an increase of 40% in the number of papers
when compared to the 2004-2011 period. We notice that there
is a tendency that the number of papers in 2014 overcomes
the number of papers in 2013 due to the growth rate of the
inclusion curve.
Figure 3 presents the distribution of the classiﬁed papers in
the research type facet deﬁned in Section II-D. The obtained
results answer RQ3 and demonstrate that most papers - about
90% of the total report solution proposals. This number
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

TABLE II. CONTRIBUTION TYPE FACET
Category
Description
Solution
Represents a software or computational solution. Also apply to this deﬁnition: tool, system or application.
Method
Indicates how things should be done, i.e., using Bluetooth to perform the indoor localization. Algorithms, techniques
and approaches are part of this classiﬁcation.
Scheme
Describes a plan or protocol to treat speciﬁc problems. Deﬁnes a set of procedures and rules for the research or
proposed solution.
Metric
Metrics and measures for indoor localization.
Model
Represents a mathematical model description for indoor localization.
TABLE III. RESEARCH TYPE FACET
Category
Description
Validation Research
Techniques investigated are novel and have not yet been implemented in practice. Techniques used
are for example experiments.
Evaluation Research
Techniques are implemented in practice and an evaluation of the technique is conducted. This also
includes to identify problems in industry.
Solution Proposal
A solution for a problem is proposed, the solution can be either novel or signiﬁcant extension of an
existing technique. The potential beneﬁts and the applicability of the solution is shown by an example
or a good line of argumentation.
Philosophical Papers
These papers sketch a new way of looking at existing things by structuring the ﬁeld in form of a
taxonomy or conceptual framework.
Opinion Papers
These papers express the personal opinion of somebody whether a certain technique is good or bad,
or how things should been done.
Experience Papers
What and how something has been done in practice. It has to be the personal experience of the author.
Figure 2. Included Papers per Year
indicates that although many studies are focused on solutions,
there are still gaps to be ﬁlled related to solutions to perform
indoor location with better accuracy and reliability. A study
that exempliﬁes a solution proposal is presented in [16], where
it is proposed a system for indoor location using WIFI signals
and Smartphone sensors to estimate the location of a human
being in a corporate environment, achieving an accuracy of
about 2.3 m.
Figure 3. Distribution of research types
The numbers of validation and evaluation researches rep-
resent together approximately 10% of the total of researches
done. This demonstrates the low amount of researches for
the validation of solution proposals in laboratories or in the
industry. Another point that has drawn attention refers to the
fact that the philosophical papers are represented by only two
papers. The papers found in this category aim to propose
taxonomies and conceptual frameworks. Thus, a low number
of papers shows that there are conceptual and deﬁnitional gaps
to be exploited, which indicates the need to obtain theoretical
foundations, discussions and categorizations.
In order to answer RQ4, we present in Figure 4, the
amount of papers for each main contribution deﬁned. This
classiﬁcation was obtained using the key wording process
described in Section 2.3. The numbers for solutions and
methods contributions represent more than 97% of the total,
which demonstrates that the researcher’s focus are on the
pursuit of ”how” to make the indoor localization of objects or
persons. Of this total, the methods represent more than 63%
of all papers. This signiﬁcant value can be explained due to
sub-categories grouping, such as algorithms, techniques and
approaches in a higher-level category.
Figure 4. Distribution of contribution types
The solutions represent 34% of all of the papers, which
demonstrates that the researchers’ search for a computational
solution capable of performing satisfactorily the localization of
people or objects in indoor environments. Another important
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

fact is that the only article to propose a new metric for the
subject is [17], which proposes a metric that quantiﬁes the
localization effectiveness provided by an access point (AP).
B. Categorization of Technologies
Once we have mapped all of the technologies used in the
subject, we organize the set of technologies for ﬁngerprint-
based indoor location in six major categories which is shown
in Figure 5. After the distribution of the technologies in the
categories based based on the transmission medium employed
for spreading the information, we realized that the Radio Fre-
quency category has a higher amount of researches, which is
mostly due to WiFi and ZigBee attendance. The large majority
of the researches focus on Radio Frequency and Sensor-based
technologies, which demonstrates the path that the researchers
have been following for indoor location infrastructure and
devices.
Figure 5 presents the data needed to answer the RQ1,
including the technologies used in the evaluated papers and
their quantities. It is noticed that the number of technologies
used exceeds the number of papers evaluated because, in
some cases, more than one technology has been used in the
research. Among all, the technology that was mostly used
was the WIFI, which surpassed more than 6 times the second
place. According to [18], in 2012 about 1.5 billion devices
were activated using with WIFI. In addition to this, another
fact should be taken into consideration: the cost. Since the
needed infrastructure exists practically everywhere, it would
not be necessary to modify or insert any equipment, therefore
reducing costs.
Another technology that deserves to be mentioned due the
number of researches presence is the ZigBee. Despite being
very similar to WIFI and Bluetooth, it proposes better power
management and low data transmission [19]. Despite these
features, there are some factors that prevent ZigBee to be
used in large scale, such as high cost to deploy and short
range. According to [20], the Bluetooth technology will be
present in almost 4 billion devices being 1 billion of this total
on smartphones in 2016. So, it was expected a much larger
number for this technology. Since we expected that, it would
be at least among the top ﬁve. This technology has some
advantages for indoor positioning as presents [21], however
[7] presents one characteristic may have direct inﬂuence in the
presented numbers of using Bluetooth in localization is that, in
each location ﬁnding, it runs the device discovery procedure;
due to this, it signiﬁcantly increases the localization latency
(10 – 30 s) and power consumption as well. For this reason,
the Bluetooth technology has a major issue to overcome when
it comes to realtime positioning applications.
Despite being a Radio Frequency-based technology, the
GPS category was separated into a main category because it is
an established technology and can provide by itself the outdoor
location. Some studies use it combined with other technologies
for better indoor positioning precision. However, [22] is the
only case in which the GPS is used by itself without the use
of any auxiliary technology to perform indoor location.
The Sensor’s category has gained a lot of attention in
recent years in the area and the technologies responsible for
it are undoubtedly accelerometers and gyroscopes. This large
increase is directly linked to the Smartphone popularization
process. According to [23], 1.75 billion people have Smart-
phones with advanced capabilities. These smartphones with
advanced capabilities typically have multiple sensors, such as
accelerometers and gyroscopes, which are the most used in
researches in the Sensors category, indicating that there is still
a large gap for this theme when compared to the number of
papers in the Radio Frequency category.
By analyzing the list of technologies obtained, we realized
that several studies focus on more than one technology at a
time. Figure 6 presents the rate of hybrid approaches found
in the evaluated papers compared to the number of included
papers per year. For a better analysis, a ratio line linking
the two measures is presented. We noticed that between
2004 and 2007, no research was performed using combined
technologies. Since 2008, researchers began to discreetly use
hybrid approaches, which are responsible for about 9% of all of
the papers written in the period; the use of hybrid approaches
remained stable until 2012, having a 1% decrease in 2009.
From 2012, we noticed a gradual growth with a constant rate
of 2% a year. Despite the low number of researches with
this characteristic, there is a tendency that, in the upcoming
years, this number will grow and new solutions and methods
using combined technologies will be proposed. We believe that
one of the reasons that led the researchers to use this type
of approach is the fact that indoor environments can be very
complex and that no single technology is able to satisfactorily
adapt itself to these environments complexities in order to
perform an accurate localization.
Figure 6. Combined technology use evolution
Analyzing the set of technologies category from the per-
spective of hybrid approaches, like it was set forth in the
previous subsection, we present in Figure 7 the numbers of
papers that use single and combined technologies over the
technologies categorization. We realize that, in most stud-
ies, the radio frequency category uses only one technology.
The fact that this number is so expressive when compared
to the others can be explained by the presence of WIFI,
since in most of the analyzed papers, it was identiﬁed that
when a research involves this technology, it tends to use
single technology as opposed to combined technologies. We
believe that the researchers consider WIFI to be the standard
technology for indoor localization like GPS is for external
localization. The sensors category, in its turn, is totally the
opposite of Radio Frequency since most of their studies that
is, 86% of them - uses more than one technology. This trend
of combining various technologies using sensors has grown
over the years and one of the reasons for this growth may
be the popularization of internet of things and ubiquitous
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 5. Technologies Categorization
computing [24]. For the GPS category, only one research
paper using a single technology was found. The remaining
works combine several technologies but in all of them, one of
the technologies used is the WIFI. For image processing and
Sound and Optical categories, the numbers of papers that use
combined technologies is higher than the number of papers
with single technology. These ﬁndings demonstrate that only
the radio frequency category does not have the higher number
of papers with hybrid approaches.
Figure 7. Combined tecnology over the technologies categorization
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we report the results of a systematic mapping
study on the subject of ﬁngerprint-based indoor localization.
The collection and interpretation of data related to this context
produced a number of important discoveries, which allow us
to understand the evolution of this area in recent years and
also point trends and open issues. In addition to the results
obtained from the data analysis, we created a categorization
for the technologies used in the context of ﬁngerprint-based
indoor localization.
Initially, this mapping showed that the most used type
of research is the proposed solution, which demonstrates the
pursuit for an indoor localization solution. Another ﬁnding is
the conﬁrmation of the WIFI technology as the most used
in researches performed on the focus area, which conﬁrms
our expectations since in fact it is the most disseminated
and present technology in most locations. ZigBee also drew
attention due to its large presence even though it’s not as
accessible as Bluetooth. On the other hand, Bluetooth appeared
in a negative manner, since it was expected to be one of the
most used technologies.
Based on the summarization of the results, we noticed
an increase, starting from the years 2011-2012, in the num-
ber of researches using Sensors, especially accelerometers,
gyroscopes and digital compasses normally present in most
Smartphones. This leads us to the conclusion that Smartphones
popularization caused a new bias to start to emerge in the area,
which is the use of Sensors present in Smartphones to obtain
new ﬁngerprints for indoor localization.
Another ﬁnding presented by this mapping was the increase
on the number of papers that use a set of technologies in their
research. The most promising category on this matter is the
Sensors, which represents 86 % of the reviewed papers. On
the other hand, the Radio Frequency category obtained only
15%, which is mostly due to the WIFI technology, which is
normally used in an isolated way.
Based on the achieved results, we notice the increasing use
of Sensors in the proposed solutions, which might lead to a key
role in future solutions. The new generations of Smartphones
have been showing the market an integration with new and
different Sensors. Since the localization in indoor environments
is more complex than in the outdoors, there is a tendency
for the new solutions to agglutinate different technologies and
approaches. For this reason, we believe that hybrid solutions
are the future of indoor localization, creating new opportunities
for scientiﬁc and technological researches.
As a contribution, this study is intend to assist researchers
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

providing an overview of the indoor location area and the
technologies used in others studies. This insight may help on
current and new researches on the area. In our future work, we
intend to perform a systematic mapping on the others indoor
localization classes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by the National Institute
of Science and Technology for Software Engineering (INES)
funded by CNPq under grant 573964/2008-4
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Lymberopoulos, D. Giustiniano, V. Lenders, M. Rea, A. Marcaletti
et al., “A realistic evaluation and comparison of indoor location tech-
nologies: Experiences and lessons learned,” ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Information Processing in Sensor Networks, 2015, pp.
178–189.
[2]
E.
Kaplan
and
C.
Hegarty,
Understanding
GPS:
Principles
and
Applications,
Second
Edition,
ser.
Artech
House
mobile
communications series.
Artech House, 2005. [Online]. Available:
https://books.google.com.br/books?id=-sPXPuOW7ggC
[3]
H. Liu, H. Darabi, P. Banerjee, and J. Liu, “Survey of wireless indoor
positioning techniques and systems,” IEEE Transactions on Systems,
Man and Cybernetics Part C: Applications and Reviews, vol. 37, no. 6,
2007, pp. 1067–1080.
[4]
Google,
“Indoor
maps,
http://www.google.com/intl/pt-
br/maps/about/partners/indoormaps/,”
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.google.com/intl/pt-BR/maps/about/partners/indoormaps/
[5]
Apple,
“Footprint:
Indoor
positioning
with
core
location,
http://developer.apple.com/library/ios/samplecode/footprint/,”
2014.
[Online]. Available: https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/samplecode/footprint
[6]
Y. Gu, A. Lo, and I. Niemegeers, “A survey of indoor positioning
systems for wireless personal networks,” Communications Surveys &
Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 1, 2009, pp. 13–32.
[7]
Z. Farid, R. Nordin, and M. Ismail, “Recent advances in wireless indoor
localization techniques and system,” Journal of Computer Networks and
Communications, vol. 2013, 2013.
[8]
P. Bolliger, “Redpin-adaptive, zero-conﬁguration indoor localization
through user collaboration,” in Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM interna-
tional workshop on Mobile entity localization and tracking in GPS-less
environments.
ACM, 2008, pp. 55–60.
[9]
K. Kaemarungsi and P. Krishnamurthy, “Properties of indoor received
signal strength for wlan location ﬁngerprinting,” Proceedings of MO-
BIQUITOUS 2004 - 1st Annual International Conference on Mobile
and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking and Services, 2004, pp. 14–23.
[10]
K. Kaemarungsi, “Design of indoor positioning systems based on loca-
tion ﬁngerprinting technique,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Pittsburgh, 2
2005.
[11]
K. Petersen, R. Feldt, S. Mujtaba, and M. Mattsson, “Systematic
mapping studies in software engineering,” in Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Evaluation and Assessment in Software
Engineering, ser. EASE’08.
British Computer Society, 2008, pp. 68–
77.
[12]
B. Kitchenham and P. Brereton, “A systematic review of systematic
review process research in software engineering,” Information and
Software Technology, vol. 55, no. 12, 2013, pp. 2049–2075.
[13]
Scopus, “Scopus, http://www.scopus.com,” 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://www.scopus.com
[14]
S. Mujtaba, K. Petersen, R. Feldt, and M. Mattsson, “Software product
line variability: A systematic mapping study,” School of Engineering,
Blekinge Inst. of Technology, 2008.
[15]
R. Wieringa, N. Maiden, N. Mead, and C. Rolland, “Requirements
engineering paper classiﬁcation and evaluation criteria: a proposal and
a discussion,” Requirements Engineering, vol. 11, no. 1, 2006, pp. 102–
107.
[16]
A. T. Mariakakis, S. Sen, J. Lee, and K.-H. Kim, “Sail: single access
point-based indoor localization,” in Proceedings of the 12th annual
international conference on Mobile systems, applications, and services.
ACM, 2014, pp. 315–328.
[17]
C. Sapumohotti, M.-Y. Alias, and S.-W. Tan, “Low cost metric for
comparing the localization efﬁcacy of wlan access points using rf
site survey data,” IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E97-
B, no. 7, 2014, pp. 1403–1411.
[18]
A.
Research,
“Wi-ﬁ
ic
market
share
analysis
and
forecasts,
https://www.abiresearch.com/market-research/service/wi-ﬁ,”
2009.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.abiresearch.com/market-
research/service/wi-ﬁ
[19]
M.-H. Hung, S.-S. Lin, J.-Y. Cheng, and W.-L. Chien, “A zigbee indoor
positioning scheme using signal-index-pair data preprocess method to
enhance precision,” 2010, pp. 548–553.
[20]
A. Research, “Emerging bluetooth verticals, http://www.bluetooth.org,”
2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.bluetooth.org
[21]
M. S. Svalastog, “Indoor positioning-technologies, services and archi-
tectures,” Ph.D. dissertation, UNIVERSITY OF OSLO, 2007.
[22]
A. Fluerasu, A. Vervisch-Picois, G. Boiero, G. Ghinamo, P. Lovisolo,
and N. Samama, “Indoor positioning using gps transmitters: Experi-
mental results,” in Indoor Positioning and Indoor Navigation (IPIN),
2010 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–9.
[23]
Gartner, “Gartner says worldwide mobile phone sales declined 1.7
percent in 2012, http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2335616,” 2014.
[Online]. Available: http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2335616
[24]
J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, “Internet of things
(iot): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions,” Future
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 29, no. 7, 2013, pp. 1645–1660.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

