Evaluation of Adaptive Interference Cancellation in Chirp Spread Spectrum-based 
Communication Systems 
 
Martin Brandl, Karlheinz Kellner 
Center for Biomedical Technology 
Danube University Krems  
Krems, Austria 
Martin.brandl@donau-uni.ac.at, Karlheinz.Kellner@donau-uni.ac.at 
 
 
Abstract—For data transmission in heavily distorted indoor 
environments, chirp-based spread spectrum systems operating 
in the 2.45 GHz ISM band are well applicable. The robustness 
of spread spectrum systems against narrow band jammers is 
given by their compression gain, which is defined by the time-
bandwidth product of the spreading signal. Using chirp 
matched filter systems, jammers can pass through the receiver 
filter and are only weighted by its transfer function. Dividing 
the receiver chirp filter into time (equivalent to frequency) 
intervals, a jammer can be suppressed by switching off the 
corresponding frequency interval, leading to an increased 
jamming robustness. Due to its simplicity, this is suitable even 
for low cost systems. Theoretical and experimental results 
prove the capability of the method. 
Keywords—spread spectrum, chirp, matched filter, FPGA design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, wireless communication systems employ 
digital 
modulation 
and 
advanced 
signal 
processing 
capabilities. Wireless transmission systems for short range 
applications are a fast growing topic in communication 
engineering. There are many fields of applications, from the 
transmission of speech and video in cordless telephone sets 
to high data rate communication in local area networks, for 
example.  
Low power devices (LPDs) for license free operation in 
the so-called industrial, scientific, and medical frequency 
bands/ISM (ISM bands are defined by the International 
Telecommunication Union—Radio Communication Sector 
/ITU-R in 5.138, 5.150, and 5.280) have been placed on the 
market. In particular, communication systems for wireless 
local area networks (WLANs) are targeted for applications in 
large indoor areas, offices with wiring difficulties, branch 
offices, and temporary indoor networks. WLANs are 
appropriate for unwired small business offices such as real-
estate agencies, where only a few terminals are needed and 
where there may be frequent relocations of equipment to 
accommodate reconfiguration or redecoration of the office 
space. Therefore, for wireless operation in local area 
networks, systems have been introduced especially for 
systems of micro- and picocells within buildings, including 
the option of roaming. Since an indoor environment with a 
dominant multipath propagation scenario [1] and unlicensed 
operation are difficult to beat using narrow band systems, 
spread spectrum sets have been introduced [2]. They operate 
with direct sequence modulation with a spreading factor of 
approximately 10 or in frequency hopping mode with a 
limited number of channels. Such WLAN systems have 
succeeded in operation and number, respectively. The 
WLAN modulation, transmitted spectral distribution, media 
access control, interoperability, and so on are standardized in 
IEEE 802.11. 
For indoor environments, the coherence bandwidth is 
typically 2 to 5 MHz for the 2.45 GHz ISM band [3]. 
Therefore, the bandwidth of the transmission system should 
be at least two times the channel coherence bandwidth, 
resulting in narrow band communication systems which are 
difficult to operate in industrial environments. To overcome 
this problem, available spread spectrum systems for WLANs 
use approximately 20 MHz of the 83.5 MHz bandwidth 
allowed in the ISM band at 2.45 GHz. For indoor data 
communication, a broad band chirp spread spectrum system 
has been developed. 
 
II. 
CHIRP-BASED SPREAD SPECTRUM SYSTEMS 
 
Due to the large bandwidth covered in chirp spread 
spectrum systems, they show good resistance against 
selective fading due to multipath propagation. Increasing 
attenuation on the propagation path because of shadowing 
results in a decrease in received energy and raises the bit 
error rate. The influence of Rayleigh fading has been 
observed to be mostly insignificant for broad band spread 
spectrum 
systems. 
If 
strong 
jammers 
occur, 
most 
conventional systems are disturbed heavily. In spread 
spectrum systems, the signal to interference ratio (SIR) at the 
detector is increased due to the correlative signal processing 
gain. The "capability" of jammer suppression by impulse 
compression on a signal matched filter (MF) is given by the 
time-bandwidth product (T·B) of the spreading signal [2]. 
The upper limit for the total jammer power (in dB) within the 
signal spreading bandwidth is the SIR at the detector 
required for the minimum error probability minus the MF 
compression gain (T·B product) in dB. It must be considered 
that in the case of weighted chirps, which are typically used 
in communication systems to get a higher peak to side lobe 
ratio, the effective T·B product becomes smaller than without 
weighting, resulting in a reduced jamming resistance.  
72
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

The developed chirp spread spectrum data transmission 
system utilizes linear chirps for spread spectrum generation. 
A linear chirp is characterized by linear frequency 
modulation and can be divided into up-chirps where the 
angular frequency is increasing over time and down-chirps 
where the angular frequency is decreasing over time. Chirp 
signals are characterized by their start and stop frequencies 
which define the chirp bandwidth Bc and the time duration of 
the chirp signal Tc. The matched filter compression gain Gc 
of a chirp spread spectrum signal is therefore given by its 
time-bandwidth product Gc = BcTc.  
In our system, the effective T·B product was 
approximately 13.6 dB instead of the theoretical maximum 
of 19 dB (Tc = 2µs, Bc = 39 MHz, where fchirp_start = 1 MHz 
and fchirp_stop = 40 MHz; 10*log(TcBc) = 19 dB). The chirp 
signals are Hamming weighted, which reduces the 
compression gain by 5.35 dB in comparison to non-weighted 
signals [4]. Signal weighting raises the side lobe suppression 
by about 30 dB, which is necessary for a reliable intersymbol 
interference (ISI) reduction [4].  
Our chirp-based data transmission system is based on 
binary orthogonal shift keying (BOK) where the data 
symbols are coded with up- and down-chirps [5]. In Figure 1 
the principle of chirp BOK data transmission is illustrated. In 
the transmitter, a logical data symbol “1” is coded with an 
up-chirp signal and a logical data symbol “0” is coded with a 
down-chirp signal. Both chirp signals are orthogonal, which 
means that the cross-correlation function is approximately 
zero. The receiver consists of two matched filters 
corresponding to the transmitted chirp signals. In the case of 
a transmitted up-chirp, the up-chirp MF delivers the chirp 
autocorrelation function at the output with a compression 
gain Gc. At the same time point, the down-chirp MF delivers 
the chirp cross-correlation function, which is approximately 
zero. The reconstruction of the transmitted data symbols is 
done by a comparator circuit which compares the MF output 
amplitudes at each symbol interval.  
 
 
x(tn)=0,1 ? 
Data stream x(t) 
Up-chirp  
(Bc=39MHz, Tc=2µs) 
Down-chirp  
(Bc=39MHz, Tc=2µs) 
x(tn)=1 
x(tn)=0 
+
Down-chirp MF 
Up-chirp MF 
Data stream x’(t)
ydown(t) 
yup(t) 
yup(tn) > ydown(tn)  x’(tn)=1 
yup(tn) < ydown(tn)  x’(tn)=0 
Chirp transmitter 
Chirp receiver 
Figure 1.  Principle of chirp-based data transmission. 
 
As discussed before, spread spectrum communication 
systems are robust against fading and jamming but there are 
clear limits given by the spreading bandwidth and the MF 
compression gain. To improve the robustness of chirp spread 
spectrum systems against jamming, which is mainly caused 
by microwave ovens and other communication systems 
operating in the same ISM band, we used gated chirps where 
the jammed chirp subband can be turned off. For linear chirp 
signals, in the time domain a certain signal interval of the 
chirp signal corresponds to a certain frequency interval in the 
frequency domain (Figure 2). In contrast to [5], where an 
analog implementation of gated chirps based on tapped SAW 
chip filters is presented, this paper deals with a fully digital 
chirp filter implementation. This offers several advantages 
especially in the fully flexible number of chip subbands as 
well as on the design of the implemented filter transfer 
function.  
 
The chirp MFs are implemented by digital finite impulse 
response (FIR) filters. By changing the filter coefficients of 
the chirp MF the transfer characteristics in the corresponding 
frequency band can be modified (turned off). In Figure 2 an 
example is given where the chirp MF impulse response is 
divided into three subbands. The narrow band jammer is 
located in subband I and can be substantially suppressed by 
turning subband I off. By modification of the chirp MF for 
adaptive interference suppression (the MF bandwidth is 
reduced by 1/3), the MF compression gain is reduced in the 
given example by 3.4 dB. 
System simulations where the SIR on the transmission 
channel is adjusted to 0 dB, which means that the power of 
f
Jammer
S(f)
Chirp subbands 
I
II
III 
f
Jammer
S(f)
Chirp subbands 
II 
III 
Adaptive interference 
cancellation 
t
f(t)
I
II
III 
t
I
II 
III 
f(t)
1MHz 
14MHz 
27MHz 
40MHz 
 
Figure 2.  Principle of adaptive interference cancellation by 
modification of the chirp MF. 
73
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

the jammer is equal to the power of the transmitted chirp 
signal, are shown in Figure 3. The frequency of the jammer 
is set to 5 MHz and therefore interferes with the chirp 
subband I. By gating off the corrupted frequency band, the 
jammer can be substantially suppressed as shown in Figure 
3.  
 
III. 
FULLY DIGITAL IMPLEMENTATION OF A CHIRP 
SPREAD SPECTRUM SYSTEM WITH ADAPTIVE INTERFERENCE 
CANCELLATION 
 
The chirp BOK system was implemented on an Altera 
DSP 
development 
kit 
(DSP-DEVKIT-2S60, 
Altera 
Corporation, USA) based on an Altera Stratix II FPGA. The 
complete hardware design is shown in Figure 4. The chirp 
generation is done by a numerically controlled oscillator 
(NCO). After subsequent digital to analog conversion and 
low pass filtering (fg = 50 MHz) the chirp signals are fed into 
a 50 ohm coaxial transmission line. The generated chirp 
signals have a start frequency of 1 MHz, a stop frequency of 
40 MHz (Bc = 39 MHz), and a time duration of 2 µs. To 
compensate the power loss of the combiner circuit, a 
monolithic RF amplifier (ERA-4, Mini Circuits, USA) is 
used in the transmission link.  
A sinusoidal jammer is generated by a function generator 
(33250A, Agilent, USA) and is fed into the transmission 
channel by a power combiner (ZFRSC-42-S+, Mini Circuits, 
USA). The chirp receiver consists of an analog to digital 
conversion section with a sampling rate of 100 MSamples/s 
and two chirp MFs with adaptive switchable filter 
coefficients for interference suppression. Envelope detection 
is done by a square law demodulator and an FIR low pass 
filter.  
 
A comparator circuit compares the amplitudes of the 
demodulated MF output signals and reconstructs the 
transmitted data stream. For data clock reconstruction a Pll 
circuit triggered by the reconstructed data symbols is used. 
Figure 5 shows the measured matched filter output signals 
after demodulation and filtering. Figure 5 depicts the MF 
autocorrelation function (compressed chirp signal) without 
(Figure 5a) and with (Figure 5b) adaptive interference 
cancellation. The pictures show three compressed chirp 
signals (MF autocorrelation function) followed by two cross-
correlation output signals in equidistant symbol time 
intervals of 2 µs.  
 
 
The performance of the chirp data transmission system is 
evaluated by its bit error rate (BER) in different jamming 
situations (Figure 6). BER measurement was done by a self-
designed BER tester based on the IC DS2172 (Dallas 
Semiconductor, USA). In general, the chirp BOK data 
transmission system yields a high jamming robustness. A 
remarkable BER was firstly measured for an SIR on the 
transmission channel below –2 dB. For lower SIR values, a 
a) 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
x 10
7
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Frequency [Hz]
Amplitude [a.u.]
 
b) 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
x 10
7
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
Frequency [Hz]
Amplitude [a.u.]
 
Figure 3.  Suppression of a narrow band jammer at 5 MHz by 
adaptive interference cancellation (SIR = 0 dB).  
 
NCO 
D/A 
TP 
Mini Circuits 
SLP-50+ 
Mini Circuits 
ERA-4 
Mini Circuits
Combiner 
ZFRSC-42-S+ 
Agilent
33250A 
Function Generator
A/D 
Up/down 
controller 
TX-data
TX-clk 
x2
x2
Down-chirp 
FIR filter 
Up-chirp 
FIR filter 
TP FIR filter 
TP FIR filter 
Comparator 
Pll 
RX-data
RX-clk 
Filter coefficient 
control 
Altera DSP-DEVKIT-2S60 
 
Figure 4.  Principle of the chirp BOK data transmission system.  
a)
 
b) 
 
Figure 5.  Matched filter output signals after demodulation: a) without chirp 
gating, b) with adaptive interference cancellation (fjammer = 5 MHz, SIR = –6dB). 
74
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

steep increase in the BER to 10e-2 was found, mainly based 
on wrong decisions at the comparator circuit resulting in lost 
data bits and high jitter at the clock recovery circuit. Using 
adaptive interference cancellation by switching off corrupted 
chirp subbands, the system performance can be increased in 
SIR robustness by at least 4 dB (Figure 6).  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A chirp spread spectrum BOK data transmission system 
with adaptive interference cancellation was built. The whole 
design was fully implemented onto an Altera FPGA board. 
For selective jammer suppression, an adaptive interference 
cancellation principle based on gated chirps was shown. By 
switching off jammed chirp subbands the robustness against 
narrow band interference can be increased by at least 4dB. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the government of Lower 
Austria and the European Regional Development Fund 
(EFRE) for their financial support of the project (Project ID: 
WST3-T-91/004-2006). 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Prorakis, Digital Communications, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, 
1995.  
[2] G.R. Cooper, C.D. McGillem, Modern Communications and 
Spread Spectrum, McGraw-Hill, 1986. 
[3] I. Paez, S. Loredo, L. Valle, R.P. Torres, “Measuring 
broadband radio channel parameters using a simple 
experimental 
set-up”, 
The 
13th 
IEEE 
International 
Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio 
Communications, vol. 1, pp. 473 – 477, 2002.  
[4] C.E. Cook., M. Bernfeld, Radar Signals, Artech House, 1993. 
[5] M. Brandl, A. Pohl, F. Seifert, L. Reindl, “Fast adaptive 
interference cancellation in chirp spread spectrum systems “, 
IEEE 
Global 
Telecommunications 
Conference, 
1999; 
Proceedings Vol. 4, Pages 2218 -2222 
 
1.E-06
1.E-05
1.E-04
1.E-03
1.E-02
1.E-01
1.E+00
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
SIR [dB]
BER
1=on, 2=on, 3=on, fi=35MHz
1=on, 2=on, 3=off,  fi=35MHz
1=on, 2=on, 3=on,  fi=5MHz
1=off, 2=on, 3=on,  fi=5MHz
4dB
 
Figure 6.  Measured bit error rate in dependency on the SIR at the 
transmission channel with and without adaptive interference cancellation.  
75
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

