Optimized Flow Management using Linear
Programming in Integrated Heterogeneous Networks
Umar Toseef ∗†, Yasir Zaki†, Andreas Timm-Giel∗ and Carmelita G¨org†
∗Institute of Communication Networks, Hamburg University of Technology, Hamburg, Germany
Email: {umar.toseef, timm-giel}@tuhh.de
†TZI ComNets, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany,
Email: {yzaki,cg}@comnets.uni-bremen.de
Abstract—There have been tremendous advances over the past
decades when it comes to wireless access technologies. Nowadays,
several wireless access technologies are available everywhere.
Even mobile devices have evolved to support multiple access
technologies (e.g., 3G, 4G or WiFi) in providing the best possible
access to the Internet. However, all of these devices can commu-
nicate using one access technology at a time. There is a need
of the integration of all these access technologies to cooperate
and work simultaneously in a heterogeneous environment from
which both the end users, as well as, the mobile operators can
beneﬁt. This paper investigates how to tackle the simultaneous
usage of wireless access technologies in the downlink. For this
purpose, a practical example of 3GPP LTE and non-3GPP WLAN
integrated heterogeneous network is considered. Furthermore,
a novel decision mechanism is proposed, that focuses on op-
timizing the ﬂow management of user trafﬁc ﬂows based on a
mathematical formulation of the system. The mathematical model
is implemented using the Linear Programming techniques. The
paper demonstrates the gains that are achieved from using such
innovative decision mechanism, as well as, the beneﬁts that arise
from the simultaneous usage of wireless heterogeneous accesses.
Keywords: LTE and WLAN interworking, User QoE opti-
mization, Linear programming, Access link modeling
I. INTRODUCTION
4G communication networks are purely IP-based, and char-
acterized by independent drives, such as: users, network
operators, and service providers, etc. Due to the maturity
of the current communication paradigms, there is no point
in highlighting the importance of heterogeneous wireless
technologies and their co-existence in the future wireless
access networks. When it comes to heterogeneous wireless
technologies, one can discern various prevailing standards in
the current communication market, such as 3GPP, non-3GPP,
3GPP2, etc. Both 3GPP and non-3GPP are of core importance,
however it is common conception that most of the non-3GPP
technologies need less investment and operation & mainte-
nance cost compared to 3GPP technologies. Furthermore, the
widespread usage of non-3GPP wireless access technologies,
like IEEE 802.11 has shown its practical usefulness in many
environments. Now, that the market is ready to accept both
3GPP and non-3GPP technologies, this provisions that end
consumers should be enabled to make efﬁcient use of the
services extended through both technologies. Even more, the
3GPP standards has already come up with such integration
standards [13].
The System Architecture Evolution (SAE) 3GPP speciﬁed
allows mobile users to roam between 3GPP and non-3GPP
access technologies. In order to provide users with seamless
mobility, Proxy Mobile IPv6 (network based mobility) and
Dual Stack Mobile IPv6 (host based mobility) have been
proposed [13]. The 3GPP SAE architecture, however, has
certain limitations when it comes to supporting multi-homed
users. This implies that a user can be associated with one of
the available access networks but cannot connect to more than
one network simultaneously.
The focus of this work is to ﬁrstly investigate how the multi-
homing support can be realized in 3GPP SAE architecture.
Secondly, how the network operators can make an optimum
use of aggregated bandwidth resources and network diversity
in a multi-homing scenario through the ﬂow management. The
rest of the paper is organized as follows: related work has been
discussed in Section II, Section III describes how the current
3GPP SAE architecture can be extended to provide users with
multi-homing support. Section IV describes the importance
of ﬂow management function in a heterogeneous network,
and Section V explains the linear programming technique
to do optimized ﬂow management operation. Finally, Section
VI provides the proof of concepts through the discussion of
simulation results of an investigated realistic scenario.
II. RELATED WORK
A number of research studies can be found making use of
cross-layer techniques and soft handover to optimize handover
cost in terms of packet delay and loss in heterogeneous net-
works. For example, Song and Jamalipour [2] describes an in-
telligent scheme of vertical handover decisions in selecting the
best handover target from the several candidate heterogeneous
networks. Several other proposals have been made to improve
the performance of cellular and 802.11 networks. Song et.
al. [3] has discussed admission control schemes to improve
the performance of integrated networks. Fei and Vikram [5]
proposes a service differentiated admission control scheme
based on semi-Markov chain which is although very accurate
but has high computational complexity. Similarly, Zhai et. al.
[6] has shown that by controlling the collision probability with
the help of input trafﬁc rate of users, the maximum throughput
can be achieved by keeping 802.11 network in non-saturated
state. Other studies are focused on developing solutions for
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

load balancing in the integrated heterogenous networks. Such a
proposal can be found in [7] where policy based load balancing
framework has been presented to effectively utilize the aggre-
gated resources of loosely coupled cellular/WLAN network.
In this work, we explore the practical limits of achievable
performance in a heterogeneous network scenario by going
down to the MAC layer functionalities of involved access
technologies. The goal is to maximize the spectral efﬁciency
of network bandwidth resources and fulﬁll the application QoS
requirements at the same time. In contrast to other studies, we
provide an analytical solution to the problem which adapts
time varying channel conditions of the user and dynamically
decides the best network paths for user trafﬁc ﬂows in order
to achieve system wide optimized performance and improved
user QoE. The focus of this work is, however, restricted to the
downlink of access technologies.
III. NETWORK SIMULATION MODEL
This work follows the proposal of 3GPP speciﬁcations in
the integration of 3GPP access technology (namely, LTE) and
trusted non-3GPP access technology (namely, legacy WLAN
802.11g) where host based mobility solutions, i.e., Dual Stack
Mobile IPv6 is considered. For this purpose, a simulation
network model has been implemented using the OPNET [14]
network simulator. This includes the detailed implementation
of LTE network entities following the 3GPP speciﬁcations.
As per 3GPP proposal the home agent (HA) function is
located at the Packet Data Network (PDN) gateway. The
remote server acts as a correspondent node (CN) from where
mobile users access application services like VoIP, video,
HTTP and FTP (see Fig. 3). A comprehensive description of
this heterogeneous network simulator can be found in [9].
It should be noted that our focus is only on the downlink
access for LTE and WLAN. This implies that no uplink
transmissions are performed for WLAN during the whole
simulation time. Instead uplink trafﬁc (e.g., TCP ACK packets
etc.) is transmitted by the user through LTE access link.
IV. FLOW MANAGEMENT
In the developed simulation environment, a user can com-
municate simultaneously through 3GPP access technology, i.e.
LTE, as well as non-3GPP access networks, i.e., WLAN.
The question still remains how a network operator or a user
can make use of the two network paths from two access
technologies. The answer is to introduce a ﬂow management
function at the home agent. The ﬂow management function
makes use of the MIPv6 extensions and allows to control
the user data rate on each network path. In general, there are
two options of managing trafﬁc ﬂows for a multi-homed user.
The ﬁrst option is to carry one complete application trafﬁc
ﬂow over one path of choice, this is known as “trafﬁc ﬂow
switching”. The second option is to divide the trafﬁc ﬂow into
several smaller sub-ﬂows where each sub-ﬂow is carried over
one network path. This will be called “trafﬁc ﬂow splitting”.
If ﬂow management is performed in properly a considerable
improvement in network capacity and user satisfaction can
be achieved. That is why the decision engine of the ﬂow
management function which controls the user data rate over
the network paths is of core importance. In order to attain the
goals of optimized network performance, the decision engine
needs to know the precise information of the available network
resources and the user demands. Once this information is
available, the decision engine, with the help of proposed math-
ematical techniques, can optimally assign network resources
to the users fulﬁlling their demands while making use of all
available network paths. Though in this work the decision
engine of the ﬂow management function is located at the home
agent, this may reside at any point inside the core network
according to the network hierarchy demands.
The amount of network resources of a wireless network are
determined from the designed parameters like frequency spec-
trum, transmission technology, antenna gains etc. Therefore
each network has a ﬁxed amount of network resources and
the network performance itself depends on the fact with what
(spectral) efﬁciency these resources are utilized. In order to
achieve higher data rates a network resource scheduler should
select those users who can attain high spectral efﬁciency and
therefore need less network resources per unit data rate. In this
work we adapt the term “network path cost” for the required
network resources per unit data rate. For a user, its network
path cost can be accessed through cross layer information from
the MAC layer of the corresponding access technologies. In
the following subsections, it is shown how the network path
cost can be computed for users in WLAN and LTE networks.
A. Network path cost for WLAN
Consider a scenario where a WLAN access network consists
of a station associated with an access point. Assume that the
station is just receiving a downlink trafﬁc ﬂow from the access
point and does not transmit anything in the uplink. In this way,
there is no contention for medium access. The transmission
of one data frame with RTS/CTS enabled takes TS seconds
including the exchange of control frames such as RTS/CTS,
SIFS (Short Interframe Space), DIFS (DCF Interframe Space),
and ACK frames, where
TS = Tbackoff +TDIF S +TRT S +TCT S +Tdata +3·TSIF S,
Tbackoff = Wmin − 1
2
· TslotT ime,
TDIF S = TSIF S + 2 · TslotT ime
All components of TS except Tdata can be found in the
802.11 standards. The value of Tdata can be computed based
on the PHY speed of transmission, i.e., Tdata =
σ
ϕ, where
σ is the data frame size in bits, and ϕ is the PHY transmis-
sion speed in [bit/sec]. Accordingly, the maximum downlink
capacity η can be estimated as follows: η =
σ
TS [bit/sec].
It is clear that 802.11 MAC follows the Time Division
Multiple Access (TDMA) like scheme, where users share the
wireless access medium for short periods of time. Considering
resource allocation time interval of 1, a user needs medium
access for a fraction τ of the interval to achieve a unit data rate
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

of 1 bit/sec. τ is actually the network path cost whose value
directly depends on TS, which is the delay experienced in
transmitting one data packet of average size σ [bit] operating
with PHY speed ϕ [bit/sec]. That is, τ = TS
σ
B. Network path cost for LTE
In contrast to 802.11, LTE performs a managed scheduling
of available bandwidth resources. The smallest unit of band-
width resource is referred as a physical resource block (PRB)
in the LTE speciﬁcation. Based on the allocated frequency
spectrum size, LTE has a certain number of PRBs. The LTE
MAC scheduler residing at the eNodeB schedules these PRBs
using a 1ms transmission time interval (TTI). The LTE MAC
scheduler has a very complex way to assign resources to the
associated users. Without digging into the details of the MAC
scheduler operation, we focus on the last stage of resource
assignment procedure in a certain TTI. On reaching that stage,
the MAC scheduler already builds up a list of users which
will be transmitting/receiving data in that TTI. For each user
entry in the list, there is a corresponding value of the allocated
number of PRBs, as well as the channel dependent Modulation
and Coding Scheme (MCS) index. These two values are used
to lookup the Transport Block Size (TBS) from a table deﬁned
in the 3GPP speciﬁcations [10]. This is a two-dimensional
table, where each row representing one MCS index lists several
values of TBS corresponding to the allocated number of PRBs.
The obtained TBS value deﬁnes the size of the MAC frame
transmitted to the user in that TTI. In this way, the user
received throughput at the MAC layer in a certain TTI can
be estimated if the TBS value for that user is known.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of PRBs
Throughput (Mbps)
Air interface throughput VS number of PRBs
 
 
MCS Index: 2
MCS Index: 6
MCS Index: 10
MCS Index: 14
Fig. 1.
Relationship of LTE air interface throughput and number of PRBs
for different MSC index values [10]. Each curve represents one MCS index.
Fig. 1 shows that for a particular MCS index, the LTE
throughput value has almost a linear relationship with the used
number of PRBs. If described mathematically, this relationship
can be used to determine the required number p of PRBs/TTI
to achieve a certain data rate X [kbit/sec] for a user having
MCS index i. That is
p = Ci · X + Ki
Ci is slope of a straight line (as shown in 1) described in
units of PRBs/kbps. Ki is the intercept at the y-axis and has
units of number of PRBs. It can be noticed that Ci is the data
rate dependent part, while Ki is the data rate independent
part of network resource requirement for a user with channel
conditions mapped to MCS index i.
V. OPTIMIZED NETWORK RESOURCE UTILIZATION
When the network path costs for a multi-homed user are
known, the problem of optimal resource utilization can be
solved using mathematical techniques. In this work, we prefer
Integer Linear Programming (ILP) to solve this problem. This
choice has been made due to several reasons. In ILP, the
optimum solution is guaranteed for a correctly formulated
problem, the problem can be extended or restricted by in-
troducing appropriate constraints, it saves some additional
implementation work by making use of already available linear
programming solvers etc.
Given
U
a set of users
αj
Data rate dependent part of the LTE link cost in PRBs per kbps
for user j, for each j ∈ U
βj
Data rate independent part of the LTE link cost in PRBs for user j,
for each j ∈ U
γj
Cost of WLAN link in seconds per kbps for user j, for each j ∈ U
δj
Minimum data rate (kbps) demand of a trafﬁc ﬂow destined to
user j, for each j ∈ U
∆j
Maximum data rate (kbps) allocation for a trafﬁc ﬂow destined to
user j, for each j ∈ U
Ω
Number of available PRBs for the LTE access network
Deﬁned variables
Xj
Size of sub-ﬂow in kbps sent over the LTE access link to user j,
for each j ∈ U
Yj
Size of sub-ﬂow in kbps sent over WLAN access link to user j,
for each j ∈ U
Zj
Auxiliary binary variable; its value for a user j is either 1 if
Xj > 0 or 0 otherwise, for each j ∈ U
Maximize
P
j∈U Xj + Yj
Subject to
1.
P
j∈U αj · Xj + βj · Zj ≤ Ω
2.
P
j∈U γj · Yj ≤ 1
3.
δj ≤ Xj + Yj ≤ ∆j for each j ∈ U
4.
Zj ≤ Xj · 1020 for each j ∈ U
5.
Zj ≥ Xj/∆j for each j ∈ U
6.
0 ≤ Xj ≤ ∆j for each j ∈ U
7.
0 ≤ Yj ≤ ∆j for each j ∈ U
8.
Zj ∈ {0, 1} for each j ∈ U
Fig. 2. Mathematical model for the optimized resource utilization in algebraic
form
Fig. 2 shows the formulation of the problem in algebraic
form. The model deﬁnes U as the set of multi-homed users.
Each element of this set has a number of input parameters,
e.g. network path costs for LTE (α,β) and WLAN network (γ)
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

according to the user channel conditions in the corresponding
network. The maximum and minimum range of user data
rate demands (δ, ∆) which is based on the individual user
application. The amount of available network resources in LTE
(Ω) and WLAN (which is 1 second) are also considered as
input parameters. The output parameters for each user in set
U include the assigned data rate over the LTE network and
the WLAN network paths (X,Y ). It is obvious that the goal of
this model is to achieve the highest possible spectral efﬁciency
from the two network access technologies. The higher the
spectral efﬁciency, the higher the network throughput. Hence,
the objective is to maximize the user data rate over the two
network paths, i.e., X and Y for every multi-homed user.
The model imposes eight constraints which are listed at
the bottom of Fig. 2. The ﬁrst two constraints ensure that
the available network resources should not be exceeded when
allocating the data rates for users. The third constraint dictates
that the user data rate allocation should lie in the speciﬁed
range. The 4th and 5th constraint determine the value of
variable Z based on the X value. If there is a need, a user
is allowed to receive its whole demanded data rate over a
single network path as shown in constraint number 6 and 7.
Constraint 8 is set in order to emphasis that Z is a binary
variable which has value either 0 or 1.
It is assumed here that each user is running only one
application. For a constant bit rate application, e.g., VoIP or
video the minimum data rate is set equal to the maximum
data rate in the model input parameters. For TCP based ﬂows,
these two values can be set according to the network operator’s
policy. It should be noted that the problem has been formulated
in a way that it guarantees the minimum data rate for all users
and then assigns an additional data rate up to the maximum
data rate while optimizing the spectral efﬁciency of the access
networks.
In the investigated scenario, the LTE coverage is available
in the whole area of user movement while WLAN coverage is
limited in a circular area of 100 meter radius around a hotspot.
This implies the users always have LTE access available and
WLAN coverage is only found in the vicinity of the hotspot
(see Fig. 3). During the resource assignment process, the ﬂow
management function classiﬁes users into the following three
categories (i) users with LTE access only and running VoIP
or video applications (ii) users with LTE and WLAN access
running any type of application (iii) users running FTP or
HTTP applications with LTE access only. Users in the ﬁrst
category must be assigned the required minimum data rate
through LTE as there is no other access available for them.
Users in the second category are multi-homed users whose
data rate will be decided by the aforementioned mathematical
model. For users belonging to the third category, they must
get their trafﬁc through the LTE path, however, it is not clear
how much data rate should be allocated to them in order to
achieve the optimized resource allocation objective. This issue
is resolved by using the following work around: the users are
assigned a WLAN network path cost greater than unity and
they are put into the second category. The WLAN network
Application Profile 
Mobility 
Home Agent 
Remote server 
PDN 
aGW 
Router1 
Router2 
eNB 
WAP 
  HLR 
Fig. 3.
Overview of the considered simulation scenario in the OPNET
simulator. The large circular area shows the LTE network coverage and the
smaller circular area shows the WLAN network coverage. The user movement
is restricted to the rectangular area inside the large circle.
cost greater than unity will refrain the LP solver to assign
any data rate for these users over the WLAN path while the
data rate for the LTE path will be decided based on the global
objective of the optimized resource allocation.
The resource assignment process by the ﬂow management
function is carried out periodically every 100ms in order to
adapt to any changes in the user channel conditions. For
this purpose user channel condition parameters are obtained
through cross layer information from the base stations of
the two access technologies. With the help these parameters,
costs for each user network path is computed and fed to the
above described mathematical model as the input arguments
accompanied with the user data rate demands. As described
earlier, the mathematical model is formulated using linear
programming and solved using the C application programming
interface (API) of ILOG CPLEX from IBM [15] which has
been integrated inside the OPNET simulator by the authors.
The output of this process consists of user data rates on each
network path. These decided data rates are then implemented
for each user through a trafﬁc shaping function residing at the
home agent.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
This section shows the beneﬁts of the proposed approach
with the help of simulation results. For this purpose, two
scenarios are considered. In one scenario, users do not make
simultaneous use of LTE and WLAN access technologies.
Instead the user trafﬁc is completely handed over to WLAN
as soon as the user enters in the hotspot coverage, otherwise
all trafﬁc takes its path through the LTE access. This is the
default policy for a multi-homed user according to the 3GPP
speciﬁcations and therefore it will be referred to as “3GPP
HO” case. Whereas, the second scenario extends the 3GPP
architecture to supporting the simultaneous use of wireless
interfaces, this will be referred to as “Multi-P”. In this case
user trafﬁc ﬂows are distributed over the WLAN and the LTE
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

TABLE I
SIMULATION CONFIGURATIONS
Parameter
Conﬁgurations
Total Number of PRBs
25 PRBs (5 MHz specturm)
Mobility model
Random Direction (RD) with 6 km/h
Number of users
2 VoIP, 1 HD video & 3 Skype video call,
2 HTPP, 4 FTP downlink users
LTE Channel model
Macroscopic pathloss model ,
Correlated Slow Fading [1]
LTE MAC Scheduler
TDS: Optimized Service Aware [8],
FDS: Iterative RR approach
WLAN technology
802.11g, RTS-CTS enabled, coverage ≈ 100 m
VoIP trafﬁc model
G.722.2 wideband codec, 23.05kbps data rate
Skype video model
MPEG-4 codec, 512kbps, 640x480 resolution,
30fps, play-out delay: 250 ms
HD video model
MPEG-4 codec, 1Mbps, 720x480 resolution,
HTTP trafﬁc model
Pag size: constant 100KB, reading time: 12s
FTP trafﬁc model
FTP File size: constant 10 MByte
continuous ﬁle uploads one after the other.
Simulation run time
103 seconds,14 seeds, 98% conﬁdence interval
access network. The trafﬁc ﬂow distribution policy is derived
from the output of the optimization problem solved using
linear programming. As a result, a user trafﬁc ﬂow is either
sent over one network path with the least cost or it is split into
two appropriately sized sub-ﬂows each taking one network
path to the destination. A reordering buffer at the receiver
takes care of sub-ﬂow aggregation and packet reordering in
case of ﬂow splitting.
Fig. 3 shows an overview of the simulation model imple-
mented in OPNET. The system is populated with 12 users
generating a rich trafﬁc mixture of as shown in Table I. The
users move within one LTE eNB cell, and within this cell one
wireless access point (or hotspot) is present. It should be noted
that in the “Multi-P” scenario the minimum data rate for FTP
and HTTP users is assigned as 200kbps while the maximum
data rate limit is set to a very high value of 25Mbps.
It’s worth mentioning here that in the “3GPP HO” scenario
users make vertical handover of hard nature, i.e., the user
disconnects completely from one network, and establishes a
new connection to the other. Though MIPv6 keeps all IP layer
connections alive through seamless handover, users might lose
some buffered data on the previously connected network. On
the other hand, the “Multi-P” scenario makes users use the
WLAN when it is in the coverage, and can still keep the LTE
connection and use it simultaneously. As a result, a bandwidth
aggregation process of both access links is carried out.
Fig. 4 shows the spider web graph of the average number
of successful ﬁle downloads per user. A spider web graph is a
visualization technique that can show multiple results in one
graph, and is used to compare the different scenarios. The
graph in Fig. 4 has four different axes, each representing one
application. Since all the axes represent the number of ﬁle
downloads, the algorithm producing the larger shape has the
best performance. In this case, it is clear that the “Multi-P”
algorithm achieves the best results for all types of user trafﬁc.
The reason why TCP based applications accomplish less ﬁle
downloads is twofold (i) higher TCP throughput helps them
download more ﬁles as seen in case of FTP (ii) in case of
140 160 180 200
FTP
100
110
120
130
HTTP
25
30
40 35
HD video
22
25
28
31
Skype video
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
Fig. 4.
Overview of downlink service performance. Average number of
successfully downloaded ﬁles by a user.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Scenario type
TCP Throughput (kbps)
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
(a) Average HTTP user throughput
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Scenario type
TCP Throughput (Mbps)
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
(b) Average FTP user throughput
Fig. 5.
TCP download throughput experienced by FTP and HTTP users
“3GPP HO” some TCP connections are aborted during the
vertical handover due to excessive packet loss and sudden big
changes in TCP round trip time. The second point is explained
further in the following.
In “3GPP HO” scenario, when the users move from one
access network to the other, the data buffered at the base
station in the previous network is lost. This is because in
the “3GPP HO” case users cannot keep connected to multiple
access networks. On the other hand, in the “Multi-P” scenario
the loss of buffered data in the network is avoided in the
following manner (i) the LTE connection is always kept
alive hence no buffered data is lost (ii) in WLAN, the ﬂow
management function at the HA sends user trafﬁc on the
WLAN link only when the user PHY mode is 9Mbps or higher.
This is because when a user enters the 6Mbps mode it implies
that the user is almost at the edge of coverage which is a strong
indication that loss of the WLAN link is imminent. Hence, no
new trafﬁc data is sent over the WLAN link which gives the
user a chance to receive the already buffered data at the access
point before the loss of the link.
If a large number of packet losses are experienced or ex-
cessive packet delays are encountered during the video stream
reception, the data download itself does not stop. However
such conditions lead to a corrupted video stream reception at
the user end which cannot be decoded and therefore its quality
cannot be evaluated. In the “3GPP HO” scenario video, users
experience packet losses during the handover as explained
earlier and, moreover, there is also large end-to-end delay
when video data is transmitted through the WLAN network.
The reason is as following, when VoIP and video trafﬁc is
transmitted over LTE, it is prioritized over FTP to achieve
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

the required QoS (i.e., throughput and delay). But, in the
“3GPP HO” scenario when this trafﬁc type is handed over
to WLAN the required QoS cannot always be achieved due
to the lack of QoS differentiation support by 802.11g. The
“Multi-P” scenario users do not come across such problems
because the ﬂow management function can precisely estimate
the network capacities and use a network path only if it can
support the required data rate. Hence no congestion takes
place at the base station and therefore no extreme packet
delays are observed. This allows the video users to receive
their streaming data without losses and delays and help them
achieve higher numbers of successful or decodable video ﬁle
downloads compared to the “3GPP HO” scenario.
Fig. 5 shows the average TCP throughput as experienced
by the FTP and HTTP users in the downlink. The “Multi-P”
algorithm achieves approximately 30% more throughput for
FTP users by increasing the spectral efﬁciency of the networks.
As for the HTTP performance, it can be seen that the two
algorithms show almost similar throughput. This is because the
HTTP page size is small enough to be downloaded completely
during the TCP slow start phase. In this way, it cannot make
full use of the available bandwidth.
4
4.1 4.2 4.3 VoIP MOS
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
HD video MOS
4
4.1
4.2
4.3
Skype video MOS
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
(a) Average MOS value
90
95 100 105
VoIP
70
90
110
130
HD video
70
90
110
130
Skype video
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
(b) Average packet delay (ms)
Fig. 6.
VoIP and video service performance
Fig. 6(a) shows the average Mean Opinion Score (MOS)
values of VoIP and video services as experienced by the users.
MOS gives a numerical indication of the perceived quality
of the media received after being transmitted and eventually
compressed using codecs. MOS is expressed in one number,
from 1 to 5, 1 being the worst and 5 the best. In this work,
the MOS values of the wideband VoIP codec and video codec
are computed using the modiﬁed E-model and Evalvid toolkit
as described in [12] and [11], respectively. The “Multi-P”
scenario users boast the highest achievable MOS value for
individual services. On the other hand, users in the “3GPP
HO” scenario suffer from a certain degradation in MOS value.
Fig. 6(b) shows the end-to-end packet delay for the three
service types. It can be observed that the “Multi-P” scenario
once again shows its superiority over “3GPP HO” by providing
shorter end-to-end packet delays.
VII. CONCLUSION
This work highlights the importance of multi-homing sup-
port in the integrated heterogeneous wireless networks of
3GPP and non-3GPP access technologies. The existing 3GPP
speciﬁcations for integration of two types of the access tech-
nologies are extended following IETF standards to realize
multi-homing support for the users. Following the proposed
extensions, a network simulation model is developed, where
4G LTE and WLAN co-exist. This work also focuses on
the problem of optimum resource utilization in such a het-
erogeneous network where the users and network operators
can take advantage of multi-homing support. The problem
of optimum network resource allocation is mathematically
modeled using the linear programming technique. The proof of
concept is provided through the simulation results. With help
of simulation results it is shown that the proposed scheme
of resource allocation brings twofold gain when compared to
the 3GPP proposal. On the one hand, it signiﬁcantly improves
the network capacity and on the other hand it fulﬁlls the user
application QoS demands, which otherwise cannot be satisﬁed
from QoS unaware non-3GPP access technologies.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7) under grant agreement no. 257448.
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP Technical Report TS 25.814, Physical layer aspects for E-UTRA,
3rd Generation Partnership Project, v.7.1.0, Sept. 2006
[2] Q. Song and A. Jamalipour, Network Selection in an Integrated Wire-
less LAN and UMTS Environment using Mathematical Modeling and
Computing Techniques, IEEE Wireless Commun., June 2005
[3] W. Song, H. Jiang, and W. Zhuang, Performance analysis of the WLAN-
ﬁrst scheme in cellular/WLAN interworking, IEEE Trans. Wireless Com-
mun., vol. 6, May 2007
[4] W. Song, H. Jiang, and W. Zhuang, “Call admission control for integrated
voice/data services in cellular/WLAN interworking”, IEEE ICC06, vol.
12, June 2006.
[5] F. Yu, V. Krishnamurthy, Optimal Joint Session Admission Control in
Integrated WLAN and CDMA Cellular Networks with Vertical Handoff,
IEEE transaction on Mobile Computing, vol. 6, Jan. 2007
[6] H. Zhai, X. Chen, Y. Fang, How Well Can the IEEE 802.11 Wireless
LAN Support Quality of Service?, IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol.
4, 2005
[7] S. Lincke-Salecket, Load shared integrated networks, Personal Mobile
Communications Conference, 2003
[8] Y. Zaki, T. Weerawardane, C. G¨org and A. Timm-Giel, Multi-QoS-Aware
Fair Scheduling for LTE, VTC Spring, 2011
[9] U., Toseef, Y., Zaki, A., Timm-Giel, C., Grg., Development of Simulation
Environment for Multi-homed Devices in Integrated 3GPP and non-3GPP
Networks, The 10th MobiWAC conference, Paphos, 2012
[10] 3GPP Technical Report TS 36.213, Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio
Access (E-UTRA); Physical layer procedures, v10.2.0, June 2011
[11] J. Klaue, B. Rathke, and A. Wolisz, EvalVid - A Framework for Video
Transmission and Quality Evaluation, 13th International Conference on
Modeling Techniques and Tools for Computer Performance Evaluation,
pp. 255-272, Illinois, USA, Sept. 2003.
[12] U. Toseef, M. Li, A. Balazs, X. Li, A. Timm-Giel, C. G¨org, Investigating
the Impacts of IP Transport Impairments on VoIP service in LTE
Networks, 16th VDE/ITG Fachtagung Mobilkommunikation, 2011
[13] 3GPP Technical Report TS 23.402, Architecture enhancements for non-
3GPP accesses, 3rd Generation Partnership Project, v10.6.0, Dec. 2011.
[14] OPNET website, http://www.opnet.com, as accessed in Sept. 2012
[15] IBM CPLEX Optimizer, http://www.ibm.com, as accessed in Sept. 2012
[16] G. Bianchi, Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coor-
dination Function, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 535-547, Mar. 2000.
[17] R. Litjens, F. Roijers, J. L. van den Berg, R. J. Boucherie,and M. Fleuren,
Performance Analysis of wireless LANs: an Integrated Packet/Flow Level
Approach, ITC Conference, Berlin, Germany, Aug. 2003.
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

