 
 
Distance Estimation of Smart Device using Bluetooth 
Joonyoung Jung, Dongoh Kang, Changseok Bae  
Personal Computing Platform Research Team 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Deajeon, Korea  
{jyjung21, dongoh, csbae}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Distance estimation identifies the distance between 
two machines in wireless network. The Received Signal 
Strength Indication (RSSI) of Bluetooth can be used to 
estimate distance between smart devices. The characteristic of 
Bluetooth RSSI value is different as environments. So, we have 
tested the relation between distance and Bluetooth RSSI value 
in several environments, such as indoor hall, meeting room, 
and 
ElectroMagnetic 
Compatibility 
(EMC) 
chamber 
environment. This paper shows the distance characteristic of 
Bluetooth RSSI from these experiment results. There are a lot 
of measurement errors at Bluetooth RSSI raw data. The 
minimum RSSI value is -88 dBm and the maximum RSSI 
value is -66 dBm at 11m of the indoor hall environment. The 
difference between maximum value and minimum value is 22 
dBm. So, it is hard to estimate the distance using Bluetooth 
RSSI raw data. Therefore, we use the Low Pass Filter (LPF) 
for reducing the measurement errors. The minimum RSSI 
value is -80.6 dBm and the maximum RSSI value is -71 dBm in 
the same environment. The difference between maximum value 
and minimum value is just 8.4 dBm. The measurement error is 
significantly reduced. We compare the distance estimation 
between the Bluetooth RSSI raw data and LPF data at the 
EMC environment. This paper shows that the distance 
estimation is possible with small error rates using Bluetooth 
RSSI LPF data. 
Keywords-Distance Estimation; Bluetooth; RSSI  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are one of the 
essential research domains. There are many applications for 
WSNs in military and civil applications [1]. The Machine to 
Machine (M2M) distance estimation is a fundamental issue 
for a lot of applications of indoor WSNs, such as a Bluetooth 
and Zigbee. Distance estimation identifies the distance 
between two machines in wireless network. Such estimates 
are an important component of systems’ localization, 
because they are used by the position computation and 
localization algorithm components. Different methods, such 
as RSSI, Time of Arrival (ToA), and Time Difference of 
Arrival (TDoA), can be used to estimate a M2M distance. 
Nowadays, lots of location systems have tried to estimate 
M2M distance using different models in wireless networks. 
For example, the Active Badge System used an infrared 
signal [2]. Cricket, developed at MIT, uses TDoA method 
[3]. Global Positioning System (GPS) uses ToA [4]. 
RADAR, developed at Microsoft, uses RSSI to estimate 
M2M distance [5]. SpotON is a RSSI-based ad-hoc 
localization system [6]. In this paper, we discuss the M2M 
distance estimation using Bluetooth RSSI. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes related work. In Section III, we describe distance 
characteristic of Bluetooth RSSI. In Section IV, we describe 
Bluetooth RSSI using a low pass filter. Section V provides 
the experimental results, and some concluding remarks are 
finally given in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
A. RSSI 
RSSI can be used to estimate the M2M distance based on 
the received signal strength from another machine. The 
longer the distance to the receiver machine, the lesser the 
signal strength at received machine. Theoretically, the signal 
strength is inversely proportional to squared distance, and 
there is a known radio propagation model that is used to 
convert the signal strength into distance. However, in real 
environments, it is hard to measure distance using RSSI 
because of noises, obstacles, and the type of antenna. In 
these cases, it is common to make a system calibration [7], 
where values of RSSI and distances are evaluated ahead of 
time in a controlled environment. The advantage of this 
method is its low cost, because most receivers can estimate 
the received signal strength. The disadvantage is that it is 
affected by noise and interference. So, distance estimation 
may have inaccuracies. Some experiments [8] show errors 
from 2 to 3 m in some scenarios. Distance estimation using 
RSSI in real-world applications is still questionable because 
of inaccuracy [9]. However, RSSI could become the most 
used 
technology 
of 
distance 
estimation 
from 
the 
cost/precision viewpoint because of low cost [10]. A. Awad 
et al. [1] discuss and analyze intensively some approaches 
relying on the received signal strength indicator. The most 
important factor for proper distance estimation is to choose a 
transmission power according to the relevant distances. It 
was showed that even for noisy indoor environments an 
average positioning error of 50cm on an area of 3.5 x 4.5 m 
is possible by choosing the RF and algorithm parameters 
carefully based on empirical studies. S. Feldmann et al. [11] 
also presented an indoor positioning system based on signal 
strength measurements, which were approximated by the 
received RSSI in a mobile device. The functional 
dependence between the received RSSI and the distance was 
achieved by a well fitted polynomial approximation. 
13
Copyright (c) The Government of South Korea, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
B. ToA 
In ToA, the M2M distance is directly proportional to the 
time the signal takes to propagate from one machine to 
another, as shown in Fig. 1 [12]. ToA needs precisely 
synchronized machines.  
 
 
Figure 1.  ToA distance estimation method  
The distance between two machines is proportional to the 
signal transmitted time. That is, if a transmitter sends a signal 
at time time_1 and a receiver receives the signal at time 
time_2, the distance between transmitter and receiver is d = 
Pr(time_2 – time_1), where Pr is the propagation speed of the 
radio signal, and time_1 and time_2 are the times when the 
signal was transmitted and received. S. Schwarzer et al. [13] 
presented a concept to measure the distance between two 
IEEE 802.15.4 compliant devices using ToA. It shows that 
compared to signal correlation in time, the phase processing 
technique yields an accuracy improvement of roughly an 
order of magnitude. 
C. TDoA 
TDoA is based on the difference in the times at which 
multiple signals from a single machine arrive at another 
machine. The machines must have extra hardware for 
sending two types of signals simultaneously, as shown in Fig. 
2. These signals must have different propagation speeds, like 
RF and ultrasound. N. Priyantha et al. [14] presented a 
TDoA method using different propagation speed signals, like 
radio/ultrasound. K. Whitehouse et al. [7] used radio/acoustic 
signals. Usually, the first signal propagation speed is light, 
while the second signal has slower propagation speed. The 
second signal is six orders of magnitude slower than the first 
signal. 
 
 
Figure 2.  TDoA distance estimation method  
An example of TDoA suitable for WSNs is used in [8] 
and depicted in Fig. 2, where the ultrasound pulse and radio 
signal are sent simultaneously. A receiver machine computes 
the difference time of the two signals. The distance can now 
be computed by the formula d = (Pr – Pu)*(time_2 – time_1), 
where Pr and Pu are the propagation speed of the radio signal 
and ultrasound pulse, and time_1 and time_2 are the received 
times of the radio signal and ultrasound pulse, respectively. 
Another different and interesting way of computing distance 
among machines using the TDoA is proposed by Fu et al. 
[15], and is based on the Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum 
(DSSS) modulation technique. The distance estimation errors 
using TDoA are several centimeters. Experiments error with 
ultrasound performed in [8] is about 3 cm, where M2M 
distance was 3 m. In [16], the experiments error with 
acoustic sound is about 23 cm, where M2M distance was 2 
m. TDoA system has precise distance estimation accuracy. 
However, it also has disadvantages. It needs extra hardware 
to send the second signal, which increases cost. And it has 
limited range of the second signal, which is about between 3 
and 10 m according as transmitter power. To save a cost, Y. 
Fukuju et al. [17] presented a TDoA system that reduces 
configuration cost. 
D. Location System using M2M Distance Estimation  
The Active Badge System finds location information 
using an infrared signal [2]. Each person wears a small 
infrared badge. The badge sends a unique packet periodically 
or on demand. A server receives badge data using fixed 
infrared sensors in building and gathers this data. The Active 
Badge system provides absolute location information using 
this infrared distance information. Infrared signal has an 
effective range of several meters because of diffusion. 
Therefore, infrared signal range is limited to small or 
medium rooms. As mentioned above, drawbacks are limited 
range of infrared sensors and usage of diffused infrared in 
fluorescent lighting or direct sunlight. 
Cricket uses TDoA method [3]. M2M distance error is 
about 3 cm, but this causes a huge burden on the receiver 
machine due to distributed computation and processing of 
ultrasound pulses and RF signal. The Cricket Location 
Support System finds location information using ultrasound 
pulse and RF signal. The RF signal is used for 
synchronization of the time measurement. Cricket estimates 
distance using TDoA and then finds location information 
using distance information. However, Cricket does not 
require a grid of ceiling sensors with fixed locations because 
its mobile receivers perform the timing and computation 
functions. A receiver receives multiple beacons, so it 
triangulates its position. Cricket has advantages that it has 
privacy 
and 
decentralized 
scalability. 
It 
also 
has 
disadvantages that it does not have centralized management 
and more it has the computational and power burden for 
timing and processing both the ultrasound pulses and RF 
signal on the mobile receivers. 
RADAR was developed at Microsoft and used RSSI to 
estimate M2M distance [5]. It is based on an 802.11 Wireless 
LAN. A building-wide tracking system based on the IEEE 
802.11 LAN wireless networking technology. RADAR 
14
Copyright (c) The Government of South Korea, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
measures the signal strength and signal-to-noise ratio at the 
base station, and then it computes the position within a 
building using these data. RADAR’s scene-analysis 
implementation has position error within about 3 meters with 
50 percent probability, while the signal strength lateration 
implementation has position error about 4.3-meter with 50 
percent probability.  
SpotON is a RSSI-based ad-hoc localization system [6]. 
The SpotON system implements ad-hoc lateration with low 
cost tags. SpotON tags estimate distance between tags using 
radio signal attenuation. It can be used for relative and 
absolute position determination. In an ad-hoc location 
system, all of the machines become mobile machines with 
the same sensors and capabilities. To estimate their locations, 
machines cooperate with other nearby machines by sharing 
RSSI data. Machines in the cluster are located relative to one 
another or absolutely if some machines in the cluster have 
known locations. The techniques for building ad-hoc systems 
include triangulation, scene analysis, or proximity. Location 
sensing with ad-hoc infrastructure has a high scalability. 
III. 
DISTANCE CHARACTERISTIC OF BLUETOOTH RSSI 
We tested the relation between distance and Bluetooth 
RSSI in indoor hall, meeting room, and EMC chamber 
environment. These experiment results show the distance 
characteristic of Bluetooth RSSI in several environments  
A. Indoor hall  
We have measured Bluetooth RSSI with a notebook and 
a Nexus 7 in indoor hall environment as shown in Fig. 3. We 
measured 200 samples at each meter from 0m to 15m. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Bluetooth RSSI mesurement test in indoor hall environment  
The result of these experiments is shown in Fig. 4. The 
RSSI raw data and average data are shown in Fig. 4 (a) and 
Fig. 4 (b).  The RSSI average data average 10 RSSI raw data. 
The distance estimation is impossible with the RSSI raw data. 
However, the distance estimation may be possible coarsely 
with the RSSI average data. The RSSI average value is 
similar from 0m to 3m, from 4m to 6m, and from 7m to 15m. 
 
 
(a) RSSI raw data 
 
 (b) RSSI average data 
Figure 4.  The Bluetooth RSSI measurement result in indoor hall 
environment  
B. Meeting Room  
We have measured Bluetooth RSSI with a notebook and 
a Nexus 7 in meeting room environment, as shown in Fig. 5. 
We measured 200 samples at each meter from 0m to 10m. 
The meeting room door is located between 7m and 8m from 
the notebook. When Bluetooth RSSI value is measured from 
8m to 10m, the meeting room door is closed. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Bluetooth RSSI mesurement test in meeting room environment  
The RSSI raw data and the RSSI average data are shown 
in Fig. 6 (a) and Fig. 6 (b), respectively. It is hard to classify 
into inside and outside of the meeting room with the RSSI 
raw data. However, the minimum RSSI average value from 
0m to 7m is -78.6 dBm and the maximum RSSI average 
value from 8m to 10m is -77.9 dBm. So, it may be possible 
15
Copyright (c) The Government of South Korea, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
to classify into inside and outside of the meeting room with 
the RSSI average data.  
 
 
(a) RSSI raw data 
 
 (b) RSSI average data 
Figure 6.  The Bluetooth RSSI mesurement result in meeting room 
environment  
C. EMC Chamber  
We have measured Bluetooth RSSI with a notebook and 
a Nexus 7 in EMC chamber environment as shown in Fig. 7. 
We measured 200 samples at each meter from 0m to 15m.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Bluetooth RSSI mesurement test in EMC chamber environment  
The RSSI raw data and the RSSI average data are shown 
in Fig. 8 (a) and Fig. 8 (b), respectively.  
 
 
(a) RSSI raw data 
 
(b) RSSI average data 
Figure 8.  The Bluetooth RSSI mesurement result in EMC chamber 
environment  
The RSSI value decreases linearly from 0m to 7m and 
has similar value from 7m to 15m. The distance estimation is 
performed well from 0m to 7m using the RSSI average value 
in EMC chamber environment. 
IV. 
BLUETOOTH RSSI USING LOW PASS FILTER 
The Bluetooth RSSI raw data at 11m of indoor hall 
environment is shown in Fig. 9. There are a lot of 
measurement errors at Bluetooth RSSI raw data. The 
minimum RSSI value is -88 dBm and the maximum RSSI 
value is -66 dBm. The difference between maximum value 
and minimum value is 22 dBm. So, it is hard to estimate the 
distance using Bluetooth RSSI raw data.  
 
 
Figure 9.  The Bluetooth RSSI raw data at 11m of indoor hall  
environment  
16
Copyright (c) The Government of South Korea, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
LPF equation is (1). When the LPF is used, the RSSI 
deviation is reduced as seen Fig. 10, where (α =  0.8). 
Ρn= αΡn-1 + (1− α)Τn  .                                           (1) 
The received signal strength (Tn) is the RSSI value 
receiving from the other smart device at k. And the LPF 
value (Ρn) is the RSSI value of LPF at k. The constant (α) has 
a value that is bigger than 0 and lower than 1. 
 
 
Figure 10.  The Bluetooth RSSI LPF data at 11m of indoor hall  
environment  
The minimum RSSI value is -80.6 dBm and the 
maximum RSSI value is -71 dBm. The measurement errors 
are significantly reduced. The difference between maximum 
value and minimum value is just 8.4 dBm. 
V. 
EXPERIMENT RESULT 
A. Distance estimation comparision in EMC chamber 
We compare the distance estimation between the 
Bluetooth RSSI raw data and LPF data. The Bluetooth RSSI 
values are measured from 0m to 15m in EMC chamber. 
Polynomial Regression (order 2) is used to estimate the 
distance as shown in Fig. 11. The R-square value of RSSI 
raw data is 0.867 and the standard deviation is shown in Fig. 
12. The maximum value and the minimum value of standard 
deviation are 4.94 dBm and 1.26 dBm. The R-square value 
of RSSI LPF data is 0.958, which is better than R-square 
value of RSSI raw data significantly.  The standard deviation 
is shown in Fig. 12.  It shows also better result than those of 
RSSI raw data. The maximum value is 1.77 dBm and the 
minimum value is 0.36 dBm. 
 
      (a) Regression with RSSI raw data 
 
(b) Regression with RSSI LPF data 
Figure 11.  Distance estimation comparision between RSSI raw data and 
LPF data in EMC chamber environment 
 
 
Figure 12.  Standard deviation comparision between RSSI raw data and 
LPF data in EMC chamber environment 
B. Distance estimation application in meeting room 
One device is located in the meeting room statically and 
the other device is moved around inside and outside of the 
meeting room. The distance from 0m to 5m is inside of the 
meeting room and the distance from 6m to 10m is outside of 
the meeting room.  
The standard deviation of RSSI value is too broad at each 
meter to estimate distance when the RSSI raw data are used, 
as shown in Fig. 13. So, we cannot distinguish between 
inside and outside of the meeting room.  
 
Figure 13.  The RSSI raw data for distinguish between inside and outside of 
the meeting room  
17
Copyright (c) The Government of South Korea, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
 
Figure 14.  The RSSI LPF data for distinguish between inside and outside 
of the meeting room  
The RSSI LPF data of the RSSI raw data are shown in 
Fig. 14 (α : 0.8). The R-square value is 0.838. The minimum 
RSSI value from 0m to 5m is -76.6dBm and the maximum 
RSSI value from 6m to 10m is -74.5dBm. The overlap 
region is only 2.1dBm. So, we can distinguish between 
inside and outside of the meeting room. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper addressed the distance estimation method and 
distance characteristic of Bluetooth RSSI. The distance 
estimation is impossible with the RSSI raw and may be 
possible coarsely with the RSSI average data in indoor hall 
environment. In meeting room environment, it is hard to 
classify into inside and outside of the meeting room with the 
RSSI raw data and may be possible to classify into inside 
and outside of the meeting room with the RSSI average data. 
The RSSI value decreases linearly from 0m to 7m and has 
similar value from 7m to 15m in EMC chamber environment.  
This paper considers the LPF for reducing the measurement 
errors. The measurement errors are significantly reduced. We 
compare the distance estimation between the Bluetooth RSSI 
raw data and LPF data at EMC chamber environment. With 
RSSI raw data, the R-square value is 0.867 and the 
maximum standard deviation value is 4.94 dBm. With RSSI 
LPF data, the R-square value is 0.958 and the maximum 
standard deviation value is 1.77 dBm. The LPF data shows 
better result than RSSI raw data. However, LPF data need to 
be improved for estimating distance more exactly. So, we 
will design a new algorithm to estimate distance with 
Bluetooth RSSI.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of 
MKE/KEIT, [K10041801, Zero Configuration Type Device 
Interaction Technology using Device Sociality between 
Heterogeneous Devices]. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Awad, T. Frunzke, and F. Dressler, “Adaptive Distance Estimation 
and Localization in WSN using RSSI Measures,” 10th Euromicro 
Conference on Digital System Design Architectures, Methods and 
Tools, Aug.  2007, pp. 471-478.  
[2] 
R. Want, A. Hopper, V. Falcao, and J. Gibbons., “The Active Badge 
Location System,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems, vol. 
40, no. 1, Jan. 1992, pp. 91-102. 
[3] 
N. B. Priyantha, A. Chakraborty, and H. Balakrishnan, “The Cricket 
Location-Support System,” Mobile Comp. and Networking, Aug. 
2000, pp. 32–43. 
[4] 
P. Enge and P. Misra, “Special Issue on GPS: The Global positioning 
System,” Proc. of the IEEE, vol. 87, no. 1, Jan. 1999, pp. 3-15. 
[5] 
P. Bahl and V. N. Padmanabhan, "RADAR: An In-Building RF-based 
User Location and Tracking System," Proceedings of IEEE Infocom 
2000, vol. 2, Mar.  2000, pp. 75-84. 
[6] 
J. Hightower, C. Vakili, G. Borriello, and R. Want, "Design and 
Calibration of the SpotON Ad-Hoc Location Sensing System," 
University of Washington, Seattle, Technical Report UW CSE 01-08, 
Aug. 2001. 
[7] 
K. Whitehouse and D. Culler, “Calibration as Parameter Estimation in 
Sensor Networks,” Wireless Sensor Networks and Apps., 2002, pp. 
59-67. 
[8] 
A. Savvides, C.-C. Han, and M. B. Strivastava, “Dynamic Fine-
Grained Localization in Ad-Hoc Networks of Sensors,” 7th 
ACM/IEEE Int’l. Conf. Mobile Computing and Networking, Rome, 
Italy, 2001, pp. 166–179. 
[9] 
 T. He, C. Huang, B. M. Blum, J. A. Stankovic, and T. Abdelzaher, 
“Range-Free Localization Schemes for Large Scale Sensor 
Networks,” MobiCom ’03, ACM Press, 2003, pp. 81-95. 
[10]  J. Bachrach and C. Taylor, “Localization in Sensor Networks,” 
Handbook of Sensor Networks: Algorithms and Architectures, I. 
Stojmenovic, Ed., Wiley, Sept. 2005. 
[11] S. Feldmann, K. Kyamakya, A. Zapater, and Z. Lue, “An indoor 
Bluetooth-based positioning system: concept, implementation and 
experimental evaluation,” International Conference on Wireless 
Networks, 2003, pp. 109–113.  
[12] B. Hofmann-Wellenho, H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, “Global 
Positioning System: Theory and Practice,” Springer-Verlag, 1997. 
[13]  S. Schwarzer, M. Vossiek, M. Pichler, and A. Stelzer, “Precise 
Distance Measurement with IEEE 802.15.4 (ZigBee) Devices,” IEEE 
Radio and Wireless Symposium, Mar. 2008, pp. 779-782. 
[14] N. B. Priyantha, A. K. L. Miu, H. Balakrishnan, and S. Teller, “The 
Cricket Compass for Context-Aware Mobile Applications,” 7th ACM 
Int’l. Conf. Mobile Computing and Networking, Jul. 2001, pp. 1-14. 
[15] Y. Fu et al., “The Localization of Wireless Sensor Network Nodes 
Based on DSSS,” Electro/Infor. Tech., 2006 IEEE Int’l. Conf., May 
2006, pp. 465–469. 
[16] K. Whitehouse, “The Design of Calamari: An Ad Hoc Localization 
System for Sensor Networks,” Master’s thesis, UC Berkeley, 2002. 
[17] Y. Fukuju, M. Minami, H. Morikawa, and T. Aoyama, “DOLPHIN: 
An Autonomous Indoor Positioning System in Ubiquitous Computing 
Environment,” Workshop on Software Technologies for Future 
Embedded and Ubiquitous Systems, 2003, pp. 53-56. 
 
18
Copyright (c) The Government of South Korea, 2013. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

