Finding Diverse Shortest Paths for the Routing Task in Wireless Sensor Networks
Wilton Henao-Mazo and ´Angel Bravo-Santos
Departamento de Teor´ıa de la Se˜nal y Comunicaciones
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
Avda. de la Universidad 30, Legan´es, 28911 Madrid, Spain
{wiltonhm, abravo}@tsc.uc3m.es
Abstract—Wireless Sensor Networks are deployed with the
idea of collecting ﬁeld information of different variables like
temperature, position, humidity, etc., from several resource-
constrained sensor nodes, and then relay those data to a sink
node or base station. Therefore, the path ﬁnding for routing
must be carried out with strategies that make it possible to
manage efﬁciently the network limited resources, whilst at the
same time the network throughput is kept within appreciable
levels. Many routing schemes search for one path, with low
power dissipation that may not be convenient to increase the
network lifetime and long-term connectivity. In an attempt
to overcome such eventualities, we proposed a scenario for
relaying that uses multiple diverse paths obtained considering
the links among network nodes, that could provide reliable
data transmission. When data is transmitted across various
diverse paths in the network that offer low retransmission
rates, the battery demand can be decreased and network
lifetime is extended. We show, by using simulations, that the
reliability in packets reception and the power dissipation that
our scheme offers compare favourably with similar literature
implementations.
Keywords-WSNs; Wireless Sensor Networks; K Shortest
Paths; Diverse Paths.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) have been one of the
trending research topics for several years due to their par-
ticular features among which are worth to highlight topolo-
gies ﬂexibility, distributed detection capacity, low energy
consumption and stand alone operation. All these WSN
features allow to cope different tasks such as target tracking
for mobile agents, event detection, environment information
gathering and remote monitoring/controlling. At the same
time this technology must perform the activities they are
required to accomplish, bearing in mind that there are some
limitations like the energy source that in almost all the cases
is a battery, the low processing capacity, the unpredictable
reliability on the information delivery due to some phenom-
ena of wireless channel, the relative-low transmission rates
and the short range in wireless communication.
In a WSN, there exists a task which consists in taking
the data through the network from one node to another in a
determined period of time, and it is known as the relaying or
the forwarding of data packets. In this process, an important
issue necessary to deal with is the transmission reliability,
whilst energy efﬁciency is maintained in order to guarantee
a considerable network lifetime. These issues have been
treated in routing tasks and mechanisms implemented in the
application layer related to energy saving goal [1][2][3]. One
justiﬁcation to pay attention in obtaining quite good relia-
bility levels in communication is the belief that signiﬁcant
energy resources can be saved when the number of required
retransmissions is reduced [4]. On the other side some, of
the referenced works only try to obtain a single optimum
route by which the data trafﬁc mainly ﬂows from source
node to destination node, and such strategy can incur faster
energy depletion of the nodes of this route. Finding multiple
paths, obtained based on the Ad hoc On-Demand Distance
Vector (AODV) that requires distances and hop count, can be
used for the relaying task and it seems to be a good option
when network survivability is required [2]. In the present
paper, a different strategy is implemented. Here, the idea of
ﬁnding multiple paths which have certain degree of diversity
among them becomes important. In this way, it is possible to
guarantee reliable successfully transmitted data rates and the
power dissipation is distributed among the nodes involved
in the data forwarding task.
As seen before, one important aspect in routing is ﬁnding
multiple paths. Hence, it is important to know that the
K shortest paths problem is a natural and widely-studied
generalization of the shortest path problem in which not one,
but several paths in increasing order of length are sought.
The K shortest paths problem in which paths can contain
loops turns out to be signiﬁcantly easier. But the problem
of determining the K shortest loopless paths has proved to
be more challenging. The problem was ﬁrst examined by
Hoffman and Pavley [5]. For undirected graphs, the most
efﬁcient algorithm, proposed by Katoh et al. [6], has the
complexity of O(K(|L| + |M| log |M|)) (|L| the number
of edges and |M| the number of nodes). For the most
general case, the best known algorithm is that proposed by
Yen in [10]. This algorithm has achieved the complexity
of O(K|M|(|L| + |M| log |M|)). Here, we use the Yen’s
algorithm as a basis for our proposal.
The organization of the paper follows with a brief outline
of Yen’s algorithm in Section II, jointly with some useful
assumptions and graph theoretic concepts. Later, in Section
III, the proposed algorithm to ﬁnd diverse shortest paths
(DSP) in a WSN is presented. Section IV shows simulation
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

results and an analysis about the proposed scheme, and
ﬁnally, some conclusion of the developed work are drawn
in Section V.
II. PRELIMINARIES
In order to deﬁne in a clear way what is wanted to do
in a WSN, we are using classical statements from graph
theory by which our wireless network of sensors can be
represented as a pair G = (M, L). Here, G represents an
undirected graph where M is the set of m sensor nodes,
each of them identiﬁed by a unique mote number inside
the net, and L is the set of possible wireless links between
nodes i ∈ M and j ∈ M. For simplicity, it is necessary
to consider a cost communication matrix Am×m, in which
each consigned entry aij ∈ {R+∪+∞} holds for the cost or
weight that is required to establish the links of the previously
described set L.
A. Some network assumptions
• Node’s mobility in the network is not allowed, hence
every node has a ﬁxed position.
• Ordinary sensor nodes have the same capabilities, the
same radio-transmitter devices and constrained power
resources.
• The sink node is assumed to have unconstrained re-
sources.
• Symmetric cost model is assumed. This means link cost
of transmit data from sensor i to sensor j is the same
than in the opposite direction.
• The received signal strength (RSS) can be measured
in each of the nodes, without signiﬁcant cost in power
consumption.
• Without loss of generality, a log-normal path loss
radio propagation model is assumed as a well-suited
approximation for the link layer modelling of a wireless
sensor network. Such a model is deeply described in [7]
[8].
• In order to guarantee a good performance of the net-
work with respect to communication reliability, an ACK
mechanism is used in each hop of the transmission
rather than an end-to-end error recovery strategy.
B. An algorithm that ﬁnds shortest paths
One of the most important algorithms developed for
ﬁnding certain amount of paths between a pair of source-
destination nodes in a graph is the Yen’s algorithm (1971)
[10]. This is based on a deviation principle. First, let us
denote the source node by s ∈ M from which it is
desired to get the sink node t ∈ M, through K shortest
loop-less paths. These paths form a set of K components,
P = {P1, P2, · · · , PK}. At the same time, each path of
the latter set is deﬁned by the sequence PK = ⟨s =
vK
1 , vK
2 , · · · , vK
i
= t⟩, where vK
i
is the i-th node of the
K-th shortest path. In the next algorithm, there is a brief
outline of this procedure.
Algorithm 1 Yen’s algorithm
Require: A, s, t, K.
1: P 1 ← Dijkstra(s, t)
2: D ← {P 1} %Set of candidates
3: P ← {} %Set of the K shortest paths
4: for k from 2 to K do
5:
SP ← the shortest path in D
6:
v ← the deviation node (SP, P)
7:
P ← P + SP
8:
while v ̸= t do
9:
discard all nodes of SP from s to v
10:
discard each output link of v which belongs to P
11:
SP ′ ← Dijkstra(v, t)
12:
join SP ′ and SP from s to t
13:
D ← D + {SP ′}
14:
restore all discarded nodes and links
15:
v ← successor(v, SP)
16:
end while
17: end for
As it can be ﬁgured out from Algorithm 1, given an
adjacency matrix and a source-sink pair of nodes, the
algorithm is initiated by calculating the shortest path P 1
(line 1) and initializing some variables. Then the algorithm
will perform K iterations. At the k-th iteration, the algorithm
extracts the shortest path stored in candidates set D. This
path is the K-th resulting path from s to t. Then, the
deviation node is calculated from all the K − 1 paths in
SP. To avoid recalculation of the already computed paths,
the algorithm discards certain nodes and links as it is shown
in lines 9 and 10. The shortest path SP ′ between deviation
and source node is calculated with the remaining graph.
Then, SP ′ joins the sub-path of the K-th shortest path
from source to deviation node and saves this new produced
path in the candidate set D. Finally, all the links and nodes
previously discarded are restored and the algorithm moves
to the successor of the deviation node (line 15) in the K-th
shortest path.
III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
As previously noted, algorithms that ﬁnd shortest paths
need metric information. This metric information can be
considered as the cost of possible inter-node links, and
according to this the algorithms try to minimize the total
cost of paths. As mentioned before, the packet reception
rate (PRR) will be useful for ﬁnding reliable paths by which
data is relayed from source to destination nodes. Trying to
avoid signiﬁcant delays in the process of path discovery, the
PRR can be computed easily at each node by the following
procedure: since each sensor node is able to obtain the
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

RSS when an incoming message is correctly received, based
on this measure, the wanted metric can be estimated. In
order to illustrate how to estimate the PRR when there
exists a BPSK modulation, with a measurement of RSS
and a good estimated characterization of noise, the SNR
can be computed as γ[dB] = RSS − Pn. Then, a bit error
probability is calculated for the current case as [7]
Pe = Q(
r
2γ Bn
R ),
(1)
where Bn is the noise bandwidth and R is the bit data
rate. Furthermore, provided that all bits are received without
errors, there exists a correct reception. Then, we can derive
the probability of successfully packet reception for a frame
of f-bytes length at certain distance as[7]
p = (1 − Pe)8f.
(2)
Finally, the PRR can be calculated regarding a NRZ en-
coding mechanism with preamble length L [7] with the
expression[7]
PRR = (1 − Pe)8L(1 − Pe)8(f−L).
(3)
So far, the computation of the PRR has been described,
but the useful metric for our algorithm is missing. If we
pretend to use an algorithm that yields shortest paths, the
raw obtained PRR is non meaningful for our desired goals of
power efﬁciency through reliable data relaying. Thus, each
possible communication link is going to have the inverse
of the PRR as metric, or cost, between nodes i and j for
ﬁnding the shortest paths,
LC(i, j) = 1/PRRij.
(4)
These link costs are consigned in the previously deﬁned
network cost communication matrix. A total link cost (TLC)
of such paths are computed within the Yen’s algorithm as
TLCPst =
X
(i,j) links ∈ Pst
LC(i, j).
(5)
Diverse paths from K shortest path
Given the Yen’s algorithm as the basis for what is wanted
to achieve, when this algorithm returns K paths, they usually
have many links in common. But we do not really need
too much redundancy in the routes avoiding this way the
faster energy depletion of the nodes involved. This kind
of ”trouble” can be explained by the principle of deviation
nodes. However, in the present work a ﬁltering or selection
applied over the set of K shortest paths is introduced. With
this selection certain degree of diversity can be achieved. It
is suspected that transmitting data packets in a WSN over
diverse paths lead us to trustful communication levels by
avoiding the amount of retransmissions that might appear in
a single path case. Algorithm 2, shown below, outlines how
to proceed to obtain paths as diverse as possible starting
from the K shortest paths,
Algorithm 2 Diverse paths selection
Require: A, s, t, K, α.
1: IncludedLinks ← {} % Set of appearing links
2: wPK ← 0 % Array of K weights of paths
3: Get P1, P2, · · · PK the K shortest paths by Yen’s algo-
rithm between s and t.
4: IncludedLinks ← All (i, j) ∈ P1
5: wP1 ← 1
6: for k from 2 to K do
7:
wPk ← P
(i,j)∈Pk
LC(i, j)
TLC(i, j)G(i, j)
8:
for each link (i, j) ∈ Pk do
9:
if (i, j) /∈ IncludedLinks then
10:
IncludedLinks ← IncludedLinks + (i, j)
11:
end if
12:
end for
13: end for
14: DSP ← Pk whose wPK ≥ α
The procedure showed in Algorithm 2 is conceived on
the idea of selecting diverse paths. After coming up with
K shortest paths by using Yen’s algorithm, we proceed to
ﬁll in the set IncludedLinks. This set contains links from
the K shortest paths such that if we analysed these paths
in ascendant order, the links that appear for the ﬁrst time
(hence, they have not been in this set before) in the search
would be in the IncludedLinks set. In the Algorithm 2 can
be noted how all the links of the shortest path 1 are in the
IncludedLinks set.
The weight of each one of the K paths is computed in
the present work as,
wPk =
X
(i,j)∈Pk
LC(i, j)
TLCPk
G(i, j),
(6)
which, at the same time, is depending on G(i, j), a general
function which indicates the previous inclusion of the link
into a previous path and deﬁned as,
G(i, j) =
 1 if (i, j) /∈ IncludedLinks
0 if (i, j) ∈ IncludedLinks.
(7)
The computation carried out in line 1 of Algorithm 2
is laying out how dissimilar the paths are, in the sense of
the amount of links they differ, and is giving a weight or
importance to the path depending on individual link costs, as
well. Finally, another important aspect to review in the latter
algorithm is the threshold α. From the different K paths we
are selecting a reduced number of them if and only if their
weights fulﬁl the condition wPK ≥ α. Such threshold is an
arbitrary ﬁxed value within the range 0 ≤ α ≤ 1, so the
greater the threshold the fewer number of links the selected
routes share.
In the example shown in Figure 1, where is depicted
in ﬁrst place (sub-ﬁgure (a) above) the resulting K = 20
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 1.
Obtained shortest paths example in a WSN.
shortest paths in a WSN, and in other (sub-ﬁgure (b) below)
the shortest paths selected from the previous ones by the
Algorithm 2 with α = 0.35. As can be veriﬁed here, whilst
Yen’s algorithm returns certain routes that seem to be copies
from a previous one except by couple of links. With the
diverse paths selection carried out over that set, we keep
paths with relative few redundant links.
IV. SIMULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
We wrote the code of a customized discrete time, event-
driven wireless sensor network simulator in MATLAB in
order to evaluate the efﬁciency of the algorithm in a packet
level environment. For simplicity on simulating the net, a
Table I
PARAMETER VALUES USED IN SIMULATION
Parameter
Value
Network topology
randomly uniform
Network area
30 × 30 m2
Data rate
19.2 Kbps
Tx Power
-7 dBm
Carrier frequency
900 MHz
Path loss exponent, n
4.7
Shadowing standard deviation, σn
3.2
Modulation
BPSK
Noise bandwidth, Bn
30 KHz
Noise ﬂoor
-105 dBm
Encoding
NRZ
Frame size, f
50 bytes
Preamble length, L
2 bytes
simple CSMA/CA mechanism is used in MAC layer to avoid
signal conﬂicts. Also the physical link layer model values
reported in [7][8][9] are used. Detailed ﬁxed simulation
parameters are shown brieﬂy in Table I.
We compare our proposed diverse shortest paths (denoted
by DSP) algorithm with a rough implementation of the
algorithm EDA proposed in [11], that ﬁnds multiple disjoint
paths based on minimum spanning trees rooted at both
source node and destination node, coming up with multiple
paths for packet forwarding. Such EDA implementation is
rough, due to it is made simulating its distributed nature by
using a heap, where events with a time stamp are managed
through this data structures. A second comparison is carried
out with a Naive algorithm that ﬁnds disjoint paths by the
following procedure: ﬁnd the shortest path between source
and sink nodes, then remove the nodes in the ﬁrst obtained
shortest path from the network; ﬁnd another shortest source
to sink path in the remaining network and delete them
once obtained. Iterate this way until a previously deﬁned
number of paths has been found. Both algorithms used for
comparison, made use of the metric LC presented in Section
III , as well as our DSP proposed algorithm.
The performance of our algorithm is demonstrated by
simulating a data packet forwarding environment between a
source node and a sink node. Then, we measure the rate of
successfully delivered packets when a source node generates
10000 information packets. Such rate is taken as the ratio of
packets that reached the destination nodes between the total
number of packets generated in the source. Every packet has
a number of packet which helps to know whether packet loss
given a period of time occur. For all the algorithms, we vary
the network nodes density (# of nodes/m2) by increasing the
number of nodes from 50 to 300 and keeping the area where
the net is deployed as speciﬁed in Table I.
Simulations results are contained in Figure 2. Taking
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 2.
Reliability in packet reception varying nodes in the WSN.
into account that the number of nodes in the network
has been varied and the transmission of the packets has
been simulated for the 3 algorithms previously commented;
it is remarkable how in almost all the cases our DSP
proposed algorithm has the best performance among these 3
algorithms. The Naive disjoint paths algorithm has generally
the weakest successful reception rate because it attempts to
look for paths in a greedy way and ignoring the possibility
of ﬁnding multiple paths at each iteration. All the three
algorithms seem to converge to a slightly good reliability
level of about 0.80 when the WSN node density is increased.
An additional important aspect that can be obtained
from simulation results is the average power required in
retransmitting when packet loss occurs. In Figure 3, we
present the power dissipated in retransmission of the three
commented strategies. Our proposal has neat advantage
when the number of nodes is 200. The DSP algorithm is
wasting only about 19% and 29% from the power required
by the Naive algorithm and the rough version of EDA,
respectively.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
To obtain diverse paths for the routing task in the WSN,
we proposed an algorithm that has as a main core Yen’s al-
gorithm, an efﬁcient algorithm for computing the K shortest
path problem. Here we compare our proposed algorithm with
one that ﬁnds multiple disjoint paths based on a spanning
tree construction [11] trying to look for some advantage,
and with a Naive procedure that ﬁnds multiple node-disjoint
paths. Our proposal presents some advantages over the
other two algorithm used for comparison. Simulations show
that relaying through the routes our proposed algorithm
ﬁnds, reliable communication levels are obtained, while
considerable energy saving takes place in the network. This
is because of the reduction on retransmission events by
Figure 3.
Average power dissipated in retransmissions.
selecting reliable paths. Another reason is that the network
lifetime is increased due to a distributed usage of the
network. A distributed usage can be seen when different
nodes which compose the diverse shortest paths are used
each time.
Another observation obtained from the results is the
unpredictable behaviour that all the ﬁnding paths algorithms
present with the variation of the number of nodes or network
density. In this work for example, the throughput curves of
the three algorithms do not follow similar patterns. Hence,
this might be a possible improvement aspect which needs
to be worked on further. Besides, a very interesting future
line work is an implementation of Yen’s algorithm that could
take advantage of the distributed processing power present
in WSNs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially supported by the Span-
ish government (Ministerio de Educaci´on y Ciencia 2009-
14504-C02-01, Consolider-Ingenio 2010 CSD2008-00010).
REFERENCES
[1] M.J. Baek, K.I. Kim and S.H. Cho , “A revised Mint-Route pro-
tocol in wireless sensor networks”. Information and Commu-
nication Technology Convergence (ICTC), 2010 International
Conference on , no., pp. 258-259, 17-19 Nov. 2010
[2] P. Hurni and T. Braun, “Energy-Efﬁcient Multi-Path Routing
in Wireless Sensor Networks”. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Ad-Hoc, Mobile and Wireless
Networks (ADHOC-NOW 08), Sophia Antipolis, France, 1013
September 2008, pp. 7285.
[3] R. Vidhyapriya and P.T. Vanathi,“Energy Aware Routing for
Wireless Sensor Networks”. Signal Processing, Communica-
tions and Networking, 2007. ICSCN ’07. International Con-
ference on, pp. 545-550, 22-24 Feb. 2007.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[4] J. Zuo, C. Dong, S. Ng, Y. Lie-Liang and L. Hanzo, “Energy-
Efﬁcient Routing in Ad Hoc Networks Relying on Channel State
Information and Limited MAC Retransmissions”. In VTC2011-
Fall, San Francisco, United States, 05 - 08 Sep 2011.
[5] W. Hoffman and R. Pavley,“A method for the solution of the
Nth best path problem”. Journal of the ACM, 6: pp. 506-514,
1959.
[6] N. Katoh, T. Ibaraki and H. Mine,“An efﬁcient algorithm for
k simple paths”. Networks, 12: pp. 411-427, 1982.
[7] M. Zuniga and B. Krishnamachari,“Analyzing the transitional
region in low power wireless links”. IEEE SECON, Santa
Clara, CA, October 2004.
[8] M. Zuniga and B. Krishnamachari,“Link layer models for
wireless sensor networks”. USC, Dec. 2005, unpublised.
[9] K. Sohrabi, B. Manriquez and G. Pottie,“Near ground wide-
band channel measurement in 800-1000 MHz”. Proceeding of
IEEE VTC, Sep. 1999.
[10] J. Y. Yen,“Finding the K shortest loopless paths in a network”.
Management Science, Vol. 17, pp. 712-716, 1971.
[11] K. Zhang and H. Gao,“Finding multiple length-bounded
disjoint paths in wireless sensor networks”. Wireless sensor
networks, Vol. 3, pp. 384-390, 2011.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

