Hybrid Optical Network with Traffic Classification and Switching Selection Scheme 
Based on Fuzzy Logic  
 
Ana Carolina de Oliveira da Silva 
Post Graduate Program in Electrical Engineering (PPGEE) 
University of Brasília 
Brasília, Brazil 
anacarol.os88@hotmail.com 
William Giozza 
Communication Networks Group 
University of Brasília 
Brasília, Brazil 
giozza@unb.br
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a performance evaluation study 
of an OCS/OBS hybrid optical network using a traffic 
classification and optical switching selector scheme based on 
fuzzy logic. The fuzzy logic scheme verifies the statistical 
parameters of the input traffic and selects the appropriate 
optical switching paradigm. The hybrid optical network 
performance is evaluated in terms of block probability and 
efficiency in the use of the network resources. Our results show 
that the hybrid optical networking approach, when submitted 
to non-uniform traffic, uses network resources in a more 
efficient way compared to an optical network implementing 
one unique optical switching paradigm. 
Keywords - Hybrid Optical Network; Optical Circuit 
Switching;Optical Burst Switching; Fuzzy Logic. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With the maturity of Wavelength Division Multiplexing 
(WDM) technology, and the increasing bandwidth demand 
in 
telecommunications 
networking, 
researchers 
and 
engineers have been looking for optical networks solutions 
that use the maximum capacity offered by fiber optics [1-5]. 
Moreover, it has been observed that the type of traffic 
carried by modern telecommunications infrastructures, 
supporting the integration of services provided by the 
Internet, differs greatly from old Poisson traffic models. 
Traffic properties such as long-range dependence and self-
similarity are present from local networks to large 
backbones, preventing the modeling of present traffic 
behavior by a Poisson process [6-11]. Therefore it seems 
important to consider traffic self-similarity characteristics - 
measured by the Hurst parameter - for planning and 
management of the network [7][12][13].  
Optical networks can be classified according to three 
optical switching paradigms, with different implications in 
terms of complexity and performance: Optical Circuit 
Switching (OCS), Optical Burst Switching (OBS) and 
Optical Packet Switching (OPS) [1]. OCS has a simpler 
management method and works by establishing light paths 
("optical circuits") between source and destination nodes; 
however, as well known, this switching paradigm is 
inefficient when subjected to high granularity traffic. OPS is 
an attractive option since it can transport Internet Protocol 
(IP) packets directly in the optical network. However, the 
absence of an equivalent to the Random Access Memory 
(RAM) in the optical domain and other technological 
barriers restrain the use of this optical switching paradigm in 
the implementation of optical networks in the near future. 
OBS scheme gathers input packets at the source node and 
sends them to the destination node as an optical burst. 
Therefore, OBS constitutes a compromise between OPS and 
OCS paradigms, facilitating the network management and 
improving the use of the available bandwidth [1][3]. 
In order to better adapt the characteristics of different 
types of optical switching to the diversity of the traffic 
presently 
carried 
by 
major 
telecommunications 
infrastructures (network cores or backbones), the concept of 
hybrid optical network emerged, characterized by a single 
optical network implementing more than one of the optical 
switching paradigms. For instance, Gauger et al. [14] 
proposed a hybrid optical network OCS/OBS, aiming to take 
advantage 
of 
the 
high-granularity-traffic 
transport 
characteristic of OBS networks and the large bandwidth 
traffic supported by OCS networks. 
This work presents a performance study of a hybrid 
optical network OCS/OBS, where the decision of the 
appropriate optical switching paradigm to incoming traffic is 
done on the basis of their statistical parameters using fuzzy 
logic. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the 
hybrid optical network topology used, Section III describes 
the fuzzy classifier used to select the more appropriate 
optical switching paradigm to an incoming traffic pattern, 
Section IV presents the performance evaluation study and 
Section V presents the conclusions. 
II. 
HYBRID NETWORK OBS/OCS 
The OCS model adopted in this work uses First Fit as 
Routing and Wavelength Assignment (RWA) algorithm [2]. 
The wavelength assignment strategy assumes that network 
nodes do not perform wavelength conversion. 
The OBS model was implemented according to the Just 
Enough Time (JET) protocol [1], assuming the existence of a 
parallel network of infinite capacity to the transport of 
control packets associated to the optical bursts. Therefore, 
resources are busy end-to-end, simulating the resource 
reservation, and unoccupied as the optical bursts pass 
through each link. The validation of the OBS implementation 
was made by comparison with results presented in Teng and 
Rouskas [16]. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

The OCS/OBS hybrid optical network includes a traffic 
classifier and switching selector module based on fuzzy logic 
in each edge node. Figure 1 illustrates the OCS/OBS hybrid 
optical network model used in this work. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Parallel hybrid optical network with traffic classifier. 
 
 The traffic classifier and optical switching selector 
module works based on statistical parameters of the 
incoming traffic - packet arrival rate (λ), inter-arrival time 
(Δt) and Hurst parameter (H) and selects the more 
appropriate optical switching paradigm (OCS or OBS) to 
apply to the incoming traffic at each time slot, at each edge 
node of the parallel hybrid optical network (Figure 1). 
III. 
TRAFFIC CLASSIFIER 
 
Fuzzy logic was chosen to implement the traffic classifier 
and switching selector (in short, the traffic classifier) because 
of its robustness in handling imprecise input values and its 
flexibility to work with traffic characteristics evolution. In 
general, problems solved by fuzzy logic can be solved by 
other tools; however, in the case of nonlinear problems, 
fuzzy logic presents advantages, avoiding the creation of 
complex mathematical models and requiring only the 
knowledge of an expert. Once the traffic classifier handles 
different statistics that cannot be added, it can be considered 
as a non-linear system. 
Fuzzy analysis divides the problem into three steps [17]:  
• Fuzzyfication – The input variables are transformed 
into linguistic values associated with an inference 
function; 
• Inference – The linguistic values are analyzed by an 
array of rules; 
• Defuzzification – Linguistic output of the rules matrix 
is transformed into a numeric value. 
In this work, the membership functions of the inputs and 
outputs of the traffic classifier were constructed considering 
the expected network behavior and by analyzing traffic 
traces available in the literature [6][10][11][18][21]. The 
fuzzyfication step was performed from the numerical values 
corresponding to the statistical characteristics of the traffic. 
The traffic classifier was developed based on the MATLAB 
fuzzy toolbox. 
The input λ corresponding to the arrival rate of packets in 
the network, illustrated in Figure 2, considers Low arrival 
rates lower than 4x105 packets/s; Medium rates between 
3x105 packets/s and 5x105 packets/s; and High rates superior 
to 4x105 packets/s. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Traffic classifier – input λ. 
The input Δt corresponding to the inter-arrival time 
(Figure 3) considers Low, intervals shorter than 3μs; 
Medium intervals between 2μs and 4μs; and High intervals 
longer than 3.5 μs. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Traffic classifier – input Δt. 
The input H corresponding to the Hurst parameter 
(Figure 4) considers Poisson traffic values lower than 0.55; 
Hybrid, a trapezoidal function from 0.4 to 0.6; and Self-
similar for higher values than 0.55. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Traffic classifier – input H. 
The output of the traffic classifier is adimensional and is 
on a scale 0-1 as shown in Figure 5. For output values 
between 0 and 0.7, the incoming traffic is considered 
appropriate to OBS transport and for values greater than 0.5, 
the incoming traffic is considered appropriate to OCS 
transport. These values were selected in a way that the 
centroid of the resulting area after the defuzzification tends 
to the right side, implying higher priority to Quality of 
Service (QoS) than to the economy of resources.  
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
Figure 5.  Traffic classifier –output. 
The matrix rules (fuzzy inference step) for the traffic 
classifier is described in Tables 1 to 3. 
TABLE I.  
MATRIX RULES FOR THE CLASSIFIER – ΔT LOW. 
Hurst Parameter 
(H) 
Packet Arrival Rate  (λ) 
 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Poisson 
OBS 
OCS 
OCS 
Hybrid 
OCS 
OCS 
OCS 
Self-similar 
OBS 
OCS 
OCS 
TABLE II.  
MATRIX RULES FOR THE CLASSIFIER – ΔT MEDIUM. 
Hurst Parameter 
(H) 
Packet Arrival Rate  (λ) 
 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Poisson 
OBS 
OCS 
OCS 
Hybrid 
OBS 
OCS 
OCS 
Self-similar 
OBS 
OBS 
OCS 
TABLE III.  
MATRIX RULES FOR THE CLASSIFIER – ΔT HIGH. 
Hurst Parameter 
(H) 
Packet Arrival Rate  (λ) 
 
Low 
Medium 
High 
Poisson 
OPS 
OBS 
OCS 
Hybrid 
OPS 
OBS 
OBS 
Self-similar 
OBS 
OBS 
OCS 
 
The defuzzification process is done using the centroid 
method [17], which provides as output the center of gravity 
of the fuzzy set. Figure 6 illustrates a temporal series of 
Voice over IP (VoIP) traffic used to validate the traffic 
classifier. 
 
Figure 6.  Temporal Serie of a VoIP traffic [11]. 
The highlighted moment in Figure 6 correspond to an instant 
which could cause a wrong classification, since it is a high 
inter-arrival time. However, the use of fuzzy logic to the 
classification allows considering the statistical parameters 
together, avoiding a wrong decision, especially in the 
presence of spurious in the incoming traffic, making the 
traffic classifier more robust. The traffic classifier output 
obtained for the input illustrated in Figure 6 was OCS which 
is consistent, since VoIP is a service which requires high 
QoS.  
IV. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
The simulation tool used in this work is an extension of 
the Transparent Optical Network Simulator (TONetS) 
presented in Soares et al. [15] allowing performance 
comparison between a parallel hybrid optical network as in 
Gauger et al. [14] and an optical network OCS under the 
same traffic conditions. TONetS is an educational simulation 
tool, developed in JAVA and conceived in blocks to allow its 
evolution. TONetS, initially developed to work with OCS 
switching, has been adapted in this work to support OBS 
switching in a parallel hybrid optical network. 
The main gain when using hybrid optical networks is the 
economy 
and 
the 
optimization 
of 
resources 
while 
transporting sparse traffic. In order to assess these gains, we 
define the metric Relative Resource Economy: 

  ( )   
         
    
    

where UOCS and UOBS are the utilization of the network 
using OCS and OBS, respectively. 
In order to evaluate the performance difference between 
the OCS and OBS switching paradigms and the hybrid 
optical network approach proposed, a simple topology with 3 
nodes was tested, using the three forms of switching (OBS, 
OCS and Hybrid). Each simulation considered: 1000 
requests, two replications and a confidence level of 0.95. 
Forty wavelengths by optical fiber link were assigned using 
the First Fit algorithm and all simulations were performed 
considering the optical network nodes without wavelength 
conversion capability. 
Using the simple 3-node topology illustrated in Figure 7, 
the OBS and OCS schemes were evaluated separately and 
together submitted to an incoming non-uniform traffic 
handled by the traffic classifier in order to select which one 
is more appropriate. In the case of the hybrid optical network 
approach, the Hurst parameter was varied uniformly between 
0.3 and 1.0 to ensure the dynamism in the network. In all 
scenarios analyzed, 40 optical channels were used (i.e., 
wavelengths) by link subjected to an initial load of 10 
Erlangs and 140 Erlangs, with increments of 10 Erlangs, in 
order to compare performances based on metrics such as 
Blocking Probability and Utilization. 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
Figure 7.  Analysed topology. 
As a first scenario studied, an OCS network with the 
topology illustrated in Figure 7 was submitted to an initial 
load of 10 Erlangs with five increments of 10 Erlangs. Figure 
8 illustrates the overall OCS utilization in this case. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Network utilization with OCS and initial load of 10 Erlangs. 
Due to the low load level, a blocking probability almost 
negligible was observed and a low utilization of the network 
resources of the OCS network. Similar results were observed 
with an OBS network and a hybrid OCS/OBS network. 
However, OBS switching achieved a slightly lower 
performance, for instance, 0.15% of blocking probability at 
50 Erlangs. 
As a second scenario studied, the same OCS network 
previously presented (Figure 7) was subjected to an initial 
load of 140 Erlangs with five increments of 10 Erlangs. 
Figures 9 to 11 illustrate the general network utilization, the 
blocking 
probability, 
and 
wavelength 
utilization, 
respectively.
 
Figure 9.  Blocking Probability with OCS and initial load of 140 Erlangs. 
 
Figure 10.  General network utilization with OCS and initial load of 140 
Erlangs. 
 
Figure 11.  Utilization by Wavelength with OCS and initial load of 140 
Erlangs. 
In this second scenario, the blocking probability observed 
was high - 29.2% at 180 Erlangs - as well as the network 
utilization - 83.6% capacity at 180 Erlangs. The same traffic 
load condition was applied to OBS switching, resulting in 
the utilization by wavelength performance shown in Figure 
12. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Utilization by Wavelength with OBS and initial load of 140 
Erlangs. 
From Figures 11 and 12, it can be observed that OBS 
switching allows improving the network performance. This 
result is consistent and can be associated with the fact that 
with OBS, intermediate links are released after the passage 
of the optical bursts. Therefore, these resources are available 
to new requests. Moreover, when the network load is high, 
intermediate links becomes relevant to performance. Table 4 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

illustrates the Relative Resource Economy, as in (1), 
obtained using the OBS paradigm. 
TABLE IV.  
RELATIVE RESOURCE ECONOMY 
LOAD (E) 
OCS 
OBS 
 
140 
0.802 
0.694 
13.47 
150 
0.801 
0.715 
10.74 
160 
0.822 
0.714 
13.14 
170 
0.822 
0.709 
13.75 
180 
0.83 
0.726 
12.53 
 
As expected, OBS showed better performance in terms of 
resource economy. For all load conditions, we obtained 
savings higher than 10% compared to OCS; this is an 
important factor especially when considering large networks 
which increase the availability of resources requiring large 
investments. 
The same load condition of the previous scenario was 
applied to the hybrid OCS/OBS network, with the value of 
the Hurst parameter ranging uniformly between 0.3 and 1.0. 
The performance obtained in terms of utilization by 
wavelength is shown in Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Utilization by Wavelength with Hybrid OCS/OBS switching 
and initial load of 140 Erlangs. 
The hybrid OCS/OBS switching, as expected, showed 
intermediate results between those obtained with the OCS 
and OBS separately. While hybrid OCS/OBS network 
presented smaller network utilization in the presence of low 
granularity traffic, OCS network appeared to be transparent 
to the granularity of traffic, wasting the available resources. 
The OCS/OBS blocking probability was about 5% lower 
than OCS at 180 Erlangs. These performance differences are 
more apparent according to the incoming traffic. In the case 
of sparse traffic, a larger portion of the traffic is switched by 
bursts, making the overall performance of the OCS/OBS 
network closer to that obtained with the OBS paradigm. For 
more continuous traffic, the opposite occurs. Recent studies 
[18-21] indicates that backbones traffic is mainly composed 
of data packets, which implies that a significant portion of 
the traffic can be switched by bursts, optimizing the existing 
infrastructure and avoiding the waste of resources. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This work presents a performance study comparing an 
OBS/OCS hybrid optical network approach to the OCS and 
OBS paradigms isolated.  
The OCS/OBS hybrid optical network studied uses a 
traffic classification and optical switching selector scheme 
based on fuzzy logic. 
Our results show that, when the traffic is non-uniform, a 
hybrid optical network approach uses the available resources 
in a more efficient way than an optical network 
implementing one unique optical switching paradigm. 
The use of Fuzzy Logic at each edge hybrid node makes 
traffic classification scheme robust to errors in the estimation 
of the input parameters, traffic growth and the emergence of 
new applications. The use of statistical traffic parameters to 
select the optical switching paradigm makes this scheme 
transparent to protocols. In the work presented by Lee [23], 
the author proposes a hybrid network and suggests a 
classification of traffic according to the duration of the flow. 
The decision threshold, however, remains an open issue. The 
classifier presented here fills this gap, consisting of a generic 
and robust solution, which can be seen as an offshoot of the 
work of Lee.  
This work brings some challenges to be investigated, 
such as the evaluation of reducing latency in high QoS 
services using hybrid optical networks and the consequent 
reduction in dispute over resources with lower QoS services 
and the use of fuzzy logic in other ways to manage traffic. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. P. Jue, V. M. Vokkarane,“Optical Burst Switched Networks”. 
Springer, 2005. 
[2] R. Ramaswami, K. Sivarajan, and G. Sasaki, “Optical Networks – a 
practical perspective”, 3rd. ed., Morgan Kaufmann, 2010. 
[3] D. Tafani, C. McArdle, and L. P. Barry, “Analytical Model of optical 
burst switched networks with share-per-node buffers”, IEEE 
Symposium on Computers and Communications – ISCC, Jun. 2011, 
pp. 512-518. 
[4] M. J. O'mahony, et al. “Future Optical Networks”. Journal Lightwave 
Technologies 24, Dec , 2006, pp. 4684-4696. 
[5] G. Corazza, W. Cerroni, G. Leli, C.  Raffaelli, M. Savi, and N. Stol, 
“Analitical Model of 3-level QoS Schedulig in Hybrid Optical 
Networks”, International Conference on Computing, Networking and 
Communications (ICNC) Workshop on Computing, Networking and 
Communications – IEEE, Jan. 2013, pp.180-184. 
[6] W. E. Leland, M. S. Taqqu, W. Willinger, and D. V. Wilson “On the 
self-similar nature os Ethernet traffic”. SIGCOMM ’93, Vol. 23, Oct. 
1993, pp. 183-193. 
[7] V. Paxson, S. Floyd, “Wide-Area Traffic: The Failure of Poisson 
Modeling”. IEEE/ACM Transaction on Networking, Jun. 1995, pp. 
226-244. 
[8] M. E. Crovella, A. Bestavros, “Self-similarity in Word Wide Web: 
evidence and possible causes”, IEEE Transactions on Networking, 
Vol. 5, no. 6, Dec. 1997,  pp. 835-846. 
[9] J. Beran, R. Sherman, M. Taqqu, and W. Willinger, “Long range 
dependence in Variable Bit Rate Video traffic”, IEEE Transactions on 
Communications, Vol. 43, Apr. 1995, pp. 1566-1579. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[10] C. Park, F. Hernandez-Campos, J. S. Marron  and F. D. Smith, “Long 
Range Dependence in  changing internet traffic mix”. Computer 
Networks 48, Jun. 2005, pp. 401-422. 
[11] C. M. Pedroso, J. P. Caldeira, and K. Fonseca, “Caracterization of 
VoIP traffic”, XVI Seminário de Iniciação Científica e X Mostra de 
Pesquisa Pontífica Universidade Católica do Paraná, Nov. 2008 
(available in Portuguese). 
[12] L. P. R. Kumar,  S. K. Kumar, D. M. Reddy, and M. R. Perati, 
“Analytical model for performance study of the switch under self-
similar variable length packet traffic”, Proceedings of the World 
Congress on Engineering and Computer Science, Vol. 1, Oct. 2010. 
[13] T. Karagiannis, M. Molle, and M. Faloutsos, “Long- range 
dependence – Ten years of Internet traffic modelling”, IEEE Internet 
Computing, Vol.5/8, Sep. 2004, pp. 57-64. 
[14] C. M. Gauger, et al. – “Hybrid Optical Network Architectures: 
Bringing Packets and Circuits Together”. IEEE Communications 
Magazine, Vol. 44, n. 8, 2006, pp. 36-42. 
[15] A. Soares,  G. Durães, W. Giozza,  and P. Cunha,  “TONetS: a 
performance tool of transparent optical networks”, Proc. of XXVII 
Sistemas Computacionais e de Computação, Jun. 2007, pp. 579-594. 
(available in Portuguese). 
[16] J. Teng, G. N. Rouskas, “A comparison of the JIT, JET, and horizon 
wavelength reservation schemes on a single OBS node”,  Proceedings 
of the First International Workshop on Optical Burst Switching, 2003. 
[17] E. Cox, The fuzzy systems handbook: a practitioner’s guide to 
building, using, and maintaining fuzzy systems . New York: AP 
Professional, 1994. 
[18] http://www.caida.org/data/passive/passive_trace_statistics.xml, 
[retrieved March, 2014] 
[19] Y. Won, R. Fontugne, K. Cho, H. Esaki, and K. Fukuda, “Nine years 
of observing traffic anomalies: trending analysis in backbone 
networks”, 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Integrated 
Network 
Management (IM 2013), May 2013, pp. 636-642. 
[20] http://www.fukuda-lab.org/mawilab/, [retrieved March, 2014] 
[21] http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/internet/traces.html, 
[retrieved 
March 2014] 
[22] C. Xin,  C. Qiao, Y. Ye, and S. E. Dixit, – “A hybrid optical 
switching approach”. IEEE GLOBECOM 2003, Dec. 2003, pp. 3808-
3812. 
[23] G. M. Lee, “Optical hybrid switching with flow classification in IP 
over optical network”, PhD thesis, Korea Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology, School of Engineering, 2007. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

