Priority-based Time Slot Assignment Algorithm for
Hierarchical Time Sliced Optical Burst Switched
Networks
Yahaya Coulibaly ∗, Muhammad Shaﬁe Abd Latiff ∗, Abu Bakar Mohammad † and Abubakar Muhammad Umaru ∗
∗ Faculty of Computer Science and Information Systems
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, 81300 Johor Bahru , Malaysia
Email: cyahaya@gmail.com,shaﬁe@utm.my,amumaru@yahoo.com
† Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia
81300 Johor Bahru , Malaysia
Email: bakar@utm.my
Abstract—Bandwidth-greedy applications are in continuous
development. These applications are testing the bandwidth limit
of current telecommunication and computer network infrastruc-
tures. Optical Burst Switching (OBS) is a promising optical
switching technology to meet bandwidth requirements of such
applications in the near-future. However, due to lack of matured
and cost effective optical equipments, such as optical memories,
this technology still suffers from high burst drops ratio as a
result of contention in the core node. Many approaches have
been proposed and evaluated to address this issue. In this paper,
a priority-based time slot assignment algorithm, which we named
as Priority-based segmented train algorithm (PSTA) is introduced
and analyzed for Hierarchical Time Sliced OBS (HiTSOBS) a
newly developed slotted OBS variant. The evaluation aims at
comparing the performance of PSTA and that of HiTSOBS in
terms of burst loss ratio and delay. Simulation results demon-
strate that PSTA outperforms time slot assignment scheme used
in HiTSOBS
Index Terms—Optical Burst Switching (OBS); Hierarchical
Time Sliced Optical Burst Switching (HiTSOBS); Burst Loss
Probability (BLP); Time Slot; Contention.
I. INTRODUCTION
Greedy-bandwidth applications are in continuous increase.
Such applications require bandwidths that are not easily afford-
able by current telecommunication technology and infrastruc-
tures. Thus, alternative solutions are being searched to satisfy
the needs of these applications. Optical networks are known
for their high bandwidth support due to the nature of the
ﬁber optic cable. Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM)
technology and its derivatives such as Dense Wavelength
Division Multiplexing (DWDM and Ultra-dense Wavelength
Division Multiplexing (UDWDM) are emerging as a future
evidence platform to transport advanced bandwidth demanding
services, Currently, three optical switching paradigms have
been proposed for that purpose. These technologies are: Op-
tical packet Switching (OPS) [1] [2] [3] [4], Optical Circuit
Switching (OCS) [5] and Optical Burst Switching. (OBS) [2]
[6]. Among these three proposals, Optical Burst Switching
technology is seen as the most feasible and viable solution
to satisfy the needs of large bandwidth applications in the
near future. Despite such favoritism for OBS, burst contention
in the core network stands out as a major roadblock for
its implementation. Burst contention occurs when ﬂows from
different input lines are sent to the same output port on the
same ﬁber channel (wavelength) at the same time. In electronic
networks, this problem is solved by using electronic memories
(RAM) as buffers. Since there, are no mature and cost effective
optical memories [7], OBS paradigm does not assume the use
of buffer in the core network. Therefore, burst loss probability
became a real hindrance to the deployment of OBS [8] and
it is the focus of research in OBS. Before OBS can beneﬁt
the telecommunication service providers, contention must be
solved so as to recue burst loss ratio. Various architectures of
OBS have been proposed in the literature in an attempt to ma-
terialize the implementation of OBS. These attempts are based
on two principles: non-slotted OBS and Slotted OBS. On one
hand, non slotted OBS switch bursts in wavelength domain;
on the other hand, slotted-OBS switch bursts in time domain
[9]. The main advantage of slotted-OBS over non-slotted OBS
is the optional use of non-cost effective wavelength converters
and ﬁber delay lines (FDLs). In this paper, we focus on time
slotted OBS variants where we propose and evaluate a priority-
based segmented- train time slot allocation algorithm (PSTA)
for the latest slotted OBS variant known as Hierarchical Time
sliced Optical Burst Switching (HiTSOBS) [10]. To our best
knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time such algorithms are being
proposed and evaluated for HiTSOBS. The rest of this paper is
organized as follows: Section II goes through related works;
Section
III describes architecture of HiTSOBS. In Section
IV, we discuss the PSTA algorithm. Simulation parameters,
scenarios and results are discussed in Section V. Concluding
remarks and future works are described in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we review route, wavelength and time slot
assignment schemes used in slotted WDM networks. RWA
199
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

for non-slotted OBS were largely studied and reviewed. An
early review of RWA can be found in [11]. From there on,
new RWA schemes were proposed and analyzed as discussed
in [12] [13], [14] [15] [16], [17] [18] [19] and others. For
more details on these schemes, the reader is referred to listed
references at the end of this paper. In [20], the authors studied
routing and wavelength and time slot assignment problem for a
circuit-switched time division multiplexed (TDM) wavelength-
routed (WR) optical WDM network. So as to overcome the
shortcomings of non-TDM based RWA. The algorithm was
applied on a network where each individual wavelength is
partitioned in the time-domain into ﬁxed-length time-slots
organized as a TDM frame. Moreover, multiple sessions are
multiplexed on each wavelength by assigning a sub-set of
the TDM slots to each session. A set of RWTA algorithms
was proposed and evaluated in terms of blocking probability.
Shortest path routing algorithm was used for the routine
part of the algorithm. Least Load (LL) wavelength selection
scheme was used for wavelength assignment, while a Least
Loaded Time Slot (LLT) technique was proposed for time
slot assignment. The researchers claimed that, their proposed
RWTA algorithm performs better than random wavelength
and timeslot assignment schemes. However, the use of SP as
routing algorithm is performance hindrance in the algorithm.
The work done by Wen et al. in [21] is similar to that proposed
in [20] and suffers for the same performance problems. In
[22], Rajalakshmi and Jhunjhunwala also proposed a RWTA
solution for wavelength routed WDM networks to increase to
increase the channel utilization when the carried trafﬁc does
not require the entire channel bandwidth. As in any TDM-
WDM architecture, multiple sessions are multiplexed on each
wavelength by assigning a sub-set of the TDM slots to each
session. Different from the work in [20], the authors used ﬁxed
routing (FR) and alternate routing (AR) algorithms for route
computation. First Fit (FF) channel assignment algorithm was
used for both wavelength and time slot assignment. In this
algorithm, when a call gets blocked, the already established
calls in the network are rerouted; wavelength and timeslot
reassigned so as to accommodate the blocked call. Based
on the results obtained, it was reported that the proposed
RWTA scheme can be used to maximize the time of ﬁrst call
blocking hence increasing the overall network performance.
The use of FR, AR and FF algorithms make the algorithm
less complex and easy to implement, but performance wise
the algorithm lacks scalability and dynamism. The works done
by the researchers in [23] and [22] are similar except that a
dynamic routing algorithm was used in [23]to compute the
routes in addition to FR and AR algorithms. In [24], Um et
al. proposed a centralized control architecture and a time-slot
assignment procedure for time-slotted optical burst switched
(OBS) networks. In this centralized resource allocation tech-
nique, ingress nodes request time-slots necessary to transmit
optical bursts, and a centralized control node makes a reply
according to the slot-competition result. The aim is to improve
burst contention resolution and optical channel utilization.
Although the algorithm did achieve high resource utilization, it
did so at the cost of high buffering delay at the ingress node.
Additionally, the centralized nature of the algorithm makes
it non-scalable. Thus it is not appropriate for large networks
and expected implementation environment for OBS networks.
The researchers in [25] considered dynamic trafﬁc grooming
issue in WDMTDM switched optical mesh networks without
wavelength conversion capability and proposed an adaptive
grooming algorithm to solve the problem. The goal was to ef-
ﬁciently route connection requests with fractional wavelength
capacity requirements onto high- capacity wavelengths and to
balance the load on the links in the network at the same time.
A cost function that encourages trafﬁc grooming and load bal-
ancing was used to achieve the aforementioned objective. The
authors concluded that, their algorithm outperforms similar
routing algorithms. However, nothing was mentioned about
time slot assignment and its effect on network performance.
In [26], Yang and Hall proposed and evaluated a distributed
Dynamic RWTA algorithm based on dynamic programming
approach. Their goal was to minimize blocking probability.
The proposed consists of three distinct parts; each part solves
a sub problem of the RWTA: Routing part; wavelength assign-
ment section and ﬁnally, wavelength assignment section. The
results were compared with SP algorithm and were reported
to perform better than that algorithm. The drawback of this
solution is the use of SP for route discovery. Noguchi and
Kamakura [27] proposed a hybrid of one-way and two-way
signalling algorithm for slotted optical burst switching (SOBS)
[28]. Through numerical analysis with comparison two-way
signalling algorithm, the researchers argued that their hybrid
signalling algorithm performs better than its competitor in
terms of end-to-end delay. In [29], the scientists observed
that next generation metro network is most likely to be based
on high-capacity agile all- optical networks and considered
a star metro network architecture that consists of a number
of buffers-less all-optical core switches. They developed three
resource sharing techniques. The ﬁrst scheme is reservation-
based, in which decisions are made at each core switch to
avoid collision and it is called Centralized TDM (CTDM). In
the second scheme, distributed and independent decisions are
made at edge switches, but dropped packets at the core nodes
are retransmitted; this algorithm is called Distributed TDM
(DTDM). Finally, a combination of the above two techniques
named Hybrid TDM (HTDM) was developed to support differ-
ent optical network architectures. According to the simulation
results, the authors reported that, among the three schemes,
HTDM performs better because. This high performance of
HRDM is attributed to the fact that it can achieve a better
performance under both low and high trafﬁc loads most of the
time. However, HTDM needs more evaluations under different
classes of service to conﬁrm such claims. The researchers
in [30] proposed a new dynamic RWTA algorithm based on
a principle known as: the maximum contiguous principle.
The proposed algorithm is called: Most-Continuous-Same-
Available (MCSA) resources. K shortest path routing algo-
rithm was used to compute the routes in accordance with hops
from small to large stored in the network nodes routing table.
200
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Although the simulation results suggest that, the algorithm did
reduce the blocking probability and achieved high resource
utilization, the algorithm has a high network overhead due to
the fact it needs the real-time information such as network
wavelength utilization, time slots allocation. Finally, in [31],
the researchers proposed and evaluated the optical time-slot
switching (OTS) technology, in which the ﬁxed size time-slot
is adopted as the basic switching granularity, and switching
is done in the time domain, rather than wavelength domain.
They also studied the issue routing, wavelength and time-slot
assignment (RWTA) problem. To this end, they introduced
an adaptive weight function to the routing and wavelength
selection algorithm, and proposed several approaches for time
slot assignment such as the train approach, wagon approach
and p-distribution approach. They have demonstrated that,
OTS and the underlying dynamic RWTA scheme performs
better than conventional non time-based OBS in terms of burst
loss probability (BLP), quality of service (QoS) and class of
service (CoS). In this OBS design, time slots are reserved
in groups. Such constraint lead to high burst loss rate. The
authors did not include loss investigation results in their paper.
Thus, the architecture needs further studies and modiﬁcations.
However, it is worth noting that, this is the only paper, at the
time of this writing, which has studied RWTA issue in the
context of WDM OBS.
III. FRAME ARCHITECTURE AND OPERATION OF
HITSOBS
In the HiTSOBS understudy, time-slots are numbered seri-
ally, starting at 0. The frame size known as radix and denoted
by N represents the number of slots in each frame in the
HiTSOBS hierarchy. i represents the time slot at which current
burst transmission starts (Equation 2). The frame structure of
HiTSOBS is depicted in Fig. 1. As in [10], a slot in the level-
1 frame may expand into an entire level-2 frame and so on.
However, in this paper, the maximum number of frame is ﬁxed
at 3. Beyond three levels, network performance is expected to
degrade especially for delay sensitive applications. Bandwidth
occupation per slot in a given level is determined by Equation
1
Sc = ( 1
kN )Wc
(1)
where Sc is the share of a slot out of the total bandwidth
of a particular wavelength of a ﬁbre link denoted by Wc
and k is the order of level transporting the burst and N is
the frame size in time slot. Similar to conventional OBS, in
HiTSOBS, ingress edge node accumulates data from different
client networks (IP, ATM, and SONET/SDH, etc) into bursts,
and classiﬁes them into three classes: Bandwidth-greedy ap-
plications (Class 0), delay sensitive applications (Class 1) and
ﬁnally loss sensitive applications (Class 2). Class 0 data are
transmitted at level-1; class 1 data are transported at level-2;
level-3 frames are used to transport class 2 bursts.
A. Control Plane Operation
Prior to the transmission of a burst, a burst header packet
(BHP) is sent to reserve necessary resources. The BHP con-
Fig. 1.
Illustration of Frame Structure
Fig. 2.
Burst Header Packet Contents
tains four types of information as depicted in Figure 3.0:
the QoS of a burst, the start slot, and the burst length.
Moreover, the BHP carries the initial routing information.
Such information is not available in the BHP of [10] because
routing was not studied. When a core node receive the control
packet, it ﬁrst deduces the outgoing link for the bursts and
its QoS requirements and then using the PSTA algorithm
determines where the slot lies in its hierarchy corresponding
to that output link. The details of the algorithm are described
in Section IV.
B. Data plane operation
Based on the routing information and the hierarchy con-
structed by the control plane, the data plane processes the
incoming bursts and sends them to the reserved output link.
A counter is maintained for each frame in the hierarchy,
corresponding to the slot last served in that frame. Each time-
slot, the counter for the level-1 frame is incremented by one,
and the corresponding slot entry is checked. If it is a leaf
entry containing a burst, the optical crossbar is conﬁgured so
that the input line corresponding to that burst is switched to
the output link under consideration. If on the other hand, the
slot entry points to a lower level frame, the counter for the
lower-level frame is incremented, and the process resources.
IV. PRIORITY-BASED SEGMENTED TIME SLOT
ASSIGNMENT ALGORITHM
After a burst is assembled and sent to the network, a routing,
wavelength and time slot assignment algorithm is responsible
for choosing the appropriate route, wavelength and time slot
to transport that burst. In this paper, shortest path routing and
ﬁrst ﬁt wavelength assignment algorithms are assumed. For
time slot assignment, a prioritized Segmented-Train time slot
assignment algorithm (PSTA) is developed and implemented.
See Fig 4. In this algorithm, time slots are allocated in a given
level depending on the priority of the burst to be transported.
Different form reservation technique used in [10], Equation 2
201
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

is used for time slot reservation.
SR = i + (B − [(B − 1)
z
](z − 1)z + [(B − 1)
z
]N
(2)
In the above equation, B represents burst size, N is the frame
size, z represents the size of the train (number of coaches) and
k is the initial position of time slot reservation. For instance,
lets assume that, we have an optical time slot switch (OTS)
that is capable of switching frames of 10 time slots (i.e., the
frame size is 10 time slots). If a burst of high priority arrives
at this core node, after being assigned the highest level in
the hierarchy (i.e., level 1), High-PSTA(z), where the number
of coaches of the train is ﬁxed at 3, will be invoked. If the
burst size is 10 time slots, time slot assignment is done as
follows: The ﬁrst 3 segments of the burst will be transmitted
in slots No. 0, 3 and 6. And so on. Using the same OTS,
if a burst of medium priority arrives at the core node, it is
transmitted at the second highest level in the hierarchy (i.e.,
level 2) and Med-PSTA(z), where number of coaches is 2,
is executed. The assignment procedures are similar to that of
high priority burst except that time slots are reserved by pairs.
When a low priority burst arrives at this core node, the lowest
level in the hierarchy (i.e., level 3) is used to transport the
burst and Norm-PSTA(z), where the train consists of only one
coach will be called and the reservation of time slots is done
one at a time as in the original HiTSOBS.
Algorithm 1 PSTA Algorithm
1: Notations:
ta: Arrival time of a burst. C : Class of the Burst. Bqreq:
Burst QoS requirements. B: Burst to be transmitted. z:
Number of coaches in a train. b : Minimum Bandwidth re-
quirement. D: Maximum delay requirement.L: Maximum
loss requirement.
2: for all B do
3:
initialize candidate time slots
4:
T m
n ← t
5:
if C = 0 then
6:
Bqreq ← b
7:
Execute High PSTA(z)
8:
else if C = 1 then
9:
Breq ← D
10:
Execute Med PSTA(z)
11:
else
12:
C = 2
13:
Bqreq ← L
14:
Execute Low PSTA(z)
15:
end if
16: end for
V. SIMULATION FACTORS AND RESULTS
A. Simulation Factors and Scenarios
To test the efﬁciency of HiTSOBS in a mesh WDM OBS
network environment and implement the newly developed time
slot assignment algorithm, we have modiﬁed the discrete-event
TABLE I
SIMULATION FACTORS AND LEVELS
Factors
Levels
Wavelengths
per link
8
Wavelength
Capacity
(Gbps)
1, 10
Frame
Size
(Time slot)
10
Burst
Size
(KB)
9
Time
Slot
size (µs)
1, 2
Buffer
Size
(Time slot)
10
Number
of
Flows
1000
Topology
NFSNET
Number
of
Simulation
run
20
simulator developed by the researchers in [10] to integrate
Shortest Path (SP) and ﬁrst ﬁt wavelength algorithms for
routing and wavelength assignment purposes. The algorithm
was evaluated using the 14 nodes NSFNET topology as
shown in Fig
refsec5:ﬁg1. We assumed that, the nodes
are interconnected with ﬁber links of 8 wavelengths each.
Bursts for ﬂow j arrive as a Poisson process at rate
λi
B
bursts per timeslot where B represents the average burst size.
The timeslot size was chosen to correspond to 1µs, which
is consistent with the switching speeds of solid-state optical
switching technologies available in the industry [32] and [33].
Two wavelength capacities were analyzed: 1 Gbps and 10
Gbps. Burst size was ﬁxed at 125 KB [10]. The number
of levels was chosen to be 3. Three classes of burst were
assumed: class 0 (High Deﬁnition Multimedia Video/audio),
class 1 (High Deﬁnition Multimedia streaming) and class 2
(normal data: FTP, email, telnet, etc...). Each ﬂow is assigned
to a level depending on its class. Upon arrival of a ﬂow’s
burst at the edge node, the following processing happens: if
the arriving burst encounters a non-empty queue, the burst is
queued in the buffer if it is not full and awaits service. If on
the other hand the arriving burst encounters an empty queue,
the edge node reserves a time slot according to PSTA using
equation 2. Time slots are reserved over a number of frames
equal to the burst length and the burst is transmitted on to the
core node. As in [10], the slot positions for burst slices for any
given ﬂow vary each time the ﬂow becomes newly backlogged;
this is important because it helps prevent synchronization and
phase locking which complicates the implementation of OPS.
Simulation parameters are summarized in Table I.
202
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Fig. 3.
Simulation Topology
(a) Loss vs. Load for 1 Gbps
(b) Delay vs. Load for 1 Gbps
Fig. 4.
Investigating the effect of 1 Gbps Channel Capacity
B. Results Analysis
In this section, different simulation results are discussed. Fig
4 shows the burst loss ratio (BLR) and the delay performance
for HiTSOBS and HiTSOBS-PSTA for wavelength capacity
of 1 Gbps. In Fig
5, the same comparison is made for
wavelength capacity increased to 10 Gbps. Fig
6 compares
the performance of both algorithms for different time slot size
in µs. Similar to the work in [10], the burst size and frame size
were chosen to be 125 KB and 10 respectively. Shortest path
algorithm was used for route selection and ﬁrst-ﬁt technique
was used for wavelength assignment.
From the above ﬁgures, it can be observed that, the proposed
time slot assignment algorithm (PSTA) performs better than
the scheme used in [10] for time slot assignment. This is due
to the fact that, in PSTA, when a burst is announced, we try
to reserve more than one time slot in one frame based on the
QoS requirements of the burst. Also, the way bandwidths are
allocated to each time slot contributes to the superiority of our
algorithm. Fig 5 demonstrates similar results as in Fig 4 and
the arguments of the superiority are similar. However, in this
case, wavelength capacity was increased to 10 Gbps which has,
(a) Loss vs. Load for 10 Gbps
(b) Delay vs. Load for 10 Gbps
Fig. 5.
Investigating the effect of 10 Gbps Channel Capacity
(a) Loss vs. Load
(b) Delay vs. Load
Fig. 6.
Investigating the effect of Time Slot size
remarkably, pulled the performance up. To study the effect of
time slot size on both loss and delay for HiTSOBS, we run
two cases of simulation; one with 1µs and the other with 2µs
as time slot size for both algorithms. For space limitation, we
only show the results of this investigation for HiTSOB-PSTA
in Fig
6. These results suggest that longer time slots have
negative impact on loss and delay of a burst inverse especially
at low and medium load (0.5). This is not surprising, because
longer time slot means more time to process, so at low load,
burst will have to wait longer before they are assigned a time
slot (more delay) and this lead to more loss as load increases
and the delay starts to decrease at very high load and the size
of time slot size becomes negligible.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed and evaluated a prioritized
time slot assignment algorithm for HiTSOBS. Simulation
results demonstrate that, the newly propose algorithm (PSTA)
does help in improving HiTSOBS in terms of loss and delay
as compared with the technique used in [10]. However, the
authors believe that, HiTSOBS-PSTA should produce better
results when better route and wavelength selection algorithms
are used. Additionally, we think that HiTSOBS should perform
better than traditional OBS. To prove these hypothesis, the
authors have integrated PSTA with an adaptive and QoS based
route and wavelength assignment algorithms that is integrated
with PSTA and it is under evaluation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Islamic Development
(IDB) for its ﬁnancial support as well as the Ministry of Higher
Education (MOHE) of Malaysia. Additionally, the authors
thank Universiti Teknologi Malaysia (UTM) for supporting
this work through Vote. No: Q.J B0000.7128.00J94.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Guillemot, M. Renaud, P. Gambini, C. Janz, I. An-
donovic, R. Bauknecht, B. Bostica, M. Burzio, F. Calle-
gati, and M. Casoni, “Transparent optical packet switch-
ing: The european acts keops project approach,” Journal
of Lightwave Technology, vol. 16, no. 12, p. 2117, 1998.
[2] D. Chiaroni, M. Renaud, G. Eilenberger, F. Masetti,
A. Jourdan, and P. Bonno, “Optical packet switching
matrix: a key system for the next generation of multi-
terabit routers/switches for ﬂexible optical networks,”
Alcatel Telecommunications Review, no. 3, pp. 183–185,
2001, 484ZY Times Cited:2 Cited References Count:3.
203
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

[3] T. El-Bawab and J. Shin, “Optical packet switching in
core networks: between vision and reality,” Communica-
tions Magazine, IEEE, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 60–65, 2002.
[4] J. Jue, W. Yang, Y. Kim, and Q. Zhang, “Optical packet
and burst switched networks: a review,” Communications,
IET, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 334–352, 2009.
[5] A. Ghafoor, M. Guizani, and S. Sheikh, “Architecture of
an all-optical circuit-switched multistage interconnection
network,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 1595–1607, 1990.
[6] C. Qiao and M. Yoo, “Optical burst switching (obs)a new
paradigm for an optical internet,” Journal of High Speed
Networks, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 69–84, 1999.
[7] T. Venkatesh and C. Siva Ram Murthy, “Introduction to
optical burst switching,” in An Analytical Approach to
Optical Burst Switched Networks.
Springer, 2010, pp.
1–41.
[8] J. Triay and C. Cervello-Pastor, “An ant-based algorithm
for distributed routing and wavelength assignment in
dynamic optical networks,” Selected Areas in Commu-
nications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 542–552,
2010.
[9] F. Farahmand, V. Vokkarane, and J. Jue, “Practical
priority contention resolution for slotted optical burst
switching networks,” 2003.
[10] V. Sivaraman and A. Vishwanath, “Hierarchical time-
sliced optical burst switching,” Optical Switching and
Networking, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 37–43, 2009.
[11] H. Zang, J. Jue, and B. Mukherjee, “A review of routing
and wavelength assignment approaches for wavelength-
routed optical wdm networks,” Optical Networks Maga-
zine, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 47–60, 2000.
[12] D. Zhemin and M. Hamdi, “Routing and wavelength
assignment in multi-segment wdm optical networks using
clustering techniques,” Photonic Network Communica-
tions, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 55–67, 2004.
[13] J. Hwang, J. Jung, Y. Park, J. Bae, H. Song, and S. Kim,
“A rwa algorithm for differentiated services with qos
guarantees in the next generation internet based on dwdm
networks,” Photonic Network Communications, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 319–334, 2004.
[14] T. Fischer, K. Bauer, and P. Merz, “A multilevel approach
for the routing and wavelength assignment problem.”
IEEE, 2008, pp. 225–228.
[15] K. Liu, “Routing and wavelength assignment algorithm
in multi-ﬁber wdm optical networks,” in Symposium on
Photonics and Optoelectronics, 2009.
Wuhan: IEEE,
2009, pp. 1–4.
[16] R. Randhawa and J. Sohal, “Static and dynamic routing
and wavelength assignment algorithms for future trans-
port networks,” Optik-International Journal for Light and
Electron Optics, vol. 121, no. 8, pp. 702–710, 2010.
[17] U. Rathore Bhatt and S. Tokekar, “Routing and wave-
length assignment algorithms for multiclass wdm optical
networks,” Optik-International Journal for Light and
Electron Optics, 2010.
[18] A. Wason and R. Kaler, “Generic routing and wave-
length assignment algorithm for a wavelength-routed
wdm network,” Optik-International Journal for Light and
Electron Optics, 2010.
[19] A. Wason and R. S. Kaler, “Routing and wavelength
assignment in wavelength-routed all-optical wdm net-
works,” Optik, vol. 121, no. 16, pp. 1478–1486, 2010,
645VZ Times Cited:0 Cited References Count:10.
[20] B.
Wen
and
K.
Sivalingam,
“Routing
wavelength
and time-slot assignment in time division multiplexed
wavelength-routed optical wdm networks,” pp. 1442–
1450, 2002.
[21] B. Wen, R. Shenai, and K. Sivalingam, “Routing,
wavelength and time-slot-assignment algorithms for
wavelength-routed optical wdm/tdm networks,” Journal
of Lightwave Technology, vol. 23, no. 9, p. 2598, 2005.
[22] P. Rajalakshmi and A. Jhunjhunwala, “Routing, wave-
length and timeslot reassignment algorithms for tdm
based optical wdm networks-multi rate trafﬁc demands,”
pp. 1–6, 2006.
[23] ——, “Routing wavelength and time-slot reassignment
algorithms for tdm based optical wdm networks,” Com-
puter Communications, vol. 30, no. 18, pp. 3491–3497,
2007.
[24] T. Um, J. Choi, S. Choi, and W. Ryu, “Centralized re-
source allocation for time-slotted obs networks.”
IEEE,
2006, p. 40.
[25] A. Vishwanath and W. Liang, “On-line routing in wdm-
tdm switched optical mesh networks,” Photonic Network
Communications, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 287–299, 2006,
035EH Times Cited:0 Cited References Count:37.
[26] W. Yang and T. Hall, “Distributed dynamic routing,
wavelength and timeslot assignment for bandwidth on
demand in agile all-optical networks,” pp. 136–139,
2007.
[27] H. Noguchi and K. Kamakura, “Effect of one-way mode
of hybrid reservation on slotted optical burst switching
networks,” pp. 1–6, 2009.
[28] Z. Zhang, L. Liu, and Y. Yang, “Slotted optical burst
switching (sobs) networks,” Computer Communications,
vol. 30, no. 18, pp. 3471–3479, 2007.
[29] A. Rahbar and O. Yang, “Agile bandwidth management
techniques in slotted all-optical packet switched net-
works,” Computer Networks, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 387–403,
2010.
[30] L. Jia, J. Fang-yuan, and X. Xiao-xiao, “A dynamic
routing, wavelength and timeslot assignment algorithm
for wdm-tdm optical networks,” pp. V1–533 – V1–537,
2010.
[31] G. Shan, J. Dai, S. Sun, G. Zhu, and D. Liu, “Study on
the problem of routing, wavelength and time-slot assign-
ment toward optical time-slot switching technology,” pp.
335–339, 2010.
[32] S. Yao, S. Dixit, and B. Mukherjee, “Advances in pho-
tonic packet switching: An overview,” IEEE Communi-
cations Magazine, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 84–94, 2000.
204
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

[33] M. Reisslein, “Measurement-based admission control for
bufferless multiplexers,” International Journal of Com-
munication Systems, vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 735–761, 2001.
205
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

