 
Incorporating Radio Frequency Identification into  
The Production Line for Work Flow Improvement 
 
Andrew Mc Clintock2, Charles Young1, Kevin Curran2, Dennis McKeag2 and Gavin Killeen1 
 
1 NuPrint Ltd, Springtown, Derry, Northern Ireland 
2 University of Ulster, Northern Ireland 
 
Abstract - Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) technology 
can be used in many different applications. There are 
numerous instances of RFID being used in everyday life.  For 
instance, anyone who works in a secure office, goes to 
university, drives a car with an immobiliser or parks in a 
secure car park. Other scenarios include the tracking of 
animals in the farming industry when cattle and sheep need to 
be identified by the farmer. Another instance where RFID can 
be used is in the manufacturing industry.  Tags can be 
attached to items that are moving through the factory on 
conveyer belts or being moved around by staff on trucks or 
forklifts. This paper documents a “real life” manufacturing 
facility, assess its current work flow process, evaluate them 
against industries best practices and seek to integrate RFID to 
help stream line work flow.   After assessment, the RFID 
solution will be implemented to tackle the highlighted areas.  
This will be achieved by understanding the client’s current 
situation, industrial best practices and how RFID technology 
can be implemented now and modified in the future to 
continue to maximize efficiency.  The expected outcome of the 
research is that RFID can contribute to modern work flow 
systems, however all systems will be inevitably based on a 
software database, and it will be how the RFID technology is 
used to create additional database entries and manipulate or 
link existing data that will see its true value.   
 
Keywords – RFID; Lean manufacturing; Location 
Determination; RFID tracking. 
 
 
I.    INTRODUCTION 
 
      It is often said in the automation industry that to control, 
you must first measure.  RFID is a non contact, long 
distance, water proof, high temperature resistant, data 
storage, automatic identification system.  These attributes 
make RFID the ideal solution for tracking and measuring 
the flow of physical items throughout a plant.  The RFID 
system comprises of an integrated collection of components, 
the tag, the reader, the reader antenna, a controller, a sensor, 
actuator and annunciator (optional), host and software 
system and communication infrastructure [1].  These 
qualities allow RFID to play an important role in allowing 
the physical flow of equipment throughout a plant to be 
linked to, or create an information flow that is real-time.  
This type of information used in the correct way can allow 
for a transparent plant wide view of how the plant runs, 
enabling users to see and predict bottlenecks and backlogs.  
In acquiring this data, the plant is then in a position to allow 
for data interrogation in order to optimize plant or process 
activities.  Lean Manufacturing is a process of data 
interrogation in order to eliminate any Non Value Adding 
Tasks (NVAT) thus improving efficiency [2]. 
 
      All manufacturing facilities must possess and adhere to 
their own manufacturing systems.  These systems are the 
foundation on which any industrial accreditations are built, 
they define the work flow process and are therefore critical 
to all aspects of how the company operates.  The tools the 
systems are built on usually refer to electronic tools, such as 
software packages and written documents manually created, 
maintained and archived.  A vast majority of these systems 
operating today have been developed onsite by skilled 
employees knowing their own responsibility and therefore 
produced a tool that delivers what his or her department 
needs to.  These tools have been developed in a similar 
fashion, as quality controls or accreditation standards 
increase or the business changes.  It is therefore accepted 
that a vast majority of these tools certainly serve their 
purpose, but are not as efficient or as transparent as they 
could be. 
 
      In today‟s global manufacturing environment the 
western world is at a disadvantage because of , high labour 
costs, high land rates, stringent environmental rules and 
regulations.  These 
factors 
make it difficult for 
manufacturing facilities to compete with its neighbouring 
Asian counterpart.  It is no surprise then that our 
manufacturing industry is in a consolidation period and 
looking to maximizing efficiency by increasing utilization 
of their current assets.  This is clearly reflected in industrial 
management 
buzzwords. 
 
These 
buzz 
words 
are 
encapsulated by two ideas, Lean manufacturing and Total 
Cost of Ownership.  Lean Manufacturing was a system 
originally developed by Toyota and defines wastefulness as 
any activity that is non value adding.  It was claimed by 
implementing lean manufacturing, you can use less of 
everything compared to mass production- half the human 
effort in the factory, half the manufacturing space, half the 
investment in tools, and half the engineering hours to 
develop a new product. In addition, it requires keeping less 
93
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 
than half of the needed inventory on site, results in a lot 
fewer defects, and produces a greater and ever-growing 
variety of products. In short, it is called lean because it uses 
less, or the minimum of everything required to produce a 
product or perform a service [1]. 
 
      All this can be achieved by reducing NVAT‟s at every 
stage in the system.  Total cost of ownership analysis then 
looks at the total cost of the system for its life time.  These 
costs include but are not limited to, cost of installation, 
preventative 
maintenance, 
corrective 
maintenance, 
operational costs, repair costs and end of life costs and 
expand the buyer‟s thought process beyond the initial 
purchase cost [3].  For manufacturing facilities to address 
the problem areas they must first find them. The solution 
requires gathering more data, gathering the data quicker, 
making the data more transparent and easy to access, 
increase communication ability and increase tractability.  In 
comparing RFID technology to the traditional barcode 
system to provide the technology for the solution it has 
many advantages including but not limited to, short scan 
times, anti pollution and durable, flexible data, penetrability 
through other materials, usable user data and better security 
[4].  Given these advantages it is easy to see why the 
technology has been adopted in a wide range of industries 
such as logistic, Health care, toll systems, retail, security 
and identification to name a few.  This project will look to 
integrating RFID into the current manufacturing work flow 
system to expose these advantages thus reducing waste and 
the TCO. 
 
      The “real life” facility is NuPrint Technologies LTD, a 
local manufacturing company who manufacture labels.  
NuPrint management have highlighted that there is an 
opportunity to reduce waste in two key production stages.  
These stages are known as Pre-prep and Production.  Pre-
prep, as the name suggests prepares the equipment before 
use in production, and maintains it after the job is complete.  
The equipment is in the form of plates and rollers.  The 
plates must be wrapped around the roller and aligned.  
Production fit the plates to automated printing machines and 
produces the required label.  The pre-prep process is not as 
straight forward as it may seem.  This is due to a multiple of 
variables including, damaged or weakened plates, plates 
being difficult to align, prioritisation of batch jobs, sourcing 
and reserving common plates to multiple jobs as well as 
keeping in touch with Operation control and Production to 
continually evaluate the job status. The aim of this project 
was to integrate an RFID solution into a Manufacturing 
Execution System (MES).  It is hoped that the RFID 
solution will allow the MES to view the process in greater 
detail in terms of job and equipment location in real time.  
The real time MES will provide a transparent view of the 
process to Pre-prep, Production and Operation Control.  
This electronic view will allow each department to have up 
to date process information with no need to ask the other 
department, thus greatly reducing the requirement for 
personnel interaction.  Personnel interaction is a major 
fluctuating unknown, which can be very wasteful.  The real 
time view will also build a history database of the 
information gathered, as well as having the ability to hold 
any additional notes the operators may want to add. 
 
 
II.   RELATED WORK 
      The Department of Industrial Engineering, Tsinghua 
University, Beijing, set up a micro plant as to best simulate 
a real plant situation.  RFID technology was used to support 
the MES to automate the tracking of materials, Work in 
Progress (WIP), fixed and mobile resources.  They designed 
and implemented the solution to target three key areas. 
These were Data Collection and Document Control, Labor 
Management and Production Control and Performance 
Analysis. Data Collection and Documentation Control is a 
continuous task throughout the manufacturing process, but 
are of particular advantage in the job scheduling and 
inventory control.  The best example of this advantage 
comes at the beginning of the manufacturing system, after a 
customer places an order, an operator scans the RFID 
labeled inventory stock, this real time scan, allows the MES 
to decide if the required inventory is available to complete 
the customer request.  If it is, the job is sent to the sorting 
centre for packaging before being sent to the assembly line.  
However, if the required inventory is not available the MES 
system automatically generates a Purchase Order (PO) and 
produces it for review before emailing it to the supplier.   
      Labor Management and Production Control in this 
solution were encapsulated by visibility.  Two billboards 
where utilised, one for the assembly line operator which 
updated them on the current job information and segment 
procedure.  After the job is completed the operator 
interfaced with the MES system and indicated if it was 
finished or scrapped, triggering a job status change.  The 
second billboard allowed management visibility of the 
production schedule being completed, including the current 
status of jobs.  Performance Analysis is achieved as a 
byproduct of the previous two implementations.  The 
system now is data rich, and is used to target Key 
Performance Indicator (KPI) matrices such as work station 
load and production efficiency.  Any target change made 
can now be evaluated on tangible numeric data that is non 
intrusive [5].  
       RFID MES system can be flexible and responsive to 
continuous, changing customer requirements [6]. Huang et 
al. [6] outlines an RFID MES implementation in JAC, an 
automotive production company based in china.  JAC 
manufacture a full line of brand vehicles including trucks, 
Special 
Reconnaissance 
Vehicle‟s 
(SRV‟s) 
and 
94
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 
Mechanically Propelled Vehicle‟s (MPV‟s).  JAC already 
had an MES system using traditional data acquisition 
methods such as manual input and barcodes.  However, they 
believed the gap between physical flow of product and 
information flow in the MES was too great to properly 
monitor and manage the production system.  The additional 
data acquisition obtained by attaching RFID tags to tools, 
materials, personnel and equipment ensured the MES turned 
into a Real Time MES (RT-MES).  The enhanced RT-MES 
decreased SRV cycle time from 5 days to 4 days, increased 
production efficiency by 20% and increased the MES data 
accuracy rate to 99.9%.  It is important to look at what the 
technology has in store for the future.  One key area for 
future development is combined logistical tracking with 
RFID & GPS [7].  The advantage here is the ability to link 
both business process info and geographical locations, this 
specifically targets the time consumed for sales, customer 
service, operation and warehouse staff to locate specific 
cargo in transit and provide the customer with the most 
accurate data in a time frame that is acceptable [8].  This 
data could also be shared between manufacturers, logistics 
and purchasers on the web so that better planning and 
scheduling can be done for incoming inventory.  
III.   RFID System Design 
 
      The design of this solution is to implement RFID in a 
manufacturing environment, to aid in the stream lining of 
production work flow.  The incorporation of RFID itself 
may not achieve this, but using RFID as a data gathering 
tool to enrich databases with real-time information can 
target important areas to the business. The RFID system 
used was a Promag PCR-340 Dual-Frequency Stationary 
tag reader. The tags used were a combination of Gen2 
Class1 Labels. These areas of the business include real time 
information which will highlight work flow bottlenecks. 
Monitoring this information during and after an operational 
fix has been implemented to reduce the bottleneck which 
will allow management to evaluate the fix and continue to 
improve it or move on to the next high priority bottleneck. 
In addition, operational procedures are stream lined 
whereby operatives must complete the previous task before 
moving on to the next stage.  
 
Management Information System Integration 
 
      During the design of this solution, the client (Nuprint) 
bought an “off the shelf” Manufacturing Information 
System (MIS) called Tharsten [9]1.  .  Tharsten‟s MIS was 
implemented to control the production area and gathers a lot 
of critical information via user interfaces regarding the 
running of the printing presses.  It was clear that if we could 
extract already gathered information from the Tharsten 
system we could greatly improve the richness of data in the 
                                                      
1 http://www.tharstern.com 
Access database and therefore achieve better results.  In 
light of this, Figure 1 shows a more detailed architectural 
overview of how data is gathered and shared between both 
systems.  Data transfer is broken down into two types, same 
system communications and sub system communication.   
Same system communications is the server interacting with 
its own type of client to enable database entries, this takes 
place on both the Access side and the Tharsten side and is 
inherent in the systems and therefore relatively straight 
forward.  What is not as usual is the passing of data between 
the systems, i.e. sub system communications.  The Tharsten 
system is an SQL based server and after some research and 
testing it was decided that the sub system communications 
could be reliably delivered via an Open Database 
Connectivity (ODBC) link, note during discussions with 
Tharsten technical engineers it was clear that to maintain 
the Tharsten system integrity and support we could only 
read data from their system with no function of writing data 
to their system. 
 
Production 
Printer
Access 
Server
Plate File 
Storage
Plate 
Mounting / 
Unmounting
Tharsten 
MIS Server
RFID Client 
Interface
Tharsten Client 
Interface
PrePrep
Production
Same System Communications
Sub System Communications
 
 
Figure 1 : System Communications 
 
 
Operations Control
Front Office
PrePrep
Storage
Production
Ground Floor
First Floor
 
Figure 2 : Nuprint Facility Layout 
95
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 
      Figure 2 shows how the facility is laid out and the 
typical personnel movement required to get a label batch 
produced from start to finish.     After initial analysis, it was 
clear from the personnel movement that there are areas of 
concern i.e. the work flow is not fluid and there is a lot of 
required points of contact for each department to allow 
them to complete their individual tasks.  This gives ground 
for a detailed analysis of both physical and data flow for a 
complete label batch production.  It is clear that the area of 
greatest concern in the system is the communications 
between pre-prep and the production area.   Given financial 
waste outlined earlier, it is clear there is an opportunity to 
introduce a system that will aim to tackle this area of high 
waste.  It was decided that the specification is to incorporate 
an RFID system to operate as follows: 
 
 
Scan in Pre-prep to locate plate file and log time 
and confirm job is mounted ready for production 
and log time 
 
Scan at Production to identify and acknowledge 
receipt thus logging time beginning job production 
and indicate job completion and log time 
 
Scan in Pre-Prep to confirm receipt of plates and 
log time and to confirm plates have been cleaned, 
restored and log time  
 
      The incorporation of RFID should enable production 
control to establish the overall job status. These include the 
time taken to mount job, time spent in transit/waiting from 
pre-prep to the press, time spent on press and backlog of 
plates to be cleaned by pre-prep.  The system should 
increase communication between production and pre-prep 
i.e. it should enable pre-prep to see the press status i.e. when 
the previous job has been scanned in by the printer to 
anticipate when a new job should be prepared. It should also 
allow pre-prep to see when the printing has finished and 
when the used plates/cylinders should be collected and 
production to check on the status of their next job.  The 
system will provide traceability and accountability. It will 
enable JIT production with pre-prep preparing the next job 
only when the previous one has been scanned / received by 
the press. This will prevent wasted time caused by pre-prep 
mounting jobs too early in advance and potentially having 
to dismount them for an urgent job. 
 
System Operation 
 
      After consultation with Nuprint and considering the new 
benefits the Tharsten system would have on the RFID 
system, the system operation was designed and a clear 
vision of how the final solution should interact with the 
operations team.  It was clear that they required two main 
interfaces, one, to maintain their plate file database allowing 
the RFID labels to take over the old labelling system of 
Plate File numbers.   
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 : User Friendly form design 
96
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 
 
 
      The second interface is to allow production information 
to be inputted for the beginning and end of a job cycle in the 
Preprep area.   These interfaces must be unambiguous, and 
simple to use.  They must not increase the work load of 
operations and whether gathering information from 
Tharsten, RFID or Access appears to be one coherent 
system. The Nuprint RFID Plate File Record section is 
available to operations to associate RFID labels with the 
Plate File details.  These details include, number of plates, 
Customer, supplier reference, number of colours, die size 
and product code.   
 
      The interface allows all relevant information to be 
shown with a simple scan button to associate a label with 
the plate file details.  This interface will be used heavily on 
system implementation as Nuprint has approximately 350 
current plate files, after this initial use the interface will 
only be used when a new job has been created for a 
customer or the RFID tag needs updating for an existing 
plate file.  The Nuprint RFID Plate File Record section is 
the main operative interface.  The interface is broken down 
into three main sections.  Section one shows the operative 
interactions broken down into four main steps.  Step one is 
for the operative to select an appropriate job, the choice 
available must only be jobs dispatched from Tharsten not 
yet picked up by Access, i.e. new jobs.  Step two is to scan 
the plate file out of holding, there should be logical checks 
done in the background that ensures the correct plate file 
has been removed from holding by the operative, if the 
wrong one has been removed the operative should be 
prompted and not allowed to continue.  Step three is to 
associate a plate cleaning operative and time with the plates 
after production has taken place.  Step four is the scanning 
of the plate file back into hold and thus completing the job 
cycle.  All steps must be clear and concise as to the 
operative actions.   Figure 3 shows how the form was 
developed from early revisions to ensure user friendliness 
and additional work was kept to a minimum. This is the 
main form and subform which allows the worker in charge 
of preparing the plates to associate plates with tags and to 
also start a new job. Here a worker in the preprint area will 
locate a folder and select the scan out button. This will now 
start the clock for the time the folder is out of the preprint 
area. Once a job is finished and the cleaning down process 
begins, the worker will select the 'wash' button. This will 
now start the timer for the time taken to wash. This time 
will be complete when the worker selects the 'scan in' 
button which will allow them to replace the folder in the 
cabinet. This completes the process but most importantly, 
will time each of the stages allowing reports to be generated 
in real-time. The solution required multiple queries to 
provide operations and management with quality data to 
help improve work flow.  The outputs of which provide 
dispatched jobs not yet picked up by operations, active jobs 
currently being manufactured, number of plates required per 
job, dates and times of specific actions, operator responsible 
for specific actions and the accumulative meters a plate has 
produced and sub divided into the specific jobs. 
 
 
IV.    RFID SYSTEM EVALUATION 
 
      It is important to evaluate how this project actually 
delivers on the key target areas outlined at the start. 
Analysis during the baseline showed the area of greatest 
waste in the communications between areas, take place 
between the Preprep and Production.  The time now spent 
on overall communications is reduced from 37.1 min to 
10.22 a reduction in 26.88 minutes per job, which represents 
a 72.4% reduction This data must now be equated to 
financial savings.  The dispersion of the total saving 26.88 
minutes is broken down into 19.03min for Production and 
7.85 min for Preprep. Assuming that Nuprint run 1.5 
batches a day these times increase to 28.6 min for 
production and 11.8 for Preprep. Taking a Preprep operative 
value at £30.00 per hour, the waste can be calculated as: 
 
Financial Waste  = (Saved Time (min) / 60 ) x 30  
 
 
= ( 11.80 / 60 ) x 30  = £ 5.90 per day 
 
Taking a Production operative value at £120.00 per hour, 
the waste can be calculated as: 
 
Financial Waste  = (Saved Time (min) / 60 ) x 120  
 
 
= ( 28.60 / 60 ) x 120 = £ 57.20 per day 
 
      This equates to a total of £ 63.10 of financial saving per 
day. As well as the everyday savings there is also non 
regular occurrences highlighted during base lining that the 
system tackles these types of individual issues are as 
follows: 
 
      Individual Issues: A typical example of an individual 
issue was, during a period when the pre-prep operator was 
off ill the pre-prep operators duties fell on the production 
operators.  However, the process of washing the plates is an 
undesired task coupled with the limited time the production 
operator had, it was decided the plates would be left 
unwashed in a pile and not cleaned or filed away. The 
consequence of this was that when an urgent job came 
through, a delay was incurred in locating the plates. When 
the plates were located a further delay was incurred because 
they had to be washed and mounted.  Once the plates were 
placed on the machine and the job „setup‟ ready for 
„signoff‟, it transpired that two were damaged as they had 
been situated at the bottom of the pile and were 
subsequently compressed. This necessitated the re-purchase 
of two £70 plates at a £10 delivery cost. The operations 
control was also faced with the dilemma of cleaning down 
97
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 
the machine to run a job while the replacement plates were 
being manufactured and delivered or to hold off on the 
wash-up / setup and run the job the next day. This expense 
was in addition to delaying delivery of the labels.  The 
result of this bad relationship was an escapade wasting 
£100‟s and damaged reputation with a customer.  After site 
consultation this likelihood and financial waste was 
evaluated at £250 per month, i.e. approximately £12.5 per 
day. 
 
      To summarize, the system is saving approximately 
£63.10 + £12.50 = £75.60 per day.  This saving is 
substantial when equated to yearly savings of £18,144.00 
calculated at 5 day week, 4 weeks per month and 12 months 
per year.  Not only is the saving justification enough but 
throughout this project it has become clear that Nuprint‟s 
ability to introduce and work with RFID technology is of 
utmost importance.  RFID is becoming a technology that 
more and more label purchasers are requesting to fulfill 
their own manufacturing processes.  Having this technology 
already in Nuprint‟s portfolio allows them to be proactive in 
selling the technology in the market place and not be driven 
to it by customers who could go elsewhere in this 
competitive market space.  
 
 
V.   CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
 
      This project initially assessed a manufacturing plants 
work flow processes and evaluated them against industry 
best practices. RFID was identified as a technology which 
could help stream line the flow of work on the factory floor.    
It was clear initially that there were NVAT in NuPrint‟s 
system.  However obvious this waste is to anyone that 
analyses the system, it was of utmost importance to 
numerically evaluate this waste. This numerical evaluation 
base line, in terms of finance and time, will firstly keep 
focus on the project aims throughout the period of the 
project, and secondly allow for proper evaluation and 
justification for the end install.  Ultimately, the system 
provides a mass amount of information to the system and 
allows proper analysis of how the system operates and how 
it can be modified to enhance KPI‟s.  This information input 
not only provides great transparency between departments 
but allows management to oversee the complete process, 
and answer questions such as whether any jobs that went for 
production are not returned to storage, the length it normally 
takes for job A to be completed, and whether areas such as 
pre-prep hold up production or vice-versa? The main aim 
was to provide a solution that reduces waste in NuPrint. The 
key here was not just the RFID technology but rather the 
data manipulation in the MES which must be capable of 
providing transparent accurate, easy to access data to all 
departments. It was found that this system will save 
approximately £63.10 + £12.50 = £75.60 per day.  This 
saving is substantial when equated to yearly savings of 
£18,144.00 calculated at 5 day week, 4 weeks per month 
and 12 months per year.  Throughout this project it became 
clear that Nuprint‟s ability to introduce and work with RFID 
technology is of utmost importance.  RFID is becoming a 
technology that more and more label purchasers are 
requesting to fulfill their own manufacturing processes.  
Having this technology already in Nuprint‟s portfolio 
allows them to be proactive in selling the technology in the 
market place and not be driven to it by customers who could 
go elsewhere in this competitive market space.  
 
The next step in the system is to incorporate live twitter 
alerts and emails to customers once labels are finished. This 
allows Nuprint‟s customers to be more informed of each 
relevant job on the factory floor. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Wong, Y., Wong, K.W.,,  &and Ali, A. (2009) Key Practice Areas of 
Lean Manufacturing, International Association of Computer Science and 
Information Technology - Spring Conference, 2009. IACSITSC '09.  
 
[2] Lahiri, S. (2005)  "RFID System" in RFID Sourcebook 
 
[3] Ritsma, R.J., Tuyl, A., and& Snijders, B. (2009), Buying the lowest 
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO), PCIC Europe, 2009. pp: 12-18, PCIC 
EUROPE '09. 
 
[4] Bellis, M. (2007) Ernst Alexanderson 1878 - 1975, About.com, 
Available: http://inventors.about.com/library/inventors/blalexanderson.htm   
 
[5] Chen, X., Xie, Z.X., and& Zheng, L. (2009), RFID-based 
manufacturing execution system for intelligent operations", Industrial 
Engineering and Engineering Management, 2009. IE&EM '09. 16th 
International Conference on, pp: 36-46 
 
[6] Huang, G. Yuan, G., and& Li, J.  (2010), Developing real-time 
manufacturing execution system for automobile assembly factory, 
Intelligent Control and Information Processing (ICICIP), pp: 72-84  
 
[7] He, W., Tan, E., Lee, E., and& Li, T. (2009), A solution for integrated 
track and trace in supply chain based on RFID & GPS, IEEE ETFA 2009 
Conference on Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation, 2009. pp: 
1-6 
 
[8] Willhite, J. (2004), Implementing the principles of lean manufacturing 
at Semicon Associates Samarium Cobalt Magnet Facility, IVEC 200 -  
Fifth IEEE International on Vacuum Electronics Conference, 2004, pp: 
104-105  
 
[9] Tharstern. http://www.tharstern.com Accessed 19/9/2011. 
 
 
98
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

