Uplink Throughput Improvement at Cell Edge using Multipath TCP
in Overlaid Mobile WiMAX/WiFi Networks
Miguel Angel Pati˜no Gonz´alez, Takeshi Higashino, and Minoru Okada
Graduate School of Information Science
Nara Institute of Science and Technology
630-0192 Ikoma-shi, Japan
{miguel-p, higa, mokada}@is.naist.jp
Abstract—Recently, many laptops, smartphones and tablets
are equipped with several broadband wireless interfaces, such
as WiFi and Mobile WiMAX. However, the current Transport
Control Protocol (TCP) only allows a single interface to be
active at any moment, while the remaining ones are not used.
Multipath TCP (MPTCP) is a proposed extension to standard
TCP, which aims to exploit the availability of such multiple
interfaces. This multipath capability is of great importance for
current and future communication systems. In this work, we
study the potential of MPTCP for improving uplink throughput
at the WiMAX cell edge by dynamic data ofﬂoading to WiFi.
To this end, we conducted measurements on real Mobile
WiMAX/WiFi networks. The results show that MPTCP can
signiﬁcantly improve the uplink throughput of Mobile WiMAX
users and also reduce the round-trip time (RTT).
Keywords-Mobile WiMAX; cell edge; MPTCP.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Internet is becoming mobile, as traditional voice-
oriented cellular networks introduce enormous advances in
data transmission capabilities. Mobile data trafﬁc is growing
very fast, with an 18-fold increase forecast between 2011-
2016 [1]. Thus, Mobile Service Operators need to solve
the critical problem of the throughput performance in their
mobile networks. As more users connect to the network,
the congestion levels increase accordingly. Furthermore, the
popularity of devices with multiple interfaces introduces a
new end-to-end communication paradigm. The conventional
TCP/IP protocol stack assumes that end-systems communi-
cate with each other by using a single connection point,
i.e.,one IP address. However, the availability of multiple
interfaces (and multiple IP addresses) within a single device
enables it to transmit and receive through diverse paths over
the Internet. Therefore, it is desirable to have the capability
of using more than one interface at any time.
WiMAX has emerged as an important technology for
Wireless Broadband communications [2]. Many telecom
operators around the world have adopted it as an alterna-
tive to wired technologies. This technology belongs to the
IEEE 802.16 family and has two main variants: 802.16d
(Fixed Access WiMAX), and 802.16e (Mobile WiMAX).
At the Physical Layer, Mobile WiMAX employs Orthog-
onal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM), while the
available modulation schemes are BPSK, QPSK, 16-QAM
and 64-QAM. It also implements an Adaptive Modulation
and Coding (AMC) functionality, which enables dynamic
adjustment of the transmission proﬁle depending upon the
current radio signal condition. According to [6], the average
throughput per sector ranges between 4-15 Mbps for uplink,
and 9-28 Mbps for downlink, using TDD with several
frequency bandwidth between 10-20 MHz.
Additionally, it is a very common practice to assign more
transmission channels to the downlink than the uplink, with
typical ratios of 2:1 and 3:2. Thus, in most cases the uplink
has lower capacity than the downlink. This is an important
fact to consider, because nowadays a growing number of
users are generating trafﬁc (uploading) from their mobile
devices to the Internet, instead of receiving trafﬁc (down-
loading) from it. These applications range from interactive
video conferencing, remote video surveillance, and regular
uploading of large ﬁles. Therefore, it is important to explore
new alternatives for improving the uplink throughput.
In this paper, we explore the Multipath Transmission
approach. The fundamental idea is to transmit over more
than one path towards the ﬁnal destination. As mentioned
previously, mobile devices with more than one interface are
already available nowadays, thus enabling the implementa-
tion of such Multipath scheme. A promising new protocol
suitable for this purpose is Multipath TCP (MPTCP) [3],
and it is the choice for our study.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion II, we describe related work. Next, in Section III we
introduce the basics of MPTCP. In Section IV we present
the experimental setup. Then, in Section V we analyze the
measurement results. Section VI presents a brief discussion
of the results. Finally, Section VII concludes the article.
II. RELATED WORK
Several works on multipath transmission have been pre-
sented. Iyengar et al [9] presented a scheme called Con-
current Multipath Transfer (CMT), based on the Stream
Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP), which added the
capability of transmitting over multiple interfaces. Later,
Koh et al [10], extended SCTP to support trafﬁc handover
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

among interfaces, best suited for mobile environments where
new IP addresses are possibly assigned while moving around
an area. Although these studies showed interesting results,
SCTP is not widely adopted in the current Internet.
Multimedia streaming via Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP) has been deployed successfully over recent years.
Thus, an extended multipath capability for TCP streaming
has also been proposed by Wang et al [11]. The authors
proved the feasibility of this approach for practical scenarios.
The use of WiFi for ofﬂoading trafﬁc from cellular
networks has also been proposed in earlier works. Balasu-
bramanian et al [13] studied the feasibility of augmenting
Mobile 3G using WiFi. They analyzed measurements made
in three cities from a moving vehicle. Positions of the
WiFi access points were recorded and used by an algorithm
for determining their proximity at a given moment. After
implementing their solution called Wafﬂer, they determined
a reduction of 45% in 3G usage. However, they did not
consider simultaneous interface usage, since their approach
is based on a single interface opportunistic scheme.
An experimental study on the throughput gains when
using a new protocol called Multipath TCP (MPTCP) was
presented by Raiciu et al [12]. The authors proved the
functionality of MPTCP while moving inside a building
with 3G and WiFi coverage. They moved from ﬂoor to ﬂoor
while measuring the corresponding variability in the signal
levels from 3G and WiFi. After comparing the measurements
against an optimal TCP scheme, the gains obtained with
MPTCP were at least 12%. They also simulated walking and
driving scenarios, reporting gains ranging between 50-100%.
However, the results showed only downlink performance,
and details about radio signal conditions were not speciﬁed.
In our work, we have chosen MPTCP, due to its com-
patibility with current Internet. We study the uplink per-
formance, which was not considered in previous studies.
Also, we focus on the most challenging area of any wireless
system, the cell edge, which was also not considered.
III. MULTIPATH TCP (MPTCP)
In current Internet technology, Transmission Control Pro-
tocol (TCP) is one of the most important transmission
protocols. It has reached maturity over the years and most
of the available services use it. However, it was originally
designed for managing communications over a single path
between two end-hosts. At any time, TCP uses only one
interface, regardless of the total available interfaces. This
fact limits the potential of the increasingly popular multi-
interface mobile devices, resulting in their under-utilization.
Thus, it is desirable to have more ﬂexibility in the selection
of transmission resources.
Multipath TCP (MPTCP) is an extension to conventional
TCP, which aims to leverage the concurrent use of multiple
interfaces within a single device. Currently, it is being
standardized by an active working group at IETF [7]. The
most important features of MPTCP when compared to
conventional TCP are:
• Connection Reliability: enables connection recovery
when one or more links become unavailable, by dy-
namically selecting an appropriate interface.
• Throughput Improvement: enables bandwidth aggrega-
tion by simultaneous use of multiple interfaces.
Moreover, a very important advantage of MPTCP is its
compatibility with current Internet architecture and services.
It does not require changes either to existing infrastructure
or applications. Therefore, it can be used transparently from
both the user and network point of view.
The MPTCP working group also pays considerable atten-
tion to wireless scenarios similar to the one described in our
work, as they envisage the necessity of wireless networks
converging [8].
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
In this study, we conducted ﬁeld measurements on real
networks within a university campus. Speciﬁcally, we used a
commercial Mobile WiMAX network and the campus WiFi.
Our objective was to investigate the effects of MPTCP use
on WiMAX uplink throughput in a overlaid WiMAX/WiFi
scenario. In particular, we focused on cases with poor radio
signal conditions, with power levels equivalent to those at a
cell edge. The reason for choosing this particular case was
that it represents the most challenging environment for a
mobile device.
Figure 1 shows the tested scenario. The Mobile WiMAX
Base Station was located on the rooftop of a ﬁve-story
building, and it is referred to as BS. The WiFi network
is based on 802.11g (2.4 GHz), providing good coverage
within the university campus. Measurement locations are
indicated by points A and B. The distances BS-A and BS-
B are approximately 370 and 280 meters, respectively. The
Mobile WiMAX antenna was located at 30 meters high,
transmitting at 20 Watts. The frequency band was 2.62
GHz, with channel bandwidth of 10 MHz. The system was
operating in TDD mode.
Location A has better WiMAX RSSI and higher CINR.
When checking the relative positions of A and B in Figure
1, it is important to clarify that location A has a better
radio condition for WiMAX because it has more favorable
Line-Of-Sight (LOS) to BS, even though it is farther away.
On the other hand, location B is closer to the BS, but its
LOS is obstructed by a building, which introduce additional
degradation to the link quality. On the other hand, WiFi
RSSI values show the opposite behavior, being worse at A
than B. Location A is outside the campus and far away from
the WiFi Access Point (AP), while location B is within the
campus, close to the AP.
The measuring equipment was a laptop equipped with a
WiFi interface and a Mobile WiMAX Router connected to
it through an USB port. In the experiments, we measured
202
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 1.
Base Station and Measurement Locations
Table I
RADIO SIGNAL CONDITIONS
Location WiMAX RSSI (dBm) WiMAX CINR (dB) WiFi RSSI (dBm)
A
-75
16
-90
B
-81
10
-65
the uplink throughput at locations A and B. In both cases,
WiMAX had low signal strength, while WiFi radio condition
was poor at one location and good at the other. The average
values are shown in Table I.
To test the MPTCP functionality, we installed the publicly
available MPTCP Implementation developed by Barr´e et al
[15]. Our testing laptop runs the Linux Kernel version 3.2.0
along with the mentioned patch.
We used the networking tool iperf to conduct the mea-
surements [4]. Then, we tested the connection quality to the
Kernel implementers website located in Belgium, which is
also running MPTCP [5]. This was deliberate, to conﬁrm
the functionality when sending trafﬁc across the Internet.
The measurements were conducted over two weeks, twice
a day, at 11 AM and 16 PM. Both sessions lasted 1 hour,
where ﬁve-minute long ﬂows were transmitted.
V. EVALUATION
In this section we introduce our measurement results.
Our objective is to investigate how MPTCP affects uplink
performance in an overlaid WiMAX/WiFi scenario. We
analyze not only the absolute values of the throughput,
but also use the Coefﬁcient of Variation (CV) parameter to
get a normalized comparison value. Thus, we analyze the
throughput variability by using Eq. 1:
CV = StdevThp
AvgThp
(1)
where StdevThp is the Standard Deviation and AvgThp
is the Average of measured Throughput. Low CV indicates
that most values lie close to the average, whereas high CV
suggests values that are distant from the average, i.e., more
dispersed values.
Figure 2.
Mobile WiMAX Uplink Throughput
A. WiMAX-only uplink throughput
Initially, we measured the WiMAX-only uplink behavior
at locations A and B. We wanted to compare the difference
in the throughput at both locations, to determine the initial
reference values. The results are shown in Figure 2. While
at location A, the average throughput was 1.1 Mbps, at
location B it was only 0.18 Mbps. The difference between
the throughput values at A and B is due to the good LOS in
BS-A path, as well as the shadowing effect by the building in
the BS-B path, which introduces about 6 dB of attenuation.
Next, we enabled MPTCP transmission and used WiMAX
and WiFi simultaneously. The WiMAX component of the
total trafﬁc over MPTCP was 1.2 Mbps at A and 0.25 Mbps
at B. In practical terms, these values can be considered
nearly equal to the previous WiMAX-only values. Thus,
MPTCP was able to fully use the WiMAX link capacity
at both locations.
Another interesting characteristic to investigate is the
Throughput Variability. To this end, we used the Coefﬁcient
of Variation (CV) deﬁned in Eq. 1. The results are shown
in Figure 3. The WiMAX-only case showed a CV increase
of 0.13, from 0.29 to 0.42 at locations A and B, which
indicates that the throughput ﬂuctuation around the average
increased slightly. However, when MPTCP was enabled, the
CV increased about 1.27, from 0.36 to 1.63 at A and B,
much more than the previous value. This means that there
are relatively high values, which are distant from the average
and appear in a sporadic way during the observation time. In
other words, this behavior shows that the WiMAX interface
increased its trafﬁc only occasionally. If we take this to
the limit, WiMAX will not transmit any trafﬁc at all, and
WiFi will carry the total trafﬁc, practically resulting in a
vertical handover. However, this is not allowed under normal
operation, because MPTCP needs to keep some trafﬁc on
each interface, to probe the links and make appropriate trafﬁc
distribution decisions.
B. MPTCP total uplink throughput
Here, we consider the Total uplink Throughput result
when using WiMAX and WiFi simultaneously. Figure 4
203
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 3.
Coefﬁcient of Variation
Figure 4.
Total Throughput using MPTCP
shows the measured values. We compared this result to
the WiMAX-only case from Figure 2. At location A, the
throughput increased from 1.1 Mbps to 1.6 Mbps, or about
+33%. Considering that, at this location, WiFi is operating
at nearly its cutoff signal level, this increase indicates the
advantage of using Multipath transmission. The throughput
increase was much more abrupt at location B, from 0.2 Mbps
to 6.1 Mbps. The reason for such a huge increase was the
high-speed WiFi, which became prevalent. In this case, the
resulting throughput aggregation had more similarity to a
vertical handover from WiMAX to WiFi.
Overall, the aggregation capability of MPTCP showed im-
portant gains on the user’s total throughput when compared
to using only WiMAX. Moreover, the WiMAX cell capacity
is indirectly increased because less WiMAX resources are
used, since a portion of the trafﬁc is sent over WiFi.
C. Trafﬁc distribution among interfaces
One of the MPTCP design objectives is to distribute
trafﬁc fairly among available interfaces. In Figure 5 we show
the measured trafﬁc distribution over WiMAX and WiFi at
locations A and B.
At location A, we veriﬁed that WiMAX gets more
throughput than WiFi about 88% of the time. This was
determined by observing the samples above the 45 degree
line. The trafﬁc distribution for location B was nearly the
(a) Location A
(b) Location B
Figure 5.
Trafﬁc Distribution over WiMAX and WiFi
opposite, because WiFi gets more throughput than WiMAX
about 86% of the time, which was an expected value due to
the good signal strength of WiFi. These values are located
below the 45 degree line.
The trafﬁc distribution over real networks strongly de-
pends on the current network congestion and wireless link
quality. In our scenario, the trafﬁc distribution should be
ideally 50-50% among WiMAX and WiFi interfaces. How-
ever, due to asymmetries in terms of bandwidth capacity and
wireless connection quality, the distribution was expected to
be asymmetric too. On the one hand, the WiFi network has
much more available bandwidth than WiMAX, and it was
prevalent when it had good wireless link conditions. On the
other hand, when WiFi quality degraded, it became more
unstable.
D. Round-trip time
Another important parameter is the round-trip time (RTT)
between end-hosts. This parameter is especially important
for many real-time applications such as video-conferencing
and Voice over IP (VoIP) running on TCP. The results are
shown in Figure 6. The WiMAX-only transmission suffers
from a large RTT at both locations. While the values at
Location A reached about 843 ms, the values at Location B
reached about 1500 ms.
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 6.
Round-trip Time (RTT)
On the other hand, the WiFi RTT values are much lower
and they are consistently around 300 ms at both locations. As
expected, for MPTCP we found values in between WiMAX
and WiFi. At location A, an RTT of around 650 ms was
observed, which represents a reduction of about 23% from
WiMAX-only, thanks to the collaboration of WiFi. The RTT
at location B was around 470 ms, a reduction of almost
70%, due to the high dominance of WiFi. Hence, these
improvements also demonstrate the advantage of introduc-
ing MPTCP in this scenario, reducing the RTT values by
considerable percentages.
VI. DISCUSSION
Although using MPTCP is advantageous in overlaid net-
works, we should consider some factors affecting its perfor-
mance. One of them is the IP conﬁguration procedure. Be-
fore transmitting any useful data, the mobile device needs to
ﬁrst be associated with the access points and authenticated.
Only then is the user granted access to the network. This
procedure takes about 4 to 5 seconds to complete, which
is relatively slow. Additionally, the routing conﬁguration is
lost whenever the device goes out of range from Mobile
WiMAX or WiFi. Thus, whenever the connection is re-
established, the routing information is not complete and the
procedure needs to be performed again, introducing even
more delay. We alleviated this issue by creating monitoring
scripts, which reconﬁgured the routing tables in the events
of connection/disconnection to the access point. However,
fully automatic conﬁguration will be necessary.
Another effect is caused by TCP itself, since it takes an
additional 3 to 5 seconds to reach a steady throughput level
after TCP ﬂow initiation. This characteristic also prevents
users from getting faster access to the network capacity, and
could have a considerable impact especially in high-mobility
environments, which we did not cover in this paper.
For more complex environments, where multiple radio
bases and access points co-exist, it is important to identify
and properly choose the most advantageous connections.
Factors affecting this decision could be technical, e.g., signal
levels, bandwidth, delay, and jitter, or ﬁnancial, e.g., cost,
or limited data transmission. MPTCP can already detect
congested networks and move the trafﬁc away from them
[17], but an additional consideration of the current radio
signal conditions could be interesting for evaluating the
connection quality.
Interactive applications can also beneﬁt from MPTCP.
Although further evaluation is needed, we have conducted
preliminary tests showing that it is possible to get packet
losses below 0.5% when using Skype. MPTCP will be
especially useful with weak radio signal conditions, where
the connection is unreliable and subject to rather frequent
disconnection events. By having an additional communica-
tion path, the impact of these disconnection events could be
reduced.
We measured uplink-only throughput because previous
works did not show it. It should be recalled that uplink
resources are more scarce. Also, it may be affected by
downlink trafﬁc.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we conducted an experimental study of the
uplink throughput when using Multipath TCP (MPTCP) in a
overlaid Mobile WiMAX/WiFi scenario. Our interest was to
verify the potential beneﬁts of a multipath protocol such as
MPTCP. In particular, we focused on cases of low WiMAX
signal levels, with good WiFi at one location and poor at
another. First, we observed a minimum of 33% increase
in the achieved throughput, even when the WiFi was near
its signal cutoff level. Second, we studied the variability
of throughput by introducing the Coefﬁcient of Variation
parameter deﬁned as the ratio between the Standard Devi-
ation and the Average Throughput. The main ﬁnding was
that the WiMAX interface achieved higher throughput only
in a sporadic way when WiFi was prevalent. The WiMAX
interface was not pushed to its maximum capacity all of
the time. Thus, the system behaved as if WiFi had received
some priority, effectively reducing the load on the WiMAX
network. Third, we analyzed the relative trafﬁc distribution
over both interfaces. When the WiFi signal condition was
better than WiMAX, it achieved higher throughput 86% of
the time. However, when WiMAX was better than WiFi,
it had higher throughput 88% of the time. Also, the RTT
values showed a reduction of at least 23%, which is very
important for real-time applications.
The results demonstrated that multipath protocols, such as
MPTCP, are a very interesting option for improving uplink
throughput near the cell edge of Mobile WiMAX.
As a future work, it is interesting to explore further
considerations for the practical use of MPTCP in mobile
networks. We are customizing a Mobile WiMAX/WiFi
testbed for the study of MPTCP performance under different
network parameters, such as backhaul and WiMAX channel
bandwidth, WiFi AP load, among others.
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

REFERENCES
[1] Cisco Systems. Visual Networking Index 2011-2016.
[2] www.wimaxforum.org 2012-09-24
[3] http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/mptcp/charter 2012-09-24
[4] http://sourceforge.net/projects/iperf 2012-09-24
[5] http://mptcp.info.ucl.ac.be 2012-09-24
[6] WiMAX Forum. WiMAX, HSPA+, and LTE: A comparative
analysis, Nov. 2009.
[7] A. Ford, C. Raiciu, M. Handley, and O. Bonaventure. TCP
Extensions for Multipath Operation with Multiple Addresses.
draft-ietf-mptcp-multiaddressed-06, IETF. Jan. 2012.
[8] G. Hampel, T. Klein. MPTCP Proxies and Anchors. draft-
hampel-mptcp-proxies-anchors-00, IETF Feb. 2012.
[9] J. Iyengar, P. Amer, and R. Stewart. Concurrent Multipath
Transfer using SCTP Multihoming over Independent End-to-
End Paths. In IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 14(5):
pp. 951-964, 2006.
[10] S. J. Koh, M. J. Chang, and M. Lee. mSCTP for Soft
Handover in Transport Layer. In Communications Letters,
IEEE, 8(3): pp. 189-191, Mar. 2004.
[11] B. Wang, W. Wei, Z. Guo, and D. Towsley. Multipath Live
Streaming via TCP: Scheme, Performance and Beneﬁts. In
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communica-
tions, and Applications (TOMCCAP), 2009.
[12] C. Raiciu, D. Niculescu, M. Bagnulo, and M. Handley.
Opportunistic mobility with Multipath TCP. In ACM Workshop
on MobiArch, pp. 7-12, 2011.
[13] A. Balasubramanian, R. Mahajan, and A. Venkataramani.
Augmenting Mobile 3G using WiFi. In ACM Mobisys’10,
2010.
[14] D. Kim, H. Cai, M. Na, and S. Choi. Performance mea-
surement over Mobile WiMAX/IEEE 802.16e network. In
IEEE World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks,
WoWMoM 2008, pp. 1-8, June 2008.
[15] S. Barr´e, C. Paasch, and O. Bonaventure. Multipath TCP:
From Theory to Practice. In IFIP Networking, May 2011.
[16] S. Barr´e, O. Bonaventure, C. Raiciu, and M. Handley. Expe-
rimenting with Multipath TCP. In ACM SIGCOMM’10, Sep.
2010.
[17] C. Raiciu, D. Wischik, and M. Handley. Practical Congestion
Control for Multipath Transport Protocols. UCL Technical
Report, 2010.
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

