Performance Analysis of Hybrid Optical Networks (OCS/OBS) considering the 
Time Period to Successfully Deliver a Data Flow 
Felipe Mazullo, Igo Moura, André Soares 
Federal University of Piauí - UFPI 
Distributed Systems and Computer Networks Laboratory 
Teresina, Brazil 
e-mail: felipe.mazullo@ufpi.edu.br, 
igo.moura@ufpi.edu.br, andre.soares@ufpi.edu.br 
 
José Maranhão 
University of Campinas - UNICAMP 
Campinas, Brazil 
e-mail: j3maranhao@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a performance 
evaluation study that compares Optical Circuit Switching 
(OCS), Optical Burst Switching (OBS) and OCS/OBS 
networks. This study considers two types of traffic flow, long 
(5GB) and short (50MB). The main contribution of this 
paper is comparing such switching paradigms in terms of 
the time to successfully deliver a flow. Besides, we identify 
the problem of blocking due to outdated information when 
OCS network works under short data flow. 
Keywords-All-Optical Networks; WDM; Simulation 
Tool. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The popularity of the Internet and the emergence of 
sophisticated applications are demanding more bandwidth 
in transport network links [1]. Figure 1 shows the average 
annual growth rate of international Internet traffic between 
2007 and 2011. In 2010-2011, for example, the average 
Internet traffic growth was 47%. Applications involving 
voice, video-on-demand, teleconferencing, high-resolution 
medical imaging and e-science applications have increased 
the bandwidth demands in transport networks. In general, 
these sophisticated applications need to transfer large 
volumes of data under high Quality of Service (QoS) 
requirements. 
 
 
Figure 1. Average annual growth of international Internet traffic 
between 2007 and 2011. Adapted from [2] 
 
A new generation of networks is based on an optical 
infrastructure that has been developed to support the 
growth of Internet traffic. This infrastructure uses optical 
fibres, which are mainly characterised by their ability to 
provide high bandwidth and their immunity to noise and 
electromagnetic interference. The use of this new material 
is justified by the existing infrastructures incapacity to 
efficiently serve a growing number of users and 
sophisticated applications. The use of Wavelength 
Division Multiplexing (WDM) can increase the efficient 
use of bandwidth in optical fibres [3]. With WDM 
technology, it is possible to establish multiple optical 
channels working at different wavelengths simultaneously 
in a single optical fibre.  
WDM optical networks can be classified as opaque 
or transparent. In a transparent optical network, 
intermediate nodes transmit signals without converting 
them to electronic impulses. Opaque optical networks 
perform wavelength routing in the electronic domain. 
Therefore, each network node must convert the optical 
signal into an electrical signal and vice versa. Opto-
Electro-Optical (OEO) converters are needed to convert 
the signal. The disadvantage of OEO converters is that 
they introduce processing delays. In transparent optical 
networks, wavelength routing is performed in the optical 
domain and does not require OEO converters, eliminating 
this limitation [3]. 
In general, the available methods for data 
switching in transparent optical networks are: Optical 
Circuit Switching (OCS), Optical Packet Switching (OPS) 
and Optical Burst Switching (OBS). In addition, there are 
hybrid 
architectures 
that 
combine 
these 
existing 
paradigms. 
To transfer information in transparent optical 
networks, it is necessary to define a route and to assign a 
wavelength to each route's link. This is known as the 
Routing and Wavelength Assignment (RWA) problem. 
RWA algorithms aim to simultaneously minimise the 
blocking probabilities of circuits, bursts and packets [4], 
[5]. 
This paper presents a performance evaluation study 
of OBS, OCS and hybrid OBS/OCS network. The main 
contribution of this paper is comparing such switching 
paradigms in terms of the time to successfully deliver a 
flow. Besides, we identify the problem of blocking due to 
outdated information when OCS network works under 
short data flow. The remainder of this paper is organised 
as follows. A description of switching paradigms is 
presented in Section II. The TONetS  simulator is 
55"
74"
61"
37"
56"
60"
78"
55"
53"
61"
68"
64"
55"
47"
58"
0"
20"
40"
60"
80"
100"
2007+08"
2008+09"
2009+10"
2010+11"
CAGR2007+2011"
Crescimento+Anual+%+
INTERNATIONAL+INTERNET+TRAFFIC+AND+
BANDWIDTH+GROWTH,+2007B2011+
Average"Traﬃc"
Peak"Traﬃc"
Internet"Bandwidth"
Data"reﬂect"traﬃc"over"Internet"bandwidth"connected"across"internaHonal"borders."
Data"as"of"mid+year."
Source:"TeleGeography"Research""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""©"2011"PriMetrica,"Inc."
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

presented in Section III. How the switching paradigms 
function is discussed in detail in Section IV. Section V 
reviews relevant literature. Sections VI and VII present our 
results and conclusions, respectively. 
II.   SWITCHING PARADIGMS 
The most important feature of the OCS paradigm is 
the reservation of resources (wavelengths) in the 
establishment phase of the optical circuit (lightpath) [5]. 
The source node sends a control message before sending 
the data. This message aims to reserve the necessary 
bandwidth and configure the optical cross-connect (OXC) 
along the data’s route. The data are sent only after the 
source node receives a confirmation message that 
bandwidth has been reserved.  OCS systems allow 
resource reservation with high QoS, but they are not very 
efficient for short communications. 
The OPS paradigm is the least developed of the 
three switching strategies [6]. OPS is a more efficient 
alternative when traffic is characterised by a high rate of 
change in the presence of data packets of variable lengths. 
OPS switching does not use resource reservation, making 
it difficult to guarantee QoS in this paradigm. Due to 
limited progress in processing and optical storage, we 
consider this technology insufficiently mature. 
The OBS paradigm uses optical bursts. A burst is a 
set of data packets sent to the same destination [7]. In an 
OBS system, a control message is sent before the burst to 
try to reserve the necessary bandwidth and configure the 
OXCs along the route. However, OBS does not wait for a 
message to confirm the reservation of resources. The 
optical burst is sent without a guarantee of successful 
resource allocation. 
The literature addresses OBS as a flexible 
alternative suitable for transporting small volumes of 
traffic through a transparent optical network [7], [8]. This 
alternative is more appropriate for scenarios that require 
less rigorous QoS. By using bursts, it is possible that a 
given data flow will exceed the maximum size of the 
burst. When this occurs, the flow is fragmented and sent 
in several separate bursts. This requires a control message 
for each burst, and may cause signalling overhead. 
Hybrid optical switching (OCS/OBS) is an 
alternative switching paradigm that allows OCS or OBS 
in the same network infrastructure. Previous research has 
addressed the mechanism required to decide which 
switching strategy should be used to serve a given request 
in this type of switching architecture [9], [10]. In a 
scenario with several different classes of users, a service 
provider should be able to offer differentiated services.  
That is, a WAN service provider must have the ability to 
provide services with higher or lower levels of QoS that 
approximate actual demand. 
Under heterogeneous scenarios, OBS is thought to 
be a good alternative for short-term network services, 
while OCS should be used for long-term network 
services. 
In 
this 
scenario, 
given 
the 
different 
characteristics of circuit switching and burst switching, a 
hybrid OCS/OBS network should be the optimal solution 
for a diverse set of users. Users with high QoS 
requirements can use the dynamic provisioning of 
circuits, while users who demand small volumes of data 
can use the OBS switching service.  
This work focuses on a hybrid network that allows 
circuit switching or burst switching within the same 
network. Our study simulates the performance of a hybrid 
OCS/OBS switching architecture. 
 
III. TONETS   
The 
TONetS 
(Transparent 
Optical 
Network 
Simulator) simulation tool is a discrete event simulator 
developed in the Java programming language. TONetS   
was integrated with OB2S [8]. Both simulators were 
developed for specific switching technologies. The former 
simulates OCS networks, and the latter simulates OBS 
networks. We used the following metrics present in 
TONetS   to assess performance: 
• Blocking probability: the probability that a given 
request arriving in the optical network is blocked. 
• Blocking 
probability 
due 
to 
outdated 
information: also called backward blocking [11]; the 
blocking of a request due to outdated network state 
information. This occurs when a request notes that a 
wavelength is free, but in the time required to perform the 
allocation, the resource is assigned to another request. 
• Queue time: the time that a request spends in the 
queue of blocked requests waiting to be sent. 
• Signalling time: the time spent on signalling 
messages in the control plan before actual data 
transmission. 
• Successful delivery time: the time between the 
arrival of a data flow in the optical network and the 
instant that flow is transferred successfully. This time is 
the sum of the Queue Time, Signalling Time and 
Transmission Time. 
IV. SWITCHING PARADIGMS PRESENT IN THE 
SIMULATOR 
A. OCS 
To establish a connection between two nodes in an 
OCS network, the required resources (wavelengths) must 
be reserved for the selected route. Signalling messages are 
sent through the control plane to reserve these 
wavelengths. Each node in the route processes these 
messages. Figure 2 shows the OCS control plane 
procedures. 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
Figure 2. OCS Control Plane 
 
With the arrival of a circuit request, the source node 
sends a control message requesting the reservation of 
resources. Each node in the route receives this message, 
processes it, and forwards the control message requesting 
resources to the next node in the route. When the message 
reaches the destination node, this node runs the 
wavelength algorithm, sets up its OXC, allocates the 
wavelength in its link, and then sends back a reserve 
message to the other nodes in the route, in reverse order. In 
the backward direction, each node receives the message, 
processes the message, sets up its OXC, allocates one 
wavelength and sends the message to the preceding node. 
This process is repeated until the source node receives the 
reserve message and configures its OXC. After this 
establishment process, the circuit is ready to transfer the 
data flow. 
B. OBS 
In an OBS, the source node first assembles the burst. 
The burst contains packets that arrive at a given source 
node of the OBS network. These packets come from 
access networks (i.e., the client networks of an OBS 
network). One burst can only contain packets with the 
same destination node. In addition to building bursts, the 
edge node must be able to disassemble bursts. The data 
from the disassembled bursts are forwarded to access 
networks across the optical network. 
The OBS that we implemented in TONetS   takes 
into account two signaling protocols, JIT (Just in Time) 
and JET (Just Enough Time) [12]. A signalling protocol 
defines how message exchanges are made and when the 
allocation and release of resources occurs. In this 
simulation, the JIT signaling protocol is used for OBS 
switching. It uses explicit allocation and implicit resource 
releasing  (i.e., a node does not have to wait for a control 
message to know when to release a resource). The node 
itself can predict when to release the resources because the 
control message contains the size of the burst to be sent. 
In OBS, a peculiarity occurs when the data flow that 
will be sent exceeds the maximum size of the burst. In this 
case, the data flow must be fragmented into several bursts, 
which are sent individually. However, in OCS the data 
flow is not fragmented. In our OBS model, the data flow is 
fragmented, and its packets are mounted in several bursts. 
Therefore, a signaling message is required in the OBS, as 
shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3. The fragmentation of a data flow into burst 
 
C. Hybrid OCS/OBS Network 
The hybrid network implemented in our simulation 
is similar to the parallel architecture presented in [13]. 
The edge node of the network classifies the data flow as 
long or short. Long flows are sent using the OCS 
paradigm, and short flows are handled by the OBS 
paradigm. However, in our parallel architecture model, 
the OBS and OCS paradigms share resources, aiming for 
better network utilisation. 
V. RELATED WORKS 
Several studies have been carried out comparing the 
performance of OCS and OBS paradigms without a 
hybrid model [14], [15], [16], [17], [18]. 
J.P. Jue and V.M. Vokkarane [14] evaluated these 
two switching paradigms taking into account three 
metrics: the blocking probability, the throughput and the 
recurrent blocking probability of a given request (circuit 
or burst), i.e., the probability that a request is blocked 
more than once. 
A. Zalesky [15] proposed an analytical model to 
study a queuing scenario. After analysing OCS and OBS 
paradigms with regard to blocking probability, queue 
delay and network utilization, the authors concluded that 
future transparent optical networks must use hybrid 
approaches to achieve a better utilisation of network 
resources. 
The study presented in [16] performed a network 
utilisation analysis comparing an OCS network with three 
different approaches to OBS networks: a pure OBS 
strategy, OBS considering wavelength conversion and a 
last variation that considers both load balancing and 
wavelength conversion. The authors concluded that more 
research was needed to determine the appropriate 
paradigm for a variety of traffic conditions and available 
network resources. 
Liu Xin, Qiao Chunming, Yu Xiang and Weibo 
Gong [17] investigated the rates of packet delivery and 
packet loss of OCS and OBS paradigms. In [18], the 
authors compared the financial costs of the OBS and OCS 
(iii) Resource Allocation 
Optical Circuit 
(i) 
Arrival of  
         Data Flow 
Time 
(v) Data flow 
transmission 
(ii) Resource request 
Source 
Destination 
(iv) Allocated 
circuit 
Data 
t0 
t1 
(iii) JIT Signaling 
burst1 
(i) Arrival of 
data flow 
time 
Source 
Destination 
(ii) Breaking the data flow into bursts 
Wavelength Assignment 
(iv) Sending the 
 initial burst 
. . . 
1 2 3 4 
1 
(v) JIT Signalling and 
transmission of other bursts 
(burst 2, burst 3 e burst 4) 
1 
1 
Data flow 
Optical Burst 
t0 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

networks equipment needs. The comparisons took into 
account the cost-effectiveness of these networks. 
With regard to hybrid optical networks, C.M. 
Gauger, P.J. Kuhn, E.V. Breusegem, M. Pickavet and P. 
Demeester [13] proposed a classification, dividing hybrid 
networks into three types: client-server, parallel and 
integrated. 
The 
authors 
presented 
a 
client-server 
architecture and an integrated architecture. In [9] and 
[19], the authors presented parallel hybrid architectures. 
Yeshuang Wang and Sheng Wang and Shizhong Xu 
and Xiufeng Wu [20] created a model for hybrid 
architecture and conducted a simulation of this 
architecture type. Compared with the OCS paradigm, the 
proposed hybrid model had the worst performance in 
regard to the time for a successful delivery. P.S. 
Khodashenas, J. Perelló, S. Spadaro, J. Comellas and G. 
Junyent [21] presented a different hybrid architecture, and 
a study of its financial cost and burst loss rate. We 
observed that the literature shows a deficiency of papers 
in which it is advantageous to use hybrid architecture. 
Additionally, no studies were found that compared a 
hybrid paradigm to both the OCS and OBS paradigms 
regarding the successful delivery time of a data flow. It is 
noteworthy that this metric is relevant to the network user. 
Therefore, this paper presents a simulation comparing a 
hybrid architecture with the OCS and OBS paradigms 
regarding the time to successfully deliver the data flows. 
 
VI. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
The experiments were carried out using the NSFnet 
topology, illustrated in Figure 4. Traffic is uniformly 
distributed between all source-destination node pairs. The 
request generation algorithm is a Poisson process with 
average rate λ, and the circuits' average hold time is 
exponentially distributed with the mean 1/µ. The 
network´s traffic intensity in Erlangs is given by ρ = λ / µ. 
All links in the network are bi-directional and have 40 
wavelengths in each direction. A randomisation algorithm 
is used for wavelength assignment. The maximum burst 
size is 250 MB. 
For each simulation study in this article, 10 
replications are performed with different, randomly 
generated, variable seeds, and 100,000 requests are 
generated for each replication. The graphical results 
present the confidence intervals evaluated at the 95% 
confidence level. Although confidence intervals have been 
plotted on all graphs in this article, they may be so small 
that they are hardly visible. 
We assume a scenario with full wavelength 
conversion [4]. Therefore, it is not necessary for the 
assigned wavelength to be the same along the whole light 
path. We also considered the use of request queues. When 
a request is blocked (because no resources are available), 
the request is queued to be sent later when resources are 
available. 
 
 
Figure 4. NSFnet Topology. 
 
Figure 5.a shows the performance of OBS and OCS 
networks in terms of successful delivery time in a scenario 
with small data flows (50 MB).   Figure 5.b shows the 
components of blocking probability (absence of resource 
and outdated information) when the network uses OCS 
technology.  
 
 
Figure 5. a) Time to successful deliver a flow of 50 MB. b) OCS 
Blocking Probability components of flows of 50 MB. c) OCS and OBS 
Blocking Probability under flows of 50 MB. 
 
The OBS paradigm achieved better performance 
than the OCS paradigm when dealing with short data 
flows. The OBS paradigm delivery time also showed low 
growth as the network load increased compared to the 
OCS paradigm. 
Of note in Figure 5.a is the worsening performance 
of OCS when the network load increases. In those cases, 
we incremented the request rate (λ) to increase network 
load (ρ = λ / µ) because the average hold time must be 
proportional to 50 MB (1/µ = 0.01 seconds). Therefore, 
when the request rate increases, the variability of the 
network resources also increases. This behaviour causes 
blocking due to outdated information in the network. The 
frequent changes in the state of the network promoted by 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

short data flow ends up generating a high probability of 
blocking due to outdated information concerning the state 
of the network. In fact, in these instances the network has 
available resources, but outdated information in the control 
plan causes blocking as shown in Figure 5.c. Blocked 
requests 
increase 
the 
average 
queue 
time, 
and 
consequently increase the successful delivery time.  
 
Figure 6.a presents, for the same metric, the 
performance of OBS and OCS working with a long data 
stream (5GB). Figure 6.b depicts the blocking probability 
for each kind of switching paradigm (OBS and OCS) for 
the same scenario of Figure 6.a. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. a) Time to successfully deliver a flow with an average 
duration of 1 second (5 GB). b) Blocking Probability in an OCS network. 
 
For scenarios with an average flow under 5 GB, the 
OCS achieved better delivery time than the OBS 
paradigm. OBS must fragment the data when the flow is 
greater than the maximum burst size. For example, 
assuming the maximum size of the burst is equal to 250 
MB, one flow of 5 GB must be fragmented into 20 bursts. 
As a result, one control message must be generated for 
each burst. Consequently, those control messages increase 
the overhead and the successful delivery time. For 
example, Figure 6.a shows that one flow of 1 second using 
OBS requires 20 seconds to be delivered successfully. 
Although the OCS network presents a blocking 
probability worse than OBS (Fig. 6b), its performance in 
terms of time to successfully deliver a flow was better 
(Fig. 6a). In this situation, it is more relevant for the users 
the time to successfully deliver a flow. This behaviour 
showed that is important to study the time to successfully 
deliver a flow besides the blocking probability. 
The frequency of state change in the network 
resources is very low under the traffic load considered, and 
with an average data flow of 5 GB. In this context, the 
blocking probability due to outdated control plan 
information is low, up to 100 times smaller than the 
blocking observed in Figure 5 scenario. Proportionally, the 
OCS paradigm performed better with data flows of 5 GB 
than with flows of 50 MB. In other words, the OCS 
paradigm performs better with long data flows. Previous 
studies indicate that the lower the duration of the circuit, 
the greater the likelihood of blocking due to outdated 
information [12]. 
Figure 7 illustrates the results for OCS, OBS and the 
hybrid (OCS/OBS) networks when subjected to two types 
of flow simultaneously. That is, when each node in the 
network generates 50% long flows and 50% short flows. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Successful delivery time in a OCS, OBS and Hybrid 
OCS/OBS network subjected to two types of flows. 
 
The OCS network obtains a lower delivery time 
than OBS network. We believe that, in this scenario, the 
impact of signalling overhead in OBS was greater than 
the impact of blocking due to outdated information in 
OCS. For the hybrid network, we assume that the short 
flow is sent through OBS and the long flow is sent 
through OCS. 
Figure 7 shows that the hybrid network delivery 
time is just above 0.04s. At first glance, this result might 
seem counter-intuitive given the fact that the OBS results 
in Figure 5.a are close to 0.04s while the OCS minimum 
time in Figure 6a is about 1 second. However, this occurs 
because the arrival rate of bursts is several times bigger 
than the arrival rate of circuits.  
This simulation study increases the network load 
keeping the hold times (1/µ) equal to 0.01s and 1s for 
short and long flows, respectively. Besides, both flows 
generate the same network load. Therefore, the arrival 
rate of the OBS flow is 100 times bigger than OCS flows. 
The simulation results regarding the hybrid network 
delivery time can be verified by the following equation: 
 
𝑇 = 𝑁!"# ∗ 𝑇!"# +  𝑁!"# ∗ 𝑇!"#
𝑁!"# +  𝑁!"#
 
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

𝑇 is the hybrid paradigm delivery time, 𝑇!"# is the 
OCS delivery time, 𝑇!"#is the OBS delivery time and 
𝑁!"# and 𝑁!"! are the OCS and OBS number of requests 
respectively. Replacing  𝑇!"# for the value from Figure 
6.a (1s), 𝑇!"# for the value from Figure 5.a (aprox. 0.04s) 
and 𝑁!"#  and 𝑁!"#  for 1 and 100 respectively the 
resulting delivery time is similar to the results shown in 
Figure 7.  
By weighting OCS and OBS delivery time in terms 
of their number of requests, the OBS delivery time had 
more impact the hybrid network delivery time which in 
turn presented a result just above 0.04 seconds. 
The study showed that the hybrid (OCS/OBS) 
network obtained the best performance in terms of 
successful delivery time when compared with OCS and 
OBS networks.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a performance evaluation 
study, carried out via simulation that investigates the 
efficiency of a hybrid OCS/OBS paradigm. As shown in 
Section VI, our hybrid network presented a shorter 
successful delivery time than the traditional OBS and 
OCS paradigms.  
The distinct behaviour of the OBS and OCS 
paradigms allows the hybrid OCS/OBS network to use the 
strengths of the two switching paradigms and enables it to 
succeed with a diverse set of users. 
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Fundação de Amparo a 
Pesquisa do Estado do Piauí – FAPEPI and the Brazilian 
National Counsel of Technological and Scientific 
Development - CNPq for support of this work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Szymaki, A. Lason, J. Rzasa, and A. Jajszczyk, 
Grade-of-service-based routing in optical networks”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Feb. 2007, pp.82-87. 
[2] Telegeography 
Research 
and 
Primetrica 
Inc. 
Executive Summary on Global Internet Geography. Free 
Resource Available in http://www.telegeography.com/research-
services/global-internet-geography/index.html, 
retrieved: 
october, 2012. 
[3] R. Ramaswami and  K. N. Sivarajan, Optical Network 
- A Practical Perspective, 2rd ed., Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 
2002. 
[4] H. Zang, J. P. Jue, and  B. Mukherjee, A Review of 
Routing 
and 
Wavelength 
Assignment 
Approaches 
for 
Wavelength-Routed Optical WDM Network”, SPIE Optical 
Networks Magazine, Jan, 2000. 
[5] G. M. Durães, A. Soares, J. R. Amazonas, and W. 
Giozza, “The choice of the best among the shortest routes in 
transparent optical networks”, Computer Networks, vol. 54, 
2010, pp. 1389-1286, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2010.03.010. 
[6] Y. Shun, B. Mukherjee, and S. Dixit, “Advances in 
photonic 
packet 
switching: 
an 
overview“, 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 38, Feb. 2000, pp. 84-94, doi: 
10.1109/35.819900. 
[7] C. Qiao and M. Yoo, “Optical Burst Switching (OBS) 
- a new paradigm for an optical Internet”, Journal of High Speed 
Networks, vol. 8, Jan. 1999, pp. 69-84. 
[8] J. Maranhao, H. Waldman, A. Soares, and W. Giozza, 
“Wavelength conversion architectures in OBS networks “, IEEE 
Network Operations and Management Symposium-NOMS, Apr. 
2008, pp. 939 -942. 
[9] Xin Chunsheng, Qiao Chunming, Ye Yinghua, and D. 
Sudhir, “A Hybrid Optical Switching Approach “, IEEE Global 
Telecommunications Conference-GLOBECOM, vol. 7, Dec. 
2003, pp. 3808 – 3812, doi: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2003.1258944 
[10]  Hai Le Vu, A. Zalesky, E.W.M. Wong, Z. Rosberg, 
S.M.H. Bilgrami, M. Zukerman, and R.S. Tucker, “Scalable 
performance evaluation of a hybrid optical switch”, Journal of 
Lightwave Technology, vol. 23, Oct. 2005, pp. 2961 – 2973. 
[11]  Lu Kejie, Xiao Gaoxi, and I. Chlamtac, “Analysis of 
Blocking Probability for Distributed Lightpath Establishment in 
WDM Optical Networks “,IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
Networking, vol. 13, Feb. 2005, pp. 187-197. 
[12]  J. P. Jue and V. M. Vokkarane, Optical Burst 
Switched Networks, 1rd ed., Springer Science, 2005. 
[13]  C.M. Gauger, P.J. Kuhn, E.V. Breusegem, M. 
Pickavet, and P. Demeester, “Hybrid Optical Network 
Architectures: Bringing Packets and Circuits Together”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 44, Aug, 2006, pp. 36-42. 
[14]  J.P. Jue and V.M. Vokkarane, Optical Burst Switched 
Networks, Springer Science, 2005. 
[15]  A. Zalesky, “To Burst or Circuit Switch?”, 
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 17, Feb.  2009, 
pp. 305-318. 
[16]  T. 
Coutelen, 
H. 
Elbiaze, 
and 
B. 
Jaumard, 
“Performance comparison of OCS and OBS switching 
paradigms”, Proc. Transparent Optical Networks, vol. 1, Jul. 
2005, pp. 212-215. 
[17]  Liu Xin, Qiao Chunming, Yu Xiang, and Weibo 
Gong, “A fair packet-level performance comparison of OBS and 
OCS”, Optical Fiber Communication Conference (OFC), 2006. 
[18]  C. Charoenlarpnopparut, E. Dhavarudha, and S. 
Runggeratigul, “Performance and Cost Comparsion for Optical 
Burst Switching and Optical Circuit Switchign”, International 
Symposium 
on 
Communications 
and 
Informations 
Technologies, 2006. 
[19]  Gyu Myoung Lee, B. Wydrowski, M. Zukerman, Jun 
Kyun Choi, and Chuan Heng Foh, “Performance Evaluation of 
an 
Optical 
Hybrid 
Switching 
System“, 
Global 
Telecommunications Conference, 2003. 
[20]  Yeshuang Wang, Sheng Wang, Shizhong Xu, and 
Xiufeng Wu, “A new hybrid optical network design consisting 
of lightpath and burst switching”, Advanced Communication 
Technology, vol. 3, Feb. 2009, pp. 1873 -1876. 
[21]  P.S. Khodashenas, J. Perelló, S. Spadaro, J. Comellas, 
and G. Junyent, “A feedback-based hybrid OBS/OCS 
architecture with fast-over-slow capability“,Optical Network 
Design and Modeling (ONDM), May 2011, pp. 1-14. 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

