Available Resources for Reconﬁgurable Systems in 5G Networks
Sebasti´an Rodr´ıguez
Department of Photonics Engineering
Technical University of Denmark
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 2800
Email: juse@fotonik.dtu.dk
Juan Jos´e Vegas Olmos
Mellanox Technologies
Roskilde, Denmark
Email: juanj@mellanox.com
Abstract—In this paper, the concept of a Radio-over-Fiber based
Centralized Radio Access Network is explained and analyzed, in
order to identify a set of resources within the network that can
be used as a base in the design of reconﬁgurable systems. This
analysis is then used to design a different reconﬁgurable systems
to be implemented as part of the next generation Radio Access
Unit. These systems are then implemented and experimentally
tested, allowing to demonstrate their operation. The obtained
results allow to show the feasibility of the systems and the
implementation of a ﬂexible architecture for the next generation
of networks.
Keywords–Mm-wave communications; Optical ﬁber networks;
mobile communication.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The next generation of networks comes from the ideas of
achieving higher capacity, allowing more users in the network
and integrating new technologies. These ideas come with
different requirements for the networks, in terms of data rates,
mobility, latency and spectrum allocation [1].
One step to solve some of these challenges is the use
of carriers within the millimeter-wave (mm-wave) frequen-
cies, with the Ka-band (26 GHz to 40 GHz) and the W-band
(75 GHz to 110 GHz) being two interesting candidates for the
implementation [2]. These higher carrier frequencies allow
the use of wider bandwidths in the wireless channels, thus
increasing the capacity of the link. The main disadvantage is
the high atmospheric attenuation in these frequency ranges.
This effect has been addressed by proposing a modiﬁcation on
the Radio Access Network (RAN), consisting of an increase in
the number of wireless access points, allowing better coverage
in the mm-wave link.
In addition to increasing the number of access points,
another big change has also been proposed in the RAN. This
change centralizes the processing and operation of the RAN
in what is known as the cloud or Centralized RAN (C-RAN).
The efforts here are set to simplify the wireless access points,
easing their implementation and reducing the implementation
(CAPEX) and operation (OPEX) costs of the network [3][4].
Lastly, Radio-over-Fiber (RoF) techniques have been pro-
posed to be the backbone technology of the C-RAN to in-
terconnect the different points of the network and distribute
the signals [5][6][7][8]. In this technique, the radio signal is
modulated and accommodated to be transmitted in the wireless
channel in the source; this signal is then used to modulate a
laser, so it can be transmitted directly to the antenna in the
optical domain.
In this paper, the architecture of a RoF based C-RAN
is analyzed, in order to show the available resources that
can be used for the design of reconﬁgurable networks. Then,
some solutions are presented and evaluated, showing the added
capabilities of reconﬁgurable systems within the C-RAN. In
Sections II, a general description of the concepts of C-RAN
and photonic up-conversion is presented. In Section III, we
discuss the available resources in the C-RAN that can be
used on the design of ﬂexible systems; Section IV presents
some examples of reconﬁgurable systems in the network. We
summarize the discussion and results on Section V.
II.
BASE TECHNOLOGIES
This section explains the two main technologies used as a
base for the proposed architectures: the architecture of the C-
RAN and photonic up-conversion, used in RoF transmissions
to generate the electrical signal in the mm-wave band.
A. The implementation of the C-RAN
The typical architecture of the C-RAN is composed of the
Central Ofﬁce (CO) and the Radio Access Units (RAUs). In
this implementation of the RAN, the Base Band Units (BBUs)
are taken away from the RAUs, and located in the CO as a
virtual BBU (vBBU) pool. This change will simplify the design
and implementation of the RAUs and allow the network to
centralize the processing in the CO. A typical implementation
of the C-RAN is presented in Fig. 1, alongside some examples
for different types of access within the network.
The CO will have additional tasks and roles within the
network, acting like the gateway between front- and backhaul,
being in charge of collecting the signals, process them and
redistribute them to each RAU as necessary. This centralization
will ease the operation on each RAU and limit the processing
points, which in turn will help to reduce the total latency of
the system. Moreover, removing the BBU from the RAU will
take away most of their complex operations. The signals will
be modulated and processed in the CO; and the RAU will
accommodate them to be wirelessly transmitted. Therefore, the
RAUs will work as interfaces between the wireless and the
optical networks.
The simpliﬁcation of the RAU comes with an additional
advantage under the context of the implementation of mm-
wave band links. Since the RAUs are the wireless access points
of the network, their simpliﬁcation will ease and reduce costs
for their implementation and the desiﬁcation process that was
proposed to increase the total coverage of the network. In
addition, the simpliﬁed design of the RAUs, will also allow
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 1. Typical implementation of the C-RAN. The heavy processing is
performed in the vBBU pool located in the Central Ofﬁce. The signals are
centralized in the Central Ofﬁce and then distributed to the RAUs. RAU:
Radio Access Unit; vBBU: virtual Base Band Unit.
the implementation of new architectures within the RAN, as
is the case of distributed antennas, to improve the connection
in indoor and wide outdoor areas.
B. Photonic Up-conversion
The photonic up-conversion is a method to generate the
mm-wave signals using the characteristics of optical devices
as an advantage. In this process, the signal is generated through
direct heterodyning in a wideband Photodiode (PD) [9]. This
method takes use of two optical signals: one that contains the
information (s(t)) modulated in a RoF signal that comes from
the central ofﬁce (Es(t)), with an angular frequency ωs; and
one that is going to be used as an optical Local Oscillator (LO,
ELO(t)) at angular frequency ωLO. The two signals are then
expressed as:
Es(t) =
p
Pss(t) · es exp[−j(ωst + φs)]
(1)
ELO(t) =
p
PLOeLO exp[−j(ωLOt + φLO)]
(2)
where Ps, φs es represent respectively the power, phase and
polarization unit vectors for the modulated signal; and PLO,
φLO and eLO are the values for the LO. The electrical signal
given at the PD will be composed of two components, one
baseband component and one RF signal with a carrier of
ωRF
= |ωs − ωLO|. The baseband component is ﬁltered
by the limited bandpass bandwidth of the antenna. The ﬁnal
transmitted RF signal can be described as
ERF (t) = 2
p
Ps · PLO·s(t)·eseLO·cos[ωRF t+φRF (t)]. (3)
III.
AVAILABLE RESOURCES IN THE 5G GENERATION
ACCESS NETWORK
In the CO, the data will be processed in a BBU and it
will be electrically modulated on an Intermediate Frequency
(IF). The signal is then transformed into the optical domain
and transported through the optical channel to the RAU using
RoF techniques. In the RAU, the photonic up-conversion
process (explained in Section II) takes place, transforming the
signal back to the electrical domain for transmission through
the wireless channel. The connection between the CO and
the different RAUs is summarized in Fig. 2. Generally, in
these applications, the PD (Optical/Electrical interface) and
the Power Ampliﬁer (PA) are integrated with the antenna.
Therefore, the RAU will transport the signal to the antenna
directly in the optical domain.
Figure 2. Simpliﬁed scheme of the signal path of the C-RAN. Composed by
the Central Ofﬁce, the optical channel, the Radio Access Unit and the
wireless channel. BBU: Base Band Unit; IF: Intermediate frequency; E/O:
Electrical to optical conversion; LO: Local Oscillator; O/E: Optical to
electrical conversion; PA: Power ampliﬁer.
In both the optical and wireless channels, there are different
kinds of resources and applications that the network can use
to achieve a better and more efﬁcient transmission of the
information. The following subsections provide a short review
of some techniques previously proposed.
A. Optical channel
The following techniques make use of optical technologies
or devices to add extra functionality to the network. We will
focus on three main techniques:
1) Wavelength: Within the optical channel, one of the most
used resources is the wavelength of the optical carrier. In
Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM), different signals
are modulated in different carrier wavelengths, with a wave-
lenght separation predeﬁned by the ITU standard [7][8][10].
All the RAUs will receive all the WDM signals and dynami-
cally select one according a control signal from the CO.
2) Optical switches: Some optical channel use optical
switches to redirect the signal to different points of the network
[10][11][12]. In these implementations, the data is distributed
in packets and signaling information is sent along with it, either
in form of a label on the packet or a synchronization order
from the CO. The RAU will then redirect the signal to different
ﬁbers that lead to different antennas, either in the same location
or in distributed arrays of antennas.
3) Multicore Fibers: The last technique that has been
proposed in these area, corresponds to the use of Multicore
Fibers (MCF) in the implementation of the access networks
[6]. In this technique, the different cores of the MCF are used
to transmit different signals through the network. Each core is
used as a different channel, which can be either reserved for
up-link or down-link. Therefore, both the RAU and the CO
can select in which core to transmit and in which to receive
an optical signal.
B. Electrical channel
The techniques implemented in the electrical domain focus
on the use of the RF spectrum or in modiﬁcations within
the antenna to give extra tunability to the network. There are
mainly three techniques to explore:
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 3. Implemented experimental setup to test the reconﬁgurable systems. DWDM: Dense wavelength multiplexion; PPG: Pulse pattern generator; NRZ:
Non-return-to-zero; PC: Polarization controller; MZM: Mach-Zehnder modulator; SMF: Single mode ﬁber; RAU: Radio access network; TBPF: Tunable band
pass ﬁlter; LO: Local Oscillator; µC: Micro-controller; VOA: Variable optical attenuator; EDFA: Erbium-doped ﬁber ampliﬁer; BiF: Bend-insensitive ﬁber;
PD: Photodiode; ED: Envelope detector; BT: Bias tee; CLK: Clock; BERT: Bit-error-rate tester..
1) Carrier frequency: Similar to the optical domain, the
ﬁrst technique consist of the use of multiple carrier frequencies
during the transmission of the signal. In this case, the LO used
within the system can be tuned, allowing to the RAU to change
the carrier frequency as necessary [7][13].
2) Beam steering: In order to compensate for the atmo-
spheric attenuation, it is desired to use antennas with high
gain. However, with a higher gain, the antenna becomes more
directive, which results in a low coverage area. The beam
steering techniques aim to modify the direction pattern of these
antennas, allowing them to change the direction of the main
transmission lobe so they can achieve better coverage [14].
In this technique, the network will get feedback on the status
of the communication link from the user terminal and adjust
the radiation pattern of the transmitting antenna in order to
enhance the power on each wireless link connected to the
network.
3) Reconﬁgurable antennas: This technique modiﬁes the
antenna’s pattern or operation to give additional functions to
the system, that not necessaryly focus on the direction of
the main lobe.This can be as is in the case of the Optically
Controlled Reconﬁgurable and Multiband Slotted waveguide
Antenna Array (OCRAA) [15] or the T-shaped antenna [16].
The former is an antenna which implements a silicon piece
that acts as a switch in the antenna, modifying the radiation
pattern by turning the antenna ”on” and ”off”. The latter refers
is an antenna that uses variable resistors to modify the resonant
frequency of the antenna.
IV.
RECONFIGURABLE SYSTEMS IN THE ACCESS
NETWORK
In this section, we collect some proposed solutions and
their results, to design reconﬁgurable RAUs. All of them are
based on the same principle and same base architecture, as
presented in Section III. A more detailed conﬁguration is
presented in Fig. 3, based on the proposed system presented in
[7]. This architecture gives a general overview of the general
components for the implementation of wireless links enhanced
with the implementation of RoF.
In the Central ofﬁce, the DWDM signal is generated
with a set of equally distanced lasers. Then, a Mach-Zehnder
Modulator (MZM) is used to modulate these lasers with a Non-
Return to Zero (NRZ) Pseudo-Random Bit Sequence (PRBS)
of 215 − 1 bits at a rate of 2.5 Gbps coming from a Pulse
Pattern Generator (PPG).
The signal propagates through a Standard Single Mode
Fiber (SSMF) to reach the RAU. In the RAU, the reconﬁg-
urable systems will be installed and a LO will be added to the
signal, before reaching the wideband PD (in this case with a
bandwidth of 90 GHz), which will convert the signal to the
electrical domain. The electrical signal will then be wirelessly
transmitted by a high gain antenna.
The receiver will collect the signal using a second high
gain antenna and demodulate it. In this scenario, high order
modulations of are not explored, meaning that this process can
be performed using an Envelope Detector (ED). The signal is
then recorded with a Digital Storage Oscilloscope (DSO) or
analyzed in real time with a Bit Error Rate Tester (BERT).
The following subsections, will discuss the design of the
different reconﬁgurable subsystems and show some of the
obtained results of their operation.
A. Wavelength selection
The wavelength selection system, was designed using a
tunable bandpass optical system. The central frequency of the
system is controlled by a micro-controller (µC) connected to
the network. Once the µC receives the order to change the
value of the ﬁlter, it uses a Digital-to-Analog Converter (DAC)
connected to the ﬁlter to move the passband.
Figure 4. Reference DWDM signal (red) with the selected channel and
corresponding optical local oscillator.
Four modulated optical channels with a spacing of
100 GHz between carrier wavelengths were used to test the
system. Fig. 4 shows the spectra of each channel after being
selected with the ﬁlter and the added local oscillator. The
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

original DWDM is shown as reference in red in the background
of the spectra. From the results, we can see that each signal was
correctly extracted but that there are still some residues of the
other channels, due to the slope and maximum attenuation of
the frequency response of the ﬁlter. Two types of channels can
be identiﬁed: the corner channels, corresponding to channels
1 and 4; and the center channels, channels 2 and 3. The main
difference between these channels is that the center channels
will have interference coming from the two adjacent channels,
making their performance different than the one for the corner
channels.
The measured BER traces can be found in Fig. 5(a).
It can be noted that all channels present error-free results.
As expected the slope of the traces for the corner channels
follows the same performance, but the center channels are
affected by the interchannel interference and present a different
performance. The sensitivity is around −4.4 dBm for channels
1, 2 and 3, and −5.6 dBm for channel 4, after comparing to
the Forward Error Correction (FEC) limit, corresponding to an
overhead of 7%,.
Figure 5. Measured BER vs optical power at the PD located in the RAU: (a)
For the different wavelength channels; (b) for the different mm-wave Carrier
frequencies.
B. Carrier Frequency selection
This system was designed by employing a tunable laser
as LO. The tunable laser is controlled by the same µC as
before. Once the wavelength of the LO laser changes, the
output carrier frequency of the system changes in a similar
way, as explained in Section II.
Fig. 5(b) shows both the optical spectra for the two
different LOs and the measured BER of the two systems. In the
demonstration the two resulting electrical carrier frequencies
were 81 and 87 GHz as shown in the optical spectrum.
The BER traces show that at 87 GHz the performance of
the systems deteriorates signiﬁcantly. The sensitivity of the
system, compared to the FEC limit, moves from −5.6 dBm
to −2.6 dBm for the higher frequency. This 3 dB difference
corresponds not only to added attenuation on the channel, but
the change of the slope shows that there is an additional effect.
The performance is also affected by the cut-off frequency of
90 GHz of the PD.
C. Optical Switches
For this application, the solution is based on the design
presented in [11]. In this case, a similar topology as in Fig.
3 was used to generate wireless packets in the Ka-band. This
implementation consisted on the use of an optical switch to
transfer the signal to different antennas in the RAU. The optical
switch is controlled by a synchronization signal given by the
CO; in the experiment, this signal is generated directly in the
PPG.
Fig. 6 shows the operation of the system, in terms of the
measured BER and the recorded times slots of the packets. The
BER traces were captured for the Back to Back (B2B) case and
after the wireless transmission. In both cases, the performance
presents similar slope, the main difference between the two
being the added attenuation due to the wireless channel.
Additionally, Fig. 6 also shows the switching process of the
received packets divided in time slots. In this ﬁgure, a packet
can be observed in a time slot with a blank space used
as safeguard for the transition. The different lines show the
process of switching between a different number of outputs,
demonstrate the correct transmission of the packets.
Figure 6. Measured BER vs optical power at the PD located in the RAU for
the implementation using optical switches. In the side, the generated packet
in time slots, with each line showing the effect of transmitting the packet to
one, two three and four active outputs.
D. Reconﬁgurable Antennas
Fig. 7 shows the device presented and tested in [15]. This
device consist of a slotted waveguide antenna that has a silicon
switch in its slots. Once the silicon pieces are illuminated (”on”
state), the radiation pattern of the antenna changes, creating
two states of operation for the device. When the device is in
the ”on” conﬁguration, the gain will increase approximate of
9 dB. This functionality allows the use of an extra boost of
power to have higher coverage in indoor applications.
E. Beam steering
The advantage of beam steering is the capacity to redirect
the main lobe of an antenna array. This can be used to enhance
the coverage of a RAU or to use it as a switch between
different receivers, thereby creating a dynamic wireless bridge.
One example is shown in Fig. 8, based on the implementation
proposed in [17]. Here two similar transmitters where placed
side by side and a receiver antenna with a mechanical beam
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 7. Optically reconﬁgurable antenna: (a) fabricated device and (b)
Operation
steering platform was used to switch between them, as shown
in 8(b) and (c).
The BER traces in Fig. 8(a) are the measurements of
the received signal for each transmitter in two cases: ﬁrst
in the case that only one of the transmitters is active at the
time of measurement used as reference to see the channel
interference; and the other case to analyze the system with
the two transmitters active.
Figure 8. Example with mechanical beam steering: (a) Measured BER traces
vs power on the PDs, (b) Front view of implementation (c) Side view of
implementation
To generate the two signals, the RoF signal was divided
in two paths; each path was used to feed a different PD and
then go through the ampliﬁers and the antennas. In one of
the paths, an extra waveguide section was used to generate
diversity between the signals. From the curves it be observed
the effects of the interference in TX2 being higher than in
TX1. This is due imbalances in the power of both transmitters
due to the different components in the paths. Nevertheless, all
the traces seem to join for a sensitivity around −1.2 dBm and
present error-free transmissions.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, an overview on the architecture of the RoF
based C-RAN and the basic elements that compose it was
presented. The architecture was simpliﬁed and analyzed in
order to provide a insights on reconﬁgurability within the
access network. This analysis was expanded with a set of
experimental results for different reconﬁgurable systems in
the network. The presented systems serve as proof of concept
for techniques as dynamic wavelength and electrical frequency
carrier selection, optical switches, beam steering and reconﬁg-
urable antennas. In each test, the results presented values below
the FEC limit for a 7% of overhead, showing the feasibility
of the solutions. Nevertheless, since the C-RAN requires that
the RAUs to be cost-efﬁcient and easy to deploy, there is still
work to consider in the integration of the diferent components
and the design of the control information within the newtork,
ir order to implement the RAU as part of a software deﬁned
network.
In overall, the presented solutions allow to show the
capability of a C-RAN architecture, completely controlled by
the central ofﬁce, providing some insights on a reconﬁgurable
optical and electrical system for the next generation of net-
works and leaving the discussion open for the introduction of
new designs and new components for the network.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Marie Skodowska-Curie
Innovative Training Network FiWiN5G supported by the Euro-
pean Unions Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme
under grant agreement No. 642355. The authors will like to
thank also Idelfonso Tafur Monroy, Alvaro Morales Vicente
of the Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e) and Igor
Feliciano Da Costa of the National Institute of Telecomu-
nications (Inatel) for their support, work and ideas on the
implementations of the original implemented systems.
REFERENCES
[1]
Dahlman et al., “5G wireless access: requirements and realization,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 12, dec 2014, pp. 42–47.
[2]
Rappaport et al., “Millimeter Wave Mobile Communications for 5G
Cellular: It Will Work!” IEEE Access, vol. 1, 2013, pp. 335–349.
[3]
Ranaweera, Wong, Nirmalathas, Jayasundara, and Lim, “5G C-RAN
architecture: A comparison of multiple optical fronthaul networks,”
in 2017 International Conference on Optical Network Design and
Modeling (ONDM), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[4]
I, Huang, Duan, Cui, Jiang, and Li, “Recent Progress on C-RAN
Centralization and Cloudiﬁcation,” IEEE Access, vol. 2, 2014, pp.
1030–1039.
[5]
Kitayama, Kuri, Olmos, and Toda, “Fiber-wireless networks and radio-
over-ﬁbre technique,” in 2008 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics
and 2008 Conference on Quantum Electronics and Laser Science, May
2008, pp. 1–2.
[6]
Galve, Gasulla, Sales, and Capmany, “Reconﬁgurable Radio Access
Networks Using Multicore Fibers,” IEEE Journal of Quantum Elec-
tronics, vol. 52, no. 1, jan 2016, pp. 1–7.
[7]
Rodriguez, Morales, Rommel, Vegas Olmos, and Tafur Monroy, “Real-
time Measurements of an Optical Reconﬁgurable Radio Access Unit
for 5G Wireless Access Networks,” in Optical Fiber Communication
Conference.
Washington, D.C.: OSA, 2017, p. W1C.3.
[8]
Kitayama, Kuri, Olmos, and Toda, “Fiber-wireless networks and radio-
over-ﬁbre technique,” in 2008 Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics
and 2008 Conference on Quantum Electronics and Laser Science, May
2008, pp. 1–2.
[9]
Lebedev et al., “Feasibility study and experimental veriﬁcation of
simpliﬁed ﬁber-supported 60-ghz picocell mobile backhaul links,” IEEE
Photonics Journal, vol. 5, no. 4, Aug 2013, pp. 7 200 913–7 200 913.
[10]
Rodr´ıguez, Rommel, Olmos, and Monroy, “Reconﬁgurable radio access
unit to dynamically distribute W-band signals in 5G wireless access
networks,” Optical Switching and Networking, vol. 24, 2017, pp. 21–
24.
[11]
Rodriguez, Madsen, Monroy, and Olmos, “Dynamic optical ﬁber de-
livery of ka-band packet transmissions for wireless access networks,”
in 2017 International Conference on Optical Network Design and
Modeling (ONDM), May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[12]
Liu, Zhang, Zhu, Wang, Cheng, and Chang, “A Novel Multi-Service
Small-Cell Cloud Radio Access Network for Mobile Backhaul and
Computing Based on Radio-Over-Fiber Technologies,” Journal of Light-
wave Technology, vol. 31, no. 17, sep 2013, pp. 2869–2875.
[13]
Shams, Fice, Gonzalez-Guerrero, Renaud, Dijk, and Seeds, “Sub-THz
Wireless Over Fiber for Frequency Band 220280 GHz,” Journal of
Lightwave Technology, vol. 34, no. 20, oct 2016, pp. 4786–4793.
[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7460176/
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[14]
Razavizadeh, Ahn, and Lee, “Three-Dimensional Beamforming: A new
enabling technology for 5G wireless networks,” IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, vol. 31, no. 6, nov 2014, pp. 94–101.
[15]
Costa et al., “Optically controlled reconﬁgurable antenna for 5G future
broadband cellular communication networks,” Journal of Microwaves,
Optoelectronics and Electromagnetic Applications, vol. 16, no. 1, mar
2017, pp. 208–217.
[16]
Jilani, Abbas, Esselle, and Alomainy, “Millimeter-wave frequency re-
conﬁgurable T-shaped antenna for 5G networks,” in 2015 IEEE 11th In-
ternational Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking
and Communications (WiMob).
IEEE, oct 2015, pp. 100–102.
[17]
Rodr´ıguez, Morales, Gallardo, Olmos, and Monroy, “Real-time 2.5
Gbit/s spatial circuit switching on W-band wireless links,” Optical
Engineering, vol. 56, no. 2, 2017, p. 26104.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

