 
 
 
Abstract— Cloud Computing is defined by flexibility, agility, 
scalability, reliability – all these being provided using the 
concept of computing as a utility. Beside all its big advantages, 
the adoption of the cloud still has a limited number of 
adherences because it also can expose the consumer to a lot of 
risks and vulnerabilities, which sometimes are heavier than the 
benefits themselves. Providing a cloud identity is a key 
component of a cloud successful story because in such 
architecture aspects like the request context, sensitive data usage 
and end-user service availability make the difference between a 
legitimate and an un-legitimate request. By using several systems 
that provide only parts of the cloud identity, we ensured that the 
end user cannot alter his access to cloud application and that the 
cloud application only manipulate allowed personal data.      
Keywords-Cloud Computing; identity management; Software 
as a Service.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing, as defined by National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST), is a model for enabling 
always-on, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared 
pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., storage, 
applications, services, etc.) that can be rapidly provisioned and 
released with minimal management effort or service provider 
interaction [1]. 
This definition provides the main characteristics of cloud 
computing [2]:  
 
Shared resources – in cloud computing architectures 
multiple users utilize the same resources from network 
level, host level to application level.   
 
Massive scalability – because of its foundation 
principles, cloud computing has the ability to scale to 
thousands of systems.  
 
Elasticity – in cloud computing framework it is very 
easy to adapt both hardware and software resources to 
the user’s need.  
 
Pay as you go – cloud computing consumers pay only 
the resources they use just for the time they actually 
require them. 
 
Self provisioning of resources – additional systems 
(processing capability, software, and storage) and 
network resources are added when and if they are 
needed. 
These characteristics prove a lot of advantages including: 
lower-cost computers for users, improved performance, lower 
IT infrastructure costs for enterprises, fewer maintenance 
issues, lower software costs, instant software updates, 
 
 
 
increased computing power, unlimited storage capacity, 
increased data safety, improved compatibility between 
operating systems, improved document format compatibility,   
and universal access to documents [3]. There is also a list of 
challenges that can be even heavier than the benefits: 
 
This type of architecture requires constant Internet 
connectivity;  moreover the disconnection can lead to 
a lot of inconsistencies that can be very hard to clean. 
 
The services quality is dependent on the connectivity 
power; it does not matter how strong and reliable a 
service is; if for bad weather for example, the Internet 
is slower, the entire performance is compromised 
 
The data ownership is shared between cloud provider 
and consumer, which may lead to insufficient security 
in storing and using the data by the cloud vendor. 
 
Compatibility issues between the cloud providers can 
lead to delays in processing data from systems hosted 
by different vendors, inefficiency in meeting the 
required Service Level Agreements (SLAs). 
 
Regulatory compliance issues due to the geographical 
position of the cloud provider data center. 
In order to phase all these challenges, the community 
proposed standards which came in the help of enterprises and 
offer them guidelines about what secure architecture means 
and. Also, from decades of experience, the Internet brought 
out to light a lot of best practices related to the information 
security, 
vulnerabilities, risk 
assessment 
and 
damage 
management and recovery. In this paper, we will reference the 
Cloud Security Alliance (CSA) standard that addresses the 
main security topics within cloud architectures [4].  
The first section of this paper presents the actual IT context 
for cloud computing concept with both its advantages and 
disadvantages. The second section states the deployment and 
services models and after this the main security domains 
together with the challenges from a cloud computing 
architecture are presented. Identity management within a 
hybrid company (it uses both on premises applications and on 
demand services) is the key component that can make the 
difference between a successful cloud computing story and a 
failed one. In the fourth section, we propose an approach that 
addresses the identity management requirements by leveraging 
the existing architecture within the company. In the last 
section, before referencing all state-of-the-art cloud computing 
materials, we conclude with benefits and future work. 
 
Identity Management Approach for Software as a Service 
Georgiana Mateescu, Marius Vlădescu  
Computer Science and Automatic Control Faculty 
Polytechnic University of Bucharest,  
Bucharest, Romania  
georgiana.mateescu@gmail.com, vladescumariusnicolae@yahoo.com  
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
II. CLOUD COMPUTING DEPLOYMENT AND SERVICE MODELS 
According to Lingenfelter [4], cloud computing is defined 
by the following characteristics: 
o 
On-demand tenant self-service model for provisioning 
computing capabilities 
o 
Broad network access and mobile platforms 
o 
Resource pooling through dynamically assigned 
physical and virtual capabilities delivered in a multi-
tenant model and location independent 
o 
Rapid elasticity of provisioned resources  
o 
Measured service to monitor, control and report on 
transparent resource optimization 
o 
All these features can be delivered as one of the three 
types of services: 
o 
Software as a Service 
o 
Platform as a Service 
o 
Infrastructure as a Service / Datacenter as a Service 
The cloud computing benefits can be implemented using 
one of the four deployment models depicted in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Cloud Computing Deployement Models [13] 
The private cloud option is ussualy adopted by companies 
with multiple braches that choose to maintain all the 
applications within the organization’s firewall having all the 
benefits the cloud architecture provides. 
The community cloud offers the cloud benefits at a 
community level – a community is a group of organizations 
that address the same domain of activities. In this model, the 
cloud services are not kept within firewalls, but are restricted  
based on community membership. 
The public cloud is the least restrictive from access perpective 
and  it has a general use. 
Each of these models has certain challenges that lead to the 
hobrid approch – the combination between private clouds 
(which 
usually hosts the most critical application), 
community clouds (which hosts the applications required for 
organizations interoperability in every day business process) 
and public clouds (which hosts applications for general usage 
– such as customer portals etc.).  
Depending on each specific environment and business 
requirements, the cloud model should be selected after a 
complex process that involves both technical and functional 
(business) teams. 
III. CLOUD COMPUTING SECURITY CHALLENGES  
European Network and Information Security Agency 
(ENISA) provided a detailed description of all risks that a 
cloud customer must phase together with the impact and 
affected areas specific on each risk [2].  
When adopting a cloud computing architecture, the 
company must address a significant number of vulnerabilities 
and risks including [2]: 
 
Policy and organizational risks include: Lock-in, 
Loss of governance, Compliance challenges, Loss of 
business reputation due to co-tenant activities, 
Cloud service termination failure 
 
Technical risks include: resources exhaustion, 
isolation failure,  cloud provider malicious insider – 
abuse of high privilege role, intercepting data in 
transit and data leakage on up/download intra-cloud, 
loss of encryption keys, Economic/Distributed 
denial of service (EDoS/DDoS) 
 
Legal risks  
 
Risks not specific to the cloud include: network 
management (breaks, congestions, miss-connection, 
non-optimal use), privilege escalation, backup lost, 
stolen, unauthorized access to premise, natural 
disaster 
 
Vulnerabilities include: AAA vulnerabilities, user 
provisioning and de-provisioning, remote access to 
management interface, lack of resource isolation 
(resources that are used by one customer can affect 
resources used by another customer), lack of 
reputational isolation, communication encryption 
vulnerabilities 
In order to efficiently address all these risks and 
vulnerabilities, CSA categorized all the security aspects from 
cloud computing architectures into the following domains[4]: 
1. Governance and Enterprise Risk Management  - The 
ability to govern and measure risk introduced by 
cloud computing 
2. Legal Issues: Contracts and Electronic Discovery - 
Security breach disclosure law 
3. Compliance and Audit - Evaluate how cloud affects 
compliance  
4. Information Management and Data Security - 
Managing data stored in cloud  
5. Portability and Interoperability - The ability to move 
data from a cloud provider to another 
6. Traditional Security, Business Continuity and 
Disaster Recovery - How cloud affects the current 
security procedures 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
7. Data Center Operations - How to evaluate provider’s 
data center architecture and operations 
8. Incident Response, Notification and Remediation - 
Proper incident detection, response, notification and 
remediation 
9. Application Security - Securing application that runs 
on different cloud deployment model 
10. Encryption and Key Management - Identify proper 
key usage and key management 
11. Identity and Access Management - Cloud-based 
IdEA 
(Identity, 
Entitlement 
and 
Access 
Management) 
12. Virtualization - Risk associated with VM isolation, 
VM co-residence 
13. Security as a Service - Third party security assurance 
including incident management and compliance 
attestation 
In this paper, we will address the Identity and Access 
Management domain and we will present our approach that 
leverages the existing Identity Manager system within the 
company premises in order to accommodate all the cloud 
specific requirements. 
IV. IDENTITY AND ACCESS MANAGEMANT  
A. Existing identity management approaches 
An Identity Management component is in charge with the 
following tasks: 
 
Establish identities: Associate personally identifiable 
information with an entity. 
 
Describe identities: Assign attributes identifying an 
entity. 
 
Record the use of identity data: Log identity activity 
in a system and/or provides access to the logs. 
 
Destroy an identity: Assign expiration date to 
personally identifiable information. Personally 
identifiable information becomes unusable after the 
expiration date. 
Identity Management can involve three perspectives [11]: 
1. The pure identity paradigm: creation, management and 
deletion of identities without regard to access or entitlements. 
2. The user access (log on) paradigm: A traditional method 
say for ex a user uses the smart card to log on to a service. 
3. The service paradigm: A system that delivers personalized 
role based, online, on-demand, presence based services to 
users and their devices. 
P. Angin [7] provides an approach to create and manage 
identities within cloud computing architectures without the 
need of trusted sources. This approach does not use enterprise 
systems and it is based on the information stored locally on 
the machine that attempts to connect to the cloud service.  
C. Mitchell [8] describes an identity management 
mechanism that performs privacy-preserving authentication 
using anonymous credentials without making usage of any 
enterprise system.  
Waleed Alrodhan [9] provides a browser plug-in approach 
for user authentication. Every digital identity is a security 
token. A security token consists of a set of characteristics, 
such as a username, user’s full name, address, SSN etc. The 
tokens prove that the claims belong to the user who is 
presenting them.  The biggest challenge related to this 
approach is related to the user behavior: they do not 
understand the importance of the approval decision or 
because they know that they must approve the certificate in 
order to get access to a particular website. 
P. Mularien [10] provides a decentralized authentication 
protocol that helps cloud users to manage their multiple 
digital identities by providing one set username and 
password—an OpenID which is further used for cloud 
authentication. The main disadvantage of this approach is its  
susceptibility to phishing attacks and social engineering. 
Each of the above solutions has its own challenges and 
risks. 
B. Personal approach  
In our scenario, we have the following systems: 
 
On premise Identity Manager system – this system 
stores all the company employees together with their 
accounts in the enterprise systems and the access 
policies that define the systems and services that the 
users are allowed to use. In order to efficiently 
implement the access policies, these are configured 
based on specific employees attributes also stored in 
the Identity Manager solution. Also this application is 
the cloud identity issuer that generates the cloud 
identities based on different components provided by 
the other applications involved in the authentication 
process. 
 
On demand Trusted Certificate store – this system 
provides digital certificates to the company. Its main 
task is to verify the digital certificate from the validity, 
legitimacy and data integrity perspectives. 
 
On demand cloud services – we used 2 services: 
Business Intelligence (BI) application and a Customer 
Relationship Management (CRM) solution 
Within a cloud computing architecture, various actors from 
both on demand and on premises systems are involved in the 
authentication process. These parties are [6]: 
1. Identity Provider (IdP) – this component issues digital 
identities. In our scenario, the identity provider in the on-
premise Identity Manager system and it is a trusted identity 
store for the cloud services. 
2. Service Provider (SP): It provides access to services to the 
identities that have the right required identities. Our use-case 
service model in Software-as-a-Service – more specifically 
we used a Business Intelligence (BI) application and a 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) solution.  
3. Entity: Entities are the ones about who claims are made. In 
our scenario, we consider the entity the user himself who 
wants to access one of the available cloud services. 
4. Identity Verifier: Service Providers send them the request 
for verifying claims about an identity. In our use-case the 
identity verification is performed using Trusted Certificate 
Store and it has the particularity that this step is performed by 
the Identity Provider itself.  
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
Figure 2. Identity Management Flow 
Figure 2 depicts the identity related information flow: 
 
The user has a token provided by the cloud service 
provider that generates the password for the cloud 
service based on a challenge code received from the 
service provider. 
 
On the enterprise machine (the user’s computer) it is 
stored a Digital Certificate (DC) that contains, beside 
the certificate’s identifications, the user’s enterprise 
unique identifier and also information related to the 
device from where the certificate is being used to 
perform authentication. 
The authentication process has the following steps: 
1. The user accesses the cloud service and in order to 
authenticate, he issues the digital certificate.  
2. The cloud service answers with a code used by 
user’s personal token to generate the password. The 
user introduces then the generated password in the 
service login window. 
3. If the password is correct, then the cloud service 
sends the DC to Identity Manager together with the 
entity code (the one generated in step 2). 
4. Identity Manager sends the DC to the Trusted 
Certification Store in order to ensure that the 
certificate is valid and legitimate and to verify data 
integrity. A certificate is considered valid if its 
expiration date is greater than the day when this 
authentication request that uses the certification is 
performed. A certificate is considered legitimate if 
the authentication request that used it, was raised 
from a host that is allowed to use that certificate. The 
data integrity is achieved when the personal 
information of the user stored on the certificate is the 
same as the one from the store. If all three 
validations are successfully completed, the Trusted 
Certificate Store retrieves the enterprise unique id to 
Identity Manager. 
All the data within the digital certificate are encrypted. 
5. Using the enterprise unique id, Identity Manager 
generates the cloud identity based on the specific 
employee attributes. 
6. The Identity Manager encrypts the cloud identity 
using the key received from the cloud service and 
sends it back to the service. 
7. Based on the allowed accesses for that specific 
identity, the available services are displayed to the 
client. 
8. After all the activities performed in the cloud service 
are completed, when the user logs out, the cloud 
identity is automatically destroyed by the cloud 
provider. 
If any of the validation described in the process fails, then 
an error is displayed to the user and the access to the cloud 
services is not granted.  
The above presented flow is described from the different 
systems interactions point of view in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Authentication Process 
The cloud identity generated by the Identity Manager 
system from the enterprise premises contains the following 
information (Figure 4): 
 
Personal information about the entity required in order 
to perform specific tasks in the cloud service that the 
user is allowed to use (such as fist and last name, 
personal account, social security number etc). 
 
Data related rights required to define which operations 
from the cloud service can use specific cloud identity 
information (such as the only the payment service can 
read the account data). 
 
Access policies required to define which operations 
from the cloud service are allowed to the user (such as 
if the user is just a regular user, he is only allowed to 
purchase some product or to see only his previous 
transactions). 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
Information related to the cloud identify sender – this 
is used in order to protect against man in the middle 
attacks, although we considered the communication 
between the Identity Manager and the Cloud Service 
trusted (such as the physical address of the computer 
that made the request to access the cloud service). 
In order to protect identity cloud data integrity, we used a 
symmetric encryption algorithm [12] (the encryption key is the 
code generated by the cloud service provider in the first step of 
the authentication). 
 
Figure 4. Cloud Identity 
Figure 5 depicts the data usage of the cloud identity within 
the cloud service: 
 
The cloud service (Business Intelligence application) 
decrypts the cloud identity information 
 
The cloud service (Business Intelligence application) 
reads from the access policies the services that must 
be provided to the user 
 
When the user performs a certain operation, the 
Business Intelligence application access the personal 
information according to the data rights from the 
cloud computing.  
 
Figure 5. Cloud Identity usage 
By using this approach, we managed to control the cloud 
application user access and also to protect the user data from 
being used in an abusive manner. The cloud identity ensures 
that the cloud application will use only the data it is allowed to 
and that after the access to the cloud application is finished the 
cloud identity is destroyed. 
V. CONCLUSION 
According to Jansen and Grance [6], cloud computing 
guarantees for enhanced performance with lower cost; but, in 
the same time, the adopters must balance the cost reduction 
with the security and privacy measures. 
In this paper, we presented an identity management 
approach that allows the enterprises to provide a secure 
transition step – from on premise architecture to on demand 
on. This transition supposes a hybrid architecture containing 
both on premise and on demand systems that interact between 
each other in everyday business flows. 
Providing the fact that on-demand services represent an 
extension of on-premise applications, existing security 
techniques can be applied within individual components of 
cloud computing. We used the on-premise identity provider 
system to generate cloud identities. This was possible because 
the identity manager not only stores the identities themselves, 
but it also has validation and verification capabilities and 
stores all the policies required to properly set the access to the 
user. 
The main benefits of our approach are: 
 
The user does not know at any time his cloud identity, 
thus he will never be able to alter his access rights into 
the cloud systems. 
 
The two steps verification process protects against the 
theft of digital certificate: 
o 
The first step is the password generated by 
the token, using the code from the cloud 
provider – if the attacker steals the DC 
without having the token, he will not be 
able to pass the first authentication step 
o 
The second verification is performed by the 
Trusted Certificate Store that checks if the 
certificate issuer is legitimate – this means 
that even if the attacker managed to steal 
also the token from the user, if he uses the 
certificate 
from 
another 
device 
the 
authentication process will fail. 
 
The authentication process involves multiple systems, 
which means that the man in the middle attack is 
impossible to be efficiently exploited with a single 
penetration step. 
 
The cloud identity contains only the required 
information according to specific access policies and 
also data access rights within the allowed services. 
 
The cloud identity is destroyed after usage, without 
storing it in the cloud. 
Compared to similar papers listed in the beginning of 
Section IV, we used multiple systems is the identity generation 
process, fact that minimizes the risk of attacking the identity 
issuer system. Also, we encrypted the cloud identity data in 
order to ensure that if it is captured after the entire generation 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
process is completed, the attacker will not be able to access the 
data stored in it.     
For future works, we plan to address two more areas 
within the proposed approach: 
 
The implementation of a more sophisticated 
encryption algorithm for the cloud identity data 
 
The single sign on process within on premises and 
on demand systems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Timothy Grance and Peter Mell, “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing”,  National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. 
Department of Commerce, Special Publication 800-145, Sept 2011.  
[2] Daniele Catteddu and Giles Hogben, “Cloud Computing Security Risk 
Assessment”, European Network and Information Security Agency 
(ENISA), 20 Nov. 2009 
[3] Jim Reavis , “Security Guidance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud 
Computing v3.0”, 14 Nov. 2011 
[4] David Lingenfelter, “Cloud Audit and Cloud Trust Protocol”, 2011, 
unpublished, last accessed on October, 5th,2013. 
 https://cloudsecurityalliance.org/research/grc-stack/ 
[5] Tim Mather, Subra Kumaraswany, and Shahed Latif, “Cloud Security 
and Privacy. An Enterprise Perspective on Risk and Compliance”, 
O’Reilly United States of America, ISBN-10: 0596802765, 5 Oct. 2009  
[6] Wayne Jansen and Timothy Grance , “Guidelines on Security and 
Privacy in Public Cloud Computing”, U.S. Department of Commerce, 
Special Publication 800-144, December 2011   
[7] Pelin Angin, Bharat Bhargava, Rohit Ranchal, Noopur Singh, Lotfi Ben 
Othmane, Leszek Lilien,  and Mark Linderman , “An Entity-centric 
Approach for Privacy and Identity Management in Cloud Computing”, 
Reliable Distributed Systems, 2010 29th IEEE Symposium, 31 October 
2010   
[8] Simone 
Fischer-Hübner, Elisabeth 
de 
Leeuw, 
and Chris 
Mitchell : “Policies and Research in Identity Management” - Third IFIP 
WG 11.6 Working Conference, IDMAN 2013, London, UK, April 8-9, 
2013, ISBN 978-3-642-37281-0 
[9] Waleed A. Alrodhan and Chris J. Mitchell “Improving the Security of 
CardSpace”, EURASIP Journal on Info Security Vol. 2009. 
[10] Peter Mularien, “Opening up to OpenID with Spring Security”, May 
2010. 
[11] Sandeep K. Sood, Anil K. Sarje, and Kuldip Singh, “A secure 
dynamic identity based 
authentication 
protocol 
for 
multi-server 
architecture”, Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Volume 
34, Issue 2, March 2011, pp. 609-618  
[12] Masashi Une and Masayuki Kanda, “Year 2010 Issues on 
Cryptographic Algorithms”, Discussion Paper No. 2006-E-8, IMES, 
C.P.O BOX 203 Tokyo, 100-8630 Japan 
[13] Neeraj Metha, “The 4 Primary Cloud Deployment Models”, 
CloudTweaks, July, 2nd, 2012  
 
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

