Classification of Node Localization Techniques in Wireless Sensor 
Networks 
 
Fatiha Mekelleche, Hafid Haffaf 
Faculty of sciences, Computer science Department, University of Oran 1 Ahmed Benbella 
Industrial computing and networking Laboratory (RIIR)  
Oran, Algeria 
e-mail: meke-fatiha@hotmail.fr,haffaf.hafid@univ-oran.dz 
 
 
Abstract—Due to their wide applications, wireless sensor 
networks have attracted global research in medical care, smart 
homes, and environmental monitoring. These applications 
often expect knowledge of the exact location of nodes. 
Localization in sensor networks hence became an important 
problem. We have studied various methods in order to 
judiciously design a specific location solution. Given the 
specific characteristics of sensor networks, this solution should 
not be oversized; otherwise it increases the cost in terms of 
energy and computation which would make it impracticable. 
In this paper, the closest methods to our problem are studied 
and compared. 
 
Keywords-wireless sensor networks; localization; location 
nodes; multilateration. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recent advances in micro-electro-mechanical systems 
(MEMS) technology, wireless communications, and digital 
electronics have enabled the emergence and evolution of 
wireless sensor networks (WSNs). Nowadays, WSNs have 
attracted worldwide research and industrial interest, because 
they can be applied in various areas such as environmental 
monitoring, smart home, hospital surveillance, etc. 
A WSN is a collection of sensor nodes, which are 
densely deployed in physical environment and organized 
into a cooperative network. Each sensor node has typically 
several parts (Sensors, Processor, Transceiver, Memory, and 
Battery). A sensor node is usually a tiny electronic device 
equipped with a battery for an energy source. It has physical 
sensors for detecting environment conditions such as 
temperature, sound, vibration, etc. A wireless transceiver is 
fitted for two way communications with other sensors [1]. 
In these large sensor network systems, we need nodes to be 
able to locate themselves in various environments. The 
sensed and gathered data would be meaningless without 
knowledge of location node in some particular applications. 
This problem, to which we refer to, is known as sensor 
localization. 
We define the problem of localization as estimating the 
position or spatial coordinates of wireless sensor nodes. 
Node localization is one of challenging and fundamental 
issues in WSN research because sensor nodes are usually 
randomly deployed in harsh fields or scattered using some 
special device [2]. Simple solution for this problem is using 
of Global Positioning System (GPS) [3], but WSN
 
constraints make the use of GPS an expensive solution in 
terms of cost, size, and power consumption. Furthermore, 
GPS cannot be used indoors or in circumstances where 
satellite signals are not available like dense forests. Also, 
because of large number of sensor nodes employed in a 
network, manual configuration into each node in order to 
get information location during deployment phase is neither 
practical. Many works have proposed solutions to this 
problem and a large number of algorithms are proposed in 
previous works to deal with sensor localization. In this 
work, our goal is to provide an overview about these 
localization 
techniques 
and 
to 
discuss 
about 
the 
characteristics of each one. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, we introduce the process of localization in WSN. 
In Section III, we show the techniques proposed in literature 
that can be used by a node to compute its position, and how 
all the estimated information of distances and positions can 
be manipulated in order to allow most or all of the nodes of 
a WSN to estimate their positions. In Section IV, summary 
of these localization techniques are given. Section V 
concludes the paper where the future challenges and 
directions to improve localization in WSN are described. 
II. LOCALIZATION IN WSN 
The location information of each sensor node in the 
network is critical for many applications. This is because 
users normally need to know not only what happens, but 
also where interested events happen [1]. For example, in 
hospital surveillance, the knowledge of where the patient is 
can help the doctors arrive at the right place as quickly as 
possible in urgent case [4]. On the other hand, the position 
parameters of sensor nodes are assumed to be available in 
many operations for network management, such as routing 
where a number of geographical algorithms have been 
proposed [5] and [6], topology control that uses location 
information to adjust network connectivity for energy 
saving [7] [8], and security maintenance where location 
information can be used to prevent malicious attacks [9]. 
So, the design of efficient techniques for nodes’ location 
has become necessary. 
In classical localization technique, nodes in the network 
are split into two classes: normal nodes (which are the 
majority) and anchor nodes helping the others to calculate 
their location. Techniques that rely on such anchors are 
called anchor-based localization (as opposed to anchor-free 
localization). Generally, the localization approaches can be 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

classified into main categories: range-based methods ( Fine-
grained) and range-free methods (Coarse-grained). They 
differ in the information used for localization. Range-based 
methods use range measurements, while range-free 
techniques only use the content of the messages. 
The range-based localization principle is to accurately 
measure the range information (the distance or the angle) 
between two nodes on a network. Several technologies 
allow this measure, we have: the Received Signal Strength 
Indicator (RSSI) [10], the Time of arrival (TOA) [11], Time 
Difference of Arrival (TDOA) [12] or Angle of Arrival 
(AOA) [13]. After this measurement, the position can then 
be obtained simply by triangulation or trilateration 
approaches. The range-based location has two major 
drawbacks. The first is related to the additional hardware 
required 
for 
the 
measurement. 
These 
hardware 
measurements consume more energy and increase the cost 
of the solution. Second, the accuracy of the measurements 
can vary several parameters related to the network 
environment: the humidity, electromagnetic noise, etc. 
In contrast, the range-free location avoids these two 
great disadvantages. Generally, these range-free localization 
techniques don’t rely on distance/angle estimates. They just 
use connectivity information between nodes. Here, the 
connectivity information of a node N can be its hop counts 
to other nodes. The connectivity is used as an indication of 
how close this node N to other nodes. Since no ranging 
information is needed, the range-free scheme can be 
implemented on low-cost wireless sensor networks. Another 
advantage of range-free scheme is its robustness; the 
connectivity information between nodes is not easily 
affected by the environment. 
Another classification is based on the manner the 
localization is organized. We distinguish: 
Centralized localization algorithm runs on a base station 
and it requires it to gain the measurement data from all the 
participating nodes. Base station determines the location of 
each node by the collected measurement data and 
transporting them into network. The distributed localization 
algorithm is such that all the computations are done by the 
sensor nodes themselves and the nodes communicate 
amongst themselves with one-hop or multi-hops neighbor 
nodes to get their positions in the network [14]. 
III. STATE OFART 
In this section, we try to depict a not exhaustive 
overview of these works proposed in literature. So, five 
classes are planned to have an attractive description of these 
methods. 
A. Class 1: Geometric techniques 
1) Trilateration 
Trilateration [15] is the most basic and intuitive method 
to determine the positions of the sensors. The basic principle 
of this algorithm is to estimate the location of the node (in 
2D plane) by acquiring three beacons (anchors) with known 
locations and their distances from the node to be localized. 
The type of the signal indicator used to estimate the beacons 
distance is in several cases the RSSI. The evaluated of 
distances from anchors to the normal node are called the 
radiuses of these circles centered at each anchor. The 
intersection of these three circles is the positions of the 
unknown node. 
Figure 1. Trilateration localization method. 
2) Multilateration 
The multilateration [16] has the same principle as the 
trilateration, by using more than three reference points 
(anchors). Also, when more than three anchors are used, an 
over determined system of equations results. By solving 
this linear system, the measurements' error is minimized, 
thus producing better results than trilateration in the 
presence of inaccurate distance estimates. 
 
Figure 2. Local multilateration. 
As it is shown in Figure 2, measuring the distances to the 
reference points, the unknown node can determine its 
position as the intersection of these circles. 
3) Triangulation 
In this approach [13], information about angles (using 
AoA) is used instead of distances. Position computation can 
be done remotely (Figure 3 (a)) or by the node itself (auto- 
localization); the latter is more common in WSN. In this last 
case, depicted in (Figure 3 (b)) at least three reference nodes 
are required. The unknown node estimates its angle to each 
of the three reference nodes and, based on these angles and 
the positions of the reference nodes (which form a triangle), 
computes its own position using simple trigonometrically 
relationships. 
 
Figure 3. Illustration of triangulation method. 
B. Class 2: Multidimensional techniques 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

1) Multidimensional Scaling(MDS) 
In this class, we have multidimensional Scaling (MDS) 
[17], which is a technique that has taken its origins in 
psychometrics and psychophysics. It is used for visualizing 
dissimilarity data. In literature, a number of localization 
techniques have been reported which use MDS. These 
techniques are energy efficient as communication among 
different nodes is required only initially for obtaining the 
inter-node distances of the network [18]. 
After the calculation of the distance between all pair of 
nodes, Torgerson [17] tries to construct distance matrix for 
MDS: DN,N=[dij].We seek the positions of points in a 
Euclidian space   with dimension m. Rm.  Let   be the vector 
Xi =  (xi1…xim) T representing the position of the point i. We 
can represent all the positions by a matrix XN, m= (x1… xN) 
T. Thus, given the matrix D, the purpose of MDS is to find 
the matrix X. For the mathematical details of MDS see [17] 
and [19]. 
2) MDS-MAP(C) 
Shang et al. [20] presented a centralized algorithm based 
on classical MDS, namely, MDS-MAP(C). This method has 
four stages: 
 Step 1: Gather ranging data from the network, and 
form a sparse matrix R, where Rij is the range 
between nodes i and j. 
 Step 2: Run a standard all pairs shortest path 
algorithm (like Dijkstra’s) on R to produce a 
complete matrix of inter-node distances D. 
 Step 3: Run classical MDS on D to find estimated 
node positions X. 
 Step 4: Transform the solution X into global 
coordinates using some number of anchor nodes. 
3) MDS-MAP(P) 
MDS-MAP (P) [20] is more complicated than MDS- 
MAP(C) because it builds for each node a local map of the 
small sub-network in the node’s vicinity and then merges 
(patches) the local maps together to form a global map. 
More exactly, the procedure of this method is shown below 
[21]: 
 
Step 1: Divide a wireless sensor network into 
several clusters; the method of dividing the cluster 
is k-hop clustering. 
 
Step 2: Use traditional MDS-MAP algorithm to 
build the location map of each cluster which is 
produced in step1. 
 
Step 3: Merge (patch) the location map of each 
cluster together to form a global location map. 
Finally, in this class, we can cite Curvilinear Component 
Analysis (CCA-MAP) [22], which is similar to MDS-MAP, 
but it is better than MDS-MAP because it is more effective 
and it performs very well for stationary WSNs. As a starting 
map, the local map of a randomly selected node is used. 
After that, the neighbor node whose local map shares the 
most nodes with the current map is selected to merge its 
local map into the current map. 
C. Class 3: Area-Based techniques 
1) Approximate Point In Triangulation(APIT) 
A well-known example of an area-based localization 
technique is APIT [23]. The key procedure in this 
approach is the Point in Triangulation (PIT) test, which 
allows a node to determine these triangles. In this test, 
once a node has determined the locations of a set of 
reference nodes, it tests whether it resides within or outside 
of each triangle formed by each set of three reference 
nodes. 
Once the PIT test completes, a position estimate can be 
computed as the center of gravity of the intersection of all 
triangles in which the normal node resides in [24]. 
 
Figure 4. APIT location method. 
2) Bounding Box (BB) 
The bounding box method is proposed in [25]. The 
principle of this approach is shown in Figure 5. For each 
reference node i, a bounding box is defined as a square 
with its center at the position of this node (xi, yi), with 
sides of size 2di (where d is the estimated distance). The 
intersection of all bounding boxes gives the possible 
positions of the node to be localized. The final position of 
the unknown node is then computed as the center of 
gravity of the obtained rectangle. 
 
Figure 5. Bounding box location method. 
3) Centroid 
Centroid algorithm is first proposed in [2]. The basic 
principle of this algorithm is to consider the centroid point 
of neighbor anchors as the estimated position of the normal 
node Nx. More exactly, the anchors periodically broadcast 
their position; Nx then receives the position of anchors and 
compute its position. The scenario is shown in Figure 6. In 
the network, there is a total of m anchors A1, A2 ... Am. 
All these anchors have the same communication range 
denoted as R. Their transmission areas have an overlap. 
Inside this overlap, the normal node Nx is located. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
Figure 6. Centroid algorithm. 
 
4) Convex Position Estimation(CPE) 
The CPE [26] is very simple algorithm, but it requires 
that the normal nodes have at least three neighboring 
anchors. The authors of this algorithm first provide an 
optimization concept, and then the locations of normal 
nodes in a WSN are found as a result of an optimization 
problem. To illustrate the principle of this algorithm, 
consider the case shown in Figure 7, where the three anchors 
A1, A2, A3 have the same communication range. The 
normal node Nx locates inside the overlap of anchors radio 
transmission. The challenge of CPE algorithm is to find the 
smallest rectangle (in Figure 7) that bounds the overlap, and 
then to take the center of this rectangle as the estimated 
position of Nx. Now, the problem is how to find the smallest 
rectangle. A solution of this problem is detailed in [26]. 
 
Figure 7. Principe of CPE algorithm. 
5) Simplified CPE 
The original CPE algorithm is not very flexible because 
it is centralized. So, a simplified and distributed version of 
CPE algorithm has been proposed in [27]. This algorithm 
defines an Estimated Rectangle (ER), which limits the 
overlap zone ranges A1, A2 ... Am. As shown in Figure 8, 
the centre point of ER denoted as NER is the estimated 
position of Nx by this algorithm. 
 
Figure 8. Principe of Simplified CPE algorithm. 
6) AT-Family: family of distributed approximation 
techniques 
In [28], a family of three distributed approximation 
techniques (called AT-Family) is presented for the 
localization problem in static WSN while taking capabilities 
of sensors into account. These three methods are: AT-Free, 
AT-Dist and AT Angle. They consider respectively the 
cases where: sensors have no capability or they can calculate 
distances with their neighbors or angles [28]. 
D. Class 4: General Techniques 
1) Probabilistic approach 
The uncertainty in distance estimations has motivated 
the appearance of probabilistic approaches for computing a 
node’s position. In these approaches, the result of 
calculation of the position is not a single point, but a set of 
points with their probability to be the real position of the 
node to be localized. An example of a probabilistic 
approach is proposed in [29]. 
2) GPS-Less 
GPS-Less [2] is very simple algorithm. It considers 
several nodes in the network with overlapping regions of 
coverage serve as reference points, that form a regular 
mesh and transmit periodic beacon signals (period = t) 
containing their respective positions. In this approach, it is 
assumed that neighboring reference points can be 
synchronized so that their beacon signal transmissions do 
not overlap in time. Furthermore, in any time interval t, 
each of the reference points would have transmitted 
exactly one beacon signal. A node which wants to be 
localized listens for a fixed time period t and collects all 
beacon signals that it receives from various reference 
points. The authors characterize the information per 
reference points by connectivity metric (CMi). From the 
beacon signals that it receives, the receiver node infers 
proximity to a collection of reference points for which the 
respective connectivity metrics exceed a certain threshold, 
CMthresh (say 90%). The receiver localizes itself to the 
region which coincides to the intersection of the 
connectivity regions of this set of reference points, which 
is defined by the centroid of these reference points. 
3) GPS-Free 
The GPS-Free algorithm, which is used in mobile Ad 
Hoc networks without GPS receivers or fixed anchor 
nodes, was proposed first in [30]. In [31], the authors 
present a GPS-free localization scheme for node 
localization in WSN called the Matrix transform-based 
Self Positioning Algorithm (MSPA), where the task is to 
use the distance information (using for example TOA) 
between nodes to determine the coordinates of static nodes. 
Similar to other relative localization algorithms, the 
coordinate establishment phase of MSPA is split into two 
phases: the establishment of local coordinates at a subset of 
the nodes (called master nodes) and the convergence of the 
individual coordinate systems to form a global coordinate 
system [31]. 
4) Ad Hoc Positioning System(APS) 
As an example of a hop count based localization 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

technique, the Ad hoc Positioning System [32] provides a 
distributed   connectivity-based   localization   approach 
that estimates node locations using a set of at least three 
reference nodes. APS is a hybrid between two major 
concepts: distance vector (DV) routing and beacon based 
positioning (GPS). What makes it similar to DV routing is 
the fact that information is forwarded in a hop by hop 
fashion. What makes it similar to GPS is that eventually 
each node estimates its own position, based on the anchors 
readings it gets. In APS approach, a reduced number of 
reference nodes is deployed with the unknown nodes. 
Then, each node estimates its distance to the beacon nodes 
in a multi-hop way. Once these distances are estimated, the 
nodes can compute their positions using multilateration or 
trilateration. Three methods of hop by hop distance 
propagation are proposed: DV-Hop, DV-Distance, and 
Euclidean distance. These propagation methods are 
described in detail in [32]. 
IV. SUMMARY OF LOCALIZATION 
TECHNIQUES 
A set of the most used methods dealing with the 
positioning problem in wireless sensor networks was 
summarized. It should be noted that this presentation is not 
exhaustive. The choice of the method of the position 
estimation influences the final performance of the 
localization system. Finally, according to some proposed 
criteria, our contribution is to give a synthesis and 
classification of the different techniques reviewed in this 
paper which is done in Table1. 
As we saw previously, the localization in sensor 
networks is essential for many sensing applications and 
network management activities. This paper provided a 
survey of different localization techniques in WSN, 
including 
geometric 
techniques, 
multidimensional 
techniques, area-based techniques and general techniques. 
For many of these techniques, it is required that there are 
sufficient reference nodes and that those nodes are evenly 
distributed throughout the network. While the accuracy 
obtained by range-free localization techniques is typically 
lower than the accuracy of range-based techniques, a main 
advantage of range-free localization is that typically no 
additional hardware is needed and localization can 
therefore be performed at a lower cost. Also, the 
comparison of a variety of centralized and distributed 
localization techniques has been presented. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTUREWORK 
Localization of sensor nodes is crucial in Wireless 
Sensor Network due to its various applications like 
surveillance, tracking, navigation, etc. Various techniques 
for localization have been proposed in literature by different 
researchers. In this paper, we present a survey localization of 
nodes in wireless sensor network. This survey is useful to 
have a global view of localization methods and to allow 
 
TABLE I.      SUMMARY OF LOCALIZATIONTECHNIQUES. 
 
Class 
Method 
Range-free 
Range-based 
Anchor-free 
Anchor-based 
Centralized 
Distributed 
 
Geometric 
Trilateration 
 

 

 

Multilateration 
 
 
(TDOA)  

 

Triangulation 
 
 
(AOA) 
 

 

 
Multidimensional 
MDS(MDS-MAP(c)) 

 

 

 
MDS-MAP(p) 

 

 
 

CCA-MAP 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Area-based 
 
CPE 
CPE 
original 

 
 


 
simplified 
CPE 

 
 

 

Centroid 

 
 

 

BoundingBox 
 

 

 

APIT 

 
 

 

 
AT- 
Family 
AT-Free 

 
 

 

AT-Dist 
 
 
(SumDist)  

 

AT-Angle  

 

 

 
 
General 
Probabilisticapproach  
 
(RSSI) 
 

 

GPS-Less 

 
 

 

GPS-Free 
 


 
 

APS 
 

 

 

55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

knowing which algorithm is better with regard of the 
utilization context. 
In the future, we want to continue our work in the 
direction of improvement of the precision of positioning. 
We will be interested in the family of localization 
Geometric. More exactly, we propose a combination of 
multilateration and trilateration algorithms by using the 
technology of measure of distance RSSI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Gui, “Improvement of range-free localization systems in wireless 
sensor networks,” Doctoral dissertation, Toulouse, INSA, 2013. 
[2] 
N. Bulusu, J. Heidemann, and D. Estrin, “GPS-less low cost outdoor 
localization for very small devices,” Personal Communications, 
IEEE, vol.7, no.5, 2000, pp.28–34. 
[3] 
B. Hofmann-Wellenhof, H. Lichtenegger, and J. Collins, “Global 
positioning system: theory and practice,” GPS-Global Positioning 
System. Theory and Practice, by Hofmann-Wellenhof, B.; 
Lichtenegger, H.; Collins, J.. Springer, Wien (Austria), 1997, XXIII+ 
389 p., ISBN 3-211-82839-7, Price DM 86.00.  vol.1, 1997. 
[4] 
Y. D. Lee and W. Y. Chung, “Wireless sensor network based 
wearable smart shirt for ubiquitous health and activity monitoring”, 
Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 140, no. 2, 2009, pp. 390–
395. 
[5] 
S. Basagni and al, “A distance routing effect algorithm for mobility 
(DREAM),” In: Proceedings of the 4th annual ACM/IEEE 
international conference on Mobile computing and networking. 
ACM, 1998, pp.76–84. 
[6] 
B. Karp and H. T.  Kung, “GPSR: greedy perimeter stateless routing 
for wireless networks,” In Proceedings of the 6th annual international 
conference on Mobile computing and networking, ACM, 2000, pp. 
243–254. 
[7] 
K. Alzoubi and al, “Geometric spanners for wireless ad hoc 
networks,” Parallel and Distributed Systems, IEEE Transactionson, 
vol.14, no.4, 2003, pp.408–421. 
[8] 
 N. Li and J. C. Hou, “Localized topology control algorithms for 
heterogeneous wireless Networks,”IEEE/ACM Transactions on 
Networking (TON), vol.13, no.6, 2005, pp.1313–1324. 
[9] 
Y. C. Hu, A. Perrig, and D. B. Johnson, “Packet leashes: a defense 
against wormhole attacks in wireless networks,” In: INFOCOM 
2003. Twenty-Second Annual Joint Conferences of the IEEE 
Computer and Communications. IEEE Societies, vol. 3, 2003, pp. 
1976– 1986, IEEE. 
[10] S. Wang, J. Yin, Z. Cai, and G. Zhang, “A RSSI-based self- 
localization algorithm for wireless sensor networks,”Journal of 
Computer Research and Development, 2008, pp. 385–388. 
[11] M. Guerriero, S. Marano, V. Matta, and P. Willett, “Some aspects of 
DOA estimation using a network of blind sensors,” Signal 
Processing,vol.88,no.11,2008, pp.2640–2650. 
[12] H. L. Chen, H. B. Li, and Z. Wang, “Research on TDoA-based 
secure localization for wireless sensor networks,”Journal on 
Communications, vol.29, no.8, 2008, pp.11–21. 
[13] D. Niculescu and B.Nath, “Ad hoc positioning system (APS) using 
AOA,” Twenty-Second Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE 
Computer and Communications. IEEE Societies. IEEE, vol. 3, 2003, 
pp. 1734–1743. 
[14] B. Gautam and T. C. Aseri, “Localization techniques for mobile 
wireless sensor networks,” International Journal of Software and 
Web Sciences (IJSWS), vol. 4, no. 2, 2013, pp. 84–88. 
[15] O. S. Oguejiofor, A. N. Aniedu, H. C. Ejiofor, and A. U. Okolibe, 
“Trilateration based localization algorithm for wireless sensor 
network,”In 
International 
Journal 
of 
Science 
and 
Modern 
Engineering (IJISME), vol. 1, September2013, pp. 21–27. 
[16] F. Santos, “Localization in wireless sensor networks,” ACM Journal 
Name, vol. 5, 2008, pp. 1–19. 
[17] W. S. Torgerson, “Multidimensional scaling: theory and method,” 
Psychometrika, vol. 17, no.4, 1952, pp. 400–420. 
[18] S. Patil and M. Zaveri, “MDS and trilateration based localization in 
wireless sensor network,” Wireless Sensor Network, vol.3, no. 6, 
2011, pp. 198–208. 
[19] J. Bachrach and C. Taylor, “Localization in sensor networks,” 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge, MA 02139, 2010. 
[20] Y.  Shang and W. Ruml, “Improved MDS-based localization,” In 
INFOCOM2004, twenty-third annual joint conference of the IEEE 
computer and communications societies, Hong Kong, China, 2004, 
pp. 2640–2651. 
[21] K. Xu, Y. Liu, C. Xu, and K. Xu, “A cluster-based and range- free 
multidimensional scaling-MAP localization scheme in wsn,” In 
Computer 
Engineering 
and 
Networking, 
Springer 
InternationalPublishing, 2014, pp.1253–1262. 
[22] J. Herault and P. Demartines, “Curvilinear component analysis: a 
self-organizing 
neural 
network,” 
Neural 
Networks, 
IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 1, 1997, pp 148–155. 
[23] T. He, B. M. Blum, C. Huang, J. A. Stankovic, and T. Abdelzaher, 
“Range-free localization schemes for large scale sensor networks,” 
In Proceedings of the 9th Annual International Conference on 
Mobile  Computing  and  Networking  (MobiCom),  San Diego, 
CA,2003, pp. 81–95. 
[24] W. Tie-zhou, Z. Yi-shi, Z. Hui-jun, and L. Biao, “Wireless Sensor 
Network Node Location Based on Improved APIT,” In Journal of 
SurveyingandMappingEngineering,vol.1, 2013, pp.15–19. 
[25] S. Simic and S. Sastry, “Distributed localization in wireless ad hoc 
networks,” Technical Report UCB/ERL, vol. 2, 2002. 
[26] L. Doherty, K. S. J. Pister, and L. Elghaoui, “Convex position 
estimation in wireless sensor networks,” In INFOCOM 2001, 
Twentieth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and 
Communications Societies, Proceedings. IEEE. IEEE, 2001, pp. 
1655– 1663. 
[27] J. P. Sheu, J. M. Li, and C. S. Hsu, “A distributed location estimating 
algorithm for wireless sensor networks,” In Sensor Networks, 
Ubiquitous, and Trustworthy Computing, 2006, IEEE International 
Conference on vol. 1, 2006, pp. 8–pp, IEEE. 
[28] C. Saad, A. Benslimane, and J. C.  König, “AT-Family: distributed 
methods for localization in sensor networks,” May 2007. pp. 1–32. 
[29] V. Ramadurai and M. L. Sichitiu, “Localization in wireless sensor 
networks: a probabilistic approach,”In International conference on 
wireless networks, 2003, pp. 275–281. 
[30] S. Capkun, M. Hamdi, and J. P. Hubaux, “GPS-free positioning in 
mobile ad hoc networks,” Cluster Computing, vol. 5, no 2, 2002, pp. 
157–167. 
[31] L. Wang and Q. Xu, “GPS-free localization algorithm for wireless 
sensor networks,” Sensors, vol.  10, no 6, 2010, pp. 5899–5926. 
[32] D. Niculescu and B. Nath, “Ad hoc positioning system (APS),” In 
Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001. GLOBECOM'01. 
IEEE, vol. 5, 2001, pp. 2926–2931, IEEE. 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

