An Experimental Study of RFID Adoption for Maritime Activities
Yasuhiro Sato, Akira Nishikiyama, Kohei Shimada, and Yoshinori Matsuura
Japan Coast Guard Academy,
Email: {sato, shimada.k, matsuura}@jcga.ac.jp, g12nishikiyama@mitsuishi.ne.jp
Abstract—Recently, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID)
system is adopted to identify various objects in our real life.
Key advantages of RFID system are to identify objects without
physical contact, and to write arbitrary information into the
tags. We believe that these advantages can improve safety and
efﬁciency of maritime activities. However, RFID adoption of
maritime activities has not been considered in previous works.
It is not cleared whether a generic RFID system can be adopted
for maritime activities because the system is assumed to use in a
stable environment such as indoors. In this paper, we investigate
the feasibility of adoption of a generic RFID system for maritime
activities. For our motivation, we evaluate the performance of
RFID system on the sea by measuring Receive Signal Strength
Indicator (RSSI) of RFID system between ships.
Index Terms—Radiofrequency identiﬁcation; RFID tags; Ma-
rine safety; Marine accidents.
I. INTRODUCTION
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) system is adopted
to identify objects such as passengers in public transportation
system [1], products in stock management [2] and vehicles
in container terminals [3]. Generic RFID system consists
of three functional components, which are RFID tag, RFID
reader and data processor. In contrast to 2-dimentional bar-
codes such as matrix codes, RFID system uses wireless radio
waves to identify objects without physical contact or line
of sight between readers and tags. A RFID tag can store
some of arbitrary information including the ID information.
Each object can be uniquely identiﬁed by attaching a distinct
tag, and multiple tags can be read at the same time. RFID
tag is mainly categorized into two types; active and passive.
The passive type tags do not need the electric power to
operate and are comparatively cheaper than the active type. In
contrast, the active type tags have longer communication range
than the passive ones. In [4], authors considered an efﬁcient
container management by using a generic RFID technology
with passive-type tags. Moreover, authors in [5] proposed a
ﬁsher boat tracking system by combination of RFID system
and Global Positioning System (GPS).
These advantages of RFID system mentioned above may
improve maritime safety and efﬁciency of maritime activities.
For example, there are lots of aquafarming rafts in maritime
area, and these rafts are managed by ﬁsheries cooperative
associations. Generally, the holder information of a raft is
displayed on a physical label attached directly on each raft.
To investigate the holder of the raft, we need to transfer from
a ship to the raft on the sea. If the label can be replaced by a
RFID tag, we can obtain the holder information from a ship
that is away from the label without transferring to the raft.
This system can apply not only to aquafarming rafts but also
ships, and can decrease the opportunities to transfer to rafts
or ships. As a result, accidents on the sea can be reduced.
Furthermore, RFID system can be applied to investigation of
ﬂotsams. Since the introduction cost of passive-type RFID tag
is comparatively low, we can manage many ﬂotsams uniquely
and continuously by attaching a passive-type tag to each
ﬂotsam even if there are a number of objects that should be
managed. In particular, a massive number of ﬂotsams were
generated by the Great East Japan Earthquake, which occurred
in March 11th, 2011. A lot of rescue teams, including the
Coast Guard ofﬁcers, the Self-Defense Forces and volunteers,
have searched the ﬂotsams to ﬁnd survivors. However, the
ﬂotsams generated by the earthquake are too many to search
efﬁciently, and the same ﬂotsam has been checked many times
by different rescue teams. If we attach a RFID tag, in which
the search information is stored, to ﬂotsam already checked,
the efﬁciency of search may be improved.
However, RFID adoption of maritime scenes and activities
has not been considered in previous works. It is not cleared
whether a generic RFID system can be adopted for maritime
activities because the system is assumed to use in a stable
environment. In this paper, we investigate the feasibility of
adoption of generic RFID system for maritime activities. For
our motivation, we evaluate the performance of RFID system
on the sea by measuring Received Signal Strength Indicator
(RSSI) of RFID system between ships or boats.
The paper is organized as follows: The details of our
experiment and measurement settings are shown in Section II.
The results of our experiment are denoted in Section III.
Finally, we conclude this paper in Section IV.
II. OVERVIEW OF OUR EXPERIMENT
Here, we describe the RFID system we adopted in this
experiment, and show how we measure the RSSI to evaluate
the availability of RFID system.
A. RFID system
We use a generic RFID system so that a lot of people
can adopt the system easily. Our reader/writer device is
MITSUBISHI RF-RW311, and the antenna is MITSUBISHI
RF-ATCP012. The device and the antenna are connecting
via a coaxial cable. The speciﬁcations of these devices are
shown in Table I. We can obtain the value of RSSI from the
laptop connected to the reader. We prepare two passive tags
to measure RSSI from the antenna; Omni-ID Ultra and AD-
380iL. Omni-ID tag has long read ranges of up to 35 m, and
AD-380iL is a label-type tag with ranges of up to 5 m that
can attach on various materials such as ID cards.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

TABLE I: SPECIFICATIONS OF RFID TAGS
(a) Omni-ID Ultra
Frequency
860 ∼ 960 MHz
IC
Alien Higgs H3
Standards
EPC C1 G2
Dimensions
210 mm × 110 mm
(b) AD-380iL
Frequency
860 ∼ 960 MHz
IC
NXP UCODE G2iL
Standards
EPC C1 G2
Dimensions
50 mm × 30 mm
2.0m
2.4m
Antenna
Antenna
Tag
Distance d
Floor
Ceiling
(1m ~ )
Floor
Ceiling
Fig. 1: Measurement environment in indoor corridor
B. Measurement environment
To establish a measurement system for experiments on
the sea, we measured RSSI of RFID system tentatively in
three cases; indoor open space, indoor corridor, and outdoor
open space. As an example of our measurement environment,
Figure 1 shows the measurement environment in the indoor
corridor. We measure RSSI between the antenna and the tag
with changing the distance to show the availability of RFID
system. In addition to the value of RSSI, we also check
whether the tag can be identiﬁed correctly in each distance.
To clarify impacts of the distance and environmental factors
on performance of RFID system, we mainly focused on the
value of RSSI in this paper. We plan to take these systems
on board, and measure RSSI between the antenna and the tag
that placed on another ship on the sea.
III. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Our RFID system can identify the tag until the value of
RSSI is −63 dBm. Figure 2 shows the variations of RSSI
measured in each environment. The horizontal axes are the
distance d between the antenna and the tag, the vertical ones
are the value of RSSI. As seen in Figures 2a and 2c, the
values of RSSI decrease in a monotone manner. By using
Omni-ID tag, we can obtain the tag ID up to 28 m at indoor
open space, 24 m at outdoor open space. In case of AD-380iL,
the maximum distance at indoor open space is 10 m, and the
one at outdoor is 4 m. Moreover, the result in indoor corridor
shows that Omni-ID tag has longer ranges of up to 60 m.
We consider that this is caused by the reﬂected wave from
the ceiling, the wall, and the ﬂoor because the corridor is a
closed space shown in Figure 1. Our preliminary results show
that the performance of RFID system is obviously affected
from the surrounding environment. Thus, we should perform
measurement experiments on the sea.
IV. CONCLUSION
We have performed some experiments of measuring RSSI of
a generic RFID system in indoors and outdoors on the ground.
As a result, the performance of RFID system is obviously
affected from the surrounding environment. Now, we plan to
perform measurement experiments on the sea in near future.
-65
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40
-35
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
RSSI [dBm]
Distance [m]
Omni-ID Ultra
AD-380iL
(a) Indoor open space
-64
-62
-60
-58
-56
-54
-52
-50
-48
-46
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
RSSI [dBm]
Distance [m]
Omni-ID Ultra
AD-380iL
(b) Indoor corridor
-65
-60
-55
-50
-45
-40
-35
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
RSSI [dBm]
Distance [m]
Omni-ID Ultra
AD-380iL
(c) Outdoor open space
Fig. 2: Variation of RSSI
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant-in-Aid
for Challenging Exploratory Research Number 15K12479.
REFERENCES
[1] M. hasan, G. Tangim, M. Islam, M. Khandokar, and A. Alam, “RFID-
based ticketing for public transport system: Perspective megacity dhaka,”
in Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International Conference on Computer
Science and Information Technology (ICCSIT 2010), Chengdu, China,
July 2010, pp. 459–462.
[2] A. Bratukhin and A. Treytl, “Applicability of RFID and agent-based con-
trol for product identiﬁcation in distributed production,” in Proceedings
of IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory
Automation (ETFA 2006), Prague, Czech Republic, September 2006, pp.
1198–1205.
[3] S. Ting, L. Wang, and W. Ip, “A study of RFID adoption for vehicle
tracking in a container treminal,” vol. 5, no. 1, 2012, pp. 22–52.
[4] L. Hu, X. Shi, S. Voß, and W. Zhang, “Application of RFID technology
at the entrance gate of container terminals,” in Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Computational Logistics (ICCL 2011),
Hamburg, Germany, September 2011, pp. 209–220.
[5] H. Durani, N. Bhatt, and H. Mehta, “RFID and GPS combination
approach implementation in ﬁsher boart tracking system,” vol. 5, no. 2,
2014, pp. 1836–1838.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

