Enhanced Positioning Method using WLAN RSSI 
Measurements considering Dilution of Precision of AP 
Configuration 
 
Cong Zou,   A Sol Kim,   Jun Gyu Hwang,   Joon Goo Park 
Graduate School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
Kyungpook National University 
Daegu, Republic of Korea  
Email: {zoucongmm@naver.com, asoli@hanmail.net, cjstk891015@naver.com, jgpark@ee.knu.ac.kr}
Abstract–With the development of mobile internet, 
requirements of positioning accuracy for the LBS 
(Location Based Service) are becoming more and more 
higher. The LBS is based on the position of each mobile 
device. So, it requires a proper acquisition of accurate 
user’s 
indoor 
position. 
Thus, 
indoor 
positioning 
technology and its accuracy is crucial for various LBS 
(Location Based Service). In general, RSSI (Received 
Signal Strength Indicator) measurements are used to 
obtain the position information of mobile unit under 
WLAN environment. However, indoor positioning error 
increases as multiple AP's configurations are becoming 
more complex. To overcome this problem, an enhanced 
indoor localization method by AP (Access Point) selection 
criteria adopting DOP (Dilution of Precision) is proposed. 
The 
proposed 
method 
can 
raise 
the 
positioning 
performance according the status of AP distribution. 
 
    Keywords-Indoor positioning;  Wireless LAN;  RSSI;  
Dilution of  Precision (DOP). 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Positioning technology is divided into two parts, which are 
indoor positioning and outdoor positioning respectively. In 
outdoor positioning, dominant technology is existed such as 
GPS (Global Positioning System) [1], however, in indoor 
environments cannot be carried out effectively by it. In recent 
years, WLAN (Wireless Local Area Network) is widely used 
to locate in an indoor environment. 
Positioning in Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) 
based on IEEE802.11 [2] is considered. Generally, received 
signal strength indication (RSSI) is used in the WLAN 
Location Based Server (LBS) as the location information 
provider. However, positioning error usually occurs in indoor 
environment. Because the access points are set very 
concentrated and complex in indoor environment. To 
overcome this problem, in this paper, an enhanced indoor 
positioning method by access point (AP) configuration 
selection criteria adopting dilution of precision (DOP) is 
proposed. 
There are a number of existing location systems which 
utilize a variety of sensing technologies and system 
architectures. These systems have varying characteristics, 
such as accuracy, scalability, range, power consumption and 
cost. Infrared has been popularly used for containment-based 
location systems [3]. Infrared location system can suffer in 
strong sunlight an under fluorescent tube lighting as both of 
these are sources of infrared light. The method that uses RSSI 
for localization is called fingerprinting. This technique is 
based on the specific behavior of radio signals in a given 
environment, including reflections, fading and so on, rather 
than on the theoretical strength-distance relation. Cricket [4] 
is an indoor location system developed at MIT and utilizes 
Radio Frequency (RF) and ultrasound using static transmitters 
and mobile receives. The Dolphin system [5], developed at 
the University of Tokyo, utilizes Radio Frequency (RF) and 
ultrasound to create a peer-to-peer system, providing co-
ordinate based positioning. The Dolphin team has created a 
system which can propagate locations with 10-15cm of 
accuracy from four stationary reference nodes.  
There have been several studies about indoor positioning 
method adopting dilution of precision (DOP). Ziari et al. [6] 
present a mathematical approach of a new version of the 
known GPS dilution of precision and also present a model that 
allows to estimate the precision based on criteria other than 
the geometric one only. Lemelson et al. [7] has implemented 
an algorithm that computes a GPS-like DOP value based on 
the geometry of access points. In A.G. Dempster [8], 
positioning using Angle-of-arrival (AOA) and an expression 
for dilution of dilution of precision (DOP) has been derived 
for angle-of-arrival positioning systems which allows the 
quality of an Angle-of-arrival (AOA)  position to be 
determined. Indoor positioning error increases as multiple 
access point's configurations are becoming more complex. To 
overcome this problem, in this paper, we propose an indoor 
positioning method that selects the AP combination adopting 
DOP due to access point (AP) geometry. That means the 
selected access point (AP) combination not only has high 
RSSI but also has good configuration to enhanced positioning 
precision.  
The remaining paper is organized as following. In Section 
II we discuss general characteristics of DOP and RSSI  
measurements. Proposed positioning method considering 
DOP is stated in Section III. In Section IV, the result of 
experiment is described. Finally, in the Section V, we give 
conclusion of this paper.  
 
 
 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

II.  CHARACTERISTICS OF DOP AND RSSI 
   MEASUREMENTS  
A.  Dilution of Precision (DOP) 
   The effect of satellite geometry is quantified in the 
measure called Dilution of Precision, or DOP [9]. DOP does 
not depend on the anything that cannot be predicted in 
advance. It only depends on the positions of the GPS satellites 
relative to the GPS location of the receiver. The satellite 
position is known in advance, and GPS position is also fixed, 
thus the DOP of GPS system can be calculated even without 
using the GPS system.  
   How can we define the DOP is poor or good due to 
satellite geometry? When satellites are located at wide angles 
relative to each other, this configuration minimizes the error 
in position calculations. On the other hand, when satellites are 
grouped together or located in a line the geometry will be 
poor. DOP is often divided into several components which are 
listed below [10]: 
VDOP: Vertical DOP 
HDOP: Horizontal DOP 
PDOP: Positional DOP  
TDOP: Time DOP 
GDOP: Geometric DOP 
These components are used due to the variation of 
accuracy of the GPS system. The PDOP is most used among 
other components. The positioning error of PDOP is 
calculated from the data of GPS receiver multiplied by range 
error which is given as: 
Positioning Error = Range Error ∗ PDOP      (1) 
    
   A DOP of 2 means that whatever the range error were, the 
final positioning error will twice as big. For example, if the 
user estimated range error (UERE) is 20 meters and the PDOP 
is 2, the final positioning error will be 40 meters (20 x 2).  
 
B.  Computation of DOP 
As a first step of computing DOP, consider the unit 
vectors from the receiver to satellite i [11] : 
 
                  (

 ,

 ,

 )              (2) 
 
where: 
        R = (x − x) + (y − y) + (z − z)        
            x, y, z :  position of the receiver 
            xi, yi, zi : position of satellite  
 
The formula (2) in matrix form is given by: 
 
      A =
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎡






−1






−1






−1
1
1
1
−1⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎤
               (3) 
 
The first three elements of each row of A are the 
components of a unit vector form the receiver to the indicated 
satellite. The elements of the fourth row when consider the 
fourth satellite. Since the number of AP is three for indoor 
positioning, thus we assume the fourth AP at the infinite and 
set every element to 1. 
Formulate the matrix, Q, as: 
Q = (AA) =
⎣
⎢
⎢
⎢
⎡ d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d

d
 ⎦
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎤
             (4) 
From Q, the DOP can be calculated as: 
      PDOP = d + d + d                   (5) 
 
C.  RSSI Measurements 
The RSSI (Received Signal Strength Indicator) is defined 
in IEEE 802.11 standard, which is the ratio of transmitter 
power and received power present in dBm unit. The RSSI has 
the characteristic that it can decrease exponentially according 
to the increase of distance. Because of these characteristics, in 
this paper we used RSSI attenuation model and is given as 
[12]: 
 
  RSSI[dbm] = −(10n log d − A)         (6) 
         distance[m] = 10

                 (7) 
 
In (6) the parameter A is the offset which is the measured 
RSSI value at 1m point apart from AP. And the parameter n is 
the attenuation factor. This parameter reflect indoor 
propagation environment. Because the RSSI is a sensitive 
parameter, it is can affected by environment significantly. In 
Figure 1 that shows RSSI attenuation as distance. 
 
Figure 1. RSSI attenuation according to the elapsed distance. 
 
In practical situations, many factors that can affect RSSI 
value exist such as furniture, walls and person. These factors 
can produce signal scattering and multi-path effect. It also can 
result in positioning error. In order to reduce positioning error, 
proper parameter determination is necessary.  
 
 
 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
-50
-45
-40
-35
-30
-25
-20
distance(m)
RSSI(dBm)
 
 
One parameter RSSI log model
Sampled RSSI
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

III.  PROPOSED POSITIONING METHOD  
   CONSIDERING DOP 
 
First of all, we should understand the relationship of 
positioning error between RSSI measurements and DOP, 
separately. High RSSI value and low DOP can potentially 
increase the positioning accuracy. Thus, according to above 
statement, if we can select the AP combination that can 
produce RSSI value which is high and DOP value is low, then 
we can get a higher positioning accuracy. However, it is 
difficult to satisfy all conditions simultaneously. In order to 
overcome the problem, we consider the appropriate Trade-off 
between RSSI measurements and DOP. So, we should 
establish the relationship of positioning error between RSSI 
and DOP. 
   In order to get a lower positioning error, we will select the 
AP whose RSSI value size just be considered in descending 
order. As shown in Figure 2, we use wireless network card on 
notebook computer, and inSSIDer software to receive the 
RSSI from AP1, AP2, AP3, AP4, separately. We use the (5) 
to calculate the DOP for every AP. The received RSSI values 
from inSSIDer software are shown in Table 1 as follows: 
 
TABLE 1.  Received RSSI value(dBm) 
 
RSSI value 
AP1 
-51 
AP2 
-52 
AP3 
-70 
AP4 
-73 
 
   When visible access points (APs) are close together or 
located in a line , the distribution of AP is said to be weak and 
the DOP value is high, when far apart, the distribution of AP 
is strong and the DOP is low. As shown as Figure 2,  
AP1,AP2, and AP3 are located in a line, the DOP value of 
range A is high, howerver, the DOP of range B is low because 
the access points (APs) are far from each other.  
 
 
Figure 2. AP selection criteria (1). 
 
   However, there are many different configurations of 
access point (AP) combination, such as combination A of AP1, 
AP2 and AP3, combination B of AP1, AP2 and AP4 or 
combination C of AP1, AP3 and AP4 and so on. In general, if 
don't consider the DOP, the best AP selection is that every 
access point (AP) has a relative high RSSI value. The Table 1 
shows that the RSSI of AP3 is just a little greater than AP4. 
So, that we should select the combination A to locate can get 
a higher positioning precision than selecting the combination 
B. But, according to the description of DOP, we can know 
that APs are grouped together or located in a line the 
geometry will be poor and located at wide angles relative to 
each other, this configuration minimizes the error in position 
calculations. So if adopting DOP, we should select 
combination B to locate because the RSSI value of AP4 
approximate AP3 and configuration status of AP4 is better 
than AP3. Why do not select the combination C to locate? In 
Figure 2, the angle a2 is a little larger than angle a1, so the 
DOP value of AP3 is a little lower than AP2's, but the Table 1 
shows the RSSI value of AP2 is much higher than AP3's. In 
other words, the difference of DOP between AP2 and AP3 is 
not high, but the difference of RSSI value between AP2 and 
AP3 is very high. In this case, it is better that select the AP2 to 
locate. Finally, we can determine that positioning accuracy B 
is higher than A. As shown as Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. AP selection criteria (2). 
 
 Through the analysis of the positioning error, we can find 
the relationship between RSSI differences and DOP 
differences. So, we can decide the new AP combination set 
compared with that of the existing AP set which decided only 
by RSSI differences.  
   In Figure 3, because the RSSI value of AP4 approximate 
AP3, so the RSSI differences between the AP3 and AP4 are 
not high, and configuration status of AP4 is better than AP3. 
Namely, the DOP value of AP4 is lower than AP3. Say it 
again, if we select the AP which is affected by the ratio of 
RSSI differences and DOP differences, that means the AP has 
high RSSI and low DOP, then we can get a good positioning 
result. The relationship between RSSI differences and DOP 
differences can be given by: 
 
(  )
() >  > 0                (8) 
 
RSSI3, RSSI4: The RSSI of 3rd and 4th AP 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

        DOP3, DOP4: the DOP of 3rd and 4th AP 
α : Threshold value which is determined by  
            environments 
 According to (8), if the ratio of RSSI differences and DOP 
differences is greater than the threshold value which is 
determined by environments, we will select the new AP to 
compare, otherwise, using the existing AP to locate. 
 
The algorithm is shown as follows: 
 
Figure 4. The proposed positioning algorithm. 
 
 
IV.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULT 
 
We verify the result by experiment in indoor half-open 
environment. In this experiment, the threshold value α is 1.8. 
In Figure 5. (a), it shows the distribution of access points 
(APs) which are set arbitrarily and the path of mobile station 
(MS). In Figure 5. (b), it can easy find that the positioning 
error of MS1 adopting DOP is better than the positioning error 
without adopting DOP. The same situation occurs in MS2 and 
MS3. But in the adopting DOP and without adopting DOP 
case, the result is almost the same.  
In Figure. 5 (a), we can find that the access points (APs) 
around the MS1, MS2, MS3 are very concentrated. If we do 
not adopt DOP to calculate the position of MS1, MS2 and 
MS3, we certainly select the combination of AP1, AP2 and 
AP3, because the RSSI value of AP1, AP2 and AP3 are better 
than others. If we adopt DOP to calculate the position of MS1, 
MS2 and MS3, we will select the combination of AP1, AP2 
and AP5 to calculate the position of MS1, and that calculate 
the position of MS2 will select the combination of AP2, AP3 
and AP4. According to the result, if the access points are set 
very concentrated and complex in indoor environment, the 
positioning error of adopting DOP is lower than without 
adopting DOP. 
 
Figure 5. Experiment result comparison: (a) MS path and AP position     
           distribution. (b) Comparison of positioning error adopting DOP  
           and positioning error without adopting DOP. 
 
As shown as Table 2, the positioning error of proposed 
method is less than that of existing method by 9.3%. The 
existing method using RSSI attenuation model in WLAN 
environment. 
 
TABLE 2. position error experiment result (m) 
 
Existing Method 
Proposed Method 
Average  error 
1.93 
1.75 
Minimum error 
1.18 
0.96 
Maximum error 
2.50 
2.32 
 
V.  CONCLUSION 
 
This paper described a method for indoor positioning use 
the RSSI attenuation model in WLAN environment. In order 
to enhanced indoor positioning accuracy, we adopt DOP 
(Dilution of Precision). That we can analyze the ratio 
relationship between RSSI differences and DOP differences 
of each AP to select the AP combination with high RSSI and 
low DOP. That is, it can raise the positioning performance 
according the status of AP distribution. Positioning error 
usually occurs in indoor environment. Because the access 
points are set very concentrated and complex in indoor 
environment. In this paper, proposed method can raise 
accuracy in access point distribution concentrated and 
complex indoor environment. The experimental result shows 
that the positioning error of proposed method adopting DOP 
is less than that of existing method only use RSSI attenuation 
model by 9.3%.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
   This work has been supported by National GNSS 
Research Center program of Defense Acquisition Program 
Administration and Agency for Defense Development. 
 
 
 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

REFERENCES 
 
[1]   M. Wright, D. Stallings, and D. Dunn, "The effectiveness of 
global positioning system electronic navigation," SoutheastCon, 
2003. Proceedings. IEEE, pp. 62-67, 4-6 April 2003. 
[2]   IEEE Standard for Information Technology, Telecommunica-
tions and Information Exchange Between Systems, Local and 
Metropolitan Area Network. Part II: Wireless LAN Medium 
Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, 
IEEE Standard 802.11, 1999. 
[3]   http://www.ubisense.net, October 2012. 
[4]  N.B. Priyantha, A. Chakraborty, and H. Balakrishnan, "The 
cricket location-support system," In Proceedings of the 6th 
annual international conference on Mobile computing and 
networking, pp. 32-43, ACM Press, 2000. 
[5]   Y. Fukuju, M. Minami, H. Morikawa, and T. Aoyama. "Dolphin:  
     An autonomous indoor positioning system in ubiquitous 
computing environment," In IEEE Workshop on Software 
Technologies for Future Embedded System (WSTFES2003), pp. 
53-56, Hakodate, Japan, May 2003. 
[6]  S. Zirari, P. Canalda, and F. Spies, "Geometric and Singal 
Strength 
Dilution 
of 
Precision 
(DOP) 
Wi-Fi," 
IJCSI 
International Journal of Coputer Science Issues, Vol. 3, pp. 35-
44, 2009. 
[7]   H. Lemelson, M. B. Kjargaard, R Hansen, and T. King, "Error 
Estimation for Indoor 802.11 Location Fingerprinting," LoCA 
'09 Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Location 
and Context Awareness, pp. 138-155, 7-8 May 2009. 
[8]   A.G. Dempster, "Dilution of precision in angle-of-arrival     
  positioning systems"Electronics Letters 2nd March 2006 Vol.   
  42 No. 5, Electronic Letters online no.: 20064410, pp. 291-292. 
[9]   Frederic G. Snider, R.P.G, "GPS: Theroy, Practice and   
  Applications," http://www.pdhcenter.com, PDH Course L116,    
  October, 2012.  
[10]  http://gpsinformation.net/main/dopnontech.htm, October 2012. 
[11]  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dilution_of_precision_(GPS),  
  October 2012. 
[12]  S. Park, D. Park, A. S. Kim, J. Park, S. Kim, C. Lim, and J. G.   
  Park, "A Study on enhanced indoor localization method    
  through IEEE 802.11 signal strength measurement" KSII The  
  second International Conference on Internet (ICONI) 2010, pp.  
  761- 765, December 2010. 
 
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

