Intelligence-based Routing for Smarter and Enhanced                            
Opportunistic Network Operations 
 
Bassem Mokhtar 
Department of Electrical Engineering  
Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University  
Alexandria, Egypt 
bmokhtar@alexu.edu.eg 
Mostafa Mokhtar 
Department of Computer Science Engineering  
Faculty of Engineering, Alexandria University  
Alexandria, Egypt 
mustafa.moukhtar@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— Opportunistic networking architecture supports 
mobile cloud computing technology for provisioning huge 
dynamic resource demands by the ever-growing and 
continually-evolved Internet. Opportunistic networks are 
highly dynamic networking environments where there are 
no static routes and known infrastructure for having 
consistent end-to-end communication. Additionally, great 
challenges exist in establishing efficient routes due to 
mobility features of communicating nodes. Many routing 
schemes have been proposed in order to optimize quality of 
service (QoS) of such networks. In this paper, we present 
intelligence-based routing approach for opportunistic 
networks via developing application-level reasoning models 
for learning patterns of data traffic and extracting data 
semantics. Those semantics, continuously updated, are 
multi-operation-domain-related 
highly-abstracted 
infor-
mation which aid routing nodes in knowing/expecting 
locations of more reliable and possible next hop nodes. 
Hidden Markov models and Fuzzy logic are adopted for 
designing semantics reasoning models and they are 
implemented over a set of routing nodes in a simulation 
scenario. Evaluation results show that integrating our 
proposed intelligence approach with two existing routing 
protocols leads to higher data delivery and minimized 
communication overhead ratio with good level of latency 
compared with protocols operation without intelligence. 
Keywords- 
Opportunistic 
Networks; 
Semantic-driven 
Operation; Routing Protocol; Context Awareness; Network 
Semantic, Information Management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Opportunistic 
networks 
enable 
networking 
and 
communication infrastructure for supporting the mobile 
cloud computing technology, which is emerged due to the 
proliferation and diversity of mobile smart Internet-
enabled entities (e.g., smartphones) [1]. This evolving 
computation technology allows mobile Internet users to 
allocate, share and exploit available resources provisioning 
dynamic QoS requirements of various running Internet 
applications and services. Since opportunistic networks are 
highly dynamic challenged mobile ad hoc networks with 
intermittent connectivity [2], mobile communicating nodes 
meet great challenges in finding next hop nods and routing 
data with constant link performance in order to accomplish 
interesting 
applications 
and 
services. 
In 
addition, 
opportunistic networks are considered as sub-class of 
delay tolerant networks where end-to-end delay varies [2] 
[3]. 
Consequently, 
delay 
sensitive 
services 
and 
applications with specific QoS requirements encounter 
difficulties in running them at such opportunistic 
networking environments.  
Communicating nodes in opportunistic networks can 
play different roles (e.g., end system host and router). Such 
networks are a type of packet switching network 
architecture 
with 
store-and-forward 
technology 
for 
transferring data packets amongst nodes. For enhancing 
network scalability, data routing and delivery ratio, 
opportunistic network infrastructure is divided into areas 
where each area comprises group of nodes where some of 
them can play routing roles. Routing nodes might have 
powerful resources compared with other nodes located at 
the same group in order to be able to direct efficiently and 
successfully data to their interesting destinations. 
Routing and data forwarding issues occupy a 
prominent position in the interesting research issues 
related to opportunistic networks [3]. Developing efficient 
routing protocols for such networks can aid, to a large 
extent, in enhancing QoS and allowing wide scope of 
applications to be run over these networks. In literature, 
there are various routing scheme classes that have been 
proposed for opportunistic networks [4]. Routing in such 
networks depends on finding suitable paths and/or 
potential next hop nodes for forwarding data packets since 
there are no dedicated paths. Some presented routing 
protocols (flooding-based routing) rely on generating 
many data packet copies and sending them over the 
network to increase the probability of data delivery [5]. 
This scheme leads to high data overhead and latency in 
networks.  Other trials aimed at developing routing 
schemes 
(prediction-based 
routing) 
with 
minimum 
overhead via estimating behavior of surrounding nodes in 
order to forward data packets to certain set of nodes with 
high existence probability [6].  
In this paper, we provide intelligence-based routing 
approach for opportunistic networks. The proposed 
approach depends on developing semantics reasoning 
models using monolithic intelligence techniques. Those 
models are implemented on and distributed over powerful 
network nodes with routing roles for learning patterns of 
data traffic and reasoning about highly abstracted 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
Figure 1.  The proposed intelligence-based routing scheme 
information, or semantics. Those semantics are related to 
various operation domains such as application- and 
resource-directed issues. For instance, extracted semantics 
might give information about locations in a network that 
are interesting in a specific application. Also, learned 
information can direct routers to forward data to certain set 
of nodes because they are reliable with good levels of 
resources. Extracted semantics are maintained and updated 
continuously in a shared accessible database server 
allowing authorized communicating nodes to retrieve and 
learn semantics in order to optimize QoS of their 
interesting applications. The proposed routing approach 
can aid in enhancing operation of various existing routing 
classes applied to opportunistic networks. For example, 
flooding-based (e.g., epidemic) and prediction-based (e.g., 
prophet) routing protocols can be integrated with 
intelligence techniques for aiding in enhancing QoS of 
related running applications. Enhancing the operation of 
such protocols will help maximize data packets delivery 
ratio and minimize resource consumption and network 
latency. Overall, we aim at enhancing performance of 
opportunistic networks enabling such environments to 
accept various applications and services with dynamic 
QoS requirements. 
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. 
Related work is presented in Section II. Section III 
presents our proposed intelligence-based routing approach 
for enhancing QoS of running applications within 
opportunistic networks. More technical depth for the 
adopted intelligence technique is discussed in Section IV. 
Preliminary results of the proposed routing approach are 
presented in Section V. Section VI concludes the paper 
and highlights our future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In literature, lots of research work has investigated and 
proposed routing protocols for opportunistic networks. In 
addition, other works have surveyed and classified routing 
schemes within such networks [4]. Routing schemes in 
opportunistic networks can be mainly classified as direct 
transmission, flooding-based schemes [5], prediction-
based schemes [6], coding-based schemes, and context-
based schemes. The main target of any proposed routing 
scheme is to ensure successful data delivery to destinations 
nodes relying on next available hop node-based rule. 
Unlike routing in case of direct transmission-based 
schemes, data sources have to wait until finding 
destination nodes in order to deliver data successfully [7]. 
Other routing schemes provide routing methodology based 
on data dissemination to ensure finding next hop nodes 
with high probability [5]. For minimizing communication 
overhead, probabilistic techniques-based routing schemes 
were presented for estimating available next hop nodes 
relied on calculated statistics and data captured from 
surrounding context [6][8]. 
An integrated routing protocol was proposed for 
enhancing operations of epidemic and prophet routing 
protocols [8]. The developed protocol utilizes context-
based information to decide whether using forward data 
based 
prediction 
technique 
or 
via 
apply 
data 
dissemination. But, the proposed protocol did not provide 
a way for forming dynamic information model that can be 
used by routing nodes on demand and at runtime to 
estimate locations of next hop nodes. It assumed that 
information might not exist. So, it might be directed to 
flooding-based routing. 
Some trials target proposing hybrid routing protocols 
where a combination of more than routing schemes 
according to presented classes in [4] can be formed to 
provide more reliable routing roles. For instance, a context 
aware routing methodology was provided based on using 
destination-sequence 
distance-vector 
algorithm 
and 
probabilistic routing scheme [9]. Such routing scheme 
exhibits large control overhead affecting data delivery rate. 
Another trial was presented to mitigate challenges of 
proposing hybrid routing protocol with low control 
overhead using optimized link-state routing version 2 [10]. 
However, there were no capabilities for estimating 
information from surrounding context that enables 
efficient changes in routing tables. In the next section, we 
will describe our intelligence-based routing approach 
highlighting differences with other trials for developing 
integrated and hybrid routing protocol for opportunistic 
networks. 
III. 
INTELLIGENCE-BASED ROUTING APPROACH FOR 
OPPORTUNISTIC NETWORKS 
 
Figure 1 presents briefly the proposed intelligence-
based routing approach. Our presented routing approach 
can be considered as an integrated or hybrid routing 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
Figure 3.  HMM-based Semantics Reasoning Model 
  
 
 
Figure 2.  Opportunistic Network Architecture with Intelligence-based 
Routing 
scheme that combines operation features of more than one 
routing scheme class. In other words, the operation of the 
presented routing approach relies on integrating artificial 
intelligence techniques with work methodology of any 
routing scheme class in order to optimize scheme’s overall 
operation. This is done via attaching routing schemes with 
efficient decision making abilities for routing data based 
on 
embedded 
enhanced 
semantics 
reasoning 
and 
situational 
awareness 
capabilities 
and 
accessible 
continually-updated information. This information is 
maintained at database servers helps distributed routing 
nodes to find, with high probability, location-specific next 
hop nodes and know more reliable nodes with sufficient 
resources 
in 
order 
to 
get 
consistent 
end-to-end 
communication. For provisioning privacy, communicating 
nodes register their identifiers (ID) at database servers to 
get information access authorization. Also, authorized 
communicating nodes will be able to learn knowledge on 
demand and at runtime that helps those nodes direct data 
packets to certain areas with high data delivery probability.  
For retrieving and learning helpful knowledge, authorized 
communicating nodes will communicate with available 
localized database servers based on the proximity base. In 
next subsection, we provide an example which clarifies the 
routing strategy via the proposed intelligence-based 
approach.   
A. Routing Strategy 
We discuss the operation of our proposed intelligence-
based routing approach for opportunistic networks via a 
simple network scenario as depicted in Figure 2. The 
scenario comprises two network levels. The first level 
concerns the running applications where its shows various 
interesting applications and services implemented on 
communicating nodes. That level shows that some 
mobility-enabled nodes, e.g., routing nodes, employ 
reasoning models to reason about semantics. The other 
level describes the communication and routing level where 
data traffic among communicating mobile nodes and also 
information (or semantics) traffic transferred between 
nodes and shared database servers. Distributed routing 
nodes capture raw data from passed traffic and they learn 
data patterns via adopting artificial intelligence technique-
based reasoning models to reason about semantics related 
to behavior of normal nodes within specific opportunistic 
network region. Extracted semantics will give information 
about the amount of data sent from each available 
connected node with specific ID within certain time slot 
and located in certain areas. Routing nodes might adopt 
hidden Markov models (HMM) [11] for semantics 
reasoning as will be discussed in the next section. Routing 
nodes store/update semantics as accessible information at 
shared always-on distributed database servers. This 
information can be accessed by normal nodes, with host 
roles, at runtime to learn where and to which reliable next 
hop node they will foreword data packets. 
IV. 
HMM-BASED REASONING MODEL 
This section discusses the operation and technical 
details of a semantics reasonign model employing HMM. 
Reasoning processes will be implemented and executed 
over set of network routers, which possess powerful 
resource and communication capabilities.  Figure 3 depicts 
the overall process of extracting high level information 
based on learning patterns of raw data and utilizing HMM-
based reasoning models. Other monolithic or hybrid 
intelligence techniques can be used. However, we apply 
HMM as a case study where HMM-based reasoning 
models can suit characteristics of network data and some 
models were developed and tested for enhancing 
networking-based services [12]. 
For targeting processes shown in Figure 3, we develop 
Java-based software agents that run artificial intelligence 
techniques for learning data patterns and extracting 
semantics. Agents are implemented over powerful network 
nodes with routing roles and integrated with their 
operating systems. Those agents, called intelligence 
agents, learn patterns of data traffic generated within 
opportunistic environments and related to various running 
hosts, which are located at various areas and supporting 
heterogeneous applications and services. Captured raw 
data are represented by intelligence agents as data profiles 
of attribute-value pairs Intelligence agents will adopt 
machine learning, such as association rule learning, and 
Fuzzy logic for knowing data patterns and related set of 
data attributes. Also, HMM-based semantic reasoning 
algorithms are adopted for extracting high-level data 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

features and reasoning about data semantics based on 
groups and sequences of known features.  
For example, intelligence agents on routers can extract 
semantics, using HMM-based reasoning models that help 
router have enhanced context awareness via estimating the 
most reliable next hop nodes with good resource level and 
high probability of existence. Additionally, those agents 
will be able to support routers with information about 
behavior of surrounding hosts within a specific region 
during the day and predicting which hosts are speedy ones 
with low probability of existence. Different HMM-based 
reasoning models can be built and implemented over 
routers’ agents where each model will be directed to focus 
on studying and estimating information related to certain 
operation domain (e.g., node location, speed, resource, 
application type, etc.). The output from those models will 
integrate 
multi-operation-domain-based 
features 
that 
provide highly abstracted information, which leads to 
having efficient decisions taken by routers. For instance, 
two potential next hop nodes, with common features, can 
be chosen by a router, however, one of them is preferred 
due to the total calculated weight of the combined features. 
In other words, set of joint interesting features might exist 
in two network next-hop nodes. But, one of the two nodes 
might have required features with maximum likelihood 
existence probability higher than the one of the other node. 
A. HMM Overview 
HMM 
comprises 
categorical 
sequence 
labeling 
supervised/unsupervised algorithms for estimating outputs 
based on sequence of hidden input words or states [11]. 
The estimation process for outputs relies on continuous 
input sequence with different Gaussian distributions. Then, 
HMM performs distribution mixture for obtaining the 
most likelihood output sequence. The input states to HMM 
are described as sequences. Each input state represents one 
learned and classified data-attribute through using machine 
learning 
mechanisms. 
HMM 
exhibits 
structured 
architectures that are able to predicting sequences of 
semantics based on input sequences of extracted network 
attributes or features. Depending on input sequences or 
pattern of high discriminative network-data features, 
HMM with forward and backward algorithms can learn 
semantics efficiently. HMM’s statistical foundations are 
computationally efficient and well-suited to handle new 
data [13]. A single HMM can be built by combining a 
verity of knowledge sources [14] with the consideration of 
their properties. This enables an efficient design of an 
HMM to reason about semantics related to various 
network-related issues (e.g., applications and resources) 
B. Example 
HMM-based reasoning model might be used by the 
routers’ intelligence agents to detect locations of high 
reliable nodes with powerful resources. For instance, we 
assume 
that 
routers 
within 
specific 
opportunistic 
networking environments are able to extract and learn 
identifiers of running hosts. Captured raw data by routers 
enable them to learn semantics that can reveal rate of data 
exchanged amongst set of hosts and also the time slots 
when those hosts exist with high probability. Reasoning 
processes in agents depend on learning patterns of 
transferred data packets that are stored as profiles of 
attribute-value 
pairs. 
As 
an 
example, 
“average_packet_size”, “node_ID” and “time_delta” is a 
combined learned and classified attribute based on fields 
found in a stored data profile and time synchronization in 
all communicating nodes (i.e., it can help in measuring 
latency). The HMM-based model looks at the group and 
the sequence of data attributes within data profiles. 
Extracted and classified attributes form states sequence 
and convey to HMM parameters (A, B, π), discussed later, 
to generate semantics. The order of states in an input 
sequence might change the output observations. In other 
words, the existence of the same data-attributes, however, 
with different order might result in different outputs 
adopting the same HMM model. Figure 2 illustrates 
HMM-based model for reasoning about semantics. 
According to the above discussed example for learning 
the more reliable next hop nodes, we assume that there 
are four input states to the HMM model. Those input 
states represent the extracted and classified data attributes 
according to transferred data through routers. For 
example, routers might know that a communicating node 
with a certain ID has transferred a number of large-size 
packets to a set of nodes located in an area within during a 
specific time slot. Accordingly, the input sequence to 
HMM-based reasoning model might have the following 
states: 
“large_average_packet_size”, 
“near_host”, 
“small_scale_ network” and “non_speedy_hosts”. Those 
states are with equal initial state probability π (i.e., π 
=1/4) and state transition probabilities A (i.e., Aij = 1/3 for 
i≠j and Aij = 0 for i=j where Aij is the transition 
probability form state i to state j). The estimated behavior 
for neighboring hosts based on the previous states 
sequence is “related hosts are reliable”. To get the 
previous output, the observation probability B matrix, 
which relates each input state with that specific output, 
will be high. For instance, B might consist of four rows r 
and two columns c; and it might equal ((0.2, 0.8), (0.25, 
0.75), (0.15, 0.85), (0.3, 0.7)) where r represents the 
number of input states while c represents the number of 
outputs. We have two outputs in this case which are 
related hosts are (i) unreliable (ii) reliable. According to 
the example, all input states have high observation 
probability with the second output “related hosts are 
reliable”. 
Then, 
this 
information 
will 
be 
maintained/updated by routers at shared accessible 
database. Hence, authorized communicating hosts can 
learn this information (e.g., IDs of reliable hosts) and they 
begin to forward data packets to reliable hosts. For sure, 
this information will be changed over time and 
communicating hosts have to update continuously their 
awareness with new available information (i.e., data 
routes might change over time). 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

TABLE I.       PERFROMANCE METRICS 
Metric 
Description 
Data delivery 
probability 
number of delivered packets to number of created 
packets 
Communication 
overhead ratio 
This is a measure of the number of packets that 
have been introduced into the network to deliver a 
packet from the source to its destination] it is 
calculated as [(number of relayed packets - number 
of delivered packets)/(# of delivered packets)] it 
refers to the number of used resources 
Average network 
latency (sec) 
the average amount of time that elapses between 
packet creation and its delivery to its destination 
Average buffering 
time (sec) 
the time that packets spend in the buffers of 
intermediate nodes 
Average hop 
count (hop) 
Average number of intermediate nodes through 
which data are transferred 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Data delivery probability 
 
TABLE II.       SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Number of hosts (fixed) 
126 hosts 
Number of routers (fixed) 
6 routers 
Number of host clusters (fixed) 
6 clusters 
Number of router per cluster (fixed) 
One router 
Min/Max host speed 
0.5/14 meter/second 
Min/Max host waiting time 
0/120 seconds 
Transmission range 
10 meters 
Data transmission rate (fixed) 
2 Mbps 
Host buffer size (fixed) 
5 × 106 bytes 
Router buffer size (fixed) 
50 × 106 bytes 
Data message size (fixed) 
500 KB and 1 MB 
Data message time to live (fixed) 
18000 seconds 
HMM approach/number of training 
sequences 
Unsupervised using 
Baum-Welch algorithm/1000 seq. 
Reasoning process rate (fixed) 
4 times/simulation time 
Scenario area (fixed) 
4500 × 3400 m2 
Simulation time (variable) 
2500 – 7500 seconds 
 
V. 
EVALUATION 
We 
conducted 
a 
simulation 
scenario, 
using 
opportunistic network environment (ONE) simulator [15], 
for building an opportunistic network similar to the one 
depicted in Figure 2. We hypothesize that our proposed 
intelligence-based routing approach can be applied to 
many routing classes working for opportunistic networks. 
So, we compare the QoS of running data transfer 
applications via four cases: i) the first two cases when 
adopting two routing protocols related to two difference 
routing scheme classes, which are flooding-based routing 
(epidemic protocol [5]) and prediction-based routing 
(prophet protocol [6]); and ii) the second cases when 
integrating the intelligence approach with the pervious 
routing schemes. We developed Java classes for building 
software intelligence agents over some routing nodes in 
the scenario. Those agents employ HMM-based models 
for semantics reasoning and Fuzzy membership functions 
(FMF) for classifying some captured attributes/features 
based on their values whether numeric or string values. 
We integrated such agent-related classes with Java classes 
of ONE simulator providing add-on intelligence services 
for semantics reasoning processes. Such services are 
attached to set of scenario nodes with routing roles. 
The simulation scenario is as follows. Data traffic is 
generated among group of communicating nodes where 
certain routing scheme is applied. Routing nodes capture 
raw data from passed traffic and they learn patterns of 
such traffic via extracting set of data attributes, which are 
classified using FMF. Extracted attributes comprise node 
ID, packet time stamp, packet size, etc. Such set of 
attributes are fed to HMM-based reasoning models to 
generate information that are kept in a shared database that 
can be accessed by communicating nodes. Such 
information can reveal powerful nodes that are located 
with high probability in a certain area and they have 
sufficient resources. According to this information, nodes 
can forward data packets to those nodes. For evaluation, 
we target the performance metrics described in Table I 
where they will be measured and compared among the 
different adopted routing protocols. Table II shows the 
simulation parameters.  
Figure 4 shows that data delivery probability is 
enhanced at using our intelligence-based approach 
compared with the case of no intelligence. The obtained 
result clarifies that more data packets are relayed and 
delivered to destination nodes according to the attached 
effective situational awareness capability to operating 
nodes (i.e., hosts and routers) and efficient routing 
decision taken by routing nodes. As appeared in Figure 5, 
the 
communication 
overhead 
is 
decreased 
when 
integrating intelligence with routing protocols where 
communicating nodes learn from shared databased the 
reliable next hop nodes. So, the number of data packet 
replica, that will be sent and relayed to reach destination 
hosts successfully, decreases compared with the case of 
operation without intelligence. Figure 6 portrays that 
applying intelligence over existing routing protocols does 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
Figure 5.  Communication overhead ratio 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Average network latency 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Average Hop Count 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Average buffering time 
 
not cause much network latency compared with the 
operation without intelligence. There is some increase in 
the average buffer time of intermediate nodes in case of 
using intelligence as shown in Figure 7. This is because 
nodes which have packets to forward have chosen the 
most reliable nodes in the network to pass packets to them. 
Hence, more data packets can be sent and received 
successfully to intermediate and destination nodes. Figure 
8 depicts the average hop count number faced at running 
with different routing protocols. We almost have same 
average hop count. This means that the implemented 
intelligence techniques were able to learn the most reliable 
locations which can support enhanced services with 
approximately same hop count. In other words, good level 
of propagation delay can be obtained. 
From results, we can conclude that our intelligence-
based routing approach succeeded in improving the QoS 
of running application compared with the case of using 
only epidemic and prophet routing schemes. According to 
these results, we have the following enhanced performance 
metrics: 
- 
High data delivery ratio 
- 
Low communication overhead ratio 
- 
Low network latency 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We have presented intelligence-based routing approach 
for the highly dynamic opportunistic networks in order to 
optimize QoS of running related applications. Our 
approach depended on developing and implementing light-
weight application-level reasoning models on powerful 
routing nodes for learning traffic patterns and reasoning 
about 
semantics. 
Learned 
semantics 
are 
updated 
continuously and are maintained at accessible shared 
databased providing useful information for communicating 
nodes in sending data to the most reliable next hop nodes 
in specific regions. For evaluation, we integrated the 
proposed intelligence approach with two known flooding-
based and prediction-based routing protocols, which are 
epidemic and prophet, respectively. Simulation results 
demonstrated the efficiency of adopting the proposed 
intelligence-based routing approach over two known 
routing protocols. There were enhancements in data 
delivery and communication overhead ratios compared 
with the case of operation with the two routing protocols 
without intelligence.  
Our future work includes a) developing mathematical 
model for the proposed approach and its operation and 
complexity within opportunistic networking; b) making 
analytical study and validation; and c) investigating 
security vulnerabilities that might affect QoS of the 
intelligence-based routing approach. Additionally, we aim 
at designing hybrid intelligence techniques which suit 
communication 
and 
routing 
requirements 
within 
opportunistic networks. Also, we target more complex 
scenarios for validating the proposed routing approach. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research work has been sponsored in part by the 
SmartCI center of research excellence, Faculty of 
Engineering, University of Alexandria, Egypt. 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Conti, S. Giordano, M. May and A. Passarella , "From 
opportunistic 
networks 
to 
opportunistic 
computing," 
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 48, 2010, pp. 126-
139. 
[2] 
C.-M. Huang, K.-C. Lan and C.-Z. Tsai, "A survey of 
opportunistic 
networks," 
in 
Advanced 
Information 
Networking and Applications-Workshops, 2008. AINAW 
2008. 22nd International Conference on, 2008, pp. 1672-
1677. 
[3] 
L. Pelusi, A. Passarella and M. Conti, "Opportunistic 
networking: data forwarding in disconnected mobile ad hoc 
networks," Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 44, 2006, 
pp. 134-141. 
[4] 
B. Poonguzharselvi and V. Vetriselvi, "Survey on routing 
algorithms 
in 
opportunistic networks," 
in 
Computer 
Communication and Informatics (ICCCI), 2013 International 
Conference on, 2013, pp. 1-5. 
[5] 
A. Vahdat and D. Becker, "Epidemic routing for partially 
connected ad hoc networks," Technical Report CS-200006, 
Duke University, 2000. 
[6] 
A. Lindgren, et al., "Probabilistic routing in intermittently 
connected networks," ACM SIGMOBILE mobile computing 
and communications review, vol. 7, 2003, pp. 19-20. 
[7] 
T. Spyropoulos, et al., "Single-copy routing in intermittently 
connected mobile networks," in Sensor and Ad Hoc 
Communications and Networks, 2004. IEEE SECON 2004. 
2004 
First 
Annual 
IEEE 
Communications 
Society 
Conference on, 2004, pp. 235-244. 
[8] 
A. Verma and A. Srivastava, "Integrated routing protocol for 
opportunistic networks," International Journal of Advanced 
Computer Science and Applications, vol. 2, 2011, pp. 85-92. 
[9] 
M. Musolesi and C. Mascolo, "CAR: Context-Aware 
Adaptive Routing for Delay-Tolerant Mobile Networks," 
Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 
246-260. 
[10] 
R. Zhi, et al., "An effective hybrid routing algorithm for 
opportunistic networks," in Cloud Computing and Intelligent 
Systems (CCIS), 2012 IEEE 2nd International Conference 
on, 2012, pp. 543-547. 
[11] 
L. Rabiner and B. Juang, "An introduction to hidden Markov 
models," ASSP Magazine, IEEE, vol. 3, 1986, pp. 4-16. 
[12] 
B. Mokhtar and M. Eltoweissy, "Hybrid Intelligence for 
Semantics-Enhanced 
Networking 
Operations," 
in 
The 
Twenty-Seventh International Flairs Conference, 2014, pp. 
449-454. 
[13] 
K. Seymore, et al., "Learning hidden Markov model structure 
for information extraction," in AAAI-99 Workshop on 
Machine Learning for Information Extraction, 1999, pp. 37-
42. 
[14] 
J. Yang and Y. Xu, "Hidden markov model for gesture 
recognition," Tech. Report CMU-RI-TR-94-10,1994. 
[15] 
A. Keränen, et al., "The ONE simulator for DTN protocol 
evaluation," in Proceedings of the 2nd international 
conference on simulation tools and techniques, 2009, pp. 
55:1 - 55:10. 
 
 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

