Choosing Multicast Conﬁguration with Forward
Error Correction for Mobile Multiaccess
Heterogeneous Users
Svetlana Boudko and Wolfgang Leister
Norsk Regnesentral, Oslo, Norway
Email: {svetlana.boudko, wolfgang.leister}@nr.no
Abstract—Mobile devices are typically equipped with mul-
tiple access network interfaces, supporting the coexistence of
heterogeneous wireless access networks. The selection of an
optimal set of multiple serving mobile networks for multicast
streams is NP-hard and is, therefore, a challenging problem. We
propose a simple heuristic approach that provides conﬁguration
of multicast groups for a given network topology and network
conditions. We consider that a forward error correction technique
is applied to deal with packet loss of the wireless communication.
Index Terms—Wireless networking, mobile network selection,
multicast, forward error correction.
I. INTRODUCTION
Continuous development of various wireless network tech-
nologies, mobile devices and services lead to complex and
highly dynamic networking and challenge resource limitations
of wireless access networks. According to a recent forecast [1],
global mobile data trafﬁc grew 69 percent in 2014 reaching
2.5 exabytes per month at the end of 2014. Mobile video
trafﬁc exceeded 50 percent of total mobile data trafﬁc for the
ﬁrst time in 2012. Global mobile devices and connections in
2014 grew to 7.4 billion, up from 6.9 billion in 2013. The
report shows that video trafﬁc will continue to dominate, and
nearly three-fourths of the world’s mobile data trafﬁc will be
video by 2019. It implies that we need intelligent mechanisms
for optimized bandwidth management in multi-access wireless
networks. These mechanisms should be capable of combining
multicast transmissions with the usage of multiple connections
and optimization of the multipath routing.
Another important concern is that channel conditions and
packet loss in a speciﬁc wireless network can vary drastically
for users of the same multicast transmission. It prompts ap-
plying different error-correcting parameters for different users
in multicast.
Implementing multipath solutions for the multicast scenario
in a multi-access network is not straight forward because the
formulation of this solution is NP-hard. Combining it with
error correction, which is speciﬁc for each user, makes the
problem even more challenging. In this paper, we look at
the optimization problem for multicast multi-access network
conﬁguration based on channel conditions of the users. The
paper is a continuation of previous work [2][3][4], where we
considered a solution for the network selection problem for
heterogeneous mobile networking as a part of multicast group
management.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. After
presenting an overview of related work in Section II, we give
a short introduction to forward error correction in Section III.
We discuss a representative scenario in Section IV and present
the problem formulation in Section V. The proposed heuristic
algorithm is given in Section VI, before discussing future work
and concluding in Section VII and Section VIII, respectively.
II. RELATED WORK
The research ﬁeld concerning selection of a network in het-
erogeneous wireless networks from a perspective of multicast
multipath delivery is not well explored. We found that previous
work in the area of mobile multicast focuses on subjects
like optimal multicast tree construction in multihop ad hoc
networks [5][6][7][8].
Jang et al. [9] present a mechanism for efﬁcient network
resource usage in a mobile multicast scenario. This mechanism
is developed for heterogeneous networks and implements net-
work selection based on network and terminal characteristics
and Quality of Service (QoS). However, in the proposed
mechanism, the network selection is performed purely based
on the terminal’s preferences; the network perspective is not
considered; and the solution does not optimize the utilization
of network resources.
Hou et al. [10] propose a cooperative multicast scheduling
scheme for multimedia services in IEEE 802.16 based wire-
less metropolitan area networks (WMAN). The scheduling is
considered for one base station that further re-sends the data to
multiple subscriber stations. These are grouped into different
multicast groups and the users are assigned to the groups. The
authors consider two approaches to select multicast groups
for services: the random selection and the channel state aware
selection. The process is controlled by the base station and
limited to one network technology. Network heterogeneity is
not considered.
The Multicast Mobility (multimob) working group [11] fo-
cuses its activity on supporting multicast in a mobile environ-
ment. The main goals of the group are to work out mechanisms
for supporting multicast source mobility and mechanisms that
optimize multicast trafﬁc during a handover. The group also
documents the conﬁguration of IGMPv3/MLDv2 in mobile
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

environments. In this sense, they extend the IGMPv3/MLDv2
protocols for implementation in the mobile domain and im-
prove Proxy Mobile IPv6 to handle multicast efﬁciently. How-
ever, they do not consider any modiﬁcations across different
access networks.
In our analysis, we recognize that the presented previous
work has not addressed several important aspects related to
selection of multiple serving networks for mobile multicast
groups. These considerations motivate us to look at the prob-
lem of building multicast groups that are capable of exploiting
multiple simultaneous connections in heterogeneous mobile
networks.
III. FORWARD ERROR CORRECTION
Forward Error Correction (FEC) [12] is a coding technique
that is widely adopted for recovery of corrupted data. On
the Internet, it is often used for data communication from
senders to receivers through an unreliable or lossy medium and
is widely discussed as a component for designing a reliable
media streaming system for wireless networks [13][14]. Block
codes are a family of FEC often used in telecommunications
that encode data in blocks. The most commonly used among
block codes is the Reed-Solomon coding [15]. Applying block
coding, the sender encodes redundant packets and sends both
the original and redundant packets to the receiver. The receiver
can reconstruct the original packets upon receiving a fraction
of the total packets. The coding takes k original packets and
produces n-k redundant packets, resulting in a total of n
packets. If k or more packets arrive at the receiver, the receiver
is able to reconstruct all the original packets. It implies that
the transmission needs larger n numbers for communications
channels with higher loss packet rate. In this paper, we
use Reed-Solomon codes as an illustrative example for our
analysis. Though the choice of error correction methods is an
important issue, we do not address this problem in our study.
IV. SCENARIO
To illustrate the yet unsolved challenges for optimal network
selection in multicast networks, we consider a multimedia
streaming scenario for a group of mobile users that concur-
rently receive the same content from the Internet. We assume
that a backbone proxy server (BPS) is placed at the network
edge. The BPS is a member of a content distribution network
(CDN).
The BPS streams content that either is hosted on a streaming
server, or re-sends the streaming content as a part of an appli-
cation layer multicast. The users of this network are located
in an area with a substantial overlap in coverage of several
mobile networks, and are connected to different networks.
The base stations of the system have multicast capabilities,
implementing, for example, Multimedia Broadcast Multicast
Service [16].
In our scenario, we assume that the mobile terminals are
capable of connecting to several access networks and getting
content from these networks simultaneously. Hence, users
that get the same content can exploit the same wireless
Figure 1. Multicast streaming scenario for a group of mobile clients receiving
the same content.
Figure 2.
Multicast streaming case for mobile clients switched to one mobile
network.
links because the content can be broadcast to them. Such
conﬁguration is beneﬁcial as it saves network resources.
However, these users may have different channel conditions,
and it is important to consider these conditions while forming
multicast groups. As the users experience different packet loss,
the corresponding number of redundant packets required for
successful decoding of the content varies for each user. The
BPS can use this information to determine how users can be
regrouped in multicast groups and how the multicast content
can be split among the serving networks. For a multicast
group, the number of redundant packets should be sufﬁcient
to provide equally good quality for all users of this group.
Obviously, the number of redundant packets for each multicast
group is calculated based on the user who experience the worst
channel conditions. In the paper, we consider three typical
cases of such regrouping.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 3.
Multicast streaming scenario for a group of mobile clients.
A. Case 1
In this case, the users are allocated to the mobile networks
with the best channel conditions. This conﬁguration is depicted
in Figure 1. This case requires the minimum number of re-
dundant packets encoded for each group, however the original
packets are sent multiple times through the network.
B. Case 2
All users can be grouped under one mobile network and
only one multicast stream is formed, as depicted in Figure 2.
In this case, the original packets are sent only to one network,
but the number of redundant packet is higher, and the serving
network needs to allocate more resources while the other
networks are underprovided.
C. Case 3
This case is depicted in Figure 3. The users exploit multiple
connections. The stream is split into original and redundant
packets. The users are divided into groups similar to Case 1.
Original packets are sent to one network along with redundant
packets for the users from this network. Additional redundant
packets for the rest of the system are sent to corresponding
networks. In this case, the original packets are send to one
network and, at the same time, the load is, to some extent,
spread among all networks.
V. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, the scenario discussed in Section IV is
formalized.
We consider a set of networks N = 1, 2, . . . , n and a set
of mobile nodes M = 1, 2, . . . , m receiving the same content
from the Internet. The content is sent at bitrate r. For each
node mj and network ni, the following is deﬁned: available
bandwidths of networks are denoted by bi; packet loss that
node mj experiences in network ni is denoted by li,j. We
Figure 4.
Heuristic Algorithm for Multicast Conﬁguration.
deﬁne a decision variable xi,j as follows:
x(i, j) =
(
1, if mj gets a portion of streaming content in ni
0, if not
(1)
For each mobile network ni, we deﬁne a function γ as
follows:
γ(i) =
(
1, if at least one mj gets a portion of content in ni
0, if not
(2)
We deﬁne a function θ as a relation between the packet loss
and the number of packets needed for successful decoding.
We deﬁne a variable yi as a number of packets per time unit
sent to network ni. To ﬁnd the best possible multicast conﬁg-
uration in terms of minimization of consumed bandwidth, we
minimize the following objective function:
min
X
ni∈N
γ(i) · yi
(3)
The objective function is subject to the set of constraints
given below.
For each mobile node mj, we need to guarantee that it can
completely receive the requested content.
∀{j} :
X
i
yi · xi · θ(li,j) ≥ r
(4)
For each network, the availability of its bandwidth is
checked.
∀{i} : yi ≤ bi
(5)
This optimization problem is NP-hard and cannot be solved
by common optimization solvers. We, therefore, need to con-
sider a heuristic approach to problem solving.
VI. ALGORITHM
To work around the NP-hardness of the above formulation,
we propose a simple heuristic algorithm for forming multicast
groups. In Section IV, we considered three different cases.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Though, Case 3 may look as an optimal one, it can be not
optimal for some distributions of packet loss among users.
Therefore, applying Case 1 or Case 2 may improve total
bandwidth usage and we need to evaluate these cases as well.
The operation of the algorithm is depicted in Figure 4.
VII. DISCUSSION
The implementation of the algorithm in real systems re-
quires that all knowledge of network resources and channel
state information of users is available to the BPS or some
other central unit that decides upon how the data transmission
shall be constructed. This implies that a signiﬁcant number
of messages needs to be exchanged inside the system, which
comes at the cost of increased delays, need for network
resources, and computation resources on mobile devices. Also,
once the information arrives at the BPS it can already be
outdated because conditions in mobile networks can change
quickly. To overcome this problem, we need an algorithm
that is designed to handle the aforementioned information
uncertainty. The problem discussed in Section V will be
reformulated. It requires that the packet loss in Section V is
replaced with corresponding probability values. A choice of
an effective FEC scheme should also be addressed as a part
of the implementation.
VIII. CONCLUSION
The paper outlines the problem of selecting the optimal
network for multicast groups of mobile clients in multi-access
scenario based on mobile clients’ channel state information.
We proposed a simple heuristic approach that provides the
assignment for a given network topology and network condi-
tions. Implementing the multipath solution for the multicast
scenario in a multi-access network is challenging because
the formulation of this solution is NP-hard. The proposed
multipath multicast approach has certain limitations and needs
further investigation.
REFERENCES
[1] Cisco, “Cisco visual networking index: Global mobile
data trafﬁc forecast update, 2014-2019,” 2015.
[2] S. Boudko, W. Leister, and S. Gjessing, “Multicast
group management for users of heterogeneous wireless
networks,” in CONTENT 2012: The Fourth International
Conference on Creative Content Technologies.
Inter-
national Academy, Research and Industry Association
(IARIA), 2012, pp. 24–27.
[3] ——, “Optimal network selection for mobile multicast
groups,” in ICSNC 2012 The Seventh International Con-
ference on Systems and Networks Communications.
In-
ternational Academy, Research and Industry Association
(IARIA), 2012, pp. 224–227.
[4] S. Boudko and W. Leister, “Network selection for mul-
ticast groups in heterogeneous wireless environments,”
in MoMM ’13: Proc. 11th Int’l Conf. on Advances in
Mobile Computing and Multimedia.
ACM, 2013, pp.
167–176.
[5] M. Gerla, C.-C. Chiang, and L. Zhang, “Tree multicast
strategies in mobile, multishop wireless networks,” Mob.
Netw. Appl., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 193–207, Oct. 1999.
[6] C.-C. Chiang, M. Gerla, and L. Zhang, “Forwarding
group multicast protocol (FGMP) for multihop, mobile
wireless networks,” Cluster Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp.
187–196, Apr. 1998.
[7] J. G. Jetcheva, “Adaptive demand-driven multicast rout-
ing in multi-hop wireless ad hoc networks,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,
2004.
[8] J. Yuan, Z. Li, W. Yu, and B. Li, “A cross-layer opti-
mization framework for multihop multicast in wireless
mesh networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24,
no. 11, pp. 2092 –2103, Nov. 2006.
[9] I.-S. Jang, W.-T. Kim, J.-M. Park, and Y.-J. Park, “Mobile
multicast mechanism based mih for efﬁcient network
resource usage in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc.
of the 12th Int’l Conf. on Advanced Communication
Technology, ser. ICACT’10, 2010, pp. 850–854.
[10] F. Hou, L. Cai, P.-H. Ho, X. Shen, and J. Zhang, “A
cooperative multicast scheduling scheme for multimedia
services in IEEE 802.16 networks,” Wireless Communi-
cations, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 1508–
1519, 2009.
[11] Multicast Mobility Working Group, “Charter for Working
Group,” 2010, [Online]. Available: http://datatracker.ietf.
org/wg/multimob/charter/, accessed July 30, 2013.
[12] G. C. Clark and J. B. Cain, Error-Correction Coding for
Digital Communications.
Perseus Publishing, 1981.
[13] S. Alamouti, “A simple transmit diversity technique for
wireless communications,” Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, IEEE Journal on, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1451–1458,
Oct 1998.
[14] A. Nafaa, T. Taleb, and L. Murphy, “Forward error
correction strategies for media streaming over wireless
networks,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 46,
no. 1, pp. 72–79, January 2008.
[15] I. S. Reed and G. Solomon, “Polynomial Codes Over
Certain Finite Fields,” Journal of the Society for Indus-
trial and Applied Mathematics, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 300–
304, 1960.
[16] G. Xylomenos, V. Vogkas, and G. Thanos, “The multi-
media broadcast/multicast service,” Wireless Communi-
cations and Mobile Computing, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 255–
265, 2008.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

