 
 
Using Attribute Certificates to Support Cryptographic Algorithm Flexibility  
 
 
Steffen Fries, Rainer Falk  
Siemens AG  
Technology 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {steffen.fries|rainer.falk}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Asymmetric cryptography is broadly used to 
protect confidentiality, integrity, and authenticity of data 
transfer. Typical applications are authentication and key 
agreement in secure communication protocols, and digital 
signatures for authentication and integrity protection of 
documents and messages. Digital certificates confirm the public 
key of a user. They are used for user authentication performed 
during the handshake by common cryptographic security 
protocols like Transport Layer Security, Datagram Transport 
Layer Security, or by authentication and key agreement 
protocols like the Internet Key Exchange or Group Domain of 
Interpretation. The cryptographic algorithm for public-key-
based user authentication is fixed by the user’s certificate. More 
flexibility to support multiple cryptographic algorithms for user 
authentication is needed, e.g., by the introduction of new, 
quantum-safe cryptographic algorithms. Attribute certificates 
can be used to support flexibly multiple cryptographic 
algorithms for user authentication, supporting a stepwise 
transition towards newer cryptographic algorithms.  
 
Keywords–communication security; cryptographic agility; 
post-quantum cryptography; attribute certificates; industrial 
automation and control system; Internet of Things; automation 
control systems. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Asymmetric cryptography and digital signatures are a 
cornerstone in many security architectures. Main applications 
of digital signatures are user (entity) authentication and 
integrity protection of data at rest and in transit. The user 
utilizes his private key for authentication. A peer verifies the 
authentication using the corresponding public key. Digital 
certificates, e.g., according to the X.509 standard, confirm the 
user identity associated with the user’s public key [1].  
Besides entity authentication, digital signatures provide 
integrity protection of the signed content, which may be a 
document or, in case of the initial phase of security protocols, 
protect the negotiation of security parameters for a 
communication session as used in common security protocols 
like Transport Layer Security (TLS) [2] and Datagram 
Transport Layer Security (DTLS) [3], or in “pure” 
authentication and key agreement protocols like the Internet 
Key Exchange (IKEv2) [4] or the Group Domain of 
Interpretation GDOI) [5] protocol.  
Due to advances in quantum computing, currently used 
asymmetric cryptographic algorithms like RSA (Rivest, 
Shamir, Adleman) or ECDSA (Elliptic Curve Digital 
Signature Algorithm) are endangered, as there underlying 
mathematical problems, like factorization and discrete 
logarithm problems (see also [6]) can be solved efficiently 
using a cryptographically relevant quantum computer 
leveraging Shor’s algorithm (see also [7]). Symmetric 
cryptographic algorithms can also be attacked using Grover’s 
algorithm (see also [7]), but for them it is currently seen 
sufficient to double the key length without a change of the 
algorithms (see also [8]).  
While the standardization and the journey to introduce 
new, post-quantum asymmetric algorithms that withstand 
such attacks is still ongoing, the discussion of transition 
approaches for currently used cryptographic algorithms to 
new algorithms has already started (see [9]). In this context, 
different strategies are being discussed, like the combined or 
hybrid use of classical and post-quantum algorithms. This also 
relates to the utilized credentials, which may come in different 
formats like hybrid certificates supporting alternative 
cryptographic algorithms in the same certificate (see [1]). 
However, only a single second public key of a single second 
cryptographic algorithm can be included. As multiple 
quantum-safe 
cryptographic 
algorithms 
are 
currently 
standardized, a more flexible approach to support multiple 
public keys for authentication of a single user is needed.  
Note that the case of post-quantum cryptographic 
algorithms is taken here as example. Crypto agility as the 
ability to adopt to alternative cryptographic algorithms, is a 
general design objective for protocols and architectures to 
ensure that new algorithms with similar boundary conditions 
can be deployed easily. 
Transition is specifically important for industrial use 
cases, as the component lifetime here is much longer 
compared to consumer electronics. Therefore, it is important 
to elaborate ways to allow an upgrade of systems already in 
the field not only with new algorithms, but also with new or 
enhanced credentials for entity authentication.  
This paper is structured in the following way. Section II 
provides an overview about related work. Section III gives an 
overview on public key certificates and attribute certificates to 
show the general structure and approach. Section IV 
investigates a new approach utilizing attribute certificates to 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
support migration. Section V concludes the paper and 
provides an outlook to potential future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The NIST challenge on replacement algorithms for digital 
signatures finishes after six years. Three digital signature 
candidates have been selected for standardization (see [10]):  
- 
CRYSTALS-Dilithium 
- 
FALCON 
- 
SPHINCS+ 
These algorithms have different parameters and different 
parameter sizes as the classical algorithms like RSA or 
ECDSA. The key size can be significantly larger compared to 
classical cryptographic algorithms. This parameters and key 
sizes need to be supported by implementations and most 
importantly also in the context of existing user authentication 
credentials like X.509 certificates.  
The migration or transition to quantum-safe cryptographic 
algorithms is a complex undertaking. The National Institute 
for Standards and Technology NIST has published a draft 
guideline on the migration to post-quantum cryptography [9]. 
Transition of cryptographic algorithms has been worked 
on in the context of ITU-T X.509 [1] with the support of 
alternative cryptographic algorithms as investigated in the 
following Section III.A. 
With the IETF, a further standardization organization 
investigates into the different options of migration towards 
post-quantum cryptographic algorithms. Here the emphasis 
lies on utilizing hybrid approaches in protocols like TLS  [2] 
or DTLS [3]. Besides integrating new algorithms in 
ciphersuites also approaches like Key Encapsulation (KEM, 
[11]) are being discussed to avoid generation of digital 
signatures on constraint devices.   
III. 
PUBLIC KEY AND ATTRIBUTE CERTIFICATES  
X.509 certificates are used for entity authentication and 
integrity protection. As shown in Figure 1, the concept of a 
public key certificate is the binding of an entity’s identity to a 
public key, which has a corresponding private key. This 
private key is kept secret by the entity and can be used to 
authenticate the entity. The certificate itself is issued by a 
trusted third party, a certification authority, that digitally signs 
the certificate. This signature is verified by the relying party 
as part of certificate path validation to a root certificate.  
 
 
Figure 1. Concept of Binding Public Keys to Identities  
These certificates are called public key certificates, as they 
bind the public key to an entity’s identity. In addition, there 
attribute certificates are defined, which can be seen as 
temporary enhancement of public key certificates. They do 
not contain public keys but additional attributes that are 
connected to the holder of the public key certificate as shown 
in Figure 2. As visible in the figure, an attribute certificate has 
a validity period, which may vary based on the application use 
case. As the attribute certificate can be assumed as a 
temporary enhancement of a statements contained in a  public 
key certificate, it may be short-lived or it may have a similar 
validity as the public key certificate. Figure 2 also shows that 
the issuing authority may be different for the attribute 
certificate as for the public key certificate. This fact may be 
interesting in cases where a separation of duty is targeted.  
The following subsections will provide more details on 
both certificate types.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Concept of Public Key Certificates and Attribute Certificates 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
A. Public Key Certificates 
ITU-T X.509 [1] is the public key certificate and 
attribute certificate framework widely applied in  Information 
technology (IT) solutions an increasingly being used in 
Operational Technology (OT) solutions. It defines the 
structure and content of public key certificates as well as the 
verification of the components.  
 
Figure 3. Public Key Certificate structure (see [1]) 
As shown in Figure 3, the certificate is a signed structure, 
containing the subject as the name of the entity and the 
subjectPublicKeyInfo structure with information about 
algorithm and the contained public key. The certificate is 
signed by an issuing certificate authority. Besides further 
components the certificate structure can also be extended 
using the extensions component.  
To support alternative algorithms, X.509 defines three 
extensions to convey the: 
- 
subjectAltPublicKeyInfo – alternative public key   
- 
altSignatureAlgorithm – alternative signature 
algorithm (used to sign the public key certificate) and  
- 
altSignatureValue – alternative signature value.  
Using theses extensions allows a relying party depending 
on its capabilities to either utilize classical cryptographic 
algorithms or alternative (here post quantum) algorithms for 
the verification of the certificate (and potential digital 
signatures performed with the public key corresponding to the 
contained public key. Depending on the security policy of the 
relying party, both signatures of the certificate may need to be 
verified.  
This approach is limited to a single alternative key for a 
public key in practical application, i.e., limited to a single 
alternative cryptographic algorithm. Simply adding multiple 
alternative keys to the authentication certificate would 
increase the certificate size significantly.  
B. Attribute Certificates 
Besides public key certificates, ITU-T X.509 [1] also 
defines the structure and content of attribute certificates, as 
well as the binding to public key certificates and the 
verification of contained components. Note that besides the 
binding to public key certificates, an attribute certificate may 
also be bound to a name of an entity or some fingerprint of 
information.  
An attribute certificate may be seen as temporary 
enhancement of a public key certificate.  
 
Figure 4. Attribute Certificate structure (see [1]) 
As shown in Figure 4, similar to public key certificates an 
attribute certificate is also a signed structure, containing the 
holder as the name of the entity, information about the 
issuer, including the signature algorithm and values as well as 
the possibility to define extensions of the attribute certificate. 
Like for public key certificates, to support alternative 
algorithms, X.509 defines two extensions to convey the: 
- 
altSignatureAlgorithm 
–alternative 
signature 
algorithm (used to sign the attribute certificate) and  
- 
altSignatureValue – alternative signature value.  
The standard does not foresee the capability to contain an 
alternative public key of the holder as additional attribute. The 
next section discusses the merits of providing this information 
as well as further, policy related information in the context of 
an attribute certificate.  
IV. 
PROPOSED NEW ATTRIBUTES  
As discussed in Section III, not all extensions defined for 
public key certificates are defined for inclusion in attribute 
certificates. This paper therefore proposes to use the 
subjectAltPublicKeyInfo extension also in attribute 
certificates to convey an alternative public key and 
information 
about 
the 
corresponding 
cryptographic 
algorithms, e.g., a public key for a post quantum asymmetric 
algorithm like FALCON, DILITHIUM, or SPHINCS+. This 
allows to associate and utilize alternative public keys to 
already existing certificates. As multiple attribute certificates 
can be issued for a single user certificate, implicitly various 
different cryptographic algorithms can be supported in a 
flexible way by issuing multiple corresponding attribute 
certificates. 
Attribute certificates contain attributes, and providing an 
alternative public key as attribute is proposed as novel 
approach. It is intended to support smooth transition to public-
key certificates using solely alternative, in the case here, post 
quantum cryptographic algorithms. As they are intended as 
temporary enhancement of public key certificates, this 
approach is seen appropriate. It is even possible to issue 
attribute certificates for an entity’s public key certificate at a 
later point in time.  
For migration to post-quantum cryptography, it is 
necessary to also support a security policy which handles the 
transition from one cryptographic algorithm to an alternative 
cryptographic algorithm (in the case here for digital 
signatures). Such a policy may require verifying only one 
signature, both signatures (classic and alternative), and may 
also provide a weight on the verification result, e.g., by the 
order of operations. Such a security policy may be configured 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
per relying party. In case of automation networks, it may be 
part of the engineering data for the Intelligent Electronic 
Devices (IED).  
An alternative approach to the device configuration of 
security policies is the provisioning of the policy as part of the 
certificate, also in the form factor of an extensions. This paper 
proposes such an extension as shown in Figure 5 that may be 
applied in both certificate types, i.e., to public key certificates 
as well as to attribute certificates.  
 
Figure 5. Proposed Migration Policy Extension  
The extension allows to specify the following security 
policies for the associated alternative public key: 
- combAND requires the verification of the signature 
performed with the classic asymmetric algorithm as well 
as the alternative algorithm. 
- combOR requires the verification signatures created with 
of either the classical or the alternative cryptographic 
algorithm, 
- weightOnAlt indicates if the alternative algorithm has a 
higher weight in the evaluation. Note that this can be used 
in conjunction with combOR for the selection of classical 
or alternative signatures and also for the combAND case in 
cases, in which one signature verification may fail. 
The extension may be included in the certificate as critical 
extension to ensure that it will be evaluated by the relying 
party. The inclusion into public key certificate can be done to 
associate a fixed security policy to the two contained public 
keys. There is also a benefit by placing the extension into an 
attribute certificate even in cases where the second public key 
is not contained in the attribute certificate but in the public key 
certificate. This approach allows to change the security 
without the need to issue a new public key certificate, enabling 
dynamic policy changes. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
This paper provides an overview on the need for a 
transition from currently used classical cryptographic 
algorithms to new, alternative cryptographic algorithms. More 
specifically, the focus is placed on the use of digital signatures 
and credentials conveying the public key within X.509 
certificates.  
In that respect, a novel approach for using alternative 
asymmetric algorithms in the context of these X.509 
certificates has been described. It is proposed to support 
alternative public keys and associated information in attribute 
certificates, which enhances the application of already defined 
certificate extensions for public key certificates also for 
attribute certificates. By this approach, multiple cryptographic 
algorithms can be supported flexibly by issuing multiple 
attribute certificates corresponding to the different public keys 
of a user. Moreover, a further security policy extension is 
proposed that allows a dynamic adaptation of the security 
policy for the transition from classic cryptographic algorithms 
towards alternative, e.g., post quantum algorithms.  
The discussed approach is currently in its infancy and 
needs to be implemented and tested to get practical 
experience. This is seen as the next consequent step. Due to 
the use of an already existing extension to transport the 
alternative public key, further investigation of the transport of 
algorithm specific parameters is not seen necessary as already 
considered in the originally defined extension. 
Besides the necessity to perform more investigation of the 
side conditions of this approach and also a proof-of-concept 
implementation, it is seen necessary to also discuss this 
approach within standardization. This is due to the fact that 
most interacting systems are built with products from different 
manufacturers. Therefore, standardization is necessary to 
ensure interoperability of different manufacturers products.  
REFERENCES 
[1] ITU-T X.509 ISO/IEC 9594-8:2020, Rec. ITU-T X.509 
(2019), 
Information 
technology 
– 
Open 
systems 
interconnection – The Directory: Public-key and attribute 
certificate frameworks, https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.509-
201910-I/en, [retrieved: August, 2023] 
[2] E. Rescorla, IETF RFC 8446, “Transport Layer Security (TLS)  
Protocol 
v1.3”, 
August 
2018, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8446, [retrieved: August, 2023] 
[3] E. Rescorla, H. Tschofenig, and N. Modadugu, IETF RFC 
9147, “The Datagram Transport Layer Security (DTLS) 
Protocol 
Version 
1.3”, 
April 
2022 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9147, 
[retrieved: 
August, 2023] 
[4] C. Kaufman, P. Hoffman, Y. Nir, P.Eronen, and T. Kirvinen., 
IETF RFC 7296, „Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2 
(IKEv2)“, 
October 
2014, 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7296, 
[retrieved: 
August, 2023]  
[5] B. Weis, S. Rowles, and T. Hardjono, IETF RFC 6407, “The 
Group 
Domain 
if 
Interpretation”, 
October 
2011, 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6407, 
 
[retrieved: 
August, 2023] 
[6] A. J. Menezes, P. C. v. Oorschot, and S. A. Vanstone, 
“Handbook of Applied Cryptography”, CRC-Press, October 
1996, ISBN: 0-8493-8523-7 
[7] D. J. Bernstein, J. Buchmann, and E. Dahmen, “Post-quantum 
cryptography”, Springer, Berlin, 2009. ISBN 978-3-540-
88701-0 
[8] L. Cehen et al., NISTIR 8105, “Report on Post-Quantum 
Cryptography”, 
April 
2016, 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2016/NIST.IR.8105.pdf, 
[retrieved: August, 2023] 
[9] W. Newhouse, M. Souppaya, W. Barker, and C. Brown, 
“Migration to Post-Quantum Cryptography: Preparation for 
Considering the Implementation and Adoption of Quantum 
Safe Cryptography”, Volume A “Executive Summary”, NIST 
Special 
Publication 
1800-38A, 
April 
2023, 
https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/crypto-agility-considerations-
migrating-post-quantum-cryptographic-algorithms [retrieved: 
August, 2023] 
[10] NIST 
Announcement, 
“PQC 
Standardization 
Process: 
Announcing Four Candidates to be Standardized”, July 2022,  
https://csrc.nist.gov/News/2022/pqc-candidates-to-be-
standardized-and-round-4, [retrieved: August, 2023]  
[11] Giacon, F., Heuer, F., and B. Poettering, "KEM Combiners", 
January 2018, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-76578-5_7, 
[retrieved: August, 2023]. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

