  
Privacy-aware Nomadic Service For Personalized IPTV 
 
Amira Bradai, Emad Abd-Elrahman, Hossam Afifi 
RST. Telecom SudParis 
Institut Mines-telecom, Telecom SudParis 
Evry, France 
amira.bradai@it-sudparis.eu, emad .abd-Elrahman @it-sudparis.eu, hossam. afifi@it-sudparis.eu 
                         
 
Abstract-User-Centric Personalized IPTV UbiquitOus and 
SecUre Services (Up-TO-US) project provides nomadism and 
personalization in IPTV operated services. This paper 
proposes a novel architecture for nomadism combined with an 
extensive game to enforce identity exposure when a user 
accesses his/her services from outside the home domain. The 
goal of the game is to minimize the personal information 
divulgation outside his/her domain. The proposed algorithm is 
implemented within a nomadic architecture. For each client, 
our algorithm can customize the Electronic Program Guide 
(EPG) in a contextualized way. We analyze two main use cases 
in nomadic situations: local nomadism and inter-domain 
nomadism. All implementations are hypertext Transfer 
Protocol (HTTP) standard-based for compatibility issues with 
all Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) platforms. 
 
Keywords-Nomadism; extensive game; IPTV; personalized 
service 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
The advance in Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) 
technology enables a new model for service provisioning by 
moving from traditional broadcaster-centric TV services to a 
new user-centric TV model. This new model allows users not 
only to access new services and functionalities from their 
providers, based upon their profiles and contexts, but also to 
become active parts in the content personalization through 
contributing in building their dynamic profiles and their 
privacy. This IPTV model is promising in allowing low cost 
services for end-users and a revenue system for broadcasters 
based on personalized advertising methods, as well as new 
business opportunities for network operators and service 
providers. 
A.  UP-TO-US Project 
The objective of the UP-TO-US project [1] is to 
elaborate, to prototype, and to evaluate an open European 
solution allowing IPTV services personalization over 
different IPTV systems (having different architectures and 
belonging to different network operators and service 
providers). The project assures content personalization 
according to each user context and the context of his 
environments (network and devices), while preserving his 
privacy, as shown in Figure 1. 
 
UP-TO-US focuses on two use-cases for service 
personalization:  
1. users in nomadic situations in a hotel, in a 
friend’s home or anywhere outside his domestic 
sphere, (allowing the user to access his 
personalized IPTV content in a hotel for 
instance and be billed on his own bill "My 
Personal Content Moves with Me"), and 
2. users’ mobility in his domestic sphere (allowing 
the user to move around within his domestic 
sphere, while continuing accessing his IPTV 
service personalized according to his location 
and devices in his proximity “My Content 
Follows Me in a Customized Manner”). 
4) End user Spheres
(Home, Hotel,…)
3) IPTV service 
Personalization
Network 
context
IPTV service Personalization 
according to the user Lifestyle and 
Different Contexts 
Terminals
Context
User
Context
2) Context Gathering
for (users, devices, 
network sand services)
Service 
Context
Context-
awareness 
System
 
Figure 1. General visions of UP-TO-US project 
 
In order to achieve the objectives of UP-TO-US, some 
enabler technologies were developed and integrated to 
different IPTV systems; these mainly include: 
  
 
A context-aware module capable of monitoring and 
gathering the user and his environment contexts and 
feed them in a dynamic manner to the IPTV system, 
 
A 
profiling 
management 
module, 
capable 
of 
constructing and dynamically updating the users profiles 
according to the various contexts, and  
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
A privacy management module that will be responsible 
for managing the different privacy levels for each user 
and 
protecting 
the 
user 
personal 
information. 
Consequently, personalized services could be provided 
in which content is selected according to users’ 
preference, Quality of Experience (QoE) requirements, 
and different contexts, while fostering trust between 
viewers and broadcasters through an efficient privacy 
management, 
and 
thus 
encouraging 
viewers 
to 
participate actively in this interactive user-centric TV 
paradigm through allowing their continuous contexts 
gathering. 
B.  Personalized EPG 
 
IPTV service personalization has been discussed in many 
works [7] [8] [9]. All those works focused on service 
personalization-based context-aware system. 
With the new era of TV and different modes of diffusion 
like satellite/Triple and Quadruple play services offered by 
many service providers worldwide, there is a need to 
customize the huge number of channels. This customization 
is mandatory, especially in the nomadic places where users 
are away from their home networks.  
Based on user profile, and on user and network gathered 
contexts, the personalization technologies can generate 
content recommendations for an individual as well as for a 
group of users. Recommendation algorithms can use content-
based filtering technologies [12], collaborative filtering 
algorithms [13], or hybrid solutions combining content-based 
and collaborative filtering techniques [14][15 ]. 
To do this task, the recommendation system will be in 
charge of calculating the most interesting videos or channels 
for each client through her/his Electronic Program Guide 
(EPG). The EPG is the way to guide and inform the IPTV 
viewers by their interesting channels and programs. To 
customize an EPG in contextualized way is one of main 
objectives in UP-TO-US project. This customization is 
mainly depending on four types of context information, as 
shown in Figure 2: 
 
 
User Context: The information concerns the user 
location.   
 
Network Context: The information concerns the 
environment like network parameters.  
 
Service Context: The information concerns the 
service adaptation and its delivery status, coding, 
definitions (High Definition, Standard Definition or 
Low Definition). 
 
Terminal Context: The information concerns the 
device capabilities and its screen resolution.  
A. EPG format 
 
In UP-TO-US, we send and receive the EPG in XML 
format, as shown in Figure 3. The information in this list 
could be live TV channel, Video-on-Demand (VOD), 
programs or the Top-K favorites programs for the client. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. EPG calculation based context information feed to 
Recommendation System 
 
 
<up2us:EPG> 
<up2us:ListProgramDescription 
xsi:schemaLocation="urn:tva:up2us:2012Up2us.xsd" 
xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance" 
xmlns:tva="urn:tva:metadata:2011" 
xmlns:mpeg7="urn:tva:mpeg7:2008" 
xmlns:up2us="urn:tva:up2us:2012"> 
 
   <up2us:Options>Top_K</up2us:Options> 
 
<up2us:ProgramDescription> 
 
 
<up2us:ProgramInformationTable 
metadataOriginIDRef="IMDB"> 
 
 
 
<up2us:ProgramInformation 
programId="crid://abc3/xyz24"> 
 
 
 
 
<up2us:BasicDescription> 
</up2us:EPG> 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. XML format for EPG in up-to-us 
 
D. Nomadic access 
 
Quality for Nomadic Access (NA) solutions are based on 
the network integration between different service providers 
(i.e., managed services operators) who are proposing key-
point in geolocalisation solutions for video services delivery 
(IPTV or VOD) to their nomadic clients.  
Customers are searching for service personalization 
anywhere/anytime/anydevice.  
In a nomadic scenario, we may have two modes of 
service accessing, as shown in Figure 4: 
 
 
Managed Mode: the operators could guarantee the 
service for the clients according to the user service 
and context profile. In this scenario, the QoS/QoE 
trends can be adjusted and end-to-end controlled by 
network operators. 
 
Unmanaged Mode: which means accessing from 
Internet and in this case we must have Multi 
Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) for the quality 
and the cost to decide which is suitable for the user 
and which is suitable for the network. Based on the 
calculations and decisions conducted by this system 
(Decision Makers), the user can choose the best 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
service (which is a nomadic service) and the 
network could assign its best resources. 
 
Figure 4. Quality aspect in IPTV nomadic access 
 
The main objective of nomadic access for IPTV service 
is to overcome the challenges of obtaining the same service 
anywhere, anytime and on any personal device. Moreover, 
nomadic service adds the means of obtaining the service 
from any operator. The aspect of TV Everywhere [2] started 
some years ago and achieved high acceptance from many 
IPTV clients. Also, the report [2] showed that by soon, a 
large percent of the customers will able to access to TV 
Everywhere services through their current providers only. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
highlights the nomadic architecture components and the 
implemented scenarios in the project. Privacy aspects are 
handled in Section III. The proposed game solution is 
presented in Section IV with some highlighting on privacy in 
personalization. Then, the paper is concluded in Section V. 
II.   NOMADIC ARCHITECTURE 
Nomadism is an equivalent term to roaming services, but 
without mobility [3]. Nomadic services allow the user to 
access to his personalized IPTV content in any place in his 
domestic and outside and to be billed on his own bill. The 
collaboration between operators helps in providing nomadic 
IPTV services in the context of cloud computing as 
explained by Abd-Elrahmen and Afifi in [4]. Moreover, the 
interconnection for IPTV terminals in visited networks with 
different services scenarios is explained in [5]. Through that, 
we can get the service either by home, visited or third party 
operator. 
In UP-TO-US, the proposed components of the nomadic 
service and personalization are implemented in C language. 
We used HTTP to communicate with the context-aware and 
the user profile servers.  The core network and IPTV service 
platform is achieved through HTTP and DIAMETER [6] 
protocols. 
We achieved the nomadism through integrating Nomadic 
Service Module (NSM) in the IPTV platform. This NSM has 
two parts: 
 
 
 
 
NSM client: this part is integrated in the Set-Top-
Box (STB) to add the nomadic features in the 
software (or hardware) client. 
 
NSM server: this server is the gateway function for 
nomadic services in operator network. Also, it is 
responsible for nomadic decisions, user domain 
searching and all inter-domain actions.  
A. Use Cases Analysis 
In our implementations, the client is software STB [1] 
developed by one of the project partners (Orange Labs).  
Then, we integrated our client module (NSM Client) in this 
STB. The client acts as hub for all requests and answers 
concern the nomadic access. The interconnection point for 
any type of access whatever nomadic or not is called IPTV 
Service Selection Function (SSF),  which is also the gateway 
for IPTV platform. 
In this part, we analyze two nomadic use cases; local and 
inter-domain as follows. 
1)  Local Nomadism 
When the user resides outside his home but within his 
operator network, the NSM of visited and home network are 
the same. The initialization phase for searching user rights to 
access nomadic service in the visited locations is explained 
in the sequence shown in Figure 5. All messages sent and 
received in HTTP format to guarantee compatibility and 
standard issues. The client initiates the Nomadic Client 
Request (NCR) and waits the answer from the NSM server 
as Nomadic Service Answer (NSA). In case of faked login, 
the ‘VALUE1’ attribute will return ‘NOT ALLOWED’. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Users access their services outside their homes from their home 
operator (same domain)  
2) Inter-domain Nomadism 
Figure 6 illustrates the sequence diagram for initialization 
phase in case of inter-domain access. In this case, we have 
different domains; so, the visited NSM has the responsibility 
of searching which home network should be contacted.  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Users access their services outside their homes from another 
operator (different domain) 
 
Then, the home NSM is responsible for service 
confirmation and checking users’ rights with other 
modules in UP-TO-US. 
III. PRIVACY ASPECTS 
There exist many risks in storing personal information in 
online systems. These data may be used fraudulently to 
perform different attacks against its owners. Many devices 
may be used to deceive and defraud customers on social 
networks. There are many ways that information on social 
networks can be used for purposes other than what the user 
intended. Data can be obtained through many different 
means like for example eavesdropping. 
Recommendation operations and context-aware system 
like the ones defined within our UPTOUS project rely on the 
use of an exhaustive amount of information provided 
implicitly or explicitly by the user. The more generous and 
detailed the personal data is, the more accurate the 
preferences inferred from the usage history are. In the case of 
our system, the information required from the user in order to 
perform a personalization operation covers a wide range of 
aspects. Many users choose to mask their real identities. 
Masking may be done via anonymity (providing no name at 
all) or pseudo-anonymity (providing a false name). By 
establishing anonymous profiles or alter egos, users decouple 
the different types of profiles they have defined. The main 
purpose is to keep a strict separation between the online 
person and the offline individual. However, it is still very 
difficult to separate the different identities or profiles defined 
for every user.  
Privacy protection is a critical issue for personalized 
IPTV services acceptability by the users. 
That is why the privacy layer in the proposed system 
supports a multi-identities mechanism. Each person holds 
multiple identities (each one with unique user Identity (Id)), 
depending on the user preferences about different data 
disclosure settings.  
After authentication process has been accomplished for a 
subscriberId, a sessionId has been returned to the User 
Domain (UD).  
Identities are used internally, while deciding which data 
is available for a personalization operation. UserId is only 
exchanged with the service domain in those interactions that 
involve users performing crud operations on identities. The 
Privacy Layer consists of: 
 
Multi-identity 
Mechanism: 
manages 
which 
identity (userId) is active at a moment for a person 
 
Privacy Control/ Settings: determines which 
information about the user behavior should be 
considered while inferring preferences 
 
Users’ Multi-Identities and Privacy Policies DB: 
this database contains all data required by the 
privacy layer to perform its functionalities. 
UP-TO-US has defined two different user domains: 
domestic and nomadic. Users in nomadic scenarios generally 
visit a platform different than the one they usually do; hence, 
they can’t be sure about who else is using the same network 
and which information is available for others. Therefore, 
situations where nomadic scenarios are involved require a 
higher level of privacy than domestic situations. Privacy is 
one of the most important issues in our evolving information 
age, where technological developments lead to intensive 
processing and storage of personal information. In this 
context, users have increasingly strong concerns about their 
sensible data stored, processed and travelling without having 
means to control their disclosure. The challenge consists then 
in providing each user with a control of his privacy-sensitive 
data and in guaranteeing the application of the appropriate 
privacy rules all along the lifecycle of these data. This should 
also allow the end-user to handle the famous privacy 
dilemma underlined by A. Westin [16]: “Each individual is 
continually engaged in a personal adjustment process in 
which he balances the desire for privacy with the desire for 
disclosure and communication of himself to others, in light 
of the environmental conditions and social norms set by the 
society in which he lives”. Indeed, each end-user needs to 
self-position between the two following extremes:  
 
Widely expose his personal data in order to take 
benefit of personalized services, but taking risk 
regarding his privacy and 
 
Hide his personal data, but without benefiting from 
such complete personalized services. 
IPTV Systems should support various privacy levels defining 
how personal data can be accessed and used.  
In Table I, for every case study, a level of privacy is 
required. Therefore, the Privacy Control/setting module will 
translate the privacy policies required by the user into 
privacy information with respect to the service provider and 
to third parties. 
       A simple model could be adapted to some use cases 
according to the level of protection, as shown in Table I: 
 
High privacy level: no action authorized for the 
service provider (trace collection and automatic 
update) neither share information with third parties. 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
Average level: service provider allowed to collect 
usage 
history 
and 
to 
automatically 
update 
preferences accordingly, but no sharing with third 
parties is allowed. 
 
Low level: service provider is allowed to collect 
usage history, to automatically update preferences 
accordingly and to share both of them (preferences 
and usage history) with third parties. 
 
TABLE I: STUDY FOR DIFFERENT USE CASES PRIVACY LEVELS  
 
 
      As shown before (in Section III. A), UP-TO-US adopts 
multi-identity mechanism and the privacy control will 
manage the divulgation of the information and profiles. The 
system handles different types of sensitive information like 
the name of the user, birth date, gender, specific location, 
contact information, history of visits, impairments, etc. 
Therefore, it is mandatory to implement a system to manage 
correctly the access to this information, assuring a 
determined level of data privacy chosen previously by the 
user and completed at the time after accessing the service. 
 
IV. THE PROPOSED MODEL FOR PRIVACY  
 
     This proposed model facilitates identity exposure in 
nomadic situations. The question is how to choose the 
identity to expose. 
     We model the interaction between a user and a visited 
service provider as an extensive game [10], as show in 
Figure 7. An extensive game means that a user and a service 
provider take turns to make decisions and take actions.  
We can model the extensive game as follows. 
Two players: The user and the visited service provider. 
A set of outcomes: in our example, there are the five 
outcomes: (Propose, Finish), (Propose, Abort), (Quit), 
(Accept, Abort), and (Accept, Finish). 
Each player chooses and takes one action. The user and the 
service provider have their preferences, which will be 
represented by payoff values.  
      We believe that users want to maximize their privacy, 
while they access recommendation services. Service 
providers want to acquire more users’ personal information 
while they provide services. We define their payoff functions 
as follows. 
A user’s payoff function, U, and a service provider’s payoff 
function, S, at each node are, respectively: 
 
U = Access – Exposure                             (1) 
 
S = Provide access + Exposure                 (2)                      
              
 
        From a user’s perspective, “Access” brings him 
constant amount of benefit for a service, which is 
independent of his personal information exposure. The 
“exposure” component in (1) reduces the benefit as 
“exposure” increases. The service provider does not get 
enough identity information from a user and aborts. Then, 
the benefit is zero. As we can notice from (2), the more the 
user exposes, the more benefit a service provider receives.  
 
 
 
Figure 7. User’ strategy in inter domain situation 
 
       We use the nomadic access in hotel as an example to 
explain the game (inter domain access). Alice has a 
subscription and is in nomadic situation. She wants to access 
to her channels. Alice provides her pseudo name. The visited 
service provider asks for her name. Then, Alice makes a 
decision. After that, the visited service provider makes a 
decision: Alice may quit the service; she may accept the 
request and gives her name; or she may propose other 
options. Let’s suppose that Alice proposes to provide only 
pseudo name.         
 
      Now, it is the service provider’s turn to take decision. 
Suppose the service provider either aborts the checkout 
service or finishes the transaction. Therefore, there are five 
outcome cases. In case 1, Alice provides only her pseudo 
name, and the service provider finishes the transaction. In 
case 2, she provides only his pseudo name, and the service 
provider aborts the process. In case 3, she quits the checkout 
process. In case 4, she gives her name, and the visited service 
provider aborts the transaction. In case 5, she gives her name 
and the transaction finishes. 
In Figure 8, Alice’s preference is {1} > { 5} > { 3, 2} > { 4}. 
That is, Alice prefers to get the same service by giving only 
his name. 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
 
Figure 8. Extensive game between the user and the visited SP 
 
        She also prefers to get the service than not get it, even at 
the price of giving her name. Her least preferred outcome is 
that she gives her name without getting the service.  
     It is possible that two or more outcomes have the same 
preference. For example, {2} and {3} have the same 
preference for Alice.  A subgame perfect nash equilibrium 
[17] is 
such 
that 
players' strategies constitute 
a nash 
equilibrium in every subgame of the original game. 
 
 
Figure 9. Online tool solution for the proposed game 
 
       
      This subgame is represented in red and green color in 
Figure 9. This subgame is unique and obtained by a Java tool  
[11] to affirm our analysis. In Figure 9, the payoff values for 
the user and the service provider in (Propose, Finish) 3, 
and 2, respectively. 
     The analysis may be found by backward induction [10]. It 
is common method for determining subgame perfect 
equilibria. 
     To begin the process of backward induction, we assume 
that the client and the service provider will choose their 
preferences to reach an outcoume (determined by the payoff 
functions). 
     We must start from the bottom of the game and we walk 
through our example in Figure 9.  The service provider may 
choose « Abort » or « Finish ». « Abort » gives the service 
provider a payoff of 0, where as « Finish » gives him a 
payoff of 2. Thus, he will choose « Finish ». Similarly, in 
the right, the service provider will choose « Finish » with a 
payoff of 3. He provides the service.  In our example, the 
client may choose « Propose », « Quit », or « Accept ». 
From our previous discussion, the client’s best choice is 
« Propose ». 
     The process  continues until the root of the game is 
reached.  
     In our example, we have reached the root of the tree. So, 
the user chooses « Propose », and then the service provider 
chooses « Finish ». It is the subgame perfect equilibrium, 
the optimal choices for the client and the service provider. 
 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
       This paper proposed a gateway to IPTV roaming 
services through nomadism. We presented the architecture of 
nomadic IPTV platform through UP-TO-US project. 
Moreover, we presented service personalization through 
EPG customization. This customization is depending mainly 
on four contexts (user, network, service and terminal). Also, 
we studied the privacy issue and its effects on service 
personalization. The sensitive information about users could 
reference the privacy-personalization phase in IPTV access 
especially in nomadic situations. For future work, we want 
to analyze more use the recommendation aspects using our 
proposed extensive game. 
 
ACKNOWLODGMENT 
       This work has been supported by the Eureka Celtic UP-
TO-US (User-Centric Personalized IPTV UbiquitOus and 
SecUre Services) European project. We would also like to 
thank Youness Oumzil for his help in the implementation. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] UP-TO-US project: “https://up-to-us.rd.francetelecom.com/” 
[retrieved: July, 2013] 
[2] Parks Associates Report “TV Everywhere: Growth, Solutions, and 
Strategies’’, February 2011. 
[3] Recommendation ITU-T Y.2091; “Terms and definitions for Next 
Generation Networks”, February 2008. 
[4] E. Abd-Elrahman and H. Afifi, “ Moving to the Cloud: New Vision 
towards Collaborative Delivery for Open-IPTV”, The 10 th 
International Conference on Networks ICN2011 in conjunction with 
GlobeNet 2011, St. Maarten,The Netherlands Antilles, 23-28 Jan 
2011, pp.353-358. 
[5] Recommendation ITU-T Y.1910; “IPTV functional architecture’’, 
Appendix IV, Sept. 2008.  
[6] Diameter 
Base 
Protocol, 
“http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3588” 
[retrieved: April, 2013] 
[7] S. Song, H. Moustafa, and H. Aﬁﬁ. “Personalized TV Service through 
Employing Context-Awareness in IPTV/IMS Architecture,’’  In Proc. 
of the 3rd International Conference on Future Multimedia Networking 
(FMN’10), Krakow, Poland, LNCS, volume 6157, June.2010, pp.75–
86. Springer-Verlag,  
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
[8] S. Song, H. Moustafa, and A. Afifi, “A survey on personalized TV 
and NGN services through context-awareness”. ACM computing 
surveys, January. 2012, vol. 11, n° 1, article 4 
[9] S. Song, H. Moustafa, and A. Afifi, “Enriched IPTV services 
personalization,” ICC ‘12: IEEE International Conference on 
Communications, 10-15 June . 2012, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 1934-1939. 
[10]  M. J. Osborne, “ An introduction to game theory;” Oxford University 
Press, August 2003 
[11] Extensive Form Game Solver: 
“http://www.gametheory.net/Mike/applets/ExtensiveForm/ExtensiveF
orm.html” [retrieved: July, 2013] 
[12] A. Elmisery, and D. Botvich, “Privacy aware recommnder service for   
IPTV networks,” FTRA’ 11 International conference on multimedia 
and ubiquitous engineering, June. 2011, pp. 160 - 166 
[13] P. Shoval, V. Maidel, and B. Shapira, “An Ontology- Content-Based 
Filtering Method,” In I.Tech-2007 - Information Research and 
Applications, 2007. 
[14] R. Pampapathi, B. Mirkin, and M. Levene, “A Review of the 
Technologies and Methods in Profiling and Profile Classification,” 
EPALS Technical Report, April, 2005. 
[15]  I. Cantador, A. Bellogín, and P. Castells, “A Multilayer Ontology-
Based Hybrid Recommendation Model,” AI Communications, 
Special Issue on Recommender Systems, IOS Press 2008, pp. 21(2-3) 
203–210.  
[16] A. Westin, “Privacy and freedom,” Fifth ed., New York, U.S.A.: 
Atheneum, 1968. 
[17] I. Obara, “Subgame Perfect Equilibrium,” UCLA, 2012 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-305-6
ICSNC 2013 : The Eighth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

