Methodologies for  detecting DoS/DDoS attacks against network servers 
 
Mohammed Alenezi 
School of Computer Science & Electronic Engineering  
University of Essex name 
Colchester, UK 
mnmale@essex.ac.uk 
Martin J Reed 
School of Computer Science & Electronic Engineering 
University of Essex name 
Colchester, UK 
mnmale@essex.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—As denial of service (DoS) attacks are becoming 
more common in the Internet, there is greater need for 
solutions to overcome these attacks. Defending against DoS/ 
DDoS attacks can generally be divided into 3 phases: 
prevention, detection and response. Detection is one of the key 
steps in defending against DoS/ DDoS attacks. However, with 
the high variation in the DoS/DDoS attack types, the detection 
of such attacks becomes problematic. A good detection 
technique should have short detection time and low false 
positive rate. This paper presents an introduction to intrusion 
detection systems (IDS) and survey of different DoS/DDoS 
detection techniques. The key observation of this survey paper 
is that a CUSUM-based detection technique has many 
advantages over other statistical instruments in that it is non-
parametric; consequently, it does not require training and is 
more robust to variations in the attack profile. 
Keywords-DoS; DDoS; detection; network security.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As DoS attacks become one of the most threatening 
security issues, the need to detect this type of attack is 
increasing. DoS is not just a “game” played for fun by some 
attackers, it has become an effective weapon for cyber war or 
for so called “hacktivist” groups [1]. In general, detection is 
required before the spread of a DoS attack. DoS detection is 
often part of a wider intrusion detection system (IDS) [2, 3]. 
An IDS is best defined as software or hardware used to 
detect unauthorized traffic or activities that are against the 
allowed policy of a given network [4]. Intrusion detection is 
not a new research field, with one of the earliest published 
IDS papers in 1980 by Anderson [5]; in 1987, Denning [6] 
provided a structure for researchers working on IDS [2]. IDS 
can be classified based on the serving component (the audit 
source location) as either host-based, network-based or a 
combination of both. In a host-based IDS the audit 
information, such as application and operating system log 
files, are monitored while the network traffic is monitored in 
a network-based IDS. The host-based is usually located in a 
single host while the network-based system is usually 
located on machine separate from the hosts that it protects 
[7]. Hybrid intrusion detection systems combine both the 
network and host-based systems [8]. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section 
II, an overview of the IDS is presented, while in section III 
DoS detection is introduced. In section IV, general DoS 
classification is presented with different proposed techniques 
and discussion. The classification of DoS flooding-based 
attack is presented in section V. Our key observations about 
the detection techniques are presented in section VI.  
II. 
IDS OVERVIEW 
Network-based IDS (NIDS) usually detects attacks such 
as worms, scans, DoS attacks, botnets, and other types of 
attacks [9]. In the following, a general overview of the IDSs 
will be presented. Then, more precisely DoS detection 
techniques will be reviewed. 
Network IDSs are generally categorized based on the 
detection method as one of two types: signature-based or 
anomaly-based detection. Signature-based, also known as 
rule- or misuse-based [10], detects an attack by comparing 
well-known attack signatures, or patterns, with the monitored 
traffic. A match generates an alarm for a potential attack. 
This type has fast detection time, detects most known attacks 
[11], and, generally has a low false positive rate, i.e., it does 
not signal an alarm for legitimate traffic. On the other hand, 
an anomaly-based IDS, also known as behavior-based, 
operates by comparing the network traffic behavior against 
previous “normal” traffic behavior. Any deviation in the 
comparison is considered to be a sign of an attack. The 
system acquires a normal traffic profile, usually through 
training, and monitors the traffic for any differences with the 
normal profile [12]. The normal traffic behavior is classified 
into two types [11]: standard and trained. The standard is 
based on standard protocols and rules such as TCP 
handshaking connection [13] set up and how the attacker 
could perform a half connection attack. The trained traffic is 
used to determine a threshold value for future detection. 
There are many network anomaly-based systems and 
interested readers can refer to [11]. Anomaly detection can 
detect unknown attacks; however, it generally produces 
higher false positive rates than signature-based systems. 
Figure 1 summarizes the IDS classifications. In practice, 
systems may combine both signature and anomaly-based 
techniques. 
In general, anomaly-based intrusion detection systems 
operate in three phases [14]: parameterization, training, and 
detection. In parameterization, the parameters of the system 
are defined.  The model of the normal behavior of the traffic 
will be built in the training phase.  In the detection phase, the 
traffic behavior is compared against that in the training 
phase. If the comparison exceeds a threshold value a 
detection alarm is triggered. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

III. 
DOS DETECTION 
A. Overview 
DoS prevention using ingress filtering [15] can help in 
reducing some types of attacks such as spoofing IP addresses 
as used by attackers to hide their identity. However, reactive 
techniques are often required and here detection is needed to 
alert about the attack and perform some automatic action. A 
DoS/DDoS attack is considered to be just one type of attack 
that an IDS can react to and there are different types of 
network DoS including: overloading a service with 
seemingly legitimate requests and sending malformed 
packets, which aims to cause a failure of the service through 
some bug in the service. This paper considers the former 
rather than the latter type, as malformed packet-based DoS is 
relevant to general host-based security and can be filtered 
using a rule-based approach. 
One of the key elements in DoS detection technique is 
the time of detection [16]. A good detection mechanism 
should detect the DoS attack before the service starts to be 
degraded. However, packets from an overloading type of 
DoS are often indistinguishable from those of legitimate 
users. This makes the detection difficult and increases the 
chance for a false positive, which is a critical problem in 
DoS detection. A good detection technique should react 
quickly and have a low false positive rate.   
 
 
Figure 1.  General classification of IDS 
B. Classifications of DoS Detection  
DoS detection techniques can be divided, as for general 
IDS, into signature and anomaly-based detection. Signature 
detection is based on well-known DoS attacks patterns [16], 
which are mostly malformed packets and protocol attacks. 
Anomaly detection is based on the traffic deviation from 
“normal” which is the form of most DoS attacks. The scope 
of this paper is anomaly-based DoS detection techniques for 
the overloading type of DoS [14]. However, even within this 
category, DoS detection techniques address different types of 
DoS attack such as a SYN flood attack[17]  or a DNS attack 
[18, 19]. 
Different classifications have been proposed to provide a 
framework for the detection techniques. The differences are 
in the method used to detect the DoS attacks. Because of the 
paper length limitation, only three different proposed 
classifications were chosen. We have classified two works 
under general DoS detection classification and one under 
specific DoS flooding attack. A general description for each 
classification work will be presented, and some of the related 
techniques will be reviewed in the following sections.  
IV. 
GENERAL DOS CLASSIFICATION 
General DoS classification will cover two presented 
works. The first work was proposed by Peng [16]. The 
detection methods in this work were divided into: DoS attack 
specific detection and anomaly-based detection. DoS attack 
specific detection covers a general and wide range of 
different detection techniques types under one classification. 
In anomaly-based detection, the techniques are based on a 
comparison between the network traffic and a prepared 
normal traffic profile. The second work was proposed by 
Yonghua [17]. The detection techniques were divided into 
two types: IP attribute-based and traffic volume-based. The 
IP attribute-based technique monitors the behavior of 
selected IP attributes and considers the anomalies as 
deviations. The traffic volume-based studies the traffic of the 
network and applies statistical calculations on the packet rate 
of network flow. 
A. Discussion 
Peng [16] proposed two classifications for DoS detection 
techniques: DoS attack specific detection and anomaly-based 
detection. In DoS attack specific detection, the classification 
was made without regard to the methodologies in the 
detection; instead it was made to cover certain proposed 
techniques. For example, the authors have classified Multi 
Level Tree for Online Packet Statistics (MULTOPS) [20] 
and SYN detection techniques under the DoS specific 
detection. However, a closer inspection shows that it can be 
quite difficult to accurately classify such techniques. For 
example, the MULTOPS technique is quite different from 
the SYN detection technique, and it is not clear that the SYN 
is not, in fact anomaly-based detection.    
Yonghua [17] proposed two classifications for DoS 
detection techniques: IP attribute-based and traffic volume-
based. In IP attribute classification, certain parameters of the 
IP packets are monitored to detect the attack. For example, 
the source IP address, port number, or the time to live (TTL) 
value will be monitored as the values will show some change 
during an attack. In the IP attribute-based classification, the 
authors cover the techniques that deal with IP header 
parameters and emphasize the use of the TTL field. The 
traffic volume-based category covers any techniques that are 
not studying the IP header parameters. Many different 
methodologies 
placed 
in 
the 
traffic 
volume-based 
classification such MULTOPS, SYN detection, and other 
techniques that are based on statistical algorithms.  
As mentioned earlier, signature-based detection is based 
on certain known characteristics in the traffic. Kompella [21] 
mentions that it is difficult to create a signature for a DoS 
attacks as the attackers could change the type and the 
content. Furthermore, Cheng [22] states that signature-based 
detection can be used to detect the communication between 
the 
attackers 
and 
their 
zombies. 
However, 
the 
communication could be encrypted making this detection 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

difficult. Consequently, Peng [16] states that signature-based 
detection is inefficient for DoS detection. However, we think 
signature-based should not be dismissed for the following 
reasons. First, although it is difficult to create signatures for 
all types of DoS, this fact applies to IDS more generally and 
not specifically DoS. There are certain types of DoS attacks 
that are straightforward to detect with a signature-based 
technique such as a TCP mixed flags attack. Second, Cheng 
[22] noted during the study one particular attack tool 
(Stacheldraht v1.666) that  the communication between the 
attackers and the zombies can be detected using a signature-
based approach. This is highly useful for the prevention 
stage. Consequently, while signature-based detection has 
limitation it can be highly effective in some cases.    
The presented work by Peng [16] and Yonghua [17] 
provides a general classification for DoS detection 
techniques. Both of the works have different naming for the 
classifications and are overlapping in the mentioned 
techniques. In the following section, some of the proposed 
detection techniques will be reviewed. 
B. Detection Techniques 
A DDoS detection technique is proposed in [23], which 
is based on the source IP address. The system monitors the 
new source IP address of the packets instead of monitoring 
the traffic. The technique is based on the study by Jung [24], 
which indicates that during an attack, most of the source IP 
addresses are new. On the other hand, during flash crowds 
most of the IP addresses are not new. A flash crowd is a 
dramatic increase in the load on a web server by a, 
legitimate, large traffic surge causing an increase in 
congestion and packet loss [24]. The main drawback of this 
technique is that the attacker could launch a DoS attack by 
known (not new) IP addresses to the target to circumvent the 
detection 
system. 
The 
attacker 
can 
start 
normal 
communication with the target then perform the attack. 
Additionally, not all of the DoS attacks use spoofed IP 
addresses for example the attacker could use zombies with 
real IP addresses.  
Talpade [25] proposes a detection technique based on the 
characterization of the dynamic statistical properties of the 
network traffic such as time to live (TTL) and other IP 
header information to detect the anomaly in the traffic. The 
characteristic of this idea is based on the change in the 
statistical distribution of the TTL values which indicates an 
anomalous change in the traffic. The main drawback is that 
the change in the TTL values does not always associate with 
anomalous traffic. Also, the model was not proposed for 
DDoS specifically.  
Kim [26] proposes a detection technique based on 
creating a stable baseline profile to monitor the deviations in 
the traffic. An analysis was conducted to check the stability 
of the traffic with regards to different parameters. Significant 
differences in traffic patterns were found between different 
sites. Therefore, a baseline profile that is based on different 
attributes was proposed for detection. The choice of the 
attributes was based on the assumption that some of the 
attributes such packet size, TCP flag pattern, and protocol 
types can be anticipated by the attacker. On the other hand, 
based on the author’s opinion, attributes such as TTL, source 
IP prefixes, and server port distribution are site dependent 
and difficult for the attacker to learn. Thus, the technique 
was proposed based on these attributes. The work presented 
in [26] has some drawbacks such as the chosen attributes are 
not directly related to DDoS attacks and there is added 
computational complexity with a high false positive rate 
[17].  
Yonghua [17] proposed two DDoS detection techniques 
based on distance. Average distance estimation is the first 
one and the second is distance-based traffic separation. By 
analyzing the distance value and traffic rate, the attack can 
be detected.  The TTL value is used to infer the distance 
value in the average distance estimation technique. The 
“normality” of the traffic is determined by the prediction of 
the mean value of the distance, where the prediction of the 
mean value was achieved by using the exponential 
smoothing estimation technique [27]. The second technique, 
distance-based traffic separation, uses the prediction of 
traffic arrival rates from different distances and thus the 
normality of the traffic is defined. The prediction of traffic 
arrival rates is achieved by using the minimum mean square 
error (MMSE) linear predictor technique. The normality and 
abnormality can be separated in the traffic for both 
techniques by using the mean absolute deviation (MAD).  
Yonghua’s 
techniques 
encountered 
the 
following 
drawbacks: first, the detection is based on the distance which 
is inferred from the TTL value. The distance will not reflect 
the real anomaly in the traffic. The attacker can know the 
distance to the victim and explicitly choose the path. Also, a 
sophisticated attacker can fix the TTL value to be within the 
predicted distance. Furthermore, the paths are subjected to 
change and different policies could be applied by different 
IPSs. Finally, for both of the techniques, the prediction of the 
normality of the traffic is achieved through the use of 
existing estimation techniques which are affected by the 
samples and can be anticipated by the attacker. 
  MULTOPS is  proposed by Gil and Poletto [20]. It is a 
heuristic and data structure-based technique used by routers 
to detect a DDoS attack. The packet rate statistics for subnet 
prefixes are maintained by the nodes of the tree.  The 
statistics are collected from different aggregate levels. The 
size of the tree is expandable with regards to the available 
memory. MULTOPS assumes the packet rate for the normal 
traffic in the communication between two machines is 
proportional.  Therefore, any disproportional in the packet 
rate would trigger an alarm for the attack.  
MULTOPS encounters some limitations mentioned by 
the authors. The location and set up of MULTOPS routers in 
the network would affect the ability of the technique to 
detect attacks with randomized IP source addresses packets.   
Legitimate packets for a certain IP destination address will 
be dropped as the MULTOPS would be confused by the 
spoofed IP address packets and identify the destination 
address to be under attacks.  Furthermore, large number of 
attackers could connect to the victim in a normal way and the 
flows rate of the attackers’ traffic is still proportional which 
means MULTOPS will not detect the attack. For example, 
large number of attackers could connect to the victim 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

through HTTP or FTP requesting a large file download. The 
victim will not be able to handle all of the requests 
consequently DoS and MULTOPS will not be able to detect 
the attack because the flow rate is proportional. Additionally, 
MULTOPS will suffer from a high false positive rate with 
streaming services as their flows are disproportional [16].           
A detection technique for SYN flooding was proposed by 
Wang [28]. It is based on the normal behavior of TCP 
protocol (i.e. handshaking process and FIN or RST) and the 
sequential change point detection. The sequential change 
point detection is a statistical method to check for a change 
in a data [29]. To make the technique easy to use and more 
general, a non-parametric cumulative sum (CUSUM) 
method was used. The technique compares the ratio of SYN 
packets to the FIN or RST to find a change. One of the 
drawbacks of this technique that is the attacker could send 
the FIN or RST along with the SYN packet to avoid the 
detection [16].   
A DoS detection technique was proposed by Blazek in 
[30]. The technique is based on statistical analysis on the 
data from different network layers to detect a change. The 
technique consists of two methods: adaptive sequential and 
batch sequential. The technique is based on the change point 
detection theory. To achieve a fixed rate of false alarms, 
statistical analysis of training data was utilized by both 
methods. The authors claim that their technique has three 
features: the methods are self-learning; the attacks can be 
detected with small delay; and computational complexity is 
manageable. The technique uses different traffic types such 
TCP and UDP in change detection modeling. The main 
drawback of the technique is the high computational 
complexity.   
One of the key issues in DoS detection is how to 
discriminate between legitimate and attacker traffic to reduce 
the false positive rate. Cheng [31] proposes a technique, 
which is based on spectral analysis, to differentiate between 
normal traffic and attacker traffic. In order to use the spectral 
analysis in a packet-based network, a signal was defined as 
the number of arrival packets in a fixed length time interval. 
The power spectral density of the signal is estimated to 
discover the periodicity. Based on the fact that the 
periodicity around the round trip time of the normal TCP 
flows is strong in both directions while the attack flows are 
not, the attack is detected. The technique is not able to detect 
any attack other than TCP flows. Other protocols such UDP 
would pass undetected by the technique. A sophisticated 
attacker can send attack traffic at the same periodic interval 
to avoid detection such as low-DoS. The attack traffic does 
not have to be from a single source to form high volume. An 
attacker could use the zombies to send normal behavior 
traffic to the victim. However, the large number of zombies 
would be enough to overwhelm and deny the service from 
the victim [16]. Kulkarni [32] proposed a detection technique 
,which is based on Kolmogorov complexity, to detect DDoS 
attacks. Kolmogorov complexity calculates the size of the 
smallest representation of the data and measures the degree 
of the randomness [33]. In general, it is based on the 
correlation between the traffic flows to distinguish between 
the attack traffic and high legitimate load traffic. It is been 
assumed that during the DDoS attack, the generated packets 
tend to have similar characteristics such as protocol type, 
destination address, type and execution pattern. All of the 
attack packets from different locations will have the same 
destination address which gives a similarity for the traffic 
pattern. This similarity can be detected by using the 
Kolmogorov complexity-based technique. On the other hand, 
the high load legitimate traffic tends to contain different 
types and characteristics which make the traffic flows to be 
randomly distributed and not greatly correlated. The 
technique is based on correlation and assumptions which are 
not always would be valid in case of the attack as the 
attackers can create a random flow to avoid the detection.  
Cabrera [34] proposed a technique to proactively detect 
DDoS by using a time series analysis. The correlation 
between the traffic behavior at both of the victim and the 
attacker is the basis for this technique. A normal profile is 
built in order to compare any deviation in the traffic from the 
normal behavior to signal an attack alarm. In order to build 
the normal profile, key variables and correlation process 
need to be identified. Key variables are extracted at the 
victim side and then the variables, from the attackers, that are 
correlated to the extracted key variable are calculated by 
statistical tools such as Granger Causality Test (GCT) and 
Auto Regressive Model (AR Model) etc. For example, the 
key variable could be the ICMP echo packets at the victim 
and the variables correlation could be the ICMP replies [16]. 
To harden the detection process, different attack traffic could 
be combined in one type to make the correlation process is 
very complex as there will be many key variables to be 
correlated. It is been assumed that the same attack tool will 
be used from the sources of the attacks which is not always 
the case [16]. 
V. 
NETWORK BASED DOS FLOODING CLASSIFICATION 
A survey for detecting DoS flooding-based attacks was 
presented by Carl [35]. The detection techniques are 
classified based on the algorithms used (not a certain 
parameter or behavior) into three groups: activity profiling, 
sequential change point detection, and wavelet analysis. 
Each group represents a general framework for the detection 
process. 
A. Activity Profiling  
Inside the header of the packet, certain information of the 
network traffic is monitored to generate an activity profile. 
The average packet rate for a network flow is defined as the 
activity profile. Consecutive packets with similar header 
fields such as protocol, port and addresses represent the 
network flow. The activity level or the average packet rate 
can be determined by the elapsed time between the 
consecutive matching packets. The average packet rates of 
all inbound and outbound flows are used to calculate the 
total network activity by dividing the sum over the average 
packet rates [35]. 
A high number of flows could be resulted by monitoring 
certain protocol services and this number will be increased 
for different services and protocols. Therefore, clustering 
concept was used to avoid the dimensional problems [35]. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Individual flows with similar characteristics can be grouped 
in a cluster. The summation of constituent flows is used to 
determine the activity level of the cluster. The activity level 
of the clusters will be used to detect the attack based on an 
increase in the activity levels between the clusters which 
indicates an increase the attack rate. Distributed denial of 
service could cause an increase in the overall clusters.  
The backscatter analysis project [36] is an example of the 
activity profiling. The authors were trying to estimate the 
worldwide DoS activity. During the attack, mostly the 
attacker uses packets with spoofed source IP addresses and 
when the victim replies to the spoofed source addresses, the 
packets will be backscattered. The backscattered packets are 
monitored and clustered based on the source address which 
is the victim’s address. The normality of the distribution of 
the clustered backscattered packets, which is calculated by 
using Anderson-Darling test, is used to detect the attacks and 
define the threshold of the cluster’s activity level.  
Feintien [37] proposes an activity level DDoS detection 
technique. It is based on statistics and entropy of some of the 
IP header’s attributes. For selected attributes such as IP 
source address, the entropy and Chi-square distribution are 
calculated for different cluster flows. Each cluster is 
categorized according to how frequent the source address of 
the packet has been seen. For example, the first cluster 
represents the most frequent source address seen in the 
traffic while the second holds the next 4 most seen source 
address. The third, fourth, and the fifth hold the next most 
16, 256, and 4,096 source addresses respectively [35]. The 
last cluster will hold the rest of the traffic. Based on 
calculations, the DDoS can be detected by comparing the 
abnormal to normal traffic. The main drawback is the choice 
of the attribute that will be used for entropy calculation [17].  
B. Sequential Change Point Detection 
In sequential change point detection [35], the traffic is 
filtered at the victim, according to different criteria, such as 
address, port, and protocol. The filtered traffic is treated as a 
time series. For an attack starting at time Ƒ, a change will be 
shown in the calculated statistics at time ≥ Ƒ. A Cumulative 
sum (CUSUM) [29] is one of the change point detection 
algorithms. It requires less computational and memory 
resources than other change point detection algorithms. 
CUSUM can be applied to DoS attacks by comparing the 
actual average for the traffic in the time series with the 
expected average. For a given time series sample, the 
difference between the actual and expected average is 
calculated. The CUSUM recursively will increase in case the 
difference exceeds an upper bound for attack traffic. On the 
other hand, the difference in the normal traffic will be under 
the bound and the CUSUM will be decreased. The DoS 
attack could be identified by defining a threshold that would 
specify the allowed increase in the time series within the 
upper bound. Based on the behavior of the network such as 
the expected volume of traffic or the range of delay that can 
be tolerated or the sensitivity of the running applications, 
CUSUM algorithms can trade-off between the detection 
delay and false positives rates during the setting of the 
threshold and the upper bound [35]. 
C. Wavelet Analysis 
The input signal, in wavelet analysis, is described as 
spectral components in wavelets. With wavelets, the time for 
a given frequency can be determined as the wavelets provide 
a description for concurrent time and frequency. On the other 
hand, the Fourier analysis provides only a frequency 
description [35]. The time-localized anomalous signals can 
be separated from the noise signals by wavelets. By 
analyzing each spectral window’s energy, the anomalies can 
be determined.         
Paul et al. [38] proposed a detection technique based on 
wavelet analysis. The analysis was applied to four anomaly 
types: measurement failure, attacks, flash crowds, and 
outages such as network failures.  The data used for the 
analysis was collected on a border router of a large university 
over six months. The data consists of IP flow and SNMP 
[39] measurements, which are decomposed into different 
time series. High and mid- band spectral energies are 
presented by applying wavelets on each time series. 
VI. 
KEY OBSERVATIONS 
As a result from reviewing the presented work on IDS 
and DDoS detection, key issues were observed which could 
help in studying DoS/DDoS detection. We believe that there 
are many aspects that should be considered towards getting a 
reliable detection system. It is not only depending on the 
technical details of the detection technique, other issues 
should be considered such as the following. First, the 
location of the machine that will carry on the detection 
process is vital and related to the design of the system. It 
could be a host-based where the traffic received and 
analyzed by the host or a network-based where the network 
traffic is monitored by a separate dedicated machine. 
Another choice is a hybrid system which combines both host 
and network types. Based on the protected system (protected 
system points to the system that installed the IDS), the 
location should be considered. For example, protecting a 
single server is different from protecting an ISP network that 
includes many hosts, servers and network resources. Second, 
considering the nature of the service provided by the 
protected system is part of the good design. Protecting a web 
server is different from protecting database server in terms of 
the information sensitivity, response time and the availability 
of server. Third, the choice for the used methodology such as 
anomaly-based or signature-based would make a difference.  
The choice should be based on the nature of the expected 
traffic and type of service provided by the protected system. 
For example, if the system is connected to the Internet or 
locally to private networks. There is a trade-off between 
anomaly-based and signature-based detection methodologies. 
Table I shows a comparison between the two methodologies. 
The same can be applied to DoS/DDoS detection. In 
DoS/DDoS, the detection is divided into two phases: the 
selected attributes to be monitored and the statistic methods. 
The selected attributes should show different behavior during 
the attack. The statistic methods would discover the 
abnormality in the selected attribute. Choosing adequate 
attributes would make significant difference in detection 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

time. Additionally, choosing the right statistic method among 
the wide available range would help in discovering the 
abnormality in the attribute very fast.  
In the experience of the authors, the CUSUM statistical 
techniques perform better than other statistical techniques 
due to many reasons. First, CUSUM is a non-parametric 
technique which means training traffic is not required to 
detect the change in the traffic such as Kolmogorov 
complexity [33], Granger Causality Test (GCT) and Auto 
Regressive Model (AR Model) [34]. Second, CUSUM 
requires less computational and storage resources comparing 
to other statistical techniques. It only requires defining 
bounds and threshold value to detect the change in the traffic 
behavior. Defining the bounds and threshold depends on type 
of running service and traffic. 
TABLE I.  
SIGNATURE AND ANOMALY BASED COMPARISON 
Method Detection 
time 
 Reliability 
Detect 
new 
attacks 
False 
Positive 
Requirements 
  Signature   Fast 
  Yes 
  No 
  Very low 
Well-known           
signature 
  Anomaly   vary 
  Yes 
  Yes 
  High 
   Trained data 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
DoS/DDoS is one of the main security threats in the 
Internet. Defending against DoS/DDoS becomes a necessary 
step that must be considered by the companies and ISPs. 
DoS/DDoS detection is regarded to be one of the main 
phases in overcoming the DoS/DDoS problem. IDS is used 
to detect different types of intruders including DoS/DDoS 
attacks. An overview and broad classification IDS are 
presented. The difficulties and characteristics of DoS/DDoS 
attacks are discussed in the DoS detection section. 
Furthermore, a classification of DoS attacks is explained. 
Three different classifications have been chosen and divided 
in two groups: general DoS classification and network 
flooding DoS-based.  In each classification, many different 
proposed techniques are introduced and reviewed to point 
out the limitations. A key observation of the authors is that 
while signature-based detection has limitations it should not 
be ignored as it is relatively efficient. In terms of the 
statistical techniques for anomaly-based detection, the 
CUSUM approach has many advantages over more 
sophisticated statistical instruments in that it is non-
parametric and thus training is more straightforward. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Mirkovic and P. Reiher, "A taxonomy of DDoS attack and DDoS 
defense mechanisms," ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication 
Review, vol. 34, pp. 39-53, 2004. 
[2] 
J. McHugh, A. Christie, and J. Allen, "Defending yourself: The role 
of intrusion detection systems," Software, IEEE, vol. 17, pp. 42-51, 
2000. 
[3] 
D. Wagner and P. Soto, "Mimicry attacks on host-based intrusion 
detection systems," 2002, pp. 255-264. 
[4] 
T. M. Wu, "Intrusion Detection Systems " Information Assurance 
Technology Analysis Center (IATAC), Septemper 2009. 
[5] 
J. P. Anderson, "Computer security threat monitoring and 
surveillance," 1980. 
[6] 
D. 
E. 
Denning, 
"An 
intrusion-detection 
model," 
Software 
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, pp. 222-232, 1987. 
[7] 
M. V. Mahoney and P. K. Chan, "Learning nonstationary models of 
normal network traffic for detecting novel attacks," 2002, pp. 376-
385. 
[8] 
H. Debar, M. Dacier, and A. Wespi, "Towards a taxonomy of 
intrusion-detection systems," Computer Networks, vol. 31, pp. 805-
822, 1999. 
[9] 
A. Sperotto, et al., "An overview of IP flow-based intrusion 
detection," Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 12, pp. 
343-356, 2010. 
[10] F. Dressler, G. Munz, and G. Carle, "Attack detection using 
cooperating autonomous detection systems (CATS)," Wilhelm-
Schickard Institute of Computer Science, Computer Networks and 
Internet, 2004. 
[11] S. A. Khayam, et al., "A survey of anomaley-based intrusion 
detection systems," School of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science (SEECS), National University of Sciences & Technology 
(NUST)2009. 
[12] N. Ye, Secure computer and network systems: modeling, analysis and 
design: Wiley, 2008. 
[13] R. W. Stevens, TCP/IP illustrated, Volume 1: The protocols: 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 1994. 
[14] P. Garcia-Teodoro, J. Diaz-Verdejo, G. Macia-Fernandez, and E. 
Vazquez, "Anomaly-based network intrusion detection: Techniques, 
systems and challenges," computers & security, vol. 28, pp. 18-28, 
2009. 
[15] ArborNetworks, "Worldwide Infrastructure Security Report," Feb 
2012. 
[16] T. Peng, C. Leckie, and K. Ramamohanarao, "Survey of network-
based defense mechanisms countering the DoS and DDoS problems," 
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 39, p. 42 pages, April 2007. 
[17] Y. You, M. Zulkernine, and A. Haque, "Detecting flooding-based 
DDoS attacks," 2007, pp. 1229-1234. 
[18] R. Naraine. Massive DDoS attack hit DNS root servers [Online]. 
Available:http://www.esecurityplanet.com/trends/article/0,10751,148
6981,00.html. 
[19] M. Prince. Deep Inside a DNS Amplification DDoS Attack [Online]. 
Available:http://blog.cloudflare.com/deep-inside-a-dns-amplification-
ddos-attack 
[20] T. M. Gil and M. Poletto, "MULTOPS: a data-structure for 
bandwidth attack detection," in Proceedings of 10th Usenix Security 
Symposium, 2001, pp. 23-38. 
[21] R. R. Kompella, S. Singh, and G. Varghese, "On scalable attack 
detection in the network," in Proceedings of the 4th ACM 
SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement. ACM Press, , New 
York, 2004, pp. 187-200. 
[22] G. Cheng, "Malware FAQ: Analysis on DDOS tool Stacheldraht v1. 
666,"[Online].Available:http://www.sans.org/resources/malwarefaq/st
acheldraht. php, 2006. 
[23] T. Peng, C. Leckie, and K. Ramamohanarao, "Proactively detecting 
distributed denial of service attacks using source IP address 
monitoring," NETWORKING 2004. Networking Technologies, 
Services, 
and 
Protocols; 
Performance 
of 
Computer 
and 
Communication Networks; Mobile and Wireless Communications, 
pp. 771-782, 2004. 
[24] J. Jung, B. Krishnamurthy, and M. Rabinovich, "Flash crowds and 
denial of service attacks: Characterization and implications for CDNs 
and web sites," 2002, pp. 293-304. 
[25] R. Talpade, G. Kim, and S. Khurana, "NOMAD: Traffic-based 
network monitoring framework for anomaly detection," in Fourth 
IEEE Symposium on Computers and Communications, 1999, pp. 
442-451. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[26] Y. Kim, J. Y. Jo, and K. K. Suh, "Baseline profile stability for 
network anomaly detection," International Journal of Network 
Security, vol. 6, No.1, pp. 60–66, Jan 2008. 
[27] V. Jacobson, "Congestion avoidance and control," in Proceedings of 
SIGCOMM'88, ACM, 1988, pp. 314-329. 
[28] H. Wang, D. Zhang, and K. G. Shin, "Detecting SYN flooding 
attacks," in In Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, 2002, pp. 1530–
1539. 
[29] M. Basseville and I. V. Nikiforov, Detection of abrupt changes: 
theory and application vol. 15: Prentice Hall Englewood Cliffs, 1993. 
[30] R. B. Blazek, H. Kim, B. Rozovskii, and A. Tartakovsky, "A novel 
approach to detection of denial-of-service attacks via adaptive 
sequential and batch-sequential change-point detection methods," 
2001, pp. 220-226. 
[31] C. M. Cheng, H. Kung, and K. S. Tan, "Use of spectral analysis in 
defense against DoS attacks," 2002, pp. 2143-2148 vol. 3. 
[32] A. B. Kulkarni, S. F. Bush, and S. C. Evans, "Detecting distributed 
denial-of-service attacks using Kolmogorov complexity metrics," 
TR176, GE Research Center, 2001. 
[33] M. Li and P. M. B. Vitányi, An introduction to Kolmogorov 
complexity and its applications: Springer-Verlag New York Inc, 
2008. 
[34] J. B. D. Cabrera, et al., "Proactive detection of distributed denial of 
service attacks using mib traffic variables-a feasibility study," 2001, 
pp. 609-622. 
[35] G. Carl, G. Kesidis, R. R. Brooks, and S. Rai, "Denial-of-service 
attack-detection techniques," Internet Computing, IEEE, vol. 10, pp. 
82-89, 2006. 
[36] D. Moore, C. Shannon, D. J. Brown, G. M. Voelker, and S. Savage, 
"Inferring internet denial-of-service activity," ACM Transactions on 
Computer Systems (TOCS), vol. 24, pp. 115-139, 2006. 
[37] L. Feinstein, D. Schnackenberg, R. Balupari, and D. Kindred, 
"Statistical approaches to DDoS attack detection and response," in 
Proceedings of DARPA Information Survivability Conference and 
Exposition, 2003, pp. 303-314 vol. 1. 
[38] P. Barford, J. Kline, D. Plonka, and A. Ron, "A signal analysis of 
network traffic anomalies," in Proceedings of the 2nd ACM 
SIGCOMM Workshop on Internet measurment, New York, NY, 
USA, 2002, pp. 71-82. 
[39] W. Stallings, SNMP, SNMPv2, SNMPv3, and RMON 1 and 2: 
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 1998. 
 
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

