Intelligent Vehicular Security System using Sensors and GPS 
 
A. Zuhair, M. Ali  
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Caledonian College of Engineering  
Muscat, Oman 
ahmed10031@cceoman.net, 
mansoor@caledonian.edu.om 
Ali Al-Humairi1,2 
1Department of Computer Science, German University 
of Technology, Muscat, Oman. 
 2Department of Communication Technologies, 
Duisburg-Essen University, Duisburg, Germany 
1ali.alhumairi@gutech.edu.om, 
2ali.al-humairi@stud.uni-duisburg-essen.de
 
 
Abstract—The problem of car thefts and cars crashing due to 
careless parking are common issues of unattended public 
parking lots. This paper presents an intelligent car security 
system which provides security to automobiles against thefts 
and crashing that happen in parking lots. The main parts of 
the proposed system are the Global System for Mobile 
Communications (GSM) and Global Positioning System (GPS) 
modems, a camera, a sensor and microcontroller. The design of 
the proposed system provides a highly secure, flexible, reliable 
and cost effective system. One of the benefits of the proposed 
system is when a crash happens to the car in any parking, the 
system immediately communicates with the owner through a 
Short Message Service (SMS). Moreover, the motion sensors 
will detect any vibration such as theft or crash and instantly 
capture the picture of the incident. The system also saves the 
picture of any damage caused to the vehicle as an evidence for 
further investigations. A prototype of the proposed system has 
been implemented and tested. The test results show that the 
system is working properly, can monitor the parking area of 
the vehicle, supply the necessary information for any car in 
case of theft and crash, and is very useful in accidents.  
Keywords- Microcontroller; Security; GPS; GSM. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
An automobile is always a precious possession to its 
owner either because of its functionality or as a prestige 
symbol.  It is often seen that people do not hesitate to put in 
their hard earned money to buy the best car that they can 
afford. In fact, the owner needs to do whatever possible 
using available technologies to protect and safeguard their 
car. Moreover, wide ranges of gadgets are available on the 
market which can be used in this regard and may be 
considered as a solution to this problem. However, all 
available gadgets are open to series of restrictions and 
criticisms. Specifically, all of these gadgets cost a lot and 
each one of them has its own merits and demerits, such as 
either not being able to perform the desired task effectively 
or performing in a limited way by failing to cover the whole 
gambit of security [1]. 
It is well known that the careless parking often leads to 
damage to the nearby vehicles and this commonly happens in 
public parking lots where vehicles are parked for long time 
or when they are unattended. In addition, theft attempts are 
also common in such places. It is really a difficult problem 
that one cannot figure out or control. No one can anticipate 
the situation of his/her car at most of the parking time and 
how such incidents occur, and whose fault it was. In fact, it 
is a common problem faced by all vehicle owners/users who 
park their vehicles in public parking lots.    
The damage caused by such incidents often ranges from 
simple to severe crashes leading to lost money, time and 
effort of the owner/user. Hence it is highly desirable to have 
an automatic alarm system attached to the car which gives 
full information about any incident when it happens and that 
can be used simply by the vehicle user to identify such 
problems. 
This paper presents the design and development of an 
intelligent, cost-effective, and smart car parking security 
system which provides complete information about theft 
attempts and crash incidents that happen in parking lots due 
to careless parking of vehicles. The scope of this paper is to 
solve a problem faced by general public by developing new 
smart security systems for the vehicle to detect if someone 
crashes it and also to protect it from theft. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the 
related work. The requirements analysis and system 
overview are defined in Section III. In Section IV, the 
experimental setup is described. Section V presents the 
results and analysis and finally the conclusions are given in 
Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A plethora of works have been done on developing the 
technical modalities for car security systems while in motion 
or parked [2]. The literature pertaining to car automated 
parking, car monitoring and car security systems using 
various techniques and methodologies has been studied and 
analyzed. 
Rashidi et al. [3] proposed a car monitoring system using 
the Bluetooth security system. The main thrust of the system 
is on the efficacy of the Bluetooth system to prevent the car 
from being encroached upon or being involved in a theft. It 
can be configured and accessed through smart mobile phones 
using the Bluetooth communication module with an 
intelligent built-in alarming alert where the car user can turn 
on or off. The triggering of an alarm would send an intruder 
alert message to the user’s mobile phone. So, there is a good 
possibility to save the car from being stolen. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Balajee et al. [4] used an automobile security system 
based on face recognition structure using Global System for 
Mobile Communications (GSM) [5] network. The authors 
developed a car security system by using a Global 
Positioning System (GPS) [7] module, a GSM, a tiny face 
detection webcam and a control module. The webcam is 
hidden in the steering wheel of the vehicle. The system 
detects the face in the vehicle during the time when someone 
is in the car. It also makes an alarm sound if that option is 
opted. After detecting the face in the alarm period, one alarm 
signal will be sent to the central control system if the face 
does not match the saved face in the memory. In the silent 
alarm mode, different modules will be at work to inform the 
user of the vehicle and the police about the intrusion and the 
possible theft. In the latter case, it will inform the precise 
location of the vehicle through GPS. The GSM module 
transmits the information about the location through Short 
Message Service (SMS) [6].   
Miguel et al. [8] designed a Bluetooth/ General Mobile 
Radio Service (GMRS) car security system with a randomly 
located movement detective device by using a system that 
links the Starter Disable Unit (SDU) and a Randomly 
Located Device (RLD). It uses GMRS to generate warning 
messages. The system works in such a way that when the 
driver activates the system and leaves the car, it would be in 
a monitoring state through establishing a connection between 
the Bluetooth, the RLD and the SDU. The GMRS 
transmission is activated to transmit the alert message and 
simultaneously activates the SDU function in order to 
prevent the possible theft. This action is initiated if the RLD 
notices preset vibration levels, then it implies that there is an 
intruder inside the car.  
 Indeed, there are a lot of problems facing car security 
and information systems in each individual system. In order 
to summarize the above literature, the problems are classified 
under few main categories. The problem of expensive 
components would make the whole system expensive as has 
been observed by most of the car security systems such as 
intelligent car park management system based on Wireless 
Sensor Network (WSN) [1]. Also, high data rate transfer is 
another problem [4]. It is well known that any developing in 
security system should take into account the social 
responsibility of not annoying the peace and tranquility of 
the neighborhood [3]. Moreover, the security system should 
be as unobtrusive as possible besides being cost effective, 
user friendly and more importantly robust in performing the 
security coverage.  Currently all the system are supposed to 
work with the minimum human interference as possible. It 
may worth mentioning that most of shortcomings that have 
been faced in the above systems have been successfully 
solved in the proposed system design. 
III. 
REQUIREMENT ANALYSIS AND SYSTEM 
OVERVIEW  
This section discusses the requirements of the car 
security system in general and from costumer perspective in 
particular. The main goal of the present paper is to develop a 
cost-effective security system that protects the car against 
any damage and/or theft. The requirements from the user’s 
point of view are given below: 
• 
The system should be sensitive enough to detect any 
kind of damage. 
• 
The system should be able to save data as evidence 
for analysis and future use. 
• 
The system response should be fast enough to 
instantly capture the action. 
• 
The system should be user-friendly, easy-to-fix, 
reliable and cost-effective. 
• 
The user should be able to retrieve the saved data 
easily. 
In accordance with above requirements, the system 
should use high performance but less expensive components. 
The cost of this system is about 120 USD in Sultanate of 
Oman. Furthermore, the system must be convenient for the 
users to fix and use, in addition to being of low initial and 
maintenance costs. Most importantly, it must have 
acceptable levels of robustness, accuracy and precision. The 
components of the security system are: 
1) Microcontroller PIC16F887: this device has been 
used due to its many features. This PIC is easier than other 
PIC’s in respect to the system setup and configuration 
points of view [11]. In addition to the multitasking feature, 
it comes at a low price and is easily available in the local 
market.  
2) XYZ sensor: it allows detection of vibration in three 
directions. It is chosen for many reasons including low 
power consumption, accuracy and easiness of interfacing.    
3) GPS and GSM modems: the GPS provides 
geographical location by using space-based satellite 
navigation system. GSM modem allows the system to 
contact the GSM network by using a subscriber 
identification module (SIM) [10] card. The GPS and GSM 
work together to send the details regarding the state of the 
car and its location to the users. 
Figure 1.  System Block Diagram. 
4) The Camera: it is used to capture the photos of the 
car [9]. It is simple in order to reduce the system cost and 
can be bought from any electronic company. 
 
An overview of the proposed system is given in Figure 1. 
The main idea of the system is to protect the unattended car 
while it is parked for a while. Sensors are used in order to 
detect any movement near the vehicle. Once any significant 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

movement is detected, the sensors send appropriate signals to 
the microcontroller, which in turn will send the signal to the 
camera. The images taken will be saved in the storage 
device. At the same time, the user of the car will be informed 
of the movement via SMS. The security system will be 
activated once the car is parked and in the absence of the 
user. For the energy consumption, there is no need to use an 
extra charger or batteries since it is using the car battery in 
order to reduce its cost. This system is switched off 
automatically when the car engine is on to reduce the power 
consumption.  
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
The proposed system has been implemented in prototype. 
The user activates the security system to detect any 
significant motion when the car is in the parking condition. 
This is done by using two sensors on each side of the car. 
The camera is fixed in the car and will capture the event to 
be used as an evidence in future. 
These sensors are located near the right front wheel and 
left rear wheel in order to detect any vibration around the car. 
To enable capturing the whole scene, four cameras are used 
in the prototype to cover all four sides. Each Camera is 
covering one side of the car. In Figure 2, A, B, C and D 
represent the positions of these cameras. 
 
Figure 2.  Cameras Locations. 
   For the GPS and GSM systems, if the car is stolen, the 
car owner sends SMS messege to the GSM system in the car 
to request the car location. The GSM system stores the 
mobile number and takes the location of the car using the 
GPS system and it sends back the car location information 
by SMS messege to the same number.  
V. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
The intelligent car security system was built to be of high 
accuracy, robustness, secure and also to be convenient to the 
users, and meets the user requirements. Thirty tests have 
been carried out in day light and low light conditions. A total 
of sixty incidents have been made and tested at different 
angles of the car. The results were analyzed using four 
performance parameters. Displaying of car license plate in 
the captured picture is considered as the most important 
parameter. The other parameters are the coverage of car 
angles and the overall perceived clarity of the captured 
picture. Capturing the picture of the third party who made 
the incident is also taken as a parameter, though is not very 
important. 
The accuracy index of the system is evaluated by 
identifying different weights for each parameter according to 
its importance. The parameter display of license plate in the 
captured picture is given 50% weight being the most 
important one because it identifies the plate details of car that 
is responsible for the accident. The coverage of car angles 
parameter is determined by the sensors, which are kept at all 
sides of the car and sense any damage to the car, so it is 
given 35% weight. 
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS 
No. 
Parameter 
Percentage of 
Importance 
1 
Display of License Plate in the 
Captured Picture 
50% 
2 
Coverage of all Sides 
35% 
3 
Overall Clarity of the Captured 
Picture 
10% 
4 
Display of the Third Party Driver in 
the Captured Picture 
5% 
 
The overall perceived clarity of Captured picture is given 
10% weight. Capturing the picture of the third party who 
made the accident is given 5% weight as it is the least 
important parameter. The various parameters and their 
weights are given in Table 1. 
The result of the first parameter ‘display of license plate’ 
is further divided into three types as given in Table 1, 
according to perceived quality of numbers and alphabets in 
the plate to make the system simple and cheap:  
• 
Type One-Good, if both numbers and alphabets on 
the plate are easily readable.  
• 
Type Two-Average, if either number or the 
alphabets on the plate are readable. 
• 
Type Three-Poor, if both of them are not readable. 
TABLE II.  
TEST RESULT 
No. 
Parameter 
No. of Tests 
Applied 
No. of 
Passed Tests 
Perceived Image 
Quality Types 
Percentage 
of Tests 
Passed 
Good 
Avera
ge 
poor 
Day Light 
 
1. 
Display of 
License 
Plate in the 
Picture 
30 
25 
7 
16 
2 
83% 
Low Light (Evening) 
 
2. 
Display of 
License 
Plate in the 
Picture 
30 
20 
5 
8 
7 
66% 
 
The number of the Passed Tests is less than the overall 
Applied Tests due to the quality of the camera used in the 
tests and its position. The number of the Passed Tests at Day 
time is more than the number of the Passed Tests at the 
Evening Time (low Light) because the camera does not 
support the night vision mode. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

The Percentage of Passed Tests at Table 2 is calculated 
by dividing the number of Applied Tests to the number of 
the Passed Tests.  
The AI (Accuracy Index) of the system is calculated by 
using the following equation: 
 
 
Using the test result from Table 3 and the above 
equation, the accuracy index for the day time (light view) 
and for the low light have been calculated as follows: 
AI_LightView = (83x50%)+(100x35%)+(100x10%)+(50x5%) 
 
        = 88.6% 
AI_LowLightView = (66x50%)+(100x35%)+(53.3 10%x)+    
                                   (16.6 x5%) 
 
 
   = 74.16% 
Thus the accuracy index of the system at day light 
condition is 88.5% and at low-light condition is 74.16% and 
the OAI (Overall Accuracy Index) of the system is 81.3% 
which is calculated by using the following equation: 
 
OAI = (AI_LightView+AI_LowLightView)/2                  (2) 
TABLE III.  
TESR RESULTS 
No. 
Parameter 
No. of Tests 
Applied 
No. of 
Passed Tests 
No. of Failed 
Tests 
Percentage 
of Tests 
Passed 
Day Light 
1. 
Covering All Sides of 
the Car 
30 
30 
0 
100% 
2. 
Overall Clarity of the 
Picture 
30 
30 
0 
100% 
3. 
Display of the Third 
Party in the Picture 
30 
15 
15 
50% 
Low Light (Evening) 
4. 
Covering All Car 
Sides 
30 
30 
0 
100% 
5. 
Overall Clarity of the 
Picture 
30 
16 
7 
53.3% 
6. 
Display of the Car 
Driver in the Picture 
30 
5 
25 
16.6% 
It is found that the system can cover easily more than 
300m of the road, but the system has faced only one 
problem, namely the problem of interfacing between the 
transmitters. This problem can be solved in two ways: First, 
by reducing the transition power and organizing the 
transition location precisely and second, by making two 
different coding systems for each side of the road. 
The above calculations and analysis were done in the 
prototype. The next stage was implemented in a module on a 
real car. In addition, in this stage we have checked the 
functionality status of the system in general. 
From Table 3, it is observed that the number of Applied 
Tests is greater than or equal to the number of Passed Tests, 
which was related to the measurement that were taken by the 
camera, which depended on the camera position and quality. 
For the Low light measurement, the camera does not support 
the night vision mode, so the number of the Passed Tests 
compared to the overall Applied Tests has been reduced 
relatively. The percentage of Passed Tests has been 
calculated and given in Tables 2 and 3. 
On the basis of the above observation, we can conclude 
that the system is generally good and can be improved by 
using a camera that supports night vision mode. Also, the 
location of the cameras can be modified in order to increase 
the system accuracy index. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Display of License Plate in - Day Light. 
 
Figure 4.  
Display of License Plate in - Low Light. 
 
(1) 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

In order to study and analyze the results more 
specifically, separate graphs were drawn for the above cases 
and given in Figures 3 to 7 . From Figures 3 to 7, it can be 
observed that the performance of the camera is much better 
at working in day light condition than in low light condition.  
In other words, the clerity of the displayed tests is 100% (in 
day light), whereas the clarity of the displayed tests is 
53.3% (in low light).This means that the utilized camera 
was not supporting low light mode and at the same time it 
indicated the necessity of providing some support to the 
night camera mode. This shortcoming can also be overcame 
and the system can be improved if we change the type and 
location of the cameras. 
 
Figure 5.  Covering all Car Sides. 
 
Figure 6.  Overall Clarity of the Captured Picture - Day Light. 
The results of testing the sensitivity of the sensors are 
demonstrated in Figure 5. Form Figure 5, we observed that 
the sensors are working perfectly and detecting any vibration 
in all corners with 100% of clarity.  
The results of the third party driver are displayed in 
Figures 8 and 9. The test shows that the clarity ratios are 
50% in day light and 25% in low light. The computed ratios 
are low because of the heating and sometimes the third party 
may be driving in the reverse mode. It is possible to increase 
these percentages by using a camera that supports low light 
mode. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Overall Clarity of the Captured Picture - Low Light. 
 
Figure 8.  Display of the Third Party in the Picture - Day Light. 
 
Figure 9.  Display of the Third Party in the Picture - Low Light. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The main objective of this paper is to develop an 
intelligent car security system that protects cars against theft 
attempts and gives vital information including pictures of 
crushing incidents that happen at parking lots due to careless 
parking. The system is easy to use and provides information 
without the need for human involvement. This system helps 
the car user to know about any crash at the parking lot by 
sending the information to his/her smart phone which are 
captured by the sensors and the cameras. In the event of 
theft, the location of car can be identified with the help of 
GPS tracking which is built in the system. The system is 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

secure, reliable, flexible and affordable. Results based on a 
number of tests conducted at different conditions show that 
the system provides accurate results. Furthermore, it is 
observed that the accuracy index of the system at day light is 
better than at low light conditions. In future work, it is 
proposed to capture not only pictures, but also short video of 
the incident as an enhancement to the system and high 
camera quality with high resolution night-vision capabilities 
will be used at different positions. The number of the 
cameras will be increase. The other area of future work is to 
attempt reducing the interference between the transmitters 
from different cars. It is recommended to design directional 
antennas or special type of signal jammers. The GSM 
modem can be upgraded with GPRS or 3G capabilities so 
that a low resolution picture or video clip of the incident or 
the intruder could be sent to the car owner. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Tang, V.W.S., Yuan Z., and Jiannong C.,, “An Intelligent Car 
Management System based on Wireless Sensor Networks,” 1st 
International Symposium on Pervasive Computing and Applications. 
Hong Kong, 2009. 
[2] Al-Absi H.R.H., Devaraj J.D.D., Sebastian P., and Yap Vooi Voon, 
“Vision-Based Automated Parking System, Tenth Internation 
Conference on Information Science, Signal Processing and their 
Applications., Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 2011. 
[3] Rashidi, F.R.M., Ariff, M.H., and Ibrahim, M.Z., „Car Monitoring 
using Bluetooth Security System,” International conference on 
Electronic, Control and computer Engineering. Pahang, Malaysia, 
2011.  
[4] Balajee Seshasayee V., and Manikandan E., “Automobile Security 
System Based on Face Recognition Structure Using GSM Network” 
Advance in Electronic and Electric Engineering, 3013. 
[5] Ruchita S., and Anuradha G., “GSM Based Car Security System,” 
International Journal of Engineering and Innovation Technology. 
2012. 
[6] Jadhav A., and Gadhari P., “Interactive Voice Response (IVR) and 
GSM Based Control System,” Proceedings of the National 
Conference "NCNTE-2012". Mumbai. 2012 
[7] India yellow pages, Pantagone satellite Bhopal, Available from: 
http://www.indianyellowpages.com/pantagone-satellite-
bhopal/products.htm?slno=257962. [Accessed :5th May 2012]. 
[8] Miguel A., Porta G., Jose A., Estufillo S., and Moises A., 
“Bluetooth/GMRS Car Security System with a Randomly Located 
Movement.Electronics,” 
Robotics 
and 
Automotive 
Mechanics 
Conference, Washington, 2006.  
[9] Peter R., Chris V., Kris L., Karin C., Yolande B., and Yves V.., 
“Component-based infrastructure for pervasive user interaction”, 
Proceedings of Software Techniques for Embedded and Pervasive 
Systems., 2005. 
[10] Jeffrey N., Brad A. M., Michael H., Joseph H,Thomas K. H., Roni R., 
and Mathilde P., “Generating Remote-Control interfaces for Complex 
Appliances,” Proceedings of the ACM Conference of User-Interface 
software and Technology (UIST02),  2002. 
[11] Brad A. M., Jeffrey N. , Jacob O., Wobbrock C., and Robert C. M.., 
“Taking handheld devices to the next level,” IEEE Computer Society, 
2004.
 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

