A Framework for Assessing the Security of the
Connected Car Infrastructure
Pierre Kleberger∗, Asrin Javaheri∗†, Tomas Olovsson∗, and Erland Jonsson∗
∗Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology
SE–412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden
Email: {pierre.kleberger, asrin.javaheri, tomas.olovsson, erland.jonsson}@chalmers.se
†Volvo Car Corporation
SE–405 31 Gothenburg, Sweden
Abstract—In this paper, a framework for assessing the security
of the connected car infrastructure is presented. The framework
includes a model of the infrastructure and a security assessment
tree. The model consists of a managed infrastructure and the
vehicle communication. The managed infrastructure is further
divided into ﬁve parts; automotive company applications’ centre,
third party applications’ centre, trusted network, untrusted net-
work, and the Internet backbone. The model clariﬁes the different
communication possibilities between the managed infrastructure
and the vehicle. Furthermore, the assessment tree deﬁnes four
categories that need to be addressed in securing vehicular
services; the actors, Vehicle–to–X communication technologies,
network paths, and the dependability and security attributes.
Moreover, we demonstrate the beneﬁt of the framework by
means of two scenarios. In this way, the communication in these
scenarios are mapped to the model, which makes it possible
to analyse the security issues for the scenarios according to the
assessment tree. The intention with such an analysis is to identify
possible weaknesses of services in the connected car.
Keywords-security assessment; vehicle service; connected car;
infrastructure.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the world of connectivity, almost all applications and
systems today are communicating and using the Internet. So
far, vehicles have been an exception. The demand for new
services are quickly changing this ﬁeld which makes the
vehicle a connected car [1]. However, these new services
have to be properly secured for their new communication
infrastructure. In this paper, we present a framework for
assessing the security of services delivered by the connected
car infrastructure.
The connected car is a vehicle equipped with a wireless
network gateway connecting the in–vehicle network to an
external network. Today, the in–vehicle network consists of
50–100 embedded computers called electronic control units
(ECUs), a number which has rapidly been increasing over
the last years. With the introduction of wireless access to
the vehicle, these ECUs will be exposed to external trafﬁc
and the need of securing the vehicle and its communication
becomes crucial [2, 3]; it is reasonable to believe that many
of the security related problems present on the Internet will
be introduced into the vehicle domain.
Protocols developed for traditional vehicular services, such
as vehicle diagnostics [4] and software download [5] where a
wired connection is used to access the vehicle, as well as new
services in development, now have to be adapted for secure
remote usage. Furthermore, by introducing a wireless gateway
to the vehicle, enabling the vehicle to communicate with
mobile devices and other vehicles, the system becomes even
more complex. Hence, a model to clarify the communication
with the vehicle for conducting security assessment on its
services is essential.
The framework presented in this paper consists of a model
for the infrastructure of the connected car and a security
assessment tree. It will help us understand and evaluate how to
implement and secure protocols and applications in different
vehicle settings. The connected car will contain a large number
of services, communication technologies, and network types,
which makes the assessment of security far from trivial [6–8].
The proposed model together with the security assessment tree
makes it possible to understand the weaknesses of the system
and the existence of threats both when designing new services
and when using current ones.
The paper is organized in the following way. After giving
an overview of related work in Section II, we present a
background to the problem in Section III. In Section IV, we
describe in detail the proposed model of the infrastructure,
which is further extended with the security assessment in
Section V. In Section VI, the security assessment is applied to
two services. We discuss the proposed framework and possible
future work in Section VII. Finally, Section VIII concludes the
paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Although there is a lot of research going on in vehicular
communication (VC) systems [6], there is very little research
found referring to models of the connected car and how to
assess the security of emerging vehicle services, i.e., remote
diagnostics, remote software download, and other Internet
services brought into future vehicles.
Nilsson et al. [9] present a model of the connected car.
The model is divided into three domains; the portal, the
vehicle, and the communication link connecting the vehicle
236
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

to the portal. A risk assessment is conducted for each of the
domains and protective security mechanisms are discussed for
the identiﬁed risks. However, in their model, details of the
networks between the portal and the vehicle are not speciﬁed,
and the possibility of other vehicles and mobile devices to
connect to the vehicle is not addressed.
The Car 2 Car Communication Consortium (C2C–CC)
describes a reference architecture which is divided into three
domains; the in–vehicle, the ad hoc, and the infrastructure
[10]. The in–vehicle domain is represented by the vehicle,
its applications, and mobile devices directly associated to the
vehicle. The ad hoc domain is represented by the vehicles and
the road–side units (RSUs), where the RSU further can be
connected to the infrastructure domain. In their architecture,
the access network, the Internet, and possible nodes connected
to the Internet are shown as part of the infrastructure domain,
but are not further considered. These parts were out of their
scope.
An architecture for providing a continuous connection to
the vehicle is presented by the CALM Forum [11]. The aim
is to make the best possible use out of available external
communication media in the vehicle. A nice overview of
the network is shown, but the focus is not in securing the
communication infrastructure.
Koscher et al. [2] recently showed on the lack of security
in the in–vehicle network. By using techniques such as packet
snifﬁng, packet fuzzing, and reverse-engineering, a number of
possible attacks toward the in–vehicle network was performed.
The focus of their work is on the security of the vehicle. Thus,
the communication link with the vehicle is not addressed.
In [3], Brooks et al. discuss a set of automotive applications
and they propose and use an adapted version of the CERT
Taxonomy for analysing the security of these applications.
Among the applications analysed are business related services,
which integrates the vehicle into the automotive company,
i.e., remote software download, remote diagnostics, and other
applications related to the comfort of the vehicle.
Research in a security architecture for VC systems have
been performed within the SeVeCOM project [12]. In [13],
Papadimitratos et al. present necessary security requirements
to provide the services of secure beaconing, secure neighbour
discovering, and secure geocasting in VC systems. Certiﬁcates
are used for securing the communication between vehicles and
pseudonyms for addressing the introduced privacy problem of
using certiﬁcates; the certiﬁcate gives the vehicle a unique
identity, which makes it possible to trace the vehicle and its
driver. In [14], Kargl et al. present implementation details
of the security architecture. Furthermore, the integration of
mobile devices and different communication technologies into
the VC system are brieﬂy discussed.
Two more research project that currently are running are
the EVITA project [15] and the OVERSEE project [16]. The
aim of the EVITA project is to provide a security architecture
for the in–vehicle network and to support secure Vehicle–to–X
(V2X) communication. The aim of the OVERSEE project is to
develop an open and secure platform for running applications,
with the possibility for internal and external communication,
in the vehicle.
However, we are still missing a structured approach in
assessing the security of services to the connected car, i.e.,
services from the automotive company or other third party
application providers. Thus, a model of the infrastructure for
assessing the security of the connected car is needed.
III. BACKGROUND
As more and more services are introduced into the vehicle,
the complexity of the vehicle is increased correspondingly.
Therefore, the work with securing the connected car requires
a holistic understanding of the system. In the lack of a model
describing the infrastructure, the development of a uniﬁed
security solution is far from trivial. This may lead to that
different security solutions, possibly incompatible with each
other, are chosen when applications are implemented in the
connected car. Therefore, for a model to be useful for further
security analysis, it must be possible to map almost all possible
scenarios into it; which actors need to be considered, and
which V2X communication technologies and network paths
are available. However, a model for mapping services and
their corresponding communication protocols, to be used for
security assessment, has not been found.
The model proposed in [9] is a simple model which only
describes the infrastructure of the connected car and leaves
out details about communication links, network entities, and
possible communication technologies. The model presented
here is an extension of that model and takes into account the
different communication technologies, various remote vehicu-
lar services, and possible threats and security risks which may
exist.
We believe that the use of a framework can help in relaxing
some requirements in different situations, e.g., the need of pro-
tecting conﬁdentiality in the repair shop when using wireless
LAN (WLAN), or the integrity of the diagnostics data while
connecting through the Internet. Considering the ﬁrst example,
the same level of security as for a wired connection could be
reached.
IV. A MODEL OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE
In this section, we present a model of the infrastructure
of the connected car. This model is shown in Figure 1.
We divide the infrastructure into two domains, the managed
infrastructure and the vehicle communication. The managed
infrastructure is further divided into ﬁve regions, automotive
company applications’ centre, third party applications’ centre,
trusted network, untrusted network, and the Internet backbone.
The vehicle communication describes the possible means
of communication with the vehicle. These communication
means are classiﬁed in two categories, bi–directional and uni–
directional.
A. Managed Infrastructure
The ﬁve regions of the managed infrastructure are further
described below.
237
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Fig. 1.
Model of the connected car infrastructure
1) Automotive Company Applications’ Centre: In the liter-
ature, the automotive company applications’ centre have had
different names. In [9], it is called portal. In [4], the remote
diagnostics is performed from a remote service centre. To
summarise, it consists of a set of servers providing services to
their vehicles. It holds necessary information about the vehicle,
such as information from previous services (e.g., diagnostics
data), conﬁguration data, cryptographic keys, as well as new
software available for the ECUs.
2) Third Party Applications’ Centre: Apart from services
provided by the automotive company, third party services
can be provided to the vehicle. We could imagine that large
“application stores” for vehicles will be available in the future.
These applications can provide any kind of service to the
vehicle.
3) Trusted Network: Some networks can be considered to
be trusted by the applications’ centres and the vehicle. For ex-
ample, a repair shop may be considered to be a trusted network
by the automotive company and the vehicle. In delivering a
service to this network, it may well be that some requirements
in an implementation can be relaxed. Furthermore, other local
services can be available in these networks for running the
local infrastructure and providing service to the vehicle.
4) Untrusted Network: All networks, except for the trusted
networks, are considered to be untrusted. In these networks,
the services provided to the vehicle have to be adapted to the
hostile environment of the Internet. In the same way as for the
trusted networks, other local services may also be provided in
these networks.
5) Internet Backbone:
The Internet backbone, with its
Internet Service Providers (ISPs), is the core network for con-
necting the other four regions together. A backbone network is
usually well protected and operated by network specialists in
a Network Operation Centre (NOC). Therefore, when network
trafﬁc has reached the Internet backbone, we assume it is very
unlikely that the data will be intentionally modiﬁed.
B. Vehicle Communication
The vehicle communication domain includes two possi-
ble types of communication means, bi–directional and uni–
directional. They are further described below.
1) Bi–directional Communication: The bi–directional com-
munication mean includes the possible communication be-
tween:
(1) the vehicle and the managed infrastructure,
(2) the vehicle and mobile devices, and
(3) the vehicle and other vehicles.
238
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

We will now go through possible communications within these
three groups:
• vehicle to wireless access point (AP). The vehicle can
establish a connection to a wireless AP in the managed
infrastructure. All open APs (hotspots) are considered to
be part of the untrusted network. Furthermore, a protected
AP, where the vehicle needs authentication keys, can be
available in both the trusted network and the untrusted
network. An example of a wireless AP in an untrusted
network is one provided by subscription from a telephone
network provider; these wireless APs can be considered
to be shared with other unknown users in the same way
as for open APs.
• vehicle to RSU. The RSUs can be used for establishing
a connection from the vehicle to the managed infrastruc-
ture.
• vehicle to cellular base stations. A mobile data network,
e.g., 3G, can be used for establishing a connection from
the vehicle to the managed infrastructure. In this case, the
vehicle connects to a cellular base station in the Internet
backbone. This connection requires a subscription to
a mobile data network service at a telephone network
provider.
• vehicle to mobile devices. Mobile devices can be con-
nected to the vehicle. For example, a connection can be
established to a mobile phone, a laptop, or a personal
digital assistant (PDA). Furthermore, the vehicle can also
act as a gateway for the mobile device, so that the mobile
device can reach the same network as the vehicle.
• vehicle to cellular base station via mobile device. If
the vehicle lacks the possibility to connect directly to
a cellular base station, another mobile device with a
connection to the cellular base station can be used as a
gateway. One example is to use the driver’s mobile phone.
By using the mobile phone, a connection to the managed
infrastructure can be created.
• vehicle to other vehicles. Finally, the vehicle can connect
to other vehicles and create a vehicle ad–hoc network
(VANET). This Vehicle–to–Vehicle (V2V) communica-
tion will be critical in future trafﬁc- and safety-related
services.
It should be noted that the description of the vehicle commu-
nication above is based on just one vehicle; any connected car
will have the same communication surroundings. This means
that the vehicle may possibly reach the managed infrastructure,
via other vehicles or other mobile devices acting as gateways.
2) Uni–directional Communication: Broadcast devices that
only sends signals to the vehicles are classiﬁed as uni–
directional communication. Two uni–directional communica-
tion means have been identiﬁed:
• the global positioning system (GPS). The GPS system
can be used by services in the vehicle.
• the radio data system (RDS).
V. USING THE MODEL TO ASSESS THE SECURITY OF
VEHICLE SERVICES
From the model of the infrastructure of the connected car,
there are different aspects that can be discussed regarding the
V2V and the Vehicle–to–Infrastructure (V2I) communication.
One of them is the security of the services delivered to the
vehicle. Figure 2 presents a brief taxonomy of the security
of these services. Four categories are described; the actors,
the V2X communication technologies, network paths, and the
dependability and security attributes. A description of them
follows bellow.
• actors. Six different actors that can be involved in a
service have been identiﬁed. Common for them all are
that they have interests in how the service is being
designed and delivered; the automotive company and the
application provider can state requirements, the car owner
and the user can have concerns on how the data from
a service is processed, the authorities can issue legal
requirements, and an attacker can try to manipulate the
service in an unwanted way.
• V2X communication technologies. A number of commu-
nication technologies are available for connecting the
vehicle to other devices. Examples of these are listed in
this branch. An extended list, including classiﬁcations of
the communication technologies, can be found in [17].
• network paths. The service may be delivered to the
vehicle using one of several network paths. The model
describes four possible network paths that the service can
be delivered through (see Figure 1); the trusted network,
the untrusted network, the Internet backbone, and an ad-
hoc network.
• dependability and security attributes. To deliver the ser-
vice in a secure and safe manner, the six attributes for
dependability and security [18] need to be considered.
In this paper, we are mainly focusing on the security
attributes.
From these four categories, an analysis can be made to
further clarify how a service will work in the infrastructure
and also highlight the dependability and security attributes that
need to be addressed in providing such a service.
VI. CONDUCTING SECURITY ASSESSMENT ON TWO
SERVICES
We will now show the beneﬁts of using the framework for
assessing the security of the services delivered to the connected
car. We will describe two scenarios to illustrate the approach;
a remote diagnostics service and a map service with GPS
positioning.
A. Remote Diagnostics
Remote vehicle diagnostics is one of the emerging vehicle
services in the connected car [4, 5]. Thus, work is being
performed by the International Standard Organisation (ISO) in
deﬁning a standard protocol for performing Diagnostics over
IP [19–21].
239
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Security Assessment of Vehicle Services
Actors
Automotive Company
Car Owner
User
Application Provider
Authorities
Attacker
V2X Communication
Technologies
LAN
Wireless LAN
Mobile Data Network
Bluetooth
DSRC
...
Network Paths
Trusted Network
Untrusted Network
Internet Backbone
Ad–Hoc Network
Dependability and
Security Attributes
Availability
Reliability
Safety
Conﬁdentiality
Integrity
Maintainability
Fig. 2.
Security Assessment Tree
In analysing a remote diagnostics service, the ﬁrst step will
be to clarify how the diagnostics will be performed. In the
model of the infrastructure (see Figure 1), we ﬁnd two cases:
(1) remote diagnostics performed by repair shop. The vehicle
connects to the trusted network at the repair shop through
an AP. The diagnostics session is provided as a local
service at the repair shop.
(2) remote diagnostics performed by the automotive company
applications’ centre. The vehicle connects to a cellular
base station in the Internet backbone. The diagnostics
session is performed by the automotive company applica-
tions’ centre through the Internet backbone and the cellular
base station.
To further clarify these cases, the security assessment tree
in Figure 2 is used. For case (1), the following question can
be derived:
What is the automotive company’s concern with
respect to the conﬁdentiality of the submitted diag-
nostics data when the vehicle is connected to the
repair shop in the trusted network using a wireless
LAN?
This question reﬂects the following set of aspects from the
tree:
{automotive company, wireless LAN, trusted net-
work, conﬁdentiality}
We note that although the network at the repair shop is
considered a trusted network, its AP can be shared with other
vehicles. Therefore, if the conﬁdentiality requirements of the
wireless link is fulﬁlled, the same level of security might be
acquired as if a cable was used.
For case (2), another question can be derived:
What is the automotive company’s concern with re-
spect to the integrity of the diagnostics data transmit-
ted between the vehicle and the automotive company
applications’ centre when the vehicle is connected to
the Internet backbone using a mobile data network?
This question reﬂects the following set of aspects from the
tree:
{automotive company, mobile data network, Internet
backbone, integrity}
In this case, we see that by fulﬁlling the integrity requirement,
modiﬁed diagnostic codes sent by an attacker will not pose any
security risk to the vehicle.
B. Map with GPS Positioning
A possible service in a vehicle is a map provided by an
Internet service (e.g., Google Maps) with positioning using
the vehicle’s built–in GPS. A further add–on to this service
may be to get local trafﬁc conditions from the road authorities.
This service leads to three sources of information that need to
be provided to the vehicle, the map, the GPS-coordinates, and
the current trafﬁc condition in the area. We will now analyse
this service with respect to the model of the infrastructure and
the security assessment tree.
The ﬁrst step will be to clarify how the map is provided to
the vehicle. From the model in Figure 1, four suitable links
between the vehicle and the managed infrastructure can be
found;
(1) vehicle to RSU,
(2) vehicle to AP,
(3) vehicle to cellular base station, and
(4) vehicle to cellular base station via a mobile device.
These four links are located in the untrusted network and the
Internet backbone, which are further connected to the third
party applications’ centre providing the map to the vehicle.
Furthermore, for the GPS-positioning, the data is retrieved
from the GPS-satellites. A security analysis of the retrieved
data is not considered here. However, for the current trafﬁc
condition, the service needs to be mapped into the model
of the infrastructure to clarify its communication. The same
four links as above can connect the vehicle to the managed
infrastructure. The current trafﬁc condition is provided by the
two networks, untrusted network and the Internet backbone,
which are further connected to the road authorities (in the third
party applications’ centre).
To further clarify the security issues of delivering the map
to the vehicle, the second step is to inspect the security assess-
ment tree in Figure 2. For the map service, several questions
can be derived with respect to the different possibilities to
deliver the map to the vehicle. To illustrate the concept, only
one question will be highlighted;
What is the user’s concern with respect to the
conﬁdentiality of the data submitted (i.e., GPS-
coordinates) to the map service when communicat-
240
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

ing with the server over the mobile data network
through the Internet backbone?
This question reﬂects the following set of aspects from the
tree:
{user, mobile data network, Internet backbone, con-
ﬁdentiality}
The question above is relevant if the user does not want any
other party, except for the server, to be able to identify the
user’s current location by eavesdropping on the transmitted
data.
For the trafﬁc conditions, the following question can be
derived:
What is the user’s concern with respect to the in-
tegrity of the data distributed by the road authorities,
when the data passes the Internet backbone and the
untrusted network, and the vehicle is connected to
the RSU in the untrusted network over a Dedicated
Short–Range Communication (DSRC)-link?
This question reﬂects the following set of aspects from the
tree:
{user, DSRC, (untrusted network, Internet back-
bone), integrity}
In this case, the user is not concerned about whether any other
party can eavesdrop on the trafﬁc condition information, but
rather that the correct information is delivered to the vehicle.
VII. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK
We believe that in analysing some scenarios and solutions
with respect to security, it might be that some of the security
requirements could be relaxed. One such example is: if the
conﬁdentiality of the communication link between the vehicle
and the AP in the trusted network can be properly established;
will security of the link then be comparable with that of a
wired cable? If so, a service can, as a ﬁrst step, easily be
introduced also for this wireless link without any modiﬁcation.
This will reduce the time for adapting already established
services, and save cost for developing new ones. However,
for other scenarios the service might need to be modiﬁed.
The security assessment tree helps us state questions re-
garding the security of the services delivered to the vehicle.
In the future, we would like to investigate how to extended this
security assessment tree to cover more aspects, e.g., security
mechanisms. A complete security analysis of a vehicle service
is also an important next step.
VIII. CONCLUSION
There is a clear trend of offering remote services, third party
applications, and critical information exchange between vari-
ous entities in the connected car. Even though there has been a
lot of research conducted in the ﬁeld of securing VC systems,
not much work has been done in assessing the security of
these services for the connected car. We believe that, by using
our proposed framework, scenarios such as remote vehicle
diagnostics, remote software download, multimedia streaming,
Internet browsing and the exchange of information between
vehicles and the infrastructure can be discussed and assessed
from a security viewpoint.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Papadimitratos, A. d. La Fortelle, K. Evenssen, R. Brignolo, and
S. Cosenza, “Vehicular Communication Systems: Enabling Technolo-
gies, Applications, and Future Outlook on Intelligent Transportation,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 84–95, 2009.
[2] K. Koscher, A. Czeskis, F. Roesner, S. Patel, T. Kohno, S. Checkoway,
D. McCoy, B. Kantor, D. Anderson, H. Shacham, and S. Savage,
“Experimental Security Analysis of a Modern Automobile,” in Proc. of
the 31st IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, 2010, pp. 447–462.
[3] R. Brooks, S. Sander, J. Deng, and J. Taiber, “Automobile Security
Concerns,” Vehicular Technology Magazine, IEEE, vol. 4, no. 2, pp.
52–64, Jun. 2009.
[4] S. You, M. Krage, and L. Jalics, “Overview of Remote Diagnosis and
Maintenance for Automotive Systems,” in 2005 SAE World Congress,
Detroit, MI, USA, 2005.
[5] M. Shavit, A. Gryc, and R. Miucic, “Firmware Update Over The
Air (FOTA) for Automotive Industry,” in 14th Asia Paciﬁc Automotive
Engineering Conference.
Hollywood, CA, USA: SAE, 2007.
[6] G. Karagiannis, O. Altintas, E. Ekici, G. Heijenk, B. Jarupan, K. Lin,
and T. Weil, “Vehicular Networking: A Survey and Tutorial on Re-
quirements, Architectures, Challenges, Standards and Solutions,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, no. 99, pp. 1–33, 2011.
[7] T. L. Willke, P. Tientrakool, and N. F. Maxemchuk, “A Survey of
Inter-Vehicle Communication Protocols and Their Applications,” IEEE
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 3–20, 2009.
[8] M. L. Sichitiu and M. Kihl, “Inter-Vehicle Communication Systems: A
Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 10, no. 2, pp.
88–105, 2008.
[9] D. K. Nilsson, U. E. Larson, and E. Jonsson, “Creating a Secure Infras-
tructure for Wireless Diagnostics and Software Updates in Vehicles,”
in Proc. of the 27th International Conference on Computer Safety,
Reliability, and Security (SAFECOMP ’08).
Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK: Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 207–220.
[10] C2C-CC Manifesto, v1.1 ed., CAR 2 CAR Communication Consortium,
Aug. 2007. [Online]. Available: http://www.car-to-car.org/. 2011-08-06.
[11] The CALM Handbook, v3 (060326) ed., The CALM Forum Ltd., 1
Beverly Hall, Halifax, West Yorkshire, HX2 6HS, UK, Mar. 2006.
[Online]. Available: http://www.isotc204wg16.org/pubdocs/The CALM
Handbookv6-070301.pdf. 2011-08-06.
[12] “Secure Vehicle Communication (SeVeCOM).” [Online]. Available:
http://www.sevecom.org/. 2011-08-06.
[13] P. Papadimitratos, L. Buttyan, T. Holczer, E. Schoch, J. Freudiger,
M. Raya, Z. Ma, F. Kargl, A. Kung, and J.-P. Hubaux, “Secure
Vehicular Communication Systems: Design and Architecture,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 100–109, Nov. 2008.
[14] F. Kargl, P. Papadimitratos, L. Buttyan, M. Muter, E. Schoch, B. Wieder-
sheim, T.-V. Thong, G. Calandriello, A. Held, A. Kung, and J.-P.
Hubaux, “Secure Vehicular Communication Systems: Implementation,
Performance, and Research Challenges,” IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, vol. 46, no. 11, pp. 110–118, Nov. 2008.
[15] “E-safety Vehicle Intrusion Protected Applications (EVITA).” [Online].
Available: http://www.evita-project.org/. 2011-08-06.
[16] “Open
Vehicular
Secure
Platform.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.oversee-project.com/. 2011-08-06.
[17] K. Dar, M. Bakhouya, J. Gaber, M. Wack, and P. Lorenz, “Wireless
Communication Technologies for ITS Applications,” IEEE Communi-
cations Magazine, vol. 48, no. 5, pp. 156–162, 2010.
[18] A. Aviˇzienis, J.-C. Laprie, B. Randell, and C. Landwehr, “Basic Con-
cepts and Taxonomy of Dependable and Secure Computing,” IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
11–33, 2004.
[19] ISO/DIS 13400-1: Road vehicles – Diagnostic communication over
Internet Protocol (DoIP) – Part 1: General information and use case
deﬁnition, ISO Std.
[20] ISO/DIS 13400-2: Road vehicles – Diagnostic communication over
Internet Protocol (DoIP) – Part 2: Network and transport layer re-
quirements and services, ISO Std.
[21] ISO/DIS 13400-3: Road vehicles – Diagnostic communication over
Internet Protocol (DoIP) – Part 3: IEEE802.3 based wired vehicle
interface, ISO Std.
241
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

