Non-binary Encoded STBC-CPM Signals  
for Wireless Slicing Networks 
 
Piotr Remlein 
Chair of Wireless Communications,  
Poznan University of Technology 
Poznan, Poland 
e-mail: piotr.remlein@put.poznan.pl 
 
 
Abstract—The paper considers a wireless transmission system in 
a multiple-user environment that can support slicing networks. 
It involves a combination of non-binary convolutional codes and 
Space Time Block Codes (STBC)  technique with narrowband 
Continuous-Phase Modulation (CPM) for transmission in an 
uplink channel using the Frequency Division Multiple Access 
(FDMA) method. Energy efficiency signals, e.g., Continuous 
Phase Modulation could be used for transmission managing or 
feedback information signals in return channels of slicing 
networks. We analyse performance of a transmission in such 
return channels which apply FDMA method with coded CPM 
signals via computer simulations. In order to reduce the Bit 
Error Rate (BER) a concatenation of CPM with non-binary 
convolutional codes over ring and STBC technique has been 
used. The spectral efficiency of investigated system is improved 
by reducing the inter-carrier frequency spacing and using a low-
complexity iterative algorithm for Inter-Carrier Interference 
(ICI) cancellation at the receiver. BER results obtained in 
computer simulations are presented for the proposed solution. 
The results suggest that FDMA coded STBC-CPM transmission 
might constitute a desirable option for return channels in slicing 
networks.  
Keywords-Continuous Phase Modulation; Frequency Division 
Multiplexed system; Slicing Networks, Non-binary codes, Inter-
Carrier Interference Receiver  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The network slicing has recently been proposed in the 
industry solutions for wireless networks as an enabler of 
network service convergence and on-demand customized 
services [1]–[3]. The network slicing can support on-demand 
tailored services for distinct application scenarios at the same 
time using the same physical network. Supported by network 
slicing, network resources can be dynamically and efficiently 
allocated to logical network slices according to the 
corresponding Quality of Service (QoS) demands. The 
authors in [4] proposed a network slicing mechanism for 
network edge nodes to offer low-latency services to users. 
The mobility management schemes and an optimal gateway 
selection algorithm to support seamless handover was 
described. In [5], a resource allocation scheme with the 
consideration of interference management was presented. In 
[6], a flexible software defined networking (SDN) based 5G 
network architecture was proposed. The SDN was used to 
allocate physical network resources to slices within a local 
area and to perform scheduling among slices. The research 
on mobility management in network slicing systems has 
been focused mostly on SDN based control and handover 
procedures [6]–[8].  
In this article, we propose and investigate the 
transmission method which can be used in such systems to 
provide managing and control signals in the return channels.  
In the paper, the focus is on FDMA CPM systems which 
are power and spectral efficiency. We concentrate on the 
study of non-binary coded STBC-CPM signals in an uplink 
scenario. The CPM signals are well suitable for wireless 
return channel transmission through its features constant 
envelope and its disruptions immunity occurring when 
signals are transmitted [9]. Additionally, CPM signals are 
resistant to non-linear distortion of power amplifiers. Multiuser 
FDMA CPM systems wherein all users employ a portion of the 
spectrum have been studied in, e.g., [10] – [13]. 
In order to increase the reliability or bit rate of 
telecommunication systems, the multi-antenna Multiple 
Input Multiple Output (MIMO) technique is used more and 
more often [14]. The technique involves multiple antennas 
on the transmitter and receiver sides. Employing the MIMO 
technique in wireless  systems allows the use of Space-Time 
Codes (STC), improving transmission quality [14]. The one 
of the most popular STC codes and widely used in MIMO 
systems are space-time block codes (STBC) [15]. These 
codes are orthogonal and can achieve full transmit diversity 
specified by the number of transmit antennas. In [16] and 
[17], the authors studied CPM signals encoded using the so-
called orthogonal space-time codes. The CPM signals 
concatenated with STBC codes are characterized by a low bit 
error rate attainable at a simultaneously low receiver 
complexity. Neither of the above solutions for MIMO 
transmission concerned FDMA CPM systems. 
In order to obtain a further improvement in energy 
efficiency, CPM was combined in classical systems with an 
external binary Convolutional Encoder (CE) and a mapper. It 
has been shown that a CPM scheme can be decomposed into 
a Continuous Phase Encoder (CPE) followed by a 
memoryless modulator (MM) [18], where the CPE is a CE 
over a ring of integers [19]. Therefore, a natural way to 
combine CPM with an outer CE is to use a CE over the same 
ring of integers. Since the CE and CPE are over the same 
algebra, no mapper is needed, and an extra coding gain was 
reported [19]. 
The literature has discussed the aspects of increasing the 
spectral efficiency of systems employing CPM and FDMA, 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

e.g., in [12], [13] but STBC coding concatenated with 
convolutional codes over ring in multiuser scenario has not 
been taken into consideration.  
This paper considers a wireless MIMO FDMA 
transmission in return channel of slicing networks. It 
involves a combination of non-binary convolutional codes 
with STBC and CPM signals for transmission in an uplink 
channel using the FDMA method. For a more efficient 
available band utilization, the distances between individual 
sub-carriers are reduced. Such a solution causes the 
deterioration of transmission quality due to the occurrence of 
ICI. In order to reduce the BER in such a system, a 
combination of CPM with non-binary convolutional codes 
over a ring has been used and a low-complexity iterative 
algorithm for ICI cancellation was employed on the receiver 
side. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, 
properties of CPM modulation are presented. The description 
of the convolutional codes over ring is included in 
Section III. Section IV presents the considered system. 
Section V provides the obtained simulation results. The 
paper is summarized and concluded in Section VI. 
II. 
CONTINUOUS-PHASE MODULATION  
A general form of a continuous-phase modulation 
describes the following formula [9]: 
xt,α = 
 cos2πf + φt, α + φ 
(1) 
where ES is the energy per symbol, T is the symbol interval, 
f0 is the carrier frequency, φ is the initial phase, α = (…, 0-1, 
α0, α1, …) refers to a sequence of data symbols adopting one 
of the values from the set:  
α ϵ ±1,±3, … , ±(M − 1) 
(2) 
where M is the cardinality of the set and is typically chosen 
as a power of 2. 
Phase φt, α , in which the transferred information is 
included, may be described as follows: 
φt,α = 2πh ∑
αqt − iT

	
 
(3) 
where h is the modulation index defining the value by which 
the phase changes in each modulation interval. 
CPM signals are characterized by the following 
parameters: modulation index h, pulse length L and phase 
response function q(t), or its derivative g(t), the frequency 
response function. One of the parameters having an influence 
on the spectral characteristics of CPM signals is the shape of 
a frequency pulse g(t) [9]. In this paper, CPM signals with a 
rectangular (REC) pulse are analyzed.  
The CPM modulator may be performed as cascade 
concatenation of a continuous-phase encoder (CPE) and 
memoryless modulator (MM). Such a system is known as the 
Rimoldi decomposition [18]. The CPE is a convolutional 
encoder that performs the function of a CPM modulator 
memory. The memoryless modulator assigns relevant signal 
shapes to symbols received from the CPE.  
To increase CPM signals’ resistance to different types of 
interference arising during transmission, a connection of the 
CPM signal modulator system with an external encoder is 
employed. Most frequently it is a convolutional coder. Such 
a solution is known as Serially-Concatenated Convolutional 
Coder (SCCC) [11]. A block diagram of the CE and 
modulator’s serial concatenation is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Serially concatenated convolutional encoder CE and CPM 
modulator. 
The convolutional encoder is connected to the modulator 
by an interleaver and a mapper. The mapper is no needed if 
external convolutional encoder connected to CPE of CPM 
modulator are over the same ring of integers modulo-M. The 
external convolutional encoder CE with rate R
 is equipped 
with a symbol puncturer with the rate R.  The overall 
encoding rate R, with the puncturing operation allowed for, is:  
R = R
R 
(4) 
The discussed method of serially concatenation of the 
external convolutional encoder and CPM is called in 
literature a SCCC-CPM and guarantees obtaining of a low 
BER. There is obtained with the iterative receiver which 
makes many iterations between the CPE decoder and the 
decoder of the external convolutional code CE to make a 
decision on the transmitted information [11]. 
III. 
PROPERTIES OF NON-BINARY CONVOLUTIONAL 
CODES OVER RING 
In this paper, we concentrate on the usage of non-binary 
convolutional codes known as convolutional codes over 
rings [19]-[21]. These codes in many cases have larger 
Euclidean distances than binary codes over GF(2) [19] [21].  
In Figure 2, it is shown a realization of the systematic 
feedback convolutional encoder of rate R
 = k/n, n=k+1. 
Input to the encoder, at time t, is information vector Ut with 
M-ary elements ut
(i) belonging to the ring ZM={0, 1, 2, ... ,M-1}  
Ut = (ut
(1), ut
(2), ..., ut
(k))  
(5) 
The convolutional encoder produces a coded sequence of 
the symbols which belong to the same ring ZM  
Vt = (vt
(1), vt
(2), ..., vt
(n)) 
(6) 
where n = k+1. 
Convolutional
binary encoder
Mapper
CPE
Memoryless
modulator
CPE SISO
decoder and
demapper
Memoryless
demodulator
Channel
DeInterl.
Interl.
Interl.
Convolutional
SISO
decoder
???
??
??(??;??)
??(??; ??)
CPM modulator
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
u 
u 
u 
v 
v 
v 
v 
Figure 2. Systematic feedback convolutional encoder over the ring of 
integers modulo-M (ZM). 
The coefficients of the encoder in Figure 2 are taken 
from the set {0,...,M-1}. The memory cells are capable of 
storing the ring elements. Multipliers and adders perform 
multiplication and addition respectively in the ring of 
integers modulo-M. 
The encoder output Vt at time t due to the input Ut is: 
Vt =Ut G,  
(7) 
where G denotes the generator matrix of the encoder [21]. 
In Figure 3, we show an example of  the systematic 
convolutional encoder with feedback this is the encoder over 
the ring Z4 of integers modulo-4.  
 
Figure 3. The systematic convolutional encoder over ring ℜ=Z4. 
The code rate is R=1/2 (k=1, n=2) and the generator 
matrix is: 






+
+
+
+
=
2
2
3
3
1
2
3
1
)
(
D
D
D
D
D
G
 
(8) 
At instant t, an information vector with 4-ary symbols 
belonging to the ring Z4, inputs the encoder. The 
convolutional encoder generates encoded vector which 
contains sequence of the symbols elements belonging to the 
same ring Z4. The encoder coefficients in Figure 3 are from 
the set {0,1,2,3}. The memory cells are capable of storing 
the ring elements. Multiplications and additions are 
performed in the ring of integers modulo-4. 
IV. 
FDMA SYSTEM WITH RING ENCODED  
STBC-CPM SIGNALS 
In this paper, FDMA system for uplink wireless 
transmission, using ring encoded CPM signals is analysed. 
To obtain the best spectral efficiency of the examined system 
with multiple users, the space between carrier frequencies 
are minor. The tight inter-carrier frequency spacing between 
adjacent channels causes strong ICI. To eliminate the ICI in 
the receiver, an ICI cancelation algorithm is employed. 
Therefore, it is possible to obtain high spectral efficiency and 
low bit error rate [13]. Asymptotic spectral efficiency (ASE) 
can be determined assuming that the signal to noise ratio 
approaches infinity. ASE is directly proportional to the 
encoding rate of CE R and the number of bits falling for 
one symbol and inversely proportional to the value of 
normalized spacing between carrier frequencies. ASE for 
MIMO systems with multiple transmit antennas (MT) is 
given by means of the following formula: 
ASE
 lim
→ SE  M 

	 

 
 (9) 
where Eb/N0 is the signal to noise ratio, R is the encoding 
rate, and  is the normalized spacing between inter-carrier 
frequencies, M-ary modulation. The obtained overall spectral 
efficiency depends strictly on the number of transmission 
channels used in the defined frequency band. The encoder 
rate R is described by relation (4) and can be changed by the 
rate of the puncturer whose value is changeable in order to 
obtain specific spectral efficiency.  
The 
CE 
encoder 
has 
a 
structure 
determined 
experimentally, enabling low bit error rate. Performing 
comparing performance of binary encoded CPM and non-
binary CPM, FDMA systems requires selecting codes of 
equal complexity defined by the number of states. While 
comparing CE one has to also take into consideration that the 
comparison in only fair when binary and non-binary systems 
achieving this same ASE are investigated. 
The non-binary code that contributes to acquiring the 
lowest BER was found for the examined FDMA CPM 
system. Such defined optimal CE over the ring of Z that has 
been found in the study and is described by the generator 
matrix: 1, D   3, 3D   1. 
I this paper, we consider the reception of non-binary 
encodes CPM signals in an FDMA system employing the 
MIMO technique and STBC coding. An STBC-CPM system 
analyzed in this paper is based on scheme described in [15]. 
The transmitted CPM signal vector can be expressed as it 
was shown in [15].  
x  x
, x
, … , x

   
(10) 
where nT  is the number of transmit antennas, and T denotes 
the transpose of the vector [ ]. 
The modified Alamouti scheme [15] is used for two and 
four 
transmit 
antennas 
FDMA 
CPM 
system. 
The 
transmission matrix for two antennas is showed below 
formula: 
S  s
s
∗
s
s
∗   
 
(11) 
In this case, the signals transmitted by the first and 
second antennas into two time intervals are described by 
equations x  s  s
∗ and x  s s
∗, respectively. 
Similarly, we can identify the signals in the case of four 
transmit antennas when transmission matrix is in the form: 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 4. Block diagram of the analyzed CPM system. 
S = 




	 s
s
−s
∗
s
∗
s
s
−s
∗
s
∗
s
s
−s
∗
s
∗
s
  s
−s
∗
s
∗ 




 
(12) 
Figure 4 shows a block diagram of the proposed system 
with STBC coding. At the input, each kth user binary 
information sequence α, … , α	, is Convolutional Encoded 
(CE), interleaved (Int.) and converted into several (M ) 
parallel streams in an STBC encoder. Each data stream is 
conveyed to one of CPM modulators. In order to achieve 
higher rates, the CE output is punctured as in [22]: a rate-
matching algorithm is used to obtain an appropriate coding 
rate R. The interleaver (Int.) is a symbol, spread (S-random) 
interleaver [22].  
Each user’s transmitter consists of an CE, interleaver, 
STBC encoder and a CPM modulator. The efficiency of an 
STBC encoder depends on the number of transmit antennas. 
The STBC encoder considered in the paper uses two or four 
transmit antennas. Each user signal is characterized by a 
distinct phase φ and delay τ, as typically occurs in uplink 
systems.  
The channel model used in the simulation takes into 
account multipath propagation. The channel model has been 
implemented as a Taped Delay Line (TDL) and it models a 
channel with flat fading and Additive White Gaussian Noise 
(AWGN) [14].  
Each receive antenna receives a faded superposition of 
MT simultaneously transmitted signals corrupted by additive 
white Gaussian noise. The fading is assumed to be flat and 
distributed according to a Rayleigh pdf. The random path 
gains between transmit antenna m and receive antenna p, 
hm,p(t) are independent complex Gaussian random variables 
with zero mean and variance per dimension 1/2. The fading 
is slow, such that the MxM fading coefficients are constant 
during a frame, but vary from frame to frame. The AWGN 
noise components np(t) are independent zero-mean complex 
Gaussian random processes with power spectral density N0.  
At the receiving end, the system consists of a MIMO 
MMSE/STBC detector/decoder and a low-complexity 
iterative algorithm to ICI cancellation [13].  
With the assumption of uniform parameters of CPM, and 
an equal number of transmit antennas MT for each system 
user, the signal at the input of the p-th receiver antenna is 
described by: 
rt = ∑
∑
∑
	 g,,t − nτ, α, 

	

	

  
∙ e∆ + nt,   j = 0, … , M − 1 
    (13) 
where B is the number of intervals for which the STBC-CPM 
signal is transmitted, for the analyzed in the paper system 
with STBC encoding B=2 or 4.  
The MMSE/STBC block realizes the STBC decoding 
and computes the cost function, i.e., minimizes: 
G = 

 HH +
 
 I
	
H 
(14) 
where H is the matrix of channel impulse response estimates, 
I – identity matrix, N0 – spectral density of noise power, 
upper index of quantity HH denotes the Hermitian transpose 
of matrix H and it is the sum of the operations of transpose 
and complex conjugate of the matrix. Signal y from 
MMSE/STC reaches the ICI cancellation block. The receiver 
carries out ICI cancellation through a set of single-user MAP 
detector/remodulator blocks, as described by Perotti et al. 
[13]. The remodulators make use of the output of the MAP 
detector to compute the remodulated signal sk
(i)(t) relative to 
the kth user and ith iteration. The channel decoder performs 
two iterations loops. The inner loop is formed by the ICI 
canceller, the MAP detector, the CPE SISO decoder and the 
remodulator, while the outer loop involves the CPE SISO 
decoder, the CE SISO decoder, the interleaver and the 
deinterleaver between the inner CPE decoder and the outer 
CE decoder. ICI cancellation can be performed while 
executing the decoding iterations to enhance the receiver 
performance. In such a case, after the inner CPE decoder is 
executed, remodulation is performed. Then, interference 
cancellation is performed and the CPM receiver, including 
the inner CPE decoder, is again executed. The decoder starts 
decoding a received code word executing NI inner iterations. 
Then, it executes NO times an outer iteration followed by an 
inner iteration. This way, ICI cancellation is performed as 
part of the decoding iterations and it results in an improved 
ICI cancellation [13]. On the final outer iteration, a decision 
is made on the transmitted data symbols α, … , α	. 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS  
The Monte-Carlo simulation method was used to 
determine the BER for the described FDMA system with 
STBC-CPM modulation concatenated with binary CE or CE 
over the ring. The simulations have been performed with the 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

aid of a simulation program written in C++ using IT++ 
libraries, ver. 4.2 [23]. The analysis assumed that each user 
transmits CPM signals with the same modulation and coding 
parameters, and of equal strength. We established the ideal 
power control, this means that the received signal power is 
the same for all users. It was assumed that the standardized 
value of the interval between the carrier frequencies of 
consecutive channels  in the system is equal to 3/4, and 
that the transmission is performed via 4 neighboring 
channels (FDMA users). The signals are transmitted through 
AWGN channel with spectral power density N0/2. The 
transmitted packets were 1000 bits long. The simulation was 
stopped if at least 100 errors occurred.  
The analysis, for the FDMA system with CPM signals 
and CE over the ring Z4, has been performed with reference 
to binary encoded CPM modulation with the parameters 
h=1/4, L=1 and the REC shape frequency pulse. The number 
of iterations in the receiver was experimentally fixed as a 
good 
trade-off 
between 
receiver 
performance 
and 
complexity.  
Two iterations (NI=2) in the interference cancellation 
loop have been made and five iterations (NO=5) in soft 
output non-binary MAP decoder. The CPM modulator is 
concatenated with CE over the ring 1, D   3, 3D   1  or 
the binary [7, 5] encoder (from [19], described in octal 
notation), both with four states. The obtained BER results for 
the CPM-FDMA systems with CE over a ring were 
compared with BER for CPM-FDMA systems employing 
binary CE, which has the same spectral efficiencies.  
Figure 5 presents BER for systems employing convolutional 
encoded CPM modulation concatenated with STBC 
encoding for different numbers of receive antennas. In this 
case, each of the four users transmitted signals via one, two 
or four transmit antennas, and the receiver used one, two or 
four receive antennas. In this scenario, the error rate at the 
BER level of 10-5 obtained for the 2x2 system was worse 
than the one obtained for the 4x4 system by about 3 dB and 
better at the BER level of 10-5than the one obtained for the 
1x1 system by about 4dB.  
 
Figure 5. BER for STBC system (CPM: h = 1/4, M = 4, L = 1, ΔT = 3/4), 
4-users, with ICI cancelation and different numbers of transmit                 
and receive antennas. 
In all cases, we observe that a slight improvement in 
BER is achieved for the systems using binary encoded STBC 
CPM 
signals 
comparing 
to 
the 
systems 
without 
convolutional encoding. We can see that the best results of 
BER can be obtained when concatenation STBC and non-
binary CE was used. It should be noted that, the SE for all 
the systems 1x1 was equal 1 b/s/Hz, for systems 2x2 
amounted 2 b/s/Hz and for 4x4 the SE was 4 b/s/Hz. BER 
results obtained in computer simulations shoved that 
proposed solution with non-binary CE gives noticeable 
improvements compared with results for FDMA systems 
without convolutional encoding.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS  
In this 
paper, a 
multiuser 
FDMA 
STBC-CPM 
transmission with non-binary encoding has been proposed. 
Through MMSE-based multiuser detection and low-
complexity 
iterative 
ICI 
cancellation, 
considerable 
improvements in both BER are achieved with respect to 
single antenna systems, while the multiuser receiver 
complexity is kept low. A performance evaluation has been 
presented to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed 
multiuser FDMA STBC-CPM MIMO system. The study 
shows that it is possible to increase transmission efficiency 
by using CPM modulation and concatenation non-binary 
convolutional encoding with STBC coding for MU 
transmissions. The presented results show that proposed 
method can be used in the slicing networks to the 
transmission of the managing and the control signals.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially funded by the Polish 
Ministry of Science and Higher Education within the status 
activity task 08/81/DSPB/8134 in the year 2018. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Rost et al., “Mobile network architecture evolution toward 
5G,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 84–91, May 
2016. 
[2] M. Jiang, M. Condoluci, and T. Mahmoodi, “Network slicing 
management & prioritization in 5G mobile systems,” 
European 
Wireless 
2016; 
22th 
European 
Wireless 
Conference, Oulu, Finland, pp. 1-6, 2016. 
[3] Ericsson, Ericsson White Paper: 5G system, Jan. 2015. 
[4] J. Heinonen, P. Korja, T. Partti, H. Flinck, and P. Poyhonen, 
“Mobility management enhancements for 5G low latency 
services,” 
2016 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communications Workshops, Kuala Lumpur, pp. 68–73, 
2016. 
[5] H. Zhang et al., “Resource allocation in spectrum-sharing 
OFDMA femtocells with heterogeneous services,” IEEE 
Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 2366–2377, July 2014. 
[6] V. Yazici, U. C. Kozat, and M. O. Sunay, “A new control 
plane for 5G network architecture with a case study on unified 
handoff, mobility, and routing management,” IEEE Commun. 
Mag.,, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 76–85, Nov. 2014. 
[7] H. Song, X. Fang, and L. Yan, “Handover scheme for 5G C/U 
plane split heterogeneous network in high-speed railway,” 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.  vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 4633–4646, 
Nov. 2014. 
[8] S. Kuklinski, Y. Li, and K. T. Dinh, “Handover management 
in SDN-based mobile networks,” 2014 IEEE Globecom 
Workshops, Austin, TX, pp. 194–200, 2014. 
[9] J.B. Anderson, T. Aulin, and C.-E. Sundberg, Digital Phase 
Modulation. New York, London: Plenum Press, 1986. 
[10] D. Bokolamulla and T. Aulin, “Multiuser detection for 
continuous phase modulation over Rayleigh fading channels,” 
IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 9, pp. 906-908, October 
2005. 
[11] P. Moqvist and T. Aulin, “Multiuser serially concatenated 
continuous phase modulation,” International Symposium on 
Turbo Codes, (Brest, France), pp. 211-214, 2003. 
[12] A. Barbieri, D. Fertonani, and G. Colavolpe, “Spectrally-
efficient continuous phase modulations,” IEEE Transactions 
on Wireless Communications, vol. 8, pp. 1564-1572, March 
2009. 
[13] A. Perotti, S. Benedetto, and P. Remlein, “Spectrally efficient 
multiuser CPM Systems,” IEEE International Conference on 
Communications (ICC 2010), Cape Town, South Africa, pp. 
1-5, 2010. 
[14] E. Biglieri, MIMO wireless communications. Cambridge 
University Press, 2007. 
[15] S. M. Alamouti, “A simple transmitter diversity scheme for 
wireless communications,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., 
vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1451–1458, October 1998. 
[16] B. Özgül, M. Koca, and H. Deliç, “Orthogonal Space-Time 
Block Coding for Continuous Phase Modulation with 
Frequency-Domain Equalization,” IEEE Trans. Commun., 
vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 3579–3584, Dec. 2009. 
[17] G. Wang and X.-G. Xia, “Orthogonal space-time coding for 
CPM system with fast decoding,” Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, 
p. 107, 2002. 
[18] B. E. Rimoldi, “A Decomposition Approach to CPM,” IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 34, pp. 260-270, 
1988. 
[19] M. Xiao and T. Aulin, “Serially Concatenated Continuous 
Phase Modulation with Convolutional Codes Over Rings,” 
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1387-1396, 2006. 
[20] J.L. Massey and T. Mittelholzer, “Convolutional codes over 
rings,” 4th Joint Swedish-USSR Int. Workshop Information 
Theory, pp. 14-18, 1989. 
[21] R. A. Carrasco and M. Johnston, Non-binary error control 
coding for wireless communication and data storage. Wiley, 
2009. 
[22] D. Divsalar and S. Dolinar, “Weight Distributions for Turbo 
Codes Using Random and Nonrandom Permutations,” JPL 
TDA Progress Report, vol. 42-122, pp. 56-65, Apr-Jun 1995. 
[23] IT++ 
project, 
http://itpp.sourceforge.net/4.3.1/, 
accessed 
August 2018. 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

