  
Efficient Video-Based Packet Multicast Method for Multimedia Control in Cloud 
Data Center Networks 
Nader F. Mir, Abhishek T. Rao, and Rohit Garg 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
San Jose State University, California 
San Jose, CA, 95195, U.S.A 
email: nader.mir@sjsu.edu 
 
 Abstract— The objective of this paper is to demonstrate the best 
architectural remedy with the required QoS under running that 
can handle high end real time streaming traffic while 
multicasting. Since streaming media accounts for a large portion 
of the traffic in networks, and its delivery requires continuous 
service, it is required to analyze the traffic sources and investigate 
the network performance. IP multicasting technology adds 
tremendous amount of challenge to a network as streamed media 
delivered to users must be multiplied in volume. In this paper, we 
first demonstrate a study of the complexity and feasibility of 
multicast multimedia networks by using different multicast 
protocols and video sources. In our proposed method, we then 
create peer-to-peer (P2P) and data center topologies in order to 
analyze the performance metrics. The implementation and 
evaluation of the presented methodology are carried out using 
OPNET Modeler simulator and the various built-in models. 
Further, we implement performance tests to compare the 
efficiency of the presented topologies at various levels.  
Keywords-video streaming; cloud data centers; multicast; 
multimedia; performance evaluation; video codecs.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION   
Over the years, major development in the industry have 
been involved in the integration of various multimedia 
applications. Delivery of streaming media (video on demand), 
e-learning with minimum delay and highest quality has been 
one of the major challenges in the networking industry. Video 
service providers, such as Netflix, Hulu are constantly changing 
the architecture in order to service these needs. These service 
providers face stiff competition and pressure to deliver the next 
generation of streaming media to the subscribers. The next 
generation media can be divided into categories: real-time and 
non-real time. Examples of real time can be live streaming and 
video conferencing and non-real time can be e-learning and 
video on demand [1].  The next generation of streaming media 
[2] involves a large number of subscribers whose delivery is 
closer aligned with the latest protocols than with the traditional 
systems. In such cases, it is required that the service providers 
upgrade their infrastructure and support them [3].  
One of the main challenges in the multimedia industry that 
motivates us to look into it in this paper is multicasting the 
video streams. IP Multicast is one of the major techniques that 
can be used for efficient delivery of streaming multimedia 
traffic to a large number of subscribers simultaneously. Group 
membership, unicast and multicast routing protocols are mainly 
required for multicast communications [4]. Inter Group 
Membership Protocol (IGMP) utilized in our study maintains 
one of the most commonly used multicast protocols at user 
facility site. IGMP is used to obtain the multicast information in 
a network. Unicast routing protocols can be distance vector or 
link state, the latter being preferred due to the dynamic reaction 
of these protocols to changes in topology. Multicast routing 
protocols can be integrated with the unicast routing protocol or 
can be independent of them. Protocols, such as the Multicast 
Open Shortest Path First (MOSPF), depend on the underlying 
unicast protocols used, whereas protocols, such as Protocol 
Independent Multicast (PIM), are independent on the type of 
unicast routing protocols used. A combination of IGMP, 
MOSPF and PIM in sparse mode or dense mode can be used 
for successful implementation and efficient delivery of 
multimedia traffic in networks [4]. 
Multicast routing enables transmission of data to multiple 
sources simultaneously. The underlying algorithm involves 
finding a tree of links connecting to all the routers that contain 
hosts belonging to a particular multicast group. Multicast 
packets are then transmitted along the tree path from source to 
destination (single receiver or group of receivers belonging to 
a multicast group). In order to achieve the multicast routing 
tree, several approaches have been adopted. Group-shared 
tree, source based tree and core based tree are some which are 
explained here.   
a. 
Group-based tree: In this approach a single routing 
tree is constructed for all the members in the 
multicast group  
b. Source-based tree: This involves constructing a 
separate routing tree for each separate member in the 
multicast group. If multicast routing is carried out 
using source-based approach, then N separate routing 
trees are built for each of the N hosts in the group [7].  
c. 
Core-based tree: This is a multicast routing protocol, 
which builds the routing table using a group-shared 
tree approach. The tree is built between edge and core 
routers in a network, which helps in transmitting the 
multicast packets. 
MOSPF and PIM use one of the above mentioned 
approaches in the transmission of packets. As PIM is the 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

multicast routing protocol used in the implementation, we 
discuss the working of PIM. 
PIM is a multicast routing protocol that is independent of 
the underlying unicast routing protocols used [7]. PIM works 
in two modes- dense mode and sparse mode. In the former 
mode the multicast group members are located in a dense 
manner and the latter approach has the multicast group 
members distributed widely. PIM uses Reverse path 
forwarding (RPF) technique in dense modes to route the 
multicast packets. In dense mode, RPF floods packets to all 
multicast routers that belong to a multicast group whereas in a 
sparse mode PIM uses a center based method to construct the 
multicast routing table. PIM routers which work in sparse 
mode sends messages to a center router called rendezvous 
point. The router chosen to be rendezvous point transmits the 
packets using the group based tree model. As seen in Fig. 1, 
the RP can move from a group based tree model to a source 
based approach if multiple sources are specified.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
provides a detail of our architecture and its functionality and 
Section III presents a performance analysis of the designed 
architectures. Finally, Section IV concludes the paper.  
 
II. NETWORK ARCHITECTURE  
Network architecture has been designed from service 
provider’s and user’s perspective. Network service providers 
are concerned with the available bandwidth and utilization of 
resources whereas end user’s main concern is with the 
delivery of streaming media with lowest time and maximum 
efficiency. In order to obtain the various parameters that are 
required for the best design of multimedia network, two 
network models were implemented and analyzed.  
A. Implemented Peer to Peer (P2P) Network Design 
Peer to peer network model is a distributed architecture 
where the application is transmitted between source and 
destination through peers. Applications such as music sharing, 
file sharing use peer-to-peer network model for transmitting 
the data. A peer-to-peer network was built using the values as 
shown in Table I. The network architecture shown below 
represents an organizational division where the admin 
department is the source of multimedia traffic, which is 
simultaneously streamed to the remaining departments namely 
the HR, finance and IT. The topology contains two backbone 
routers connected back-to-back, a video streaming source is 
configured and stored in the admin department, where the 
video frames are encoded with a H.264 codec and generating a 
frame rate of 15-20 frames per sec. The backbone routers are 
configured with PIM-DM as the multicast protocol that is 
responsible to carry multicast packets. The topology diagram 
can be seen in Fig. 2.  
 
Figure 1. Sample diagram of multicast routing 
 
 
Figure 2. Peer to Peer (P2P) Network Topology 
 
TABLE I. CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS FOR A PEER TO PEER NETWORK 
DESIGN 
Link speed 
(in 
Mbps) 
Frame size 
Frame 
interarrival 
rate 
Video 
Codec 
Multicast 
protocol 
used 
100 
128x120 
10 fps 
H.264 
PIM-DM 
100 
128x240 
15fps 
H.264 
PIM-DM 
1000 
352x240 
30 fps 
H.264 
PIM-DM 
 
B. Implemented Data center topology  
A data center contains certain facilities for computing, data 
storage, and other technology resources distributed over 
different parts of the world. Data center architecture is divided 
into access, distribution and core layers. Access layers consist 
of switches that are connected to servers, distribution layer 
contains switches which transfer the data from access to core 
layers, and core layer has high speed switching circuitry that 
transmits the data over WAN links and to other sites. The data 
center testbed topology implemented in this paper is shown 
Fig. 3.  
  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

  
Figure 3. Data Center Topology as the test bed for multimedia 
streaming 
 
The topology has been implemented taking into account 
redundancy at all levels. The topology responds dynamically 
to failures at link, path and device level. Scaling the number of 
nodes, both horizontally and vertically has been considered in 
order to analyze the performance metrics of the network. 
Streaming media content stored at the servers are configured 
for varying bit rates and varying frame sizes. OPNET 
simulator has been used as the simulation tool for 
implementing and testing multicast multimedia traffic detailed 
metrics that are used for data center implementation has been 
shown in the Table II.   
 
TABLE II. CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS FOR A DATA CENTER 
Number of servers per rack  
2 
Number of TOR switches used per rack  
2 
Number of distribution switches per rack  
2 
Number of core switches per rack  
1 
Total number of servers  
8 
Total TOR Switches  
8 
Total distribution switches  
4 
Total Core switches  
2 
Link speeds in data centers  
1000 Mbps 
Link speeds to WAN   
PPP DS3 
Video Application and codec used  
Video streaming, 
H.264 
Frame sixe  
Constant (5000) 
Bit rates  
Constant (10 fps)  
             
III. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS  
The configuration parameters for used for the performance 
evaluation are shown below in Table III. Since backbone 
routers are majorly involved in the transmission of traffic over 
the internet, Ethernet load across these links has been 
considered. As the frame size increases load across the 
backbone links increases, which leads to increase in the 
delivery of media to destination.  
 
 
 
TABLE III. VIDEO CONTENT CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS 
Test 
Name  
Frame Size 
(in bytes)  
Video  
Codec  
Used  
Frame  
Inter-arrival 
Time  
Ethernet Load 
Across the Link 
(packets/sec)  
Video1  
   15,360 
H.264  
10 Frames/sec  
280  
Video2  
5,000  
H.264  
Exponential  
530 
 
In order to reduce the end to end delay, latency and 
prioritize traffic Quality of Service (QoS) was implemented. 
Opnet simulator has various built-in QoS profiles, some of 
them being WFQ, FIFO, priority queueing.  Differentiated 
services code point based QoS is being used in this 
implementation wherein based on the priority of traffic 
delivery, a certain level of service is configured depending on 
which resources are allocated along the path of delivery.  
Now, we present the Ethernet load test – a performance 
metric which determines the amount of data packets that are 
carried by the network. Although each link in the network 
carries data packets WAN / core routers are chosen for 
analysis. In peer-to-peer topology mentioned earlier, the links 
connecting the backbone routers are considered, whereas in a 
data center topology core router links/WAN links have been 
chosen.  
The variation in the graph can be explained as follows. In 
this case the bit rate and frame size s, both have been kept as 
exponential increasing functions. From Fig. 4 it can be 
observed that in a two node network since there is a single link 
connecting the backbone routers, Ethernet load across these 
links is considerably higher than that of a multi node model 
where, PIM builds a tree structure (source based or center 
based) for sending the multicast packets. As a result, the load 
is distributed across various links thereby reducing the failure 
percentage. One more alternative that can be used is port-
channel can be configured to distribute the load across the 
links connecting the routers. Over the time period considered 
it was observed that the load was higher in a two mode 
network and lesser in a multi node network.   
  
Figure 4. Comparison of Ethernet Load between 2 nodes and multimode 
case  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Our next experiment is concerned with the queueing delay 
which is the amount of time that a packet waits in the router’s 
queue before being sent onto the network. This is one of the 
most important parameters for multicast networks as an 
increase in the queueing delay can cause significant delay in 
the transmission of packets across the network. Queueing 
delay can be due to many factors, such as buffer size in a 
router, router’s processing capacity, link speed used, number 
of hops from source to destination. In this analysis, the 
queueing delay has been analyzed for a two node and a multi-
node environment. From the graphs shown in Fig. 5, it can be 
observed that although in a two node network links of higher 
speed were used, when packets of multiple applications arrive, 
a two node network experienced significant queueing delay 
which led to the delay in the transmission of packets. Since no 
QoS was configured all the packets were serviced based on 
packet arrival times. The graph for a 2 node network shows 
peaks of highest queueing delay and lows of least queueing 
delay. This is due to the fact that when packets related to 
multiple applications arrive there has been peaks of high 
queue delay and when packets related to single applications 
arrive less queueing delay has been experienced. In order to 
have less queueing delay priority traffic can be classified 
based on QoS policies which helps in serving these packets 
better.  
Next, we consider a test on QoS -  a mechanism which is 
used to analyze the performance of networks. QoS policies 
configured ensures traffic prioritization and reservation of 
resources along the path from source to destination. QoS plays 
a major role in multimedia networks where defining QoS 
policies defines the traffic priority when real time multimedia 
traffic and interactive media is involved. Since these types of 
traffic have rigid delay constraints defining QoS policies for 
these types can result in prioritizing them when requests for 
other traffic are in queue.  
Simulation results of QoS implementation is shown in Fig. 
6. Since real time interactive media could not be created in a 
simulation environment, two video sources (video1 and 
video2) were created and video1was configured with a WFQ 
QoS profile traffic group of video 1 being set to high priority 
and traffic group of video 2 being set to best effort with no 
QoS configured. From the plots in the figure, it can be 
observed that over a period of time when requests arrive for 
video1 and video2 packets requesting information, video1 is 
serviced with less packet delay than those packets for video2 
while multicast flow is also included in the configuration. 
Since the IGMP convergence time was 2 min the QoS traffic 
servicing has started after the first few minutes.  
Finally, the latency is our last performance metric to focus 
on. The latency is the amount of delay involved in 
transmitting the data from source to destination. For 
calculating the Latency issues in network different pixel sizes 
were chosen for analysis. Three different Pixel sizes were 
configured over a period of time with link speed and other 
parameters being kept constant.   The link speed was defined 
to be 100 Mbps and pixel sizes of 352x240, 128X240 and 
128X120 were defined with frame interarrival rates to be 
logarithmic. After several tests it was observed that the latency 
in the transmission of a high quality video was more compared 
to the latencies of the transmission of a video of lesser 
resolution as shown in Fig. 7. If a video of high quality has to 
be transmitted in minimum time, then separate channels can 
be used for high definition video where source specific trees 
can be used for routing thereby achieving successful routing 
of packets.  
 
  
Figure 5. Comparison of queueing delay between 2 nodes and multimode 
case 
  
Figure 6. QoS servicing of priority and non-priority traffic  
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
Figure 7. Comparison of Latency of various frame sizes.  
IV. CONCLUSION  
In this paper, we designed and implemented peer to peer 
and data center topologies. The two topologies were 
implemented for various video streaming applications such as 
video conferencing and video streaming. The parameters of 
these video sources were changed in to measure the 
performance metrics of the multicast networks. Parameters 
such as video codecs, frame size, frame interarrival rate, link 
speed, QoS were changed for analysis. From the analysis it 
was observed that a multitier architecture connected to high 
speed links was best suited for high end real time traffic. 
Further it was observed that the QoS configuration for these 
real time traffic reduces the packet end to end delay and the 
latency of these packets was also less as compared to other 
packets. Building a multitier not only helped in better load 
distribution of traffic across links but also this type of 
topology was better equipped to handle failures at device, 
links and server levels. This paper also covered the different 
multicast routing protocols that can be used and how the 
routing table can be constructed.  
REFERENCES  
[1] 
K. Oe, A. Koyama, and L. Batolli, “erformance evaluation of multicast 
protocols for multimedia traffic,” IEEE Xplore document, IEEE 27th 
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and 
Applications (AINA), 2013. 
[2] 
T. Do, K. Hua, and M. Tantaoui, “P2VoD: Providing fault tolerant 
video-on-demand streaming in peer-to-peer environment.” Proc. of the 
IEEE ICC 2004. Paris: IEEE Communications Society, 2004.  
[3] 
B. Cheng, L. Stein, and J. Hetal, “Grid Cast: Improving peer sharing 
for P2P VOD,” ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, 
Communications, and Applications, vol. 4, 2008. 
[4] 
B. Quinn and K. Almeroth, “IP Multicast Applications: Challenges and 
Solutions.” RFC, 2001, ACM Digital Library. 
[5] 
“OPNET Technologies Inc. OPNET Modeller Product Documentation 
Release 14.5,” OPNET Modeller, 2008.  
[6] 
X. Sun, and J. Lu, “The Research in Streaming Media OnDemand 
Technology based on IP Multicast,” 3rd International Conference on 
Computer and Electrical Engineering, 2010.  
[7] 
http://www2.ic.uff.br/~michael/kr1999/4-network/4_08-mcast.htm, 
Access date: July 2018.  
[8] 
Z. Bojkovic, B. Bakmaz, and M. Bakmaz, “Multimedia Traffic in New 
Generation Networks: Requirements,” Journal of Control and 
Modeling, 2016.  
[9] 
S. Khanvilkar, F. Bashir, D. Schonfeld, and A. Khokhar, “Multimedia    
Networks and Communication,” 2015 
[10] X. Wang, C. Yu, and H. Schulzrinne, “IP Multicast Simulation in 
OPNET,” Semantic Scholar, 2015.  
. 
  
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-669-9
ICSNC 2018 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

