Feasibility Veriﬁcation of Access Control System
for Telecommuting by Users Reliability Calculation
Atsushi Shinoda
Graduate School of Informatics
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan
email: shinoda@net.itc.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Hirokazu Hasegawa
Center for Strategic Cyber Resilience R&D
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan
email: hasegawa@nii.ac.jp
Hajime Shimada
Information Technology Center
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan
email: shimada@itc.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Yukiko Yamaguchi
Information Technology Center
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan
email: yamaguchi@itc.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Hiroki Takakura
Center for Strategic Cyber Resilience R&D
National Institute of Informatics
Tokyo, Japan
email: takakura@nii.ac.jp
Abstract—Nowadays, telecommuting, in which users connect to
a corporate network from remote locations, such as their homes,
is increasing as a measure to prevent COVID-19 spread. However,
telecommuting exposes companies to information security risks
by allowing users to connect terminals from their home that
is out of control. Further security enhancements are required
for ensuring secure telecommuting, but they easily cause trade-
off issues between security and business efﬁciency that the
administrators have to solve. As a solution to this problem,
we have proposed an access control system to minimize the
loss of business efﬁciency while enhancing security. The system
calculates the reliability of each connected user and implements
network access control. This access control allows connection to
many resources for business efﬁciency if the user’s reliability
is high, and minimizes the number of resources available for
reducing risks if the user’s reliability is low. This paper conﬁrmed
the feasibility of implementing the system to calculate reliability
from realistic indicators and perform network access control
using pseudo-corporate network.
Index Terms—Access Control, ACL, SDN, Network Latency,
Telecommuting, User Reliability
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, telecommuting, in which users connect to a
corporate network from remote locations, such as their homes,
is increasing as a measure to prevent COVID-19 spread and
due to a development of information technology. It increases
the number of work style options and increases business
efﬁciency. However, for corporate networks, remote networks
and terminals that are difﬁcult to control by corporate admin-
istrators become a risk because their security is not guaranteed
compared to terminals at the intranet. There is a need to
enhance the security of corporate networks for telecommuting
communications, but security enhancement measures often
decrease business efﬁciency.
Therefore, we have proposed a solution to this problem:
an access control system that enhances security but does
not decrease business efﬁciency as much as possible [1] [2].
The proposed system calculates the reliability of each Virtual
Private Network (VPN) connected user and determines which
resources the user can connect to based on the importance
of the resources. However, in the previous research, we have
only proposed the mechanism of this system and veriﬁed the
access control based on the pre-deﬁned reliability indicators.
We have not veriﬁed the feasibility of implementing the system
that calculates reliability based on realistic indicators and its
access control.
In this paper, we implemented the proposed system and
veriﬁed how the implementation would affect the corporate
network and remote connections. The results of the network
latency evaluation in the intranet data transfer process during
the remote connection conﬁrmed that the intranet communica-
tion was not affected. In addition, the results of the experience
degradation evaluation of the remote connection users showed
that all connections to the corporate network were less than
1.0 second. However, connections to resources varied from 3.2
seconds at low load to 26.6 seconds with simultaneous remote
connections and high load on the intranet.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section
II describes related work, Section III outlines the proposed
system, Section IV describes the implementation, Section V
describes the veriﬁcation experiments, and Section VI provides
a conclusion and future work.
II. RELATED WORK
By registering Access Control List (ACL) in network equip-
ment, such as routers, network access control can be imple-
mented and corporate network can be more secure. Smetters
et al. have conducted an extensive and long-term research on
how access control with ACL can enhance security [3].
There is also research on using Software Deﬁned Network-
ing (SDN) to dynamically generate ACL to further enhance
security [4]. While this research is only for the targeting
of IoT devices, SDN is used as an IDS for network access
control. We have to make high frequency ACL changes for
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

dynamic access control in the proposed system. Therefore,
we also use SDN as one of the easier ways to implement it.
However, it can be assumed that ACL is normally conﬁgured
on the network equipment, and management methods also
exist. Liu et al. proposed ACL management method using
optimization algorithm, it can make management easier by
reducing redundancy, but it is not suitable for rapid ACL
changes [5].
Dynamic control with SDN is expected to affect greater
load on the network, so the impact on the network should be
considered. There have been several research on the impact of
SDN control in networks. Iqbal et al. proposed an analytical
model for the end-to-end communication latency caused by
centralized control using SDN, based on experimental mea-
surements in a virtual environment and testbeds across the
US and nine countries [6]. Llopis et al. proposed minimizing
critical communication, such as remote surgery, latency reduc-
tion method in IoT communications by routing and redirecting
to the shortest path using SDN [7]. This two research focus
mainly on routing using SDN, whereas proposed system in
this paper differs by focusing on network access control. Due
to the fact that very few research have used SDN for network
access control and measured speed, this paper cannot set a
value as a baseline.
The proposed system in this paper uses user reliability to
enhance security. For a concept similar to the user reliability,
there are two research about scaling the self-report measure of
user’s security intentions [8] or attitudes [9]. As self-reported
data is not accurate and dynamic, proposed system in this
paper uses numerical data that can be obtained by automat-
ically as a reliability indicator to calculate user reliability.
In addition, there is research about investigation on Chief
Information Security Ofﬁcers’ (CISO) awareness of Human-
Centered security in corporation. Hielscher et al. indicate that
many CISOs may not have enough knowledge about the latest
academic Human-Centered security [10]. The system proposed
in this paper to automatically determine the user reliability will
be more required in the situation where the administrators
(such as CISOs) do not have enough knowledge. Research
also exist that focus on user’s security awareness. While this
paper discusses a method to measure user’s security awareness,
Masssoth et al. proposed learning method that uses AI to
improve user’s security knowledge and awareness [11].
III. ACCESS CONTROL SYSTEM USING USER RELIABILITY
We explain about details of proposed system and user
reliability calculation.
A. Overview of the Proposed System
It is difﬁcult for companies to manage the networks and
terminals which connected from outside of the companies.
It is a risk to the corporate network because telecommuting
communications can become a bridgehead. Therefore, it will
be necessary to enhance security (e.g., strictly access control),
but this is likely to sacriﬁce business efﬁciency. There is a need
for a method that balances business efﬁciency and enhanced
security.
Thus, we have proposed an access control system that aims
to enhance security while minimizing the loss of business efﬁ-
ciency [1] [2]. This proposed system calculates the reliability
of users who connect to the corporate network from outside for
telecommuting and determines the user’s accessible resources.
The user’s reliability is calculated based on an index that
indicates the user’s security awareness, and the importance of
each resource is used to determine which resources to allow
the user to connect to.
Users with high reliability are granted access to a wide range
of resources. In contrast, users with low reliability are granted
access to the minimum necessary resources. Furthermore,
proposed system has a function that allows users to apply
for access permission in case a user with low reliability
needs to access a resource to which he/she has been denied
access. If approved by the administrators, the user can connect
to the resource temporarily for a certain period of time. It
also has a dynamic access control function that periodically
recalculates reliability to ﬂexibly cope with time-changing
network conditions.
B. User Reliability Indicators
The calculation of user reliability is based on indicators of
user’s awareness of security enhancement. Useable indicators
for user reliability calculation are listed below.
• Security Training
This reliability indicator can have two values, the progress
rate of security training courses and test result scores
during security training course.
• Incidents History
This is the number of incidents that the user has caused
in the past, such as being the target of a cyber attack that
resulted in an information leakage.
• Security Surprise Test
This is a result of unannounced surprised tests, such as a
pseudo malicious e-mail that includes web beacon URL
or attachment ﬁle includes beacon. If the user opens URL
or attachment ﬁle, the score becomes bad. In addition,
whether the user reported such risky behavior to the
administrators comes to be another reliability indicator.
• Result of URL Filtering Detection
This reliability indicator is the number of a user’s at-
tempts to follow malicious or suspicious URLs detected
and prevented by the corporate Firewall or Uniﬁed Threat
Management (UTM).
• Other Reliability Indicators
Depending on the network environment, there are many
other possible indicators, e.g., ‘Windows security logs’,
‘Whether security updates are applied to installed pro-
grams’, ‘Number of spam e-mails received by users’, and
‘IP address of the telecommuting user’s remote network’.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

User DB
ACL DB
VPN Clients
The
Internet
Local Clients
Conﬁgure the equipment
Sign-in/out
Detector
ACL generator
ACL Conﬁgurator
ACL
Proposed System
AD
User Reliability
Calculator
NW DB
Resources
Temporary Permit 
Application
User
Admin
ACL
Cron
Filter Log
Corporate Network
Training Data Server
User Data
Network Data
VPN Connection Log
importance
Training Data
Network Data
(IP address-username)
VPN Server
UTM
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
8)
7)
Reliability
9)
Connected User Information
Fig. 1: Architecture of the Proposed System.
C. Calculation of User Reliability
The procedure of the reliability calculation based on each re-
liability indicator is shown as follows. First, for each reliability
indicator, the data is standardized for all users, so that the value
becomes relative and can be calculated by addition. Then, the
reliability is calculated by adjusting a parameter to set the
weight of each standardized reliability indicator. Parameter
adjustment can be determined using statistical approaches,
such as machine learning, or by dividing reliability indicators
into some categories to reduce the number of parameters.
Thus, administrator’s effort for parameter adjustment may be
reduced.
D. Generation of ACL
The proposed system determines the communication per-
mission between the user’s terminal and the server storing the
important resources. We assume the importance of a resource
can be determined by setting the level in advance by admin-
istrator or creator (such as setting level of conﬁdentiality), or
by using resource importance estimation methods, such as our
previous research [12].
For the generation of ACL using network access con-
trol, it is necessary to determine the relationship between
user reliability, resource importance, and stabilization con-
stant(=threshold). As an example, Formula (1) is access con-
trol condition that grants permission to connect.
Reliability − Importance > StabilizationConstant (1)
The stabilization constant is adjustable as a parameter and
can be changed depending on company’s security situation.
For example, if threat intelligence indicates possible threat
detection, such as the company is being targeted, or if a tem-
porary increase of malicious communications to honeypots,
or an increase of the number of malicious e-mails, we can
increase the stabilization constant to make the company more
secure. In contrast, if the situation subsides, the stabilization
constant can be decreased to allow access to a wider range
of areas to improve business efﬁciency. Also, by dividing the
stabilizing constants by department, the number of parameters
to be adjusted will increase, but it will be possible to create
ACL that better ﬁt the information being handled.
E. Architecture of the Proposed System
Fig. 1 shows the architecture of the proposed system and
the corporate network assumed to apply the system. The
description of each function in the processing procedure is
as follows.
1) A VPN connection is made to the corporate network
from a remote location for telecommuting.
2) The VPN server outputs the connection information such
as the assigned IP address and username as a log to the
proposed system at the time of connection.
3) Sign-in/out Detector detects the start/exit of the user’s
VPN connection from the received log and stores the
connected user information including VPN connec-
tion ID, username, and assign IP address to the User
Database (DB).
4) The User Reliability Calculator obtains several kinds of
data from Active Directory (AD) and other servers and
calculates the user’s reliability based on the data. The
calculated reliability is sent to the User DB.
5) ACL Generator generates ACL based on user’s reliabil-
ity and resource importance, and stores them in the ACL
DB.
6) ACL Conﬁgurator receives the ACL stored in the ACL
DB and passes them to network equipment.
7) Network equipment implements network access control
based on the ACL.
8) The application for temporary permission also gener-
ates ACL based on the application and approval, and
activates the ACL Conﬁgurator.
9) In addition, in order to ﬂexibly cope with time-changing
conditions, the ACL Generator is periodically invoked
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

TABLE I: Details About Network Elements.
Function
Element
Details
Router
Router and VPN Server
NEC IX2310
AD
OS
Windows Server 2019
Proposed System
OS
Rocky Linux 8.8
SDN Protocol
OpenFlow 1.3
SDN Controller
Ryu 4.3.4
Programing
Python 3.6.8
DB
SQLite 3.26.0
Log Server
Rsyslog
SDN Switch
OS
Ubuntu 22.10
SDN Switch
Open vSwitch 3.0.0
Resource Server
Host Machine OS
Windows 10 Professional
Guest Machine OS
Rocky Linux 8.6
File Sharing Protocol
SMB
Local Clients
OS
Windows 10 Professional
VPN Clients
OS
Windows 10 Professional
NW Info Server
OS
Rocky Linux 8.6
File Sharing Protocol
SMB
to review the user’s reliability and dynamically perform
access control.
IV. PROPOSED SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
We implemented the access control system described in
Section III into a pseudo-corporate network and veriﬁed it.
Fig. 2 shows the organization of the pseudo-corporate
network in which the proposed system is implemented. Table
I shows the detail breakdowns of elements in Fig. 2. In this
implementation, unless otherwise noted, all processing is done
by programs written in Python.
In this implementation, it is assumed that the network
conﬁguration information server (NW Info Server) combines
several server functions, such as NW DB and Security Training
Server. Therefore, NW Info Server also keeps information
related combined functions such as some reliability indicators,
client IP address and username correspondence table, and
resource importance information. It is also assumed that one
server was considered one resource.
The elements shown in Fig. 1 of the proposed system in
this implementation are listed below.
A. Sign-in/out Detector
The VPN Server sends the logs using Syslog, and Rsyslog
in the Sign-in/out Detector receives them. When received the
log, Sign-in/out Detector is activated and extracts connection
information (VPN connection number, VPN client’s assigned
IP addresses and username) from the log, and stores it in the
User DB.
B. User Reliability Calculator
Indicators which we implemented for user reliability and
their obtaining methods are shown below.
• Progress Rate of Security Training Courses, Test Result
Scores During Security Training Course: These are stored
in the NW Info Server as an Excel ﬁle, and User
Reliability Calculator obtains it by Server Message Block
Protocol (SMB).
• Incident History: It is associated with each user’s infor-
mation in AD, and User Reliability Calculator obtains it
by LDAP.
• Result and Response of Security Surprise Test: These are
stored in the NW info server as an Excel ﬁle, and User
Reliability Calculator obtains it by SMB.
• Result of URL Filtering Detection: URL ﬁltering is
implemented by the Router function, and the log of IP
address is obtained by Rsyslog. The table of correspon-
dence between IP addresses and username of local clients
is placed in the NW Info Server as an Excel ﬁle, and User
Reliability Calculator obtains it by SMB.
We classiﬁed into the following categories. Some indicators
classiﬁed into multiple categories.
• User Carelessness: Result of Security Surprise Test, Re-
sult of URL Filtering Detection, Incident History
• User Awareness of Efforts to Secure: Progress Rate of
Security Training Courses, Response of Security Surprise
Test
• User Skill Level: Test Result Scores During Security
Training Course, Result of Security Surprise Test
The User Reliability Calculator obtains each reliability
indicator for all users, standardizes them, and calculates user’s
reliability. User u’s reliability R(u) is as follows (2).
R(u) =
1
|C|
∑
c∈C
1
|c|
∑
i∈c
(−1)Ki × vi(u)
(2)
Here,
C: set of categories,
c: category, set of indicators,
i: indicator,
Ki: attribute determined by indicator i,
vi(u): user u’s reliability value of indicator i.
For indicators where higher values indicate less user re-
liable, ‘-1’ is multiplied in the calculation. Therefore, Ki
becomes 0 in case of indicators about ‘Progress Rate of Secu-
rity Training Courses’, ‘Test Result Scores During Security
Training Course’, ‘Response of Security Surprise Test’. In
contrast, Ki becomes 1 in case of indicators about ‘Incident
History’, ‘Result of Security Surprise Test’, ‘Result of URL
Filtering Detection’.
Note that if a large number of VPN is connected at the same
time, the User Reliability Calculator and ACL Generator will
be started again for each connection, which spend large times.
Therefore, after the Sign-in/out Detector detects a connection
and stores it in the User DB, if more VPN connections are
connected, the ACL Generator is not activating in the middle
of the process, but only once at the end. The periodic execution
is deﬁned by Cron and is executed every minute.
C. ACL Generator
This function generates ACL for each connected VPN user
to access resources. The intranet utilizes default deny policy
so that we have to set allow ACL to access resources. A
permission rule is generated based on the generation condition
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Resource Segment
VPN Server
Department 1
Department 2
Department 3
Resources
Server Segment
AD
×7
Open vSwitch(SDN Switch)
SDN control line
URL Filter
Proposed System
NW Info
Server
Pseudo-Corporate Network
192.168.{11,20,100,101,102}.254/24
192.168.100.0/24
192.168.101.0/24
192.168.102.0/24
192.168.20.0/24
192.168.11.0/24
Router
VPN Clients
The
Internet
Fig. 2: Experimental Network.
Formula (1). In this implementation, Stabilization Constant
value is ‘0’. The information of resources importance is
already speciﬁed individually for each resource server, and
is placed in the NW Info Server as an Excel ﬁle, which is
obtained by ACL Generator via SMB.
D. ACL Conﬁgurator
The ACL Conﬁgurator obtains ACL to be conﬁgured from
the ACL DB. The ACL Conﬁgurator implements Ryu [13]
as an SDN (Protocol: OpenFlow) controller and conﬁgures
the received ACL to the SDN switch by the ﬁrewall function
of Ryu. In this implementation, access control from the local
client to the resource server is performed by SDN, but the
ACL are prepared in advance, so they are not affected even if
the ACL are updated by a VPN connection.
V. FEASIBILITY VERIFICATION EXPERIMENT
The proposed system enhances the security of corporate
network by providing access control based on the user re-
liability for telecommuting. However, it is not desirable that
the introduction of this system affects connection to and use of
the corporate network. Therefore, experiments were conducted
on the availability when a large number of remote users are
connected to corporate network at the same time or when the
corporate network is busy.
A. Overview of the Experiment
We measured the time required for a VPN connection and
the time until the resource can be accessed (SMB connection)
in the experimental environment. Since the ACL generated
change with each additional connection, multiple VPN con-
nections are measured. There are two possible patterns for
these multiple connections:
• Sequential connections: the number of VPN-connected
clients is increased one by one.
• Simultaneous connections: all VPN-connected clients
are connected at the same time.
In addition, since the load on the SDN and resource server may
vary depending on whether the local client is communicating,
measurements will be taken for two patterns:
• None: no communication from the local client to the
resource server.
• Heavy: an extremely large amount of communications are
transported from the local client to the resource server.
The measurement on the VPN Clients is controlled by Pow-
erShell Remoting and using Measure-Command. The load
Heavy means sending large PING packets (51.6KB) every 1
second by 5 local clients to resource servers and receiving
600MB ﬁle via SMB by 7 clients from resource servers.
For each reliability indicator, the data was generated by
random number generation after adjusting the generation range
so that the ratio of high:medium:low reliable users is 2:6:2.
All measurements were taken three times, and the values in
the table are averages of the three.
B. Results of the Feasibility Veriﬁcation Experiment
Measured VPN connection times and SMB connection
times are shown in Fig. 3.
In the pattern of Transport: Heavy, Connection Type: Si-
multaneous, the SMB can not connect to because of too long
waiting time, so trying to SMB connection is waiting until
PING can be accepted (Note: the measured time at the pattern
(Heavy, Simultaneous) in the Fig. 3d is the sum of the PING
waiting time and SMB connection time).
C. Consideration
As shown in Fig. 3, the reason why there was no signiﬁcant
difference in the VPN connection was because the system’s
reliability calculation process was not started up yet.
The difference in SMB time for the Sequential was no more
than 1 second, and the SMB connection time did not depend
on the number of clients. In the Simultaneous, some clients
(ID: user8, user10) took the same amount of time as in the
Sequential, but other clients took twice as long. This was
due to the processing of simultaneous VPN connections. Even
though PowerShell was used to initiate the batch connection,
there was slight difference between user8, user10 and other
users. Based on such difference, the proposed system divided
the connection into two sets. In fact, during the experiment,
two VPN connections succeeded → ACL generator started →
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
user0
user1
user2
user3
user4
user5
user6
user7
user8
user9
user10
user11
average
VPN
SMB
(a) Intranet Transport: None, Connection Type: Sequential
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
user0
user1
user2
user3
user4
user5
user6
user7
user8
user9
user10
user11
average
VPN
SMB
(b) Intranet Transport: None, Connection Type: Simultaneous
0
5
10
15
20
user0
user1
user2
user3
user4
user5
user6
user7
user8
user9
user10
user11
average
VPN
SMB
(c) Intranet Transport: Heavy, Connection Type: Sequential
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
user0
user1
user2
user3
user4
user5
user6
user7
user8
user9
user10
user11
average
VPN
SMB
(d) Intranet Transport: Heavy, Connection Type: Simultaneous
Fig. 3: Results of VPN/SMB Connection Waiting Time(second).
other VPN connections succeeded → ACL generator started,
and so on.
When the network was under heavy load, it took some
time for both the Sequential and Simultaneous to become
available. This is because the ACL generator takes more than
10 seconds.
The time command was used to measure the execution time
of each function of the proposed system under each situation,
and the results are shown in Table II. get ﬁle process is a
function that User Reliability Calculator obtains a ﬁle from
the NW Info Server, and it is used about 4 times. acl conﬁg
process is a function for the ACL Conﬁgurator to reﬂect the
ACL database to the SDN switch. all processes is a series of
processes performed by the User Reliability Calculator, ACL
Generator, and ACL Conﬁgurator.
From the above, it can be assumed that the waiting time
of Sequential under heavy load is due to get ﬁle process
being performed about 4 times, and the waiting time of
Simultaneous is due to it being performed twice as many
times by many clients. To solve this problem, it is necessary to
shorten the access to some reliability indicators, so the value of
the indicators should be calculated in advance and the process
of passing it to the system side should be asynchronous, with
high frequency.
Just in case, we checked the effect on the local client’s
communication using heavy load for pseudo-corporate net-
TABLE II: Execution Time for Each Function(second).
Intranet Transport
None
Heavy
VPN connection clients
0
12
0
12
get ﬁle process
1.361
1.348
3.649
3.641
acl conﬁg process
0.376
0.666
0.380
0.738
all processes
2.248
2.666
11.419
11.715
work, but there was almost no change in the time taken for
communication in both the Sequential and Simultaneous.
Impacts of the proposed system is limited because it is only
applied immediately after the VPN connection is established.
In this experiment, the network is under heavy load, which
means that some of the bandwidth is overﬂowing, but it is
difﬁcult to imagine a network that is always in this state.
However, if SMB communication is performed immediately
after the VPN connection is established in a Simultaneous,
sometimes an error raise and a delay is caused.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we implemented access control system based
on user reliability in the pseudo-corporate network envi-
ronment. The veriﬁcation using the network conﬁrmed the
feasibility of the proposed method. The proposed system
focuses on the user’s security awareness and the risk to the
corporate network. The purpose of the proposed system is to
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

balance security enhancement and business efﬁciency as much
as possible, which easily cause trade-off issues in network
access control.
The system was implemented on a pseudo-corporate net-
work, and in the feasibility veriﬁcation, waiting time for VPN
connections and SMB connections were measured. The impact
of the proposed system on VPN connections and the corporate
network was limited. The impact of multiple connections
was also limited if they were small scale. However, it was
conﬁrmed that if the network was under an abnormal load,
the waiting time can not be ignored due to the time spent
during the reliability calculation and ACL generation.
In future works, the exact validation of user reliability
calculation has not been carried out in this paper. In addition,
the reliability indicators should be based on as many indicators
as possible so that the reliability can be calculated accurately.
Furthermore, in order to be simplify and optimize the ad-
justment of parameters in calculating reliability, the proposed
system should introduce a function that uses received feedback
and automatically adjusts the parameters. With regard to the
proposed system feasibility, the algorithm or system conﬁg-
uration should be reviewed to cope with the situation where
signiﬁcant waiting times were identiﬁed in the experiment.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI
Grant Numbers JP19K20268, JP23H03396, JP19K11961.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Hasegawa and H. Takakura, “A dynamic access control system based
on situations of users,” 7th International Conference on Information
Systems Security and Privacy, pp. 653-660, 2021.
[2] A. Shinoda, H. Hasegawa, Y. Yamaguchi, H. Shimada, and H. Takakura,
“Feasibility veriﬁcation on impact of frequently access control update
based on user reliability,” 9th International Conference on Information
Systems Security and Privacy, Abstracts Track, 2023.
[3] D. K. Smetters, N. Good, “How users use access control,” 5th Sympo-
sium on Usable Privacy and Security, pp. 1-12, 2009.
[4] A. Hamza, H. H. Gharakheili, and V. Sivaraman, “Combining MUD
policies with SDN for IoT intrusion detection,” 2018 Workshop on IoT
Security and Privacy, pp. 1-7, 2018.
[5] A. X. Liu, E. Torng, and C. R. Meiners, “Compressing network access
control lists,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems,
Vol. 22, No. 12, pp. 1969-1977, 2011.
[6] A. Iqbal, U. Javed, S. Saleh, J. Kim, J. S. Alowibdi, and M. U. Ilyas,
“Analytical modeling of end-to-end delay in openﬂow based networks,”
IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 6859-6871, 2017.
[7] J. M. Llopis, J. Pieczerak, and T. Janaszka, “Minimizing latency of
critical trafﬁc through SDN,” 2016 IEEE International Conference on
Networking, Architecture and Storage, pp. 1-6, 2016.
[8] S. Egelman, M. Harbach, E. Peer, “Behavior ever follows intention?: a
validation of the security behavior intentions scale (SeBIS),” 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 5257-5261,
2016.
[9] C. Faklaris, L. Dabbish, and J. I. Hong, “A self-report measure of end-
user security attitudes (SA-6),” 15th Symposium on Usable Privacy and
Security, pp. 61-77, 2019.
[10] J. Hielscher, U. Menges, S. Parkin, A. Kluge and M. Angela Sasse,
“Employees Who Don’t Accept the Time Security Takes Are Not Aware
Enough: The CISO View of Human-Centred Security,” 32nd USENIX
Security Symposium, pp. 2311-2328, 2023.
[11] M. Masssoth, “Next Generation Artiﬁcial Intelligence-Based Learning
Platform for Personalized Cybersecurity and IT Awareness Training: A
Conceptual Study,” The Seventeenth International Conference on Sensor
Technologies and Applications, pp 32-37,2023.
[12] Y. Zhou, H. Hasegawa, and H. Takakura, “A resource importance
estimation method based on proximity of hierarchical position,” 5th
International Conference on Information Science and Systems, pp. 83-
89, 2022.
[13] RYU project team, “Ryubook 1.0 documentation,” 2014.
https://osrg.github.io/ryu-book/en/html/index.html [retrieved: Oct, 2023]
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-099-5
ICSNC 2023 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

