Design of IT Keys and Its Real Practice Specialist Program to Promote Key 
Engineers as Security Specialists 
 
Atsuo Inomata, Satoshi Matsuura, Kenji Ohira, Youki Kadobayashi,  
Kazutoshi Fujikawa, Hideki Sunahara 
and Suguru Yamaguchi 
Graduate School of Information Science 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology 
Ikoma-city, Nara-pref, Japan 
e-mail: {atsuo, matsuura, k-ohira, youki-k, fujikawa, suna, suguru}@itc.naist.jp 
 
 
Abstract—We introduce a practical teaching strategy called 
“IT Keys” for information security management. The 
educational goal is to put the work-ready graduates out into 
the social as a security expert (CSO: Chief Security Officer or 
CISO: Chief Information Security Officer). We collaborated 
with four universities and some departments of the Japanese 
government for IT Keys program. In this paper, we describe 
how to construct the teaching strategy, based on a combination 
of problem-based and project-based learning for promoting 
security expert. Furthermore, through the use of IT Keys for 5 
years since 2008, we report evaluations of some special lectures 
and exercises according to every feedback each of year. 
Keywords-IT 
Keys; 
information 
security; 
education; 
problem-based learning; project-based learning;  government. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Information technology is an important and integral part 
of the current social infrastructure. Internet has come to play 
an important role in various foundations of our society and 
life. To maintain all our systems and ensure infrastructure 
safety, many organizations, government bodies, and 
companies employ security experts. In addition, they have 
engineers to carry out their work properly. However, very 
few people must have heard of a management technique or a 
policy for information security. Training these professionals 
is costly because their training involves imparting not only 
technical skills such as machine installation or specific 
procedures, but also special skills concerning law, policies, 
inspection, management, and ethics. These are necessary for 
taking 
decisions 
regarding 
the 
security 
policy 
of 
organizations, which is called the information security 
literacy. We believe that it is very important for future 
security experts to acquire and promote information security 
literacy more safely and reliably. Further, we believe that 
communities of students from different universities, 
organizations, and fields are important factors in the 
education for the information security. 
In this paper, we propose a novel and practical teaching 
strategy called IT Keys that is a combination of problem-
based and project-based learning. We particularly focus on 
“HORENSO” (in Japanese) [7], which is an information 
sharing technique based on members’ understanding and 
synchronizing actions for changing circumstances within 
and outside an organization. The “HO” is the short form of 
“report,” meaning timely and adequate reporting. Its flow is 
usually from subordinates to superiors. However, superiors 
or administrators must also ensure that subordinates are kept 
informed in order to ensure timely reporting. “REN” is 
“contact” and “SO” is “consult”. This says that when a 
problem occurs, workers should report the issue, and not 
keep it to themselves. They should contact the relevant 
people, the foreman or the Japanese coordinator in this case. 
Instead of assuming that they can fix it themselves, they 
should consult with others to get their advice. Therefore, we 
believe that “HORENSO” is the most important factor for 
the information security experts to understand correctly.  
In Japan, IPA [8] is an organization of professionals that 
contributes to the growth and advancement of Japan’s 
economy by providing the strategic technology and human 
resource infrastructure required to support sustainable 
development of software and information processing 
systems. IPA provides a skill map of information security 
management to different categories of IT users. The map 
defines the security skill level in terms of a set of some 
technological 
elements. 
Further, 
it 
presents 
the 
quantification and visualization of the security skill required 
to grasp a level of each element. It can be considered as a 
measure that evaluates the level of competency required for 
information 
security 
management. 
Companies, 
organizations, and institutes can customize skill maps 
themselves according to their requirements. Skill maps can 
be classified into 16 classes on the basis of the type of 
technical skills to be acquired by information security 
professionals.  
II. 
IT KEYS PROGRAM 
IT Keys program (special IT program to promote key 
engineers as security specialists) was started in October 
2008 as one of “IT Specialist Training Promotion Program” 
by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
88
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Technology (MEXT), Japan, for the promotion of the best 
standards in the field of information security. The purpose is 
to establish a strong and practical education foundation 
through industry-university cooperation to allow skilled 
people in the field of management of advanced and practical 
information security to interact. This is achieved by the 
cooperation of the teachers from four universities (NAIST, 
Kyoto University, Osaka University, JAIST) and working 
members of NTT Communications) and three organizations 
(NICT, JPCERT/CC, NPO-the Research Institute of 
Information Security). We aim lead to realize the following 
by training talented people in IT Keys.  
Fig. 1 shows three fundamental keys for IT Keys 
knowledge acquisitions: (1) advanced knowledge, (2) 
practical knowledge, and (3) fundamental knowledge. In the 
case of acquisition of advanced knowledge, it focuses on 
comprehensive 
and 
rigorous 
social 
knowledge 
for 
information security, consisting of security policies, laws, 
security management, and ethical issues. In the case of 
acquisition of practical knowledge, it targets latest 
knowledge 
on 
information 
security, 
especially 
the 
cryptography 
theory, 
network 
security 
techniques, 
standardization of these techniques, network operation, etc. 
In the case of acquisition of fundamental knowledge, the 
study is based on basic computer science and mathematics 
knowledge in order to logically understand. 
1. We make all learners study and understand not only 
the technology involved but also laws, policies, 
management techniques, and ethics with stress on 
systematic learning. We train about 20 people every 
year. 
2. Through 
industry-university 
cooperation, 
we 
established a new educational foundation that helps in 
raising talented people who can take multifaceted 
information security countermeasure that a company 
or an organization needs.  
3. We train students at a single center and make them 
study and exercise together closely. They can not only 
learn but also generate future human resource by 
forming human networks. So, we think that to get 
student together is a most important factor of IT Keys 
for them. 
4. We realized social cognition by (1) conducting open 
lectures to present exercises and results to the public, 
(2) considering the results of an evaluation carried out 
by organizations for many kinds of IT business, (3) 
extending the cooperation of various external 
organizations, and (4) continuously improving the IT 
Keys program. 
5. We contribute to the realization of an IT society in 
Japan, which will ensure the safety of all people, by 
reducing the social IT risk and establishing high-level 
information 
security 
through 
training 
security 
engineers and administrators and spreading awareness 
regarding information security among people. 
III. 
HOW TO DESIGN 
A. Problem-based and Project-based learning on IT Keys 
We focused on the integration of problem- and project-
based learning in IT Keys. Problem-based learning is 
conventionally restricted to classrooms. A group of learners 
(for example, 2 to 6 members) meet at a place where an 
instructor can facilitate a discussion on learning issues. 
Individual research may be conducted off-campus, but 
collaborative learning integral to this methodology is 
enabled by face-to-face communication and the process of 
negotiation of important learning issues. Savin-Baden 
introduced computer-mediated collaborative problem-based 
learning as a model that combines the current trend of 
online learning within universities, with problem-based 
learning focused on instructional methodology. Meanwhile, 
project-based learning is an instructional methodology 
adopted for the “Interactive design for multimedia” course 
that had a multiphase project as the major assessment 
component. 
A combination delivery mode, for example, was used, 
and non-compulsory lectures were given and supplemented 
with practical sessions that involved support groups. This is 
based on a combination of problem- and project-based 
learning. Hence, we set up various problem scenarios in 
which a clear solution does not exist and then adopted both 
planning and learning to obtain a solution not by a single 
person but by cooperative work. IT Keys consist of the 
following 2 lectures and 5 exercises: information security 
management literacy, most recent information security 
issues, accident response exercise, risk management 
exercise, system attack and defense exercise, system break-
in and analysis exercise, and IT crisis management exercise. 
B. Lecture on information security management literacy 
In a lecture on information security management literacy, 
some expert engineers gave information on the latest 
technologies to learners; for example, an engineer presented 
real raw traffic data and a case on an accident associated 
with an Internet service provider. This lecture was 
developed by an ISP engineer and manager, a lawyer, a 
government administrator (National Information Security 
Center, NISC), an auditing company, etc. This lecture 
provides a comprehensive and rigorous account of 
information security, consisting of topics on security 
policies, laws, security management, and ethical issues 
besides latest technologies. Thus, learners are also taught 
management techniques. According to hot security incidents 
on every year, we are updating the courseware, especially at 
89
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

this year, we have added the digital forensics, cloud security 
and smartphone security. 
C. Lecture on latest information security issues 
In a lecture on latest information security issues, some 
professors presented theoretical and technical issues. The 
former deal with the basic algebra, fundamentals of public 
key infrastructure, and development of digital signature and 
elliptic curve cryptography [9]. Elliptic curve cryptography 
is the most attractive public key cryptosystem since it 
realizes the privacy protection with a small key size while 
maintaining the security high.  This is why the elliptic curve 
is currently attracting a great deal of attention from a low 
power machine such as a smart card.  Furthermore, a new 
tool from elliptic called a bilinear pairing, cast a new light 
on various problems on cryptology. In this lecture, we 
execute an exercise for implementing a bilinear pairing on 
Python language. Also the technical issues deal with basic 
network security mechanisms such as intrusion detection 
systems or development of firewalls. We provide some 
information systematically so that they can trouble shoot 
and take countermeasures against various accidents.  
D.  Exercise in IT crisis management 
In the exercise called IT crisis management, learners 
work on a virtual ISP, and each group consists of 4 learners. 
They are responsible for the operation and management of 
web-hosting services for virtual customers. Further, they 
develop network equipment and some servers for this 
exercise in advance. Each group has an IP telephone, some 
routers and switches, network devices, PCs, etc. In practical 
situations, several security accidents can occur. The exercise 
staffs in backyard call and claim as various customers and 
then force their servers and services suspend or stop (Fig. 2). 
Each learner attempts to take countermeasures for 
unexpected accidents, to restore web-hosting services, deal 
with claims from customers, and find the reasons behind 
accidents. Finally, each group gives a clear and detailed 
explanation about the accidents and countermeasures to the 
CEO or President of ISP (Fig. 3). 
E. Exercise in dealing with security incident 
In the exercise called dealing with security accidents, 
learners work on a real security testbed called “StarBED” 
developed by National Institute of Information and 
Communications Technology (NICT). 
Real computers and network equipment are required to 
evaluate the software practically for the Internet. In 
StarBED, there are many computers and switches, which 
connect these computers. We reproduce situations close to 
real situations using real equipment that are used on Internet. 
This idea is based on our previous work [5]. If developers 
want to evaluate their real implementation, they have to use 
real equipment. We believe that it is important for learners 
to emphasize on hands-on learning in real complicated 
Internet environments such as in the case of “StarBED” to 
monitor, analyze, and prevent Internet accidents and a 
variety of attacks and to deal with them. Another important 
factor is to learn more about computer viruses and malwares 
in order to understand the mechanism of cyber attacks. Fig. 
4 shows snapshots of this exercise. We analyzed malware 
attacks (8 specimens) sampled from over 5000 e-mail 
viruses.  
F. Exercise in risk management 
In the exercise called risk management, learners learn 
the “internal behavior” of real malwares after the exercise 
on dealing with security accidents, which comprises 
learning the external behavior. Learners were studying at 
Telecom-ISAC Japan. The objective of Telecom-ISAC 
Japan is to enhance security countermeasures for the 
information 
and 
telecommunication 
industry, 
by 
establishing the systems for sharing between the members 
and analyzing the security accidents. Hence, it is important 
for them to study practical countermeasures against new 
malwares. Learners are responsible for analyzing and 
determining the internal behavior of malwares using 
analyzing tools. This also helps in taking the right action 
when a computer access accident comes to light. To 
recognize and respond to these situations, they learn about 
an analyzing technique at the machine language level (in 
this exercise, only Intel IA32 [10] Architecture) to detect 
suspicious codes or operations at the early stage. Fig. 5 
shows snapshots of this exercise. 
IV. 
EVALUATION 
In order to verify the validity of the learning method for 
IT Keys, we carried out two evaluations. One was based on 
a questionnaire.  
・ Two or more traps were baited and devised in one 
incident scenario, it was very interesting for each other. 
・For various situations and causes for an incident case 
which were occurred in this exercise, a communication to 
customer or a negotiation to group members simultaneously, 
these various experiences became future good tips. 
・Since we could tackle some problems only by forming a 
small group and the exercise equipment and system was 
ready, we were able to play as each role for a virtual 
security division. However, since there were too many tasks 
to be completed in a short time, it was difficult and tough to 
complete unexpected incident. 
Furthermore, we conducted a test based on the skill map, 
repeating the test 3 times from 2008 to 2011. This skill test 
was given twice to all learners, before and after the 
completion of the IT Keys courseware. For 2008, the 
average score in the first test was 52.7 and in the final test 
was 71.3; for 2011, the score in the first test was 55.7 and in 
the final test was 85.1 (out of 100). On 2008, we confirmed 
that the scores of tests on the topics “information security 
management,” “application security,” and “law, ordinance, 
and standard” had increased greatly. However, we found 
that the overall scores for “cryptography” and “law, 
ordinance, and standard” were low. In order to improve 
90
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

comprehension, we implemented some feedbacks in the IT 
Keys courseware. For better understanding of the 
cryptography theory, we made learners use the Mathematica 
and Python language to implement a protocol for elliptic 
curves themselves. Then, we clarified the cryptography 
theory and its applications systematically. In addition, we 
subdivided the chapter on law, ordinance, and standard into 
2 chapters and then evaluated their comprehension clearly 
from 2009. Consequently, the scores increased considerably. 
We found that the most important thing for educating a 
security expert is to keep on updating and feedback due to 
learner’s level of understanding.  
V. 
SUMMARY 
We have conducted the special security expert education 
program supported by MEXT. From 2011, we continue it on 
our independent efforts. At March 2012, finally MEXT gave 
IT Keys a very good evaluation (most high degree) [6].  
REFERENCES 
[1] Slavin, R.E., Cooperative Learning: Theory, Research and 
Practice (2nd edition), Boston: Allyn and Bacon press, 1995. 
[2] Savin-Baden M., Facilitating Problem-based Learning: 
Illuminating Perspectives, Open University Press, 2003. 
[3] Savery, John R., “Overview of Problem-based Learning: 
Definitions and Distinctions”, Interdisciplinary Journal of 
Problem-based Learning, Vol.1, Article 3, pp.9-20, 2006. 
[4] Frank K.. and Michelle R., “Project-based learning and 
learning environment”, Issues in Information Science and 
Information Technology press, Vol. 4, pp.503-510, 2007. 
[5] Gregory Blanc, Youki Kadobayashi, “A step towards static 
script malware abstraction: Rewriting obfuscated script with 
Maude”, IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, 
Vol. E94-D, No.11, pp.2159-2166, 2011. 
[6] MEXT, available at  http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/koutou/ 
it/h19/1321120.htm (japanese), 2012. 
[7] Japan Intercultural consulting, available at http://www. 
japanintercultural.com/en/news/default.aspx?newsid=169 
[8] IPA, http://www.ipa.go.jp/ 
[9] Steven Galbraith, available at http://www.isg.rhul.ac.uk/ 
~sdg/ecc.html  
[10] Intel, available at http://www.intel.com/content/www /us/en/ 
processors/architectures-software-developer-manuals.html
IT‐Keys 3 knowledge acquisitions
Practical Security Engineer 
Logically
Fundamental
Experimentation
Practice
Universal
Advance
Basic computer science 
knowledge and mathematics 
in order to understand 
logically
Social comprehensive and rigorous 
knowledge for information security, 
consisting of security policy, law, security 
management and ethical issues
Latest brand-new knowledge for 
information security (Theory and 
Technical), cryptography and its 
standardization, network operation 
   
 
 
              Figure 1.  IT Keys’ 3 knowledge acquisitions.                       Figure 2. Exercise staff and learner responds to unexpected accidents. 
 
  
     
 
 
                Figure 3.  Discussion in each group  and  presentation to CEO.                    Figure 4. Exercise in dealing with security accidents using StarBED. 
 
 
Fig.5 An assemble code for the malware static analysis. 
91
Copyright (c) The Government of Japan, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

