Evaluation of the New e-Health Signaling Model in the Ubiquitous Sensor Network 
Environment 
 
Adel Mounir Said 
Faculty of Engineering 
Ain Shams University 
Cairo, Egypt. 
amounir@nti.sci.eg 
Ashraf William Ibrahim 
Switching Department 
National Telecommunication Institute – NTI 
Cairo, Egypt. 
awilliam@nti.sci.eg 
 
Abstract— Ubiquitous Sensor Network (USN) is a conceptual 
network built over existing physical networks. It makes use of 
sensed data and provides knowledge services to anyone, 
anywhere and at anytime, and where the information is 
generated by using context awareness. In 2010, the ITU-T 
provided the requirements to support USN applications and 
services in the Next Generation Network (NGN) environment 
to exploit the advantages of the core network. One of the main 
promising markets for the USN application and services is the 
e-Health. It provides continuous patients’ monitoring and 
enables a great improvement in medical services. In this paper, 
the authors provide the evaluation of the e-Health signaling 
model in the USN environment, which was introduced in a 
previously published work. The model is based on using the IP 
Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) as a service controller sub-layer 
for the USN platform. This paper provides a USN based IMS 
detailed network design for e-Health implementation with 
emphasizes on Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) modification 
and middleware entities functions. The proposal evaluation 
was carried using OPNET Modeler for network simulation and 
proved its applicability and reliability. 
Keywords- e-Health; ubiquitous sensor netowrk; NGN; IMS; 
SIP. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ITU recommendation Section for Ubiquitous Sensor 
Network (USN) presents the requirements for a platform to 
numerous number of life services and applications [1]. The 
USNs consist of collaborative efforts of many small wireless 
sensor nodes. These nodes are small and autonomous devices 
capable of measuring all sorts of environmental and physical 
conditions (e.g., temperature, sound, vibration, pressure, 
motion or pollutants) forming the USN sensor layer. The 
Next Generation Network (NGN) capabilities can impact the 
service requirements of the USN. Support of USN 
applications and services may require some extensions 
and/or additions to NGN core. 
One of the main emerging markets for the USN 
applications and services is the e-Health. It has been invented 
to exploit the wide use of the USNs to gather the patients’ 
medical/non medical data for various applications. e-Health 
offers timely coverage of the advances in technology that 
offer new and innovative options to practitioners, medical 
centers, and hospitals for managing patient care, electronic 
records, and many other features.  
 
Considerable ongoing research efforts are focusing on 
providing the physical design for the USN entities according 
to the ITU requirements. Some of these proposals are based 
on Context Awareness (CA), such as [2][3][4]. Also, an 
integration between service enablers based on the CA system 
is proposed to provide various services in [5]. Paganelli et al. 
proposed a context aware mobile service platform supporting 
mobile caregivers in their daily activities [6]. They have 
demonstrated its capability for providing an extensible set of 
services aiming at supporting care networks in cooperating 
and sharing information for the goal of improving a chronic 
patient’s quality of life. This work was used for health 
monitoring and alarm management of chronic conditions in a 
home-based care scenario [7]. The CA service architecture 
proposed by Domingo [8] can also be used in order to 
integrate with social networks. 
Another group of researches concentrated on providing a 
network and service integration techniques for the USN with 
the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS). One of the recent 
solutions is based on building a service enabler over the IMS 
to support e-Health services without mentioning the 
consideration of the core network [9][10].  
Most of these researches and standardization efforts 
proposed only theoretical ideas and potential scenarios. 
However, they did not provide a detailed signaling flow to be 
the roadmap for implementing these e-Services. 
Apart from the ITU recommendations of USN, there are 
other approaches for building a platform for sensor networks 
services. Singh et al. [11] proposed a prototype for a global 
homecare monitoring system. The prototype is based on 
using IP-based USN in a personal area to provide sensor 
data. Kim [12] proposed a middleware platform including 
several types of sensor network for building USN services. 
The platform is used to build a healthcare service that is 
proposed to be integrated with standardized medical devices 
communication framework based on ISO11073/ IEEE1073 
standard. These proposals introduce a healthcare service with 
minor capabilities offering monitoring only due to the 
limited core network facilities. Moreover, it did not consider 
the challenges of the integration between USN and existing 
infrastructure. Besides that, these solutions miss proposing 
real scenarios and its required signaling flow. 
On the contrary, in [13], we proposed the usage of IMS 
as a service controller sub-layer in the USN environment. 
The IMS platform is used to utilize its benefits and features 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[9] and to provide the service requirements of USN 
applications and services [1]. The main contribution of [13] 
is to develop a detailed network signaling flow for different 
applicable e-Health scenarios using Session Initiation 
Protocol (SIP).  
In this paper, we provide a USN-based IMS detailed 
network design for implementing the e-Health service with 
emphasizes on the middleware layer entities functions. There 
is a need to modify the SIP protocol (SIP MESSAGE 
request) to match the features provided in the proposed e-
Health service as will be discussed in details in Section III. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
describes the detailed proposed network architecture. Section 
three explains the modification of the SIP Message Request 
and initialization phase, as well as the different applicable 
scenarios. Section 4 presents the proposal evaluation using 
OPNET simulation. Finally, Section 5 gives a conclusion 
and an idea about the current and future work. 
II. 
PROPOSED NETWORK AND SERVICE ARCHITECTURE 
The proposed network follows the IMS-based NGN 
architecture and according to the requirements of the USN 
[1]. We implemented these requirements in the form of 
physical devices as described in the proposed model as 
shown in Figure 1. The architecture is divided into two 
stratums: transport stratum and service stratum. 
The patient sensor network contains different types of 
sensor nodes with wireless capability. These nodes observe 
the patient and the surrounding atmosphere as well. A USN 
Gateway is used to translate between the network's access 
network protocol and that of the sensor nodes providing the 
connectivity requirement to the IMS infrastructure. 
The transport stratum includes transport sub-layer and 
transport control sub-layer. The transport sub-layer contains 
access network and core transport network. The access 
network take care of end-users' access to the network as well 
as collecting and aggregating the traffic towards the core 
network. The transport control sub-layer is further divided in 
two subsystems the Network Attachment Subsystem (NASS) 
and the Resource and Admission Control Subsystem 
(RACS) to provide the QoS, privacy, security, and 
authorization, as required for the USN applications. These 
elements provide transport control functionalities according 
to the standards [14][15]. 
The service stratum includes IMS service control sub-
layer, USN middleware sub-layer, and the IMS service 
application sub-layer. 
It provides the platform for enabling services to the user. 
It includes registration and session control functions. It 
includes three sub-layers: the service control sub-layer, the 
USN middleware sub-layer, and the service application sub-
layer. The service control sub-layer is based on the standard 
IMS [16] and controls the authentication, routing, and 
database of the subscribers. This sub-layer provides the USN 
requirements needed including service profile, open service 
environment, security, and authorization. 
The USN middleware sub-layer consists of a set of 
logical functions to support USN applications and services. It 
contains the Application Servers (ASs) providing the 
different services. It interfaces with the Serving Call Session 
Control Function (S-CSCF) using SIP and is responsible of 
applications execution. 
 
Figure 1.  Next Generation e-Health Network Architecture 
There is a need for a CA server to automatically adapt an 
application or service depending on the user current 
situation. In this proposal, a new AS integrated with a CA 
server is developed to provide e-Health services. This 
integration eases services control and reduces the signaling 
required between both of them. There is one centralized 
server, which provides a coherent environment and is 
responsible of services control. 
The USN middleware sub-layer contains also a private 
database for the e-Health services’ subscribers. We call it the 
Electronic Health Record (EHR). It contains the initial 
sensors configuration settings, the collected monitored vital 
signs, the different patients’ data files such as (X-Ray, tests 
results, prescription, etc.), emergency contacts, medical 
supervisors, medical history, and any other information 
related to the patient health. The proposal allows the patients 
to access the EHR. This enables them to change their details, 
update their emergency contacts, and upload files. Access to 
the EHR is provided through a Web Server (WS), which is 
implemented in the service application sub-layer or via an 
IMS client. 
This sub-layer covers the sensor network management, 
service profile, open service environment, location based 
service support, and service privacy of the USN 
requirements. 
The Service Application Sub-layer contains a Presence 
Server (PS), which is used to follow and publish the patients’ 
status in real-time to their emergency contacts as explained 
later in details. This addition allows informing selected 
persons by the emergency situation as soon as it occurs. 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Request Line 
Header 
. 
Message Body 
 
Fields of: Sensors Initial Configuration 
OR 
Fields of: Subscriber Information 
OR 
Fields of: Sensors Data 
OR 
Fields of: Alerts Types & Severity Degree 
This sub-layer contains also a Web Server (WS), which 
interfaces the patients’ records. Through the WS, patients 
can change in their details, upload files, contact medical 
centers, doctors, etc. 
III. SIGNALING SCENARIOS 
This section focuses on the IMS and SIP functionalities 
and does not cover the transport layer as there is no 
modification to its functions. 
The Section describes in details the initialization phase as 
well as the different applicable scenarios. It is to be noted 
that the SIP "MESSAGE" requests in these scenarios are 
used differently from their original use. The standard SIP 
"MESSAGE" requests are designed to carry content in the 
form of Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) 
body parts. Therefore, in this work, we propose using a 
special format and data fields for the MESSAGE request 
body to carry data from/to AS/CA. These data may contain 
sensors 
initial 
configurations, 
sensors 
data, 
alerts, 
subscribers’ information, etc. Figure 2 shows an example of 
the proposed data fields provided in the MESSAGE request 
body. 
A. Initialization and Registration 
Figure 3 shows the registration messages for a patient, 
which follows the standard IMS client registration until 
message 20. The messages flow starting from message 21 
until the end message presents the proposed signaling flow to 
initialize and activate the e-health service and the 
modification of the SIP MESSAGE to fulfill the 
requirements 
of 
the 
service. 
After 
the registration 
completion, the S-CSCF evaluates the user’s Initial Filter 
Criteria (IFC) (message 21) and accordingly, it forwards the 
register message to the AS/CA (22).  Based on the e-heath 
algorithm saved in the AS/CA, it downloads the initial 
configurations, measurements thresholds, possible diseases’ 
situations, and patient's emergency contact list from the EHR 
using the HTTP "GET" request (24). HTTP is proposed to be 
used between the EHR/WS and the AS/CA server. It is to be 
noted that every patient (e-Health subscriber), via the WS 
interface, can build his own contact list to be notified in case 
of emergency as mentioned before. The AS/CA forwards the 
downloaded initial configurations to the USN Gateway in the 
body of a SIP "MESSAGE" request (26). The next message 
is that the AS/CA sends a "SUBSCRIBE" request (32) to the 
PS to be notified by the presence status of the persons in the 
downloaded patient's emergency list. The PS sends back a 
"NOTIFY" message (34) containing the current status. The 
PS sends a "NOTIFY" request to the AS/CA every time 
there is a status change. At the same time, the AS/CA sends 
a "PUBLISH" request (36) to the PS containing the current 
patient’s status. It is to be noted here that the patient's status 
is not meant to be online or offline. Instead, it reflects the 
patient's health condition (normal, critical, emergency, etc). 
Another important issue arises; the contacts in the patient's 
emergency list (MC: Medical Center, Rel: Relatives, 
Doctors, etc.) have to follow his status automatically and 
without their intervention. To solve this, the AS/CA 
subscribes on behalf of them to the patient's status by 
sending a "SUBSCRIBE" request (38) to the PS. 
Accordingly, they will be continuously notified of any status 
change via "NOTIFY" requests (40). 
Figure 2.  Proposed SIP Message Request Body for e-Health Services 
 
Figure 3.  Registration and Initialization Scenario 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

B. First Scenario (Periodic Transmissions) 
This Scenario proposes a simple case for transmitting 
periodic sensed information. The period to transmit regular 
collected data is determined from a timer value in the initial 
configuration received from the AS/CA during the 
initialization phase. The USN Gateway collects the sensed 
data from the sensors. When the data is ready for 
transmission, the USN Gateway puts the collected sensors 
data in the body part of a SIP "MESSAGE" request (1) and 
sends it to the AS/CA. the request is routed normally to the 
AS/CA, which stores the data in the EHR using HTTP 
"PUT" (4). Figure 4 shows the scenario's signaling flow. The 
USN Gateway transmits the data to the EHR through the 
AS/CA and not directly, because the collected data has to be 
assessed and compared to specific thresholds to determine 
emergency cases (more details in next scenario). These 
thresholds are set in the initial configuration file downloaded 
from the EHR during the initialization. This task has to be 
done by the AS/CA and not the EHR as this later is only a 
database, and it has no control or service algorithm as in the 
AS/CA. Another reason is security as the EHR must be 
hidden from non-trusted users’ devices. 
C. Second Scenario (Emergency Case) 
Figure 5 shows the emergency scenario. The emergency 
case is determined if the collected data values are out of the 
threshold range set in the initial patient's file stored in the 
EHR and downloaded to the AS/CA. After saving the users’ 
data into the EHR, the AS/CA evaluates the collected values 
to the preset thresholds. If an emergency case is identified, it 
updates the patient status in the PS using a "PUBLISH" 
request (10) to be critical or emergency. The PS updates, in 
turn, the emergency status in the patient's contacts list by a 
"NOTIFY" request (12). Simultaneously, an alert message is 
sent to these contacts. The AS/CA has two options to do so 
depending on the contacts' IMS status: online or offline. In 
case the contact person is online, the alert is sent using a SIP 
"MESSAGE" (14) containing the current patient's data. In 
case the contact person is offline, the alert is sent using a 
SMS message (16) through the mobile network. The 
contacts' IMS status is known since the AS/CA has already 
subscribed to their status during the initialization phase. The 
emergency contacts could be relatives, treating doctor, 
medical center, ambulance, neighbors, etc. 
D. Third Scenario 
This scenario, shown in Figure 6, provides the case of a 
patient uploading a file (scanned X-ray, ultrasound, magnetic 
resonance, etc.) to his EHR record. There are two options for 
doing this. The first option uses an IMS client. When the 
uploader (patient) needs to upload a file, he transmits a SIP 
"MESSAGE" (1) containing in its body part a request for the 
necessary upload information (URL, username, password, 
etc.). Once the request arrives at the AS/CA, it asks the 
needed information from the EHR by a HTTP "GET" (7). 
The AS/CA forwards this information to the uploader in a 
SIP "MESSAGE" (9). The uploader can now upload the file 
according to the received settings using FTP (15). The 
username and password sent in the previous message are 
temporary and will change the next time for security. After 
uploading the file successfully, the EHR informs the AS/CA 
of the upload termination using HTTP "POST" (17). 
According to the patient’s customized service algorithm, the 
AS/CA informs the concerned persons (e.g., doctor, medical 
center, relatives, etc.).  This is done, depending on the 
contacts' IMS status, using a SIP "MESSAGE" request (19) 
or a SMS (21) as explained in the previous scenario.  
The second option is shown in Figure 7. In that case, the 
uploader does not use an IMS client. He uses HTTP to 
browse the WS (1), and submits his file directly by FTP (2, 
3) without using the IMS network. As in the first option, the 
EHR informs the AS/CA of the upload termination using 
HTTP "POST" (4). The AS/CA, in turn, informs the 
concerned persons using a SIP "MESSAGE" request (6) or a 
SMS (8). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Periodic Transmission Scenario 
 
Figure 5.  Emergency Scenario 
 
Figure 6.  Uploading Patients’ Files using an IMS Client 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
Figure 7.  Uploading Patients’ Files Through the Web Server 
E. Fourth Scenario 
This scenario is similar to the previous one. However, the 
uploader here is not the patient but the treating doctor or the 
scanning center or the tests laboratory, etc. Consider the 
patient’s doctor would like to send or update the prescription 
of the patient or the lab wants to send the test results. They 
will connect directly to the WS using their accounts 
credentials and upload the new file or update the existing 
information. The sender can also identify the urgency of this 
data. The EHR informs the AS/CA of the new upload or the 
information change. The AS/CA, in turn, informs the patient 
using a SIP "MES-SAGE" request or a SMS depending on 
his IMS availability. 
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
This section presents the performance evaluation of the 
proposal. To evaluate the system, we implemented the 
different scenarios using the OPNET modeler 14.0. The 
objective of the simulation is to study the applicability and 
reliability of the proposal under different conditions such as 
number of users and links bandwidths (BWs). As this work 
concentrates on the IMS and the SIP protocol and as the 
NGN transport layer has no change in our model, the 
performance Section focuses on the IMS evaluation. The 
simulation model passes by sequential steps as follows: 
 Build the proposed network architecture (IMS 
servers) using the OPNET simulation tool as shown 
in Figure 8 and assign the transmission delay to the 
servers’ connections according to the values of Table 
I. 
 Create the developed signaling flow using the 
graphical OPNET application task tool (ACE 
whiteboard) as shown in Figure 9. The servers are 
called tiers in ACE whiteboard. 
 Assign the processing time of each server (tier) in the 
ACE whiteboard model according to Table I in [17]. 
 Import the ACE whiteboard model into the main 
project model. 
 Assign the server function of each ACE model tier 
corresponding to the developed signaling flows. 
 
Figure 8.  Network Architecture Built using the OPNET Simulation Tool 
TABLE I: IMS ENTITIES PROCESSING AND TRANSMISSION TIMES 
Parameters 
Duration 
Process time 
(microsecond) 
UE 
P/S/I-CSCF 
HSS 
200 
200 
10 
Transmission delay 
(microsecond) 
UE/P-CSCF 
other links 
5,000 
200 
 
 
Figure 9.  ACE Whiteboard Model for the Registration and Initialization 
Signaling Flow 
Simulation 1: for the first scenario (initialization and 
registration), we studied the effect of increasing the BW of 
the link between the USN Gateway and the network on the 
initialization time. The initialization time is defined as the 
time spent between the register message (1) and the 200 OK 
message (41). We repeated the simulation several times 
increasing the BW from 50 to 500 Kbps in steps of 50 Kbps. 
The connection BW is chosen to be low to assure the 
reliability of the proposed scenarios.The initialization time 
was calculated for different number of users varying from 
100 to 1000. Figure 10 shows the collected results. The 
simulation shows that the delay of the initialization time 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

decreases with the increase of the connection BW. On the 
other hand, the number of users has a negligible effect for 
bandwidths higher than 150 kbps and a small effect for 
bandwidths less than 150 kbps. This is because the 
connection bitrate required for each user to register and 
activate his e-health subscription is low according to the 
signaling proposed in Figure 3.  
Simulation 2: the emergency detection scenario is 
evaluated by simulating the signaling flow shown in Figure 
5. The simulation was run for different USN Gateway 
connection BWs ranging from 50 to 500 Kbps for 100, 500, 
and 1000 users respectively. The collected results are shown 
in Figure 11. The simulation shows that the maximum 
detection time of an emergency case is 0.21 seconds. This 
time decreases exponentially as the BW increases and is not 
affected significantly by the number of users. As shown in 
the figure, the number of users has a minimum effect on the 
delay. This is because the BW needed for the process is low, 
which proves the reliability of the developed signaling flow. 
Moreover, the delay is within an acceptable margin for 
implementing the emergency scenarios as  they do not 
require high connection bitrate. 
 
 
Figure 10.  The Registration Time at Different Connection Speeds 
TABLE II: UPLOADED FILES SIZES 
File Type 
Purpose 
Average File 
Size 
Text 
Sensed Information 
Medical Analysis, etc. 
A few KB 
Image 
X-Ray 
Magnetic resonance, etc. 
0.5 MB 
Video 
Ultrasound, etc. 
5.0 MB 
 
TABLE III: HSUPA CATEGORIES SPEED 
HSUPA Category 
Max Uplink Speed 
Category 1 
0.73 Mbit/s 
Category 2 
1.46 Mbit/s 
Category 3 
1.46 Mbit/s 
Category 4 
2.0/2.93 Mbit/s 
Category 5 
2.0 Mbit/s 
Category 6 
2.0/5.76 Mbit/s 
 
Figure 11.  The Emergency Detection Time at Different Connection Speeds 
 
Figure 12.  File Uploading Time at Different Number of Users 
 
Figure 13.  File Uploading Time at Different Connection Speeds 
Simulation 3: to investigate the time required to upload a 
patient’s file. We simulated the flow shown in Figure 7 
increasing the number of users from 10 to 100 in steps of 10 
and the simulation was repeated for different file sizes as 
shown in Table II. The BW of the link between the USN 
Gateway and the network was set to 0.73 Mbps 
corresponding to HSUPA-category 1 connection rate. Figure 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

12 shows the output results. The figure clearly shows that at 
small file sizes of 1KB and moderate file sizes of 0.5 MB, 
the delay is almost constant with the number of users. These 
files sizes represent the USN sensed information or patient 
analysis files and the average size of the x-ray or image files 
respectively. On the contrary, for large file sizes (5.0 MB), 
which represent an average video file size, the delay 
increases with the number of users. Hence, the proposed 
solution is very effective in case of small or medium files 
representing data and radiography files. On the other hand, 
video files will suffer of delay depending on their sizes. 
Simulation 4: for the same scenario of Figure 7, the effect 
of the USN Gateway connection BW on the upload time is 
studied. The simulation was run several times for different 
connection bit rates corresponding to the different HSUPA 
categories as stated in Table III. It is to be noted that the 
HSUPA Category 4 speed is not simulated as it is not being 
widely implemented. The file size was assumed to be 0.5 
MB in this simulation. Figure 13 shows the results. The 
simulation proves that for a fixed number of users and file 
size, the delay decreases with the increase of the users’ 
connection speed.  
Simulation 5: the initialization process of Figure 3 and 
the upload scenario of Figure 7 were combined together in 
one final simulation to study their effect on each other. We 
simulated 10 users performing the initialization process 
simultaneously with 10 other users uploading files of 0.5 
MB. The USN Gateway connection BW is 1.46 MB/S 
(HSUBA Category 2). The simulation was repeated for 50 
and 100 users. The results are shown in Figure 14 along with 
the results of the initialization and upload times collected 
from the previous simulations where the two processes were 
simulated separately. The results show a slight effect on the 
upload time, which could be neglected. On the other hand, 
there is no congestion effect on the users registering to the 
network even when there are other users uploading files. 
This is because the registration process does not mandate 
high connection speed. 
 
 
 
Figure 14.  The Effect of Uploading FilesScenario on the Registration 
Scenario. 
 
Figure 15.  The Effect Uploading Files Scenario on Periodic Data 
Transmission Scenario 
Simulation 6: finally, the mutual effect of combining the 
traffic of uploading files of size 5.0 MB and the periodic 
sensors’ data transmission according to the signaling flow of 
Figure 5 is investigated. The USN Gateway connection BW 
is 1.46 MB/S (HSUBA Category 2). Each type of traffic was 
simulated separately and then combined together. The results 
are shown in Figure 15 for separate and combined traffic 
types. We can conclude that there is almost no mutual effect 
as the periodic data size is very small and does not require 
high bit rate. Therefore, the emergency scenarios reliability 
will not be affected by the simultaneous transmission of 
other files. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Despite that e-Health is one of the promising services in 
NGN, there is no complete or detailed solution to provide 
this service. In this paper, we tried to propose a complete 
solution, including both the architecture and the inter-entities 
signaling to provide e-Health services in NGN based on the 
IMS and using the SIP protocol to fulfill the service 
requirements of the USN applications according to the ITU 
recommendation. A new architecture is introduced. It uses 
the existing IMS-based NGN functional entities adding to 
them new ones such as the e-Health AS integrated with a WS 
and the EHR. Detailed scenarios are presented showing the 
complete execution of the service and the interaction 
between the different entities. 
The evaluation of the proposal proves the ability to 
implement the proposed e-Health scenarios and the 
reliability of the new signaling model. The results show: 
first, the initialization time and the emergency detection time 
are very short (0.64 S, 0.21 S), respectively, even under low 
BW and high number of active users. Second, the file 
uploading time is affected essentially by the file size and the 
available BW. However, since file transfer is not delay 
sensitive, this is not a major issue if high BW connections 
are not available. Finally, combining different types of traffic 
together does not have a significant effect on the 
performance of the system. 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

REFERENCES 
[1] [ITU-T 
Y.2221] 
ITU-T 
Recommendation 
Y.2221 
(2010), 
“Requirements for support of ubiquitous sensor network (USN) 
applications and services in the NGN environment”. 
[2] E. J. Ko, H. J. Lee, and J. W. Lee, “Ontology-based context Modeling 
and reasoning for U-HealthCare,” Ieice Transactions on Information 
and Systems, vol. E90d, Aug 2007, pp. 1262-1270. 
[3] M. Mitchell, C. Meyers, An-I Wang, and G. Tyson, “Context 
Provider: Context Awareness for Medical Monitoring Applications”, 
Conference Procedding IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society, EMBC, doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2011.6091297, 2011, pp. 5244-
5247. 
[4] S. Bhattacharyya, R.A. Saravanagru, and A. Thangavelu, “Context 
Aware Healthcare Application,” IJCA - International -Journal of 
Computer Applications, vol. 22, no. 3, May 2011, pp. 7-12 . 
[5] J. Kim, J. Jeong, S. Nam, and O. Song, “Intelligent Service Enabler 
based on Context-Aware in Next Generation Networks,” Proceedings 
of the 2008 International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed 
Processing with Applications, doi: 10.1109/ISPA.2008.118, Dec 
2008, pp. 802-806. 
[6] F. Paganelli, E. Spinicci, and D. Giuli, “ERMHAN: A Context-Aware 
Service Platform to Support Continuous Care Networks for Home-
Based Assistance,” International Journal of Telemedicine and 
Applications, vol. 2008, no. 4, doi:10.1155/2008/867639, Jan 2008, 
pp. 802-806. 
[7] F. Paganelli and D. Giuli, “An Ontology-Based System for Context-
Aware and Configurable Services to Support Home-Based 
Continuous Care,” Ieee Transactions on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine, vol. 15, Mar 2011, pp. 324-333. 
[8] M. C. Domingo, “A Context-Aware Service Architecture for the 
Integration of Body Sensor Networks and Social Networks through 
the IP Multimedia Subsystem,” IEEE Communications Magazine, 
vol. 49, Jan 2011, pp. 102-108. 
[9] M. Strohbach, J. Vercher, and M. Bauer, “A Case for IMS, 
Harvesting the Power of Ubiquitous Sensor Networks,” IEEE 
Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 4, no. 1, doi: 10.1109, Mar 
2009, pp. 57-64. 
[10] J. Vercher et al., “Ubiquitous Sensor Networks in IMS: an Ambient 
Intelligence Telco Platform,” in Proc.ICT Mobile Summit, no. 20, Jun 
2008. 
[11] D. Singh et al., “IP-based Ubiquitous Sensor Network for In-Home 
Healthcare Monitoring,” International Multimedia, Signal Processing 
and 
communication 
Technologies 
(IMPACT’09), 
doi: 
10.1109/MSPCT.2009.5164210, Mar 2009, pp. 201–204. 
[12] Y. B. Kim, “u-Healthcare Service Based on a USN Middleware 
Platform and Medical Device Communication Framework,” 5th 
International Conference on Intelligent Computing (ICIC 2009), vol. 
5754, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-04070-2_76, 2009, pp. 706-714. 
[13] A. M. Said and A. W. Ibrahim, "NEW e-health signaling model in the 
NGN environment," in e-Health Networking, Applications and 
Services (Healthcom), 2012 IEEE 14th International Conference on, 
doi: doi: 978-1-4577-2038-3/12Oct 2012, pp. 391-394. 
[14] ETSI ES 282 004: “Telecommunications and Internet converged 
Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking (TISPAN); NGN 
Functional Architecture; Network Attachment Sub-System (NASS)”, 
V3.4.1 (2010-03). 
[15] ETSI ES 282 003: “Telecommunications and Internet converged 
Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking (TISPAN); 
Resource and Admission Control Sub-System (RACS): Functional 
Architecture”, V2.0.0 (2008-05) 
[16] [ITU-T Y.2021] ITU-T Recommendation Y.2021 (2006), IMS for 
Next Generation Network. 
[17] Y. Kitatsuji, Y. Noishiki, M. Itou, and H. Yokota, “Service Initiation 
Procedure with On-demand UE Registration for Scalable IMS 
Services”, the 5th International Conference on Mobile Computing 
and Ubiquitous Networking (ICMU 2010), 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

