Real Time Green Corridor Health IoT Monitoring
System
Asha S R, Aditi Patil, G Narendra Kumar
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering
University Visveswaraya College of Engineering
Bangalore Karnataka,India
asha.sr003@gamil.com, aditipatil787@gamil.com, gnarenk@yahoo.com
Abstract—The information and communication technologies
have led to the development of Internet of Thing (IoT) allowing
many devices to collect, transmit data through the internet
providing more data interoperability methods. Iot helps in
monitoring, recording, storing and displaying of information
through the inter-connection of many wireless sensor networks.
The vital health parameters are captured and transmitted
through wireless communication to the server providing quality
of service in health care. In this paper we are proposing the
system that helps patient in monitoring health parameters and
the information can be accessed by the physician, caretakers
with an unique identiﬁer. During an emergency, the patient
has to be taken to the hospital faster and safer through the
online monitoring of patient’s health condition and provides
trafﬁc free path to the nearest hospital. The earliest possibility
of reaching the hospital is achieved by using the real-time
smart trafﬁc system providing a green corridor to the vehicle
equipped with Zigbee Transmitter and Zigbee Receiver at the
trafﬁc signal. Real-time health monitoring system is built with
required sensors that helps in capturing and storing of data in
the remote server that is accessed through a mobile application.
A smart trafﬁc system is developed to provide a green corridor
that helps patient to reach the hospital to the earliest.
Index Terms—IOT; Health Monitoring System; Smart Traf-
ﬁc Control; Wireless Communication; Zigbee.
I. INTRODUCTION
Health is one of the basic needs for a better life, there
are several global health issues such as lack of health
care services, unavailability of doctors during the emer-
gency, transportation facility and adequate trafﬁc on the
roads etc,. World Health Organization (WHO) deﬁnes the
health as ”a state of complete physical, mental and social
well being”. A modern healthcare system [1] as shown in
Figure 1 provides better healthcare services to people at any
time from anywhere that is economical and user-friendly.
Nowadays the healthcare system is growing rapidly. In the
traditional approach, the physicians had to visit the patients
for proper diagnosis and advice.The basic health parameters
are monitored at remote location and when the situation
becomes critical the patient has to be taken to hospital. To
resolve such issues the patients are equipped with knowledge
and information on the current situation, disease diagnosis
and providing quicker treatment remotely. This healthcare
service is provided by acquiring, recording, displaying and
transmitting the data from the patient to a remote server at
any time. This provides an alarm to the caretakers when the
parameters exceeds the deﬁned threshold and is centrally
monitored. With the required ﬁrmware and software, the
server will be connected to an open communication network
via TCP/IP protocol. Thus, a patient can be monitored from
any location. The patients can reduce unnecessary back-and-
forth travel to the far located hospitals as the data is already
delivered via SMS or Email.
Fig. 1. Health Monitoring System
Internet of Things (IoT) [2] is connecting devices to the
internet with sensors and compatible platforms. These IoT
sensors are placed on the patient; health information will
be collected and updated to server continuously via the
WiFi module that is the fastest, most ﬂexible, interoperable
method for monitoring any issues related to the health, its
treatment and responsiveness. This information needs to be
secured with the authentication and authorization mechanism
to avoid misuse of data. We propose a solution to address
all these challenges of the smart healthcare system.
During an emergency, the patient needs to be monitored
continuously on the way to the hospital and to reach the
hospital using the shortest and earliest path; however, trafﬁc
imposes delays and makes it difﬁcult to achieve this. The
difﬁculties faced by emergency vehicles can be avoided
using this smart trafﬁc system [3] with ZigBee technology.
As shown in Figure 2 as the emergency vehicle approaches
the trafﬁc intersection, the serial communication takes place
when the vehicle is in the range of 100m and the signal
is tapped to green. The signal remains green until the
emergency vehicle passes and then followed by a normal
sequence. In this paper we propose a smart trafﬁc solution
to address all the above-listed issues.
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we list
related works, in section III we explain our proposed system,
in section IV we provide the implementation details, section
V covers the experimentation results and observations ﬁnally
we conclude our work in section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Wireless monitoring of health has drawn attention from
the research and industry in the last decade. Research and
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 2. Smart Trafﬁc System
development efforts have been published in the literature.
We have constrained this effort to consider some of the very
recent associated works.
A smartphone-based wireless healthcare monitoring sys-
tem (WHMS) is presented in [4]. The paper proposes a
system with online real-time tracking of the health of the
patient. In addition to that, it provides the alarm and message
on the received information. Heart rate monitoring and data
transmission via Bluetooth is presented in [5]. The paper
describes a simple heart rate monitor system with data on
the LCD and simultaneously sends the information to a smart
device via Bluetooth. The system considers the input from
the pulse sensor by keeping the patients ﬁnger over the
sensor and is processed by Arduino to count the number
of pulses and displaying the output.
Wireless sensor-based health monitoring system is pre-
sented in [6]. The system monitors the parameters of multi-
ple patients. A coordinator node in contact with the patient
captures the data and transmits it to the base station. This
forms a wireless body sensor network (WBSN) able to sense
the heart rate, temperature and so on. During abnormal con-
ditions, this issue an alarm to the patient and the physician
receives an SMS/E-mail. This minimizes the consumption
of energy to improve the lifetime of the network, gear up
and extend the communication coverage for better quality.
A smart ambulance system is presented in paper [3],
this system provides trafﬁc clearance to the ambulance.
The patient parameters along with the coordinates from the
ambulance are sent to control center. The control center
sends the nearby hospital details to the ambulance, then the
ambulance will choose the path to the hospital and the trafﬁc
signals from this path will turn green; this route will be
considered as a green bay.
III. PROPOSED SYSTEM MODULE
In the proposed system we monitor the basic health pa-
rameters like temperature, heart rate, ECG, Blood pressure.
These parameters are monitored 24X7 and updated to the
server.The block diagram of our proposed system is shown
in Figure 3; data from different sensors are collected and
updated in the server with a Wi-Fi module. The data is
analyzed with the standard thresholds if the range is within
the standard threshold its just displayed on the LCD and
updated to the server. The Physicians and the caretakers can
access the data stored at the server through the TCP/UDP
application. The data is secured as each patient is provided
with a unique identiﬁer.
In case the range of parameters exceeds the threshold and
its detected as an emergency or the physician suggests the
caretakers that the patient needs to be hospitalized then we
Fig. 3. Flow Chart
use the smart trafﬁc system with Zigbee technology to reach
the hospital as early as possible.
In this smart trafﬁc system, we have equipped the Zigbee
transmitter at the emergency vehicle and a Zigbee receiver
at the signal intersection. The Zigbee transmitter and Zigbee
receiver operate with a baud rate of 9600. This uses UART
protocol and through the serial communication the signal
gets tapped to green. As the emergency vehicle approaches
the signal intersection and is within a range of 100m the
signal gets tapped to green. The signal remains green until
the emergency vehicle passes the intersection and it remains
red on all the other paths. Here the paths are indicated
with four switches each switch interfaced with each path.
While the patient is taken to the hospital the parameters are
monitored continuously and updated to the server, so that
when the patient reaches the hospital the next procedure is
carried out and the life of the patient is saved in critical
situations. Figure 5 indicates the Zigbee transmitter module
and Figure 6 indicates the Zigbee receiver module.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
Step by step implementation of the smart health monitor-
ing system is shown in Figure 4, information from different
sensors is collected and updated to the server via the wireless
communication channel, Wi-Fi Module 24X7. This Wi-Fi
module can be used as the client as well as the server, here
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 4. Block Diagram
Fig. 5. Zigbee Transmitter at Emergency Vehicle
Fig. 6. Zigbee Receiver at Trafﬁc Signal
it acts as a server that helps in fetching and storing of the
information. The data can be accessed by the physicians or
the caretakers through a user-friendly application based on
TCP/UDP protocol. The data is secured as each patient is
provided with a unique identiﬁer and is updated to the server
every 5 seconds. The doctors and the caretakers can access
the physical parameters of the patient anytime and provide
a required solution.
During emergency, on the way to the hospital trafﬁc
is another issue. This is taken care by the smart trafﬁc
system, providing a green signal on the path of an emergency
vehicle approach then followed by a normal sequence. The
technology used here is ZigBee, transmitter placed at emer-
gency vehicle and receiver at the trafﬁc signal intersection.
When the vehicle approaches the intersection point, the serial
communication takes place and taps the signal to green on
the path of emergency vehicle. The signal continues to be
green on the path of an emergency vehicle and red on the
other paths. Once the emergency vehicle passes the signal
intersection, the normal sequence is continued. In this way,
the chances of accidents at the intersection are reduced and
the life of a patient is saved.
The basic Parameters to be monitored with the following
sensors namely: Heart Rate Sensor, Blood Pressure, Tem-
perature, ECG. The vibration sensor is used to demonstrate
the occurrence of the accident.
A. Heart Rate Sensor
Infrared light is transmitted through IR diode into the
ﬁngertip and the reﬂected light is captured by the photo-
diode. Depending on the volume of blood at ﬁngertip the
intensity of reﬂected light varies.
Fig. 7. Heart Rate Sensor
The thresholds of the heart rate are mentioned in Table II.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

B. Blood Pressure Sensor
As the blood gets pumped by the heart in the body the
pressure of blood at arteries is measured. As the heartbeats,
it contracts and pushes blood through the arteries to the rest
of the body. This creates pressure on the arteries.
Fig. 8. Pressure Sensor
The thresholds of the blood pressure are mentioned in
Table III.
C. Temperature Sensor
The LM35 series are precision integrated-circuit tempera-
ture sensors, the output voltage is linearly proportional to the
Celsius (Centigrade) temperature. This is more advantageous
over linear temperature sensors calibrated in Kelvin as we
get both values.
Fig. 9. Temperature Sensor
The thresholds of temperature sensor are mentioned in
Table IV.
D. ECG Sensor
The electrical impulses generated in every heartbeat is
captured. The electricity detected by an electrode is trans-
mitted via this wire to a machine, which translates the
electricity into wavy lines recorded on instruments present
at the hospital. The ECG records in detail and are used to
diagnose a broad range of heart conditions.
Fig. 10. ECG Sensor
E. LCD Display (16*2)
The most useful device in an embedded system. Mainly
to display the required information. Pixels are used for most
ﬂexible ones.
Fig. 11. LCD Display
F. Wiﬁ Module
The patient is tracked continuously with the Wireless
module, that can connect the computer to the internet. The
Arduino Uno WiFi module can be used as a WiFi modem.
This can be used as a server and transmit the data to the
webpage automatically.
Fig. 12. Wiﬁ Module
G. Zigbee
The available wireless Zigbee technology is cost and
power-efﬁcient. Its characteristics make this communication
best suited for several embedded applicationslike industrial
control, home automation when compared to other wireless
technologies like Bluetooth, IEEE802.11b, IEEE802.11g,
and UWB.
Fig. 13. Zigbee
The Table 1 shows the comparative study of wireless
technology with different parameters.
H. LED
The LEDs are small, individual electronic lights created
using applied voltage to a semiconductor chip and reﬂector
inside a small colored lens or outer casing.
I. ARDUINO UNO
Arduino Uno is an 8-bit ATmega328P microcontroller.
Along with ATmega328P, it consists of other components
like crystal oscillator, serial communication, voltage regu-
lator, etc. They are inexpensive, can run on cross-platform,
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

TABLE I
COMPARISON OF WIRELESS TECHNOLOGY
Parameter
Zigbee
Bluetooth
802.11b
802.11g
UWB
Throughput
(Mbps)
0.03
1-3
11
54
200
Max.
Range(ft)
100
30
200
200
30
Bandwidth
(MhHz)
0.6
1
22
20
500
Price (USD)
2.0
3.0
5.0
12
7
opensource and extensible hardware and software compared
to another microcontroller.
Fig. 14. Arduino UNO
J. LPC2148 ARM 7
LPC2148 Pro Development Board is based on an
LPC2148 ARM7TDMI microcontroller with 512K on-chip
memory. This board is powered by the USB port and
does not require any external power supply. It is ideal for
developing embedded applications with high-speed wireless
communication (Zigbee / Bluetooth / WiFi), USB based data
logging, real-time data monitoring and control, interactive
control panels, etc.
Fig. 15. LPC2148
V. RESULTS AND OBSERVATIONS
The patient is monitored with different sensors and the
information is updated to the server every 5secs using
IoT. This data can be accessed by the physicians and the
caretakers anytime with a unique identiﬁer. To monitor the
criticality of health parameters we used the standards deﬁned
by healthcare system regulators and are tabulated. The
observation of different sensors and threshold are accessed
by a mobile application that captures the data stored at the
dedicated server through the Wi-Fi module.
As the system is turned on, different health parameters
are displayed on the LCD. The heart rate is measured by
Fig. 16. Health Monitoring System
TABLE II
HEART RATE VALVES
Target Zone
Training Recommended
Normal (72 BPM)
Normal Rate
Low (60-70 BMP)
Low Heart Rate
Hign (>72 BPM)
Abnormal Heart Rate
placing a ﬁnger on the sensor, it measures the heartbeat and
blood level at the ﬁngertip. The pressure sensor monitors
the pressure, this device has a projection where we can
apply the pressure on the projection, based on the applied
pressure it determines the pressure along with high BP or
low BP. The temperature sensors monitor the temperature
of the patients body and determine whether the patient has
a fever or is normal based on the medical standards.ECG
helps in monitoring the different heart rate parameters. The
signal is observed and the value changes based on different
parameters.
TABLE III
BLOOD PRESSURE VALUES
Pressure Level
Systolic(mmHg)
Diastolic(mmHg)
Normal
90-130
60-80
Low
<90
<60
High
>140
>90
TABLE IV
TEMPERATURE VALUES
Type
Celsius
Farienheat
Hypothermia
<35.0
95
Normal
36.5-37.5
97.7-99.5
Fever
>37.5
>99.5
Hyper Pyrexia
>40
>104.0
During the emergency, the patient is taken to the hospital
with continuous tracking of health parameters. The trafﬁc
on the way to the hospital is avoided with the smart trafﬁc
system implemented with ZigBee technology to save the
life of the patient. The four paths are provided with four
switches in the demonstration, when the switch is pressed
the respective signal interfaced to that path turns green. The
switch is also interfaced to display the availability of the
metro facility on the respective path where the emergency
vehicle is approaching. In future, the GPS will be integrated
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 17. Smart Trafﬁc System
to know the availability of metro and distance of it from the
emergency vehicle, so that the patient is taken to the hospital
to the earliest.
The health parameters displayed on the LCD are shown
in Figure 18.
Fig. 18. Display of Parameters
The android application interface is shown in Figure 19.
Fig. 19. Android Application Interface
VI. CONCLUSIONS
The Health monitoring system proposed in this paper
keeps track of the patient health. It minimizes the time
by providing user-friendly solution that keep track of the
patient and report the same to the concerned person along
with updating it to the server for future reference. The
solution achieves the goal of mobility and agility of the
device on human and still be very particular with the tracking
of all the health parameters. Our system provides security
control over the data access and is easier to operate in any
environmental conditions with minimal space for storage.
During an emergency, the trafﬁc on the way to the hospital
is avoided with smart trafﬁc system with ZigBee technology.
As the vehicle approaches the signal, serial communication
takes place between the Zigbee transmitter and the ZigBee
receiver within the range and the signal is tapped to green
followed by a normal sequence. As a future enhancement,
the application can be extended to include other vital health
information, provide more security, monitor multiple patients
simultaneously by providing an alarm to the concerned
person and could be integrated with the Electronic Health
Record (EHR) system to make it more useful and can be
coupled with historical data. The Global Positioning System
(GPS) and density-based sensor can be included as a future
scope that improves the performance by using real time
trafﬁc information.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Gope and T. Hwang, “Bsn-care: A secure iot-based modern health-
care system using body sensor network,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16,
no. 5, pp. 1368–1376, 2015.
[2] A. J. Jara, M. A. Zamora-Izquierdo, and A. F. Skarmeta, “Intercon-
nection framework for mhealth and remote monitoring based on the
internet of things,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 31, no. 9, pp. 47–65, 2013.
[3] D. S. Reddy and V. Khare, “A smart ambulance system,” International
Journal of Innovative Technologies (IJITECH), vol. 5, no. 02, pp. 0224–
0227, 2017.
[4] A. Abdullah, A. Ismael, A. Rashid, A. Abou-ElNour, and M. Tarique,
“Real time wireless health monitoring application using mobile de-
vices,” International Journal of Computer Networks & Communica-
tions (IJCNC), vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 13–30, 2015.
[5] P. K. Nisha and Y. Vinita, “Heart rate monitoring and data transmission
via bluetooth,” International Journal of Innovative and Emerging
Research in Engineering, vol. 2, no. 2, 2015.
[6] M. Aminian and H. R. Naji, “A hospital healthcare monitoring system
using wireless sensor networks,” J. Health Med. Inform, vol. 4, no. 02,
p. 121, 2013.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

