QoS Aware Multi-homing in Integrated 3GPP and
non-3GPP Future Networks
Umar Toseef∗†, Yasir Zaki†, Liang Zhao†, Andreas Timm-Giel∗ and Carmelita G¨org†
∗ComNets, Hamburg University of Technology, Hamburg, Germany
Email: {umar.toseef, timm-giel}@tuhh.de
†TZI ComNets, University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany
Email: {yzaki, zhaol, cg}@comnets.uni-bremen.de
Abstract—In future networks, collaboration of heterogeneous
wireless access technologies is inevitable. 3GPP has already
standardized the interconnection of non-3GPP access technolo-
gies with the exiting 3GPP access networks. This enables users
to make seamless vertical handovers between available access
networks. However, the question still remains whether the non-
3GPP access technologies can deliver the Quality of Service
(QoS) demands of user applications? Within the context of the
Open Connectivity Services (OConS) of the SAIL European
project, this work investigates the effects of the integration of
two network types on user Quality of Experience (QoE). In order
to accomplish QoS guaranteed service from non-3GPP access
technologies, this paper proposes a novel resource management
algorithm. With the help of simulation results it is proved that
network operators can get signiﬁcant performance boost for
their networks when the proposed scheme is deployed in an
environment with heterogeneous access networks.
Keywords: LTE and WLAN interworking, Efﬁcient resource
allocation, User QoE optimization, Multihoming in wireless
heterogeneous networks
I. INTRODUCTION
The EU-funded research project SAIL (Scalable & Adaptive
Internet Solutions) research the design of the Networks of the
Future, investigating new architecture for the future internet.
The SAIL project is part of the European Commission’s 7th
Framework Program [1]. 24 operators, vendors and research
institution are working together since 2010 on the research and
development of novel networking technologies using proof-of-
concept prototypes to lead the way from current networks to
the Network of the Future [2]. The work of this paper falls
within the solutions that the OConS work package is provid-
ing. The work ranges from concepts of OconS architecutre
framework and Multi-P transmissions in LTE systems. The
OConS approach is working on the proposal of an open and
ﬂexible architectural framework to handle the connectivity of
networks. To fulﬁll the requirements and to keep the ﬂexibility
and openness of OConS, a component-based architecture
frame-work is proposed, in 3 steps: (1) information collection;
(2) decision making; (3) decision enforcement. These steps are
handled by three functional entities:
• Information Management Entity (IE) is in charge of
gathering the information required by decision making,
e.g., link quality, power limitation, load and congestion
of the networks. IE also pre-processes and ﬁlters the
gathered information before it is delivered to the other
entities.
• Decision Making Entity (DE) uses the information from
IE to make the decision to fulﬁll some pre-deﬁned
metrics. For example, the ﬁnal enforcements can be
handover, load balancing and ﬂow splitting. The goals
of improving system performance can be maximizing the
network throughput, balancing the load etc.
• Execution and Enforcement Entity (EE), ﬁnally, executes
or performs the decision made by DE.
A. Motivation and Contributions
Nowadays, the end-user equipments are more and more
powerful, and normally, have more than one interfaces which
can connect to different wireless networks, e.g., 3G/4G mobile
systems or wireless LAN (WLAN). On the other hand, the
network resources are always scarce for supporting a huge
number of users running different applications. The Multi-P
algorithm, enables the interconnection of LTE and WLAN,
so that end users can exploit all of the available wireless
resources, meanwhile operators can also ﬂexibly balance the
trafﬁc load among multiple access networks.
In this presented work, besides the general introduction to
SAIL, OConS and Multi-P we put our focus on a simula-
tion model realizing the Multi-P transmission of 3GPP LTE
and WLAN. This involves development of simulation model
according to 3GPP speciﬁcations, implementation of MIPv6
extensions to realize multi-homing and ﬂow management
techniques as well as the integration of user QoE evaluation
tools in the simulator. With the help of intelligent resource
management schemes we contribute towards network capacity
improvements and user QoE enahancements.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
introduces the details of the OPNET1 [20] simulation model
for Multi-P. The trafﬁc ﬂow management strategies and the
detailed mechanisms are described in Section III. For proof
of concept, Section IV shows simulation results of different
scenarios to reveal the advantages of our approach. At the end,
Section V concludes this work and points out some possible
points for our future works.
1OPNET Modeler R⃝is a commercial network simulator which accelerates
the R&D process for analyzing and designing communication networks,
devices, protocols, and applications.
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Profile Applic- 
ation 
   HLR 
Mobility 
 
Home 
Agent 
PDN 
Application server 
S-GW 
router 
router 
eNB 
Hotspot1 
Hotspot2 
Hotspot3 
Hotspot4 
Fig. 1.
Overview of the considered scenarios in OPNET. The large circular
area represents the LTE access coverage. The small circular areas represent the
coverage of WLAN access technology which overlaps LTE access coverage.
II. SYSTEM MODELS
A. Applying Multi-P of OConS into interconnection of 3GPP
LTE and WLAN
The goal of the presented work is to investigate the Inter-
connection (and cooperation) of 3GPP (e.g., LTE) and non-
3GPP systems (e.g., Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN))
by means of the Multi-P transmission. The key part of this
approach is the decision process: selection of interfaces of the
UE and access alternatives (at the network side) that should
be used for the transmission and how to manage the trafﬁc
ﬂows.
From an architectural point of view as depicted in Fig. 1, the
interconnection between 3GPP and non-3GPP (in our case we
have chosen LTE and WLAN as case study) is possible at the
Packet Data Network Gateway (PDN GW). Hence, it becomes
a reasonable location for the DE of the network controlled
Multi-P decision. For the LTE side, the IEs are located at the
eNodeB (eNB) and the access gateway (aGW). For the WLAN
side, the IE is located at the Wireless Access Point (WAP). UE
also has IE and DE to gather the downlink information for the
Multi-P decisions and to execute the Multi-P transmission.
B. OPNET Simulation Model
3GPP speciﬁed SAE [19] architecture allows a mobile user
to roam between 3GPP and non-3GPP access technologies. In
order to provide users with seamless mobility Proxy Mobile
IPv6 (network based mobility) and Dual stack Mobile IPv6
(host based mobility) have been proposed [19]. We follow this
proposal in the integration of 3GPP access technology (namely
LTE) and trusted non-3GPP access technology (namely, legacy
WLAN 802.11g), where host based mobility solution i.e., Dual
stack Mobile IPv6 is considered. According to current 3GPP
speciﬁcation multi-homing is not supported. This implies that
a user can either be associated to LTE network or WLAN
network but cannot connect to both networks simultaneously.
This work extends the 3GPP speciﬁed architecture to give
users multi-homing capabilities. This is achieved by extending
the implementation of MIPv6 to support multiple care-of
address [14] and ﬂow management functionality [12][13].
Fig. 1 shows an overview of the simulation network imple-
mented in OPNET. All entities of SAE architecture which are
necessary to carry out multi-homing scenario have been imple-
mented. As per 3GPP proposal home agent (HA) function is
located at PDN gateway. All users are considered to be out of
home network during the complete simulation time. Remote
server acts a correspondent node (CN) from where mobile
users access application services like VoIP, Video and FTP.
Users receive router advertisements from eNB and possibly
from WLAN access point to conﬁgure care-of addresses.
These care-of addresses are then registered with their HA
through standard MIPv6 signaling. In this way all user trafﬁc
is tunneled from HA to the user.
It should be noted that our focus is only on the downlink
access for LTE and WLAN. This implies that no uplink
transmissions are performed for WLAN during the whole
simulation time. Instead all uplink trafﬁc (e.g., TCP ACK
packets etc.) is transmitted by the user through LTE access
link.
The original OPNET simulator does not adjust PHY data
rate of WLAN users dynamically based on the received signal
strength. This behavior has been modiﬁed based on literature
survey [15] to bring it closer to the reality. As a result of
this extension the user PHY data rate changes dynamically
based on the received signal strength. However, the users are
served by the access point only if their channel conditions are
good enough allowing them to transmit at PHY data rate of
6Mbps or better. This is to avoid WLAN netwrok performance
degradations due to users with low PHY data rate e.g., 1Mbps,
2Mbps etc.
OPNET provides no mechanism to evaluate voice call qual-
ity for wideband G.722.2 [17] codec. A procedure according
to ITU-T recommendation has been introduced to evaluate
voice call quality for simulation results as detailed in [18].
Furthermore, OPNET has also no support for realistic video
trafﬁc generation using any standard codec. Another extension
has been made to generate realistic video call trafﬁc according
to MPEG-4 codec and evaluate the video call quality at the
receiving end as proposed in [16].
III. TRAFFIC FLOW MANAGEMENT
A network operator can manage the trafﬁc ﬂow of a multi-
homed user either by switching the complete trafﬁc ﬂow from
one path to another or by splitting it into multiple sub-ﬂows
in a way that each path carries one sub-ﬂow. These sub-
ﬂows are then aggregated at the destination to reconstruct the
original trafﬁc ﬂow of the application. Though the option of
splitting a trafﬁc ﬂow involves more sophisticate techniques, it
provides greater ﬂexibility in network load balancing. That is
why in this work, ﬂow management with ﬂow splitting option
is implemented and analyzed with the help of simulations.
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

A very basic question related to ﬂow splitting option is:
What should be an appropriate size of sub-ﬂows (in bits/sec)
transported to a multi-homed user over each path? In other
words, how much trafﬁc should be sent to user on each
of the available access links? And a straightforward answer
would be: each path or link should be loaded according to
its bandwidth capacity. Moreover, when considering the ﬂow
splitting option one should also think how these sub-ﬂows
will be aggregated at the receiving end. In the following
subsections, answers to these two questions are addressed.
A. Estimation of Link Capacity
1) WLAN Access Technology:
Legacy WLAN (802.11
a/b/g) provides no QoS when scheduling user trafﬁc. Essen-
tially, there is only single queue in a WLAN access router
where all incoming trafﬁc is received and then transmitted
over the air to the users in a “First Come First Serve” manner.
That’s why overall throughput of a hotspot and that of the users
being served is highly variable based on number of active users
in the system, their offered trafﬁc load as well as their channel
conditions. One way to estimate the throughput of a user is by
knowing how much data have been sent to the user in a certain
time window. However, this option has a serious drawback; it
can only be used if there is already some data ﬂowing to the
user over WLAN link. Therefore, during time when a user
has just attached to an access point and has not yet received
any data over WLAN link, its potential bandwidth capacity
over WLAN link cannot be estimated. Sending an arbitrary
amount of data trafﬁc on WLAN link without the knowledge
of its capacity may lead to excessive queuing delays and buffer
overﬂows at the WLAN access point.
This work proposes a novel way of scheduling available
WLAN bandwidth resources in an efﬁcient way which also
provides an accurate estimation of user bandwidth capacity
over its WLAN link. This approach needs following pieces of
information to work i.e., number of active users attached to
WLAN access point and their PHY data rate at a particular
time instance. Once the number of active users associated to an
access point N is known and they are assumed to be served in
round robin manner, throughput of a user i denoted by λrr
useri
can be easily computed. Let’s take ti as the time required to
transmit one complete IP packet of size pi bits. The value of
ti can be computed based on user’s current PHY data rate,
packet size and MAC/PHY protocol overhead bits. Now that
λrr
useri =
pi
PN
i=1 ti
.
(1)
Similarly the access point throughput λrr
AP is given by
λrr
AP =
PN
i=1 pi
PN
i=1 ti
,
(2)
The assumption that access point serves users in round
robin manner can be realized by performing an intelligent
ﬂow splitting at HA. Actually HA is the entity where ﬂow
management function decides to which user’s care-of address
a packet will be forwarded. For all users who are being served
by the same access point, their data trafﬁc packets are sent
towards the serving access point in the round robin manner
i.e., one packet from ﬁrst user, next packet from second user,
and so on. Owning to the fact that no packet re-ordering takes
place on the transport link from PDN-GW to the access point,
all of these packets will be buffered in the FIFO queue of the
access point in the sent order. In this way, when these packets
are transmitted to the users it can be claimed that users are
being served by the access point in round robin manner.
The round robin way of scheduling WLAN resources,
however, does not make optimum use of the resources. This
point can be elaborated with following example. Consider a
single active user attached to a WLAN access point who is
receiving a UDP ﬂow comprised of ﬁxed IP packet size of p
bits. Assuming 54Mbps PHY data rate, the user experiences a
throughput of p/t54Mbps where t54Mbps is the time to transmit
one packet. As soon as another user with 6Mbps PHY data
rate (who is also receiving a similar UDP ﬂow) associates to
the same access point, the overall throughput now amounts
to 2p/(t54Mbps + t6Mbps). Considering basic channel access
mechanism of 802.11g t6Mbps ≃ 5.6 · t54Mbps which implies
that joining of second user reduces the overall access point
throughput by 70%. This is because round robin is a fair
scheme which gives equal chance of medium access to all
active users irrespective of their channel conditions.
One way to overcome this drawback is performing ﬂow
splitting in such a manner which gives users with medium
access in proportion to their PHY data rate values. In other
words, the users are given equal share of time slice and in
this way the users with the higher PHY data rate can transmit
more packet compared to the users with lower PHY data
rate. This scheduling effect can be achieved in the above
described example if 56 packets from ﬁrst user and 10 packets
from second user are sent to WLAN access point by ﬂow
management function residing at HA. This will enhance the
overall system throughput by 196% compared to simple round
robin scheme. However, this overall system performance gain
comes at the cost of reduction in throughput of second user.
Nevertheless, the proposed scheme is fair enough to give a user
system throughput share in proportion to his channel condition
while considerably improving the overall system throughput.
In order to compute the throughput of a system which
follows above mentioned WLAN resource scheduling scheme,
let’s deﬁne ri as the achievable data rate for a user who is the
only active user in the system. This amounts to ri = pi/ti,
where ti is the time taken by user i to transmit a packet
of size pi bits when transmitting with a certain PHY data
rate. Now, the user i’s fair share from throughput resources
in proportion to his achievable data rate ri is given by wi
such that wi = ri/(PN
i=1 ri). This way, the overall system
throughput λch
AP will be computed as following
λch
AP =
PN
i=1 wi · pi
PN
i=1 wi · ti
(3)
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

and the throughput of user i is given by
λch
useri =
wi · pi
PN
i=1 wi · ti
(4)
The above described method of scheduling WLAN bandwidth
resources is just one of the possible ways. In general, any
scheduling scheme can be imposed using ﬂow management
function at HA.
2) LTE Access Technology: In case of LTE, it is not
simple to compute the bandwidth capacity available to a user.
This is because its value depends on several factors, e.g.,
MAC scheduler type, channel conditions of all users, QoS
requirements of trafﬁc from all users, cell load level, etc. This
problem can, however, be solved by introducing a throughput
metering function between PDCP and RLC layers at eNodeB.
This metering function reports the average throughput of the
user data ﬂowing from PDCP to RLC layer in downlink
direction. The reported throughput value is then taken as LTE
link capacity of that particular user. In addition to frequent
user throughput reports, the metering function also provides
occupancy level of user PDCP buffer at eNodeB. PDCP buffer
occupancy actually reﬂects the tendency of increase or de-
crease in user throughput. For example, when user throughput
reduces due to some reason (e.g., cell overload or bad channel
conditions) the egress data rate from PDCP buffer becomes
lower than the ingress data rate which in turn makes PDCP
buffer occupancy to increase. The opposite is true, when user
throughput increases. Owing to this fact, ﬂow management
function at HA tries to keep PDCP buffer occupancy at a
certain target level. During the events of decrease in PDCP
buffer occupancy more user trafﬁc is sent to LTE link till the
target buffer occupancy level is achieved and vice versa. The
amount of target buffer occupancy is decided dynamically as
explained later in this section.
B. Sub-ﬂow Aggregation Function
In multi-path communication, packet may arrive out of
order at the destination [7]. Real time applications usually
deploy a play-out (or de-jitter) buffer, which is intended to
get rid of jitter associated with packet delays. However, it can
also perform packet reordering if packets arrive within time
window equal to play-out buffer length. In this way, real time
applications face no problems when receiving out of order
packets in multi-path communication unless delay of all paths
is less than play-out buffer length.
On the other hand, TCP based application are very sensitive
to packet re-ordering. This is because an out-of-sequence
packet leads TCP overestimate the congestion of the net-
work, which results in a substantial degradation in application
throughput and network performance [6]. A literature survey
shows that there are several proposals to make TCP robust
against packet re-ordering [8]-[11]. The analysis and imple-
mentation of these schemes in our simulator is currently not
within the focus of this research work. Instead, we implement
a simple TCP re-ordering buffer at user side, which is very
TABLE I
SIMULATION CONFIGURATIONS
Parameter
Conﬁgurations
Total Number of PRBs
50 PRBs (10 MHz specturm)
Mobility model
Random Direction (RD) with 6 km/h
Number of users
5 VoIP, 3 HD video & 5 Skype video call,
7 FTP downlink users
LTE Channel model
Macroscopic pathloss model ,
Correlated Slow Fading [3]
LTE MAC Scheduler
TDS: Optimized Service Aware [4],
FDS: Iterative RR approach
WLAN technology
802.11g, RTS-CTS enabled, coverage ≈ 100 m
VoIP trafﬁc model
G.722.2 wideband codec, 23.05kbps data rate
Skype video model
MPEG-4 codec, 512kbps, 640x480 resolution,
30fps, play-out delay: 250 ms
HD video model
MPEG-4 codec, 1Mbps, 720x480 resolution,
30fps, play-out delay: 250 ms
FTP trafﬁc model
FTP File size: constant 10 MByte
continuous ﬁle uploads one after the other.
Simulation run time
103 seconds,13 seeds, 98% conﬁdence interval
similar in functionality to a play-out buffer. Simulation anal-
ysis shows that re-ordering buffer length must be set as less
than TCP protocol time out value. In this work, re-ordering
buffer length has been kept between 100ms to 500ms. TCP re-
ordering buffer length τtcp is a key factor in deciding target
PDCP buffer occupancy level µi of a user i.e.,
µi = λLTE
i
· τtcp,
(5)
where λLTE
i
is the estimation of LTE link throughput of the
user.
With the help of this strategy, LTE link delay is controlled
not to exceed the TCP re-ordering buffer length, and hence,
avoid unnecessary TCP time-outs.
IV. SIMULATION SCENARIOS AND RESULTS
The target of this section is to highlight the gains that can
be achieved by extending the 3GPP inter-working architecture
to support the simultaneous use of the multi interfaces. That
means the aggregation of several wireless interfaces, in order
to enhance the system performance. In this section, two main
scenarios are compared against each other, that is, the 3GPP
default architecture, where multi-homing is not supported
however user can perform seamless Handover (HO) to switch
between the multiple wireless networks, and this will be
referred to as “3GPP HO”. Whereas, the second scenario is the
novel proposal of this paper, to extend the 3GPP architecture
into supporting the simultaneous use of wireless interface, this
will be referred to as “Multi-P”.
For each aforementioned scenario, two simulations setup
are investigated. The ﬁrst setup is composed of 20 users with
mixed trafﬁc of: Voice over IP (VoIP), File Transfer Protocol
(FTP), video conference (i.e., Skype video call), and High
Deﬁnition (HD) video streaming. The users move within one
LTE eNodeB cell, and within this cell four wireless access
points or hot-spots are present as shown in Fig. 1. The second
setup is a special case where 5 FTP users are moving within
the restricted coverage of a wireless access point where no
LTE access is available. The motivation behind the later setup
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

is to show how the resource management function of “Multi-
P” scenario outperforms the default “3GPP HO” case. The
simulation conﬁguration parameters are shown in Table I.
A. Mixed User Trafﬁc
In this subsection, the mixed trafﬁc setup investigations are
discussed. As stated earlier, two different cases are compared
against each other, these are: “3GPP HO” scenario and “Multi-
P” scenario. The ﬁrst scenario does not make simultaneous
use of LTE and WLAN access technologies. In this case, all
trafﬁc takes its path to the user through LTE access which is
available everywhere. However, when user enters the WLAN
coverage its trafﬁc is completely handed over to WLAN. It is
worth mentioning here that in the “3GPP HO” scenario the
users make vertical handover of hard nature, i.e., the user are
disconnected completely from one network, and establish a
new connection to the other one. Though MIPv6 keeps all
IP layer connections alive through seamless handover, users
might lose some buffered data on the previously connected
network. On the other hand, the “Multi-P” scenario enables
the users to use WLAN access when they are in its coverage
while still keep the LTE connection alive and using it at the
same time. As a result, a bandwidth aggregation process of
both wireless links is achieved.
Fig. 2 shows the spider web graph of the average user delay
values. A spider web graph is a visualization technique that
can show multiple results in one graph, and is used to compare
different scenarios. The graph in Fig. 2 has four different axes,
each representing one performance metric, mainly VoIP, Skype
video, HD video, and FTP ﬁle transfer end-to-end delay.
5
10
15
20
FTP file DL
 time (s)
0.04
0.08
0.12
0.16
VoIP E2E delay (s)
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.12
Skype video 
E2E delay (s)
0.015
0.03
0.045
0.06
HD video E2E delay (s)
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
Fig. 2.
End-to-end delay comparison spider web graph
Since all the axes represent delay, the algorithm producing
the smaller shape has the best performance. In this case, it is
clear that the “Multi-P” algorithm achieves the best results
for the VoIP and videos trafﬁc scenario. As for the FTP
performance, it can be seen that the “3GPP HO” scenario
has a slightly lower FTP ﬁle download time. However, the
total number of 10MByte downloaded ﬁles is higher in the
“Multi-P” scenario compared to the “3GPP HO” one (see
Fig. 3). This is because in “3GPP HO” case some of the TCP
connections abort due to excessive packet loss and sudden
huge changes in TCP round trip time during the handover. In
order to have performance evaluation comparison between the
two scenarios, the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) values for the
VoIP and the video trafﬁcs are shown in Fig. 4.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
Scenario type
Average FTP downloaded Files
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
Fig. 3.
Number of FTP downloaded ﬁles comparison
2
3
4
5
VoIP MOS
2
3
4
5
HD video MOS
2
3
4
5
Skype video MOS
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
Fig. 4.
VoIP and video MOS comparison
The results show that the “Multi-P” algorithm provides
very good performance for the VoIP, as well as, for both
video trafﬁc types (Skype and HD). On the other hand, the
“3GPP HO” scenario achieves very low MOS value for the
VoIP users, the reason behind is, when VoIP users move from
one access network to the other (from LTE to WLAN, and
vice versa), the buffered data in the previous network is lost,
and this affects the quality of the VoIP calls signiﬁcantly as
reﬂected in the MOS value. Furthermore, when VoIP and
video trafﬁc is transmitted over LTE, it is prioritized over
FTP to achieve required QoS (i.e., throughput and delay).
But when in “3GPP HO” scenario this trafﬁc type is handed
over to WLAN the required QoS cannot always be achieved
due to lack of QoS differentiation support by 802.11g. Thanks
to algorithms of “Multi-P” scenario which manages 802.11g
resources in a way that not only the required QoS for real time
trafﬁc is met but also the optimum throughput performance of
WLAN access point is accomplished. Moreover, in “Multi-P”
scenario the loss of buffered data in network is avoided in
the following manner. (i) LTE connection is always kept alive
hence no buffered data is lost there. (ii) As far as WLAN
link is concerned, the ﬂow management function at HA sends
user trafﬁc on WLAN link only when user PHY data rate is
9Mbps or higher. This is because when a user has PHY data
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

rate as 6Mbps it is a strong indication that loss of WLAN link
is imminent. Hence, no new trafﬁc data is sent on WLAN
link for that user which gives him a chance to receive already
buffered data from the access point before the loss of link.
It can be noticed that video users MOS values in “3GPP
HO” scenario are not shown. The reason for that is the large
packet loss rate due to two reasons: (i) buffered data loss at
previously connected WLAN AP(ii) high end-to-end packet
delay which makes play-out buffer discard the packets with
delay greater than 250ms. Due this high packet loss rate,
EvalVid tool [16] cannot evaluate the exact MOS value of the
received video call implying that received video quality to too
bad to be watchable. This limitation of EvalVid has already
been discussed by the authors of the tool on their website.
B. FTP User Trafﬁc
In this subsection, a special setup is investigated in order
to highlight the advantages of using WLAN resource man-
agement algorithm discussed in Section III-A1. The scenario
comprises of 5 FTP users, all moving within the coverage
of the wireless access point without having LTE access. In
both scenarios, the FTP users download constant 10MByte
ﬁle size one after the other. Fig. 5(a) shows the average FTP
ﬁle download time for both scenarios.
0
10
20
30
40
50
Scenario type
Average FTP downloaded time (s)
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
(a) Average ﬁle download time
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Scenario type
Average FTP downloaded files
 
 
3GPP HO
Multi−P
(b) Average downloaded ﬁles count
Fig. 5.
FTP download performance
It can be seen, that the “Multi-P” scenario achieves a lower
FTP ﬁle download time compared to the other scenario where
no management of WLAN resources is performed. Moreover,
the users in “Multi-P” scenario manage to download more
ﬁles than in “3GPP HO” scenario. This shows that “Multi-P”
scenario’s algorithm of WLAN resource management does its
job in optimum resource utilization to increase overall network
throughput as explained in Section III-A1.
V. CONCLUSION
3GPP SAE architecture speciﬁes how non-3GPP access
technologies can be integrated in 3GPP networks and a seam-
less handover between these access technologies can be per-
formed. This work proposed an extension to the speciﬁcations
to allow a user beneﬁt from all available access technologies
by connecting to them simultaneously. The legacy WLAN
does not provide QoS guarantee, and therefore not suitable for
realtime interactive applications. However, through the use of
suggested algorithms for resource management and accurate
bandwidth capacity estimation WLAN bandwidth resources
can be utilized for multi-homed users running QoS sensitive
applications. In order to validate the proposed algorithm and
procedures, an implementation of integrated network of LTE
and legacy WLAN access technologies in OPNET simulator
has been carried out. The simulation results provide proof
of the concept where proposed scheme succeeds not only
in providing QoS aware service to multi-homed users, but
also optimizing the network bandwidth resource utilization.
By outperforming the current 3GPP proposal, the new scheme
assures a win-win situation for network operators as well as
for users in future wireless networks.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme
(FP7) under grant agreement no. 257448.
REFERENCES
[1] SAIL project website: http://www.sail-project.eu/, acessed in Sept. 2012
[2] SAIL consortium, D.A.5: Exploitation and dissemination plan, 2010
[3] 3GPP Technical Report TS 25.814, Physical layer aspects for E-UTRA,
3rd Generation Partnership Project, v.7.1.0, Sept. 2006
[4] Y. Zaki, T. Weerawardane, C. G¨org and A. Timm-Giel, Multi-QoS-Aware
Fair Scheduling for LTE, Vehicular Technology Conference, 2011
[5] N. Zahariev, Y. Zaki, T. Weerawardane, C. G¨org, and A. Timm-Giel. Opti-
mized service aware lte mac scheduler with comparison against other well
known schedulers. In 10th International Conference on Wired/Wireless
Internet Communications, WWIC 2012, June 2012
[6] M. Laor and L. Gendel, The Effect of Packet Reordering in a Backbone
Link on Application Throughput, IEEE Network, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 28-
36, Sept./Oct. 2002
[7] Ethan Blanton, Mark Allman. On Making TCP More Robust to Packet
Reordering. ACM Computer Communication Review, 2002
[8] R. Ludwig and R. Katz. The Eifel algorithm: Making TCP robust against
spurious retransmissions. ACM Computer Communication Review, 2000
[9] S. Floyd, J. Mahdavi, M. Mathis, and M. Podolsky. An extension to the
selective acknowledgement (SACK) option for TCP. RFC 2883, 2000
[10] F. Wang and Y. Zhang. Improving TCP performance over mobile ad-hoc
networks with out-of-order detection and response. In Proc. of the ACM
MOBIHOC, 2002
[11] Stephan Bohacek, Joao P. Hespanha, Junsoo Lee, Chansook Lim, Katia
Obraczka, TCP-PR: TCP for Persistent Packet Reordering, Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems,
p.222, May 19-22, 2003
[12] G. Tsirtsis, G. Giaretta, H. Soliman, and N. Montavont, Trafﬁc selectors
for ﬂow bindings (RFC 6088), 2011
[13] G. Tsirtsis, H. Soliman, N. Montavont, Giaretta, G., N. Montavont, and
K. Kuladinithi, Flow bindings in mobile IPv6 and NEMO basic support
(RFC 6089), 2010
[14] R. Wakikawa, V. Devarapalli, G. Tsirtsis, T. Ernst, and K. Nagami,
Multiple care-of addresses registration (RFC 5648), 2009
[15] 802.11 Wireless Networks, The Deﬁnitive Guide; Matthew S. Gast, 2nd
Edition O’reilly publications
[16] J. Klaue, B. Rathke, and A. Wolisz, EvalVid - A Framework for Video
Transmission and Quality Evaluation, In Proc. of the 13th International
Conference on Modeling Techniques and Tools for Computer Perfor-
mance Evaluation, pp. 255-272, Illinois, USA, Sept. 2003
[17] Recommendation ITU-T G.722.2, Wideband coding of speech at around
16 kbit/s using Adaptive Multi-Rate Wideband (AMR-WB), Approved in
July 2003
[18] U. Toseef, M. Li, A. Balazs, X. Li, A. Timm-Giel and C. G¨org,
Investigating the Impacts of IP Transport Impairments on VoIP service
in LTE Networks, in 16th VDE/ITG Fachtagung Mobilkommunikation,
Osnabr¨uck, Germany, May 18-19, 2011
[19] 3GPP Technical Report TS 23.402, Architecture enhancements for non-
3GPP accesses, 3rd Generation Partnership Project, v10.6.0, Dec. 2011
[20] OPNET website, http://www.opnet.com, as accessed in Sept. 2012
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

