20 Gb/s Absolute Polar Duty Cycle Division Multiplexing-Polarization Division 
Multiplexing (AP-DCDM-PolDM) Transmission System 
 
 
Amin Malekmohammadi 
Dept. of Electrical and Electronic Engineering 
The University of Nottingham 
Aminmalek_m@ieee.org 
 
 
Abstract— The performance of Absolute Polar Duty Cycle 
Division 
Multiplexing 
(AP-DCDM) 
over 
Polarization 
Division Multiplexing (PolDM) system is presented based on 
the simulation results, in order to double the capacity in 
optical fiber links. It is demonstrated that the spectral width 
occupied by 10 Gb/s RZ is 40 GHz whereas, this value can be 
reduced to 20 GHz over 2 channels of the proposed system. 
Simulations show that the maximum attainable dispersion-
limited transmission distance for 20-Gb/s AP-DCDM-PolDM 
data over standard single-mode fiber can be extended to 200 
km for a 2-dB penalty. 
Keywords- Optical Communication; AP-DCDM; PolDM 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There has recently been a capacity explosion of optical 
fiber links due to techniques such as Wavelength-Division 
Multiplexing (WDM) [1]. However, WDM systems are 
straining 
to 
accommodate 
either 
smaller 
channel 
wavelength spacing or wider wavelength ranges in order to 
continue the growth in capacity. The minimum channel 
spacing and the total wavelength range are limited by 
many factors, including optical filters, wavelength drifts, 
signal bandwidth, Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier (EDFA) 
bandwidth, and dispersion and nonlinearities [1, 2].  
Next generation systems working at 40-Gb/s data rates 
and 
incorporating 
Dense 
Wavelength-Division 
Multiplexing (DWDM) will require bandwidth efficient 
transmission formats to minimize the chromatic dispersion 
penalty [3]. Bandwidth efficiency is also important for 
maximizing the spectral efficiency of the WDM 
transmitters, whilst maintaining low levels of crosstalk. 
Bandwidth efficient transmission has previously been 
achieved in several ways including advanced modulation 
formats such as Differential Quadrature Phase Shift 
Keying (DQPSK) However, this technique increase the 
complexity of the receiver by the introduction of the 
temperature-stabilized 
Mach-Zehnder 
Interferometer 
(MZI) [4].  
Absolute Polar Duty Cycle Division Multiplexing (AP-
DCDM) is an alternative multiplexing which appears 
promising for its spectral width and its chromatic 
dispersion tolerance [5, 6].  The narrow optical spectrum 
on AP-DCDM reduces the inter channel coherent crosstalk 
in AP-DCDM-WDM systems. The possibility of setting 
channel spacing as narrow as 62.5 GHz for 40 Gbit/s AP-
DCDM signals over WDM was confirmed [6]. As reported 
in [6], a capacity of 1.28 Tbit/s (32 x 40 Gbit/s) was 
packed into a 15.5 nm EDFA gain-band with 0.64 bit/s/Hz 
spectral efficiency by using 10 Gbit/s transmitter and 
receiver. Good propagation format together with a simple 
transmitter 
implementation 
make 
AP-DCDM 
very 
interesting for uncompensated optical links [5]. 
Polarization Division Multiplexing (PolDM) is well 
known technique for doubling the spectral efficiency. In 
PolDM system two signals are transmitted at the same 
wavelength with orthogonal States of Polarization (SOP). 
At the receiving end the polarization channels are 
demultiplexed at polarization beam splitter and detected 
independently. PolDM allows the transmission at an 
equivalent double bitrate without reducing the reach to a 
fourth due to chromatic dispersion [7, 8]. PolDM has the 
advantage that it can be implemented without major 
changes to the existing systems. PolDM can be 
implemented by adding a transceiver and associated 
polarization multiplexer/demultiplexer at each end of the 
fiber link, while leaving the rest of the system unchanged 
[9]. 
In this paper, for the first time to the best of our 
knowledge, the AP-DCDM system has been exploited 
together with PolDM in order to achieve, a reach of 200 
km at an overall bitrate of 20 Gb/s (2 x 2 x 5 Gb/s), 
without dispersion compensation. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
the simulation setup of AP-DCDM-PolDM over 200 km 
single 
mode 
fiber. 
Section 
III 
discusses 
the 
implementation issues in comparison against other 
techniques and Section IV discusses the performance of 
AP-DCDM over PolDM. 
 
II. 
SIMULATION SETUP 
In this study, two commercial software, OptiSystem 
and MATLAB were used to access the system 
performance. The performance evaluation of the system is 
based on Bit Error Rate (BER) which is described in [5]. 
Fig.1 shows the model of AP-DCDM over PolDM 
system. The evaluation starts with 2 AP-DCDM channels 
209
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

setup. Data1, Data 2, each at 5 Gb/s with Pseudo Random 
Binary Sequence (PRBS) of 210 -1 are carved with one 
electrical RZ pulse carvers at 50% of duty cycle and NRZ 
pulse carver, respectively. 
The voltages for all users at the multiplexer input are 
identical. All users’ data are multiplexed via a power 
combiner (electrical adder) resulting in a bipolar signal. 
Subsequently, the absolute circuit is used to produce an 
absolute polar signal [5]. The signals are used to modulate 
a Laser Diode (LD), which operates at 1550 nm 
wavelength using a Mach-Zehnder Modulator (MZM). 
The modulated AP-DCDM signal is split in two replicas 
uncorrelated by means of a fiber spoil, with a delay of 
about 15 μs.  
The two replicas, equalized in power, are orthogonally 
polarized by adjustable fiber Polarization Controller (PC) 
and recombined by a pig-tailed micro-optic Polarization 
Beam Combiner (PBC). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. AP-DCDM-PDM Setup 
 
A polarization multiplexed signal at an overall bit-rate 
of 20 Gb/s is generated and then it is boosted by an 
Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifier (EDFA) and launched in a 
uncompensated Single Mode Fiber (SMF) link. At the 
receiver, 
the 
multiplexed 
channels 
are 
optically 
preamplified by an EDFA and a variable amount of 
Amplified Spontaneous Emission (ASE) noise, generated 
by a filtered ASE source, is added in order to modify the 
Optical Signal-to-Noise Ratio (OSNR).  
The 20 Gb/s AP-DCDM-PolDM performance is 
assessed over lengths ranging from back-to-back to 200 
km. nonlinear effects are negligible due to low lunch 
power [10, 11]. 
At the end of the fiber link, the two orthogonally 
polarized PolDM channels at the same wavelength are 
then optically demultiplexed by a fiber Polarization Beam 
Splitter (PBS) after an adjustable fiber PC. 
A single demultiplexed channel is detected by a 
Avalanche Photodiode (APD) and passed through a Low-
Pass Filter (LPF) and a Clock-and-Data-Recovery (CDR) 
unit. The regeneration and error detector are programmed, 
using sampling points and threshold value. The samples 
are taken at two sampling points (S1 and S2) at the first two 
slots in every symbol [5]. The sample values are fed into 
the decision and regeneration program. In this program, 
the sampled values are compared against threshold value 
and the decision is performed based on the operation 
shown in Tables I and II [5, 6]. These tables contain the 
regeneration rules for a two-channel AP-DCDM system 
that the data recovery program uses to regenerate original 
data for each channel. For example for user one, binary 0 
is regenerated when sampling values at S1 and S2 are less 
than threshold value (Table 1 rule 1). Binary 1 is 
regenerated when sampled amplitude at S1 is equal or 
greater than threshold, while amplitude at S2 is less than 
threshold (Table 1 rule 3) [5]. 
 
TABLE I.  
DATA RECOVERY RULES FOR USER 1 (U1) 
No 
Rules 
1 
if 
(S1 < Thr) 
& 
(S2 < Thr) 
then
U1 = 0 
2 
if 
(S1≥ Thr) 
& 
(S2 ≥ Thr) 
then
U1 = 0 
3 
if 
(S1 ≥ Thr) 
& 
(S2 < Thr) 
then
U1 = 1 
4 
if 
(S1 < Thr) 
& 
(S2 ≥ Thr) 
then
U1 = 1 
 
TABLE II                   DATA RECOVERY RULES FOR USER 2 (U2) 
No 
Rules 
1 
if 
(S2 < Thr) 
then 
U2 = 0 
2 
if 
(S2 ≥ Thr) 
then 
U2 = 1 
 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES IN COMPARISON WITH 
OTHER TECHNIQUES 
 
AP-DCDM 
like 
NRZ-OOK requires only one 
Modulator and one Photodiode (PD) for n number of 
users at the transmitter and the receiver side, respectively. 
This is very economical in comparison to other 
modulation formats such as NRZ-DPSK, which require 
one Delay Interferometer (DI) and two PDs at the receiver 
[5], or RZ-DQPSK which requires two MZM at the 
transmitter, and two DIs together with four PDs at the 
receiver [5] or duobinary which require one dual-arm 
MZM modulator including driver amplifier for each 
modulator arm at the transmitter and one PD in the 
receiver. 
Referring to the AP-DCDM data recovery concept, one 
may argue that the complexity of AP-DCDM receiver is 
higher than other systems. However, the complexity is 
due to additional electronics components and devices, the 
solutions of which are available in term of technology and 
experts [5]. 
210
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

IV. 
PERFORMANCE OF AP-DCDM-POLDM 
Fig. 2 shows the optical spectra measured after the 
MZM. Considering the null–to–null bandwidth, the 
spectral width of 10 Gb/s AP-DCDM is around 20 GHz 
and it is equivalent to that of a 10 Gb/s NRZ-OOK signal. 
Comparing the optical spectral width at the same 
aggregate bit rate (10 Gb/s) between RZ-OOK (which is 
around 40 GHz), and AP-DCDM, AP-DCDM shows a 
great spectral width reduction (~20 GHz). This is because 
AP-DCDM divides the symbol to n slots where n is the 
number of channels [5]. Thus, it requires a null-to-null 
spectral width of 2 × [n × single channel bit rate], whereas 
RZ-OOK requires 2 × (2 × aggregate bit rate). This 
amount of saving in the spectral width is will leads to 
better spectral efficiency and tolerance to chromatic 
dispersion [5]. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Optical spectra for AP-DCDM 
 
The PolDM-AP-DCDM system at 20 Gb/s with the 
SOP stabilizer is tested for different SSMF propagation 
lengths up to 200 km. we have measured the BER as a 
function of the single demultiplexed channel OSNR, 
which is detected after polarization demultiplexing. Note 
that the optical power at the APD input is kept constant to 
-15 dBm.  The performance of the PolDM-AP-DCDM 
transmission 
is 
compared 
with 
single 
channel 
transmission. Fig. 3 shows the required OSNR for a BER 
value of 10-9 versus propagation length. In the case of 
back to back because of the around 35 dB polarization 
extinction ratios of both polarization beam combiner and 
polarization beam splitter and to the good constancy of 
the SOP at the demultiplexing polarization beam splitter 
there is no penalty in transitory from the case of single 
channel transmission to the case of both polarization 
multiplexed channels. The cross-talk between the 
channels after polarization demultiplexing is thus small 
therefore with respect to the single channel case the 
penalty is negligible.  
On the other hand in correspondence of the BER 
measurements for propagation length of around 70 km 
and more a penalty is found due to the cross-talk which is 
generated by small SOP fluctuations and enhanced by the 
fiber propagation, at the polarization beam splitter after 
polarization demultiplexing. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. OSNR for a BER of 10-9 versus length of propagation over 
uncompensated SMF 
 
In the case below, 150 km refer to the channel whose 
performance is slightly worse than the orthogonally 
polarized channel. the penalties remain however not higher 
than 1 dB but at 200 km OSNR penalty increases to 
around 2 dB and a change in the slope is obvious as can be 
seen in Figure 4, where BER carve versus OSNR are 
shown.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. BER curves versus OSNR for different length of propagation 
over uncompensated SMF 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Absolute Polar Duty Cycle Division Multiplexing 
over Polarization Division Multiplexing has been proved 
an attractive technique to double the transmission rate, 
while preserving the 10 Gb/s dispersion tolerance of the 
AP-DCDM format.  The numerical results confirm that 
using 
this 
electrical 
multiplexing/demultiplexing 
technique, more than two users can be carried over the 
same PolDM channel. Consequently, the capacity 
211
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

utilization of the PolDM channels can be increased 
tremendously; which is achieved at a lower spectral width 
in comparison to conventional techniques. Transmission 
over 200 km SSMF was also demonstrated. Based on the 
simulation results it can be concluded that AP-DCDM is 
suitable for implementation in PolDM transmission 
systems. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] 
S. Bigo, Multiterabit DWDM terrestrial transmission with 
bandwidth-limiting optical filtering, IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum 
Electron., vol. 10, pp. 329–340,  2004 
[2] 
G. Charlet, E. Corbel, J. Lazaro, A. Klekamp, R. Dischler, P. Tran, 
W. Idler, H. Mardoyan, A. Konczykowska, F. Jorge, and S. Bigo, 
WDM transmission at 6 Tbit/s capacity over transatlantic distance 
and using 42.7 Gb/s differential phase-shift keying without pulse 
carver, in Proc. Optical Fiber Communication Conf. (OFC), 2004, 
Paper PDP36, pp. 1-3 
[3] 
K. Fukuchi, T. Kasamatsu, M. Morie, R. Ohhira, T. Ito, K. Sekiya, 
D. Ogasahara, and T. Ono, 10.92-Tb/s (273 x 40-Gb/s) triple-
band/ultra-dense WDM opticalrepeatered transmission experiment, 
in Proc. Optical Fiber Communication Conf. (OFC), 2001, Paper 
PD24, pp. 1684-1686 
[4] 
A. F. Abas, A. Hidayat, D. Sandel, B. Milivojevic and R. Noe, 100 
km fiber span in 292 km, 2.38 Tb/s (16×160 Gb/s) WDM DQPSK 
polarization division multiplex transmission experiment without 
Raman amplification, Opt. Fiber Technol. vol.13, pp.  46-50, 2004 
[5] 
A. Malekmohammadi, M. K. Abdullah, G. A. Mahdiraji, A. F. 
Abas, M. Mokhtar, M. F. A. Rashid and S. M. Basir, Analysis of 
return-to-zero-on-off-keying over Absolute Polar Duty Cycle 
Division Multiplexing in Dispersive Transmission Medium,  IET 
Optoelectron., vol. 3, pp. 197–206, 2009 
[6] 
A. Malekmohammadi, A. F. Abas, M. K. Abdullah, G. A. 
Mahdiraji, M. Mokhtar, M. F. A. Rasid, Absolute Polar Duty 
Cycle Division Multiplexing over Wave Length Division 
Multiplexing System, Optics Communications, vol. 282, pp. 4233-
4241, 2009 
[7] 
M. I. Hayee, M. C. Cardakli, A. B. Sahin, and A. E. Willner, 
Doubling of bandwidth utilization using two orthogonal 
polarizations and power unbalancing in a polarization-division-
multiplexing scheme, IEEE Photon.Technol. Lett., vol. 13, pp. 
881–883,  2001 
[8] 
S. Bhandare, D. Sandel, B. Milivojevic, A. Hidayat, A. A. Fauzi, 
H. Zhang, S. K. Ibrahim, F. Wust, and R. Noe, 5.94-Tb/s 1.49-
b/s/Hz (40 x 2 x 2 x 40 Gb/s) RZ-DQPSK polarization-division 
multiplex C-band transmission over 324 km, IEEE Photon. 
Technol. Lett. vol. 17, pp. 914-916 , 2005 
[9] 
P. Winzer and R. Jean, Advance modulation formats for high-
capacity optical transport networks, J. Lightwave Technol. vol 24 
pp.4711–4728, 2006 
[10] H. Kim and R. J. Essiambre, Transmission of 8 × 20 Gb/s DQPSK 
signals over 310-km SMF with 0.8-b/s/Hz spectral efficiency, 
IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 15, pp. 769–771,  2003. 
[11] C. Xie, I. Kang, A. H. Gnauck, L. Moller, L. F. Mollenauer, and A. 
R. Grant, Suppression of intrachannel nonlinear effects with 
alternate-polarization formats, J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 22, no. 3, 
pp. 806–812, 2004. 
 
212
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

