CobCel: Distributed and Collaborative Sensing of Cellular Phone Coverage
Using Google Android
Jonathan Pino and Jorge E. Pezoa
Electrical Engineering Department and The Center for Optics and Photonics
Universidad de Concepci´on, Concepci´on, Chile
Email: {jonpino,jpezoa}@udec.cl
Abstract—This paper presents CobCel, a prototype Android
application for measuring, in a distributed and collaborative
manner, the cellular coverage as perceived by the users of mo-
bile devices. Unlike specialized cellular coverage tests, CobCel
samples the received signal strength indication (RSSI) using
smartphones operated by their own users. The sensed RSSI
is supplied with the geographical location of the device, and
this supplemented information is next transmitted to a server
which aggregates the collaboratively sensed data and displays a
historical cellular coverage map as perceived by the cellphone
users. Data collected by CobCel is intended to be used not
only to report cellular coverage, but also to create open-source
databases of cellular coverage and end-users mobility patterns.
Further, it has been noticed after analyzing the data that real-
world RSSI samples seems to follow a heavy-tail law instead
of the chi-squared distribution usually assumed in theory.
Keywords-Distributed Sensing; RSSI; Collaborative Sensing;
Google Android
I. INTRODUCTION
Cellular networks are nowadays extensively used to pro-
vide voice and data services. The major concern of cellular
service providers is supplying a high quality service to
their customers. The aforementioned quality-of-service is
primarily assessed by measuring cellular network coverage
using standard tests and specialized equipment [1]. Lately,
customers, which are always concerned about obtaining the
quality-of-service they are paying for, have taken the matter
(literally) in their own hands and exploited the capabilities
of modern smartphones to conduct their own assessment
of the cellular coverage. Examples of such efforts are the
website CellReception [2] and applications like Sensorly and
OpenSignalMaps [3], [4].
CobCel is yet another application for collaboratively mea-
suring the cellular coverage of cellphone systems. CobCel is
a prototype Android application that differs from specialized
cellular coverage tests in several ways. First, specialized test
use expensive equipment to take samples of the received
signal strength indication (RSSI) [5] CobCel instead uses
inexpensive smartphones as sensors. Second, specialized test
take data on the streets from a moving or ﬁxed vehicle
[5], while CobCel collects samples of the RSSI not only
on the streets, but also at any location a user of a mobile
phone may visit during the day such as buildings, elevators,
shopping malls, etc. Third, during drive-tests, antennas are
usually either outside of the vehicle or inside of the vehicle
at a place where occlusions can be reduced [5]. CobCel is
an end-user application which no requires special attention
from the user, hence, samples of the RSSI are typically taken
from users’ pockets, bags, purses, etc. Lastly, drive tests
normally conduct measurements using pre-established routes
and places [5]. Since CobCel takes samples from several
users at any time in a collaborative manner, the geographical
and temporal diversity achieved by the samples of the RSSI
is large, thereby creating a well-representative data pool of
the cellphone coverage. Because of this geographical and
temporal diversity, data collected by means of CobCel is
intended to be used not only to assess and report cellular
coverage, but also to create an open-source database of
cellular coverage and end-users mobility patterns.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
present related work on the subject. In Section III, we
describe the design of the CobCel application. Section IV
presents results. Our conclusions are given in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
Among all the applications available to measure the
cellular coverage, Sensorly [3], and OpenSignalMaps [4] are
the most popular. These applications are of special interest
to this work because they serve the same purpose as CobCel.
Sensorly is an Android-based application and a website aim-
ing to help cellular phone operators to improve their network
quality [3]. Sensorly collects, processes, and displays end-
user supplied measurements of the signal quality of 4G
[6], CDMA [7], GSM [7], and WiFi [8] networks from
all over the world, thereby providing “a unique perspective
on network experience as perceived by real life users”
[3]. Sensorly provides to its users free maps on both the
Android Market and the Internet. Unlike CobCel, Sensorly
provides as well information on the network speed, the cause
of dropped calls, and means to compare different service
providers. Similarly, the software OpenSignalMaps, devel-
oped by Staircase 3 Inc., has built a database of cell phone
towers, cell phone RSSI, and Wi-Fi access points from all
over the world. Data is sensed collectively by the end-users
running OpenSignalMaps’ Android application [4]. As in
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

the case of Sensorly, OpenSignalMaps shows at its website
the collected data and plots also heat maps exhibiting the
strength of the received signal at any particular area. Some
of the unique features of OpenSignalMaps are the display
of the signal direction and the display of radar views of
cell towers and Wi-Fi routers. It must be commented that
both applications, Sensorly and OpenSignalMaps, take care
of privacy issues, and aim to save processing power and
battery. CobCel differs from any other application is that
the data collected is intended to be used not only to assess
and report cellular coverage, but also to create an open-
source database of cellular coverage and end-users mobility
patterns.
III. APPLICATION DESIGN
Overview. CobCel exploits the standard functions sup-
plied by Google Android to read cellphone’s RSSI. In addi-
tion, and to provide a fairly accurate geographical location
for the measurements, GPS information is also collected.
Once the RSSI is sensed, a ﬁxed-size data packet, which
contains additional information such as time, local area code
(LAC), and mobile network code (MNC), is created and
transmitted to a server which aggregates the sensed data and
displays a historical cellular coverage map as perceived by
the cellphone users. CobCel and its associated visualization
system is an open-source effort which exploits both Google’s
software tools and MySQL [9] to yield a distributed sensing
platform which allows to measure and display the RSSI at
any geographical location. Figure 1(a) depicts the overview
of the CobCel and its storage and display platform.
Requirements. In developing CobCel, the following re-
quirements have been considered: (i) the operating system
must be Android 2.2 for compatibility; (ii) a GPS locator
must be available to accurately locate the RSSI samples; (iii)
the smartphone must be able to query the LAC, the MNC,
and the cellular tower ID, to properly store and display cel-
lular network information; (iv) the use of CPU, storage, and
batteries must be scarce; and (v) the anonymity of the sensed
data must be guaranteed. The last requirement is achieved by
never storing or sending smartphone’s sensible information
such as the international mobile equipment identity (IMEI).
Also, the user must be capable of adjusting the following
parameters: the minimum time between consecutive sam-
ples, the minimum distance between consecutive samples,
and enabling/disabling the energy savings policy (ESP).
Battery savings. The following means have been pro-
vided in CobCel to save batteries. First, the type of com-
munication to be used by the smartphone prior to transfer
the sensed data. According to [10], a Wi-Fi connection
consumes less power than a cellular data connection; we
have prioritized the use of a Wi-Fi connection over cellular
data. Second, due to the sensed data is not time-sensitive,
an ESP that delays the transmission of the sensed data until
the smartphone is connected to a Wi-Fi network has been
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: (a) Overview of the CobCel application and its storage
and display platform. (b) CobCel’s ﬂow diagram.
implemented. Third, and also to provide the user a means
to adjust the amount of data to be sensed and transmitted,
we have included in CobCel parameters for selecting the
sampling time and distance of the application.
Application’s state deﬁnition. According to the modes
of operation of a smartphone, the battery savings policy, and
the application requirements, the following states have been
deﬁned for the CobCel application. State 1: the smartphone
has cellular coverage, data service, and the ESP is disabled.
State 2: the smartphone has cellular coverage, data service,
and the ESP is enabled. State 3: the smartphone has cellular
coverage yet no data service, and the ESP is either enabled or
disabled. State 4: the smartphone has no cellular coverage.
State 5: the smartphone is in airplane mode or any other
mode where RSSI cannot be sampled.
All the aforementioned application states and require-
ments, as well as the energy constraints, have been con-
sidered in the design of CobCel’s work ﬂow, which has
depicted in Fig. 1(b). The most relevant steps in the ap-
plication work ﬂow are detailed next. Once the application
is executed the state of the smartphone is determined. If
the smartphone is in state 1, 2, or 3, the RSSI is sampled
using the function getSystemService(). Clearly, for
the other two states, the RSSI cannot be retrieved. Simul-
taneously, and if the smartphone is in state 1, 2, or 3,
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

the geographical location of the device is acquired using
Android’s class LocationListener and the function
requestLocationUpdates(). Next, if the RSSI was
sampled, CobCel checks if both the minimum time and the
minimum distance criterion between consecutive samples
has been fulﬁlled to store the sampled RSSI value. Finally,
CobCel checks if the ESP is disabled, and if it does, it sends
the data prioritizing the use of a Wi-Fi connection over a
cellular data service. Otherwise, CobCel follows the ESP
and delays the transmission of the sensed RSSI data until
the smartphone is connected to a Wi-Fi network.
IV. RESULTS
The CobCel application is available at the Google Play
store [11]. To date, the application has been installed more
than 5,000 times and data from several countries has been
collected in our database. Figure 2(a) shows a sample map of
the cellphone coverage in Concepci´on, Chile. We comment
that date and time information are also transmitted with
the RSSI and geographical position samples. Thus, we note
that, with this spatial and temporal information, we may
indeed use CobCel’s sampled data to generate an open-
source database of actual end-used mobility. As an example
of this added feature, we comment that the map in Fig. 2(a)
does correspond to a sample mobility test of an Android
user in downtown Concepci´on.
Lastly and to show the potential of CobCel in generating
an open-source database of cellular coverage, we ﬁtted an
empirical distribution for the RSSI and compared it to its
theoretical distribution. According to most theoreticians, the
RSSI in open areas follows closely a chi-squared distribution
[7]. The ﬁtted and theoretical distribution for the RSSI are
shown in Fig. 2(b). The ﬁtted distribution was constructed
by pooling data from several users connected to the same
cellular tower, and due to the non-Gaussian nature of the
data, we employed Doane’s formula to determine the number
of data bins. From Fig. 2(b) we conclude that real-world data
seems to follow a heavy-tail law instead of a chi-squared.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
We presented CobCel, a prototype application for measur-
ing, in a distributed and collaborative manner, the cellular
coverage as perceived by the users of mobile devices. By
sampling the RSSI and the geographical location of a mobile
device, historical maps of cellular coverage can be displayed
allowing the users to assess the service supplied by different
service providers. Data collected by CobCel is intended to
be used not only to report and assess cellular coverage, but
also to create open-source databases of cellular coverage
and end-users mobility patterns. The application is available
for testing at Google Play and appears to be a useful tool
for creating open-source databases of cellular coverage and
end-users mobility patterns.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2: (a) Sample map of the cellphone coverage in Con-
cepci´on, Chile. (b) Fitted and theoretical RSSI curves.
As a future work, we will merge the RSSI measurements
with speed, reliability, and availability measurements and we
will conduct surveys with the goal of measure the quality of
experience of the users in regards to their service providers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the support of Fondecyt Project
11110078 and Basal Project FB024.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Kostanic, N. Mijatovic, and S. Vest, “Measurement based
qos comparison of cellular communication networks,” in
IEEE Int. Workshop on Com. Quality & Reliability, 2009.
[2] Mobiledia,
“Cell
reception,”
Internet:
http://www.cellreception.com/,
2002,
[Online;
retrieved:
September 2012].
[3] Sensorly,
“Coverage
Maps
Sensorly,”
Internet:
http://www.sensorly.com/,
2011,
[Online;
retrieved:
September 2012].
[4] Staircase 3 Inc., “OpenSignalMaps - Cell Phone Tower and
Signal Heat Maps,” Internet: http://opensignalmaps.com/,,
2012, [Online; retrieved: September 2012].
[5] W. Lee, Mobile Communications Eng.
McGraw-Hill, 1982.
[6] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Skold, 4G: LTE/LTE-
Advanced for Mobile Broadband.
Academic Press, 2011.
[7] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Commu-
nications.
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[8] C. Smith and J. Meyer, 3G Wireless with 802.16 and 802.11:
WiMAX and WiFi.
McGraw-Hill, 2011.
[9] Oracle, “MySQL,” Internet: http://www.mysql.com, 2012,
[Online; retrieved: September 2012].
[10] Google Inc., “Coding for Life–Battery Life, That Is,” Inter-
net: http://www.google.com/events/io/2009/sessions/Coding-
LifeBatteryLife.html, 2009, [Online; retrieved: September
2012].
[11] J. Pino and J. E. Pezoa, “CobCel: Cobertura Celular,” Internet:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=itux.cobertura.cl,
2012, [Online; retrieved: September 2012].
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

