On Throughput Performance and its Enhancement in Mobile
Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs)
Mouna Abdelmoumen, Mariem Ayedi
and Mounir Frikha
Sup’com
Ariana, Tunisia
Email: {mouna.abdelmoumen, ayedi.mariem, m.frikha}@supcom.rnu.tn
Tijani Chahed
Institut Mines-Telecom; Telecom SudParis
Paris, France
Email: tijani.chahed@telecocm-sudparis.eu
Abstract—In this work, we investigate the performance of
Mobile Ad Hoc networks (MANETs) in terms of the throughput
achieved in transferring packets from source to destination. First,
we study the relationship between mobility and routing and
deﬁne metrics that enable us to derive an analytical expression
for the throughput. Secondly, we validate this expression, via
simulations, as a function of several mobility patterns, as well
as routing protocols, for various nodes speeds. Eventually, we
propose the use of additional ﬁxed relays so as to enhance the
throughput performance in case of ill-behaved mobility schemes.
Keywords—MANETs;
mobility
models;
routing
protocols;
throughput model; additional relay proposal.
I. INTRODUCTION
Data trafﬁc transfer in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs)
requires the existence of a path between source and destina-
tion. This path is established based on the use of intermediate
nodes which act as relays. As these nodes are mobile, network
connectivity can change at any time. And so, the performance
of the network, in terms of throughput for instance, is largely
dependent on the varying topology of the network, which itself
depends on the nodes mobility pattern, as well as the used
routing protocol.
Several works studied the impact of mobility on MANET
performance. For instance, Grossglauser and Tse [1] showed
that the mobility of nodes increases the throughput between
source and destination. N. Sadagopan, F. Bai, B. Krishna-
machari and A. Helmy [2] deﬁned a connectivity-oriented
metric, namely path duration, to analyse the effect of mobility
on the connectivity graph between the mobile nodes. They
developed a simple ﬁrst-order model that showed that the
throughput is in a strong linear relationship with the reciprocal
of the average path duration. As of its relationship to routing,
the same study showed how mobility impacts the performance
of reactive routing protocols in MANETs.
Despite the fact that these works focused on the relationship
between mobility and MANETs performance, they did not
give explicit details on the relationship between mobility and
routing in this context. In the present work, we focus on this
relationship between mobility and routing, and deﬁne mobility
and routing oriented metrics, namely mobility and routing path
durations and path absence durations, which would enable
us to model the throughput achieved in transferring packets
between source and destination. This model will be next val-
idated through simulations by considering different mobility
patterns and routing protocols. Eventually, and in the case of
poor throughput performance due to network fragmentation,
we propose a new solution based on the deployment of
additional ﬁxed relay nodes that would maintain mobility and
routing paths for longer and hence enhance the overall network
performance.
The remainder of this work is organized as follows. In
Section II, we focus on the relationship between mobility
and routing and derive an expression for the throughput based
on mobility and routing oriented metrics. In Section III, we
evaluate these metrics and validate our throughput model
by means of comparison between analytical and simulation
results. In Section IV, we present our proposal for additional
ﬁxed relay nodes deployment and quantify its impact on the
network performance. Section V concludes the paper.
II. MODEL
In order to study the network performance, in terms of
throughput, one needs to characterise the paths established
between the source and destination. In order to do so, we
ﬁrst focus on the relationship between mobility and routing.
A. Mobility-Routing Relationship
When two nodes i and j come within each other commu-
nication range, a so-called mobility link, denoted by Lm(i, j),
is established. The path between the source and destination is
a succession of such links, whose creation/destruction is func-
tion of nodes encounters/dis-encounters, and hence mobility.
Once this mobility-based path is established between the
source and destination, and before the effective transfer of
information between them, the routing protocol exchanges
some information, such as routing table update, route re-
quest/response, etc, so as to enable the source and destination
nodes to learn about the existence of a path between them. A
routing link between nodes i and j, denoted by Lr(i, j), will
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 1. Mobility-Routing relationship.
thus be created on top of the mobility link, Lm(i, j). Figure
1 illustrates this situation.
Both mobility and routing paths are composed of time-
varying sub-, or unitary, paths relating successive nodes be-
tween source s and destination d pairs.
The mobility and routing unitary paths, denoted by upm
and upr, respectively, between nodes s and d, are composed
of k − 1 consecutive mobility or routing links, respectively,
and are deﬁned in a similar fashion as upa(s, d, tc, tv) =
{La(s, n1), ..., La(nk−2, d)}, where index a can be replaced
by m for mobility and r for routing. tc is the establishment or
discovery time of the mobility or routing unitary path, respec-
tively, and tv is the corresponding break or interruption time.
Also, we deﬁne ∀q, upaq(s, d) = upaq(s, d, tcq, tvq). Then, the
mobility and routing paths, denoted by Pm and Pr, respec-
tively, between nodes s and d, are composed of successive
unitary paths: Pa(s, d, tc, tv) = {upag(s, d), ..., upal(s, d)}.
Pa(s, d, tc, tv) is the mobility or routing path between s and
d established at time tc = tcg and interrupted at time tv = tvl
with ∀q ∈ [|g + 1, l|]; tcq ≃ tvq−1 or tcq − tvq−1 ≤ ε.
The absence of mobility, as well as routing paths APm and
APr, respectively, between s and d corresponds to the absence
of successive mobility and routing links between s and d for a
period of time larger than ε. So, we have, APa(s, d, ti, tf) =
(upai(s, d), upaf (s, d)) where tcf ≫ tvi.
B. Metrics
To quantify the mobility and routing paths, we deﬁne,
ﬁrst, the link duration, LDa(i, j, t), observed at time t, as
the longest time interval, [t, t′], during which La(i, j) exists.
Based on the work of N. Sadagopan et al. [2], we deﬁne the
mobility and routing path duration, PDa(s, d, t1, t2), which is
equal to:
X
upaq (s,d)∈Pa(s,d,tc,tv)
min
1≤h≤kq LDa(nh, nh+1, tcq)
(1)
where ∀ upaq(s, d); n1 = s, nkq = d and kq is the number of
nodes of the unitary path.
The duration of the path absence is simply given by:
APDa(s, d, ti, tf) = tf − ti
(2)
For an observation duration denoted by T = [tbegin, tend],
we deﬁne three sets. The ﬁrst set, denoted by Pa(s, d, T ),
contains all of the paths between s and d observed during T ;
{Paz(s, d) = Pa(s, d, tcz, tvz); tcz, tvz ∈ T, tcz ≤ tcz+1∀z ≫
0}. The second set, denoted by APa(s, d, T ), contains all
the absences of paths between s and d observed during
T ; {APaz(s, d) = APa(s, d, tiz, tfz); tiz, tfz
∈ T, tiz
≤
tiz+1∀z ≫ 0}. The third set, denoted by MPSD, contains all
source-destination pairs between which a mobility path will
be investigated.
For the observation duration T and for the MPSD set,
we derive the following average metrics. The average path
duration, PDa, is equal to :
P
(s,d)∈MPSD PDa(s, d)
Card(MPSD)
(3)
where PDa(s, d)
=
P
Paz (s,d)∈Pa(s,d,T ) P Daz (s,d)
Card(Pa(s,d,T ))
having
PDaz(s, d) = PDa(s, d, tcz, tvz) and where Card is the
number of elements in the set.
The average path absence duration, APDa, is equal to:
P
(s,d)∈MPSD APDa(s, d)
Card(MPSD)
(4)
where APDa(s, d) =
P
APaz (s,d)∈APa(s,d,T ) AP Daz (s,d)
Card(APa(s,d,T ))
having
APDaz(s, d) = APDa(s, d, tiz, tfz).
C. Throughput Model
We assume a full buffer case wherein source s has con-
tinuously data to transfer to destination d during observation
duration T at transmitting rate (trafﬁc rate) rtraffic. When
the mobility path between s and d is established, the routing
path can be set on top of it and hence data transfer can take
place. As the routing path constitutes the effective opportunity
to exchange data between source and destination nodes, the
transfer of data is performed only during the routing path
period represented by PDr(s, d) and is interrupted during the
path absence duration accounted for by APDr(s, d). Figure 2
illustrates this situation.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 2. Relationship between the routing level and the packet transfer.
Hence, for the source-destination pair (s, d), the observation
duration T is divided as follows:
T = TTransfer + TNoTransfer
(5)
where TTransfer and TNoTransfer are the total durations during
which a data transfer takes place and is interrupted, respec-
tively.
Following Figure 2, we have:
TNoTransfer = APDr(s, d) ∗ fr(s, d) ∗ T
(6)
where fr(s, d) is the routing path discovery frequency which
is equal to
1
P Dr(s,d)+AP Dr(s,d). Hence, (6) becomes:
TNoTransfer =
APDr(s, d)
PDr(s, d) + APDr(s, d)
∗ T
(7)
Based on (5) and (7), we obtain:
TTransfer = (1 −
APDr(s, d)
PDr(s, d) + APDr(s, d)
) ∗ T
(8)
Now, we suppose that the total quantity of information
transfered between nodes s and d during T is D(s, d).
The connection throughput, denoted by T h(s, d), is equal to
D(s,d)
T
. And so,
T h(s, d) = (1 −
APDr(s, d)
PDr(s, d) + APDr(s, d)
) ∗ D(s, d)
TTransfer
(9)
In addition, we assume that the packet reception rate,
denoted by rrecp(s, d), is different from the packet generation
rate, denoted by rgen(s, d). This difference is due to many
factors such as the number of links of the routing path, the
transmission conditions, the inter-frame waiting times, as well
as the routing path repair duration. Hence, we have:
D(s, d)
TTransfer
= rgen(s, d)
rrecp(s, d) ∗ rtraffic
(10)
The connection throughput is thus equal to:
(1 −
APDr(s, d)
PDr(s, d) + APDr(s, d)
) ∗ rgen(s, d)
rrecp(s, d) ∗ rtraffic (11)
III. MODEL VALIDATION AND PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate our metrics and throughput
model using simulations.
A. Simulation Settings
In order to evaluate the mobility and routing metrics and
to validate our connection, throughput model, we consider the
following mobility models, routing protocols and network set-
tings. For the mobility models, we have chosen the following
widely-used mobility patterns:
• Random Way Point (RWP), as described by D.B. Johnson
and D. A. Maltz [3], is the most widely used mobility
model for which the node movement is free of restric-
tions, both temporal and spatial;
• Smooth Random Mobility Model (SRMM), deﬁned by
C. Bettstetter [4], enhances RWP by adding a temporal
dependency where speed is changed incrementally in a
smooth fashion;
• Graph Based Mobility Model (GBMM) which was pre-
sented by J. Tian, J. Hahner, C. Becker, I. Stepanov and
K. Rothermel [5] performs as RWP, but it constrains the
node movement to a connected graph;
• Manhattan Mobility Model (MMM), evoked by F. Bai, N.
Sadagopan and A. Helmy [6], includes all dependencies.
It makes use of a map to conﬁne movement to lanes.
Moreover, nodes move according to a temporal correla-
tion. The nodes speed is constrained by the speed of the
front node in the same lane.
For RWP and SRMM mobility models, the value of the
pause time is randomly chosen between 10s and 60s. In
addition, we use the maps shown in Figures 3 (a) and (b)
for GBMM and MMM, respectively.
In addition, we consider the following widely referenced
routing protocols:
• Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) [7] is a reactive routing
protocol, where routes are created on demand using two
mechanisms: route discovery to ﬁnd routes and route
maintenance to preserve them. It is based on source
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 4. Average path durations (a) and average path absence durations (b) function of mobility models, nodes speed and routing protocols.
Fig. 3. Maps used for GBMM (a) and MMM (b)
routing whereby all the routing information is maintained
and continually updated at mobile nodes;
• Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV) [8] works
similarly to DSR using route discovery and maintenance
mechanisms. It, however, uses hop by hop routing;
• Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) [9] is a proactive
routing protocol, where the information about the network
topology is exchanged by control packets (Hello mes-
sages). OLSR makes use of Multi-Point Relays (MPR)
nodes to retransmit broadcast messages and hence reduce
control packets.
We run simulations over NS-2 (Network Simulator version
2). Simulation duration is taken to be 1000s. Speeds of 1m/s
and 20m/s (equal to 3,6km/h and 72km/h, respectively) are
used to mimic the mobility of both pedestrians (low speed)
and cars (high speed). Transmission ranges are equal to 100m.
The trafﬁc rate is 32kbits/s and the data packets size is
96Bytes. Trafﬁc is generated during all simulation duration.
So, let the set of the source-destination pairs, MPSD, be
{(i, i + 20) ∀i ∈ [1, N]} where N is the number of nodes.
We use the number of nodes and the simulation area of
10 and 200m×200m, respectively to simulate a high nodes
connectivity.
Finally, we generate 20 mobility scenarios for RWP, SRMM,
GBMM and MMM based on [10], [11] and [12] tools,
respectively.
B. Mobility and Routing Metrics Results
Figure 4 shows the average path durations and the average
path absence durations as a function of nodes speed for the
different mobility models and routing protocols stated above.
First, we observe that both metrics decrease as speed in-
creases for all mobility models and routing protocols. In effect,
when the nodes speed increases, paths are established and
broken more frequently and hence the path and absence of path
durations decrease. In addition, Figure 4 shows that for high
nodes speed, the best values for the metrics are obtained for
MMM followed by GBMM, RWP and ﬁnally SRMM. When
the nodes speed increases, the mobility models performance
order changes and becomes GBMM, RWP, SRMM and MMM.
The reasons for these results are the following. First, the
performance of MMM is due to the map shown in Figure 3(b)
where links are only formed if nodes move close to each other
in the same or opposite lanes or at intersections which are
less probable situation when the nodes speed is high. As a
consequence, the network fragmentation occurs which means
that some nodes become not reachable by other nodes of
the network which leads to large absence of path duration
and small path duration. In addition, the performance of
random mobility models RWP and SRMM are similar as they
allow nodes to move in all directions, and so, links can be
formed more frequently than for the MMM model. The good
performance of GBMM is due to the fact that it is a mix
between restricted and random mobility models. In effect,
nodes positions are ﬁxed on the graph as shown in Figure 3(a)
and the nodes destination positions are randomly chosen. As
a consequence, the probability of link and path establishment
is high whatever the network parameters are.
Moreover, we observe that the mobility path durations are
larger than the routing ones and, on the contrary, the absence of
routing path durations are larger than the mobility ones for all
mobility models and nodes speed. The reason is that mobility
paths persist more and are less sensitive to interruptions than
the routing ones.
Finally, we observe that AODV is the worst routing protocol
as it has the lowest values of path durations and largest
absence of path durations. The best routing protocol for such
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 5. Packet reception rate (a) and connection throughput (b) function of mobility models, nodes speed and routing protocols.
conﬁguration is DSR. As OLSR is a proactive protocol, at
each topology modiﬁcation and/or periodically, messages are
broadcasted to update network information. This fact increases
the knowledge about the validity of paths. However, as our
network has a high nodes connectivity, less updates are made
which allows OLSR to be more efﬁcient. DSR and AODV are
reactive, and so, latencies characterize the routes discovery
mechanism. Due to the maintenance mechanism however,
path interruptions can be quickly detected. In particular, DSR
uses MAC notiﬁcation to detect link failure and AODV uses
periodic Hello messages which are broadcasted each 2s. And
hence, DSR failure detection mechanism is more efﬁcient than
AODV’s. As a result, DSR performs better.
C. Throughput Results
Figure 5 shows the average packet reception rate and
connection throughput as a function of nodes speed for the
different mobility models and routing protocols obtained from
the analytical model (see 11) and from the simulations.
First, we observe that, in almost all cases, packet reception
rate is close to packet generation rate. The reason is that
as shown for the routing metrics, discovered paths last a
longer period of time before breaking. This allows a constant
reception rate of packets at the destination. In addition, we
observe from Figure 5(b) that the throughput performance
follows the mobility and routing metrics as explained above.
Moreover, as can be seen from Figure 5(b) throughput under
GBMM is the largest among all routing protocols. AODV
and DSR work better than OLSR. Those observations are
due to the results obtained for mobility and routing metrics
discussed above. Furthermore, we observe that throughput
reaches 32kbit/s peak and it is low for MMM at high speed.
These performances follow, again, the routing metrics: when
the routing path duration is high compared to the absence
path duration, the network performance is at its best. When
the nodes speed decreases, the MMM mobility model works
bad as the network fragmentation occurs.
Last, but not least, we observe that our analytical connection
throughput model follows closely the values obtained by
simulations, as shown in Figure 5(b).
IV. PROPOSAL FOR ENHANCING THROUGHPUT
PERFORMANCE
As shown in the previous section, for MMM at high speed,
when network fragmentation is frequent, paths cannot be avail-
able for a large duration and the network performs poorly. On
the contrary, when mobility enables more path establishment
opportunities, as in the case of GBMM, throughput achieves a
better performance. M. Abdelmoumen, I. Arfaoui, M. Frikha
and T. Chahed [13] proposed the use of additional ﬁxed relay
nodes so as to improve the network performance by increasing
the opportunities of establishing paths and preserving them.
We next reproduce its architecture and its impact on enhancing
throughput performance for the case of MMM mobility model.
A. Number and Position of Additional Relays
The number of these additional relay nodes must be large
enough so as to improve the network performance, but must
not exceed a certain limit so as not to overload the network.
By trial and error, we ﬁx this number to around 20% of the
total number of nodes in the network.
As of their positions, they depend on the (instantaneous)
topology of the network. For the special case of MMM model
at high speed, as the transmission range of the nodes is
sufﬁciently large compared to the simulation area (100m and
200m×200m, respectively) and with reference to the MMM
map (see Figure 3(b)), we choose to ﬁx relay nodes at the
positions shown in Figure 6, so as to cover all possible nodes
positions and to have a continuous transmission link during
the simulation duration.
B. Performance of Proposal
Figures 7 and 8 show the mobility and routing metrics and
the average connection throughput, respectively, before and
after the use of the additional relay nodes. For comparison,
we also show the old values of the studied metrics.
As shown in Figure 7, the mobility path duration increases
and the absence of mobility path duration decreases a little
with the use of the additional relay nodes. In effect, at high
nodes speed, the mobility and routing metrics do not yield a
large improvement because nodes move fast enough to have
a high connection/disconnection frequency despite of the use
of the ﬁxed relay nodes.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 6. Relay nodes position for MMM at high speed.
Fig. 7. Average path durations (a) and average of the path absence durations
(b) for MMM at high speed without and with ﬁxed relay nodes.
As of throughput, Figure 8 shows that throughput increases
with the use of the ﬁxed relay nodes for all mobility models,
routing protocols and nodes connectivity. The reason is that
packets are lost in smaller number because the absence routing
path duration is lower than without the use of the ﬁxed relay
nodes. In addition, as explained in the previous section, DSR
and AODV work better than OLSR.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we studied the relationship between mobility,
routing and MANETs network performance, notably in terms
of throughput. We speciﬁcally proposed a new model for
throughput based on metrics for mobility and routing and
validated it in comparison to simulations for various network
settings, mobility patterns and routing protocols.
In the case of poor performance, mainly due to network
fragmentation, we proposed, and optimized, the use of addi-
tional ﬁxed relay nodes which would maintain the overall net-
work connectivity and hence improve the overall throughput
performance.
As a future work, we intend to make our study more
practical by applying it to a real network.
Fig. 8. Network throughput for MMM at high nodes speed without and with
ﬁxed relay nodes.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Grossglauser and D. Tse, ”Mobility increases the capacity of ad hoc
wireless networks”, IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., Aug. 2002, vol. 10, no. 4,
pp. 477-486 .
[2] N. Sadagopan, F. Bai, B. Krishnamachari and A. Helmy, ”PATHS:
analysis of path duration statistics and their impact on reactive MANET
routing protocols”, Proc. ACM MobiHoc, Jun. 2003, pp. 245-256.
[3] D.B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, ”Dynamic source routing in ad hoc
wireless networks”, In Mobile Computing, The Kluwer International Series
in Engineering and Computer Science Volume 353, 1996, pp. 153-181
[4] C. Bettstetter, ”Mobility modeling in wireless networks: categorization,
smooth movement and border effects”, SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Com-
mun. Rev., Jul. 2001, pp. 55-66.
[5] J. Tian, J. Hahner, C. Becker, I. Stepanov and K. Rothermel, ”Graph-
based mobility model for mobile ad hoc network simulation”, SS’02, San
Diego, Apr. 2002, pp. 337-344.
[6] F. Bai, N. Sadagopan and A. Helmy, ”IMPORTANT: a framework to
systematically analyze the impact of mobility on performance of routing
protocols for adhoc networks”, INFOCOM ’03, San Francisco, Mar.-Apr.
2003, pp. 825-835 .
[7] D. Johnson, Y. Hu and D. Maltz, ”The Dynamic Source Routing Protocol
(DSR) for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for IPv4”, RFC 4728 Experimental,
Feb. 2007.
[8] C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer and S. Das, ”Ad hoc On-Demand Distance
Vector (AODV) Routing”, RFC 3561 Experimental, Jul. 2003.
[9] T. Clauser and P. Jacquet, ”Optimized link State Routing Protocol
(OLSR)”, RFC 3626 Experimental, Oct. 2003.
[10] R. Baumann, F. Legendre and P.Sommer, ”Generic mobility simulation
framework (GMSF)” , Mobility Model,08 : Proceeding of the 1st ACM
SIGMOBILE workshop on Mobility models, Hongkong, China, May.
2008, pp. 49-56.
[11] The
CANU
Mobility
Simulation
Environment
(CanuMobiSim)
[http://canu.informatik.uni-stuttgart.de/mobisim/: Aug. 2014]
[12] The mobility tool generators [http://nile.cise.uﬂ.edu/important/software.htm:
Jun. 2013]
[13] M. Abdelmoumen, I. Arfaoui, M. Frikha and T. Chahed, ”On the
performance of MANETs under different mobility patterns and routing
protocols and its improvement based on ﬁxed relay nodes”, NTMS,
Istanbul, May. 2012, pp. 1-5.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

