Multi-Dimensional Detection in Future Hyper-Scale Datacenters 
Santiago Echeverri-Chacón 
Department of Photonics Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark  
 
Mellanox Technologies Denmark ApS  
4000 Roskilde, Denmark  
e-mail: santiagoe@mellanox.com 
Abstract— Extraordinary demand of internet services is 
challenging the growth capacity of datacenters and their 
networks. In particular, interconnect suppliers will need to 
explore radical solutions in order to keep up with bandwidth 
expectations from service providers. In this paper, we discuss 
key paths towards multi-dimensional detection in interconnect 
channels that will be relevant for hyper-scale datacenters. The 
emphasis is on highlighting challenges and opportunities of 
receiver architectures that have recently been pitched to 
replace intensity modulation and direct detection in the 
datacenter interconnect scenario.  
Keywords- Fiber optics; Optical communications; Datacenter 
interconnection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There is a strong demand for delivering interconnect 
solutions for next-generation hyper-scale datacentre inter-
connects that support 400 Gb/s and beyond [1]. Technologies 
that support higher symbol rates per wavelength channel will 
be critical to connect bigger campuses and regional clusters 
demanding more efficiency in fibre deployment.  
A typical datacentre network is shown in Figure 1. Data 
Centre Interconnects (DCI), provide connectivity for 
networking, storage and compute resources inside (intra-DC) 
or between (inter-DC) datacentres and are based on optical 
or copper channels. Passive copper cables also known as 
Direct-Attach-Copper (DAC) are still the most effective 
solution for links of < 5 m which are used to connect servers 
to the Top-of-Rack (ToR) switch. Connections from the 
ToR switch to other layers of the network, as well as all 
other DCIs are based on optical signalling. Both multimode 
(MMF) [2] and single mode (SMF) [3] optical fibres are 
used. Transceivers for use with MMFs have arrays of 
Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers (VCSELs) and are 
commonly used for driving channels of lengths within 
5 - 100 m linking switches within a room. The vertical 
design of VCSELs allows them to be produced, tested and 
packaged at a low cost, while their circular cavity permits 
low insertion loss when coupling to the core of MMFs. On 
the other hand, SMF solutions require edge emitting lasers 
and optical assemblies tailored to couple light to a fibre with 
a much smaller core. Excitation of a single mode enables 
communications over longer fibre spans and opens the door 
to Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM) as a technique 
to parallelize data transmission. Within the datacentre, trans-
ceivers for links between a hundred meters and 2 km are 
increasingly implemented by photonic integrated circuits 
coupled to arrays of Parallel Single Mode Fibre (PSM4).  
 
Figure 1. Datacentre architecture and interconnect solutions for inter- and 
intra-data centre links. 
Longer reach solutions connecting campuses (2-80 km) 
use externally modulated lasers and optical elements for 
WDM, which are hosted inside hermetically-sealed trans-
mitter and receiver optical sub-assemblies.  
Optical interconnects below 80 km use Intensity Modula-
tion and Direct Detection (IM/DD) of optical signals and are 
so far dominated by the Non-Return to Zero (NRZ) modula-
tion format. Nevertheless, the industry is rapidly migrating 
from NRZ to Multilevel Pulse-Amplitude Modulation 
(M-PAM), which has higher Spectral Efficiency (SE) [4][5]. 
The format with 4 levels, PAM4, is the first to gain broad 
support and will most likely become and remain dominant in 
the short term. When looking further ahead in time, over-
coming channel impairments on links above 10 km will 
become difficult without signal processing techniques that 
are comparable in complexity to more efficient alternatives. 
Other advanced modulation formats achieve better 
sensitivity and SE than PAM4 by taking advantage of higher 
dimensionality and can become increasingly attractive to 
increase bitrates in the future, without adding extra channels 
in the form of wavelengths or fibres. However, these 
advantages 
require 
receiver 
architectures 
that 
are 
significantly more complex than in DD. 
This paper reviews some of the paths towards imple-
menting multi-dimensional receiver solutions in DCI. This 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

vision is inspired by the current transition between IM/DD 
and coherent detection in the metro scenario enabled by 
novel coherent pluggable transceivers, such as the 100 Gb/s 
(C) Form-Factor Pluggable version 2 (CFP2) [6].  
The manuscript is organized in the following manner: In 
Section 2 the need for architectures that overcome the 
limitations of IM/DD in our scenario is stated, and a brief 
overview of the selection of candidate approaches is 
presented. Section 3 provides a review of each receiver 
architecture and highlights implementation challenges. 
Finally, the work is concluded in section 5. 
II. 
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATACENTER INTERCONNECTS 
The relatively low cost of adding fibres, and the advent 
of WDM has kept IM/DD solutions dominant in the DCI 
scenario; even though, bitrates per wavelength have 
remained unchanged at 25 Gb/s per lambda solutions. A 
possible explanation for the tendency towards multiplexing 
is the slow progress in the development of production-ready 
optical building blocks with high bandwidth, low noise and 
sufficient linearity. It is hinted that the transition to multi-
level signalling in the form of PAM4 at high symbol rates 
(50 GBd) will likely require Digital Signal Processing (DSP) 
to enable increasingly elaborate equalization techniques [7]. 
DSP will in turn bring power and heat dissipation issues that 
need to be resolved to fit the stringent specifications of next 
generation transceiver modules. In addition, there are limits 
to: the number of fibres, the fabrication tolerances of WDM, 
and the power needed to support multiple channels. These 
limits on symbol rate and spectrum will encourage bitrate 
increase by means of modulation formats that use other 
orthogonal dimensions for coding [8]. 
Well-known dimensions for coding in SMF channels 
include the phase and linear State of Polarization (SoP) of 
the optical field. Commercial coherent receivers detect the 
phase and amplitude of each SoP, and will be regarded here 
as able to decode in 4 orthogonal dimensions or “4D”. There 
is also interest in alternative receiver architectures capable to 
recover signals in 3D and 2D that may be a better fit for the 
specific conditions of DCIs.  
A. Overview of architectures 
Figure 2 presents a selection of multi-dimensional 
receiver architectures that can be pitched to bring 
multidimensional signalling in the DCI scenario. They are 
ordered by decreasing level of trade-off between complexity 
and spectral efficiency. Additionally, selected elements of 
each architecture have been coloured according to the level 
of uncertainty or risk needed to develop a mature solution. 
Red coloured blocks indicate a significant challenge, where 
either elements are still too complex, or unfit for the DCI 
requirements. Yellow coloured blocks indicate that there is a 
mature assessment of the limitations and evidence of strate-
gies to overcome them.  
We begin with a light-DSP version of the mainstream 
polarization division multiplexing intra-dyne coherent ap-
proach shown in Figure 2(a). The objective is to further tailor 
traditionally power-hungry optics and algorithms for the 
specific conditions of short reach communications.  
 
Figure 2. A selection of ordered multi-dimensional receiver architectures 
for future datacenter interconnects by decreasing complexity: (a) Intra-dyne 
digital coherent receiver. (b) Stokes vector receiver. (c) Homodyne 
coherent receiver and (d) self-homodyne differential receiver. 
Then, Figure 2(b) illustrates the basic architecture of 
Stokes Vector Receivers (SVR) [8] which demodulate 
signals encoded in the power (or Stokes) space. Signals 
modulated in the Stokes space are independent of the 
absolute phase of the carrier, but dependent on the relative 
phase and amplitude ratio between the vertical and horizontal 
polarization components [9][10].  
An SVR as shown here can demodulate signals encoded 
in up to three orthogonal dimensions, and achieve spectral 
efficiencies of up to 6 bits per symbol per wavelength. 
One can also consider technological developments that 
revive single-polarization architectures from early coherent 
demonstrations. Figure 2(c) represents homodyne coherent 
receivers where analog electronics are used to track varia-
tions in the phase of the carrier. Here, we have stressed the 
importance of including active polarization tracking.  
Finally, Figure 2(d) illustrates a concept of single polar-
ization coherent receiver that uses self-homodyne detection 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

and differential coding to achieve polarization-independent 
multi-dimensional signalling on the phase and amplitude. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES OF  ARCHITECTURES 
The objective of this section is to go through the architec-
tures that were briefly mentioned above and highlight some 
of the specific challenges and advantages of each. 
Given that photodiodes can detect only optical power, 
interferometric techniques are used to obtain the phase of a 
signal by analysing the effects on the intensity at the outputs 
of a phase diversity measurement where the modulated 
signal is mixed with a reference signal [11]. All Optical 
Front Ends (OFE) in Figure 2 share the building block 
known as a 90° hybrid used for optical mixing, but differ in 
the 
way 
in 
which 
information 
is 
extracted 
from 
measurements. Additionally, they all use some form of 
homodyne detection, meaning that signals at the input of 90° 
hybrids should strive to have the same frequency. Finally, a 
last critical condition for mixing is the control of the SoP. 
This is because most integrated optics elements are 
polarization dependent and received signals have an 
unknown SoP due to random birefringence in the fibre. 
Different approaches to deal with polarization control are 
shown before the 90° hybrids and will be mentioned in what 
follows. 
A. Intra-dyne digital coherent receivers  
The OFE in commercial coherent receiver architectures 
has remained unchanged in the form of the intra-dyne digital 
coherent receiver in Figure 2(a). It is referred to as intra-dyne 
because small variations in frequency and phase between the 
signal carrier and Local Oscillator (LO) are corrected using 
DSP. Powerful DSP Application Specific Integrated Circuits 
(ASICs) enabled not only algorithms for Carrier Recovery 
(CR) and channel impairment compensation, but also tech-
niques for digitally tracking the state of polarization. A trade-
off of coherent Polarization Division Multiplexing (PDM) is 
the doubling in complexity of the OFE. To extract phase 
information from independent polarizations, polarization 
beam splitters and rotators project the fields (signal and LO) 
into the known orthogonal basis of the 90° hybrids. The 
considerable number of elements, combined with the need of 
a LO has historically justified scepticism in short reach 
intra-dyne coherent solutions. 
The top-down approach for developing receivers like the 
one in Figure 2(a) for gradually shorter links is the one most 
favoured by the industry. Challenges are well known and 
there is consistent progress in reducing the power consump-
tion and size of optical, thermal and electronic components. 
The tradition inherited from the long haul encourages multi-
level modulation formats like 16 Quadrature Amplitude 
Modulation (QAM) or even 64-QAM for short reach to 
better use the channel capacity given a larger Signal-to-Noise 
Ratio (SNR) [12]. But this approach assumes keeping the 
DSP complexity and could be challenged by bottom-up 
implementations that focus on symbol rate and simplicity 
instead of channel capacity. 
 Photonic integration of optical components is critical for 
reducing the costs, size and power consumption of the 
optical frontend [13]. Silicon photonics in particular, 
promises receiver solutions with low loss, no need for her-
metic sealing, and can profit from the economics of scale and 
maturity of established CMOS foundries. In addition, 
advances in the supporting technologies of components, such 
as lasers, phase shifters and detectors, could further reduce 
the complexity of equalization and CR routines in the digital 
domain. 
The complexity of ASICs is dominated by algorithms for 
compensation of channel impairments, such as Chromatic 
Dispersion (CD) and Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD) 
that decrease in magnitude with shorter fibre lengths typical 
of the DCI scenario. It is conceivable that big reductions in 
complexity could be achieved by tailoring ASICs for the 
next frontier of coherent pluggable, on the condition of suffi-
cient demand of spectral efficiency in the datacentre. 
Moreover, ASICs have been following Moore’s law enabling 
×0.7 power savings per process node every two years [12]. A 
tailored solution for short reach could also loosen vertical 
resolution requirements on elements for Analog-to-Digital 
Conversion (ADC) and support implementations with simple 
constellations at a high symbol rate. 
B. Stokes vector receivers 
Modern Stokes vector receivers are developments of 
early attempts to implement PDM of IM/DD signals and are 
generally categorized as a form of direct detection. Direct 
detection approaches for PDM, including early versions of 
SVR, lost the race against coherent detection in the long 
haul when the opportunity to do linear digital processing on 
the later demonstrated its superiority for channel impairment 
compensation. However, there has been a revived interest in 
SVR [8]–[10] for optical channels that are too long for 
PAM4 and too short to justify intra-dyne coherent detection. 
These efforts have now resulted in working implementations 
of 2D formats like Dual Polarization PAM4 (DP-PAM4), 
and 3D formats, such as DP-PAM4 with inter-polarization 
Phase Modulation (DP-PAM4+PM). Thus, one advantage of 
SVRs is the possibility of detecting formats with SE 
between 
2-6 bits/symbol/wavelength 
and 
optimize 
complexity for a given channel length.  
Two of the DSP blocks in Figure 2(b) are highlighted in 
red because algorithms for de-multiplexing and equalization 
after the OFE have not converged to a standardized form. 
They have also not been optimized and synthesized for use 
in ASICS as is the case for the others. It is not yet clear what 
is the expected power consumption of a SVR ASIC and how 
it compares to state-of-the-art coherent DSP. The ASIC 
could be less complex than an intra-dyne equivalent if 
implemented for short reach communications where CD and 
PMD are not significant. Additionally, in demonstrations of 
multi-dimensional detection using SVR, high performance 
ADC and DAC blocks have been necessary to showcase 
high bitrate operation. This suggests that there is a 
requirement for extra sensitivity given the square root power 
envelope conditions of direct detection. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Photonic integration is already playing a role in realizing 
specialized building SVR blocks for next generation multi-
dimensional enabled short-reach links [14][15]. It is worth 
noting that compared to the architecture in Figure 2(a) the 
SVR has only one 90° hybrid, half the number of 
polarization beam splitters and rotators, no LO and only 6 
PDs of which two are single ended. 
C. Homodyne coherent receivers  
In homodyne coherent receivers, the LO must track the 
frequency and SoP of the incoming signal. Analog receivers 
electronically detect variations in frequency and use elec-
trical feedback signals to lock the LO laser to the carrier 
frequency. Recent implementations of analog Phase Lock 
Loops (PLL) [16]–[18] present homodyne receivers working 
at still modest speeds of 40 Gbit/s. Similarly, integrated 
polarization controllers are slowly  becoming a reality [19]–
[21]. Additionally, analog equalization has also been 
demonstrated recently at low symbol rates [22]. Sufficient 
innovation in integration and co-packaging could revive 
single polarization homodyne coherent detection and take 
full advantage of the cost and power efficiency of analog 
electronics for the short reach scenario. 
Variations on single polarization coherent detection using 
a LO can also be found in coherent access networks [23], 
which as the DCI scenario, are also constrained by cost and 
low power requirements on the LO and DSP. Noteworthy, 
are heterodyne solutions using 3x3 optical couplers [24]. 
Other novel ideas based on homodyne detection and inspired 
in access networks, use carrier delivery for remote modula-
tion in a bi-directional link [25].  
D. Delay-line based differential coherent receivers  
Delay-line based differential coherent receivers [26], like 
the one depicted in Figure 2(d), are one important group of 
receiver architectures known as Self-Coherent (SC). A com-
mon trait of self-coherence is the absence of a LO, which 
allows avoiding carrier recovery schemes. An excellent 
comparison of SC receivers can be found in [27].  
In delay-line receivers, the difference between the phases 
of consecutive symbols is detected instead of the absolute 
phase of the field. Detection is achieved by mixing the signal 
with a delayed copy of itself. Provided that the OFE has a 
polarization controller or that it can be made of polarization 
independent optical elements, the SC receiver can recover 
phase and amplitude modulated signals on a single 
polarization. Additionally, even though most demonstrations 
use DSP, analog signal processing, even if not linear, is 
possible [28] without the loop bandwidth constraints of a 
PLL or the need of polarization de-multiplexing. The appar-
ent simplicity of this approach hides significant challenges in 
the design of an OFE that guarantees precise delays in both 
polarizations at a given wavelength. 
Implementations of photonic integrated SC differential 
receivers have been demonstrated using Mach-Zehnder 
delay-line interferometers [29][30], and recently ring 
resonators [31]. Free-space optics based self-homodyne 
coherent receivers [32] solve the problems of polarization 
independence and tuning flexibility, but require bulky and 
expensive building blocks. 
In other manifestations of self-coherent receivers, mixing 
happens at the transmitter or is done with a reference that 
travels alongside the signal. When mixed at the transmitter, 
single polarization DD approaches using only one photodi-
ode can be implemented at the cost of higher DAC/ADC 
bandwidth, large processing complexity, and a high 
Carrier-to-Signal Power Ratio (CSPR) [33]. A similar trade-
off is present when sending the carrier on an orthogonal 
polarization [34]–[36]. 
E. Note on transmitter complexity 
In this section, we chose to analyse the technological 
challenges of receiver architectures, leaving aside the topic 
of multi-dimensional modulators. This is because a basic IQ 
modulator in combination with a polarization beam 
combiner is a sufficiently general system for coding in any 
combination of the 4 orthogonal dimensions mentioned 
above. Differences between modulation formats come from 
the driving signals sent to individual phase shifters placed in 
the Mach-Zehnder modulators and waveguides that make up 
a traditional IQ modulator.  
F. Common challenges 
As hinted above, common challenges are photonic inte-
gration and achieving packaging solutions where driving 
electronics and DSP ASICs are placed closer to the optics.  
On the photonic integration aspect, the selection of sub-
strate platform is critical. There are trade-offs to be consid-
ered when deciding to implement architectures in the III-V 
material ecosystem or in silicon photonics. Hence, many 
commercial 
solutions 
tend 
to 
favour 
heterogeneous 
integration, especially in the transmitter side. Above all, the 
platform on which multi-dimensional receivers are built 
should support polarization handling elements, such as 
polarization beam splitters and polarization rotators. Or 
alternatively, guarantee polarization independence. Not all 
foundries have polarization handling building blocks and 
some designs require extra processing steps, such as wet 
etching, that can increase the complexity of fabrication and 
reduce yield.  
Regarding packaging, a significant milestone was 
achieved recently when Ball-Grid-Arrays (BGA) packaged 
coherent modules were demonstrated [37]. Finally, hybridi-
zation of III-V active components on a Silicon substrate is an 
ambitious objective that could significantly reduce power 
and footprint constraints [38]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Multi-dimensional modulation formats are starting to be 
proposed to achieve better SE in the DCI scenario. We have 
highlighted four receiver architectures as an attempt to 
review trends that are relevant for solving requirements of 
next generation DCI links. The discussion on the specific 
challenges that are faced on each case will be the foundation 
of future decisions on a path to follow. Even though it looks 
like the industry is focusing on gradually reducing the 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

complexity of traditional coherent transceivers, we have 
observed and presented examples of architectures such as 
SVR or variations of SC receivers that have the potential to 
move the frontier of multi-dimensional modulation formats 
to shorter reach applications with reduced complexity.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
S. Echeverri would like to express his gratitude to 
Innovation Fund Denmark who partly funded this work 
under file No. 5189-00006B. The author also wants to thank 
D. Feng, and J. Levy from Mellanox Technologies 
(Monterey Park, CA, USA) for the first-hand learning 
opportunities in the area of Silicon photonics. Finally, J.J. 
Mohr, J.J. Vegas and S.B. Christensen from Mellanox 
Technologies Denmark are thanked for their constructive 
discussions and encouragement and I. Tafur and Il-Sug from 
the Technical University of Denmark for their continued 
support.  
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Eiselt et al., “Real-time 200 Gb/s (4 X 56.25 Gb/s) PAM-4 
transmission over 80 km SSMF using quantum-dot laser and 
silicon 
ring-modulator,” 
in 
2017 
Optical 
Fiber 
Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC), 2017, pp. 
1–3. 
[2] K. Kurokawa, “Group delay in multimode optical fibers,” 
Proc. IEEE, vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 1217–1218, Aug. 1977. 
[3] D. Marcuse and C. Lin, “Low dispersion single-mode fiber 
transmission - The question of practical versus theoretical 
maximum transmission bandwidth,” IEEE J. Quantum 
Electron., vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 869–878, Jun. 1981. 
[4] A. Dochhan et al., “Solutions for 400 Gbit/s Inter Data Center 
WDM Transmission,” in ECOC 2016; 42nd European 
Conference on Optical Communication; Proceedings of, 2016, 
pp. 1–3. 
[5] N. Eiselt et al., “First Real-Time 400G PAM-4 Demonstration 
for Inter-Data Center Transmission over 100 km of SSMF at 
1550 nm,” 2016, p. W1K.5. 
[6] S. Khatana, “Components for 100G Coherent Pluggable 
Modules-CFP2,” 
in 
Optical 
Fiber 
Communication 
Conference, 2016, p. Th3G–5. 
[7] J.-P. Elbers, N. Eiselt, A. Dochhan, D. Rafique, and H. 
Griesser, “PAM4 vs Coherent for DCI Applications,” in 
Signal Processing in Photonic Communications, 2017, p. 
SpTh2D–1. 
[8] M. Chagnon, M. Morsy-Osman, and D. V. Plant, “Multi-
Dimensional Formats and Transceiver Architectures for 
Direct Detection With Analysis on Inter-Polarization Phase 
Modulation,” J. Light. Technol., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 885–892, 
Feb. 2017. 
[9] K. Kikuchi and S. Kawakami, “Multi-level signaling in the 
Stokes space and its application to large-capacity optical 
communications,” Opt. Express, vol. 22, no. 7, p. 7374, Apr. 
2014. 
[10] D. Che, A. Li, X. Chen, Q. Hu, Y. Wang, and W. Shieh, 
“Stokes vector direct detection for short-reach optical 
communication,” Opt. Lett., vol. 39, no. 11, p. 3110, Jun. 
2014. 
[11] L. G. Kazovsky, “Phase- and polarization-diversity coherent 
optical techniques,” J. Light. Technol., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 279–
292, Feb. 1989. 
[12] F. Frey, R. Elschner, and J. K. Fischer, “Estimation of Trends 
for Coherent DSP ASIC Power Dissipation for different 
bitrates and transmission reaches,” in Photonic Networks; 18. 
ITG-Symposium, 2017, pp. 1–8. 
[13] C. 
R. 
Doerr, 
“Silicon 
photonic 
integration 
in 
telecommunications,” Front. Phys., vol. 3, Aug. 2015. 
[14] S. Ghosh, Y. Kawabata, T. Tanemura, and Y. Nakano, 
“Polarization-analyzing circuit on InP for integrated Stokes 
vector receiver,” Opt. Express, vol. 25, no. 11, p. 12303, May 
2017. 
[15] P. Dong, X. Chen, K. Kim, S. Chandrasekhar, Y.-K. Chen, 
and J. H. Sinsky, “128-Gb/s 100-km transmission with direct 
detection using silicon photonic Stokes vector receiver and 
I/Q modulator,” Opt. Express, vol. 24, no. 13, p. 14208, Jun. 
2016. 
[16] M. Lu, H.-C. Park, E. Bloch, L. A. Johansson, M. J. Rodwell, 
and L. A. Coldren, “Highly Integrated Homodyne Receiver 
for Short-reach Coherent Communication,” in Optoelectronic 
Devices and Integration, 2015, p. OT2A–4. 
[17] A. Mizutori, T. Abe, T. Kodama, and M. Koga, “Optical 16-
QAM Signal Homodyne Detection by Extracting ±π/4 and 
±3π/4-Phase Symbols,” in Optical Fiber Communication 
Conference, 2017, p. Th4C–6. 
[18] Mingzhi Lu et al., “An Integrated 40 Gbit/s Optical Costas 
Receiver,” J. Light. Technol., vol. 31, no. 13, pp. 2244–2253, 
Jul. 2013. 
[19] P. Velha et al., “Wide-band polarization controller for Si 
photonic integrated circuits,” Opt. Lett., vol. 41, no. 24, p. 
5656, Dec. 2016. 
[20] C. R. Doerr, N. K. Fontaine, and L. L. Buhl, “PDM-DQPSK 
Silicon Receiver With Integrated Monitor and Minimum 
Number of Controls,” IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 24, 
no. 8, pp. 697–699, Apr. 2012. 
[21] M. Ma et al., “Silicon photonic polarization receiver with 
automated stabilization for arbitrary input polarizations,” in 
CLEO: Science and Innovations, 2016, p. STu4G–8. 
[22] N. Nambath et al., “First demonstration of an all analog 
adaptive equalizer for coherent DP-QPSK links,” in Optical 
Fiber Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC), 
2017, 2017, pp. 1–3. 
[23] A. Shahpari et al., “Coherent Access: A Review,” J. Light. 
Technol., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 1050–1058, Feb. 2017. 
[24] J. Tabares, V. Polo, and J. Prat, “Polarization-independent 
heterodyne DPSK receiver based on 3x3 coupler for cost-
effective 
udWDM-PON,” 
in 
2017 
Optical 
Fiber 
Communications Conference and Exhibition (OFC), 2017. 
[25] S. Echeverri-Chacón et al., “Short range interdatacenter 
transmission with carrier delivery and remote modulation for 
112 Gb/s PM-QPSK signals,” in 19th International 
Conference on Transparent Optical Networks, 2017. 
[26] X. Liu, S. Chandrasekhar, and A. Leven, “Digital self-
coherent detection,” Opt. Express, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 792–803, 
2008. 
[27] D. Che, Q. Hu, and W. Shieh, “Linearization of Direct 
Detection 
Optical 
Channels 
Using 
Self-Coherent 
Subsystems,” J. Light. Technol., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 516–524, 
Jan. 2016. 
[28] D. van den Borne, S. Calabro, S. L. Jansen, E. Gottwald, G. 
D. Khoe, and H. de Waardt, “Differential quadrature phase 
shift keying with close to homodyne performance based on 
multi-symbol phase estimation,” pp. 12–12, Jan. 2005. 
[29] S. Faralli, K. N. Nguyen, J. D. Peters, D. T. Spencer, D. J. 
Blumenthal, and J. E. Bowers, “Integrated hybrid Si/InGaAs 
50 Gb/s DQPSK receiver,” Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 18, pp. 
19726–19734, Aug. 2012. 
[30] J. Klamkin et al., “A 100-Gb/s noncoherent silicon receiver 
for PDM-DBPSK/DQPSK signals,” Opt. Express, vol. 22, no. 
2, p. 2150, Jan. 2014. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[31] P. Velha, S. Faralli, and G. Contestabile, “A Compact Silicon 
Photonic DQPSK Receiver Based on Microring Filters,” 
IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 418–
424, Nov. 2016. 
[32] J. Li et al., “A self-coherent receiver for detection of PolMUX 
coherent signals,” Opt. Express, vol. 20, no. 19, pp. 21413–
21433, Sep. 2012. 
[33] X. Chen et al., “218-Gb/s Single-Wavelength, Single-
Polarization, Single-Photodiode Transmission Over 125-km 
of Standard Singlemode Fiber Using Kramers-Kronig 
Detection,” in Optical Fiber Communication Conference 
Postdeadline Papers, 2017, p. Th5B.6. 
[34] R. Kamran, N. B. Thaker, M. Anghan, N. Nambath, and S. 
Gupta, “Demonstration of a polarization diversity based SH-
QPSK system with CMA-DFE equalizer,” in Wireless and 
Optical Communication Conference (WOCC), 2017, pp. 1–4. 
[35] M. Y. S. Sowailem et al., “100G and 200G single carrier 
transmission over 2880 and 320 km using an InP IQ 
modulator and Stokes vector receiver,” Opt. Express, vol. 24, 
no. 26, p. 30485, Dec. 2016. 
[36] Q. Hu, D. Che, Y. Wang, and W. Shieh, “Advanced 
modulation formats for high-performance short-reach optical 
interconnects,” Opt. Express, vol. 23, no. 3, p. 3245, Feb. 
2015. 
[37] C. Doerr et al., “Silicon photonics coherent transceiver in a 
ball-grid array package,” in Optical Fiber Communications 
Conference and Exhibition (OFC), 2017, 2017, pp. 1–3. 
[38] G. Roelkens et al., “III-V-on-Silicon Photonic Devices for 
Optical Communication and Sensing,” Photonics, vol. 2, no. 
3, pp. 969–1004, Sep. 2015. 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-591-3
ICSNC 2017 : The Twelfth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

