A Fair and Efﬁcient Spectrum Assignment
for WiFi/WiMAX Integrated Networks
† Kazuhiko Kinoshita, † Masashi Nakagawa, ‡ Keita Kawano, † Koso Murakami
† Department of Information Networking,
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University
1-5 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565–0871, JAPAN
‡ Center for Information Technology and Management, Okayama University
3-1-1 Tsushimanaka, Okayama, Okayama 700–8531, JAPAN
E-mail: † {kazuhiko, nakagawa.masashi, murakami}@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp
‡ keita@cc.okayama-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In recent years, integrated wireless networks and
spectrum sharing in such networks have been researched actively.
We have also proposed a spectrum assignment method for
improving the average throughput of the whole network. In this
method, however, WiFi users would obtain higher throughput
at the expense of WiMAX users. This would be unfair in
WiFi/WiMAX integrated networks. To overcome this problem,
this paper proposes a fair and efﬁcient spectrum assignment
method for such networks. Finally, simulation experiments show
the excellent performance of the proposed method.
Keywords-spectrum assignment; spectrum sharing; dynamic spec-
trum access; WiFi; WiMAX.
I. INTRODUCTION
With advances in communication technologies, network
services available via the Internet have become widely di-
versiﬁed. People can use such services not only via wired
networks but also via wireless networks. With the demand
for multimedia services via wireless networks growing, just
as for wired networks, the bandwidth of cellular networks is
growing and the number of wireless LAN access points (APs)
is increasing greatly.
There are already several wireless systems being used in
practice, including Cellular [1], WiFi [2], and WiMAX [3],
[4]. Each system uses its own spectrum as prescribed by law
to avoid interference.
However, these wireless communication systems operate
independently, because the mechanisms of these systems are
fundamentally different. Therefore, switching between sys-
tems must be performed manually by users. To avoid this
inconvenience, an integrated network [5], [6], within which
these systems can interwork, has been designed as a next-
generation wireless communication system. In such an inte-
grated network, mobile users can have seamless, continuous
communication via the best available wireless communication
system, according to the application or the local conditions of
the wireless systems. Therefore, it will be possible to provide
better communications for mobile users.
However, the available spectrum resources are ﬁnite, and
so other approaches that use radio resources more effectively
are being considered. As mentioned above, although the
amount of available radio spectrum for a particular form of
wireless communication is decreasing because of the increas-
ing diversity of wireless networks, the trafﬁc demand for
wireless networks is increasing with the increasing variety of
broadband applications. To address this dilemma, “cognitive
radio” [7], [8] is receiving much attention.
Cognitive radio technologies can be classiﬁed as either mul-
timode systems or dynamic spectrum access (DSA) systems
[9], [10]. Multimode systems select between a number of
independent wireless systems according to the communication
environment of the user and the condition of each wireless
system. Conversely, a DSA-based wireless system can make
secondary use of the radio frequency spectrum that other
wireless systems are using. The frequency spectrum is used
more efﬁciently in DSA systems than in multimode systems.
We have proposed a spectrum assignment method for
improving the average throughput of the whole network
[11]. However, because this method focuses only on the
overall improvement of the average throughput in the network,
WiFi users would obtain higher throughput at the expense
of WiMAX users. This would be unfair in WiFi/WiMAX
integrated networks.
To overcome this problem, this paper proposes a fair and
efﬁcient spectrum assignment method for such networks.
In the rest of this paper, Section II introduces related work
and points out the problematic issues. Section III proposes
the fair and efﬁcient spectrum assignment method. It is
evaluated in Section IV and V. Finally, Section VI makes some
conclusions and indicates future works.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Integrated Wireless Network
Although several wireless systems, such as Cellular, WiFi,
and WiMAX, have developed independently, they should
be integrated for seamless access by users. Therefore, in
recent years, Cellular/WiFi integrated networks [12], [13]
and WiFi/WiMAX integrated networks [14], [15] have been
researched actively. In particular, a WiMAX/WiFi integrated
117
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

network can achieve high-quality communications by using
WiMAX and WiFi as complementary access resources. This
integrated network enables load balancing between WiMAX
and WiFi by using each system selectively in response to the
demands of users and the condition of each system.
However, this integrated network assumes that each wire-
less system uses the spectrum band prescribed by law, so that,
even if the WiMAX system has unused spectrum temporarily,
it cannot be used by WiFi systems. As a possible solution to
this problem, cognitive radio is receiving much attention.
B. DSA
According to [10], DSA strategies can be categorized in
terms of three models, namely, the Dynamic Exclusive Use
Model, the Open Sharing Model, and the Hierarchical Access
Model, which are described below.
1) Dynamic Exclusive Use Model: This model protects the
current spectrum regulation policy, in which spectrum bands
are licensed to services for exclusive use. The main idea is
to introduce ﬂexibility to improve spectrum efﬁciency. Two
approaches have been proposed under this model, namely,
spectrum property rights and dynamic spectrum assignment.
The former approach allows licensees to sell and trade spec-
trum and to choose freely between technologies. The economy
and the market will therefore play major roles in driving
towards the most proﬁtable use of this limited resource.
On the other hand, the latter approach aims to improve
spectrum efﬁciency through dynamic spectrum assignment
by exploiting the spatial and temporal trafﬁc statistics of the
various services.
2) Open Sharing Model: This model employs open sharing
among peer users as the basis for managing a spectral region.
Advocates of this model draw support from the phenomenal
success of wireless services operating in the unlicensed In-
dustrial, Scientiﬁc, and Medical radio band.
3) Hierarchical Access Model: This model adopts a hier-
archical access structure with primary users (licensees) and
secondary users. The key idea is to open licensed spectrum to
secondary users while limiting the interference perceived by
primary users. Two approaches to spectrum sharing between
primary and secondary users have been considered, namely,
spectrum underlay and spectrum overlay. The former approach
imposes severe constraints on the transmission power of
secondary users so that they operate below the noise ﬂoor
of primary users. By spreading transmitted signals over a
wide frequency band (i.e., using an Ultra-Wideband system),
secondary users can potentially achieve short-range high data
rates with extremely low transmission power. Alternatively,
the latter approach does not necessarily impose severe re-
strictions on the transmission power of secondary users, but
rather on when and where they may transmit. It directly targets
spatial and temporal white space in the spectrum by allowing
secondary users to identify and exploit local and instantaneous
spectrum availability in a nonintrusive manner.
C. The Existing Method for WiFi/WiMAX Integrated Networks
and Problematic Issues
A spectrum-sharing method whereby several WiFi APs
temporarily use an unused WiMAX band in a WiFi/WiMAX
integrated network has been proposed. It is based on the
spectrum overlay described above. In this proposal, as shown
in Fig. 1, a central control server called the spectrum manager
(SM) manages the spectrum assignment and necessary infor-
mation for assignment in a WiMAX base station (BS) and the
WiFi APs inside the WiMAX service area of the BS. In this
paper, we abbreviate “WiMAX service area” to “area” and
call the hexagonal area accessed by the WiFi AP the “cell”.
Fig. 1.
Network Model
The coverage area of the WiMAX BS, a few kilometers
in radius, is so large that it will include some WiFi APs.
Therefore, the same spectrum can be used repeatedly by
assigning unused WiMAX spectrum to WiFi APs without
causing interference between the adjacent WiFi APs. If two or
more WiFi APs use some WiMAX BS spectrum, the spectrum
utilization efﬁciency can be enhanced for the whole network.
In [11], a spectrum assignment method to improve the
overall average throughput for the network was proposed. In
this method, the WiFi APs best suited to receive an additional
channel from the WiMAX system are decided by using a
genetic algorithm (GA). The sum of the number of users who
connect to assigned target WiFi AP is deﬁned as its ﬁtness
value. As a constraint, the method does not assign a certain
channel to adjacent WiFi APs simultaneously. In this paper,
we call this method the “existing method”.
It was conﬁrmed that the existing method improved the
overall average throughput in the network compared with a
method without spectrum sharing, as shown in Fig. 2. In
this graph, the horizontal and vertical axes show the arrival
rate for the entire network and the average download time,
respectively.
However, because the existing method focuses only on
improvements in the average throughput of the entire network,
the individual throughput obtained by WiFi or WiMAX is
unfairly distributed, as shown in Fig. 3. That is, WiFi users
obtain their higher throughput at the expense of WiMAX
users. This would be manifestly unfair in a WiFi/WiMAX
integrated network.
118
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 0
 100
 200
 300
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
Average Downl oad Ti me[ s]
Arri val  Rat e[ 1/s]
exi st i ng met hod
wi t hout  spect rum shari ng
Fig. 2.
Throughput Improvement via the Existing Method
 0
 100
 200
 300
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
Average Downl oad Ti me[ s]
Arri val  Rat e[ 1/s]
ent i re net work
Wi MAX
Wi Fi
Fig. 3.
Performance Characteristics of Existing Method
III. PROPOSED METHOD
To overcome the problem described above, we propose a
spectrum-sharing method that improves fairness in addition
to providing higher throughput. The proposed method aims
not only to improve total throughput but also to minimize the
difference in throughput between WiFi users and WiMAX
users. To achieve this, we introduce an index to indicate the
effectiveness of the spectrum assignment. Here, a smaller
value for the index means a better spectrum assignment.
The procedure for the proposed method is shown in Fig.
4. First, the number of users who connect to each system
is acquired. Next, the index is calculated for the instant of
time of the assignment. In addition, suppose that one channel
is assigned from the WiMAX spectrum, and the APs of
the assignment target are decided. After the assignment is
conducted, the capacity of each system will be changed.
Therefore, the capacity of each system is renewed and the
index is recalculated.
The index is then calculated for the case of a second
additional channel being assigned from WiMAX in the same
Get the Number of Users
Calculate the Index
Decide the Assignment Target AP
based on GA
Renew the Capacity of Each System
Assignment the Channles 
that Minimizes the Index
Finish the Calculation
for All WiMAX Channels?
Recalculate the Index
Yes
No
Fig. 4.
Flowchart of the Proposed Method
manner. Finally, the number of assignment channels that
minimizes the index is decided.
As mentioned above, after the assignment is carried out,
the capacity of both WiFi and WiMAX will be changed. In
what follows, “capacity” means the capacity after increasing
or decreasing the number of channels.
The average throughput for WiFi users is calculated by Eq.
(1).
n
i=1 piui
n
i=1
1
ci
ui
× piui
,
(1)
where n, ci, and ui are the number of areas, the capacity of
the WiFi AP, and the number of connected users, respectively.
pi is an indication function, with pi = 1 indicating that area
i contains a WiFi AP, and pi = 0 indicating otherwise.
In the same way, the average throughput of WiMAX users
is calculated by Eq. (2).
C
U ,
(2)
where C and U refer to the capacity of the WiMAX system
and the number of connected WiMAX users, respectively.
The index of the proposed method is deﬁned in Eq. (3)
and the proposed method assigns additional channel(s) from
WiMAX to WiFi based on the number of channels that
minimizes the value of this index.

n
i=1
1
ci
ui
× piui
n
i=1 piui
− U
C

(3)
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Simulation Model
In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed
method by simulation experiments.
119
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Fig. 5 shows the network model assumed in this simulation.
One WiMAX BS and 10×10 = 100 small areas are allocated
to the access area of the WiMAX system. The WiFi APs are
allocated to the small areas according to the distribution rate.
For example, if the distribution rate is 0.75, 100 × 0.75 = 75
small areas are selected at random and each has a WiFi AP.
The spectrum of the WiMAX BS is divided into several
channels of 20[MHz] each. The WiMAX system is assumed
to provide 40 Mbps per channel in accordance with [18] and
the WiFi systems are assumed to provide 17.5 Mbps per
channel according to our preliminary experiments that used
ns2 [19]. In addition, the spectrum utilization, the load status
of each system, the control of the spectrum assignment, and
the implementation of GA are managed by the SM, as shown
in Fig. 5.
1
2
11
90
89
99 100
･ ･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･
10
10
Spectrum Manager
21 22
WiMAX BS
WiFi AP
1
2
11
90
89
99 100
･ ･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･
･ ･ ･ ･
10
10
Spectrum Manager
21 22
WiMAX BS
WiFi AP
Fig. 5.
Simulation Model
In this paper, we focus on best-effort trafﬁc such as data
downloading or web browsing. Users are assumed to be
downloading a 10[MByte] ﬁle. When a new mobile user joins
the integrated network, the user connects to a wireless system
selected by the spectrum manager and starts downloading
data at the allocated throughput. When the downloading is
complete, the mobile user disconnects from the wireless
system.
If a new user arrives in an area with a WiFi AP, the
WiFi connection is used. Otherwise, the WiMAX BS is used.
In addition, users stay in the arrival area until the end of
their downloading. Calls occur according to a Poisson arrival
process, and the arrival rate depends on the existence of the
WiFi AP. Because WiFi APs tend to be set up in places where
people gather, such as cafes, ofﬁces, and rail stations, the call
arrival rate in an area with a WiFi AP is assumed to be x
times higher than that in an area without a WiFi AP.
We deﬁne the arrival rate for the entire network in the case
of x = 1 as λsys. To keep λsys independent of the distribution
rate r and the arrival rate ratio x, arrival rates of λa (with WiFi
AP) and λb (without WiFi AP) were selected to satisfy the
following equations.
λa = λsys ×
x
(1 − r) × 1 + r × x
(4)
λb = λsys ×
1
(1 − r) × 1 + r × x.
(5)
To measure performance, we observe the average time to
ﬁnish downloading (download time) and its coefﬁcient of
variance.
Other parameter settings are as shown in Table I.
TABLE I
DEFAULT SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Distribution rate for WiFi APs r
0.5
Spectrum bandwidth for WiMAX
100 MHz
Arrival rate ratio x
5
Interval time T for spectrum assignment
300 seconds
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
Fig. 6 shows the average download time as a function of
the call arrival rate. It indicates that the average throughput
of the proposed method is almost equal to that of the existing
method.
 0
 100
 200
 300
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
Average Downl oad Ti me[ s]
Arri val  Rat e[ 1/s]
proposed met hod
exi st i ng met hod
Fig. 6.
Mean Dowload Time
Fig. 7 shows the coefﬁcient of variance as a function of
the call arrival rate. From this ﬁgure, the proposed method is
shown to have a lower coefﬁcient of variance than the existing
method for heavy-load situations.
Figs. 8 and 9 show the average download time and its
coefﬁcient of variance as a function of the arrival rate ratio
x, respectively. The call arrival rate was set to 12[1/s].
These results indicate that the proposed method is robust
against the arrival rate ratio.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we have described a spectrum-sharing method
that improves the average throughput in a WiFi/WiMAX inte-
grated network and we have shown that there was still room
for improvement in the fairness of individual-user throughput.
We have therefore enhanced the method to consider fairness
in addition to providing higher throughput.
In future work, it will be necessary to propose a spectrum-
sharing method that considers QoS issues for network trafﬁc.
120
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 0
 0. 5
 1
 1. 5
 2
 10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
Coef f i ci ent  of  Vari ance
Arri val  Rat e[ 1/s]
proposed met hod
exi st i ng met hod
Fig. 7.
Coefﬁcient of Variance
 0
 100
 200
 300
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
Average Downl oad Ti me[ s]
Arri val  Rat e Rat i o
proposed met hod
exi st i ng met hod
Fig. 8.
Mean Download Time (variable arrival rate ratio)
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP, http://www.3gpp.org/.
[2] WiFi Forum, http://www.wiﬁ-forum.com/wf/.
[3] “Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems,” IEEE
STD 802.16–2004., (Oct. 2004).
[4] “Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Sys-
tems,” IEEE P802.16e/D12., (Feb. 2005).
[5] S. Ohmori, Y. Yamao and N. Nakajima, “The Future Generations of
Mobile Communications Based on Broadband Access Technologies,”
IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 134–142, (Dec.
2000).
[6] M. Buddhikot, G. Chandranmenon, S. Han, Y.W. Lee, S. Miller and L.
Salgarelli, “Integration of 802.11 and Third-Generation Wireless Data
Networks,” IEEE INFOCOM’03, vol. 1, pp. 503–512, (Apr. 2003).
[7] J. Mitola III and G. Q. Maguire, “Cognitive Radio: Making Software
Radios More Personal,” IEEE Personal Communications, vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 13–14, (Aug. 1999).
[8] I.F.
Akyildiz,
et
al.,
“Next
generation/dynamic
spectrum
ac-
cess/cognitive radio wireless networks: A survey,” Computer Networks
Journal, vol. 50, pp. 2127–2159, (Sept. 2006).
[9] Q. Zhao and B.M. Sadler, “A Survey of Dynamic Spectrum Access,”
IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 79–89, (May
2007).
 0
 0. 5
 1
 1. 5
 2
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9
 10
Coef f i ci ent  of  Vari ance
Arri val  Rat e Rat i o
proposed met hod
exi st i ng met hod
Fig. 9.
Coefﬁcient of Variance (variable arrival rate ratio)
[10] M. Nekovee, “Dynamic spectrum access - concepts and future architec-
tures,” BT Technology Journal, vol.24, no.2, pp. 111–116, (Apr. 2006).
[11] M. Nakagawa, K. Kawano, K. Kazuhiko and K. Murakami, “A Spec-
trum Assignment Method based on Genetic Algorithm in WiMAX/WiFi
Integrated
Network,”
Proceedings of the 5th ACM International
Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies
(CoNEXT2009), (Dec. 2009).
[12] W. Song and W. Zhuang, “Resource Allocation for Conversational,
Streaming, and Interactive Services in Cellular/WLAN Interworking,”
IEEE GLOBECOM ’07, pp. 4785–4789, (Nov. 2007).
[13] W. Song, W. Zhuang, and Y. Cheng, “Load Balancing for Cellu-
lar/WLAN Integrated Networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 21, no. 1, pp.
27–33, (Jan.-Feb. 2007).
[14] L. Berlemann, C. Hoymann, G. R. Hiertz, S. Mangold, “Coexistence
and Interworking of IEEE 802.16 and IEEE 802.11(e),” Vehicular
Technology Conference, vol. 1, pp. 27–31, (May 2006).
[15] D. Niyato, E. Hossain, “Intergration of WiMAX and WiFi: Optimal
Princing for Bandwidth Sharing,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol.
45, no. 5, pp. 140–146, (May 2007).
[16] O. lleri and N.B. Mandayam, “Dynamic Spectrum Access Models:
Toward an Engineering Perspective in the Spectrum Debate,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 153–160, (Jan. 2008).
[17] S. Hanaoka, J. Yamamoto and M. Yano, “Platform for Load Balancing
and Throughput Enhancement with Cognitive Radio,” IEICE Transac-
tions on Communications, vol. E91–B, no. 8, pp. 2501–2508, (Aug.
2008).
[18] WiMAX
Forum,
“Mobile
WiMAX
-
Part
I:
A
Technical
Overview
and
Performance
Evaluation,”
http://www.wimax
fo-
rum.org/technology/downloads/Mobile WiMAX Part1 Overview and
Performance.pdf, (2006).
[19] ns-2, http://www.ise.edu/nsnam/ns/.
121
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

