On Design of Mobile Agent Routing Algorithm for Information Gain Maximization 
in Wireless Sensor Networks 
Maryam Alipour  
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department  
Qazvin Islamic Azad University 
Qazvin, Iran 
malipour@qiau.ac.ir 
Karim Faez  
Electrical Engineering Department 
Amirkabir University of Technology 
Tehran, Iran 
kfaez@aut.ac.ir
 
Abstract— Mobile agent routing for data aggregation in 
wireless sensor networks may considerably decrease the data 
traffic among sensor nodes. Finding an appropriate route 
which leads to the highest aggregation ratio is a major 
challenge in these networks. Complexities on the design of a 
mobile agent routing algorithm are related to the precise 
selection of source nodes and their visiting sequence during 
mobile agent migration. In this paper, the improvement of 
mobile agent routing for the dynamic model designed by Xu 
and Qi is proposed. Xu-Qi's model is developed to solve the 
problem of target tracking application using the mobile agent 
migration. The pattern of source nodes selection is based on 
the cost function, the trade-off between increasing the 
information gain and decreasing the energy consumption. In 
this paper, a method is proposed to expand the cost function; 
our method improves the impact of both information gain and 
power efficiency in source nodes selection; also, it increases the 
accuracy of aggregated data. The scope of wireless sensor 
networks covered by this paper is suitable for many 
applications. Simulation results in NS2 show that for networks 
with different number of nodes, the proposed method has less 
delay and energy consumption compared to Xu-Qi's model. 
Keywords- wireless sensor networks; data aggregation; 
mobile agent; dynamic routing; information gain 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A WSN (Wireless Sensor Network) typically consists of 
hundreds or even thousands of sensor nodes scattered in a 
geographical region to perform sensing, processing, and 
communication tasks. The sensor nodes have limited 
resources, such as battery power, processing capacity, 
memory, and network bandwidth. The data collected by 
sensor nodes are transmitted to the unlimited resource PE 
(processing element) or sink, where a higher degree of 
processing is performed. In the dense networks, sensor nodes 
are geographically close to each other. Therefore, nearby 
nodes may sense the environmental data with negligible 
differences. If all sensed data are transmitted to the PE, the 
network bandwidth utilization will be unnecessarily 
increased. In order to eliminate the redundant data, an 
aggregation scheme is used [1]. Data aggregation scheme 
can be classified in two categories: CS (Client-Server) and 
MA (Mobile-Agent) based [2]. Data aggregation schemes 
can be integrated with routing concepts. The data-centric 
routing aims to find the route with the highest ratio of data 
aggregation. 
In traditional CS scheme, all data packets are passed to 
the PE for further processing. The packets enter the PE 
arrival queue and wait for their turn to be processed. Due to 
the asynchronous data processing and congestion taken place 
on arrival queue, delay and packet loss rate may be 
increased. This scheme is not scalable for large-scale 
wireless sensor networks, where node density is high. 
Therefore, as increasing nodes number in the network, 
energy and bandwidth consumption will be increased. 
In the new MA scheme, a different processing model is 
employed. MA is a piece of software code that is initially 
dispatched by the PE and subsequently moves among source 
nodes to collect data. The sensor nodes that will be visited 
along the route by an MA are known as the source nodes.  
Structure of the MA consists of four main components: The 
identification, which identifies an MA specially; processing 
code, which is used to process sensed data locally; route, 
which is a set of source nodes and their visiting sequence 
during mobile agent migration; data space, which carries 
aggregated results. When the MA arrives at the source node: 
First, it takes a local processing on the sensed data; then, it 
aggregates the data from source nodes that have already been 
visited; finally, it stores aggregation results in its own data 
space. After the MA leaves the current source node, it 
migrates to another one. Eventually, MA will return to the 
PE. Transmitting collected data through an MA packet to a 
PE may consume less energy and bandwidth in WSNs [3].   
The route design problem means selecting a sequence of 
source nodes which will be visited by MA. The node 
selection process should lead to increase in the energy-time 
efficiency and data aggregation ratio. The routing problem 
can be divided into two categories: the static, and the 
dynamic routing [4]. In the static scheme, the entire topology 
information is needed. PE uses it to construct an efficient 
route for MA migration. The main drawback of this scheme 
is that it is not scalable. In the dynamic scheme, a node is 
selected as the next source node locally; The MA based route 
is specified autonomously and through migration from one 
node to another one. Therefore, MA can dynamically adapt 
itself to any variable environmental conditions. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 
2, the related work on mobile agent routing for data 
aggregation is presented. In Section 3, the assumptions and 
problem statement are described. The problem solution 
approach is explained in Section 4, including the trade-offs 
in the route selection. In Section 5, the details of proposed 
algorithm are discussed. The high performance of our 
193
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

proposed method is approved by simulation results in 
Section 6. The paper is concluded in Section 7. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we intend to review some algorithms 
which have been proposed to find appropriate MA routes in 
WSNs. 
In [5], authors proposed two simple heuristic algorithms, 
LCF (Local Closest First) and GCF (Global Closest First), 
to design a route for MA migration. In LCF, the node with 
the shortest distance to the current source is selected as the 
next node, while in GCF, the shortest distance to PE is 
considered. These algorithms are static and centralized. 
Since the entire network topology information is needed, 
these algorithms are not scalable. Also, the route selection is 
only depended on the spatial distance of source nodes, but 
not on energy consumption.  
Authors of [6] proposed two static routing algorithms, 
IEMF (Itinerary Energy Minimum for First-source-selection) 
and IEMA (Itinerary Energy Minimum Algorithm). The list 
of N source nodes which will be visited by the MA has been 
specified in PE. Using the round robin method in IEMF, 
each node is temporarily replaced as the first source node, 
and then the LCF algorithm will be applied to route among 
the other N-1 source nodes. Therefore, N routes are 
designated among which only one route with minimum 
communication cost will be selected. Communication cost is 
formulated by considering energy consumption and data 
aggregation models. Consequently, the performance of the 
LCF algorithm is improved by taking into account the energy 
constraint in MA routing. The IEMA is the iterative version 
of the IEMF, where the IEMF is used to determine the next 
source node in each hop. Thus, IEMA selects the order of the 
remaining source nodes besides the first one. Although both 
algorithms find an energy efficient route for MA, these are 
still based on the non scalable LCF algorithm.   
In [7], Y. Xu and H. Qi proposed an algorithm for the 
dynamic MA migration in the target tracking application. In 
this algorithm, an MA is dispatched in the network with 
Gaussian distributed sensor nodes to follow a moving target 
at different times. MA migrates to nodes which can obtain 
more accurate information about the target location by 
consuming the lower migration energy. Hence, a cost 
function is defined to decide about selecting the source 
nodes. Cost function is a trade-off between the energy 
expenditure on MA migration and benefit of high 
information gain. The neighbors of current source are known 
as the next node candidates, among which one node with 
minimum cost value is selected as the next source. 
Information gain model is used to compare the data accuracy 
collected by nodes. By collecting the more accurate data 
about the target, the node will have a greater probability for 
selection as the next source. In order to gain the maximum 
information about the target; the MA should migrate to the 
nodes with higher signal strength. The closer a sensor node is 
to the target, the higher signal energy and information gain 
would be achieved. Here, a zero mean Gaussian function is 
used to model the relationship between the information gain 
of candidate node k at time t, 𝐼𝑘(𝑡), and target distance as [7]: 

2
2
( )
2
1
( )
2
k
x t
x
I k
t
e
−
−
σ
=
πσ
, 
 
(1) 
where σ is the standard deviation, 
( )
k
x t
−x
is the distance 
of the node k from the target at time t,  xk is the location of 
node k, and x(t)
෢  is the target location at time t which can be 
estimated by trilateration localization algorithm.  
In [8], the heuristic TBID (Tree-Based Itinerary Design) 
algorithm is presented to find near-optimal routes for 
multiple MAs. The algorithm is executed statically at the PE. 
The area around the PE is divided into concentric zones to 
construct the MA routes from the inner zones to the outer 
ones. The number of routes is assigned to MAs is equal to 
the maximum number of first-zone nodes. At each round of 
algorithm runs, the lowest costly node will be attached to a 
tree. The objective is to minimize the total energy cost of 
routes. Although this algorithm is designed for static routing, 
the use of proper data structures can adapt it to the dynamic 
network conditions.   
In this paper, a data-centric routing algorithm based on 
MA is proposed. The algorithm is an improvement of MA 
routing for the dynamic model designed by Xu and Qi in [7]. 
Xu-Qi's model is developed for target tracking application in 
WSNs. The source nodes are determined by the minimum 
value of the cost function, the trade-off between the 
information gain and energy consumption. At each hop along 
the route, selection of the next source node is performed 
among neighbors of current source. Hence, two consecutive 
source nodes may gain the similar information. The 
improvements of our algorithm for route selection include: 
• 
Our algorithm is not limited to special applications. 
• 
The possibility of visiting the more selective nodes is 
decreased due to their lower remaining energy.   
• 
The algorithm seeks the nodes which consume the 
lower power for transmitting an MA to the next hop.  
• 
If none of the current node neighbors obtain the 
higher information gain, then MA can migrate to the 
nearest 2n-hop nodes (n≥1) by consuming the 
minimum transmission energy.  
• 
The higher aggregation ratio can be achieved by 
traversing the smaller number of source nodes. 
• 
Our algorithm has less end-to-end delay and energy 
consumption.  
Finally, we evaluate the solution performance in terms of 
both energy and delay to verify the practicality of our 
algorithm.    
III. 
ASSUMPTIONS AND PROBLEM STATEMENT 
In this section, we will define the purpose of our research 
along with main assumptions in this paper.  
A. Network Model 
A wireless sensor network is modeled as a graph G(V, E), 
where V is the set of static sensor nodes, V={v1, v2, …, vn}, 
and E is the set of bidirectional links eij between nodes, 
E = {eij = {vi, vj}| vi, vj ∈ V, i ≠ j}. The network consists of N 
194
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

sensor nodes that are scattered in a rectangular field A with 
Gaussian distribution. The PE is denoted by v0, considered as 
both the start and end points of MA migration route. It is 
supposed that except for the PE, all sensor nodes are 
resource-constrained especially in terms of energy and 
bandwidth. The sensor nodes are aware of their remaining 
energy and geographical location in the form of (x, y) 
coordinates. The sensor nodes have maximum transmission 
range R, where they can recognize their neighbor nodes in 
every time intervals. Each sensor node broadcasts a list 
including the amount of remaining energy, the geographical 
location, and the number of times which it was visited by 
MA. It is supposed that the current source node being met by 
MA is denoted by vi. The candidates of next source node are 
shown with vj, as one of them will be selected as the next 
hop of MA. The data aggregation operation is performed by 
MA during moving among the source nodes. The MA packet 
only passes through the intermediate nodes between current 
and next source nodes.  Mobile agent migration in a wireless 
sensor network is illustrated in Fig. 1. 
B. Problem Statement 
In this paper, we study the MA as a processing 
component which aggregates the collected data by the source 
nodes in the WSN. The scope of the network is not limited to 
special applications. The MA is dispatched by the PE to 
aggregate the data sensed by source nodes during migrating 
from one node to another. After completing the mission, it 
returns to the PE. 
The problem is to design a dynamic and informative 
route for MA migration by considering the following 
parameters: 
• 
Increasing the network lifetime by taking into 
account of the remaining energy level of each node as 
well as the required power for transmitting an MA.  
• 
Improving the accuracy of aggregated data by 
selecting 
the 
source 
nodes 
with 
maximum 
information gain.  
• 
Decreasing the end-to-end delay of MA migration 
when it is dispatched until it is returned. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The mobile agent migration in the wireless sensor network to 
aggregate the sensed data of source nodes along the route. 
IV. 
SOLUTION APPROACH 
To design an efficient route for MA migration in the 
network, it is important to select the source nodes which 
have minimum migration cost. To decide whether a node 
could be chosen as the next source, a cost function is 
defined. This function consists of the following components. 
 
A. Information Gain, Ij(x, y) 
It is supposed that the sensor nodes are scattered by 
Gaussian distribution in the field A. Once a source node vi 
senses data, all its nearby neighbors may collect the same 
data with small differences. In result, instead of migrating to 
the adjacent nodes, MA could migrate to farther nodes to 
achieve higher degree of information gain. Therefore, the 
information gain is directly related to the nodes distance.     
In order to demonstrate the relationship between the 
information gain and the nodes distance, the inverse 
Gaussian function in two-dimension would be used as: 
Ij(x, y) = ൫σ2√2π൯e
൭
dij2
2σ2൱
,                     (2) 
where σ is the standard deviation and the value of mean 
is selected as zero, dij is the distance between nodes vi and vj  
which is calculated as:  
dij = ට൫xi − xj൯
2 + ቀyi − yjቁ
2
,                   (3) 
where ൫xi, yi൯ and ቀxj, yjቁ are the coordinates of nodes vi 
and vj in the network.  
B. Migration Energy, Eij 
The energy cost for sending an MA from node vi to vj 
equals to sum of the transmitting energy etx
ij , the receiving 
energy erx
ij , and the energy consumption in their intermediate 
nodes along the route. Also, it is supposed that the needed 
energy for the data processing is the same for each node in 
the network. 
The amount of energy for transmitting and receiving an 
MA is measured as [6]: 
etx
ij = ctx × Stx + Otx, 
 
 
(4) 
erx
ij = crx × Srx + Orx,                           
(5) 
where ctx and crx are the energy consumption per bit for 
both transmitting and receiving an MA packet, Stx and Srx are 
the size of MA packet which is transmitted and received 
respectively, Otx and Orx are the constant components of the 
channel usage overhead. 
The intermediate nodes between the two source nodes 
can only forward the incoming MA packet. The average 
number of intermediate nodes which are located between the 
nodes vi and vj along the route is calculated as ቒ
dij
Rቓ. 
Therefore, the energy spent by each intermediate node in 
195
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

transmitting and receiving of an MA packet is equal to etx
ij  
and erx
ij , respectively [6]. In result, the forwarding energy 
consumed by all these nodes will be calculated by 
ቒ
dij
Rቓ  × ൫etx
ij  + erx
ij ൯.  
The total energy for sending an MA from node vi to vj is 
measured as: 
Eij = ൫etx
ij +erx
ij ൯ × ቀ1+ ቒ
dij
Rቓቁ 
          (6) 
where Eij is the sum of the transmitting energy of node 
vi, the receiving energy of node vj, and the energy 
consumption of their intermediate nodes.   
C. Remaining Energy, ej  
A candidate node vj will be designated as the next source, 
if its remaining energy is higher than the other nodes. Due to 
the prolonging network lifetime, a candidate node with the 
lower energy level would not be selected. 
D. Transmission Power,
j
P   
As pointed out in (2), a candidate node vj which is farther 
from the current source may gain the more precise 
information. In contrast, a farther node may entail more 
power consumption to send out an MA. Hence, a trade-off 
between the information gain and the transmission power is 
defined. We use the number of neighbors around a candidate 
node vj as an approximation of its transmission power. Once 
a candidate node with the more neighbors is selected as the 
next source, it usually can consume less transmission power 
during its next hop. The transmission power Pj is inversely 
related to the number of vj's neighbors, Nneigh
 j
, shown as  
Pj ≈ 
1
Nneigh
 j
. 
E. Migration Cost, Cij  
Decision of selecting the best candidate node as the next 
hop is made by the cost function, Cij. Cost function Cij 
indicates the migration cost spent to transfer an MA from 
current node vi to candidate node vj. The cost function is the 
trade-off between increasing the benefits and decreasing the 
losses as follows. Cost function tries to increase the 
information gain and network lifetime as well as to decrease 
the energy consumption on MA migration. Therefore, it 
increases the probability of selecting the lowest-cost node 
among the candidate nodes. The cost function Cij for 
transferring an MA from vi to vj can be defined as: 
Cij = α ቆ1 − Ij(x, y)
Imax
ቇ + β(Nvisit + 1) ൬1 − ej
emax
൰ 
    +γ
Eij
Emax + (1 − α)
Pj
Pmax 
                              (7) 
0 ≤ α, β, γ ≤ 1,    Nvisit ≥ 0,   
where Ij(x, y) is the information gain of a candidate node 
vj, Imax is the maximum information gain of nodes, Eij is the 
energy consumption for transferring an MA from node vi to 
vj, Emax is the maximum transmission energy for sending 
MA from one node to another, ej is the remaining energy of 
node vj, emax is the same initial energy of nodes, and Nvisit is 
the number of times that node vj has already been visited by 
MA; Numerous selection of node vj as the next source will 
cause its more energy loss and reduction of the network 
lifetime. Therefore, the number of times that a node can be 
visited by an MA is limited. α, β and γ are the weighed 
factors, Pj is the power consumed to transmit an MA from 
node vj to its next hop, and Pmax is the maximum power to 
transmit an MA in the network; Pmax is inversely 
proportional to the maximum number of a node neighbors, 
Pmax ≈ 
1
Nmax, where Nmax is calculated as [9]: 
Nmax = (N − 1) ×
𝜋R2
A  , 
 
(8) 
where N is the number of scattered sensor nodes in the 
network, R is the maximum transmission range of nodes, and 
A is the area of network. The cost consumption on the MA 
migration is decreased by increasing the number of node 
neighbors. Thus, the possibility of selecting that node as the 
next source would be increased.    
V. 
ALGORITHM DESCRIPTION 
Data will be aggregated in the selected source nodes. 
Other intermediate nodes will forward the MA packet. When 
a node is selected as the next source, the value of its 
information gain will be stored in MA packet as the latest. 
Once MA is dispatched from the PE, it migrates to the 
nearest node with the minimum cost measured according to 
the (7). After receiving the MA by the first source node, data 
will be aggregated. Then, MA tries to find the next source: 
First, the entire one-hop neighbors will be checked according 
to the (7) to designate the least costly candidate node; 
second, the difference of information gain in this candidate 
node with the current value is calculated. If it is higher than 
the specific threshold, the MA will be migrated to that node 
and aggregate data. Otherwise, the MA will migrate to the 
nearest node two-hop away from the current node for which 
data is aggregated. Since, the MA has no knowledge of 
network topology; it first migrates to the nearest one-hop 
neighbor that hasn't been selected; thereafter, it moves from 
there to the next closest neighbor. After the MA arrived in 
the node two-hop away, the threshold condition of the 
information gain is checked. If condition does not satisfy, the 
MA will be moved to the nearest node four-hop away of the 
current node. The process of searching will be continued in 
all 2n-hops nodes (n≥1), until a most informative node is 
selected as the next source. Once, the informative node is 
found, the MA starts again to aggregate and find the next 
node in all one-hop neighbors. Finally, MA will return to the 
PE at the end of the migration. If MA cannot find any next 
node, it will return back to the PE. Note that in all the above 
196
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

steps, the next node is selected from the non common 
neighbors of current and previous nodes. The proposed 
scheme has been suggested for selecting the next node with 
the highest information gain and the lowest transmission 
power. A pseudocode description of our scheme is given in 
Fig. 2. 
VI. 
SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
This section represents the simulation results on the 
proposed scheme by using NS-2 (Network Simulator) [10] as 
a simulator. The simulation parameters are summarized in 
Table 1. We consider all types of energy consumptions for 
both computational and communication costs in our 
simulations. In simulation results, each data point represents 
an average of 40 simulation trials. The results include 95% 
confidence interval for each data point. We first evaluate the 
impact of using the different values for factor-α on the 
performance metrics of our scheme. According to (7), α is 
the weighted factor of information gain with the value 
ranging from 0 to 1. The evaluated metrics are given below: 
• 
Aggregation Precision Ratio: refers to the precision 
of aggregated data by MA. If the MA visits all of the 
nodes in the network, the precision will be one. 
• 
Average End-to-End Delay: refers to the time 
interval between transferring MA from processing 
element and its recurrence to this point. 
Fig. 3 illustrates the impact of the factor-α on the 
aggregation precision ratio in our scheme. There is a direct 
relationship between the information gain and the factor-α. 
Therefore, increasing the value of factor-α directly enhances 
the information gain effectiveness on the cost function (7). In 
result, the data aggregation is performed with more 
precision.  
Fig. 4 shows the average end-to-end delay versus the 
values of factor-α. Here, are two related points: First, the 
more information is gained by increasing the factor-α       
(see Fig. 3); second, the more information is gained in farther 
nodes of current source in (1). Given these two points, the 
MA migrates to farther source nodes by increasing the value 
of factor-α. Therefore, the end-to-end delay will be 
increased. 
We next compare our scheme with Xu-Qi's model, when 
the number of nodes varies from 100 to 400. The comparison 
is in terms of average remaining energy and end-to-end 
delay. The average remaining energy refers to the energy 
consumption ratio of the nodes at the end of the simulation 
process after several rounds of MA migrations in the 
network. 
 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
 Value
Parameter
 
 2000 m×2000 m
Terrain Area
 
 100 – 400
Number of nodes
 
 115 m
Transmission Range
 
 IEEE 802.11
MAC
 
 600 S
Simulation time
 
 
 
Fig. 5 compares the percentage of average remaining 
energy in our scheme with Xu-Qi's model. Our scheme 
selects the nodes which consume less power for transmitting 
the MA along the route; it balances the energy consumption 
among multi-hop source nodes. Also, the required accuracy 
of the data aggregation is obtained by visiting the fewer 
number of source nodes. Hence, our scheme can save up to 
52% energy compared to the work in [7]. 
Fig. 6 shows the average end-to-end delay of MA 
migration in our scheme comparing with the existing one. 
Increasing the number of nodes in the network, the           
end-to-end delay will be increased. However, our scheme 
has lower delay than the existing model. The reason is that 
our scheme can find the most informative route by traversing 
the less number of source nodes; thus, MA takes less time to 
return to PE. Our scheme can reduce the average end-to-end 
delay by 13%. 
The simulation results verify the practicality of our 
algorithm. The results show that our algorithm improves the 
Xu-Qi's model in terms of aggregation precision, energy 
consumption and end-to-end delay. 
 
In PE
:    
    find first source node according to (7)    
    set last gain to the current gain     
    can_fusion =1; hop_count =1; hop_jump =1; 
In Sensor Node
: 
    if can_fusion = 1 then {   
        find next node according to (7)   
        diff = current gain – last gain;  
        if diff  ≥ threshold then {        
            select this node as next source     
            set last gain to the current gain   
            can_fusion =1; hop_count =1; hop_jump =1; 
           } 
        else {     
            find the nearest neighbor that hasn't been selected      
            can_fusion =0; hop_count = (hop_count)×2;        
            hop_jump = hop_count; 
           }   
        }   
    else  
     if can_fusion=0 then  {     
        hop_jump =(hop_jump) – 1       
        if hop_jump == 0 then {      
              diff = current gain – last gain;      
              if diff  ≥ threshold then {       
                    select this node as next source  
                    set last gain to the current gain           
                    can_fusion = 1; hop_count = 1;  
                    hop_jump = hop_count;   
                    }     
              else {             
                    find the nearest neighbor that hasn't been selected         
                    can_fusion =0, hop_count = (hop_count)×2     
                    hop_jump = hop_count; 
                    }     
             } 
         else        
               find the nearest neighbor that hasn't been selected      
        } 
Figure 2.  The pseudocode of mobile agent migration process. 
( 0 )
v
0)
,
(
i ≠
vi
197
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a dynamic mobile agent 
routing algorithm in wireless sensor networks. Our proposed 
algorithm is an improvement of the dynamic model designed 
by Xu and Qi. The Xu-Qi's model is developed for target 
tracking application, but our scheme is not limited to special 
ones. In Xu-Qi's model, the node selection process is 
determined by the minimum value of cost function. The cost 
function is the trade-off between the information gain and 
the energy consumption. We improved the cost function so 
that, the highest information gain is achieved along the route 
by consuming the minimum energy. Therefore, our 
algorithm can increase the accuracy of the aggregated data. 
We verify the practicality of our algorithm using simulations 
and compare its performance to Xu-Qi's model. The 
simulation results show that our proposed algorithm 
outperforms the existing model in terms of energy and     
end-to-end delay. Future work includes extending this work 
to support multi-cooperative mobile agent to achieve more 
precision and less delay. Also, we would like to extend the 
proposed scheme for selecting a source node in the hostile 
environment by considering the reliability and security 
factors in the cost function. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Aggregation precision ratio, when the factor-α varies from 0 to 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Average end-to-end delay, when the factor-α varies from 0 to 1.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, 
“Wireless sensor networks: A survey,” Computer Networks, Vol. 38, 
pp. 393–422, 2002. 
[2] 
M. Chen, T. Kwon, Y. Yuan, and V.C.M. Leung, “Mobile agent 
based wireless sensor networks,” Journal of computers, Vol. 1, No. 1, 
pp. 14-21, April 2006. 
[3] 
H. Qi, Y. Xu, and X. Wang, “Mobile-agent-based collaborative signal 
and information processing in sensor networks,” in Proceeding of the 
IEEE, Vol. 91, No. 8, pp. 1172-1183, August 2003. 
[4] 
P.K. Biswas, H. Qi, Y. Xu, “ Mobile-agent-based collaborative sensor 
fusion,” Information Fusion Journal, Vol. 9 ,No. 3, pp. 399 – 411, 2008.  
[5] 
H. Qi and F. Wang, “Optimal itinerary analysis for mobile agents in     
ad hoc wireless sensor networks,” in Proceeding of the IEEE ICC'01, 
Helsinki, Finland, June 2001.  
[6] 
M. Chen, V. Leung, S. Mao, T. Kwon, and M. Li, “Energy-efficient 
itinerary planning for mobile agents in wireless sensor networks,” in 
Proceeding of the IEEE ICC'09, Dresden, Germany, pp. 14-18, 2009.  
[7] 
Y. Xu and H. Qi, “Mobile agent migration modeling and design for 
target tracking in wireless sensor networks,” Ad Hoc networks 
Journal, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 1–16, 2008. 
[8] 
 C. Konstantopoulos, A. Mpitziopoulos, D. Gavalas, and G. Pantziou, 
“Effective determination of mobile agent itineraries for data 
aggregation on sensor networks,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engineering, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1679–1693, 2010. 
[9] J. C. Hou, N. Li, I. Stojmenovic, Sensor networks: algorithms and 
architectures. John Wiley & Sons, chapter 10, pp. 313-317,2005. 
[10] Network simulator ns version 2. http://isi.edu/nsnam/ns/ 
 
 
Figure 5.  Comparison of average remaining energy percentage, when the 
number of nodes varies from 100 to 400. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Comparison of average end-to-end delay, when the number of 
nodes varies from 100 to 400. 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Alpha value
Aggregation Precision Ratio
Aggregation Precision Ratio v.s. Alpha
 
 
our algorithm
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Alpha value
Average End-to-End Delay (second)
Delay v.s. Alpha
 
 
our algorithm
100
200
300
400
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Number of nodes
Average Remaining energy percentage
Average Remaining energy
 
 
Our Algorithm
Xu-Qi 's Algorithm
100
200
300
400
35
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
Number of Nodes
Average End-to-End Delay (second)
Average End-to-End Delay
 
 
Our Algorithm
Xu-Qi 's Algorithm
198
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

