Bulk Data Transfers through an Airline Delay-Tolerant Network 
 
Christina M. Malliou, Nikolaos Bezirgiannidis, Vassilis Tsaoussidis 
Democritus University of Thrace 
Xanthi, Greece 
 e-mail: {cmalliou, nbezirgi, vtsaousi}@ee.duth.gr 
 
 
Abstract— In the era of big data, the Internet engineering 
community is searching for solutions to alleviate the issues caused 
by the constantly increasing data traffic. In this paper, we at-
tempt to revive the sneakernet paradigm as a possible solution 
for non-real-time bulk data transfers. We propose a sample net-
work architecture that takes advantage of the existing worldwide 
airline infrastructure, and leverages Delay-Tolerant Networking 
architecture to transfer data over the air in an automated way. 
We exploit Contact Graph Routing algorithm, which utilizes 
flight schedules to route bundles based on delivery delay or cost 
minimization. We examine the applicability of our proposal in a 
scenario that includes bulk space-data transfers between ESA 
data centers. Through simulations, we illustrate that the pro-
posed scheme can deliver data efficiently between connected data 
centers, while the achieved throughput increases with the amount 
of data transmitted. 
Keywords-Delay/Disruption 
Tolerant 
Networking; 
Airport 
network;  Sneakernet;  Bulk data;  Contact Graph Routing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Internet growth and digital data production are typically 
considered as two symmetric but also reciprocally-influenced 
aspects of our digital era: Internet boosts digital data produc-
tion and digital data growth is served through the growing 
Internet. However, data privacy, ownership or processing pa-
rameters occasionally call for local access of data – typical 
Internet speeds cannot accommodate timely transfer of huge 
data to local ends. 
Every year a vast amount of digital information is pro-
duced, with a rate that grows exponentially. This includes non-
real-time data, such as data center backups and scientific data. 
For example, according to [1] the European Bioinformatics 
Institute (EBI) in Hinxton, UK, currently stores 20 petabytes of 
data and back-ups; in 2016 the Large Synoptic Survey Tele-
scope, in Chile, will create 140TBytes of data every five days 
[2] and the European Space Agency (ESA) expects production 
of 850Gbit of compressed data per day from a single mission 
(Euclid) [3] NASA in [4] claimed that planned missions will 
easily stream more than 24TBytes a day. Also, every year, 
particle-collision events in CERN's Large Hadron Collider 
generate around 15 petabytes of data [1]. Frequently, these data 
have to be transferred around the world, in order to be elabo-
rated locally by various research centers, occasionally with 
different scope. All such non-real-time transmissions of scien-
tific data, plus other potential information sources of medical, 
meteorological or social nature, that produce huge data, consti-
tute the major challenge of the proposed approach. Until now, 
such data was delivered either using costly dedicated networks 
or via physical delivery of hard copy elements between the 
source and the end-user. 
Our architectural approach exploits two major properties of 
future Global Internet (see [5]): (i) the ability to accommodate 
data-in-flight in storage, following the Delay-Tolerant Net-
working (DTN) paradigm, and (ii) the Contact Graph Routing 
algorithm (CGR), which optimizes routing when deterministic 
contacts are scheduled – with or without probabilistic influ-
ence.  
In particular, we explore the potential to incorporate a De-
lay-tolerant network within the network of airports around the 
world, and build a Contact Graph Routing algorithm using the 
scheduled flight connections, aiming at carrying bulk data be-
tween data centers located near airports. We evaluate this po-
tential based on throughput gains and cost expenditures; how-
ever, given the increasing amount of big-data applications and 
the digitalization of everything, we consider that our approach 
to evaluate impact is rather modest. In order to present realistic 
results, we use the high-capacity dedicated internal network of 
ESA [6], as reference for comparison. 
Practically, we consider end users unaware of network 
characteristics. Certainly, users are indeed delay-tolerant since 
they expect to transfer huge amounts of data towards a far end; 
therefore, our assumption for an end-to-end delay-tolerant ap-
plication for delivering huge data across the globe is not unre-
alistic. Instead of using a transmission link, the network uses 
the physical airline connection. Thus, the aircraft becomes the 
transmission link. Clearly, the Delay X Bandwidth product 
with the typical link versus the airline-as-the-link differs; the 
real issue is when the data-to-transfer or the storage capacity of 
the airplane balances the trip delay. 
In the context of the physical architecture constraints, we 
show that a significant improvement in terms of delivery 
time/throughput could be achieved; the significance grows 
when data amount grows and the importance of the solution 
grows when the geographical distribution of the end users ex-
pands. Beyond that, one can focus also on the importance of 
automating the manual data delivery service, alone. 
Our work is structured as follows: we discuss the context of 
our approach within the framework of related work in Section 
2 and present the architectural constraints in Section 3. We 
detail the evaluation methodology in Section 4 and show the 
results in Section 5. We conclude in Section 6 along with our 
remarks for complementary and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Researchers have proposed different types of vehicular 
networks, such as trains, buses, cars and airplanes, for data 
transportation. In TrainNet [7], storage devices are placed in 
trains and stations for delivering data from one station to an-
other. As in our approach, this method provides high band-
width link that could be used to deliver non real-time data. The 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

authors propose the alternative of fiber optics to connect trains 
and stations, however they evaluate it using human interfer-
ence, i.e., the transmission of disk cases between trains and 
stations. Furthermore, they focus on data queue management 
policies, and consider only single-hop transmissions, without 
any routing or automated forwarding policies. 
In various works, researchers have proposed the use of bus-
es to extend Internet service to disconnected areas. In [8], buses 
travel according to a schedule between Internet kiosks and 
opportunistically exchange data. A similar functionality is pre-
sented in [9], where data transfers exploit a connectivity plan 
routing protocol. In contrast to the network proposed here, the 
aforementioned architectures strongly rely on the Internet, and 
couldn’t be used for bulk data transmissions.   
Also, cars are used in [10] for solving the transmission 
problem of bulk data. The whole idea exploits the existing 
worldwide road infrastructure for moving huge amounts of data 
between geographically distributed locations. In this network, 
unlike our work, cars do not follow regular prescribed sched-
ules.  
The idea of exploiting air flights has been proposed in [11] 
where the authors suggest a method to send messages between 
airports, based on the scheduled flight connections. This net-
work is used for delivering small size messages from one air-
port to another, by using the passengers’ mobile devices, where 
the messages are loaded depending on their destination, while 
passengers are waiting for their flight. By contrast, our pro-
posed approach targets the transmission of bulk data exploiting 
an infrastructure installed in airports and airplanes. Further-
more, we propose the use of Contact Graph Routing algorithm, 
which exploits the scheduled connections, and achieves 100% 
delivery ratio, assuming adequate storage network capacity.  
In [12], the authors suggested the combined use of the In-
ternet together with the postal system to send a part of the data 
using hard-drives. However, this approach lacks automation, 
due to the fact that it strongly relies on the human interference.  
Here, we attempt to exploit the airline network to create a 
high-capacity, automated system for bulk data transmissions, 
which operates in a transparent fashion (i.e., without any need 
to physically transfer storage media), and routes data according 
to the predefined air flight schedules. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
In this Section, we present the architecture of the proposed 
system, which can be used to transport massive quantities of 
non-real-time data between two distant geographical locations. 
The system combines the existing worldwide airline infrastruc-
ture with the concept of delay-tolerant networks, providing a 
reliable manner to distribute bulk data in an automated way.  
In particular, the proposed architecture exploits the DTN 
paradigm as an alternative or complementary network layer to 
IP, for the data transmissions. Applications that are used to 
transmit data, either in a pull or in a push function, function on 
top of the DTN architecture in an automated and transparent 
way, similar to the Internet infrastructure. 
Unlike the Internet protocol suite, however, DTN does not 
necessitate end-to-end connectivity; instead, it can deliver data 
in the presence of communication disruptions, or through in-
termittent links. Therefore, it constitutes an ideal candidate for 
transmitting data through a store-and-forward airplane net-
work. Moreover, DTN may function on top of the Internet 
architecture as well [13], hence providing a hybrid mode of 
operation, where data can be routed either over Internet links or 
airplane links, depending on the routing objective. 
Our network model comprises a sending node (e.g., re-
search center where scientific data are stored), a destination 
node, (e.g., research center where a scientist requests data 
download), a set of interconnected airports with persistent 
DTN storage capabilities, which are in the vicinity of the re-
search or data centers, and a fleet of airplanes, which have 
persistent storage to carry the bulk sets of data onboard (see 
Figure 1). 
In a data transmission scenario, a bulk data set, originated 
from the sending research center, is transferred to the nearby 
airport, where it is stored in the data storage. When the airplane 
- selected by the data routing function - arrives, the data set is 
transferred to the airplane storage. For large data sets that do 
not fit in a single airport, different bundles (i.e., subsets) of data 
are routed via different airplanes. The airplane(s) travel(s) with 
data onboard and, upon arrival at destination airport, data are 
offloaded into the destination airport’s persistent storage. From 
that point, the data bundles may continue with transmission 
over consecutive flights, until the arrival at the destination 
airport (i.e., the airport that supports the destination research 
center), which will forward the data to the destination research 
center.  
In this early work, we focus on a generic architecture 
scheme and on the evaluation of different routing alternatives. 
Therefore, we do not study the hardware components and net-
work infrastructure extensively, but, instead, propose a sample 
infrastructure implementation. In our proposal, the research 
centers are connected with airports via fiber optics links; the 
airports have installations of high-capacity network drives 
where the data are transferred on a parallel mode; airplanes 
have boxes of storage disks (e.g., Solid-State Drives); and data 
are transferred between airport and airplane storage drives 
through high capacity Ethernet (10 /100 Gigabit Ethernet) on 
parallel mode. Since the storage hardware components are 
being continuously improved, the infrastructure components 
may evolve or be updated to higher-capacity, higher-speed, 
state-of-the-art hardware, and provide further improved data 
rates and storage capabilities than the ones proposed here. 
We note that, since in this work we focus on transmission 
of bulk amounts of non-real-time, non-confidential data (e.g., 
scientific/research data), we do not consider security or confi-
dentiality aspects of the data deliveries.  
The aforementioned procedure is depicted in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Sample Network Topology 
One of the main features of the proposed bulk data delivery 
system is that data transmissions are based on the air flight 
schedules. Hence, we employ CGR [14] [15], an algorithm that 
bases its routing decisions on some ordered list (named “con-
tact plan”) of anticipated connectivity changes, named “con-
tacts”.  
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

The contact plan involved in proposed architecture com-
prises of i) the continuous contacts between research centers 
and airports; ii) the intermittent contacts between airport stor-
age and airplane storage, with rate equal to the storage writing 
speed, and contact intervals of one hour prior to the flight time; 
and iii) the contacts that represent the flights, with propagation 
delays equal to the flight times. For each of the aforementioned 
contacts, we have the following structure {FromNode ID, 
ToNode ID, Contact Start Time, Contact End Time, Transmis-
sion rate, Propagation delay}. We assume that each network 
node has an accurate contact plan knowledge that was obtained 
using a dissemination protocol, such as the Contact Plan Up-
date Protocol (CPUP) [16], and uses it to build a “routing ta-
ble” data structure, which is a list of “route lists,” i.e., one route 
list for every research center in the network. 
When a research center initiates the transmission of a data 
set, it is segregated into multiple bundles, according to the 
bundle size. For every one of the bundles, the routing algorithm 
calculates the paths between this research center and destina-
tion research center, based on the connectivity plan, and selects 
the one that achieves the earliest bundle delivery time. The 
routing procedure is subsequently executed in every network 
node through the path to destination, where each node recalcu-
lates the optimal route towards the data destination, excluding 
the previously visited node to avoid routing loops.  
In this paper, also, we propose a different routing objective, 
namely cost minimization. Cost represents the transmission 
value per MB of the data delivered through the entire path from 
source to destination, including the air flights. If cost for two 
routes is equal (e.g., two similar flights for two successive 
days), the routing decision is based on the earliest delivery 
time. For each of the contacts, we now have the following 
structure {FromNodeID, ToNode ID, Start Contact Time, End 
Contact Time, Transmission rate, Propagation delay, Cost}. 
IV. 
EVALUATION METHODOLOGY 
In order to evaluate the proposed framework, we consider 
scenarios with transmissions of bulk space data and compare it 
with the European Space Agency’s (ESA) internal dedicated 
network with high-speed connections (1, 2.5, and 10 Gbit/s) 
[6], which interconnects ESA’s assets inside Europe (shown in 
Figure 2), with the purpose of transferring a vast amount of 
space data among them. 
 
 
Figure 2. ESA’s Data Network, Copernicus [6] 
The performance of the proposed architecture is evaluated 
using the DTN simulator that was originally used in [16]. We 
assume that the airports in the vicinity of ESA’s research center 
support the architecture described in Section 3; we also use one 
extra airport (namely OSL) to support the connection with 
Svalbard airport. We assemble the contact plan of the formed 
network, using the FlightStats Web Services API [17], and the 
set of connected airports, for a certain period of time of 40 
days. We assume that the connections between airports and 
airplanes, as it is mentioned, last one hour prior to the flight 
time and after landing. Also, we assume that there are no de-
lays in flights, the research centers have continuous connection 
with the corresponding airport, and the storage capacity in 
airports is unlimited. The parameters of the proposed architec-
ture are given in Table I. 
 
TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Bandwidth of optical fiber 
10Gbps 
SSD read speed 
SSD write speed 
500Mbps 
377Mbps 
Number of ssd 
Bundle size 
60 
10GB 
 
We assess the performance of the proposed architecture in 
different simulation series, in terms of system throughput 
achieved, for different data values. At the first set of simula-
tions a single research center in Frankfurt transmits data to-
wards a single receiver in Madrid. The second set includes 
parallel data transmission from many research centers (specifi-
cally 2 and 5) to one. We also evaluate the performance of the 
proposed system with different routing objectives in mind, 
alternatively to the earliest delivery delay. Using cost minimi-
zation as the routing objective, data routing will not rely on the 
fastest transmission but on the most economical one. For an 
initial evaluation, we measure the cost per MB of the flights 
based on the flight distance; undoubtedly, in a deployed system 
the cost would depend on more parameters, e.g., the airport 
infrastructure expenses, the airline policies, the agreement 
between data providers and airline companies, etc. Finally we 
compare the data delivery times of the proposed model with 
ESA’s dedicated network, assuming constant throughput, and 
with a hybrid model that leverages both internal network and 
airplane data transmissions. Since the delivery delay (and 
throughput, respectively) of the airplane network depends 
mainly on the flight schedules and the transmission initiation 
time, we used uniformly random transmission start times, at a 
daily basis, for 30 days, to obtain statistical deviations and 
associated confidence intervals. 
V. 
EVALUATION RESULTS 
Based on the described evaluation method we examine, ini-
tially, bulk data transmissions from a single sender to a single 
receiver. In Figure 3, we illustrate the throughput of the pro-
posed system for different amounts of transmitted data; single-
hop transmissions represent the case in which the contact plan 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

contains only the direct flights between the two airports that 
reside near the sending and receiving research centers, whereas 
in multi-hop the contact plan contains the flights between more 
airports in network, exploiting also intermediate flights. In both 
cases the achieved throughput increases with the amount of 
data transmitted, and, for large bulk data sizes (i.e., 100TB), 
the system throughput approaches the optical fiber speed. As 
expected, further data increase wouldn’t improve the system’s 
throughput, due to the fact that it approaches the optical fiber 
speed, which is the transmission bottleneck and the through-
put’s upper bound of the proposed system. 
Therefore, since the throughput achieved by the flights is 
not the bottleneck, there is no discrepancy between single-hop 
and multi-hop data transmissions. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Throughput over different data sizes with 99% confidence interval 
We continue the evaluation of the proposed methodology 
by considering many-to-one bulk data transmissions, in order 
to study the effect of multiple, parallel flows on the throughput. 
In Figure 4, we illustrate the achieved throughput regarding the 
simultaneous data deliveries from multiple research centers to 
one; specifically, we have used two and five research centers 
with each one sending 10ΤΒ or 100TB of data towards the 
same receiving research center.  As Figure 4 illustrates, the 
transmission from multiple senders to one, over the proposed 
system can be proven quite beneficial; for example the system 
in case of 2 senders manages to transmit, in more or less the 
same time, 2 times the amount of data (approximately double 
throughput) that can be transmitted by only one sender. The 
main reason for the above enhancement is the usage of an air-
craft as transmission link, which allow us to transmit simulta-
neously (using different aircrafts) a vast amount of data from 
different resources, where the theoretical limit is the airplane’s 
store capabilities and the corresponding optical fiber between 
the airport and research center at destination. 
In Figure 5, we illustrate the delivery delay per bundle, for 
10TB data transmissions; we compare the proposed system 
with a dedicated Internet link with throughput equal to 1Gbps, 
as well as with the use of a hybrid system, where the two 
aforementioned approaches are combined. We observe that the 
first bundles are delivered faster with the dedicated Internet 
link, since the transmission starts right away, rather than wait 
for the first flight. After 5.8TB, however, data are routed 
through the air flight link. Exploiting this separation, the bun-
dles can be transferred via the faster available mean, reducing 
both the transmission time and the congestion on the dedicated 
Internet link. 
 
 
Figure 4. Throughput over different number of senders for 10TB and 100TB 
with 99% confidence interval 
 
Figure 5. Destination delivery times per bundle 
In Figure 6, we present the transmission cost and throughput 
for different amounts of transmitted data, applying cost and 
delivery time as the routing objective (referred to as 
CGR_COST and CGR, respectively). The throughput, depicted 
in bars, is approximately the same in both cases, with a minor 
improvement at the case where routing decisions are made 
based on delivery time. The corresponding cost is illustrated by 
the two lines across different data samples. It is worth noticing 
that, in cases where we use as routing criterion the cost, the 
method achieves to maintain a constant cost/MB ratio, in con-
trast to the second case where the routing criterion does not 
have any relation with the flights’ cost, thus, as depicted in 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 6, the overall transmission cost may vary, depending on 
the specific test case’s available flights.  
 
 
Figure 6. Throughput over different data sizes and corresponding cost per MB 
with 99% confidence interval 
However, the cost in second case seems to have only small 
fluctuations, in comparison to the first one, for mainly two 
reasons: First, the evaluation is based on the distances of the 
European airports that form the aforementioned ESA network, 
which renders costs among them quite similar. Second, the 
number of scheduled flights is restrictive, due to the usage of 
only specific airports. In other words, the bundles do not have 
the opportunity to follow multiple routes in order to decrease 
the delivery delay at the expense of cost. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have described a network architecture for 
bulk data transfers, by using airline infrastructure. This archi-
tecture exploits Delay-Tolerant Networking and Contact Graph 
Routing algorithm providing an automated way to efficiently 
transmit large amounts of data. We evaluate the proposed net-
work via a set of simulations and compare the throughput of 
the proposed architecture with a dedicated network of ESA, in 
order to show that an acceptable level of service (in terms of 
throughput) can be provided. Furthermore, a possible combina-
tion of the proposed system, along with the existing, internal 
network infrastructure could further reduce transmission times 
and congestion on the dedicated links. Finally, we demonstrate 
the impact of the proposed approach when motivation is the 
minimization of data transmission cost; we incorporate it as an 
alternative objective of our routing policy. 
Our future work has several dimensions. One critical di-
mension is to expand the architecture per se and cancel the 
restrictive assumption that research centers are located nearby 
airports – this is doable via a combination of bus or train trans-
portation service. Another recent dimension is derived by the 
motivations of Future Internet and, in particular, of UMOBILE 
project [18], where localized access to data necessitates, in 
some occasions, transmissions of large amounts of data over 
different network architectures, complementary or alternative 
to IP. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
   The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Union’s (EU) Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under grant agreement No 645124 (Ac-
tion full title: Universal, mobile-centric and opportunistic 
communications architecture, Action Acronym: UMOBILE). 
This paper reflects only the authors’ views and the Community 
is not liable for any use that may be made of the information 
contained therein. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Marx, "Biology: The big challenges of big data." Nature 
498.7453,  pp. 255-260 (2013). 
[2] The Economist, “Data, data everywhere”. [Online]. Available 
from:  http://www.economist.com/node/15557443 2015.09.25 
[3] European Space Agency (ESA), Euclid mission. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://sci.esa.int/euclid/46661-mission-
operations/ 2015.09.25 
[4] N. Skytland, “Big Data”, open.NASA blog. [Online]. Available 
from:   http://open.nasa.gov/blog/2012/10/04/what-is-nasa-
doing-with-big-data-today/ 2015.09.25 
[5] S. Burleigh, V. Cerf, J. Crowcroft, and V. Tsaoussidis, "Space 
for Internet and Internet for Space", Elsevier Ad Hoc Networks, 
Special Issue on New Research Challenges in Mobile, 
Opportunistic & Delay-Tolerant Networks, vol. 23, pp. 80–86, 
December 2014. 
[6] G. Buscemi, "The new dimension of the Copernicus Data 
Network", NETSPACE Workshop, 2014. 
[7] A. M. Zarafshan, TrainNet: A Novel Transport Infrastructure for 
Non Real-Time Data Delivery. University of Wollongong, 2009. 
[8] S. Guo, M.H. Falaki, E.A. Oliver, S. Ur Rahman, A. Seth, M.A. 
Zaharia, and S. Keshav, "Very low-cost internet access using 
KioskNet." ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication 
Review 37.5, pp. 95-100 (2007). 
[9] I. Komnios and V. Tsaoussidis, "CARPOOL: Connectivity Plan 
Routing Protocol", 12th International Conference on Wired & 
Wireless Internet Communications (WWIC 2014), Paris, France, 
May 26-28, 2014. 
[10] R. A. Gorcitz et al., "Vehicular carriers for big data transfers 
(poster)." Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC), 2012 
IEEE. IEEE, 2012. 
[11] A. Keränen and J. Ott, "DTN over aerial carriers." Proceedings 
of the 4th ACM workshop on Challenged networks. ACM, 
2009. 
[12] B. Cho and I. Gupta, "Budget-constrained bulk data transfer via 
internet and shipping networks." Proceedings of the 8th ACM 
international conference on Autonomic computing. ACM, 2011. 
[13] V. Cerf, S. Burleigh , A. Hooke, L. Torgerson, R. Durst, K. 
Scott, K. Fall, and H. Weiss, Delay-Tolerant Networking 
Architecture. RFC 4838 (Informational), Apr 2007. 
[14] S. Burleigh, Contact graph routing. Tech. Rep. draft-burleigh-
dtnrg-cgr-01, Network Working Group, Jul 2010. 
[15] G. Araniti, N. Bezirgiannidis, E. Birrane, I. Bisio, S. Burleigh, 
C. Caini, M. Feldmann, M. Marchese, J. Segui, and K. Suzuki, 
"Contact graph routing in DTN space networks: overview, 
enhancements and performance," Communications Magazine, 
IEEE , vol.53, no.3, pp.38,46, March 2015. 
[16] N. Bezirgiannidis, F. Tsapeli, S. Diamantopoulos, and V. 
Tsaoussidis, "Towards Flexibility and Accuracy in Space DTN 
Communications", in 8th ACM MobiCom Workshop on 
Challenged Networks, (CHANTS'13), Miami, Florida, USA, 
September 30, 2013.  
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

[17] Flightstats. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://developer.flightstats.com/products/scheduled_flights 
2015.09.25 
[18] Umobile 
European 
project. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.umobile-project.eu/index.php/4-the-network-of-
excellence-on-internet-science 2015.09.25 
 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

