Connecting Communities: Stories of Digital Adventures in a Third Sector 
Organization
 
Maria Burke 
 Salford Business School 
 University of Salford  
Salford, UK  
 m.e.burke@salford.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—This paper aims to give an overview of the 
implementation of read and write back Quick Read (QR 
Codes) and Radio Frequency Identification Data (RFID) 
technology to a third sector, charity organization. The context 
of the research project is the Internet of Things and this 
particular "snapshot" of the research created tagged items 
with a story or history of that item, which was then accessible 
to customers of the charity via relevant mobile apps. The paper 
discusses issues around knowledge and knowledge browsing, 
the background to the project, the initial pilot, the regional 
trial of ten weeks and the journey towards national roll out. 
Then, the paper considers aspects of knowledge recovery and 
concludes with thoughts about knowledge sharing. 
Keywords-communities; third sector; QR codes. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
In order to attempt to “connect communities” we must 
first examine the medium we use to connect – and that is 
knowledge. In its simplest form, knowledge can be 
categorized, as explicit or tacit knowledge [1][2][3][4][5]. 
Members of a society produce knowledge via raw 
information. Society in general is organized into many 
different systems, (organizations), which are often controlled 
by technology. Within organizations knowledge systems 
utilize the available technology in order to undertake 
particular parts of the information management process –
including careful planning of the way in which the 
information flows within the organization structure – 
resulting in overall improved control of the way in which the 
knowledge is managed. Due to the current, continuous nature 
of change in organizations today, it is critical that managers 
are able to respond and take prompt decisions. For example,  
new tagging technology can provide a means of improving 
business performance by offering a new way of browsing, 
recovering and sharing information such as an estate agent 
who is able to measure the performance of property adverts 
in local papers by offering clients the facility to “read 
additional information” via QR codes placed beside the 
property photo. 
 
Another example is that of  a recruitment manager who 
could dramatically affect the induction process by setting up 
a process for leaving “hidden” memories in the form of 
messages embedded in QR Codes, on items in offices, such 
as printers, keyboards; desks; walls, in order to speed the 
levels of efficiency and effectiveness, and again improve 
performance of the organization. The charity store manager 
may have the facility to personalize each donated gift 
through a technological facility where customers can listen to 
powerful memories associated with objects by “reading” the 
QR code. In these examples, knowledge that was tacit 
becomes available – available for others to browse; available 
as a form of recovered information (known but never 
written) and almost a type of mythological knowledge; and 
knowledge which is available to be shared using new forms 
of technology. All of these aspects are part of a broader 
discipline of knowledge management that can be defined as 
the process of locating, organizing, transferring and using the 
information and expertise within an organization. More 
formally, knowledge management can be defined as “the 
generation, representation, storage, transfer, transformation, 
application, embedding and protecting of organizational 
knowledge” [6] and this is the one that we consider best 
represents the work outlined in this paper. The old adage that 
the overall success of the organization, however, rests on one 
aspect, that of sharing information is still true, but with the 
onset of social media and newer more accessible 
technologies the ways of dealing with knowledge is 
changing. Now it is easy to share and indeed sometimes, 
difficult not to share. 
What has become important and what will be discussed 
next is the ability to both “browse knowledge and to recover 
knowledge” and to show how tagging technologies can be 
applied in these areas. 
II. 
KNOWLEDGE BROWSING 
The confidence to browse suggests that an individual or 
organizations are comfortable in a context to afford them 
the time to survey products, services and perhaps people with 
whom they would like to connect. The act of browsing also 
suggests an open-minded disposition that is receptive to new 
modes of practice and interested less in finding answers to 
specific questions, but to understanding novel solutions, or 
even opportunities of which they were previously unaware. 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

What is important in this technological context is that aspect 
of browsing which we can define as “uncertainty”. We will 
deal here with organizational uncertainty. Uncertainty can be 
viewed from two areas, that of “relational uncertainty” [7], 
where it is difficult for employees to predict the beliefs and 
behaviour of colleagues and that of “informational 
uncertainty” where the accuracy of the actual information is 
called into question- as addressed in the information seeking 
literature [8][9][10][11][12]. Both these areas are concerned 
with three issues. The first is the trepidation experienced by 
organizational members about levels of accuracy and 
quantity of information; the second issue is about both 
trusting the source of the information and a willingness to 
trust co -workers enough to share information whilst the 
third issue is about having sufficient relevant knowledge to 
make quality decisions. All of these issues are becoming 
clearer through the use and application of new forms of 
media and technology. 
III. 
THE CASE STUDY – CONNECTING A 
COMMUNITY THROUGHT KNOWLEDGE  
The project known as Tales of Things: Electronic 
Memories (TOTeM) aims to apply digital technology to the 
public at large, to business and to ensure that new kinds of 
technology are available and in a format which can be used 
by all sectors of society. The research is multi – institutional 
(Edinburgh, Salford, Brunel, UCL and Dundee Universities) 
and multi –disciplinary, and arises out of a research council 
Digital Economy Programme. During the project, a small 
pilot was launched working with a third sector charity store 
whereby a number of donated items were “tagged with QR 
codes which were embedded with the memory or history of 
that particular item. So, for example a teapot may be tagged 
with memories of families growing up and a variety of 
celebrations; a scarf may be tagged with memories of cold 
crisp winter days and so on.  Audio facilities were located 
placed in the store, so that voices could be heard re-living the 
memory. In this way a very powerful atmosphere was 
created which enhanced the selling process and made the 
process of buying connected with the process of donating. 
The short pilot was very successful with all the items 
sold and a high rise in revenue during that week. The value 
of the goods had been increased by the connection with 
memory. Later in the project, as the charity became familiar 
with the work, the team were involved in a larger study 
which involved ten charity shops over an initial period of 
twelve weeks. The team developed an App for use with 
iPhones that would encourage customers to try out the 
technology for themselves. The App could be downloaded to 
any Smartphone and used to read the QR Codes. Many items 
were tagged with QR Codes and placed on the shelf, ready 
for customers to read using mobile phones. The “stories” 
were interesting and varied – for example, the memory about 
a Party Dress (worn on a first date) to a pair of trainers (worn 
when running city Marathons) to memories of teapots and 
favourite cookbooks.) 
A press launch took place and considerable interest was 
shown in the work. During the following ten weeks, 166 
customers were interviewed about their experiences using 
the technology. The results were positive with most people 
enjoying the innovation and the novelty of accessing 
previously denied information. Donors’ tended to spend less 
time leaving stories at drop off points, but buyers were keen 
on hearing the stories. 
 
 
IV. 
 KNOWLEDGE RECOVERY: THE CONTEXT OF 
MEMORY 
 
Knowledge recovery is a new term and one that can be 
used to discover and recover information – to find out about 
memories and about identities of artifacts, to engage almost 
with history. This kind of knowledge is embedded personally 
in an individual experience and depends on other factors 
such as personal belief, perspective and the accepted value 
system, Gourlay [13] discovers that tacit knowledge has the 
identical phrase and defines it as practical know-how. It is 
informal rather than formal among professional groups 
including managers. What is particularly interesting is that 
new forms of digital technology are used to enhance this 
process. For example, the web site talesofthings.com that 
allows users to record a “tale” about any object and to upload 
to a database, is a form of both knowledge sharing and 
knowledge recovery. As individuals we are able to share 
with relative ease, however this becomes more problematic 
for us as we spend most of our lives dealing with or as part 
of organizations that operate within an ever-changing 
external environment. How then, can knowledge recovery 
both implicit and explicit be enhanced through digital 
technology? We may start to approach this problem by 
analyzing types of societies. This may be helpful as it allows 
us to consider the aspect of sharing information and the 
management of knowledge from quite different perspectives 
than technology and sociology. For example, Van der Ritja 
[14] was concerned with the two concepts of societies which 
displayed characteristics associated with individualism and 
collectism. These types of societies are important and 
provide means of charting differences in the concept of 
sharing [15][16]. 
 
V. 
KNOWLEDGE SHARING  
Sharing generally happens within the context of an 
information system or a knowledge management system.  
For example, the work carried out in 2004,  [17] concerned a 
virtual learning environment for French Physics teachers. 
This was an important study as it showed how the sharing of 
knowledge through the use of IT could be used to 
successfully 
“mediate” 
information, 
learning 
and 
understanding. Yet, the popularity and availability of social 
media sites has made “sharing” a much more social activity. 
Sharing in organizations only takes place where there is trust 
and where there is a shared feeling of ownership of goals. 
The reasons behind the tendency to share are based on the 
kind of interpersonal relations between co- workers inherent 
within the organization and the effects of social relationships 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

on 
organizational 
teams. 
Strengthening 
the 
social 
relationships between individuals in the team is crucial in 
motivating team members to share knowledge. 
The current thinking in the research community about 
knowledge sharing within organizations is that barriers to 
knowledge sharing can be classified into individual barriers, 
organizational barriers and technology barriers. The UK has 
a rich array of examples where attention has been paid to 
knowledge management initiatives in order to set up major 
knowledge management systems, e.g. the Health Service and 
Banking sectors. Although these have not always been 
wholly successful, UK companies have taken up the ideas of 
knowledge management and have endeavored to identify and 
overcome barriers to sharing [18]. Of particular interest is the 
work 
[19], 
which 
investigated 
knowledge 
sharing 
capabilities and knowledge development needs in the context 
of East-West technology. However, in order for even the 
most basic KM system to work effectively, as we have seen, 
(above) there must be a sense of trust in the organization and 
this trust is crucial to the open sharing of information. 
Sharing only takes place where there is trust and where there 
is a shared feeling of ownership of goals.  Within a business, 
this is often done through a framework of knowledge sharing 
networks. For example, Dyer and Nobeoka [20], on the 
Toyota’s network can be seen as a purely classical way as 
having solved   
“three fundamental dilemmas with regard to knowledge 
sharing by devising methods to (1) motivate members to 
participate and openly share valuable knowledge (while 
preventing undesirable spillovers to competitors), (2) prevent 
free riders, and (3) reduce the costs associated with finding 
and accessing different types of valuable knowledge.  Toyota 
has done this by creating a strong network identity with rules 
for participation and entry into the network. Most 
importantly, production knowledge is viewed as the property 
of the network”. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
There seems to be a high-degree of interest in the project 
and the responses have been mostly positive, but the user 
statistics suggest that this has not yet translated into “a story 
for every object”. An Android application may have helped 
gather more stories and questionnaire responses, although 
iPhone users were the most prolific respondents to the 
questionnaire.  The creation of an iPhone application for this 
trial can be justified by the results on Smartphone usage. The 
work is ongoing and evolving as both the technology 
changes and communities become less fragmented as 
knowledge is recovered and new knowledge is added, and 
ultimately memories are enriched. 
The digital adventure of sharing, of connecting 
communities both locally and globally is ongoing, exciting 
and dynamic. The ability of technology to radically shift our  
perception of value is changing the life of communities 
towards more sustainable futures. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
TOTeM (Tales of Things and Electronic Memory) is a 
collaborative 
research 
project 
and 
I 
acknowledge 
contributions from all the TOTeM Research Team - C. 
Speed, Edinburgh University; A. Karpovich, Brunel 
University; A Hudson Smith, University College London; S. 
O’Callaghan and Jon Rogers of Dundee University and all 
our research staff.  TOTeM is funded through a grant from 
the Digital Economy Research Councils UK.  
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
H.M.Ali and N.H. Ahmad, “Knowledge management in 
Malaysian banks: A new paradigm,” Journal of Knowledge 
Management Practice,” vol 7,(3) 2006 pp.73-79 Retrieved: 
November, 2012 from http://www.tlanc.com/articl120.htm 
 
[2] 
 W. Zheng, “A Conceptualisation of the relationships between 
organisational culture and Knowledge management,” Journal of 
Information and Knowledge Management, vol 4(2) 2005 pp.113-124. 
 
[3] 
S.Song, “An internet knowledge sharing system.” Journal of 
Computer Information Systems, Spring, 2002, pp. 25-30. 
 
 [4]  S.Kim and H.Lee, “The impact of organizational context and 
information 
technology 
on 
employee 
knowledge-sharing 
capabilities”, Public Administration Review.  May/June,  2006, 
pp.370-385. 
 
[5]  M. H. Brent and S.A.Vitall, “Knowledge sharing in large IT 
organizations: a case study,” VINE The Journal of Information and 
Knowledge Management  Systems vol. 37 (4) 2007 pp. 421-439. 
 
[6]  U. Schultze and D. Leidner, “Studying KM in IS research: 
discourses and theoretical assumptions,” MIS Quarterly vol. 26 (3) 
2002, pp. 213-242. 
 
[7]  C. 
R. 
Berger, 
Beyond 
initial 
interaction: 
uncertainty,understanding and the development of interpersonal 
relationships, pp. 122-145 in H. Giles and R. St Clair,  (Eds), 
Language and social psychology, Oxford: Blackwell,  1975.  
 
[8]  M. Burke, “Cultural issues,  organizational hierarchy and 
information fulfilment: an exploration of relationships,” Library 
Review, vol. 56 (8) 2007, pp. 236-245. 
 
[9]  M. Burke, “Philosophical and theoretical perspectives of 
organization structures as information processing systems,” Journal of 
Documentation vol.59 (2) 2003, pp.131-142. 
 
[10]  M. Burke,   “Achieving information fulfilment in the networked 
society, Part 1: Introducing new concepts,” New Library World, vol. 
107 (9/10) 2006, pp. 21-26. 
 
[11]  C.Choo,  “Environmental scanning as information seeking and 
organizational learning,” Information Research, vol. 7 (1) 2001, 
pp.35-39 
Retrieved: 
November, 
2012 
from 
http://informationr.net/ir/7-1/paper112.html 
 
 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
[12]  C. Kulthau, “A Principle of uncertainty for information 
seeking,” Journal of Documentation, vol.  49 (4) 1993, 
pp.39-55. 
 
[13]  S. Gourlay, “Knowledge management and HRD”, Human 
Resource Development International, vol. 4 (1) 2001, pp. 27-46. 
 
 [14]  P. Van der Rijta, Precious knowledge: virtualness and the 
willingness to share knowledge in organisational teams. Amsterdam: 
University van Amsterdam Press, 2007. 
 
 [15]  C. Chen, “How can cooperation be fostered? The cultural 
effects of individualism-collectivism,” Academy of Management 
Review, vol.  23, (2) 1998, pp. 285- 304. 
 
[16]  G. Hofstede and G. J. Hofstede,  Cultures and organizations. 
software of the mind. London: McGraw Hill, 2005. 
 
[17]  M. Kalogiannakis, “A virtual learning environment for the 
French physics teachers,” Education and Information Technologies, 
vol.  9, (4)  2004, pp. 345-353. 
 
[18]  K.Y.Wong and E. Aspinwall, “An empirical study of the 
important factors for knowledge management adoption in the SME 
sector.,” Journal of Knowledge Management, vol. 9, (3) 2005, pp. 64-
82. 
 
[19]  T. Elenurm, “Entrepreneurial knowledge sharing about 
business opportunities in virtual networks”, Proc. 8th European 
Conference on Knowledge Management, (ECKM 07) May, 2007, 
pp.285-290. 
 
[20] J.H. Dyer and K. Nobeoka, (2000). “Creating and managing a 
high-performance knowledge-sharing network: the Toyota case,” 
Strategic Management Journal, vol. 21, 2000, pp.345–349.
  
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

