Cooperative Clustered Architecture and Resource Reservation for OBS Networks 
 
Ihsan Ul Haq1,2,3, Henrique M. Salgado1,2 , and Jorge C. S. Castro1 
1INESC PORTO, Porto Portugal. 
2Faculdade de Engenharia, Universidade do Porto, Portugal 
3Dept. of CSE, NWFP University of Engineering & Technology Peshawar, Pakistan 
ihaq@inescporto.pt, hsalgado@inescporto.pt, jcastro@inescporto.pt
 
Abstract--  Resource contention is a major concern in Optical 
Burst Switching networks that leads to relatively high burst 
loss probability. This article presents a clustered architecture 
for OBS networks, called Cooperative Clustered Optical Burst 
Switching (C2OBS) network architecture. In this architecture, 
the network is divided in overlapping zones/clusters with a 
zone/cluster head having the knowledge of available resources 
within the zone called Zonal Information Base (ZIB) and 
maintains a short resource usage history called Short History 
Base (SHB). Furthermore, a resource reservation strategy for 
the proposed Cooperative Clustered OBS network architecture 
(C2OBS-RR) is also presented which is centralized within the 
zone and distributed in the overall network, for combining the 
benefits of both the centralized and the distributed resource 
reservation schemes. This novel approach uses the zonal state 
of the resource availability, ZIB, so that the bursts originating 
at the ingress nodes in the same part of network having been 
assigned the same wavelength, can be assigned different time 
offsets. This will proactively reduce the probability of 
contention at the intermediate nodes within a zone and is 
expected to significantly reduce the overall network burst loss 
probability. For illustration purpose, the proposed C2OBS 
architecture has been applied to the European Optical 
Network. 
 
Keywords- Optical Burst Switching; Resource Reservation; 
Resource Contention Avoidance. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Optical Burst Switching (OBS) is a promising 
technology for supporting the next generation Internet over 
Dense 
Wavelength 
Division 
Multiplexing 
(DWDM) 
network.  An OBS network consists of Edge and Core 
nodes. Edge nodes may be ingress or egress nodes. The edge 
nodes are the electronic transit points between the burst-
switched backbone and the legacy networks. In the existing 
OBS architecture, the ingress node performs burst assembly, 
routing, wavelength assignment, signaling and edge 
scheduling. The main tasks performed by core nodes are 
signaling, 
core 
scheduling, 
routing/forwarding, 
and 
contention resolution. The core nodes are mainly composed  
of an optical switching matrix and a switch control unit 
which is responsible to forward optical data bursts [1][2] 
[3][8].  
The ingress node receives packets from the client 
network, assembles a burst and sends a corresponding Burst 
Header Packet (BHP) on the control channel. The BHP is 
received at the input module of core node containing source  
 
 
and destination addresses, burst offset time, burst length and  
the Class of Service (CoS) of the corresponding data burst. 
The purpose of the BHP is to reserve the necessary 
resources at each core node along the path for transmitting 
the burst. Three reservation schemes have been proposed, 
namely the Centralized Resource Reservation [4], the 
Distributed Resource Reservation [5], and the Intermediate 
Node Initiated (INI) Resource Reservation scheme [6][7].  
The 
Centralized 
two-way 
Resource 
Reservation 
mechanism proposed in Wavelength Routed OBS networks 
[4], exploits the knowledge of network wide resources 
availability to optimize resource reservation, but is more 
complex to implement and increases the transmission 
latency due to its two way resource reservation process. The 
advantages and limitations of this reservation scheme are 
mentioned in [8]. 
In the Distributed Resource Reservation mechanism, 
resources can either be reserved using two-way resource 
reservation, labeled as Tell-And-Wait (TAW), or one-way 
resource reservation, designated as Tell-And-Go [8][9] 
(TAG). TAW relies on establishing a virtual circuit prior to 
starting burst transmission. More precisely, a BHP is sent 
from the ingress node towards the egress node to reserve 
transmission capacity at all the intermediate nodes along a 
given routing path. When the reservation is successful in the 
entire path, an acknowledgment message is sent back to the 
ingress node, which then starts transmitting the data burst. 
Otherwise, the node detecting resource shortage sends a 
negative acknowledgment message back to the ingress node 
to release the reserved resources. Importantly, the delay 
imposed to data bursts by the resource reservation 
mechanism, which for TAW is defined as the time elapsed 
between assembling a data burst and initiating its 
transmission at the ingress node after receiving the 
acknowledgment, is equal to or larger than the Round Trip 
Time (RTT) between the ingress and egress nodes. This is 
the major limitation of TAW, which may adversely affect 
the quality of real time delay sensitive traffic. 
One-way resource reservation, or TAG, shortens the 
delay imposed on data bursts by starting the burst 
transmission shortly after sending the BHP to the core nodes 
along 
the 
routing 
path 
without 
waiting 
for 
an 
acknowledgment of a successful reservation. In this 
reservation scheme, the reservation may be immediate like 
in JIT [10], JIT+ [5] and E-JIT [12][13] or delayed as in 
JET[5]  and Horizon [5]. However, in TAG, the burst loss 
probability is relatively high but end-to-end delay is less 
213
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

than TAW. Therefore, neither TAG nor TAW reservation 
schemes can have both low latency and low burst loss at the 
same time.  
In the INI Resource Reservation scheme, the reservation 
request is initiated at an intermediate node, called the 
initiating node. In the first part of the path, from ingress 
node to the initiating node, the INI Resource Reservation 
works with an acknowledgement for the BHP, similar to 
TAW, and from the initiating node to egress node, it follows 
the JET reservation scheme. The burst loss probability with 
INI is less than with JET, and the end-to-end delay in less 
than with TAW.  However, the selection of the initiating 
node in INI resource reservation scheme is a critical issue, 
and may be considered as a bottleneck of the proposed 
solution [8]. Moreover, the intermediate node does not have 
knowledge of network wide resource availability and cannot 
optimize the resources reservation and utilization.  
This article proposes a novel clustered architecture 
(C2OBS) and resource reservation strategy for clustered 
OBS network (C2OBS-RR). The C2OBS-RR strategy will 
decrease resource contention, reduce the burst drop 
probability as compared to TAG, and the reservation 
waiting time as compared to the centralized reservation 
scheme and TAW as explained in Section III. In C2OBS, 
the whole network is divided into overlapping zones with a 
Zone Head (ZH) and Backup Zone Head (BZH).  A 
centralized reservation scheme is utilized only within the 
zone exploiting the zonal knowledge of resources available 
at the ZH, while the distributed reservation is employed 
across the zones. The purpose of the combined strategy is to 
overcome the shortcomings of the centralized and the 
distributed resource reservation techniques, while retaining 
the best of both approaches where appropriate. Across zones 
a distributed reservation is employed to reduce overall 
latency while keeping a centralized approach within the 
zone for reducing the burst loss probability.  
A further improvement included in the C2OBS 
architecture consists of the utilization of a single shared 
module of Wavelength Convertors (WCs) and Fiber Delay 
Lines (FDLs) bank placed either at a central location or at 
the ZH within each zone for resolving contention within the 
zone. This solution is also attractive from network planning 
perspective because this module can be easily enhanced or 
replaced keeping in view the future estimated traffic load. 
The article is organized as follows. In Section II, an 
enhanced architecture called Cooperative Clustered Optical 
Burst Switching Network architecture is presented. In this 
section, the same concept has been applied to the European 
Optical Network (EON) for illustration. Section III presents 
the proposed resource reservation strategy for reducing the 
overall network burst loss probability. This section also 
provides an application of C2OBS-RR to EON topology for 
illustration. Section IV discusses the expected benefits of 
the proposed C2OBS architecture and of the C2OBS-RR 
strategy by comparing it with the existing resource 
reservation paradigms. Finally, Section V provides 
conclusion and highlights future work directions. 
II. 
PROPOSED COOPERATIVE  ARCHITECTURE 
In the C2OBS architecture, the network is partitioned 
into overlapping zones/clusters as shown in Figures 1 and 2. 
The zone is defined in terms of number of hops and not 
physical distance, because we can limit the dissemination of 
control information based on the number of hops, by using 
the Time to Live (TTL) value as in IPv4 header, or the 
HopLimit value as in the IPv6 header [14]. The zone size 
should be small to reduce dissemination of control 
information. Furthermore, the gateway (explained later) 
does not allow the broadcast “Hello messages” from the 
Zone Head (ZH) to pass through, as such information is not 
required in adjacent zones. As the zones are overlapping, 
there will be one or more nodes that will be part of more 
than one zone and acts as gateway and backup gateway. For 
example, in Figure 2, Copenhagen (COP) serves as a 
gateway among Z-3, Z-4 and Z-5 because it is common to 
the three zones. Similarly, Prague (PRA) is common 
between zone two and four and functions as a gateway 
between these zones. Each zone has a Zone Head (ZH) and 
Backup Zone Head (BZH). For example, the node at Paris 
(PAR) is a ZH for Z-1. The ZH keeps the information of all 
of the nodes within the zone. The BZH duplicates the tasks 
performed by the ZH, either in case of failure of the ZH or if 
the ZH is overburdened with other processing tasks like 
performing the job of a gateway and stops broadcasting its 
“Hello messages”. The role of the ZH is further elaborated 
in section III. The other members of the zone are referred to 
as Zone Members (ZMs).  
The ZH is dynamically elected with a criterion as the 
node with the highest degree in the zone. This condition has 
been imposed because in most cases the ZMs will be 
directly connected to the ZH and it will be possible for ZMs 
to communicate with the ZH with the least propagation 
delay for resource reservation. Furthermore, the ZH needs 
not to be fixed, because if a node is busier in processing 
other jobs and cannot efficiently process the ZM’s requests, 
it will leave its role as ZH and BZH will take over its 
responsibility. As the BZH will become the ZH, other ZMs 
will take part in election to become BZH and the node with 
highest degree will win and will become the BZH. Even in 
case of failure of ZH, the similar procedure will take place. 
 Each zone will have common shared wavelength 
convertors (WCs)/ Fiber Delay Lines (FDLs) bank for 
contention resolution. This shared bank of WCs/FDLs in a 
zone is our novel idea and has never been proposed in 
literature as per our knowledge.  This shared bank can be 
installed at a central location as in Figure 1 or may be placed 
along with of optical switch having highest degree as shown 
in Figure 2.  
Optimal wavelength converter placement in optical 
networks has been shown to be NP-hard, and many 
heuristics have been proposed [15], but still this is an open 
research area. In optical networks, where do we optimally 
place 
the 
WCs/FDLs 
is 
a 
vital 
question.
214
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 
Figure 1. OBS Network Architecture showing ZH, BZH and shared WCs/FDLs 
One of the possible solutions is to place the WCs at each 
output port of the optical switch. This solution is not cost 
effective as WCs may not be required all the time and it is 
the wastage of expensive resource. As wavelength 
convertors are still expensive, providing dedicated 
wavelength convertors is not a cost effective solution 
[3][15], the proposed shared WCs/FDLs bank architecture 
provides a reasonable solution for placement of WCs in  
OBS network. The WCs/FDLs bank can be accessed by 
any 
incoming 
burst 
that 
needs 
wavelength 
conversion/buffering. This will also make the network 
planning simpler and economical because this module can 
be upgrade as per requirement keeping in view the future 
increase in traffic without upgrading/replacing the optical 
switches. This shared architecture will also improve the 
utilization of this resource (WCs/FDLs) because all the 
nodes within the zone will use the same resource for 
wavelength conversion and optical buffering. This will 
make the OBS networks economically more feasible as 
augmenting each node with WCs/FDLs is an expensive 
solution [15]. Although, the use of WCs/FDLs will be 
minimized as much as possible by using effective 
resource reservation scheme explained in the next section 
and this will act as a last resort to save the burst from 
blocking.  In this way, the requirement for number of 
WCs/FDLs will be reduced, which is technically and 
economically more attractive. 
The 
proposed 
architecture 
has 
been 
named 
Cooperative 
Clustered 
Optical 
Burst 
Switching 
architecture because the Gateway nodes in the network 
cooperate for successful resource reservation in the 
adjacent zone and tries to reduce the burst blocking 
probability.  
As an illustration, the clustered network architecture 
model has been applied to European Optical Network 
(EON) topology [16][17] as shown in Figure 2. The EON 
topology consists of 20 nodes and 38 links. The network 
has been divided into five zones (Z-1 to Z-5) and detail 
about the role of each node in the zone is depicted in 
Table 1. The table shows the status of each node in its 
respective zone, i.e. whether the node is Zone Head (ZH), 
Zone Member (ZM) and Gateway (GW). It also indicates 
the degree of the node in the network, which is a key 
selection criterion for the role of ZH. In Figure 2, the 
WCs/FDLs bank has been shown along with the ZH and 
the circle, oval and cloud shapes has been used to 
represent different zones in EON and has been labeled as 
Z-1 to Z-5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Cooperative Clustered OBS Network Architecture for EON 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BRS
PRA
BER 
AMS 
COP 
LUX 
LIS 
MAD
LON
DUB
PAR
ATH 
ZAG 
ROM 
VIE 
STO 
MOS 
MIL 
OSL 
ZUR 
Z-1 
Z-2 
Z-3 
Z-4 
Z-5 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
Bank 
215
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Table.1. Node Description of EON 
III. PROPOSED RESOURCE RESERVATION 
STRATEGY 
The C2OBS-RR scheme utilizes centralized reservation 
for intra-zonal traffic. Centralized reservation is also used 
for inter-zonal traffic between the ingress node and the 
zone gateway. Then the gateway prompts the next ZH 
which becomes responsible for reserving the necessary 
resources for the upcoming burst. The process is repeated 
until the burst reaches the zone where the egress node is 
located.  
Although resource reservation is centralized within 
each zone, it may also be considered as distributed for 
inter-zonal traffic because a degree of cooperation is 
required among multiple ZHs and gateways. 
In the C2OBS-RR scheme, the ZH acknowledges the 
BHP by consulting its Zone Information Base (ZIB) and 
Short History Base (SHB) thereby reducing delay 
compared to wavelength routed OBS (WROBS) which 
requires end-to-end acknowledgement [4]. 
Moreover, 
while 
also 
employing 
distributed 
reservation for inter-zonal traffic, the proposed strategy 
does not require end-to-end acknowledgement like Tell & 
Wait (TAW) thus reducing delay, and uses zonal 
knowledge for resource reservation, thereby reducing the 
burst loss probability compared to Tell & Go (TAG). 
For intra-zonal traffic, the ingress node requests 
resources from the ZH by transmitting a BHP using a 
control channel. The ZH consults both its Zone-Base, for 
assigning route and free wavelength, and its Short History 
Base (SHB) to assign a suitable offset time for avoiding 
contention at the intermediate core nodes. The SHB is 
dynamically updated with offset times assigned to bursts 
as the transmissions from different ingress nodes proceed 
within the zone. The ZH acknowledges the BHP by 
transmitting amended BHP containing information about 
offset time, routing and wavelength assignment for the 
incoming burst transmission, which is estimated/predicted 
based on knowledge inferred from the data stored in the 
ZH. The same amended BHP is forwarded to the 
intermediate nodes and the egress node for the necessary 
switching configuration. The routing and wavelength 
assignment problem has been dealt with in a separate 
article in detail while the suitable offset time issue is 
discussed below. 
The minimum offset time can be given by [5][7]  
 
Toffset
min = kTBHP +TSW  
 
 (1) 
where k is the number of hops along the path from  the 
ingress node to the egress node, TBHP is the header 
processing time, and TSW is the switch configuration time. 
However, the ingress node may also use a larger value for 
service differentiation [5][18], if necessary. 
In the C2OBS-RR strategy the ZH calculate Toffset
total  by 
looking at the ZIB for the number of hops in the burst 
route. Then, for avoiding contention it calculates an extra 
offset time δT by looking for all previously scheduled 
channels in the SHB. The extra offset is meant to isolate 
traffic form different ingress nodes that are using 
overlapping paths. The total offset time for the burst can 
be finally given by 
 
Toffset
total = kTBHP +TSW +δT  
 
(2) 
The ZH forwards the amended BHP to the ingress node 
and multicasts the same to the intermediate nodes in the 
zone for resource reservation. Upon receiving the 
amended BHP multi-casted by the ZH, the intermediate 
nodes check the value of  δT and their location in the 
routing path and assign that value to k. The parameter k 
has a different meaning for both the ingress nodes and 
intermediate nodes. For the ingress node and intra-zonal 
traffic, k represents the number of hops along the path 
from the ingress node to the egress node while for inter-
zonal traffic, it represents the number of hops from the 
ingress node to the zone gateway. For intermediate nodes, 
the node checks its position within the routing path and 
assigns that value to k.  The intermediate nodes perform 
delayed reservation by using equation (2) and knowledge 
of both TBHP  and TSW  to calculate the burst arrival time. 
S.No 
Location of 
Node 
Zone 
Member 
Member 
Status 
Degree of  
Node 
1. 
Libson (LIS) 
Z-1 
ZM 
2 
2. 
Madrid (MAD) 
Z-1 
ZM 
2 
3. 
Paris (PAR) 
Z-1 
ZH 
6 
4. 
Brussels (BRS) 
Z-1, Z-3 & 
Z-4 
ZM & GW 
5 
5. 
Zurich (ZUR) 
Z-1 & Z-2 
ZM & GW 
4 
6. 
Athens (ATH) 
Z-2 
ZM 
2 
7. 
Rome(ROM) 
Z-2 
ZM 
3 
8. 
Zagreb (ZAG) 
Z-2 
ZM 
4 
9. 
Vienna (VIE) 
Z-2 
ZM 
3 
10. 
Milan (MIL) 
Z-2 
ZH 
6 
11. 
Prague (PRA) 
Z-2 & Z-4 
ZM & GW 
5 
12. 
London (LON) 
Z-3 
ZH 
7 
13. 
Dublin (DUB) 
Z-3 
ZM 
2 
14. 
Amsterdam 
(AMS) 
Z-3 & Z-4 
ZM & GW 
5 
15. 
Berlin (BER) 
Z-4 
ZH 
7 
16. 
Luxemburg 
(LUX) 
Z-4 
ZM 
1 
17. 
Copenhagen 
(COP) 
Z-5 & Z-3 
ZM & GW 
3 
18. 
Moscow 
(MOS) 
Z-5 
ZM 
2 
19. 
Stockholm 
(STO) 
Z-5 
ZH 
4 
20. 
Oslo (OSO) 
Z-5 
ZM 
3 
216
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

Early release is also used as the amended BHP informs 
about the burst length. 
For the inter-zonal traffic, the ingress node also starts 
off by requesting resources from its own ZH. The ZH 
assigns a free wavelength, a suitable offset time and a route 
only up to the zone gateway, and amends the BHP with this 
information. The amended BHP is also forwarded by the ZH 
to all intermediate nodes till the zone gateway. Then, it is 
the gateway’s responsibility to cooperate with the ingress 
node for reserving resources in the next zone, by forwarding 
the amended BHP to the next ZH (NZH). Subsequently, the 
NZH assigns the necessary resources for the upcoming 
burst, and the zone by zone reservation procedure is 
repeated until the burst reaches the zone where the egress 
node is located. 
A. An Application of the C2OBS-RR to the EON 
Topology 
In the following, the C2OBS-RR scheme is applied to 
the EON topology as depicted in Figure 2 for illustration. 
The assignment of nodes to each zone has been described in 
section II. 
In case of intra-zonal traffic say within zone-one (Z-1) 
from Lisbon to Zurich, the ingress node at Lisbon sends a 
BHP including burst length, Class of Service (CoS) and 
source and destination addresses to the ZH (Paris). The ZH 
inspects the BHP and examines both its Zonal Information 
Base (ZIB), for routing and wavelength assignment, and its 
SHB for assigning a suitable offset time. The ZH returns the 
amended BHP to the ingress node and multicasts the same 
to intermediate nodes. The amended BHP adds information 
to the BHP about route, i.e., LIS-MAD-PAR-ZUR, a free 
wavelength along the route, say λ1, and suitable offset time 
for the ingress node. The intermediate nodes and destination 
calculate the offset time as explained above and reserve the 
resources using delayed reservation. The ingress node 
transmits the burst after the offset time elapses, which 
propagates transparently along the route to the destination. 
As the burst passes through the intermediate nodes, the 
resources are released and the ZH updates its SHB 
accordingly so that the resources may be assigned efficiently 
to other subsequent burst. 
In case of the inter-zonal traffic, e.g., for traffic from 
Lisbon (Z-1) to Amsterdam (Z-3), the last address along the 
path will be the zone gateway’s address, Brussels, which is a 
member of both Z-1 and Z-3. As the gateway node 
(Brussels) receives the amended BHP with the destination 
address of Amsterdam (egress node), it forwards the BHP to 
the next Zone Head (NZH), London, with the information 
about the wavelength on which the burst will arrive. This 
wavelength is considered as “preferred” wavelength by the 
NZH. The NZH, looking at the destination address and 
preferred wavelength channel information in the BHP, 
checks its own ZIB, and classifies the traffic as intra-zonal 
or inter-zonal. Since the traffic is now intra-zonal, the NZH 
checks both its ZIB and SHB to decide whether the same 
wavelength channel is available on the path within the new 
zone. If it is available, the NZH returns the amended BHP to 
the gateway and multicasts the same BHP to the 
intermediate nodes and egress node (Amsterdam) for 
resource reservation. If the preferred wavelength channel is 
not free, the NZH checks the CoS of the burst to find 
whether the incoming burst belongs to either delay 
insensitive or delay sensitive class of service. For delay 
insensitive class, the NZH adds a suitable δT to the 
calculated offset time using equation (2) and directs the 
incoming burst to the shared FDL bank. For delay sensitive 
class, it assigns a new free wavelength to the incoming burst 
and directs it to the shared WCs bank. This reduces delay 
for delay sensitive traffic, thus ensuring Quality of Service 
provisioning. When the data burst arrive at the gateway, it is 
transparently forwarded towards the egress node.  
In summary, the strategy of the C2OBS-RR scheme for 
contention avoidance is that the ZH should provide a routing 
path with a free wavelength, and an appropriate offset time 
to each burst to isolate traffic originating from different 
ingress nodes using overlapping paths. 
IV. EXPECTED BENEFITS of C2OBS 
The aim of this section is to discuss the expected 
benefits of the C2OBS architecture & the C2OBS-RR 
strategy and compare it with the extant reservation schemes. 
In C2OBS, the whole network has been divided into more 
manageable smaller units called zones, with a ZH that 
maintains both a ZIB and a SHB. The information contained 
in both these information-bases is utilized for effective 
reservation of resources. The C2OBS-RR strategy aims to 
lessen the inherent problems of both centralized and 
distributed resource reservation techniques while combining 
the best features of both approaches. The centralized two 
way resource reservation technique introduces longer 
delays, is more complex and adds more processing burden 
on a central node than the one way reservation technique. 
On the other hand, the distributed resource reservation 
schemes suffers from a relatively high burst loss probability 
because nodes have only partial knowledge about resource 
availability limited to its outgoing links. 
The C2OBS-RR will have a shorter delay and will be 
easier to implement than the centralized reservation scheme 
because the ZH is normally located only one hop away from 
the ingress nodes within the zone and the processing burden 
is shared by multiple ZHs. On the other hand, the C2OBS-
RR approach will have less wavelength contention 
compared to the distributed resource reservation schemes, 
because the ZH takes advantage of its complete resource 
availability knowledge within the zone for assigning 
suitable offset times such that contention is avoided among 
bursts using partially or totally overlapping paths. 
As compared to the centralized reservation scheme, 
where all resource assignment is accomplished by a single 
central node, the proposed scheme is following a distributed 
strategy having ZHs in each zone for resource assignment 
and reservation. In the case of the centralized reservation 
217
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

scheme, when the central node fails, the whole network 
performance will be affected. So the central node becomes a 
performance bottleneck in the network. In contrast, in the 
C2OBS architecture and the C2OBS-RR scheme, failure of 
a ZH will affect a single zone within the network till the 
BZH takes the responsibility of ZH. 
A further advantage of the proposed architecture is its 
scalability. If the number of nodes in the network is 
increased, the network can be redesigned by either adding 
the new node to an existing zone or creating a  new zone to 
maintain the network performance. However, the distributed 
reservation protocols such as JET, JIT, JIT+, or E-JIT are 
not flexible to accommodate further nodes without 
deteriorating the network performance.   Furthermore, the 
central node in case of central reservation scheme has a 
limited processing capability. The number of nodes offering 
load beyond this processing capacity will worsen the 
performance of the network as well. 
Wavelength convertors are still immature and expensive, 
full wavelength conversion (i.e., any wavelength entering a 
node can exit on any free wavelength on any output fiber) 
[3][18] is still not a realistic solution. The alternative 
solution is to place the wavelength convertors sparsely. 
Optimal placement of sparse wavelength convertors in 
optical networks is a vital question but it has been shown to 
be NP-hard. The proposed shared WCs bank in the zone is 
comparatively a more feasible alternative because the WCs 
bank is either placed at a central location or at a node having 
the highest degree in the zone, which will mostly provide 
direct connectivity between any switching nodes and the 
bank. This solution is also attractive from network planning 
perspective because this module can be easily enhanced or 
replaced keeping in view the future estimated traffic load. In 
existing architecture where wavelength convertors are an 
integral part of the switch, there is no such flexibility. 
Finally, in the proposed resource reservation strategy, 
the ingress node does not have to wait for resource 
reservation 
acknowledgment 
as 
in 
TAW 
where 
acknowledgement delay is equal to RTT between ingress & 
egress node. Additionally, unlike the central reservation 
scheme, the ingress node does not have to wait for RTT 
between ingress node and central node for resource 
confirmation. In this work, the ZH is mostly available at one 
hop from the ingress node as the ZH has a highest degree in 
the zone; the latency is comparatively low as compared to 
TAW 
and 
central 
reservation 
technique 
which 
is 
comparatively suitable for real time delay sensitive traffic. 
Based on the above comparative analysis with existing 
reservation techniques, it appears that the proposed scheme 
is both more flexible and scalable. It is also expected that 
the C2OBS-RR will offer less delay as compared to TAW 
and centralized reservation schemes. Moreover, the blocking 
probability is also expected to be lower than that of TAG 
(JET, JIT, JIT+, E-JIT, and Horizon). 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, a divide and conquer approach has been 
applied to OBS networks by splitting the whole network 
into more manageable small units called zones. Each zone 
has a Zone Based information repository and Short History 
Base in the Zone Head. The ZIB contains information about 
routing and wavelength assignment while SHB dynamically 
records information about scheduled channels. Since it is 
not realistic to provide full wavelength conversion in the 
optical networks, an improvement in the network 
architecture has been suggested by implementing the bank 
of WCs/FDLs as a separate module from the switch within 
the zone and all zone members can use the same bank when 
required. 
A resource reservation strategy for C2OBS network 
architecture with the focus on gathering the advantages of 
both the centralized and the distributed reservation 
mechanism has been presented. It will help to reduce the 
burst drop probability. The innovative methodology uses the 
zonal state of resource availability in the zone such that the 
bursts at the ingress nodes in the same part of the network, 
having being assigned the same wavelength, are assigned 
different offset to avoid contention. 
It is expected that the proposed scheme will shorter the 
delay and will be easier to implement then the reservation 
scheme proposed for WROBS networks. Furthermore, it 
will have less probability of wavelength contention at the 
intermediate nodes as compared to distributed resource 
reservation schemes. The proposed scheme appears more 
scalable and flexible as compared to both extent centralized 
and distributed schemes. 
As for as future work is concerned, the next objective is 
to implement a simulation model for analyzing the 
performance of the C2OBS network architecture and the 
C2OBS-RR strategy, and compare it with the extant 
resource reservation schemes for verification and validation. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors wish to acknowledge the support of FCT 
(Ministry of Science, Technology and Higher Education, 
Portugal), under the Associated Laboratory contract with 
INESC Porto, Portugal. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Siva Ram Murthy and Mohan Gurusamy, "WDM Optical 
Networks: Concepts, Design and Algorithms" Prentice Hall PTR, 
2002. 
[2] Jason P. Jue and Vinod M. Vokkarane, “Optical Burst 
Switching Networks”, Springer Science + Business Media Inc, 
2005 
[3] Biswanath Mukherjee, “Optical WDM Network”, Springer 
Science + Business Media Inc, 2006. 
[4] Polina Bayvel, “Wavelength-Routed or Burst-Switched Optical 
Networks,” 
3rd 
International 
Conference 
on 
Transparent Optical Networks, 2001, Page 325. 
 
218
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

[5] Jing Teng and George N. Rouskas, “ A Detailed Analysis and 
Performance Comparison of Wavelength Reservation Schemes for 
Optical 
Burst 
Switching 
Networks”, 
Photonic 
Network 
Communications, vol. 9, no. 3, 2004,Page(s) 311-335. 
[6] R. Karanam, V.Vokkarane, and  J. Jue, “Intermediate Node 
Initiated (INI) Signaling: A Hybrid Reservation Technique for 
Optical Burst Switched Networks”, Optical Fiber Communication 
Conference, 23-28 March 2003, Page(s) 213-215. 
[7] Joel J.P.C. Rodrigues and Binod Vaidya, “Evaluation of 
Resource Reservation Protocols for IP over OBS Networks”, 11th 
International Conference on Transport Optical Networks, 28th 
June to 2nd July 2009, Page(s) 1-4. 
[8] Ihsan Ul Haq, Henrique Salgaso, and Jorge Castro, “Survey and 
Challenges for Optical Burst Switching Networks: A High Data 
Rate Network for Future Internet” 2nd International Conference on 
Intelligence and Information Technology, 28-30 October, 2010, 
Lahore, Pakistan, Page(s) 381-386. 
[9] I. Widjaja, “Performance Analysis of burst admission control 
protocols, IEEE Proceeding- Communications, vol. 142, no. 1, 
1995, Page(s) 7-14. 
[10] I. Baldine, George N. Rouskas, H.G. Perros, and  D. 
Stevenson, “JumpStart: A Just-in-Time Signaling Architecture for 
WDM 
Burst 
Switched 
Networks” 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, vol. 40, no. 2, 2002, Page(s) 82-89. 
[11] Joel J.P.C. Rodrigues, Mario M. Freire, Nuno M. Garcia, and 
Paulo M.N.P Monteiro, “Enhanced Just-in-Time: A New 
Reservation Protocol for Optical Burst Switching Networks”, 12th 
IEEE Symposium on Computer and Communications, 1- 4 July 
2007, Page(s) 121-126. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[12] Joel J.P.C. Rodrigues and Mario M. Freire, “Performance 
Assessment of Enhanced Just-in-Time Protocol in OBS Networks 
Taking into Account Control Packet Processing and Optical Switch 
Configuration 
Times”, 
22nd 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced Information Networking and Applications- Workshop, 
25-28 March 2008, Page(s) 434 – 439 
13] Yang Chen, Chunming Qiao, and Xiang Yu, “Optical Burst 
Switching: A New Area in Optical Network Research”, IEEE 
Network, vol. 18, no. 3, May-June 2004, Page(s) 16-23. 
[14] Larry L. Peterson and Bruce S. Davie, “Computer Networks: 
A Systems Approach” 3rd Edition, 2003, Morgan Kaufmann Series 
in Networking. 
[15] Bo Li and Xiaowen Chu, “Routing and Wavelength 
Assignment vs Wavelength Converter Placement in All-Optical 
Networks”, IEEE Communication Magazine, vol. 41, no. 6, 2003, 
Page(s) 522-528. 
[16] M.J.O’ Mahony, “A European Optical Network: Design 
Considerations”, 
IEEE 
Colloquium 
on 
Transport 
Optical 
Networks: Applications, Architectures and Technology, 1994, 
Page(s) 1-6. 
[17] M.J.O’ Mahony and D. Simeonidou, A. Yu, and J. Zhou, “The 
Design of a European Optical Network”, Journal of Lightwave 
Technology, vol 13, no. 5, May 1995, Page(s) 817-828. 
[18] Kee Chiang Chua, Mohan Gurusamy, Yong Liu, and Minh 
Hoang Phung, “Quality of Service in Optical Burst Switched 
Networks”, @007 Springer Science + Business Media, LLC. 
219
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

