Supporting a Variety of Secure Services Based on MTM 
 
Seungyong Yoon, Yongsung Jeon 
Mobile Security Research Section 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Rep. of Korea 
e-mail: syyoon@etri.re.kr, ysjeon@etri.re.kr  
Jeongnyeo Kim 
Cyber Security System Research Department 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Rep. of Korea 
e-mail: jnkim@etri.re.kr
 
 
Abstract—In general, the software security scheme is mainly 
used to protect the mobile device from the security threat. 
However, this security scheme can be easily manipulated. For 
high level of mobile security, it is important to ensure safety 
and stable service by hardware based security technology such 
as Mobile Trusted Module (MTM). MTM technology that 
provides physically enhanced security has been studied. In this 
paper, we propose a method using a variety of secure services 
based 
on 
MTM 
technology. 
Existing 
e-commerce, 
authentication, and Digital Rights Management (DRM) 
services based on MTM technology can improve security and 
reduced costs. 
Keywords-MTM; secure service; mobile security.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The mobile banking and payment services are growing 
rapidly in recent years. In addition, fraud in mobile financial 
services is also frequently reported. The initial malware of 
the mobile device is simply for the purpose of malicious 
code propagation and paralyzing basic function. Recently, 
however, malware is evolved into the type of information 
leakage and financial charge. In particular, mobile malware 
using ‘phishing’ and ‘smishing’ will intentionally cause 
financial charges to infected users is very prevalent. So, it is 
proceeding and developing a variety of researches and 
solutions to prevent damage from mobile attack [1][2]. 
Generally, because software can be easier exploited than 
hardware, the researches using hardware-based technique 
that provides physically enhanced security have been 
proceeding [3][4].  
Mobile Trusted Module (MTM) is one of the solutions to 
security problems of mobile device. MTM is a security 
element and a newly approved Trusted Computing Group 
(TCG) specification for use in mobile and embedded devices 
[5]. MTM designed to secure hardware by integrating user 
authentication, platform integrity, device authentication, and 
data protection to devices for the purpose of blocking 
information leakage and hacking from mobile device, such 
as smart phone [6]. 
MTM basically provides tamper-resistant feature to 
respond to physical attack. Also, MTM provides a Root of 
Trust function, Root of Trust for Storage (RTS) for the 
secure storage of data, Root of Trust for Measurement 
(RTM), which records the measurement state of system in 
the MTM, and Root of Trust for Reporting (RTR) to verify 
the trusted state of the system.  
MTM’s specification contains a number of functions. 
However, many functions can be summarized into the 
following three functions: platform integrity verification, 
protected storage, and remote attestation. In order to provide 
these security functions, MTM basically has execution 
engine, as well as encryption co-processor, random number 
generator, sha-1/hmac hash engine, key generators, and so on.  
In this paper, we propose and implement the method that 
can provide various MTM-based secure services safely at a 
lower cost by adding service modules, such as banking, 
payment, authentication, encryption, and DRM to basic 
functions of existing MTM’s specification. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
gives an overview of related work and provides a discussion 
of our contribution. Section III describes secure service 
provision 
based 
on 
MTM. 
Section 
IV 
describes 
implementation and operational test, followed by conclusion 
in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
MTM is TCG’s specifications for trusted computing 
technologies in mobile devices. There are a lot of researches 
and studies that relates to MTM. Kim et al. presented design 
and implementation of a MTM which should satisfy small 
area and low-power condition [7]. Schmidt et al. proposed 
how to deploy MTM to a trustworthy operating platform [8]. 
Dietrich et al. proposed and analyzed existing approaches for 
providing modular, customizable MTM functionality which 
are based on currently available cell phones’ security 
extensions [9]. Bugiel et al. introduced a framework for 
application-specific credentials and provided a prototype 
implementation using MTM technologies [10].  
MTM 2.0 use cases include mobile commerce use cases 
for mobile banking and payment [11]. However, these 
mobile commerce services have not been implemented so far. 
In order to activate prevalent use of a variety of secure 
services based on MTM, the method using existent MTM 
function to improve the security must be proposed and 
implemented. Our proposed method can provide more secure 
services based on MTM at a lower cost. 
III. 
SECURE SERVICE PROVISION BASED ON MTM 
Figure 1 shows the basic architecture of the MTM-based 
secure service system. Existing traditional MTM command 
is executed and processed by the MTM execution engine. 
However, non-traditional MTM command for banking and 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

payment services is processed and executed in the secure 
service execution engine.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Basic architecture 
In order to process two types of commands in the MTM-
based security chip, the functional extension of the MTM 
message processing module is required. In addition, to 
provide a variety of services safely, it is necessary to have 
extensions of user authentication and application-based 
session management module. Secure service execution 
engine 
stores 
important 
information, 
such 
as 
user 
information, 
bank 
account 
information, 
credit 
card 
information, certificate, and encryption key in the secure 
storage. This engine processes the received command, which 
requests access to information within secure storage.  
Conventional TPM/MTM command (Type 1) is used as 
the field and value defined in the standard specification, and 
SSM command (Type 2) for the secure service is used as 
extended header field. According to the ‘tag’ value of header 
field, request and response are defined to use for common 
channel or secure encrypted channel. The ‘ssnID’ of header 
field added to support multiple sessions is used to identify 
and manage the session efficiently. 
Figure 2 shows the authentication-based session 
management 
module. 
The 
‘AuthData’ 
is 
for 
user 
authentication through the ‘TakeOwnership’ process for a 
mobile device, and this data is stored in secure storage of 
MTM security chip. In addition, when an application is 
installed on a mobile device, ‘App Integrity Value’ through 
the application integrity verification process is stored in 
secure storage. 
In order to use the secure services of the MTM, the 
application tries to establish a session. The session is 
established only if the ‘AuthData’ and ‘App Integrity Value’ 
comparison process for user authentication and application 
integrity verification are passed, respectively. 
The multi-session support is essential for multiple 
applications to take advantage of the MTM secure services at 
the same time. The following values are created and 
registered in the session table: ‘SessionID’ to identify each 
session, ‘AuthHandle’ value which is dynamically assigned 
to pass authentication process of the session, and 
‘SessionKey’ value to support the encrypted communication 
over secure channel. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Authentication-based session management module 
After 
the 
message 
processing 
module 
and 
the 
authentication-based session management module, the 
control comes to the event processing module. The event 
processing module calls the appropriate function or 
procedure to execute the command according to the type of 
command. The secure service execution engine provides a 
range of secure services, such as banking, payment, 
authentication, encryption, and DRM service. In addition, 
this engine stores and manages important information for a 
service providing to the secure storage and requests and 
processes the necessary information during command 
execution. 
The command is processed by the secure service 
execution engine. The various types of service commands 
are supported: banking, encryption/decryption, integrity 
verification, device management, payment, sessions and key 
management, data protection, access control and secure 
channel, and so on. In addition, other service commands can 
be extended and defined. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION & OPERATIONAL TEST 
We have developed MTM chip for providing secure 
service, android mobile device embedded MTM chip, and a 
variety of application using the secure services. Figure 3 
shows a screenshot of mobile device embedded MTM chip 
and secure service applications, such as banking, payments, 
and device management.  
 
 
Figure 3.  MTM based mobile device and secure service applications 
The sensitive personal data stored in existing mobile 
device was easily leaked when the device was infected by 
mobile malware. However, the MTM-based secure services 
using our proposed method in this paper, without leaking 
personal information, such as banking, payment, and device 
management, can be provided safely. We have confirmed 
this safety by operational test. 
First, we performed hacking test of commercial 
smartphone. Most of the mobile malwares are distributed by 
sending SMS messages or E-mail. We are using E-mail for 
this test. The mobile malware is downloaded and installed on 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

user’s mobile devices by masquerading as a common normal 
application. An attacker inserts malicious code into an 
application. Once the malicious application is installed and 
run successfully, malicious code collects and steals private 
data stored in mobile device, for example, SMS messages, 
contacts list, pictures and digital certificate.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Screenshot of hacker’s server 
In the hacker’s screen from Figure 4, ‘NPKI.zip’ is a 
digital certificate. By clicking on the link, we can get more 
detailed information. This certificate is very important and 
sensitive private data which is widely used in field of mobile 
e-commerce in Korea. Digital certificate can be easily leaked 
from commercial device. 
On the other hand, in case of our proposed method, there 
is no digital certificate on hacker’s server in the same test. 
Because digital certificate is protected securely within secure 
storage of MTM hardware, hacker failed to get this private 
data. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed a method using a variety of 
secure services based on MTM technology. Our proposed 
method, utilizing existent MTM function to improve the 
security, can provide more secure services at a lower cost. In 
addition, the proposed method has a scalability to support a 
wide range of additional secure services to meet the needs of 
users. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by the Korea government (MSIP) (No.R-20150518-001267, 
Development 
of 
Operating 
System 
Security 
Core 
Technology for the Smart Lightweight IoT Devices). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Zhou and X. Jiang, “Dissecting Android Malware: 
Characterization and Evolution”, IEEE Symposium on 
Security and Privacy, 2012, pp. 95-109. 
[2] M. Polla, F. Martinelli, and D. Sgandurra, “A Survey on 
Security for Mobile Devices”, IEEE Communications 
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, 2013, pp. 446-471. 
[3] Trusted Computing Group (TCG), “TPM Main Specification 
Version 1.2,  Revision 116”, Mar. 2011.  
[4] G. Cabiddu, E. Cesena, R. Sassu, D. Vernizzi, G. Ramunno, 
and A. Lioy, “The Trusted Platform Agent,” IEEE Software, 
vol. 28, 2011, pp. 35-41. 
[5] Trusted Computing Group (TCG), “Mobile Trusted Module 
Specification Version 1.0, Revision 6”, Jun. 2008.  
[6] J. Ekberg and M. Kylanpaa, “Mobile trusted module (MTM) - 
an introduction”, Nokia Research Center, Nov. 2007. 
[7] M. Kim, H. Ju, Y. Kim, J. Park, and Y. Park, “Design and 
Implementation of Mobile Trusted Module for Trusted 
Mobile Computing”, IEEE Transaction on Consumer 
Electronics, vol. 56, Feb. 2010, pp. 134-140. 
[8] A. Schmidt, N. Kuntze, and M. Kasper, “On the deploy of 
Mobile Trusted Modules”, IEEE Wireless Communications 
and Networking Conference, Mar. 2008, pp. 3169-3174. 
[9] K. Dietrich and J. Winter, “Towards Customizable, 
Application Specific Mobile Trusted Modules”, ACM 
Workshop on Scalable Trusted Computing, 2010, pp. 31-40. 
[10] S. Bugiel and J. Ekberg, “Implementing an Application-
Specific Credential Platform Using Late-Launched Mobile 
Trusted Module”, ACM Workshop on Scalable Trusted 
Computing, 2010, pp. 20-30. 
[11] Trusted Computing Group (TCG), “Mobile Trusted Module 
2.0 Use Cases”, Mar. 2011. 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-439-8
ICSNC 2015 : The Tenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

