Optimal Network Selection for Mobile Multicast
Groups
Svetlana Boudko and Wolfgang Leister
Norsk Regnesentral, Oslo, Norway
Email: {svetlana.boudko, wolfgang.leister}@nr.no
Stein Gjessing
University of Oslo, Norway
Email: steing@iﬁ.uio.no
Abstract—Mobile devices are typically equipped with mul-
tiple access network interfaces, supporting the coexistence of
heterogeneous wireless access networks. The selection of an
optimal set of serving mobile networks for multicast streams
is a challenging problem. We consider a network selection
problem for multicast groups of mobile clients that operate in a
heterogeneous wireless access network environment. We present
a solution to this problem with an optimal allocation of mobile
users to multicast groups when multiple mobile networks are
available for operation. This solution is suited for small scale
networks and can be used as reference for complex networks.
Index Terms—Wireless networking, mobile network selection,
decentralized algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
The increasing market of mobile devices and mobile ser-
vices, continuous development and diversiﬁcation of user
terminals as well as availability of various wireless network
technologies challenge resource limitations of wireless access
networks. This requires consideration of the resource alloca-
tion problem from the different angle, including collaboration
between mobile users and networks in improvement of the
utilization of resources. Referring to wireless access networks,
the ability to be connected to several network technologies
poses new challenges in formulating effective strategies for
selecting the best network. The network selection problem
inspired by the “always best connected” concept was mostly
focused on the deﬁnition of metrics to address the end user
quality of service and considered the problem from a single
user view point.
Multicast [1] is an efﬁcient method for point-to-multipoint
communications, which reduces drastically the usage of net-
work resources when the same content is sent to a large group
of users. Different types of applications like video conferenc-
ing, ﬁle distribution, live multimedia streaming can beneﬁt
from deploying multicast networking. However, the well-
known complexity of managing multicast networks makes the
deployment of multicast even more challenging in wireless
environments when mobility issues have to be considered. In
this paper, we consider a solution for the network selection
problem for heterogeneous mobile networking as a part of
multicast group management.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. After
presenting an overview of related work in Section II, we
discuss a representative scenario in Section III. We present
the problem formulation and outline a suitable algorithm in
Section IV. A usage example and test results are given in
Section V, before discussing future work and concluding in
Section VI and Section VII, respectively.
II. RELATED WORK
To the best of our knowledge, the research ﬁeld concerning
selection of a network in heterogeneous wireless networks
from a perspective of multicast delivery is not well exploited.
Most previous works for mobile multicast focus on optimal
multicast tree construction in multihop ad hoc networks [2–
5].
Ormond and Murphy [6] propose a network selection ap-
proach that uses a number of possible utility functions. This
solution is user-centric, and an interplay between different
users and networks is not considered; neither is a multicast
scenario. Ormond and Murphy conclude that the impact of
multiple users operating in the same region needs to be further
examined.
Gluhak et al. [7] consider the problem of selecting the
optimal bearer paths for multicast services with groups of
heterogeneous receivers. The proposed algorithm selects the
bearer path based on different optimization goals. However,
Gluhak et al. address the problem only for the ideal static
multicast case without taking into account users crossing
different cells. In their work, multicast membership does not
change during the duration of a service, and multicast groups
are not built with consideration of users’ movements. In our
opinion, this is not a realistic case for wireless networks.
Yang and Chen [8] propose a bandwidth-efﬁcient multicast
algorithm for heterogeneous wireless networks that is formu-
lated as an Integer Linear Programming problem that is solved
using Lagrangian relaxation [9]. The algorithm deals only with
constructing optimal shortest path trees for multicast groups.
In this approach, important parameters such as cost of service,
user’s velocity, etc. are not considered.
Jang et al. [10] present a mechanism for efﬁcient network
resource usage in a mobile multicast scenario. This mechanism
is developed for heterogeneous networks and implements net-
work selection based on network and terminal characteristics
and Quality of Service (QoS). However, in the proposed
mechanism, the network selection is performed purely based
on terminal’s preferences, the network perspective is not
considered, and the solution does not optimize the utilization
of network resources.
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Figure 1.
Multicast streaming scenario for a group of mobile clients served
by several mobile networks before regrouping.
Figure 2. Multicast streaming scenario for a group of mobile clients switched
to one mobile network after regrouping.
In our analysis, we recognize that the presented previous
work has not addressed several important aspects related to
the network selection for mobile multicast groups. We need
to study how the users’ movements inﬂuence the optimal
selection of members for multicast groups and how the in-
formation needed for network selection is exchanged between
the decision makers.
III. SCENARIO
To illustrate the yet unsolved challenges for optimal network
selection in multicast networks, we consider a multimedia
streaming scenario for a group of mobile users that concur-
rently receive the same content from the Internet. We assume
that a backbone proxy server (BPS) is placed at the network
edge. The BPS is a member of a content distribution system
(CDN). This scenario is an extension of a scenario that we
previously have considered to illustrate an adaptive multimedia
streaming architecture to mobile nodes [11].
The BPS streams content that either is hosted on the server,
or resends the streaming content as a part of an application
layer multicast. The users of this network are located in
an area with a substantial overlap in coverage of several
mobile networks, and are connected to different networks.
The base stations of the system have multicast capabilities,
implementing, for example, Multimedia Broadcast Multicast
Service [12]. A representative scenario of such networking is
illustrated in Figure 1.
In our scenario, the mobile terminals are capable to connect
to several access networks, and vertical handoffs between these
networks are technically possible. Further, we assume that
these terminals are equipped with GPS receivers, so that their
location information can be transmitted to the BPS. The BPS
can use this information to determine how the users can be
regrouped in multicast groups. Such regrouping is beneﬁcial
as it saves network resources. Hence, the users that get the
same content can exploit the same wireless link because the
content can be broadcasted to them. The resources in the
backhaul network are also better utilized because the content
is now delivered only to one mobile network instead of being
spread to several networks. An example of such regrouping is
depicted in Figure 2.
Technically, to facilitate such a mechanism, the user ter-
minals will have the possibility to switch to other mobile
networks after receiving certain messages from the BPS. Since
users may have different preferences depending on diverse
criteria, for example, power consumption, security, network
cost of service, etc., the interplay between the users’ utilities
and the networks’ utilities is important to consider. In the
current paper, we formulate and solve the problem, which
solution gives us an optimal allocation of mobile users to
mobile networks.
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we formalize the scenario discussed in
Section III.
We consider a set of networks N = 1, 2, . . . , n, a set of
mobile nodes M = 1, 2, . . . , m and a set of streaming contents
S = 1, 2, . . . , s. Each content sk can be delivered to more
than one mobile node mj. Therefore, using multicast for data
dissemination is beneﬁcial. For each node mj and network
ni, the following is deﬁned: available bandwidths of networks
are denoted by bi; streaming bitrate requirements of mobile
nodes that request content sk are denoted by rk; rssi,j is the
received signal strength in network ni for terminal mj, while
power consumption and the cost of service in network ni for
node mj are denoted by pi,j and ci,j, respectively.
For each node mj, we deﬁne a user preference proﬁle that is
described by a tuple containing Thp
j, Thc
j, and Thrss
j
. These
denote thresholds or user preferences, for, respectively, power
consumption, cost of service and received signal strength.
For each node mj and each mobile network ni we deﬁne
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

an availability function δ as follows:
δ(i, j) =
(
1, if ni is available for mj
0, if not
(1)
For each mobile network ni and each streaming content sk
we deﬁne a function γ as follows:
γ(i, k) =
(
1, if at least one mj receives sk in ni
0, if not
(2)
We deﬁne a decision variable xi,j as follows:
x(i, j) =
(
1, if ni is assigned for mj
0, if not
(3)
To ﬁnd the best possible allocation of the mobile nodes to
the available networks in terms of minimization of consumed
bandwidth, we minimize the following objective function:
min
X
ni∈N
X
sk∈S
γ(i, k) · rk
(4)
The objective function is subject to the set of constraints
given below.
We need to garantee that each mobile node is assigned to
one network.
∀{i} :
X
j
δi,j · xi,j = 1
(5)
We need to specify that user preferences deﬁned in their
proﬁles are satisﬁed.
∀{i, j} : xi,j · pi,j ≤ Thp
j
(6)
∀{i, j} : xi,j · ci,j ≤ Thc
j
(7)
∀{i, j} : xi,j · rssi,j ≥ Thrssj
(8)
The deﬁned problem is a typical integer linear programming
problem. To solve this problem we have taken advantage of
the MATLAB Optimization Toolbox. We use the function
bintprog, which solves problems of the following form
min
x f T x such that





A · x ≤ b,
Aeq · x = beq,
x binary.
(9)
V. USAGE EXAMPLE
The system computes the optimal assignment of mobile
nodes to networks for a given static network condition and
application situation. It is not a topic of this paper to compare
any existing network selection algorithms with this system,
but we consider it necessary to demonstrate that the optimal
network selection decision does not have a trivial solution
in the general case. We have done this by applying the
computation to several network topologies. Here, we show the
examples.
Table I
TOTAL CONSUMED BANDWIDTH OF THE SYSTEM.
Number of networks
Random
Optimum
4
26144
8072
5
32680
7560
6
39216
6536
We consider a scenario with four, ﬁve and six wireless
networks and 1000 mobile users in the system. Not all of
these networks are simultaneously available for all users. We
consider two local WLANs that do not cover the whole area
in consideration and, therefore, not all users have the access
to these networks. 25% of users can access both WLANs,
50% can access one of them equally distributed, and 25% can
access none of the WLANs. The rest of the networks deploy
4G LTE technology. Further, we divide the requested content
into four categories in terms of required bandwidth, 512 kbps,
1024 kbps, 2000 kbps, and 3000 kbps.
In this experiment, we evaluate the total consumed band-
width for all networks. The results for the total bandwidth in
kbps are shown in Table I. We see clearly that the system
achieves a much higher throughput than the random network
selection approach.
VI. DISCUSSION
The implementation of the algorithm in real systems re-
quires that all knowledge of network resources and preference
proﬁles of users is available to the BPS or some other central
unit that decides upon how the data transmission shall be
constructed. This implies that a signiﬁcant number of messages
needs to be exchanged inside the system, which comes at
the cost of increased delays, need for network resources, and
computation resources on mobile devices. To overcome this
problem, we need an algorithm that is designed to handle
the aforementioned information uncertainty. Several research
studies address combinatorial problems that contain input data,
which cannot be obtained accurately [13–15]. The problem
discussed in Section IV will be reformulated using the results
of these studies. This requires that the thresholds in the
constraints 6, 7, and 8 are replaced with probabilities for these
preferences.
VII. CONCLUSION
The paper studied the problem of selecting the optimal
network for multicast groups of mobile clients in multi-stream
scenario based on mobile clients’ preferences and location
information. We proposed a method that provides the optimal
assignment for a given network topology, network conditions
and user preferences.
Since the calculation is rather computing-intensive, and
since the knowledge of the entire system state is necessary
for the calculation, we conclude that this method is not suited
for large scale networks due to scalability reasons. However,
the method can be used for small scale networks and, mostly
important, we intend to use the method as a reference to
evaluate related algorithms that allow network selection in
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

a decentralized manner with only limited information shared
among the decision makers.
As a further step, we intend to develop distributed algo-
rithms that operate under partial knowledge of the network
topology and conditions, inaccurate knowledge of clients’
preferences, dynamically changing networking parameters
such as available bandwidth of mobile networks and network
availability for mobile nodes.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work described in this paper has been conducted
as a part of the ADIMUS (Adaptive Internet Multimedia
Streaming) project, which is funded by the NORDUnet-3
programme.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Savetz, N. Randall, and Y. Lepage, MBONE: Multi-
casting Tomorrow’s Internet, 1st ed.
Foster City, CA,
USA: IDG Books Worldwide, Inc., 1995.
[2] M. Gerla, C.-C. Chiang, and L. Zhang, “Tree multicast
strategies in mobile, multishop wireless networks,” Mob.
Netw. Appl., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 193–207, Oct. 1999.
[3] C.-C. Chiang, M. Gerla, and L. Zhang, “Forwarding
group multicast protocol (FGMP) for multihop, mobile
wireless networks,” Cluster Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp.
187–196, Apr. 1998.
[4] J. G. Jetcheva, “Adaptive demand-driven multicast rout-
ing in multi-hop wireless ad hoc networks,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,
2004.
[5] J. Yuan, Z. Li, W. Yu, and B. Li, “A cross-layer opti-
mization framework for multihop multicast in wireless
mesh networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24,
no. 11, pp. 2092 –2103, nov. 2006.
[6] O. Ormond and J. Murphy, “Utility-based intelligent net-
work selection,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Communications,
ICC, 2006.
[7] A. Gluhak, K. Chew, K. Moessner, and R. Tafazolli,
“Multicast bearer selection in heterogeneous wireless
networks,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Communications, ICC,
vol. 2, May 2005, pp. 1372–1377.
[8] D.-N. Yang and M.-S. Chen, “Efﬁcient resource allo-
cation for wireless multicast,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 387–400, Apr. 2008.
[9] M. L. Fisher, “The lagrangian relaxation method for
solving integer programming problems,” Manage. Sci.,
vol. 50, no. 12 Supplement, pp. 1861–1871, Dec. 2004.
[10] I.-S. Jang, W.-T. Kim, J.-M. Park, and Y.-J. Park, “Mobile
multicast mechanism based mih for efﬁcient network
resource usage in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc.
of the 12th Int’l Conf. on Advanced Communication
Technology, ser. ICACT’10, 2010, pp. 850–854.
[11] W. Leister, T. Sutinen, S. Boudko, I. Marsh, C. Griwodz,
and P. Halvorsen, “An architecture for adaptive multime-
dia streaming to mobile nodes,” in MoMM ’08: Proc.
6th Int’l Conf. on Advances in Mobile Computing and
Multimedia.
ACM, 2008, pp. 313–316.
[12] G. Xylomenos, V. Vogkas, and G. Thanos, “The multi-
media broadcast/multicast service,” Wireless Communi-
cations and Mobile Computing, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 255–
265, 2008.
[13] G. B. Dantzig, “Linear programming under uncertainty,”
Manage. Sci., vol. 50, no. 12 Supplement, pp. 1764–
1769, Dec. 2004.
[14] J. R. Birge and F. Louveaux, Introduction to Stochastic
Programming, ser. Springer Series in Operations Re-
search and Financial Engineering.
Springer, 1997.
[15] D. J. Bertsimas, P. Jaillet, and A. R. Odoni, “A priori
optimization,” Oper. Res., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 1019–1033,
Jan. 1991.
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

