Building Efficient End-to-End Service Transparent Fiber Networks Supporting 
Access Rates Beyond 10Gb/s 
 
Theofanis G. Orphanoudakis, Chris Matrakidis, 
Christina (Tanya) Politi, Alexandros Stavdas 
Dept. of Informatics and Telecommunications 
 
University of Peloponnese  
Tripolis, Greece 
{fanis, cmatraki, tpoliti, astavdas}@uop.gr 
Helen-Catherine Leligou, Evangelos Kosmatos 
Dept. of Electrical Engineering 
Technological Educational Institute of Central Greece 
Psahna—Evia, Greece 
leligou@teihal.gr
 
 
 
Abstract— Currently, networks are developed based on the 
layered model focusing on customized solutions for the access, 
metro and core domains. Access networks rely upon 
centralized packet multiplexers, while core network switches 
rely on large port count electronic switches assisted where 
appropriate by Optical Cross-Connects (OXCs). However, this 
monolithic model can lead to capacity and space bottlenecks, 
compromise network services because of a lack of common 
feature sets, and limit the revenue that data services can 
produce for operators. In this paper, we present a novel 
control plane solution, which can lead to metro network 
segment collapse and access-core integration supported by an 
efficient traffic control and distributed multiplexing scheme 
based on a hybrid long-reach fiber access network 
architecture. We show that this architecture can be exploited 
as a large scale distributed multiplexer that can be used to 
funnel traffic directly from access networks over a core optical 
network and describe a control plane architecture compatible 
with the concept of Software Defined Networking for 
simplifying 
the 
aggregation 
process 
and 
improving 
performance at the same time. 
Keywords-Passive optical networks; wavelength division 
multiplexing; access-core integration; medium access control; 
FTTx. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telecommunications traffic is soaring at an astonishing 
rate. Worldwide, the average traffic will increase threefold 
over the next five years [15]. The evidence we have so far 
indicates that the demand for even higher capacity networks 
is steadily increasing. The widespread availability of 
bandwidth intensive services and advanced Fiber to the x 
point (FTTx) schemes will have dramatic consequences in 
core networks: In this paper, we propose a network control 
and data plane architecture aiming to capitalize on the 
complementary strengths of “optical” and “electronics” 
technologies so as to design an ultra high capacity end-to-
end network solution allowing for transparent core-access 
integration. The existing and new services/applications that 
are becoming available to the end user are currently 
supported by wireline access technologies, such as relatively 
limited capacity cable modems, and Digital Subscriber Line 
(DSL) [14] or high capacity FTTx/Very-high-bit-rate DSL 
(VDSL) [13] as well as wireless technologies such as mobile 
3G/4G/Long Term Evolution Advanced (LTE-A) networks 
(High-Speed Downlink Packet Access (HSDPA)/High Speed 
Packet Access (HSPA)+) [12], WiFi and WiMax. Wireless 
networks feature high flexibility in terms of broad area 
coverage but face the limitations of relatively low bandwidth 
(10’s to a few 100’s of Mbps shared between all the users in 
a cell). Therefore, next generation fiber access networks are 
ultimately expected to become a universal access networking 
platform for broadband service delivery either directly to 
end-users or as a wireless/mobile access backhaul 
infrastructure.  
While deployment of dedicated fibers per subscriber may 
prove economically unjustifiable, there are several solutions 
that may lead to resource sharing, hence, cost reduction. 
Passive Optical Networks (PONs) were initially proposed in 
1980s to efficiently concentrate/distribute traffic via a 
commonly shared, passive tree-shaped topology. Under this 
scheme, the time sharing of this topology allowed traffic 
from multiple Optical Network Units (ONUs) to reach, 
collision free, a single port at the Optical Line Termination 
(OLT) [1]-[3]. 
In the core network, L2/L3 switches and routers are 
progressively pushed back to core network periphery. 
Thanks to architectural changes in access networks a trend 
for significant core node consolidation is emerging i.e., 
fewer, but higher capacity, nodes across the network. Hence, 
efficient ways to aggregate and transport traffic over the core 
network infrastructure are required. The objective is to 
exploit 
the 
immense 
capacity 
offered 
by 
optical 
transportation systems, while avoiding the cost of electronic 
switching at transit nodes. This task in turn requires 
appropriate traffic grooming and forwarding schemes that 
can operate at the optical layer and reduce conversions to the 
electronic layer as much as possible to reduce costs. In order 
to achieve this, a coordinated end-to-end network operation 
is required. This coordination must take into account the 
boundaries of different administrative domains and provide 
appropriate interfaces to allow exchange of information and 
implementation of a distributed information forwarding and 
traffic aggregation scheme.  
In the rest of this paper, we describe the framework for 
developing such a network architecture. In the following 
section, we focus on the end-to-end network view and the 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

core network functionality. In Section III, we describe an 
interoperable long reach access network architecture that can 
lead to access-core integration. In Section IV, we describe an 
integrated resource reservation scheme that can operate over 
both Wavelength-Division Multiplexing (WDM) and Time-
Division Multiplexing (TDM) shared optical networks. In 
Section V, we evaluate the proposed scheme under specific 
scenarios. Finally, Section VI concludes our paper. 
II. 
END-TO-END NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 
The objective of an end-to-end network is to collect the 
traffic from the access part and forward it to the recipient 
access network while providing the requested Quality of 
Service (QoS) performance. Our approach is to optimize the 
performance in this segment proposing suitable network and 
node architectures in the framework of dynamic networking 
while ensuring backwards compatibility. The overall vision 
is shown in Figure 1. The main ideas are to remove the need 
for 
a 
physical 
aggregation 
network, 
use 
optical 
interconnection between access and core whenever possible, 
and still reap the benefits of statistical multiplexing to 
achieve efficient use of resources, i.e., exploiting access-core 
integration [4]. 
In order to achieve the objective of efficiency (i.e., 
reduced deployment and operational costs), the network 
must implement efficient traffic aggregation and routing 
schemes so that the available fibers and switch ports are 
utilized to the greatest possible extent. Additionally, the 
transparency at the optical layer should be maintained to the 
greatest possible extent as well, so as to reduce the increased 
cost of deploying complex and costly in terms of power 
consumption packet routers. Transparency could be achieved 
in different forms. Ultimately, optical transparency could 
guarantee traffic forwarding directly at the optical layer. In 
this case scalable optical switches could be exploited. 
However, this is difficult to achieve since traffic flows need 
to be redirected based on flexible rules that lead to specific 
requirements about traffic processing at each node. While 
optical transparency is difficult to achieve end-to-end in long 
paths, we will show that the same objectives can be achieved 
if 
service 
transparency 
is 
maintained. 
By 
service 
transparency, we refer to aggregation and processing of 
traffic flows aggregated and managed in terms of 
provisioned network services that can lead to reduced 
complexity and efficient implementations. Thus, core optical 
nodes can be exploited for transportation and switching of 
large traffic containers at extremely high data rates. Network 
and node architectures to achieve these objectives has been 
described in [5][6]. 
This could exploit a flexible and scalable control plane to 
allow exchange of information across domains so as to 
achieve implementation of optimal traffic aggregation rules 
so that well utilized optical flows are switched end-to-end 
across network segments remaining entirely in the optical 
domain. In the example of Figure 1, under appropriate 
coordination of reservations in the access domain (1) of the 
source node traffic from different user interfaces and services 
can be aggregated and transported over appropriately formed 
L2 traffic containers. Such containers can then reserve 
wavelength resources (possibly time-shared) over the core 
domain (2, 3 in Figure 1) and reach the recipient over 
appropriately reserved resources at the destination access 
domain (1’ in Figure 1). 
To achieve optimal resource utilization in the network, 
 
 
Figure 1. End-to-end network architecture and resource reservation domains. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

however, the end-to-end paths signaled by the network 
control plane must be computed based on available network 
status information at each segment. Taking into account the 
requirement for interoperability across 
administrative 
domains this can be addressed through the introduction of an 
appropriate path computation architecture, where peering or 
hierarchical Path Computation Elements (PCEs) will 
cooperate for the computations of end-to-end optimal paths, 
even in scenarios spanning different administrative domains 
(Figure 2). Such a distribution of the path computation 
functionality network serves a two-fold purpose. First, by 
deploying a PCE per network segment (e.g., one per cluster 
and another in the core part connecting CTNs), a scalable 
path computation tailored to the characteristics of each 
network segment can be implemented. Furthermore, 
assuming that network segments are owned by different 
network operators, optimal end-to-end path computations 
without compromising the confidentiality between domains 
can still be achieved. For instance, this would likely be 
achieved through the deployment of hierarchical PCE 
architectures, or the usage of path-key mechanisms amongst 
peering PCEs. 
The above scheme suggests a seamless integration of 
abstraction and resource orchestration mechanisms across 
the entire physical layer infrastructure. Towards this end, 
new technologies for optimal configuration and planning to 
reduce costs, simplify management, improve service 
provisioning time, and improve resource utilization in multi-
domain networks become increasingly important. Ideally, an 
application or service could be completely decoupled from 
the underlying network infrastructure, but this is not always 
realistic. In most cases, access to the specific underlying 
infrastructure quality performance indicator factors and 
resource management mechanisms, is required in order to 
establish and manage specific Service Level Agreements 
(SLAs). To meet application performance objectives, it 
becomes necessary for the application or its proxy to ensure 
that the underlying network is aware of the application 
requirements and provides the necessary services. This is a 
task of the network control and management plane entities in 
order to appropriately map applications to offered services 
configure the network elements and orchestrate reservation 
of resources across network segments. While proprietary 
implementations exist to achieve the interactions described 
above most are based on some sort of a network control 
plane that utilizes specific interfaces and protocols. The 
objective is to decouple network processing and information 
forwarding 
data 
plane 
functions 
from 
the 
service 
composition, configuration and management functions. To 
support transport networks with multiple administrative and 
technology segments, communication and interoperability 
between control planes is required. The mediation between 
control and transportation, layers can facilitate joint 
optimization of computing and networking deployments, 
software-defined functions at a number of layers, including 
the transport (i.e., optical and TDM) layer, enabling simpler 
interworking of different administrative and technology 
domains, and application-aware transport network resources. 
Motivated by the above objectives and in order to replace 
proprietary implementations and manual processes with an 
automated control plane mechanism the Software Defined 
Networking (SDN) paradigm has emerged [7][8]. The 
recently introduced SDN concept based on the OpenFlow 
[8] protocol relies on a complex notion of a flow associated 
to a number of header fields in the data frame, which 
enables the definition of detailed rules for the treatment of 
different traffic classes and owners. Because of this, SDN is 
seen as a potential solution for a unified control plane in 
converged access/aggregation and mobile networks. Thus, 
Core
Content / Application/ 
Service Provider POP, 
BRAS farms etc.
Optical switching domain
Active 
Remote 
Access Node
Metro 
Edge 
Node
Reservation 
Domain 1
Cluster 1 
control 
plane
Cluster N
control 
plane
Core 
network 
control 
plane
Reservation 
Domain 2
Child 
PCE1
Child 
PCE2
Child 
PCE3
Parent PCE
 
Figure 2. SDN based control plane, hierarchical scenario. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

SDN principles could be employed to implement service 
delivery policies and coordinate end-to-end reservations 
implementing the framework described above resulting in 
efficient service transparent optical networks. 
 
III. 
ACCESS NETWORK ARCHITECTURE 
Having described the vision for achieving service 
transparency over the core network, we should also focus on 
how to achieve deeper fiber penetration in the last mile 
building an end-to-end optical infrastructure maintaining 
service transparency so as to increase efficiency and reduce 
complexity. Towards this end, we first describe the available 
technologies and architectural components that can be used 
to develop dynamic optical access networks and present a 
scalable reference access network architecture. In the 
following section, we will describe how the control plane 
mechanisms described above can be extended to support 
end-to-end resource reservation schemes across the entire 
optical network. 
WDM-PONs, 
possibly 
complemented 
by 
TDMA 
techniques, are considered the next step in the evolution of 
PONs. They can lead to higher per-ONU bandwidths, 
splitting ratios, and reach, as compared to EPON and GPON 
architectures due to the higher capacity per fiber. The use of 
WDM-PONs 
enables 
new 
broadband 
business 
and 
residential applications on a broad scale, and enables the 
evolution of metro area networks towards a unified access 
and backhaul infrastructure. Different per-wavelength bit 
rates ranging from 1 to 10 Gb/s have to be supported, and 
full integration into a management system and also into a 
control plane is necessary.  
A WDM-PON architecture mainly depends on the use of 
the so-called Remote Nodes (RNs), which are used as 
wavelength (de)multiplexing points and the design of ONUs 
(Figure 3a). In WDM-PONs as a basic multiplexing stage 
most frequently, a wavelength routing device (like an 
Arrayed Waveguide AWG, used in a single or in multiple 
stages) or wavelength filters with specific properties also 
including power couplers are used. To achieve higher 
flexibility next-generation WDM-PONs should have the 
capabilities of flexible wavelength routing to sub-trees and in 
turn provide some sort of wavelength agility in the ONU 
side. Different degrees of flexibility in wavelength routing 
could be provided by supporting sharing of wavelength 
across different sub-trees. The latter option assumes some 
sort of wavelength agility on the ONU side to operate in 
different wavelengths. 
In [9][10], an efficient long-reach access network 
supporting the above features based on the introduction of 
the Active Remote Node (ARN) in the access network 
exploiting a Fibre-to-the-Curb (FTTC) architecture has been 
presented. The ARN is physically sited close to the end-user, 
e.g., where the Cabinet/DSLAM is located and its role is to 
terminate and (de)aggregate the traffic from/to a group of 
end-user ONUs in the same neighbourhood (Figure 3b). 
Thus, the ARN is the place where optical transparency is 
terminated creating a two-stage optical access network.  
 
LR-WDM-PON
Remote 
Node 
(RN)
Metro
100Km
OLT
Photonic Core
OADM/ 
ROADM
OADM/ 
ROADM
OADM/ 
ROADM
OADM/ 
ROADM
 
(a) 
XGPON ONT
ARN
XGPON 
OLT TRx
[1-GMAX]
TRx
L2 SW
WMAX
RN
MAX 1: 64
MEN
TRx
[1-WMAX]
Control plane elements
Centralized 
control
 
(b) 
Figure 3. Generic WDM-PON architecture (a) and two-stage hybrid 
TDM/WDM PON  
This architecture has been shown to reduce cost and 
increase scalability [10]. The most important features of the 
two-stage hybrid TDM/WDM PON of Figure 3b is that 
access rates beyond 10Gb/s per user can be achieved using 
cost efficient ONUs (e.g., XGPON [2]) while increasing 
aggregate capacities over the WDM trunk line. 
Concluding, we summarize below the main points of the 
architecture described above. First, the flat hierarchy exploits 
optical transmission and multiplexing to a minimize the cost 
of packet processing and switching, since long-reach can be 
achieved (as proposed in [4][6]). The second contribution of 
this paper is that an integrated control plane architecture is 
proposed to implement this network hierarchy. Beyond 
simplification of the access routers and switches the 
proposed architecture can also lead to reduction of cost and 
power consumption due to the simplification of the 
Customer Premises Equipment (CPE), while maintaining 
very high access rates that can exploit mature 10Gb/s 
technologies. Below, we will finally show that the proposed 
integrated optical network architecture can exploit service 
transparency to also further reduce the implementation cost 
of multiple access control and access latency over the shared 
network paths of tree-shaped access networks.  
IV. 
INTEGRATED RESOURCE RESERVATION SCHEME 
The access architecture described above evidently 
defines two discrete resource reservation domains extending 
between the active nodes of the network (i.e., the customer 
ONUs, ARN and MEN), as depicted in Figure 2 and Figure 
3b. Assuming TDM-PONs in the last drop from the ARN to 
the customer ONUs resource reservation in the first segment 
would be performed following the Medium Access Control 
(MAC) protocol and the associated traffic management 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

mechanisms [1]-[3]. In both IEEE 802.3 based Ethernet 
PONs (EPONs) and the ITU based G-PONs this assumes the 
implementation of a number of discrete Classes of Service 
(CoS) and the corresponding per CoS queuing and request 
process in the ONUs and MAC scheduling of timeslot 
allocations per ONU and CoS (transmission grants) at the 
OLT [11]. If the two segments operate independently, 
forwarding of traffic aggregated by each OLT over the core 
network would then typically require routing/switching of 
traffic to output interfaces. Implementing appropriate output 
queuing policies CoS scheduling would handle the 
transmission 
over 
each 
output 
interface. 
This 
is 
schematically shown in Figure 4a, where M input (access) 
interfaces (OLTs) aggregating traffic from PONs with a split 
ratio N are interconnected to L core network destination 
nodes (Di) over K output (core) interfaces. 
 
Core network
ONU1
ONU2
ONUN
ONUN
ONU2
ONU1
MAC
MAC
MAC
SCHEDULER
D1
DL
D2
I1
I2
IM
O1
O2
OK
CoS
queues
Per  CoS queues
 
(a) 
ONU1
ONUN
ONU1
ONU2
ONUN
ONU1
MAC
I1
I2
IM
Core network
D1
DL
D2
O1
O2
OK
D1
DL
Per  destination 
and CoS queuing
SDN Control 
plane
 
(b) 
Figure 4. Distributed per segment queuing and scheduling (a) vs. SDN 
controlled distributed multiplexing and centralized MAC (b) 
Implementing the SDN approach described in Section II, 
flexible flow association rules can be defined (e.g., using the 
OpenFlow protocol) across the entire optical access and core 
network up to the ONUs. This can make possible an 
alternative queuing and reservation policy (following the 
approach of [11]), which can handle collectively upstream 
requests and perform scheduling and traffic forwarding in a 
centralized manner, as shown in Figure 4b.  
In this paper, we extend the work presented by 
Orphanoudakis et al. [11] to address hybrid WDM/TDM 
networks as proposed by Matrakidis et al. [9] assuming an 
SDN compatible mode of operation estabishing provisioned 
links over the core network to implement flow forwarding 
based on programmable rules. Thus, even packet switching 
at the ARN side can be simplified by appropriate frame 
tagging techniques like VLANs or MPLS. Finally, the 
centralized arbitration eliminates the requirement for 
buffering at the output interfaces. 
It is worth noting that this scheme does not increase the 
complexity of ONUs, since per flow queuing is already 
implemented and only the number of queues is increased  
(not affecting the total memory requirements though, as will 
be shown  next) to implement per destination queuing as 
determined by SDN rules. On the contrary, a single MAC 
entity can be used to collectively schedule upstream 
transmissions from all access networks so as to optimally 
utilize connections over the core network eliminating the 
need for output queues and  scheduling. Thus, the network 
will operate as a distributed switch under the control of the 
centralized MAC arbiter. Since the single MAC entity has 
global knowledge of traffic conditions at each ONU as well 
as the status and service rate of each core interface we will 
show that improved access latency as well as throughput can 
be achieved.  
V. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed 
scheme, a simulation model implementing the two-stage 
hybrid TDM/WDM PON shown in Figure 3b was developed 
using the OPNET simulation tool. The simulated topology 
comprises 4 PONs, with 16 ONUs each, the capacity of each 
PON being set to 10Gb/s. We consider two traffic classes 
(high priority and low priority class). The traffic arrival 
pattern of the high priority class were simulated by constant 
bit rate sources generating short fixed-size packets 
periodically. This service class is expected to serve mostly 
traffic from real-time services with high QoS requirements. 
The traffic arrival pattern of the low priority class were 
simulated by ON-OFF sources (modelling self-similar 
Internet traffic) with a burstiness factor of 8. Regarding the 
packet size, the tri-modal distribution was used as is proved 
to be good approximation of IP applications originating in 
Ethernet networks. In detail, it consists of packet sizes of 64, 
500, 1500 bytes appearing with probability of 0.6, 0.2, and 
0.2 respectively. The traffic mix included on average 30% 
high priority traffic and 70% low priority traffic. The number 
of destination core nodes (L) was set to 13. In order to 
simulate an unbalanced traffic demand per destination all 
packets from the first ONU in each PON, were set to have as 
destination a single core node, while for the traffic from all 
the other ONUs its destination was randomly selected by 
using a uniform distribution among all destinations.  
Following the methodology of [11], we compared this 
architecture with a non-integrated one, where the OLT MAC 
schedules the transmission of each PON independently. In 
this architecture the OLT decides on scheduling by taking 
into account only the requirement for fair sharing of 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

resources among all competing ONUs (denoted hereafter as 
“Distributed” MAC implementation referring to Figure 4a). 
Figure 5 illustrates the probability density function (PDF) 
of access delay (across all queues of all ONUs) for a total 
offered load of 95%. Evidently, the proposed centralized 
architecture achieves lower aggregate access delay at high 
loads (at low loads demands per output interface remain low; 
hence, there is no impact of the MAC scheduling).  
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
0
5
10
15
20
25
Number of Samples (x103)  
Queueing Delay (ms)  
Uni
Dest
Distributed
Centralized
 
Figure 5. Probability Density Function (PDF) of access delay at 95% load. 
 
Figure 6. Packet Loss Rate (PLR due to buffer overflows. 
The improved access latency of the centralized MAC we 
propose in this paper, also has an impact on the total 
buffering requirements as observed in Figure 6, where the 
packet loss probability in ONU queues is shown. As can be 
deduced by observing the results in Figure 6, the distributed 
MAC results in higher losses and reduced throughput for an 
ONU buffer size value of 16Mbits, while for the centralized 
MAC proposed here this value is up to 30% improved.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
We described an end-to-end optical network architecture 
that can efficiently scale to support the requirements of next 
generation networks. The proposed architecture exploits 
flexible core networks based on efficient traffic aggregation 
and optical switching and integrated access-core networks 
based on hierarchical long reach hybrid TDM/WDM PONs 
allowing access rates beyond 10Gb/s. Based on this network 
architecture, we proposed a unified control plane architecture 
that can perform end-to-end coordination and resource 
reservation based on SDN principles. Hence, ultra high 
capacity service transparent optical networks can be 
deployed exploiting the emerging SDN principles to 
implement traffic aggregation and flow switching. A 
scenario of operation of this integrated resource reservation 
scheme and centralized control was assessed by means of 
simulation and was shown to achieve improved performance 
in terms of throughput and access latency. Additionally, the 
proposed scheme can lead to lower complexity of the access 
nodes since a centralized MAC engine guided by an SDN 
control plane can replace multiple engines that would be 
needed in the case of distributed control. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been co-financed by the EU (ESF) & Greek 
funds through the “Education and life-long learning” of the 
NSRF-Research Funding Program: ARCHIMEDES III 
“Investing in Knowledge Society through ESF”.  
REFERENCES 
[1] ITU-T G.984.x “Gigabit-Capable Passive Optical Networks 
(GPON)”. 
[2]  ITU-T 
G.987.x, 
“10-Gigabit-Capable 
Passive 
Optical 
Networks (XG-PON)”. 
[3] IEEE Stds. 802.3ah-2004, IEEE Stds. 802.3av. 
[4] G. Weichenberg, V. W. S. Chan and M. Médard, “Design and 
Analysis of Optically Flow Switched Networks,” IEEE/OSA 
Journal on Optical Communications and Networking, vol. 1, 
no. 3, pp. B81-B97, Aug. 2009 
[5] A. Stavdas, C. Matrakidis, C.T. Politi, T. Orphanoudakis, and 
J. 
Dunne, 
D. 
Chiaroni: 
“Optical 
Packet 
Add/Drop 
Multiplexers for packet ring networks” Th.2.E.1, vol. 4 – 103, 
ECOC 2008, 21-25 September 2008, Brussels, Belgium 2008. 
[6] J. D. Angelopoulos, et. al., “An Optical Network Architecture 
with Distributed Switching Inside Node Clusters Features 
Improved Loss, Efficiency and Cost”, IEEE Journal on 
Lightwave Technologies, vol. 25, no. 5, May 2007, pp. 1138-
1146.  
[7] Open 
Networking 
Foundation: 
“Software-Defined 
Networking: The New Norm for Networks” ONF White 
Paper April 13, 2012”, April 2012. 
[8] OpenFlow Switch Specification Version 1.3.1 (Wire Protocol 
0x04), September 6, 2012, OpenFlow 1.3.1. 
[9] C. 
Matrakidis, 
T. 
Orphanoudakis, 
and 
A. 
Stavdas, 
“Performance Evaluation of a Truly Cost-Efficient, Scalable 
and Green Optical Access Network” Photonics in Switching 
2012, Ajacio, France, 11-14 Sep. 2012. 
[10] T.G. Orphanoudakis, C. Matrakidis, A. Stavdas, and H.-C. 
Leligou, “Exploiting state of the art WDM-PON technologies 
for building efficient FTTC networks”, 15th Int. Conf. on 
Transparent Opt. Netw. (ICTON), Cartagena, Spain, June 23-
27, 2013. 
[11] T. Orphanoudakis, H.-C. Leligou, E. Kosmatos, and A. 
Stavdas, “Future Internet infrastructure based on the 
transparent integration of access and core optical transport 
networks”, IEEE/OSA Journal of Optical Communications 
and Networking, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. A205–A218, 2009. 
[12] Erik Dahlman, Stefan Parkvall, Johan Sköld "4G – LTE/LTE-
Advanced for Mobile Broadband", Academic Press, 2011. 
[13] ITU-T G.993.1, "Very high speed digital subscriber line 
transceivers", June 2004.  
[14] ITU-T G.Sup50, "Overview of digital subscriber line 
Recommendations", November 2011. 
[15] Cisco White paper, "Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast 
and 
Methodology, 
2013–2018", 
June 
2014.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-368-1
ICSNC 2014 : The Ninth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

