Blockchain-based Decentralized KYC (Know-Your-Customer)  
Syed Azhar Hussain 
University of Nicosia  
Nicosia, Cyprus 
qadria[at]gmail[dot]com 
Zeeshan-ul-hassan Usmani  
University of Nicosia 
Nicosia, Cyprus 
zusmani78[at]gmail[dot]com
Abstract— Know Your Customer (aka KYC) is the regulatory 
and compliance obligation for the conventional banking and 
financial system to capture customer information before 
onboarding and providing any financial services. In banks, 
KYC is embedded into the account opening forms, which 
mandate customers to provide accurate information and 
ideally update as soon as any change occurs in the KYC data. 
Similarly, other financial institutions such as stocks, Mutual 
Funds, 
Insurance 
companies, 
etc. 
also 
require 
KYC 
information from prospective customers.  Primarily KYC 
helps financial institutions to prevent identity thefts, money 
laundering, terrorist financing, and profiling and eliminating 
the runaway creditors. Conventional banking and financial 
institutions spend a substantial part of customer acquisition 
costs of operating residents and isolated KYC databases and 
try to keep them updated and accurate. The overall cost of 
managing the silo KYC per customer increases because of a 
lack of transparencies, poor control, mistrust, and data 
duplication. Blockchain technology offers a solution to 
establish trust and transparency and provide a secure and 
publicly verifiable KYC. This paper presents a unique trust 
management 
platform 
based 
on 
self-sovereign 
and 
decentralizes 
Know-Your-Customer 
(DKYC) 
model 
to 
enhance customer privacy through consent-based access, 
featuring regulator governance and helping banks to use 
trusted and accurate customer data while reducing the 
customer acquisition costs. 
Keywords-Blockchain application; self-sovereign identity; 
trust system; know your customer (KYC); customer privacy. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Blockchain is an emerging technology, a trust protocol, 
envisioned by Satoshi Nakamoto [1] with an extraordinary 
digital currency use case. In just a short span of 10 years, 
blockchain technology has disrupted every industry to 
establish 
trust 
and 
transparency 
through 
immutable 
provenance. The financial sector is facing many challenges, 
especially 
higher 
transaction 
costs 
[2] 
in 
trustless 
environments and eventually, all cost burdens shifted to end-
customers. Additionally, banks pay huge sums to prevent 
fraud, but data breaches, leaks, and hacks [3] are fairly 
prevalent. This paper specifically examines the most 
important use case of financial sector i.e., “Know Your 
Customer” KYC (Figure 1), and addresses the key 
challenges it faces such as a high cost of managing the KYC 
per customer, increasing the unbanked customers [4], 
verification time, audit error and most importantly, the 
isolated centralized databases which do not talk to each 
other. This paper proposes a novel DKYC model, which is 
going to disrupt the current KYC implementations through 
distributed ledger technology and offers benefits such as 
lower 
transaction 
costs, 
with 
higher 
provenance, 
immutability, and transparency in transactions. 
Figure 1. Know your customer 
This paper is structured as follows; Sections I, II and III 
discuss the KYC challenges related to processes, 
implementations and regulatory implications in the financial 
sector. Sections IV and V explain our proposed model of 
distributed KYC (DKYC) solution. Section VI briefly 
highlights the viable incentive mechanisms, and Section VII 
summarizes the paper with key topics open for further 
study.  
II.
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
In today’s glo1bal economy, we live in a world where the 
users are in full control of their identity and are the sole 
authorizer to whom they may share their information. Know-
Your-Customer has become pivotal in the digital world and 
large financial institutions need to identify ways to trust 
foreign banks and have more transparency into recipients’ 
proﬁle. Most financial institutions are sticking to the 
conventional procedures of KYC [4] which are inefficient 
and convey an unpleasant consumer interaction with the long 
and arduous process that KYC entails. Also, because of the 
involvement of many parties in the traditional KYC 
processes, it becomes prone to flaws and human errors and is 
very inefficient. Following are the key market dynamics and 
barriers of the KYC processes [5]:  

Despite dramatic increases in headcount and spend, 
KYC resource remains the greatest challenge to 
financial institutions 
Identity Cards
High KYC Cost 
Bank 
Departments
Inadequate 
KYC 
Databases  
Multiple 
KYC 
Checks
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications


The largest financial institutions ($10billion+ turnover) 
have seen average spend on KYC-related procedures 
increase from $142m in 2016 to $150m in 2017 

The number of financial institutions employees 
working on KYC adherence has rocketed from an 
average of 68 in 2016 to 307 in 2017 

Despite the rise in headcount, a third (34%) of financial 
institutions report that a lack of resources remains the 
biggest challenge in conducting KYC and customer 
because of diligence processes 

Financial institutions claim that on average it takes 26 
days to onboard a new client, up from 24 days in our 
2016 survey. However, corporate customers claim that 
on average it takes 32 days 

Financial institutions expect onboarding times to rise 
again by 12% in the next year 
Many of the barriers can be eased with the adoption of 
state-of-the-art technology that can revolutionize this process 
both for the institution and the user. By using distributed 
ledger-based KYC [6], which can be shared by multiple 
banks, we are looking at a game-changing, innovative 
process that will reduce the burden of many processes and 
also provide more transparency and visibility let alone an 
enhanced user-friendly environment for KYC. We make 
identity verification secure and accessible on-demand.   
Example 
KYC 
implementations 
using blockchain 
technology: 
TABLE I. KYC IMPLEMENTATIONS 
Company
Description
Argos 
Solution 
[7] 
Argos provides KYC form submission and 
screening for errors and fraud cases. It also 
provides checkups on the customer lists with 
our AML global watch lists and targeted 
profile investigation and risk leveling. AML 
report publishing and Whitelist finalization. 
HQ in South Korea. 
KYC-
Chain [8] 
A B2B managed workflow application that 
enables organizations to manage their KYC 
processes for individuals and corporates. It 
provides 
a 
solution 
to 
streamline 
the 
onboarding process for the customer. Review 
and process incoming KYC applications by 
streamlining workflow and automating the 
screening and verification process. HQ in 
Hong Kong. 
Tradle [9] 
KYC on blockchain provider. Aims to build a 
global trust provisioning network to give retail, 
wealth, SME and institutional customers of 
financial institutions access to capital and risk 
allocation. Uses pre-integrated vendor products 
such as biometrics, ID scanning, sanctions, and 
PEPs checkers. HQ in New York. 
KYC  
Legal [10] 
Provides 
blockchain 
KYC 
document 
verification through a mobile application, and 
verification of identity and documents with a 
KYC LEGAL agent. After verification into the 
blockchain, the user can use the stored data to 
verify identification for multi-purposes. The 
application is available for iOS and Android 
mobile devices.  Provides B2B and B2C 
services. Offices in Berlin, San Francisco, and 
Moscow. 
Confirm 
[11] 
The company’s platform uses algorithms and 
big data analysis to provide data on blockchain 
transactions and parties. It provides an AML 
Platform that offers anti-money laundering 
(AML) products for companies and financial 
institutions operating in the cryptocurrency 
ecosystem. Provides an end-to-end know your 
customer solution covering entities' activity in 
the crypto ecosystem. HQ in London, UK. 
III.
REGULATORY FRAMEWORKS
In this paper, have taken up the regulatory part to shed 
some light on how regulatory challenges affect the growth 
of DKYC based blockchain model. It is important to 
compare the traditional framework [2] with the perceived 
updated one across jurisdictions and the ways by which it 
makes compliance to allow decentralized growth. This will 
help us to form an adjustable framework that complies with 
all existing compliance models and can be changed 
regarding the jurisdiction in question. 
A. Customer Case Studies 
Because of the decentralized nature of our platform, it is 
difficult to formulate a common and adjustable framework, 
as different individuals and entities from different parts of 
the world will need separate frameworks for establishing 
KYC compliant infrastructure. An individual from the 
Eurozone in need of a GDPR compliant KYC/AML[12] 
framework cannot pass the legal hurdles with the local 
authorities when provided with an AML/CFT II framework 
established by the U.S. Regulatory Framework Act. Thus, 
there is a need for simplification of complexities of 
frameworks, as the traditional KYC model discourages 
knowledge transfer from one to another, limiting the 
exchange of value, information and ideas. 
B. Frameworks  
Most countries follow a similar KYC/AML framework 
[13], all taking its roots from either the European or the 
American standard of compliance. Most organizations have 
an inefficient system of asking for KYC/AML [6] documents 
separately, each time a new customer comes in. This model 
is flawed and inefficient as the same person might have to 
submit the same documents again and again with different 
entities throughout their lifetime, and inefficient on the 
business side and it brings in extra costs. By forming a 
common framework by which both sides can do away with 
this repetitive process, millions, if not billions can be saved 
in operating costs around the globe. 2015 saw a continued 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

rise in regulatory frameworks developed by governing 
bodies [14] with a key focus area for management, finance, 
registration, and authentication. Know Your Customer 
(KYC) and anti-money laundering regulations are becoming 
important to help businesses protect themselves from identity 
theft, money laundering and financing terrorism. Incidents 
like the one above, are all too common and the costs of 
complying with KYC’s anti-corruption due diligence 
procedures are high.  
According to the International Monetary Fund [15], 
incidents involving money laundering, compliance violations 
of KYC regulations, and other breaches are estimated to cost 
between two and five percent of the world’s gross domestic 
product. The compliance with the regulatory frameworks (as 
illustrated in Figure 2) such as AML/CFT, Basel III, MiFID 
II, PSD2, GDPR is imperative for any KYC solution both at 
state and/or country level.  
Figure 2. Regulatory Frameworks
The frameworks differ from area to area, depending on 
the perceived needs of the authorities to discourage unethical 
and unlawful practices. There are innumerable challenges 
when coming up with a common framework that is 
adjustable depending on the area and situation. Therefore, it 
is of utmost importance to show a robust KYC/AML 
framework with enough privacy, management, and oversight 
that ultimately understands and mitigates non-compliance 
and AML risks. 
C. Other Compliance Costs 
A financial institution spends on an average of about $50 
million a year on KYC related expenses [16], with larger 
institutions going as high as $150 million dollars. Our aim is 
to propose a DKYC model to cut these costs that are 
associated with the tedious process of traditional KYC. The 
major cost that DKYC might incur is the registration with 
Governments of various countries. Each country has its own 
KYC norms that need undivided attention to detail as the 
subtle difference can lead to scrupulous outcomes. A 
research team will be necessary to go through the details of 
each country one by one to be thorough in all respects. 
IV.
DKYC MODEL
KYC forms (as depicted in Figure 3) are complex and 
contain lots of information related to the customer including 
Name, Birth Dates, Addresses, Income, etc. And as most of 
the information is dynamic in nature, the update process is 
very tedious and complex. In our study we have examined 
the data requirements of KYC, to understand the structured 
relationships and how it can be captured and reshaped 
through the DKYC model. There will be two different major 
segmentations, which hold and serve the Individuals KYC 
and Business KYC, and subsequently, both segments have 
different treatments. 
Figure 3. KYC Sample Form 
Traditional KYC is based on the Pull mechanism where 
the customer information captured while onboarding the 
customer. DKYC supports both the Push (customer sending 
information to the service provider) and the Pull models 
(bank or service provider seeking an update on customer 
profile) with customer consent on what, where and whom 
he/she would like to share the information. 
Figure 4. DKYC Decentralized Approach for building KYC distributed 
network 
As illustrated in Figure 4, the typical scenario starts when 
a customer creates his/her identity on the chain and likes to 
push his/her information to the service provider for example 
to create a bank account. Bank will validate the request 
through the chain and start the customer onboarding. DKYC 
will be a public blockchain where anyone without 
geographical restriction joins the identity platform. We will 
apply Proof of Importance consensus algorithm to establish a 
scoring mechanism where existing conventional identities 
establishments e.g. Civilian Identities, Regulators, National 
Security Numbers, other private sector identities stores can 
also participate and part of the network to set the scoring. For 
example, from an Individuals segment, anyone can join the 
network by having the basic form of proof is “peer 
witnesses”, however, the score is 50.  
If the customer provides his fingerprint (which is unique 
in the world), his/her score in the DKYC chain will increase 
to 100. Similarly, if the customer provides the National 
Identity proof than his/her score will increase to 200. And A 
similar mechanism applies to a business establishment where 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

the score will increase based on the maturity of their proof of 
importance starting from peer witnesses to commercial 
identity, etc.  
Now the service providers when they would like to pull 
identity of an Individual or Business, they will send the 
request and after the consent from the Individual/Business, 
the selected information will be shared with the service 
provider to complete his/her business transactions (e.g. 
creating an account). In our model, scoring sensitivity would 
be selected by the Service Provider (e.g. banks, stocks, etc.) 
depending on the Service to Offer. For example, bank open 
accounts with score 50 and lend when the score is greater 
than 150.  In this way everyone either small or big and 
regardless of their income they can be part of the network 
and present the proof of identity. 
V.
SOLUTION ARCHITECTURE
As per the segmentation, there would be two different 
end-users of this DKYC Model one for retail/consumer 
referred to as DKYC Individual and another one for Business 
referred to as DKYC Business. On the DKYC public chain, 
every Individual or Business identities represented by the 
unique address which will be used in the chain for the 
business processes interactions and workflows. 
Figure 5. DKYC Solution Architecture 
Proposed technology stack includes a hard-fork of the 
current 
Ethereum 
mainnet 
(development 
architecture 
illustrated in Figure 5) and adds customizations such as 
replacing the gas fee with the transaction-based fee which 
will be based on the transaction and paid by the requestor, 
with specific smart contracts to cover following high level 
use cases (listed in Table II).  However, at the application 
layer, we will keep our development frameworks like the 
Ethereum development architecture (illustrated in Figure 5) 
where the community may use the existing platforms for 
dApp design, integrations, and developments. In a typical 
workflow, a customer will create his identity first time and 
pay the transaction fee for peer witnessing nodes, when the 
customer adds his/her fingerprint or national identity or 
passport, he or she will pay the verification node of civilian 
oracles node (onetime) and the record will be part of 
blockchain database. Moving forward for any network 
transaction the approving node will receive the benefits of 
service. Following are the list of Key Use Cases: 
TABLE II. USE CASES 
VI.
INCENTIVE MODELS
We have explored multiple incentivized business models, 
where CAPEX would be covered through seed funding or 
ICO. However, OPEX is incentivized by node subscriptions, 
network usage fee or extrinsic token-based fees. Figure 6 
explains the key CAPEX and OPEX based models, which 
will be selected as per the applicable law in the jurisdiction. 
At the beginning of the project, CAPEX fundraising shall be 
done through Seed or ICO, whereas in OPEX several 
business model options are available such as collecting fees 
from nodes subscription, or charging a fee based on network 
usage and lastly we can also explore the applicability of 
fungible tokens. 
Figure 6. Incentive Approaches 
VII.
CONCLUSION
   In our exploratory approach, we have tried to identify the 
core problems that current traditional KYCs databases are 
facing and how advances of blockchain could revolutionize 
the whole identity ecosystem (in trustless digital world) and 
bring the privacy control back to the end-users or end-
customers where they will leverage the DKYC as 
decentralize, transparent, and trust-based know your 
customer. The open areas for research are; to address 
challenges such as fraud protection using artificial 
intelligence, 
creating 
the 
devices' 
identity, 
dApps 
application models, on-chain/off-chain oracles, performance 
and the blueprint for decentralized score-based KYC. 
No. 
Use Cases Name  
(Transactions Types)
Requestor 
1 
Customer Onboarding Use Case  
Customer 
2 
Business Onboarding Use Case 
Business 
3 
Verification Use Case 
Any Entity 
4 
Risk Notifications Use Case 
Customer or Business 
5 
Annual Profile Review Use Case 
Customer or Business 
6 
Retire Record Use Case 
Customer or Business 
7 
Activate Record Use Case 
Customer or Business 
8 
Customer Consent Use Case 
Customer or Business 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

REFERENCES
[1]
S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash 
System.” 
[2]
KELVIN DICKENSON, “The Future of KYC – How Banks 
Are Adapting to Regulatory Complexity,” Opus.com, 2018. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.opus.com/future-of-kyc/. 
[Accessed: 02-Sep-2019]. 
[3]
LILY HAY NEWMAN, “How Hackers Pulled Off a $20 
Million Mexican Bank Heist | WIRED,” Wired.com, 2019. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.wired.com/story/mexico-
bank-hack/. [Accessed: 02-Sep-2019]. 
[4]
AFI, “KYC Innovations, Financial Inclusion and Integrity,” 
no. March, pp. 1–103, 2019. 
[5]
Refinitiv, “KYC compliance: the rising challenge for financial 
institutions,” p. 33, 2019. 
[6]
J. Parra Moyano and O. Ross, “KYC Optimization Using 
Distributed Ledger Technology,” Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng., vol. 59, 
no. 6, pp. 411–423, 2017. 
[7]
“Product | Argos Solutions,” Argos Solutions, 2019. [Online]. 
Available: https://argos-solutions.io/product/. [Accessed: 02-
Sep-2019]. 
[8]
KYC-Chain, “What is Know Your Customer (KYC) and how 
does it affect your business? - KYC-Chain,” KYC-Chain, 
2019. [Online]. Available: https://kyc-chain.com/what-is-
know-your-customer-kyc-and-how-does-it-affect-your-
business/. [Accessed: 02-Sep-2019]. 
[9]
Tradle.io, “Tradle. Trust provisioning on blockchain.,” 
Tradle.io, 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://tradle.io/. 
[Accessed: 02-Sep-2019]. 
[10] KYC.Legal, 
“KYC 
- 
Blockchain 
user 
verification,” 
KYC.legal, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://kyc.legal/faq-
en. [Accessed: 02-Sep-2019]. 
[11] Coinfirm, “Coinfirm Reports,” coinfirm, 2019. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.coinfirm.com/resources/coinfirm-
reports. [Accessed: 02-Sep-2019]. 
[12] SUMSUB.COM, “5 Most Important AML Compliance Laws 
You Need In 2019 | SumSub.com,” SUMSUB.com, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://sumsub.com/blog/aml-
compliance-laws/. [Accessed: 02-Sep-2019]. 
[13] D. Mulligan, “Know Your Customer Regulations and the 
International Banking System: Towards a General Self-
Regulatory Regime,” Fordham Int. Law J., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 
2324-, 1998. 
[14] International Telecommunications Union, Digital financial 
services: Regulating for financial inclusion - an ICT 
perspective. 2016, 2016. 
[15] FATF, “Money Laundering - Financial Action Task Force 
(FATF),” FATF, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.fatf-
gafi.org/faq/moneylaundering/. [Accessed: 02-Sep-2019]. 
[16] John Callahan, “Council Post: Know Your Customer (KYC) 
Will Be A Great Thing When It Works,” Forbes, 2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2018/07/10/k
now-your-customer-kyc-will-be-a-great-thing-when-it-
works/#47624be48dbb. 
[Accessed: 
02-Sep-2019].
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

