Basic Concepts of Buried Wireless Sensor under Ballasted Layer 
 
 
Nagateru Iwasawa, Satoko Ryuo, Koki Iwamoto,  
Nariya Iwaki, and Akio Hada 
Signalling and Transport Information Technology Division 
Railway Technical Research Institute 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: iwasawa.nagateru.81@rtri.or.jp 
Akiko Kono 
Railway Dynamics Division 
Railway Technical Research Institute 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: kono.akiko.43@rtri.or.jp
 
 
Abstract— The impact of train loading deteriorates ballasted 
track that has differential settlement of ballasted layer 
primarily around rail joints. However the formation process of 
settlement has not yet clarified. With the development of 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT), the 
research on applying the remote monitoring system using 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) has become prevalent in 
railway equipment. This study focuses on the track monitoring, 
especially ballast condition, and conducted experiments of 
WSN to apply that monitoring. From a result of the 
experiments, the large attenuation by ballast was not 
confirmed, therefore, WSN can be used to monitor the 
condition of ballast. 
Keywords-railway tracks; ballast; monitoring system; raido 
wave propagation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Ballasted track is a general track structure on railways; it 
consists of a ballast, such as gravel and crushed stone, 
sleepers, and rails. Ballast settlement is normally caused by 
the repeated loading of train traffic and its progression 
occurs sparsely and locally, which has been a long-standing 
problem, as a challenge in the track maintenance. It is known 
that ballast settlement progresses rapidly particularly where 
impact load occurs, such as rail joint, see Figure 1. Uneven 
ballast settlement leads to "Hanging Sleeper," which induce 
sleeper vibration. To provide safety running of trains and 
comfortable riding, regular track maintenance is required, 
such as ballast maintenance by ballast tamper, which takes a 
lot of cost and effort. Therefore, the research of reducing 
maintenance work has been studied, for example, the method 
of elastic bottom sleepers to disperse the load transmitted 
from sleepers to ballast [2] and prevention of ballast 
settlement to fix the ballast by grout [3]. Also, the vibration 
acceleration of the ballasted layer is measured by embedding 
a “ballast sensing stone” with piezoresistive triaxle 
acceleration sensors in a track ballast [4] to observe the 
relationship of dynamic response of ballasted layer and 
ballast settlement. The ballast sensing stone has to be 
embedded in a track ballast for each measurement, but this 
will loosen the track.  
With the development of ICT, the research on a condition 
monitoring system for remotely monitoring the condition of 
equipment using WSN has proceeded in a railway field. In 
WSN, the measurement data from sensors can be acquired 
over a long period of time by the installed wireless sensor 
node on a monitoring target. Thus, applying WSN can be 
expected to reduce maintenance and measurement work. By 
developing a device that integrates vibration acceleration and 
wireless sensor with respect to the ballast sensing stones 
installed inside the ballast which mentioned in the above, it 
is possible to reduce loosening of the track. In this paper, the 
sensor node, which is buried in the ballast in the long term 
for condition monitoring and is applied to the wireless sensor 
network, is examined. 
The rest of the present paper is organized as follows:  
Section II introduces related work about monitoring track. In 
Section III, we propose the measuring system for the ballast 
layer. In Section IV, we introduce our verification test for 
communication between sensor nodes buried under ballasted 
layer and receiver placed outside of the ballast, and we 
indicate its result. Finally, Section VI concludes the present 
paper. 
II. 
MONITORING TRACK 
This section introduces conventional researches and 
problems for adapting them for monitoring tracks. 
Impact loadings
Ballasted layer
Hanging sleepers
Sleeper
 
 
Figure 1. An image of the ballast settlement 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

A. Related Work 
As the research on the condition monitoring of track, the 
framework for monitoring tracks, with a network where 
sensor nodes transmit to base stations via wireless 
transmission, was proposed [5], see Figure 2. In Figure 2, the 
data collected by WSN is transmitted to the server via the 
Internet, and this data is stored in the database at the server 
and also can be checked on the monitor.  
It is required to monitor various points and items for 
recognizing the condition of tracks in [6], shown in Figure 3. 
According to [6], it can be seen that the monitoring point 
exists below the ballasted layer. Correspondingly, track 
condition monitoring systems have been already proposed 
with wired or wireless transmission.  
As an example of using a wired transmission, a remote 
monitoring system shown in [7] collects the data under 
ballast into a laptop pc installed along a track wayside using 
wired cable called probe and transmits the collected data to a 
remote place via Internet, shown in Figure 4. As an instance 
of using wireless transmission, a system for transmitting the 
sensing data of rail using wireless sensor was proposed in [8]. 
However, the research on a remote monitoring for points 
below the ballasted layer using wireless sensor nodes has not 
been presented. Therefore, it is necessary to verify that the 
sensor node buried below the ballasted layer can transmit the 
data to the base station using wireless communication. 
B. Problems 
In the railway system in Japan, the periodic patrol that 
the maintenance worker carries out inspections by walking 
on the patrol path provided along tracks is generally 
conducted. Therefore, in addition to the problems, such as 
cable break, passages for workers may not be cleared due to 
the wires for the monitoring system. The wired system can 
also be expensive to maintain, as they have external damage 
as described in [6]. 
When considering a sensor that transmits data by 
wireless, it is necessary to verify the communication between 
below ballasted layer and outside ballast. Therefore, this 
paper proposes the monitoring system collecting data under 
ballast and its sensor node and discusses the possibility of 
their application. 
III. 
PROPOSED MEASURING SYSTEM 
This section introduces the concept of sensors in ballast 
layer for monitoring tracks. 
A. Overview of the system 
The overview of the proposed monitoring system is 
shown in Figure 5 [9]. As before, we define network from 
sensor nodes to the base station as WSN. 
In the proposed WSN for monitoring under the ballasted 
layer, sensor nodes installed in the ballast transmit the data to 
the base station. In cases where a sensor node cannot directly 
transmit the data to the base station and consume the large 
power due to frequent communication failure, a relay node is 
installed in the ballast shoulder, receives the data from the 
Sensor 
node
Sensor 
node
Sensor 
node
Base 
station
Server
Monitor
Database
 
 
Figure 2. System framework for monitoring tracks [5] 
 
Figure 3. Schematic location of the sensors used for condition 
monitoring [6] 
 
 
Figure 4. Remote monitoring system package [7] 
 
Figure 5. Condition monitoring system for Railway [9] 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

 
 
Figure 6. Buried wireless sensor node under ballasted layer 
Wireless module (429MHz band)
Wireless module (920MHz band)
Antenna
 
 
Figure 7. Wireless modules used in the experiment 
Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3
60mm
65mm
Wireless module 
in resin-made box
Ballast
Addition of ballast
Addition of ballast
 
 
Figure 8. Experiment conditions 
Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3
Addition of ballast 
Addition of ballast 
Receivers
Transmitters
5 m
 
 
Figure 9. Experiment scenario 
sensor nodes, and appropriately sends their data to the base 
station.  
B. Buried wireless sensor node under ballasted layer 
The following shows the sensor node buried under 
ballasted layer. Figure 6 shows the position of the sensor 
under the ballast and its composition. The sensor node 
consists of a sensor for measurement, memory for 
temporarily storing sensing data, a wireless module for 
transmitting sensing data, a CPU for controlling them, and a 
battery. It has the memory to store the sensing data, so it can 
transmit when there is no train passing, for example, the time 
zone of train operation. We suppose that the sensor node is 
installed under ballasted layer and left to monitor, so its 
maintenance, such as battery changing is not needed. 
However, there is some possibility of the sensor node trouble, 
so it is necessary to consider how to grasp its condition and 
reliability of sensing data, and so on. 
IV. 
FUNCTIONAL VERIFICATION 
429 MHz, 920 MHz, and 2.4 GHz band, which does not 
need a license, are mainly used for WSN in Japan. We made 
experiments to verify the reachability of 429 MHz band 
radio wave and 920 MHz band radio wave from inside of the 
ballast to outside of the ballast. Both of the frequencies of 
429 MHz and 920 MHz band have good diffraction 
properties, compared with 2.4 GHz band. Although those 
bandwidths are narrow so those transmission speeds are 
lower than 2.4 GHz’s, those speeds are enough to transmit 
data several times a day. Moreover, those frequency bands 
have wireless modules of the radio communication standards 
classified as Low Power Wide Area (LPWA). We use MU-
2-429 (Figure 7 left side) [10] as a 429 MHz band wireless 
module and BP35A1 (Figure 7 right side) [11] as a 920 MHz 
band wireless module for the experiment. 
Figure 8 shows the experimental conditions and Figure 9 
shows its scenario. Condition 1 is the state of the transmitters 
not buried under the ballasted layer, condition 2 is that the 
ballast is filled by 65mm more than condition 1 and the 
transmitters are buried under ballasted layer. Then, condition 
3 is that the ballast is filled by 60mm more than condition 2 
and the transmitters are buried completely under the 
ballasted layer. We buried wireless modules in a resin-made 
box under the ballasted layer as transmitters and put wireless 
modules as receivers at a distance of 5 m from transmitters. 
We measured the Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) 
of the receivers. 
Figure 10 shows the result of the experiment for using 
429 MHz band wireless module, and Figure 11 shows it for 
using the 920 MHz band wireless module. They show loss of 
each condition based on the RSSI of the condition 1. Their 
loss does not exceed 3 dB, so we cannot find an influence of 
the ballast to propagation characteristics under our 
experiment’s conditions. The possible reason for this is that 
there were many gaps in the ballasted layer. Then, it is 
possible to get different results, depending on the positional 
relation between stones of ballast and antenna. Therefore, the 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

-10
-5
0
5
10
Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3
Loss [dB]
 
Figure 10. An experiment result for using 429 MHz band wireless 
module 
-10
-5
0
5
10
Condition 1
Condition 2
Condition 3
Loss [dB]
 
Figure 11. An experiment result for using 920 MHz band wireless 
module 
loss of RSSI might be affected by ballast fluctuations due to 
maintenance and train passing, etc. 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposed the sensor node buried under 
ballasted layer for the condition monitoring of tracks. To 
confirm the wireless transmission from the sensor node 
buried under the ballasted layer, we examined the 
communication test using wireless devices whose frequency 
is 429 MHz bandwidth and 920 MHz bandwidth. From the 
result of the tests, it was confirmed that the amount of 
attenuation was within 3 dB. Therefore, it can be said that 
the wireless transmission can be used for communication of 
the sensor node buried under ballasted layer. However, a 
dense ballast could cause blockage of the radio propagation 
path inside that ballast, so further verifications are required 
under different ballast conditions. We are going to make the 
prototype and to verify our proposed system at the field 
considering actual use. In addition, it needs to be examined a 
method of correcting the acceleration data, because its axis 
gets shift with long-term use. In practical use, reliability and 
weatherability of sensors themselves are  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Suzuki, M. Ishida, K. Abe, and K. Koro, “Measurement on 
Dynamic Behaviour of Track near Rail Joints and Prediction 
of Track Settlement,” Quarterly Report of RTRI, vol. 46, no. 
2, pp. 124-129, Aug. 2005, doi:10.2219/rtriqr.46.124. 
[2] A. Kono, M. Suzuki, and F. Urakawa, “Evaluation of 
Reducing Effect of USP on Ballasted Track Vibration based 
on Loading Frequencies,” RTRI Report, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 29-
34, Jun. 2018, ISSN: 0914-2990 (in Japanese). 
[3] T. Nakamura, Y. Momoya, K. Muramoto, and K. Ito, 
“Development of Railway Roadbed Improvement Method for 
Existing Lines by Reusing Deteriorated Ballast,” Quarterly 
Report of RTRI, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 46-50, Mar. 2014, 
doi:10.2219/rtriqr.55.46. 
[4] A. Aikawa, “Techniques to Measure Effects of Passing Trains 
on Dynamic Pressure Applied to Sleeper Bottoms and 
Dynamic Behavior of Ballast Stones,” Quarterly Report of 
RTRI, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 102-109, Jun. 2009, 
doi:10.2219/rtriqr.50.102. 
[5] V. Bolle and S.K. Banoth, “Review on Railway Bridge & 
Track Condition Monitoring System,” International Research 
Journal of Engineering and Technology, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 
1092-1095, Aug. 2016, ISSN: 2395-0056. 
[6] C. Ngamkhanong, S. Kaewunruen, and B. J. A. Costa, “State-
of-the-Art Review of Railway Track Resilience Monitoring,” 
Infrastructures, vol. 3, no. 1, Jan. 2018, 
doi:10.3390/infrastructures3010003. 
[7] E. S. Aw, “Novel Monitoring System to Diagnose Rail Track 
Foundation Problems,” Master’s Thesis, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, 2004. 
[8] E. Aboelela, W. Edberg, C. Papakonstantinou, and V. 
Vokkarane, “Wireless Sensor Network Based Model for 
Secure Railway Operations,” IEEE International Perfomance 
Computing and Communications, pp. 623-628, Apr. 2006, 
doi:10.1109/.2006.1629461. 
[9] N. Iwasawa, T. Kawamura, M. Nozue, S. Ryuo, and N. Iwaki, 
“Design of Wire Sensor Network in the Railway,” 
International Conference on Sensor Networks, vol. 1, pp. 122-
127, Jan. 2018, doi:10.5220/0006638101220127. 
[10] Circuit Design, Inc., 
http://www.circuitdesign.jp/jp/products/products2/mu2/index
1.asp [retrieved: Sep., 2019] 
[11] Rohm Semiconductor, 
https://www.rohm.co.jp/products/wireless-
communication/specified-low-power-radio-modules/bp35a1-
product [retrieved: Sep., 2019]
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-753-5
ICSNC 2019 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

