Wireless Ad hoc and Sensor Network Underground with Sensor Data in  
Real-Time 
 
Emmanuel Odei-Lartey, Klaus Hartmann                                                                                          
Center for Sensor Systems, University of Siegen                                                                                    
Paul-Bonatz-Str. 9-11, 57068 Siegen, Germany                                                                                     
elartey@zess.uni-siegen.de, hartmann@zess.uni-siegen.de 
 
Abstract— This paper describes an innovative approach using 
a wireless ad hoc and sensor network solution in a borehole 
telemetry system. This contribution is in line with the wireless 
network track of the conference with regards to channel 
modeling and characterization as well as wireless applications 
and services. The paper further validates the feasibility of 
achieving 
a 
reliable 
wireless 
communication 
network 
underground with real-time data acquisition with respect to 
the described borehole telemetry system.  
Keywords-Wireless communication; drilling; sensor node; 
tubes; underground 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Intelligent Tube (ITUBE) Project, is an on-going 
project at the Center for Sensor Systems, University of 
Siegen. This is a borehole telemetry system where the 
objective is to obtain the latest information in real time on all 
relevant data during a drilling operation. This data is taken 
into account for faster complex decision-making processes, 
which affect the actual drilling (drilling, completion, 
intervention and process control). This is motivated by but 
not limited to the in situ soil mixing drilling process where 
quality and accurate vertical drilling is essential to save cost 
[8]. In connection with this soil mixing process, the pressure 
conditions at the nozzle exit and the temperature are of 
particular interest [7]. To ensure quality of work, pressure 
should be continuously monitored closely at the outlet to 
control the process, which is presently a challenge in the in 
situ soil mixing process [8]. During the drilling process, real-
time information about the drill head progress is important, 
thus the need to cluster the essential sensors within the drill 
head to gather the relevant data to ensure the quality of the 
drilling process. For this to be achieved, a flexible, robust, 
fast and reliable communication structure needs to be put in 
place. Hence, in this paper, we analyze the feasibility of 
achieving 
such 
a 
reliable 
wireless 
communication 
underground for real-time data acquisition with regards to 
the borehole telemetry system. 
Section II describes the proposed structure of the network 
nodes, as embedded in drill tubes, for communication. The 
succeeding section, Section III, explains the theoretical 
concept and the related work drawn from the works of [1][2] 
required to justify the feasibility of the approach. Section IV 
then shows MATlab simulations and analysis using the 
model equations described in the previous section. Finally, 
the last section, Section V, deals with open questions and 
future work. 
II. 
PROPOSED NETWORK STRUCTURE 
For data communication, as shown in Figure 1, the nodes 
are designed such that the radio transceivers are placed at the 
ends of each drill tube, therefore, enabling a closer proximity 
to each other (in this instance about 100mm to 300mm apart) 
within the ground, thereby, reducing the gap to be overcome 
by the signals. Within each tube, the end to end transceivers 
are connected to each other via a microcontroller and a 
power supply by cable to form a node as again shown in 
Figure 1. The microcontroller is programmed to enable for 
routing of data in the wireless ad hoc network setup. In 
accordance with the joining of the drill tubes into a strand 
during the drilling process, the individual wireless nodes will 
automatically form an ad hoc network strand irrespective of 
the order of the tubes. Sensor functionality is located in the 
drill head, which serves as a data source. The data collected 
in the drill-head sensor node is wirelessly sent to the next 
node located in the mechanically flanged pipe of the drill 
string. On the surface, the last node used in the drill string 
pipe connects with the base station communication interface 
outside of the drill string. The base station forms the 
interface to various system controls. 
III. 
UNDERGROUND COMMUNICATION 
This section focuses on the modeling and analysis of the 
underground communication to verify the feasibility of a 
reliable 
communication 
framework. 
For 
reliable 
communication between the nodes in the underground 
environment, the radio signals transmitted should be 
received independent of the prevailing conditions of the soil 
medium. This explains the close proximity of the transceiver 
modules to each other at adjoining ends of the tubes or pipes 
as described in the previous section. 
A. Related Work 
A modification of the Frii’s Transmission Equation of 
the received signal strength, as described in [1], expressed in 
the logarithmic form is given as  
 
, 
     (1) 
where 
: power at receiver, 
: power at 
transmitter, 
: receiver gain, 
: transmitter gain, 
: path loss in free space, 
: path loss in soil 
medium. 
 
188
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 
 
Figure 1. The schematic of the interconnecting drilling tubes with the 
integrated wireless ad hoc network. Each tube is a node, which consists of 
two transceivers, a micro-controller, and a power supply. The approximate 
distance between each tube is 300mm while each tube measures about 9m 
in length. 
 
As observed in (1), this modified equation takes into 
account the path loss of the signal in the soil medium. The 
path loss is the reduction in power density (attenuation) of 
the radio signal as it propagates through a medium. Further 
deductions as described in [1], shows that the direct path 
loss considering both free space and the soil medium is 
given as 
 
, (2) 
 
 .  
 
(3) 
 
where 
and  represent the attenuation constant (1/m) and 
the phase shift constant (radian/m) respectively. These 
quantities depend on the dielectric permittivity of the 
medium through, which the signal passes as described also 
in [1]. It is represented as 
 
 , 
(4) 
 
 , 
(5) 
 
where 
 and 
 represent the real and imaginary dielectric 
permittivity of the mixture of and water medium through, 
which signal transmission takes place. These quantities, 
according to Peplinski’s principle [2], are represented as 
 
 
 
 
, 
 
         (6) 
. 
 
                    (7) 
 
where 
 represents an empirically determined constant, 
 
and 
 are also empirically determined constants depending 
on soil types given as 
 
, 
 
,  
(8) 
 
. 
(9) 
 
where 
 and 
 represents the relative real and 
imaginary dielectric constant of water respectively, which 
are also given as 
  
,  
 
(10) 
 
, 
(11) 
 
 . (12) 
 
where : mass fraction of sand, : mass fraction of clay, 
: 
magnetic permeability of free space, 
: permittivity of free 
space, 
: volumetric water content of the soil, 
 and 
 
189
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

the real and imaginary parts of the relative dielectric constant 
of water, 
: static dielectric constant of water, 
: high-
frequency limit of 
 , 
: effective conductivity of 
water, : operating frequency, 
: relaxation time of water, 
: specific density of the solid soil particles, 
: bulk 
density 
B. Antenna Design 
As the signals move through the soil medium there is a 
decrease in wavelength as compared to transmission through 
air [6]. This suggests the antenna should be designed for a 
higher frequency other than the given free space frequency 
of the transceiver modules (868MHz) or should have a wide 
bandwidth. From the above results the range of the resulting 
frequencies in the ground soil could be deduced using the 
following relation as again described in [1] 
 
,     
, 
(13) 
 
 , 
 
(14) 
 
where 
 is the phase shift constant, 
 is the new 
wavelength 
in 
the 
ground 
soil, 
 represents 
the 
corresponding frequency and  is the speed of light in free 
space as described by (13)(14). From computational results, 
for a typical configuration setting, the theoretical new 
frequency in the ground soil is found to range from 1.7GHz 
to 1.9GHz. An integrated chip or ceramic antenna designed 
for such high frequencies is most appropriate for such 
underground wireless communication. 
IV. 
FEASIBILITY OF COMMUNICATION 
The model equations as described in the previous section 
were coded and simulated using MATLab software. 
A. Matlab Simulations and Results 
From the model equations, (2)-(12), in Section III, it is 
observed that the path loss depends on the frequency, 
distance between the transceiver nodes, clay soil content, 
sand soil content and the volumetric water content of the soil 
[3]. In conformance to the ITUBE project, the frequency of 
the radio module is fixed at 868MHz with a fixed maximum 
distance of approximately 300mm between any two 
adjoining transceiver nodes where wireless communication 
takes place. Using the above model equations, the range for 
the direct path loss as well as the power received at the 
receiver node (Received Signal Strength) was simulated with 
varying values of the parameters stated (clay content, sand 
content and water content) to determine the feasibility of the 
underground communication network in different soil 
conditions. These parameters are used to simulate a wide 
range of possible constituents of the ground soil since there 
is no much control over such ground soil characteristics on 
the field where the drilling takes place. The best case 
scenario with a Volumetric Water Content (VWC) of 1% is 
observed and compared to a worse situation of a VWC of 
80%. VWC here is defined as the ratio of water contained in 
the soil to the total volume of the soil. The effect of the 
different proportions of clay to sand content in the soil on the 
path loss and consequently the Received Signal Strength 
Indicator (RSSI) is observed. RSSI is the measurement of the 
power present in the received radio signal.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Path loss graph with volumetric water content (VWC) at 1% 
volume 
 
     
 
 
Figure 3.  Received signal strength indicator graph with volumetric water 
content (VWC) at 1% volume 
 
190
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

 
 
Figure 4.  Power loss graph with volumetric water content (VWC) at 25% 
volume 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Received signal strength indicator graph with volumetric water 
content (VWC) at 25% volume 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Power loss graph with volumetric water content (VWC) at 80% 
volume 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Received signal strength indicator graph with volumetric water 
content (VWC) at 80% volume 
 
From the datasheet of the wireless transceiver module, 
AMB8420 [5], the minimum sensitivity of the receiver is -
102dBm (-110dBm at 50Ω) and the output power of the 
transmitter is typically 2dBm (10dBm at 50Ω). From the 
results, as indicated in Figures 3, 5 and 7 above, the RSSI 
value in all cases falls within the RF sensitivity limit, thus 
indicating feasibility of the application given such conditions 
as described by the graphs. From the graphs, it can also be 
seen that the RSSI value at the receiver tends to decrease 
with increase in sand and clay content of the soil. This is 
more significant with the increase in the VWC of the soil. In 
Figure 2, the VWC is at 1%. This value is increased to 25%, 
as shown in Figure 4, and finally, to 80%, also as shown in 
Figure 6. With this trend, a steep increase in the path loss is 
observed. Consequently, the RSSI value is observed to fall 
from about -54.5dBm with 1% VWC to about -95.1dBm 
with 80% VWC, as shown in Figures 3 and 7, which does 
not exceed the threshold of -103dbm (the minimum receiver 
sensitivity). This observation establishes the feasibility of a 
reliable communication within the underground soil at the 
given fixed distance of 300mm and frequency of 868MHz. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
From the analysis in the previous section, it is observed 
that for a frequency of 868MHz and a proximity gap of 
300mm 
between 
transceiver 
modules, 
reliable 
communication underground is highly feasible under a wide 
range of possible soil conditions. However, on the work 
field, certain properties of the ground soil such as the 
chemical or salt content also have a significant effect on the 
dielectric characteristics of the soil [4]. Salty ground soil 
conditions tend to increase the path losses; therefore, 
decreasing the power at the receiver node (RSSI value) to a 
great extent [4]. Future work will include the possibility of 
transmission power control depending on the prevailing 
conditions of the soil as well as using cognitive radio 
techniques to enable automatic switching of transmission 
frequency to accommodate conditions in the ground soil.  
 
191
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

REFERENCES 
[1] L. Li, M. C. Vuran, and I. F. Akyildiz, “Characteristics of 
Underground Channel for Wireless Underground Sensor 
Networks,” Med-Hoc-Net ’07, Corfu, Greece, pp. 92-99, June 
13-15. 
[2] N. R. Peplinski, F. T. Ulaby, and M. C. Dobson, “Dielectric 
Properties of Soils in the 0.3-1.3-GHz Range”, IEEE 
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, Vol. 33, 
No. 3, pp. 803-807, May 1995 
[3] I. F. Akyildiz, Z. Sun, and M. C. Vuran, “Signal propagation 
techniques 
for 
wireless 
underground 
communication 
networks,” Elsevier Journal, Physical Communication, pp. 
167-183, 2009. 
[4] R. J. Edwards, “RF Skin Depth in the Ground vs. Frequency 
for Given Soil Characteristics,” Ground Systems, Tigertek 
Inc, 2010, http://www.smeter.net/grounds/rf-skin-depth-in-
soil.php [Last Accessed: 18 July 2011]. 
[5] “AMB8420 Compact Low-Cost Radio Module 868MHz ISM 
Band,” datasheet, Amber Wireless, 2009. 
[6] A. R. Silva and Mehmet C. Vuran, “Communication with 
Aboveground Devices in Wireless Underground Sensor 
Networks: An Empirical Study,” IEEE Communications 
Society, IEEE ICC, pp. 1-6, 2010. 
[7] S. Kazemian and B. K. Haut, “Assessment of Stabilization 
Methods for Soft Soils by Admixtures,” International 
Conference on Science and Social Research, Kuala Lumpur, 
Malaysia, pp. 118-121, 2010. 
[8] R. D. Andrus and R M. Chung, “Ground Improvement 
Techniques for Liquefaction Remediation Near Existing 
Lifelines,” U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute 
of Standards and Technology, pp. 1-85, Ocotober 2005. 
192
ICSNC 2011 : The Sixth International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-166-3

