Prefilter Bandwidth Effects in Asynchronous Sequential Symbol Synchronizers 
based on Pulse Comparison by Positive Transitions at Bit Rate 
Antonio D. Reis1,2 and José P. Carvalho1 
Dep. Física / Unidade D. Remota 
1Universidade da Beira Interior, 6200 Covilhã, Portugal 
adreis@ubi.pt, pacheco@ubi.pt 
José F. Rocha2 and Atílio S. Gameiro2 
Dep. Electrónica e Telecom. / Instituto Telecom. 
2Universidade de Aveiro, 3810 Aveiro, Portugal 
frocha@det.ua.pt, amg@det.ua.pt 
 
Abstract- This work studies the prefilter bandwidth effects in 
four asynchronous sequential symbol synchronizers. We 
consider three prefilter bandwidths namely B1=∞∞∞∞, B2=2.tx and 
B3=1.tx, where tx is the bit rate. The synchronizer has two 
variants one asynchronous by both transitions at rate and other 
asynchronous by positive transitions at rate. Each variant has 
two versions namely the manual and the automatic. The 
objective is to study the prefilter with the four synchronizers 
and to evaluate their output jitter UIRMS (Unit Interval Root 
Mean Square) versus input SNR (Signal Noise Ratio). 
Keywords - Prefilter; Synchronizers; Communication systems. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This work studies the prefilter bandwidth effects on the 
jitter-SNR behavior of four sequential symbol synchronizers. 
The prefilter, applied before the synchronizer, switches 
their bandwidth between three values namely first B1=∞, 
after B2=2.tx and next B3=1.tx, where tx is the bit rate. 
The synchronizer has four versions supported in two 
variants, one asynchronous by both transitions at rate with 
versions manual (ab-m) and automatic (ab-a) and other 
asynchronous by positive transitions at rate with versions 
manual (ap-m) and automatic (ap-a) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. 
The difference between the four synchronizers is in the 
phase comparator. The clock is the VCO (Voltage Controlled 
Oscillator) that samples appropriately and retimes correctly 
the input data, guarantying good quality [7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. 
Fig. 1 shows the prefilter followed of the synchronizer. 
 
Figure 1.  Prefilter with synchronizer based on pulse comparison 
 
PF(s) is the prefilter (low pass). The synchronizer has 
various blocks, namely Kf is the phase detector gain, F(s) is 
the loop filter, Ko is the VCO gain and Ka is the loop gain 
factor that controls the root locus and loop characteristics. 
Following, we present the prefilter with their three different 
decreasing bandwidths (B1=∞, B2=2.tx, B3=1.tx).  
After, 
we 
present 
the standard reference 
variant, 
asynchronous sequential symbol synchronizers based on 
pulse comparison by both transitions at rate, with versions 
manual (ab-m) and automatic (ab-a).  
Next, we present the new proposed variant, asynchronous 
sequential symbol synchronizers based on pulse comparison 
by positive  transitions at rate, with versions manual(ap-m) 
and automatic (ap-a). After, we present the design and tests. 
Then, we present the results. Finally, we present the 
conclusions. 
 
II. ART STATE, PROBLEMS AND SOLUTION 
In the past art state was developed various synchronizers, 
but now is necessary to study their performance. 
Previously, we studied the prefilter effects in synchronous 
synchronizers, the actual motivation is to study the prefilter 
but in asynchronous synchronizers [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. 
The problem is that the jitter increases with the noise. So, to 
solve this problem, we propose a prefilter that attenuates the 
noise but however distorts slightly the signal [6, 7, 12]. 
 
II. PREFILTER BANDWIDTH EFFECTS 
The prefilter, applied before the synchronizer, filters the 
noise but distorts slightly the signal. The prefilter bandwidth 
B switches between three values (B1=∞, B2=2.tx, B3=1.tx). 
Fig. 2 shows the prefilter with their three bandwidths. 
 
 
Figure 2. Three prefilter bandwidths: a) B1=∞; b) B2=2.tx; c) 
B3=1.tx 
 
We will evaluate the three bandwidth effects (B1, B2, B3) 
on the jitter-SNR curves of the four symbol synchronizers. 
a) Prefilter bandwidth equal infine (B1=∞): first (Fig.2a), 
we study this bandwidth effects. 
b) Prefilter bandwidth equal two tx (B2=2.tx): second 
(Fig.2b), we study this bandwidth effects. 
c) Prefilter bandwidth equal one tx (B3=1.tx): third 
(Fig.2c), we study this bandwidth effects. 
 
III. REFERENCE BY BOTH AT RATE 
The 
reference, 
asynchronous 
sequential 
symbol  
synchronizers based on pulse comparison operating by both 
transitions at bit rate has two versions which are the manual 
(ab-m) and the automatic (ab-a) [1, 2]. 
The versions difference is in the phase comparator, the 
variable pulse Pv is common but the fixed Pf is different. 
 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

A. Reference by both at rate manual (ab-m) 
 
The block Pv, shown below, produces a variable pulse Pv 
between the input bits and VCO. The manual adjustment 
delay with Exor produces a manual fixed pulse Pf (Fig. 3). 
 
 Figure 3. Asynchronous by both at rate and manual (ab-m)  
 
The comparison between the pulses Pv and Pf provides the 
error pulse Pe that forces the VCO to synchronize the input. 
The block Pv is an asynchronous circuit (Fig.4). 
 
 
 Figure 4. Intern aspect of the block Pv 
 
The error pulse Pe diminishes during the synchronization 
time and disappear at the equilibrium point. 
 
B. Reference by both at rate automatic (ab-a) 
 
The block Pv, common with anterior, produces the variable 
pulse Pv between input and VCO. The block Pf, shown 
below, produces the comparison fixed pulse Pf (Fig. 5). 
 
 Figure 5. Asynchronous by both at rate and automatic (ab-a)  
 
The comparison between the pulses Pv and Pf provides the 
error pulse Pe that forces the VCO to follow the input. The 
block Pf is an asynchronous circuit (Fig. 6). 
 
 Figure 6. Intern aspect of the block Pf 
 
The error pulse Pe does not disappear, but the variable area 
Pv is equal to the fixed Pf at the equilibrium point. 
 
IV. PROPOSED BY POSITIVE AT RATE 
The 
proposed, 
asynchronous 
sequential 
symbol 
synchronizers based on pulse comparison operating by 
positive transitions at bit rate has also two versions namely 
the manual (ap-m) and the automatic (ap-a) [3, 4]. 
The versions difference is in the phase comparator, the 
variable pulse Pvp is common but the fixed Pfp is different. 
 
A. Proposed by positive at rate manual (ap-m) 
 
The block Pvp produces the variable pulse Pvp between 
input positive transitions and VCO. The manual adjustment 
delay T/2 with AND produces a fixed pulse Pfp (Fig. 7). 
 
 
 Figure7. Asynchronous by positive at rate and manual (ap-m) 
 
The comparison between pulses Pvp and Pfp provides the 
error pulse Pe that forces the VCO to synchronize the input. 
The block Pvp is an asynchronous circuit (Fig. 8). 
 
 
 Figure 8. Intern aspect of the block Pvp 
 
The error pulse Pe diminishes during the synchronization 
time and disappear at the equilibrium point. 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

B. Proposed by positive at rate automatic (ap-a) 
 
The block Pvp, common, produces the variable pulse Pvp 
between input and VCO. The block Pfp, shown below, 
produces the comparison fixed pulse Pfp (Fig. 9). 
 
 
 Figure 9 Asynchronous by positive at rate and automatic (ap-a) 
 
The comparison between the pulses Pvp and Pfp provides 
the error pulse Pe that forces the VCO to follow the input. 
The block Pfp is an asynchronous circuit (Fig. 10). 
 
 
  Figure 10. Intern aspect of the block Pfp 
 
The error pulse Pe does not  disappear at the equilibrium 
point, but the variable area Pv becomes equal to the fixed Pf. 
 
V. DESIGN, TESTS AND RESULTS 
We present the design, tests and results of the various  
synchronizers [5]. 
 
A. Design 
 
To get guaranteed results, is necessary to dimension all the 
synchronizers with equal conditions. Then, the loop gain 
Kl=KdKo=KaKfKo must be equal in all the synchronizers. 
The phase detector gain Kf and the VCO gain Ko are fixed. 
Then, the loop gain amplification Ka controls the root locus 
and consequently the loop characteristics. 
For analysis facilities, we use normalized values for the bit 
rate tx=1baud, clock frequency fCK=1Hz,  extern noise 
bandwidth Bn=5Hz and loop noise bandwidth Bl=0.002Hz. 
Then, we apply a signal power Ps= A2
ef and a noise power 
Pn= No= 2σn2.∆τ, where σn is the noise standard deviation 
and ∆τ =1/fSamp is the sampling period. The relation 
between SNR and noise variance σn2 is 
SNR= A2
ef/(No.Bn) = 0.52/(2σn2*10-3*5)= 25/σn2        (1) 
Now, for each synchronizer, is necessary to measure the 
output  jitter UIRMS versus input SNR  
- 1st order loop: 
The used cutoff loop filter F(s)=0.5Hz, is 25 times greater 
than Bl= 0.002Hz, what eliminates the high frequency but 
maintain the loop characteristics. The transfer function is 
H(s)= G(s)
1
+ G(s)
=
+
=
+
KdKoF s
s
KdKoF s
KdKo
s
KdKo
( )
( )
                   (2) 
the loop noise bandwidth is 
Bl = KdKo
Ka KfKo
4
4
=
 = 0.02Hz                                   (3) 
So, with (Km=1, A=1/2, B=1/2, Ko=2π) and loop bandwidth 
Bl=0.002, we obtain respectively the Ka, for analog, hybrid, 
combinational and sequential synchronizers, then 
Bl=(Ka.Kf.Ko)/4 = (Ka.Km.A.B.Ko)/4 -> Ka=0.08*2/π      (4) 
Bl=(Ka.Kf.Ko)/4 = (Ka.Km.A.B.Ko)/4 -> Ka=0.08*2.2/π   (5) 
Bl=(Ka.Kf.Ko)/4 = (Ka*1/π*2π)/4 -> Ka=0.04              (6) 
Bl=(Ka.Kf.Ko)/4 = (Ka*1/2π*2π)/4 -> Ka=0.08              (7) 
For the analog PLL, the jitter is 
σφ
2=Bl.No/Aef2=0.02*10-3*2σn2/0.52=16*10-5.σn2           (8) 
For the others PLLs, the jitter formula is more complicated. 
- 2nd order loop: 
Is not used here, but provides similar results. 
 
B. Tests 
 
We used the following setup to test synchronizers (Fig. 11) 
 
 
 Figure 11. Block diagram of the test setup 
The receiver recovered clock with jitter is compared with 
the emitter original clock, the difference is the jitter. 
 
C. Results 
 
We will present the results, in terms of jitter - SNR, for 
each prefilter bandwidth with the four synchronizers. 
Fig. 12 shows the jitter-SNR curves for the prefilter 
bandwidth B1=∞ with the four synchronizers (ab-m, ab-a, ap-
m, ap-a). 
 
Figure 12. Jitter-SNR curves of  B1+4synchronizers  (ab-m,   ab-a,   
ap-m,  ap-a) 
 
For prefilter B1=∞, we verify that, for high SNR, the four 
synchronizer jitter-SNR curves tend to be similar. However, 
for low SNR, the variant asynchronous by both at rate with 
versions manual (ab-m) and automatic (ab-a) are better than 
the variant asynchronous by positive at rate with versions 
manual (ap-m) and automatic (ap-a). 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

Fig. 13 shows the jitter-SNR curves for the prefilter 
bandwidth B2=2.tx with the four synchronizers (ab-m, ab-a, 
ap-m, ap-a). 
 
Figure 13. Jitter-SNR curves of  B2+4synchronizers  (ab-m,   ab-a,   
ap-m,  ap-a) 
 
For prefilter B2=2.tx, we verify that, it becomes the jitter-
SNR curves more similar between themselves. For high SNR, 
it degrades slightly the jitter-SNR curves. However, for low 
SNR it benefits significantly the jitter - SNR curves. 
Fig. 14 shows the jitter-SNR curves for the prefilter 
bandwidth B3=1.tx with the four synchronizers (ab-m, ab-a, 
ap-m, ap-a). 
 
Figure 14. Jitter-SNR curves of  B3+4synchronizers  (ab-m,   ab-a,  
ap-m,  ap-a) 
 
For prefilter B3=1.tx, we verify that, it becomes the jitter-
SNR curves still more similar between themselves. For high 
SNR, it harms more the jitter-SNR curves. However, for low 
SNR, it benefits less the jitter-SNR curves. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We studied three prefilter bandwidths (B1=∞, B2=2.tx, 
B3=1.tx) with four synchronizers, one variant asynchronous 
by both transitions at rate with versions manual (ab-m) and 
automatic (ab-a) and other variant asynchronous by positive 
at rate with versions manual (ap-m) and automatic (ap-a). 
Then, we measured their jitter - SNR curves. 
We observed that, in general, the output jitter curves 
decreases gradually with the input SNR increasing. 
For prefilter B1=∞ (greater), we verified that, for high 
SNR, the four synchronizers jitter curves tend to be similar, 
this is comprehensible since all the synchronizers are digital 
and have similar noise margin. However, for low SNR, the 
variant asynchronous by both at rate with its versions manual 
(ab-m) and automatic (ab-a) is better than the variant 
asynchronous by positive at rate with its versions manual (ap-
m) and automatic (ap-a), this is comprehensible because the 
variant by both transitions has more transitions (double) than 
the variant by positive transitions and then, the going time 
from the error state to the correct state is lesser. 
For prefilter B2=2.tx(medium), we verified that, it becomes 
the jitter-SNR curves more similar between themselves. For 
high SNR, it degrades slightly the jitter-snr curves. However, 
for low SNR, it benefits significantly the jitter-SNR curves. 
For prefilter B3=1.tx (minor), we verify that, it becomes the 
jitter-SNR curves still more similar between themselves. For 
high SNR, it degrades more the jitter-SNR curves. Also, for 
low SNR, it benefits less the jitter-SNR curves. 
So, the prefilter, for high SNR, distorts the signal what is 
prejudicial, for low SNR, attenuates noise what is beneficial. 
In the future, we are planning to extend the present study to 
other types of synchronizers. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 The authors are grateful to the program FCT (Foundation 
for sCience and Technology) / POCI2010. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Jean C. Imbeaux, “performance of the delay-line multiplier circuit for 
clock 
and 
carrier 
synchronization 
in 
Digital 
Satellite 
Communications”, 
IEEE 
Journal 
on 
Selected 
Areas 
in 
Communications pp. 82-95 Jan. 1983. 
[2] Werner Rosenkranz, “Phase Locked Loops with limiter phase detectors 
in the presence of noise”, IEEE Transactions on Communications 
com-30 Nº10 pp. 2297-2304. Oct 1982. 
[3] Hans H. Witte, “A Simple Clock Extraction Circuit Using a Self 
Sustaining Monostable Multivibrator Output Signal”, Electronics 
Letters, Vol.19, Is.21, pp. 897-898, Oct 1983. 
[4] Charles R. Hogge, “A Self Correcting Clock Recovery Circuit”, IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices pp. 2704-2706 Dec 1985. 
[5] Antonio D. Reis, Jose F. Rocha, Atilio S. Gameiro and Jose P. 
Carvalho “A New Technique to Measure the Jitter”, Proc. III Conf. on 
Telecommunications pp. 64-67 FFoz-PT 23-24 Apr 2001. 
[6] Marvin K. Simon and William C. Lindsey, “Tracking Performance of 
Symbol 
Synchronizers 
for 
Manchester 
Coded 
Data”, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Communications Vol. com-2.5 Nº4, pp. 393-408, 
April 1977. 
[7] Jeffrey B. Carruthers, D. D. Falconer, H. M. Sandler and L. 
Strawczynski, “Bit Synchronization in the Presence of Co-Channel 
Interference”, Proc. Conf. on Electrical and Computer Engineering pp. 
4.1.1-4.1.7, Ottawa-CA 3-6 Sep. 1990. 
[8] Johannes Huber and Weilin Liu “Data-Aided Synchronization of 
Coherent CPM-Receivers” IEEE Transactions on Communications 
Vol.40 Nº1, pp. 178-189, Jan. 1992. 
[9] Antonio A. D’Amico, Aldo N. D’Andrea and Ruggero Reggianni, 
“Efficient Non-Data-Aided Carrier and Clock Recovery for Satellite 
DVB at Very Low SNR”, IEEE Jou. on Sattelite Areas in Comm. 
Vol.19 Nº12 pp. 2320-2330, Dec. 2001. 
[10] Rostislav Dobkin, Ran Ginosar and Christos P. Sotiriou “Data 
Synchronization Issues in GALS SoCs”, Proc. 10th International 
Symposium on Asynchronous Circuits and Systems, pp. CD-Ed., 
Crete-Greece 19-23 Apr. 2004. 
[11] N. Noels, H. Steendam and M. Moeneclaey, “Effectiveness Study of 
Code-Aided and Non-Code-Aided ML-Based Feedback Phase 
Synchronizers”, Proc. IEEE Intern. Conference on Communications 
(ICC’06) pp. 2946-2951, Istambul-TK, 11-15 Jun 2006. 
[12] Antonio D. Reis, Jose F. Rocha, Atilio S. Gameiro and Jose P. 
Carvalho “Carrier Phase Lock Loop and Bit Phase Lock Loop”, Proc. 
IX Symposium on Enabling Optical Network and Sensors (SEONs) 
pp. CD-Edited, Aveiro-PT 1-1 July 2011. 
 
 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-231-8
ICSNC 2012 : The Seventh International Conference on Systems and Networks Communications

