A Survey on Multi-Channel Based, Digital Media-
Driven 802.11 Wireless Mesh Networks
Christian K¨obel∗, Walter Baluja Garc´ıa∗ and Joachim Habermann†
∗Department of Telecommunications, Polytechnic University ISPJAE Jos´e Antonio Echeverr´ıa
Calle 114, No. 11901, Marianao, Havana, Cuba
{Kobel, Walter}@Tesla.CUJAE.edu.cu
†Department for Information Technology, Electrical Engineering & Mechatronics
TH Mittelhessen University of Applied Sciences
Wilhelm-Leuschner-Str. 13, D-61169 Friedberg Germany
Joachim.Habermann@IEM.TH-Mittelhessen.de
Abstract—802.11 hardware has ultimately made its way into
the electronic consumer market. But, especially in home net-
works, it clashes with high quality demands of rich multimedia
streaming applications, that WirelessLAN can only partly cope
with. This work describes basic features and fundamental ﬂaws
of 802.11, particularly with regard to multimedia streaming
and Quality-of-Service (QoS) requirements. To overcome cur-
rent problems of missing bandwidth resources in wireless home
environments, the presented work points towards future multi-
interface extensions of 802.11-based networks, in combination
with decentralized Wireless Mesh Network (WMN) structures.
The work provides an overview of all relevant 802.11 and
WMN components with reference to important research works
and indicates basic design aspects, crucial success factors and
challenges of a future QoS-ready, multi-layer system that
combines the advantages of decentralized wireless networks
and of multi-channel MAC usage.
Keywords-802.11; Mesh; Multi-Interface; QoS
I. INTRODUCTION
All things considered global consumer industry has made
great experiences with the IEEE family of WirelessLAN
802.11 standards. But, the increased usage of wireless
connections by consumer end devices has made wireless
networks, especially home networks, become more hetero-
geneous. At the same time, new media applications raised
the requirements on wireless networks and users expect the
same quality of experience (QoE) from web based service
platforms (e.g., YouTube) as it is well known from broadcast
TV signals for example. So what has been achieved for wire-
less connectivity has to be achieved for Quality of Service
(QoS) on future wireless links. The 802.11 spectrum is not
fully exploited in most setups, although for example IEEE
802.11a would provide up to 12 orthogonal channels for
simultaneous usage. Multi-channel / multi-interface WLAN
networks offer a viable solution for these problems and some
key aspects of their exploitation will therefore be presented
in this work.
Furthermore, this work deals with 802.11 multi-channel
systems in combination with Wireless Mesh Networks
(WMN). Recent hardware development favors the shortfall
of access points in home setups, since nodes with multimedia
capabilities provide more CPU resources and are able to
compute complex routing decisions and forward packets in
mesh networks on their own. To decrease the dependency
on wired backbones and to enable a more scalable collective
network, with enhanced all-wireless coverage and connectiv-
ity over a larger area, a WMN is the most suitable approach
[1]. This advantage is in particular valuable in residential
buildings, where often a single AP is not sufﬁcient to
connect all clients over several ﬂoors. Home networks with
the purpose to essentially transport real-time media and less
data trafﬁc (e.g., a ﬁle download) are a key motivation
scenario of this work.
The rest of the work is structured as followed: Section
II provides essential knowledge about underlying 802.11
PHY and LLC techniques. Relevant mesh routing strategies
are highlighted in Section III. Section IV identiﬁes general
QoS requirements. Finally, Section V outlines challenges
and chances of possible multi-channel solutions for WMNs.
In Section VI representative 802.11 measurements are pre-
sented and Section VII concludes the presented aspects.
References to related works are included throughout the
article.
II. 802.11 - OVERVIEW AND RELEVANT COMPONENTS
The IEEE 802.11 standard covers the Medium Access
Control (MAC) sublayer and the physical layer of the OSI
reference model. But, an effective QoS-sensitive transmis-
sion chain requires the revision of QoS-related parameters
(e.g., CPU power, buffer sizes, encryption, etc.) on almost
every OSI layer. In this chain, 802.11 sub-protocols, espe-
cially in MAC layer, are at risk to become a bottleneck [2].
This section now covers the threat potential of known 802.11
169
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

issues in reference to QoS constraints, in order to efﬁciently
apply mesh structures in home networks.
A. 802.11 Physical Layer Schemes
To conquer interference problems, 802.11 PHY layer
natively provides frequency diversity: Depending on the
region, 802.11b/g offers between 2 and 3, and 802.11a up
to 12 non-overlapping channels . This generally favors the
deployment of mesh nodes equipped with multiple wireless
network interface cards (WNIC), but, current WLAN sta-
tions mostly deploy only a single interface, which can only
communicate on one channel at a time. The ﬁrst standard-
ized attempt (in consumer hardware) to increase spectrum
utilization within a single WNIC is described by 802.11n
[2]. Besides MIMO antenna features, 802.11n allows to bond
two 20 MHz channels and thus to increase the bandwidth on
the PHY layer. Still, applying 802.11n physical bonding in
2.4 GHz band would consume up to two-thirds of the avail-
able spectrum and might hence increase interference levels.
Those considerations about effective spectrum utilization
may lead to a later addressed dynamic bundling approach,
which envisions MAC coordinated channel bundling.
Due to physical limitations, PHY layer does not always
match the requirement that “using n interfaces equals n-fold
performance” [3] and so only offers a limited modularity
for WNIC combinations. Per node performance is also
limited by hardware capacities [4] and upper layer buffers;
a less relevant effect for consumer hardware. Disadvanta-
geous alignment of wireless cards and distances and angles
between antennas might also jeopardize performance [5]. In
reality negative radio effects like ACI might also occur on
low SIR levels, despite the general assumption that two non-
overlapping channels with physical proximity are supposed
to be interference free [6]. Apart from that, capacity gain is
always superior to all single-interface setups.
B. 802.11 MAC Layer Schemes
Besides physical interference, also the chance of a high
amount of nodes sharing the same coverage area is respon-
sible for the inherent unreliability of wireless systems. The
more nodes are active, the higher is the packet congestion:
Although 802.11 PHY layer is designed for multi-channel
purposes, the medium access control (MAC) scheme implies
a single channel shared by all stations, using CSMA/CA
(Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Avoidance).
CSMA/CA was originally designed for solely best effort
transmission, not considering distinction and prioritization
of different packet classes. The lack of QoS support in
802.11 led to the ﬁrst standard amendment 802.11e [7],
that takes different trafﬁc priorities into account. In 802.11e,
standard 802.11 Distributed Control Function (DCF, with
its strong best effort character) is replaced with the Hybrid
Coordination Function (HCF), which increases the transmit
probability for QoS-sensitive packets. 802.11e performance
strongly depends on packet inspection methods in the MAC
layer in order to detect protection-worthy trafﬁc, or on
the corresponding QoS signaling in IP headers, performed
by upper layers (e.g., DiffServ). This denoted dependency
underlines the advances of a cross-layer QoS system [8].
Because of their poor scalability, random access protocols
such as CSMA/CA are not an efﬁcient solution for WMNs.
Standard 802.11 MAC is not designed for multi-hop commu-
nication, which creates elementary problems in intermediate
nodes, which forward packets between source and destina-
tion. These packets have to be replicated multiple times
through multiple nodes, but still belong to the same end-
to-end ﬂow. The 802.11 standard does not consider this and
forces every to-be-sent packet to compete for the medium
anew, although it would be sensible to coordinate common
time slots for coherent forwarding packets on all involved
intermediate nodes on the multi-hop route. In affect, the
available throughput for each node is not only limited by
the raw channel capacity, but also by the forwarding loads
imposed by other nodes, since only one node can access the
medium at a time. This results in an inefﬁcient store-wait-
and-forward process along the route. To reduce overhead
time wasted for channel access negotiation, Bononi et. al.
[8] described a basic and a fast-forward negotiation mode.
The former mode equals standard DCF procedure, the latter
mode extends RTS / CTS messages by a ﬂow identiﬁer
and by a variable reservation period for each forwarded
stream, facilitating multi-hop transmissions. These schemes
can be further optimized by including a distributed multi-
interface usage, for example when a set of interfaces A is
responsible for the actual data transmission, while another
set B coordinates the synchronized medium access along the
route. Such enhanced functionality, when packet forwarding
indicated by the network layer is supported by link layer,
further argues for a cross-layer approach to decrease delay.
IEEE standard committee recognized these needs and has
formed the Robust Audio/Video Streaming Task Group, who
deﬁned general QoS requirements on WLAN in the 802.11aa
standard amendment [9]. 802.11aa mainly depicts enhanced
signaling between APs/stations and robust multi-cast, but
also relies on packet inspection methods. A general overview
of related 802.11 amendments is given in [10].
III. WIRELESS MESH NETWORKS AND ROUTING
PROTOCOLS
Especially in WMNs deployed in the private sector (e.g.,
home network) users frequently access external Internet
resources and thus routes to the gateway node are more often
penetrated than any other node-to-node connection, which
provokes bottlenecks near the Internet gateway. If routing
measures cannot compensate such limitations, alternative
solutions have to be found in the underlying 802.11 access
technology (see Section V).
170
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

To extend regular wireless mesh networks to multi-
interface, QoS-ready WMNs, distance vector protocols like
AODV are suitable in principle [12], because they already
share a lot of neighbor information (included in signaling
messages) locally, which could be extended with channel
allocation information of the involved interfaces. On the
other hand distance vector (DV) protocols are less scalable
and produce high amounts of overhead, since comprehensive
routing information is exchanged. In addition, DV protocols
do no converge fast enough, due to the unsynchronized
and unacknowledged way that distance vector information is
exchanged. A fast convergence might be a critical factor for
a home network, since users expect multimedia devices to be
quickly integrated into the network. Link state protocols like
OLSR [11] offer contrary and thus positive characteristics:
Low network overhead (since exchanged information only
contains single link characteristics), good scalability and fast
convergence.
Research works show that cross-layer routing metrics may
heavily increase performance in mesh routing [12]. Including
medium-speciﬁc characteristics like e.g., the actual through-
put, packet delay or packet delivery ratio values, directly
obtained from driver API, allows a precise evaluation of
the link quality, but, at the expense of compatibility (the
system then always depends on a special operating system
or WLAN driver). For a better multimedia performance
in home networks, standard metrics should be replaced
with residual bandwidth capacity and round-trip-time, which
plays to the requirements of a video/audio stream. For a best
effort trafﬁc transmission high speed and low delay are not
necessarily mandatory to carry out its duty, but rather a high
packet delivery rate.
To enhance this multi-layer metric concept, in a next step
routing metrics should adapt to changing network conditions
[13]. Given the assumption that trafﬁc is spread heteroge-
neously, the cumulative equation that describes the used
routing metric in total could beneﬁcially combine several
sub-metrics and weight them with a factor that depends on
dynamic zones in the mesh network. In zones with low QoS-
related trafﬁc activity and low packet collision/contention
probability, it is better to traverse packets as fast as possible
through this area, rather than observing the general band-
width utilization in this zone for example. In this case packet
delay and hop count dominate (represented by a higher
weight factor). In zones with high network loads, that might
threaten QoS performance on busy links, it is sensible to
consider the residual bandwidth capacity instead. To realize
a proactive indication whether a part of a route is about to
carry real-time trafﬁc or not, a source node could broadcast
network-wide QoS-reservation messages for a planned end-
to-end route, before starting the actual stream. K¨ohnen et.
al. [14] already implemented such functionalities in Ethernet
networks. The reservations are included in the cumulative
metric equation as weight factors.
Internet Gateway
Multicast Source
Multicast Receiver
Shared Channel
(1 WNIC / node)
Vulnerable Link
When Streaming
1
2
3
Internet Gateway
Multicast Source
Multicast Receiver
Different physical 
channels 1-3
Multi-IF
Nodes
A)
B)
2 IF
2 IF
2 IF
4 IF
Figure 1.
Single-Interface / Multi-Interface Home Topology
IV. TRANSPORT LAYER AND BEYOND
Introducing QoS in a home mesh reveals structural is-
sues of standard WLAN setups: Advanced scenarios might
require multicasting of local video/audio sources, which is
contrary to common point-to-point data communication and
may further provoke bottlenecks (see red links in Figure
1, A)). To implement QoS, the correct identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation of real-time packets is mandatory, but also
hard to accomplish, due to the convergence of Media over
IP trafﬁc (e.g., YouTube, Hulu or Telekom Entertain), best
effort trafﬁc (e.g., HTTP protocol) and linear DVB broad-
casts. Trafﬁc can be identiﬁed in several ways and the
identiﬁcation process should never slow down the actual
packet processing of the node. Most of the current setups
require a deep packet inspection with a thorough payload
analysis [14] to determine the real nature of a packet’s
content, which is generally not a problem with common
home consumer devices. After a successful identiﬁcation,
transport protocols like the Resource Reservation Protocol
(RSVP) can reserve bandwidth for certain ﬂows. RSVP re-
quires that every client supports the protocol and is therefore
mainly applied in homogeneous cable backbones and less in
wireless mesh networks. Besides bandwidth reservation and
packet prioritization (e.g., 802.11e) the consideration of a
multi-interface environment marks a third viable alternative
to protect trafﬁc. The beneﬁts are regarded in the following
sections.
V. CHALLENGES OF MULTI-INTERFACE ENVIRONMENTS
This section attends to initial problems of multi-interface
/ multi-channel (MIMC) networks. In most multi-interface
solutions a single virtual MAC interface (which is pre-
sented as such to upper layers) combines and manages
PHY interfaces. This architecture provides a good trade-off
between portability and channel diversity exploitation, since
the original 802.11 standard needs no further modiﬁcations
and future PHY modulation schemes such as 802.11ac [10]
can be easily adopted.
Xu et. al. [13] examined differences between the aim to
exploit channel diversity in MIMCs, which implies assigning
as much different channels as possible to different neighbor-
to-neighbor links, and sole channel bonding, which means
171
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

aggregating bandwidth capacities of the involved interfaces
between two neighboring nodes. The group states that
under high trafﬁc load conditions, with a high degree of
packet collisions that deteriorate the throughput and delay
performances, relying on channel diversity greatly reduces
collisions and may improve both throughput and delay since
trafﬁc can be equally distributed on more channels. Channel
bonding only slightly decreases packet delays in high-trafﬁc
conditions. On the other hand, when trafﬁc is low, the
bonding of two interfaces achieves low delay values on a
link and therefore favors QoS streams. Bonding has a better
leverage effect when applied to concrete links that form parts
of routes carrying QoS-packets between two nodes. MIMC
is rather suitable to balance and absorb high packet quantities
(both best effort and real-time) in the mesh network. The two
concepts are regarded and shall be combined in the following
subsections.
A. Channel Distribution in MIMC Environments
Channel distribution for multi-interface nodes must aim
to at least equally distribute available channels in a hop-
by-hop fashion, in order to decrease per channel congestion
and mutual interference levels. Also, in this way the network
topology might be actually shaped through (physical) route
separations by frequencies; for example to separate three
different streaming/multicast single hop links, as depicted
in the in-house scenario B in Figure 1. First of all channel
distribution has to be applied in a way that a logical
connectivity (appearance in the routing table, despite of the
used channel) between a node and every neighbor within its
coverage range is guaranteed. If nodes transmit on different
channels without further knowledge of the channels their
neighbors are reachable on, they become invisible to each
other. In the literature this problem is referred to as deafness,
which further leads to common hidden terminal issues on
multiple hops [15]. Therefore a dedicated control channel
(CC) is needed [16]. The scope of the CC ranges from
sole transmission of signaling packets generated by MAC
(RTS, CTS, ACK) and network layer (e.g., OLSR HELLO
and Topology Control overhead trafﬁc) to hybrid solutions
where overhead trafﬁc is mixed with best effort trafﬁc.
CC must be always accessible by all stations and must
carry information about a node’s general access to a set
of channels and which of them are currently assigned to
/ used by its interfaces. To somehow consider the limited
coverage area, for the sake of simplicity a node distributes
this information only to its 1-hop and 2-hop neighborhood,
to not provoke excessive overhead by network-wide ﬂooding
of its channel signaling information. The information itself
can be distributed through an arbitrary message type or, more
economically, embedded in existing signaling messages.
Another deciding design attribute of a multi-channel /
multi-interface network is the question whether channel
allocation is performed pro- or reactively. Bononi et. al. [8]
Forwarding Node
Internet Gateway
Neighboring Node 2
Neighboring Node 1
3
3
3
Internet Gateway
Neighboring Node 2
Neighboring Node 1
1
3
3
4
2
5
3
3
Scenario A: Single-Interface Nodes
Scenario B: 5 Interfaces per Node 
Ch. 3 used for both best effort 
traffic AND video stream from 
source to gateway
Ch. 3 used for best effort traffic
Ch 1,2,4,5 used for video 
stream from source to gateway
Forwarding Node
Source Node
Source Node
Figure 2.
Separate Resources for Gateway Routes and QoS Trafﬁc
deal with the question if channel assignment should follow
after the actual route ﬁnding mechanism, or vice versa.
Wu et. al. [16] implement channel allocation in a reactive
manner by combining RTS/CTS management with the iden-
tiﬁcation and distribution of unused channels within the 1-
hop neighborhood, all based on a common CC. A proactive
solution on the other hand might be more suitable, since
a basic connectivity between nodes has to be established
anyway. (Re-) Assigning channels in reaction to a transmit
request by upper layers only consumes additional channel
(re-)allocation time; a critical factor for delay-sensitive real-
time trafﬁc. Additionally, interference is prevented a priori
when channels (orthogonal to each other) are assigned
proactively, before upcoming ﬂows.
The dynamic adaption to actual trafﬁc loads and QoS-
demands in a node, instead of simply assuring a uniform
distribution of channels, make assignment mechanisms even
more effective. To classify next-hop links and thus the
majority of trafﬁc they are bearing, we distinguish between
best effort links (low priority), links that carry trafﬁc towards
or coming from Internet gateways and links that carry QoS
trafﬁc (both high priority). Identiﬁcation of the type of trafﬁc
may be provided by upper layers (deep packet inspection
methods). Gateway nodes are identiﬁed through the routing
table. As mentioned before, gateway routes generally carry
the majority of trafﬁc in WMNs and should receive more
resources to prevent bottlenecks in the mesh region near
the actual gateway node. The distributable channel resources
depend on the amount of available interfaces per node.
In a ﬁrst step, QoS- and gateway routes are favored with
separate interfaces, while best effort links may communicate
on a shared channel, applying CSMA/CA. Figure 2 depicts
a related scenario. In this case the channel distribution is
calculated and seen from the forwarding nodes’s point of
view, which deploys 5 WNICs. A video stream that takes
a gateway route receives 4 different orthogonal channels.
This signiﬁcantly increases bandwidth, lowers delay and
prevents negative interference effects for this stream. Based
on this example, resources in MIMC environments are either
represented by separate channels for each neighbor, or in
the advanced case, by multiple separate channels for each
172
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

neighbor, which lead to the application of channel bundles.
B. Channel Bundling in MIMC Environments
Bundles may be dynamically generated respectively de-
graded, depending on the variable amount of 1-hop neigh-
bors (assuming that links suddenly break down or come up).
In the particular case of ﬁg. 2, each link of the QoS route
aggregates capacities of two interfaces. Bundles are formed
reactively (for example directly after the identiﬁcation of
a concrete QoS-stream), when extra capacity is needed
and if the involved nodes can provide sufﬁcient interface
resources. Channel Bundling requires load balancing. To
double bandwidth capacity, both channels can be loaded
simultaneously with packets. Another concept sets the focus
on stability: One channel might act as a fall-back option in
case the main channel (that carries all packets) fails, or if the
packet error rate on the main channel exceeds a threshold.
Alternatively, redundancy (multiple transmission of the same
packet) might increase stability as well. On the arrival side
packet reordering has to be performed, depending on the
chosen load balancing scheme. Packet reordering is a critical
performance factor as well since wireless links are less
predictable and packets may not always arrive in the correct
order, due to different delay values of the interfaces.
In current research works, channel bundling options are
still poorly considered, mostly because it is supposed that
nodes may use all interfaces to serve different neighbors
ﬁrst. Therefore additional WNICs for bundling are rarely
available. Still, channel bundling is the future concept to
increase network capacity in 802.11. Tradeoffs between
MIMC and bundling have to be deﬁned here to enable
efﬁcient hybrid scenarios like in Figure 2, where all low-
priority links can be served on a shared channel.
Channel bundling decreases packet delay times and for
this reason it is especially interesting for supporting media
streams. Since the overall transmission bandwidth of a link
that contains bundled interfaces is enlarged, the transmission
rate increases, which decreases packet transmission time,
assuming a constant packet size.
VI. MEASUREMENTS
The presented measurements were simulated with Net-
work Simulator NS-2, in combination with OLSR as proac-
tive link state routing protocol. They reﬂect the promis-
ing performance gain of multi-interface (IF) over single-
IF 802.11 mesh networks. Comparative throughput (respec-
tively TCP/FTP goodput), packet delay and packet drop rate
observations are considered to evaluate the performance of
each scenario.
Before addressing a home WMN, our ﬁrst setup shall
represent a large scale WMN and depicts a 150m x 150m
area where 50 nodes where placed at random positions
(cf. Figure 3). 4 extra nodes (yellow marked in ﬁg. 3)
are placed at ﬁxed positions at the corners of the square
Figure 3.
WMN with random node positions
area. Yellow node 1 initiates a TCP stream to node 2 in
each of the 200 simulation runs, as well as node 0 to
node 3. The two streams take different routes in each run
due to their random character. A single-IF scenario, where
all 54 nodes communicate on a shared 802.11a channel
(54Mbits/s raw bitrate), is opposed to a multi-IF setup,
where each of the 50 randomly positioned node contains
two .11a interfaces. First interface is either tuned to channel
36 or 40, second IF to channel 44 or 48. Channels are
selected randomly in each run. In this second scenario the
4 extra nodes apply 4 interfaces each to access all 4 used
channels and to ensure a physical connection to all possible
neighbors. Results are shown in Figure 4. Multi-IF setup
clearly outperforms single-IF because limited single-channel
resources are spatially disseminated on other frequencies,
optimizing channel utilization. The “total” column of each
graph refers to the overall value across the entire mesh.
Second measurement maps a typical indoor scenario in a
10m x 10m home (see Figure 5) where the left node on the
top ﬂoor maintains a UDP stream for 200 seconds, which
is interfered by a FTP stream after 100s. Again OLSR is
used, but any other mesh protocol may be applied instead.
Compared are both situations; undisturbed UDP/TCP stream
and both UDP and TCP stream at the same time. Again, a
single-IF setup (802.11a) is compared to a multi-IF envi-
ronment (cp. legend in ﬁg. 5). Results in Figures 6, 7 and
8 reveal that using a separate orthogonal channel for each
link dramatically increases performance and makes the home
network more suitable for QoS streams.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
This work focuses on 802.11-based wireless mesh net-
works, used to transport real-time streams. As shown by
the so far discussed ﬂaws of 802.11, the development of
network solutions that provide abundant streaming capacities
for future rich multimedia formats is critical for the ongoing
173
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
1 → 2 
0 → 3 
Total
Throughput [kBytes/s] 
1 IF
2 IF
(a) Throughput Comparison
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1 → 2 
0 → 3 
Total
Packet Drop Ratio [%] 
1 IF
2 IF
(b) Drop Rate Comparison
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1 → 2 
0 → 3 
Total
Packet Delay [ms] 
1 IF
2 IF
(c) Delay Comparison
Figure 4.
Single-IF vs. Multi-IF - Performance Comparison
UDP / FTP Sink
UDP Stream with 
constant bitrates 
(e.g. Video over IP)
FTP / TCP Stream
(e.g. File 
Download)
Intermediate Node
FTP Source
UDP Source
(1 / 1)*
(1 / 1)**
(1 / 1)*
(1 / 2)**
(1 / 1)*
(3 / 1-3)**
(1 / 1)*
(1 / 3)**
*) Single-IF Scenario
**) Multi-IF Scenario:
(# of IFs / channel index)
Legend:
Figure 5.
Home Mesh Scenario
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
UDP Stream
Throughput
FTP Stream
Throughput
UDP Stream
Throughput with
parallel FTP Stream
FTP Stream
Throughput with
parallel UDP Stream
Throughput (kBytes/sec) 
Throughput Results 
1024 kB/s UDP CBR, Single-IF
1536 kB/s UDP CBR, Single-IF
1024 kB/s UDP CBR,Multi-IF
1536 kB/s UDP CBR, Multi-IF
Figure 6.
Throughput Results
adaption process of 802.11. Especially home networks based
on standard single channel 802.11 links may not be able to
provide sufﬁcient bandwidth resources and high quality links
to satisfy the constantly growing quality-of-service demands.
This work provides a base for future multi-layer approaches.
Multi-Layer Architecture allows routing metrics to get a
more adequate view on the actual link states. Moreover,
results of packet inspection methods can be used to facilitate
trafﬁc distribution over physically separated routes in the
MAC layer, to decrease the general packet congestion per
channel. A novel MAC layer instance to control the channel
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
UDP Stream Packet
Drop Ratio
FTP Stream Packet
Drop Ratio
UDP Stream Packet
Drop Ratio with
parallel FTP Stream
FTP Stream Packet
Drop Ratio with
parallel UDP Stream
Packet Drop Ratio (%) 
Packet Drop Ratio Results 
1024 kB
1536 kB
1024 kB
1536 kB
Figure 7.
Packet Drop Ratio Results
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
UDP Stream Packet
Delay
FTP Stream Packet
Delay
UDP Stream Packet
Delay with parallel
FTP Stream
FTP Stream Packet
Delay with parallel
UDP Stream
Packet Delay (msec) 
Packet Delay Results 
1024 k
1536 k
1024 k
1536 k
Figure 8.
Packet Delay Results
assignment and channel bundling of connected interfaces
forms part of the multi-layer strategy. To optimize the
mixture of MIMC and bundling approaches is an important
task for the future.
Now we are on the boarder to second and third generation
mesh networks that offer quality features beyond simple
connectivity of all nodes. 802.11s [18] is clear evidence
that mesh structures are ﬁnally accepted in a broad range
of wireless applications. To help the IEEE 802.11 standard
to evolve with future requirements, its network structures
have to become more dynamic and able to fully exploit
the channel diversity offered by the PHY layer. Enhanced
spectral efﬁciency and adaptive multi-channel utilization are
the keywords for a signiﬁcantly increased network capacity.
174
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

REFERENCES
[1] G. R. Hertz, S. Max, E. Wei, L. Berlemann, D. Denteneer, and
S. Mangold, “Mesh Technology enabling Ubiquitous Wireless
Networks”, in Proc. of the 2nd Annual International Wireless
Internet Conference (WICON 06), Boston, MA, USA: ACM,
Invited Paper, pp. 11, August, 2006.
[2] S. Maarouﬁ, W. Ajib, and H. Elbiaze, “Performance Evalu-
ation of New MAC Mechanisms for IEEE 802.11n”, in the
Proc. of First International Global Information Infrastructure
Symposium, 2007.
[3] Chenzhe Zhang, Karol Kowalik, and Mark Davis, “An Exper-
imental Study of the Impact of Using Multi-Radio in WLAN
Mesh Networks”, in the Proc. of IEEE WICOM ’09, pp. 2587-
2590, 2009.
[4] R. Draves, J. Padhye, and B.Zill, “Routing in Multi-radio,
Multi-hop Wireless Mesh Networks”, in the Proc. of ACM
Mobicom, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 114 - 128, 2004.
[5] J.
Robinson,
K.
Papagiannaki,
C.
Diot,
X.
Guo,
and
L.Krishnamurthy, “Experimenting With a Multi-Radio Mesh
Networking Testbed”, in the Proc. of WinMee, 2005.
[6] Chen-Mou Cheng, Pai-Hsiang Hsiao, H. Kung, and D. Vlah,
“Adjacent Channel Interference in Dual-radio 802.11a Nodes
and Its Impact on Multi-hop Networking”, in the Proc. of IEEE
Global Telecommunications Conference GLOBECOM ’06, pp.
1-6, 2006.
[7] Nikos
Passas,
Dimitris
Skyrianoglou,
and
Panagiotis
Mouziouras,
“Prioritized
support
of
different
trafﬁc
classes in IEEE 802.11e wireless LANs”, ACM Computer
Communications
Volume
29,
Issue
15,
pp.
2867-2880,
September 2006.
[8] Luciano Bononi, Marco Di Felice, Antonella Molinaro, and
Sara Pizzi, “A Cross-Layer Architecture for Efﬁcient Multi-
Hop Communication in Multi-Channel Multi-Radio Wireless
Mesh Networks”, in the Proc. of 6th Annual IEEE Commu-
nications Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc
Communications and Networks Workshops SECON ’09, pp.
1-6, 2009.
[9] Ganesh Venkatesan, Multimedia Streaming Over 802.11 Links,
IEEE Wireless Communications - Industry Perspectives, pp. 4-
5, April 2010.
[10] Guido R. Hiertz, Dee Denteneer, Lothar Stibor et. al., “The
IEEE 802.11 Universe”, IEEE Communications Magazine, pp.
62-70, January 2010.
[11] A. Tonnesen, A. Hafslund, and Ø. Kure, “The Unik - OLSR
Plugin Library”, OLSR Interop and Workshop, 2004.
[12] Sana Ghannay, Sonia Gammar, Fethi Filali, and Farouk
Kamoun, “Multi-Radio Multi-Channel Routing Metrics in
IEEE 802.11s-based Wireless Mesh Networks - And the Win-
ner Is . . . ”, in the Proc. of First International Conference on
Communications and Networking, ComNet, 2009.
[13] L. Xu, K. Yamamoto, and S. Yoshida, “Performance Compar-
ison between Channel-Bonding and Multi-Channel CSMA”, in
the Proc. of WCNC ’07, pp. 37-40, 2007.
[14] C. K¨ohnen, C. ¨Uberall, F. Adamsky, V. Rakocevic, M. Ra-
jarajan, and R. J¨ager, “Enhancements to Statistical Protocol
IDentiﬁcation (SPID) for Self-Organised QoS in LANs”, IEEE
ICCCN ’10, pp.1-6, August 2010.
[15] M. Di Felice, G. Zhu, and L. Bononi, “Future Channel
Reservation Medium Access Control (FCR-MAC) Protocol for
Multi-Radio Multi-Channel Wireless Mesh Networks”, in the
Proc. of IEEE PE-WASUN’08, pp. 71-79, 2008.
[16] S.-L. Wu, C.-Y Lin et al., “A New Multi-Channel MAC
Protocol with On-Demand Channel Assignment for Multi-Hop
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks”, in the Proc. of IEEE ISPAN ’00,
Dallas, pp. 232-237, 2000.
[17] Ali Hamidian, Claudio E. Palazzi, and Tin Y. Chong, “De-
ployment and Evaluation of a Wireless Mesh Network”, in
the Proc. of the Second International IEEE Conference on
Advances in Mesh Networks, pp. 66-72, 2009.
[18] S. Jeon, J. Lee, and J. Choi, “Performance Evaluation of
Enhanced 802.11 in Wireless Mesh Networks”, in Proc. of
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Communication
Technology, ICACT ’08, pp. 839-842, 2008.
175
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

