 
 
 
Throughput Evaluation Approach for GSM Networks 
 
İsmail Yıldız 
Business Intelligence Solutions – Network Analytics 
TURKCELL TEKNOLOJI 
Istanbul, Turkey 
e-mail: ismail.yildiz@turkcell.com.tr 
Sena Aydeniz 
Statistical Quality Assurance 
TURKCELL 
Istanbul, Turkey 
e-mail: sena.aydeniz@turkcell.com.tr 
 
 
Abstract — Data Usage in GSM networks has 
increasingly become more important compared to voice 
calls. Smartphone usage grew rapidly in the last few years 
and Internet access via mobile devices is ever increasing. 
Experienced speed while using data, often called throughput, 
is a vital part of GSM service quality. Although throughput 
itself is a straightforward concept, evaluation of the values 
for throughput is complex. Experienced throughput value 
depends on many factors. Determining factors and their 
significance is central to measuring and improving perceived 
throughput. This papers deals with the evaluation problem 
and proposes a new approach to evaluate GSM network 
throughput experienced by subscribers. 
Keywords—Throughput evaluation; expected throughput; 
GSM network; data usage; evalution approach; smartphone; 
mobile network; mobile throughput evaluation. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
It is believed that communication between people far 
away started with smoke. Many years later telegraph was 
invented, which was a crucial invention. In the following 
decades, telephone, radio, computer, internet and cell 
phone were invented. Finally, smartphones have become 
widespread which was the sign of a different era. In this 
era, people increasingly tend to access Internet with their 
mobile devices predominantly using GSM network. 
In the smartphone era, almost every person acquires a 
smartphone in order to increase life quality. Some people 
use it for its original purpose, which is connectivity, but 
now the phone became more than that; it can be used for 
social media, navigation, gaming, business, and even 
health. People also customized their smartphones 
according to their needs. 
Intensive smartphone and mobile application usage led 
to intensive data download and upload volumes. So speed 
of data, which is called throughput, has become the most 
crucial service quality indicator in mobile communication 
business. 
Since definition and measurement of throughput is 
performed easily, evaluation of measured values is not 
easy for GSM companies because there is not any globally 
accepted standard or reference point. 
In this paper, the problem of throughput evaluation is 
discussed in detail. Previous market experience and 
measured values are combined in order to propose a 
modern approach to solve this problem. Finally, expected 
throughput approach is devised and success of this 
approach is tested, which lead to excellent results.  
II. PROBLEM DEFINITION 
Data experience of subscriber is one the hottest and 
most complex topics in GSM world. Since data experience 
has become more and more important for the smartphone 
era, companies tend to focus much on this topic.  
Throughput, which is the measured data speed, is one 
of the most vital performance indicators of subscriber data 
experience and widely used by GSM companies while 
monitoring network health and data service quality.  
Although it is easy to define and calculate throughput, it is 
not so easy to evaluate measured throughput values. It is a 
complicated issue to make inferences from measured 
throughput values. As example, measured experience of 5 
Mbps data download speed is acceptable and a good speed 
for many people. But for some people who are used to 
much higher speeds, 5 Mbps data speed is definitely not 
acceptable and means a poor quality of service.  
In order to clarify the situation, we can look closer to a 
similar problem from daily life. Assume that one is driving 
a vehicle and it reached the speed of 110 km/h. Is it 
possible to accept that speed as good, or bad? Of course, 
that depends on some factors. If one is driving on a high-
way, we can say that it is a slow speed. What about if one 
is driving a heavy-duty truck? Then the speed is fair 
enough. As we can see, the type of car is another factor 
used to evaluate the speed.  Some other factors such as 
condition of the vehicle, top speed and engine type of 
vehicle, and driver’s past experience can be added. 
Similar to driving example, throughput in GSM 
network depends on many factors. Measuring the actual 
values and simple mathematical operation like average 
may not result in the correct evaluation.  
Figure 1 shows the average throughput values 
measured in mobile network in the first quarter of 2015. 
Because 
of 
market 
competition 
and 
commercial 
limitations, exact throughput values cannot be revealed, 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
instead values are multiplied by a private multiplier and 
general trend is depicted. The unit of multiplied throughput 
values is defined as “T” in the remaining part of this paper. 
Regarding Figure 1, throughput values vary daily and it is 
difficult to interpret this figure in terms of experience 
evaluation. 
 
Fig. 1. Average Throughput values of whole GSM network 
To better understand the variation, two cities of Turkey 
were selected for sampling. Because of the data security 
rules and market competition, we do not name the cities 
explicitly. Instead we call them as City A and City B.  
Figure 2 shows the throughput trend of City A versus 
whole network in the first quarter of 2015. 2015 Q1 time 
period is used in the whole study. Throughput average 
values of City A are fluctuating more than the whole 
network and have different characteristics compared to the 
whole network. For some of the days, throughput average 
value of City A is higher than the whole network’s 
throughput average. But for some of the days, throughput 
average value of City A is lower than the whole network’s 
throughput average. 
 
Fig. 2. Average Throughput values of City A vs whole GSM network 
Figure 3 shows the throughput trend of City B in the 
first quarter of 2015. For most of the days, throughput 
average of City B is lower than the whole network’s 
average values. 
 
Fig. 3. Average Throughput values of City B vs whole GSM network 
Only two cities are given as example for this article, 
but during the study nearly 30 cities were analyzed. 
Increasing number of city analysis, even smaller regions 
called districts, did not change the fact that there is no 
correlation between average throughput trends of cities and 
whole network.  
If we come back to throughput evaluation problem for 
data experience, one common methodology is comparing 
individual subscriber’s throughput figures with the whole 
network’s 
throughput 
average. 
Another 
common 
methodology is location based throughput comparison. 
Individual subscriber’s throughput figures are compared to 
his/her city or district’s throughput average. As we 
mentioned previously, these methodologies may result in 
wrong interpretations. Data experience should be evaluated 
session by session and generalizations will lead to 
incorrect results. 
In the remaining part of the study, factors affecting 
experienced throughput by GSM subscribers are analyzed 
in detail and a modern approach is devised.  
III. INVESTIGATION OF FACTORS 
In this section of the article, investigations of various 
factors that are assumed to affect experienced throughput 
of subscriber are performed. 
First, type network or GSM technology must be the 
dominant factor affecting experienced throughput. By 
nature, detail specifications and methods are different for 
each network type. By the mid of 2015 2G and 3G 
network technologies were in use in Turkey. Figure 4 
shows the average throughput trend for 2G and 3G 
network technologies for the first quarter of 2015. As 
expected, average throughput of 3G network type is 
obviously higher than 2G network type. So, it is proved 
that network type is a major factor affecting experienced 
throughput. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Effect of network type 
Second, data traffic direction may be another important 
factor affecting experienced throughput. Figure 5 shows 
the average throughput trend of downlink and uplink data 
traffic directions in the first quarter of 2015. Not 
surprisingly, average throughput of downlink direction is 
clearly higher than uplink direction. Therefore, data traffic 
direction 
is 
another 
factor 
affecting 
experienced 
throughput. 
 
Fig. 5. Effect of traffic direction 
Another factor may be the subscriber and mobile 
application behavior. Figure 6 shows the average 
throughput trend of selected popular applications in the 
first quarter of 2015. In this figure, the first finding is that 
video based applications, such as Youtube and Vine, have 
higher average throughputs. Messaging applications like 
Whatsapp and Turkcell Bip have comparably lower 
average throughputs. Facebook, which can be assumed 
having a mixed character (combination of text, image 
&video), has the lowest average throughput. Also, 
significant decrease in Vine’s average throughput is 
detected towards the end of the quarter. 
 
Fig. 6. Effect of mobile applications 
Application 
based 
analysis 
gave 
us 
better 
understanding, but it is not sufficient to come to a result. It 
can be said that content type of data traffic that is called 
mime type (video, image, text, audio, web browsing) 
should be considered while analyzing application effect. 
Figure 7 shows the average throughput trend of mime 
types in the first quarter of 2015. As we see in the figure, 
mime type directly affects experienced throughput values. 
 
Fig. 7. Effect of mime type 
Applications also vary in communication protocols 
used behind. Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) and 
Secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTPS) are two 
major protocols used by applications. Figure 8 shows the 
average throughput trend of communication protocols in 
the first quarter of 2015. As it is known, HTTPS is a 
secured version of HTTP protocol. Relevantly, HTTPS 
average throughput values are lower than HTTP protocol’s 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
average throughput values. It is clear that, impact of 
communication protocol on experienced throughput is 
significant. 
 
Fig. 8. Effect of application communication protocol 
When we come back to driving example, the vehicle 
itself is a key factor for speed evaluation. In our case, the 
device used by the subscriber called terminal is another 
factor that may affect experienced throughput. Figure 9 
shows the average throughput trend of terminal types in 
the first quarter of 2015. It is clear that, type and HDSPA 
support of terminal is another factor affecting experienced 
throughput. 
 
Fig. 9. Effect of terminal type 
IV. PROPOSAL OF NEW APPROACH 
 
In the previous section we have proved that 
experienced throughput depends on various factors which 
are: 
 Network type (2G, 3G) 
 Data traffic direction (downlink, uplink) 
 Mime type (video, text, audio, web browsing, 
image) 
 Communication protocol (HTTP, HTTPS) 
 Terminal HDSPA Support (Not Supported, 0-7.2, 
7.2-14.4, 14.4-21.1, 21.1-63.3) 
When data traffic is simplified down to session level, 
each session has unique characteristics of 5 major factors 
mentioned above. In other words, a session is either 2G 
session or 3G session (4G was not launched in Turkey yet 
by mid of 2015). Similarly, a session is either established 
by HTTP or HTTPS.  
TABLE I.  
SAMPLE SESSION CHARACTERISTICS 
Sessions 
Major Factors 
Network 
Type 
Data 
Traffic 
Direction 
Mime 
Type 
Communication 
Protocol 
Terminal 
HDSPA 
Support 
Session 1 
2G 
Uplink 
Video 
HTTP 
21.1-63.3 
Session 2 
2G 
Downlink 
Video 
HTTPS 
14.4-21.1 
Session 3 
2G 
Downlink 
Image 
HTTP 
Not 
Supported 
Session 4 
2G 
Uplink 
Image 
HTTPS 
0-7.2 
Session 5 
2G 
Downlink 
Audio 
HTTPS 
7.2-14.4 
Session 6 
3G 
Downlink 
Text 
HTTP 
7.2-14.4 
Session 7 
3G 
Uplink 
Text 
HTTPS 
21.1-63.3 
Session 8 
3G 
Downlink 
Web 
Browsing 
HTTPS 
Not 
Supported 
Session 9 
3G 
Uplink 
Image 
HTTPS 
0-7.2 
 
Table I shows 9 different session characteristics as an 
example. Since characteristic of a session is formed by 5 
major factors, we reach 200 (2x2x5x2x5) possible 
combinations, 
therefore 
200 
distinct 
session 
characteristics. 
Each of the 200 distinct session characteristics has its 
own requirements and story. We have come up with the 
concept of Expected Throughput that is ideal throughput 
value of a session. Formula for expected throughput is 
devised as follows: 
 Expected Throughput = C * Square Root (Net Data 
Volume) 
where C is a constant value for related session 
characteristic. Net Data Volume is measured total data 
volume; the packet header and footer are not included. For 
each session characteristic, detailed statistical analysis are 
performed and constant C values are calculated. So 200 
different C values are formed. 
 
For any subscriber session, Expected Throughput is 
calculated by measuring net data volume, square rooting 
and then multiplying by related constant C value. 
 
In order to test the success of proposed Throughput 
Evaluation Approach, which is Expected Throughput 
concept, subscriber complaints are correlated with 
expected throughput values. All sessions of subscribers 
who made a complaint about data speed are taken into 
account. In order to make a correct matching, only sessions 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
before actual complaint time are included in the analysis 
set. During the analysis, it is found that 97.7% of 
individual subscribers who complained about bad data 
experience or low data speed fall below expected 
throughput values within complaint period. As a result, it 
can be said that the proposed Expected Throughput 
Approach is successful in evaluating subscriber data 
experience. 
 
V.CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a detailed analysis on experienced 
throughput values and the problem of evaluation. 
Depending on analysis results, a new concept of expected 
throughput was formed and a formula was created. 
The solution was easy to use and very applicable in 
subscriber data experience evaluation. Success rate of the 
expected throughput concept and formula to reflect real 
subscriber data experience was very high. 
Currently, the solution is in use in Turkcell and 
feedbacks from our colleagues are very positive. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Firstly, many thanks to our Turkcell as a visionary 
company that heavily supports research & development 
activities. Also, thanks to network technologies teams for 
their contribution in building signalization knowledge base 
and application operations team for providing detailed 
measurements of mobile network. Finally special thanks to 
our managers for their encouragement for writing this 
article. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Laiho, A. Wacker, and T. Novosad, “Radio Network Planning 
and Optimization for UMTS”, Wiley & Sons, 2006. 
[2] B. Ballard, “Designing the Mobile User Experience”, Wiley & 
Sons, 2006. 
[3] O. Krecjar, “Problem solving of low data throughput on mobile 
devices by artefacts prebuffering”, EURASIP Journal on Wireless 
Communications and Networking - Special issue on enabling 
Wireless Technologies for Green Pervasive Computing, vol.2009, 
2009, Article No. 8. 
[4] IEEE, “A novel mechanism for data streaming across multiple IP 
links for improving throughput and reliability in mobile 
environments”, Twenty-First Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE 
Computer and Communications Societies, vol.2, 2002, pp.773-781. 
[5] M. Mouly and M. B. Pautet, “The GSM System for Mobile 
Communications”, Telecom Publishing, 1992. 
[6] M. J. Dixon and F. J. Massey, “Introduction to Statistical 
Analysis”, McGraw Hill, 1957. 
[7] N. R. Draper and H. Smith, “Applied Regression Analysis”, Wiley 
& Sons, 1998. 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

