A Technical Comparison Between Data Rate Enhancement Options in Radio 
Communications Networks 
 
Cristian Androne 
Communications Department 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
cristian.androne@com.utcluj.ro 
Tudor Palade 
Communications Department 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
tudor.palade@com.utcluj.ro 
 
 
Abstract—This paper makes a comparative study between two 
newly emerged technologies in the radio communications 
domain: on the one hand, the small cells networks, designed to 
be implemented in the existing macrocellular networks, with 
the goal of enhancing the coverage area and the capacity of the 
whole network, and the 60 GHz wireless local area networks 
on the other hand. This latter technology is developed in order 
to offer high data rates taking advantage of the license free 
spectrum available around the 60 GHz frequency. The paper 
highlights the main common and disjoint aspects of both 
technologies and offers some implementation options. 
Keywords-60 
GHz 
WLAN; 
applications; 
comparison; 
coverage;,  femtocell;  small cell. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the ever-increasing demands of today’s end users, 
the service providers need to come up with solutions that 
match these requirements. The main necessities are in terms 
of the data transfer rates which need to be at higher levels in 
order for the operators to offer the desired services in radio 
communication networks. 
Therefore, the two main fields of operation that attracted 
most users, i.e., cellular mobile communications and wireless 
local area networks, respectively, need to be enhanced in 
order to become viable solutions for the end users. Regarding 
the mobile cellular domain, new standards have been 
introduced, which can offer besides voice services, also data 
services at comfortable rates. Here, we speak of standards 
like HSPA/HSPA+ or LTE offered by 3GPP [1], or WiMAX 
offered by IEEE [2]. Even with this important enhancement 
regarding capacity and throughputs of the networks, services 
are not sufficient, especially in indoor environments, where 
very often the radio coverage is poor. Recent studies have 
shown that in cellular networks, about 60% of all voice calls 
and 90% of all data services, take place in indoor 
environments [3]. That is why it is extremely important to 
have a good coverage in these regions. Several recent papers 
present the difficulties encountered, by the traditional 
approach, in assuring a good indoor coverage [3],[4]. The 
issues relate especially to dense urban areas where it is very 
costly to obtain a good indoor coverage due to the geometry 
of the environment. Also, the capacity of the network is a 
sensitive problem, given the fact that using a strictly 
macrocellular approach, a large number of base stations 
would be needed, rising once again the costs. Additionally, 
the planning and optimization of the network would be hard 
to manage. 
As a possible solution to these problems, the femtocell 
concept was developed and implemented. It is mainly 
designed to enhance both coverage and capacity of the 
traditional macrocellular network. Femtocells, also known as 
Home Base Stations, represent cellular network access 
points, which have the role of connecting the users to the 
operators network. The link to the macrocellular network is 
realized through a backhaul IP connection.  
A Femtocell Access Point (FAP) is similar in concept to 
the wireless access point used in wireless local area 
networks, and it is designed to be implemented by the user. It 
has a low transmit power of maximum 250 mW [5], in case 
it is used for the residential environment. The number of 
active users is limited in this case, and can be up to 5 [6]. 
Given the fact that this equipment has a reduced transmit 
power, it can be implemented with a much larger density 
than macrocell base stations. Thus, due to the high 
deployment frequency, previous results show an enhanced 
spectral efficiency [4]. 
In the local area networks domain, the high density of 
equipment and users operating in the unlicensed ISM band 
has forced standardization bodies to search for alternatives to 
the current implementations. A possible solution is 
considered the implementation of the WLAN concept in the 
60 GHZ frequency band. The 60 GHz millimeter wave 
technology is relatively new on the market and hopes to 
fulfill the needs of users for gigabit-scale traffic. The strong 
interest in the 57 – 66 GHz frequency band [7] is shown by 
the recent industrial and standard development efforts made 
by international standardization bodies like ECMA TC48, 
IEEE 802.15.3c and the proposed IEEE 802.11 VHT60 Task 
Group [8]. 
The high interest is due to the large bandwidth which is 
unmatched in any of the lower frequency bands [9]. Figure 1 
shows 
the 
available 
spectrum 
for 
indoor 
wireless 
communications around the world. The fact that this band is 
unlicensed and largely harmonized across most regulatory 
regions in the world is a big advantage in comparison to the 
narrower spectrum available in other frequency bands, like 
2.4 GHz and 5 GHz, available for 802.11 standards. Both 
ECMA and 15.3c employ a channel plan that consists in 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

dividing the available spectrum into 2.16 GHz frequency 
bands for each channel. 
 
Figure 1.  The available spectrum for indoor wireless communications in 
the 60 GHz band around the world 
Both technologies present high perspectives for future 
implementations, offering  important benefits to the users. 
They both try to enhance the user experience by offering 
higher data rates, one for wireless local area networks, the 
other for radio mobile communications.  
Given the tendency of developers to integrate and unify 
the current technologies, the 60 GHz WLAN and femtocell 
networks, offer real perspectives, but it depends on the users 
choice, regarding which will have the best advantage.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section 
II, we present a comparative study between the two 
technologies, regarding some technical aspects encountered 
in the implementation process. In Section III, we consider a 
case study involving an indoor office environment in which 
the two networks will be implemented and studied. An 
analysis is done regarding aspects like the obtained coverage, 
the resulting interference or the attenuations introduced by 
the environment objects. Finally, Section IV concludes the 
paper and presents some future aspects.     
II. 
COMPARISON OF TECHNICAL ASPECTS 
The fact that both technologies address the same market 
segment, i.e., that of the clients situated in the indoor 
environment 
which 
need 
enhanced 
data 
rates 
for 
communication, constitutes an important start point in 
developing a solid comparison. Being in the early stages of 
network implementations, offers the possibility to have a 
much wider view concerning the research in these domains. 
In this way, the development of common points can be 
realized, leading in the future to the integration of these two 
types of technologies, in order to enhance the quality of 
service experienced by the client. 
In 
this 
section, 
we 
will 
emphasize 
the 
main 
characteristics of the two technologies regarding some key 
aspects 
like 
the 
integration 
with 
the 
existing 
implementations, the connectivity to the current networks, 
mobility and handover possibilities and also interference 
within the deployed network or with the existing one. 
A. Integration with the existing implementations 
Regarding the 60 GHz WLAN technology, possibilities 
of integration with existing 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz wireless 
LANs, represent a major research topic; this is primarily due 
to the high costs, which result in the implementation of a 
purely 60 GHz network, as we will see later in the paper. The 
authors of [9] present a method to integrate the three WLAN 
technologies, facilitating the commercialization of equipment 
operating in triple band. Using this, the client can choose the 
operating frequency depending on the needs and the 
environment: 2.4 GHz for applications with reduced needs, 5 
GHz for applications regarding confidential traffic and 60 
GHz for high transfer rate applications. Thus, a mandatory 
enhancement of the equipment and terminals used must be 
done, in order to facilitate the implementation of the new 60 
GHz technology. This, however, would not be an easy task 
given the fact that most of the current access points operating 
in the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz frequency bands, have 
omnidirectional antennas, which, in the case of the 60 GHz 
technology, is not a well suited option because of the high 
attenuation of the waves transmitted on this frequency. Thus, 
especially for Non-Line of Sight (NLOS) communications, 
antennas with higher gains are mandatory in order to reach 
the receiver. The use of the omnidirectional antennas for the 
60 GHz operating frequency would be viable only for direct 
Line of Sight (LOS) communications, which is not always 
the case in real life scenarios. The addition of new antennas 
will rise up the costs, leading to a poorer interest in the 
technology. Therefore, different approaches need to be 
found. 
In the case of the femtocell networks, the transmitters 
must integrate into the existing cellular architecture with no 
modifications to the first. Thus, the existing terminals must 
be able to connect to the femtocell with no enhancements 
needed. The fact that the femtocells use the same operational 
frequency as the macro network is an important advantage. 
However, architectural modifications need to be done in 
order to cope with the femtocell concept. Given the 
opportunistic nature of the femtocell deployment, meaning 
that the femtocell base stations are implemented by the user, 
and not by the operator, one may not be able to predict their 
location; thus, radio planning simulations, prior to the actual 
deployment, can not be done in order to enhance the 
operation. Therefore, a new entity must be defined in order 
to manage and enhance the functionality of femtocells 
among them, and within the core network. This entity is 
called the Femto GW and it is the preferred option by the 
standardization bodies [10]. Its main role is to manage and 
control the operation of  the active femtocells. Among its 
functionalities are: assuring a secure connection between the 
femtocell base station and the core network (CN), providing 
support for paging and handover procedures, transparent 
transfer of Layer 3 messages between the User Equipment 
(UE) and core network. A more detailed description of the 
structure and roles of the Femto GW or Home NodeB GW, 
in the 3GPP terminology, is given in [11] and [12]. The 
Femto GW interfaces towards the other entities of the 
network are defined in [13], [14] and [15].   
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

The dual mode operation Wi-Fi/ 3G is not needed in the 
case of using femtocells, but this could be a further research 
topic regarding the integration of femtocells and 60 GHz 
equipment within the same device. 
B. Connectivity to the current networks 
Maybe the most important issue regarding the 60 GHz 
WLAN concept is represented by the short coverage area of 
a transmitter. It is well known that the waves emitted within 
the 60 GHz frequency band are very much attenuated by the 
surrounding environment and also by the oxygen, because of 
the fact that this frequency is the resonance frequency for 
oxygen. A detailed study of the attenuations involved is 
presented in [8]. Therefore, a concrete wall, for example, 
acts as an isolator for the radio waves, introducing an 
attenuation of up to 40 dB [16], depending on the width of 
the obstacle. Practically, in order to implement a 60 GHz 
WLAN network, a transmitter needs to be implemented in 
each room of the indoor environment. Thus, we can clearly 
say, without creating an abuse of terms, that the 60 GHz 
WLAN acts as a cellular WLAN. In [16], Genc et al. present 
an architecture for this kind of network, in which the 
transmitters are connected through fiber optics. Considering 
this, we can establish a common point between the femtocell 
concept and the 60 GHz WLAN, taking into consideration 
that the femtocell network is connected to the core network 
of the operator through a similar backhaul connection. Figure 
2 presents a practical generic architecture that can be 
implemented for both technologies. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Generic architecture for 60 GHz and femtocell networks 
In each case, an AP-MS (Access Point Management 
System) must be developed in order to coordinate the 
functioning of the transmitters. Both types of technologies 
use a backhaul connection in order to connect to the existing 
infrastructure, i.e., the core network (CN) in the case of the 
cellular communication network, and respectively the 
network of the Internet Service Provider (ISP) for the case of 
the wireless local area network. The existing mechanisms to 
integrate an AP into a WLAN must be modified in order to 
cope with the characteristics of the 60 GHz technology. The 
access mechanisms used until now in WLANs, CSMA/CA 
can no longer be used given the fact that due to the isolation 
created by the environment, the 60 GHz cells will have very 
little superimposing of the coverage areas, thus the receivers 
can detect only one transmitter in any point in the 
environment. In the case of the femtocells, a Femto GW 
device has been developed which enables the access points 
to communicate with the core network and between them. 
Practically, a femtocell is seen by the terminal as another 
macrocell, and therefore the handover process may remain 
the same, except for the fact that it is realized through the 
Femto GW. 
C. Mobility and handover possibilities 
When a wireless local area network is implemented in a 
specific location, the user must have the desired mobility 
rights. Given the fact that the superimposing of the coverage 
areas is very small in the 60 GHz technology, especially near 
windows or doors, the handover process from one transmitter 
to another needs to be done in this area. Thus, a very fast 
handover procedure needs to be done in order to maintain the 
connection of a user passing from one room to another. One 
such solution is given in [16], which proposes that WLAN 
cells should be grouped in such a way that all the cells in a 
specific group transmit the same information on the same 
channel. Using this, we obtain larger cells that may be 
planned easier, in such a way that the superimposing of the 
coverage areas is enlarged, making it easier for the handover 
procedure to be realized. 
In the case of the femtocell concept, things are different. 
It mainly depends on what access mechanism the femtocells 
use: in open access mode, all the users of the macrocellular 
network are able to connect to the femtocell, thus a handover 
procedure can be done; in closed access mode, the outside 
users are not allowed to connect to the femtocell device, and 
in this case the FAP acts as an important interference source. 
The scientific literature proposes also a hybrid mode, in 
which full access is given to the registered users (sub-
scribers), while the non-subscribers are allowed only limited 
access to the resources, for minimal applications [17]. 
However, even when considering the open access mode, the 
large number of handovers which a mobile user may 
experience while passing through the coverage areas of 
several femtocells, may lead to increased signaling on the 
network, which degrades the performance. The authors of [6] 
present an algorithm which may be used in order minimize 
the core network signaling. 
D. Interference Issues 
One important issue in designing any cellular network is 
represented by the interference which occurs between the 
transmitters, at the receivers site.  
In the case of the purely 60 GHz WLAN, interference is 
not a problem given the fact that a cell created by a 
transmitter is isolated by the environment obstacles. This is 
due to the high attenuations created by the objects in the 
surrounding environment on the waves operating on this 
frequency. In the case of a combined 2.4 GHz and 60 GHz 
network, the principle is the same for the 60 GHz 
transmitters, while for the ones operating at 2.4 GHz, the 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

access mechanism used, CSMA/CA avoids the negative 
impact of the interference between the transmitters. 
However, this issue is of critical importance while 
implementing a femto-macro network. Here, interference 
between the femtocell and macrocell layers occurs, due to 
the closed access mechanism implemented in the femtocell. 
Using this, only subscribers are allowed to connect to the 
femtocell. For the other macrocell users that enter the 
coverage area of a femtocell, this acts as a powerful 
interference source  which can degrade de QoS experienced 
by the user in such a way that it could lead to outage. Other 
types of interference are represented by the interference 
caused by a MacroBS to user that is connected to a FAP and 
results in a downgrade of the SINR level; interference caused 
by a macro user on the uplink communication, to a FAP, or 
even femto-to-femto interference which can occur in dense 
urban areas where femtocells can be deployed close to each 
other. In the femtocell domain, ways of reducing the cross- 
and co-tier interference represents the major research topic. 
Several possibilities have been presented in papers like [18]-
[21]. However, a stable and final solution has not yet been 
found, but research is currently making important progress. 
III. 
CASE STUDY DEPLOYMENT   
In this section, we will concentrate on the behaviour of 
the two technologies described above, from the radio 
propagation point of view. Therefore, we will analyze the 
impact of deploying both the 60 GHz WLAN access points 
and the cellular communications femtocell access point. In 
order to have a better understanding of the impact resulted 
from the deployment of each technology, we will consider 
the same environment conditions for both cases.  
The scenario involved in this experiment consists of an 
indoor office environment, in which the two technologies 
will be deployed. The environment and the simulations are 
realized using the RPS (Radiowave Propagation Simulator) 
program [22], a tool which is no longer available under this 
brand, but the same functionalities are encountered in the 
tool provided by Actix [23].  
 
Figure 3.  The deployment scenario 
The medium is built in the Environment Editor, a 
program similar to AutoCAD [24], which enables the 
construction to be realized on layers, each of them being 
characterized by a series of parameters: thickness, electrical 
permittivity, the possibility to allow or not penetrations, 
diffractions or reflections. The environment consists of an 
office scenario in which the effects of the presence of the 
outer and inner walls, of the windows and doors, are taken 
into consideration in the evaluation of the coverage. The 
environment is very complex from the point of view of the 
types of materials used: concrete, brick, reinforced wood, 
wood, glass, and we have even simulated the presence of the 
human body, which has an important effect especially on the 
60 GHz wireless local area network.  The created scenario is 
illustrated in Figure 3. 
In order assure a sufficient coverage of the environment 
using only transmitters that must operate at the 60 GHz 
frequency, the resulting network would be extremely costly, 
resulting in a number of up to 27 transmitters. The technical 
parameters of each one are presented in Table 1, taken from 
[4]. 
TABLE I.  
TECHNICAL PARAMETERS OF THE 60 GHZ TRAMSMITTERS 
Orientation of 
the antenna 
Tx 
name 
Antenna 
type 
Phi 
Theta 
Antenna 
height 
[m] 
Tx power 
[dBm] 
Tx1 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx2 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx3 
Patch 
45 
0 
3 
12 
Tx4 
Patch 
330 
0 
3 
12 
Tx5 
Patch 
280 
0 
3 
12 
Tx6 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx7 
Patch 
135 
0 
3 
12 
Tx8 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx9 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx10 
Patch 
220 
0 
3 
12 
Tx11 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx12 
Patch 
45 
0 
3 
12 
Tx13 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx14 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx15 
Patch 
270 
0 
3 
12 
Tx16 
Patch 
270 
0 
3 
12 
Tx17 
Patch 
110 
0 
3 
12 
Tx18 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx19 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx20 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx21 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx22 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx23 
Patch 
270 
0 
3 
12 
Tx24 
Omni 
0 
0 
3 
12 
Tx25 
Horn 
260 
0 
3 
12 
Tx26 
Patch 
180 
0 
2 
12 
Tx27 
Horn 
90 
0 
2 
12 
 
A sample snapshot of the level of the received signal 
strength for the deployment of the 60 GHz WLAN access 
points is presented in Figure 4. One may notice the strong 
attenuations introduced by the environment upon the signal 
waves transmitted with the 60 GHz frequency. Practically, in 
order to assure the coverage in all the indoor environment, at 
least one transmitter is necessary in each closed area. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Moreover the presence of the human body significantly 
attenuates the level of the received signal strength. 
That is why such a solution is not feasible, and the 
proposed solution presented also in [4], would be to combine 
the 60 GHz technology with the existing 2.4 GHz network. 
The placement of the 60 GHz transmitters in only a few 
points of the environment would ease the implementation 
and help reduce costs. 
However, such a solution needs to be supported by the 
ability to integrate these two types of wireless LANs. 
Practically, we have implemented a 2.4 GHz network in all 
the environment, able to offer services for users that need 
support for common applications, while the 60 GHz network 
is implemented in only a few key points of the environment, 
like conference rooms, executives offices, etc., able to 
support the need for high data rates applications like video 
conferences or the transfer of large files. 
 
Figure 4.  Level of received signal strength for the 60 GHZ WLAN. 
The same scenario considering a femtocell-macrocell 
network would imply a different approach. Considering a 
macrocell network already deployed in the exterior of the 
building, the complicated structure of the scenario and 
simulations done, which reveal a poor indoor coverage of the 
macrocellular approach, demonstrate the need to implement 
a femtocell transmitter. By doing this, with only one 
femtocell transmitter, the coverage inside the office building 
is assured with good results. The technical parameters of the 
deployed transmitters are presented in Table 2. 
Considering 
the 
cellular 
network 
implementation 
standard as being UMTS, the operating frequency chosen is 
considered to be 2 GHz. The considered macrocellular base 
station is placed at a distance of 550 meters from the indoor 
environment, while the femtocells are placed in the 
environment, at various positions such that they will assure a 
sufficiently high level of the received signal strength . The 
considered transmit power is 43 dBm for the MacroBS and 
20 dBm for the FAPs. In case of the FAPs, an adaptive 
power control algorithm would be necessary to reduce the 
cross-tier interference that occurs between the femtocells and 
macrocell respectively. 
TABLE II.  
TECHNICAL PARAMETERS OF THE CELLULAR NETWORK 
TRANSMITTERS 
Parameter 
MacroBS 
FAP 
Antenna type 
UMTS 
30.03 
Sector antenna 
Omnidirectional 
Antenna Gain 
1 dB 
0 dB 
Polarization 
Linear vertical 
Linear vertical 
Phi = 90 deg. 
Phi = 0 deg. 
Orientation 
of 
the 
antenna 
Theta = 0 deg 
Theta = 0 deg 
Antenna height 
7 meters 
3 meters 
Transmit power 
43 dBm 
20 dBm 
Carrier frequency 
2 GHz 
2 GHz 
Distance to the indoor 
location 
boundary 
(window) 
550 meters 
Variable, depending 
on position 
 
A sample snapshot of the level of the received signal 
strength coming from the femtocell base stations is presented 
in Figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Level of received signal strength for the femto-macro network. 
One may notice that in order to assure coverage inside 
the indoor environment only three femtocell base stations are 
necessary, considering also that we benefit from the outdoor 
signal of the macrocell base station. Therefore, from the 
point of view of the user, the cost are significantly lower in 
the case of using the femtocell solution, rather than the 60 
GHz WLAN, mainly because of the much lower number of 
transmitters needed to cover that certain area. 
The complex nature of the environment influences the 
coverage differently in the cases of the two technologies. 
Therefore, one important factor because of which we need 
such a high number of transmitters in case of the WLAN, 
necessary to cover the scenario, is represented by the 
attenuation created by the environment to the traveling 
waves. Table 3, presents a comparative study between the 
attenuations that occur for the 60 GHz and 2 GHz, 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

respectively. One interesting fact here, consists in the 
attenuation introduced by the human body to the waves 
operating at 60 GHz. As mentioned before, the 60 GHz 
frequency is the resonance frequency for oxygen, and given 
the fact that the human body is constituted in a high 
proportion out of water, such an obstacle practically creates 
isolation to a receiver situated behind it. 
TABLE III.  
ATTENUATIONS INTRODUCED BY THE ENVIRONMENT 
Attenuation introduced [dBm] 
Obstacle 
2 GHz 
60 GHz 
Outer wall (Concrete 40 cm) 
27 ~ 30 
No detectable signal 
Inner wall  (Glass 3cm) 
3 ~ 4 
10 ~ 12 
Inner wall  (Brick 10 cm) 
16 ~ 19 
No detectable signal 
Door  (Glass 2 cm) 
2.5 ~ 4 
3 ~ 5 
Cubicles (Wood 5 cm) 
3.5~ 5 
18 ~ 23 
Door  (Reinforced wood 3 cm) 
23 ~ 25 
No detectable signal 
Human body 
13 
No detectable signal 
 
Considering these results, one important factor when 
choosing between one technology or the other is represented 
by the costs of the deployment at the user. Therefore, when 
implementing a combined 60 GHz – 2.4 GHz WLAN, the 
user would need to support the entire cost of the equipment. 
Even though the 60 GHz transmitters are positioned only in a 
few points in the environment, and with the research done in 
using the CMOS technology to develop these transmitters, 
the overall cost of the WLAN network would exceed that of 
choosing the femtocell technology. In this latter case, the 
user would need to acquire only the FAP, which is by 
definition of low cost; thus, the investment is minimal.  
With the development of the new cellular standards like 
LTE 
and 
WiMAX 
combined 
with 
the 
femtocell 
implementation which assures the necessary radio coverage 
in the indoor environment, the user would be able to obtain 
comparable or even higher data rates, than by using the 2.4 
GHz WLAN system. Another advantage in favor of the 
femtocell is that the handsets need no additional 
improvements in order to work using the femtocell 
technology considering the same operating frequency, while 
for  the 60 GHz technology the terminals would need 
additional improvements in order to facilitate this operation. 
But, the femtocell technology will never be able to 
achieve the high data rates offered by the 60 GHz WLAN. 
Therefore, when choosing one technology or the other the 
user must decide if it is worth to invest in a costly network, 
but which offers great transfer rates, or if its requirements 
can be supported by a less costly network, capable of 
assuring sufficient transfer rates. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The goal of the paper was to realize a comparison 
between two upcoming new technologies that will be 
available on the market in the next few years: the 60 GHz 
technology with direct applications in the wireless local area 
networks domain, and the femtocell technology which will 
be implemented in order to enhance the coverage and 
capacity of the existing macrocellular networks.  
Both technologies offer good advantages for the users: 
the 60 GHz WLAN offers great transfer rates, unmatched by 
any of the existing technologies; while the femtocell concept 
enhances the coverage of cellular networks leading to a 
higher QoS level at the receiver site, offering the possibility 
to obtain good transfer rates, enhances the capacity of the 
network by managing a part of the users that were normally 
handled by the macrocell, all of these with the advantage of 
mobility. Therefore, the femtocell is advantageous for both 
the operator and the user.  
But, besides these benefits, the mentioned technologies 
have some drawbacks as well: in the case of the 60 GHz 
network, the major issue refers to the fact that the coverage 
of a transmitter is limited by the closed environment it is 
placed in. Also, another relevant problem  is represented by 
the handover of a user between two transmitters, mainly 
because of the little superimposing of the coverage areas of 
two adjacent cells..  
For the femtocell concept, the major problem relates to 
the interferences that occur between the femtocellular and 
macrocellular layers. This issue will probably be resolved in 
the near future due to the extensive research done in this 
domain in the last few years. 
Therefore, in the mass market implementation the 
femtocell concept will outrank the 60 GHz WLAN, due to its 
low cost and mobility advantage that it provides. This does 
not mean that the 60 GHz WLAN will disappear from the 
market, on the contrary, its implementation will address 
more high demanding applications most likely for the 
technological and research domains. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was supported by the project "Doctoral 
studies in engineering sciences for developing the knowledge 
based society-SIDOC” contract no. POSDRU/88/1.5/S/ 
60078, project co-funded from European Social Fund 
through Sectorial Operational Program Human Resources 
2007-2013. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Information/WORK_PLAN/Description_Rel
eases/, [retrieved March  2012]. 
[2] 
http://standards.ieee.org/about/get/802/802.16.html, [retrieved March  
2012]. 
[3] 
V. Chandrasekhar, J. G. Andrews and A. Gatherer, “Femtocell 
Networks: A Survey”, The University of Texas at Austin Texas 
Instruments, June 28, 2008. 
[4] 
C. Androne, T. Palade and E. Puschita, “Open Loop Sensor based 
System used for Mitigation of Cross-tier Interference in Femtocell 
Networks ”, Proc. of  TELFOR 2010, Belgrade, Serbia. 
[5] 
3GPP TR 36.814, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA); Further advancements for E-UTRA physical layer aspects” 
Version 9, 2010. 
[6] 
J. Zhang and G. de la Roche, “Femtocells, Technologies and 
Deployments”, Wiley, 2010. 
[7] 
http://www.mmwaves.com/products.cfm/product/20-194-0.htm, 
[retrieved March 2012]. 
[8] 
L. L. Yang, “60 GHz : Opportunity for Gigabit WPAN and WLAN 
Convergence”, , Intel Corporation, January, 2009. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[9] 
C. Androne and T. Palade, “Radio Coverage and Performance 
Analysis for Local Area Networks’,  Proc. of ISETC 2010, Timisoara, 
Romania. 
[10] 3GPP TR R3.020, “Home (e)NodeB; Network Aspects,” Sept. 2008. 
[11] TS 43.318, ”Generic Access Network (GAN) Stage 2”, Rel-5. 
[12] TS 44.318, “Generic Access Network (GAN); Mobile GAN Interface 
Layer 3 Specification”, Rel-5. 
[13] TS 25.410, “UTRAN Iu Interface: General Aspects and Principles”, 
Rel-5. 
[14] TS 25.450, “UTRAN IuPC Interface General Aspects and 
Principles”, Rel-5. 
[15] TS 25.419, “UTRAN IuBC Interface: Service Area Broadcast 
Protocol (SABP)”, Rel-5. 
[16] Z. Genc, B. L. Dang, J. Wang and I. Niemegeers “Home networking 
at 60 GHz: Challenges and Research issues”, IFIP International 
Federation for Information Processing, 2008, Volume 256/2008, pp. 
51-68.,. 
[17] H. Claussen, L. T. W. Ho, and L. G. Samuel, “Self-Optimization of 
Coverage for Femtocell Deployments,” Proc. Wireless Telecommun. 
Symposium (WTS ‘08) (Pomona, CA, 2008), pp. 278–285. 
[18] V. Chandrasekhar, J. G. Andrews, T. Muharemovic, Z. Shen and A. 
Gatherer, “Power Control in Two-tier Femtocell Networks,” IEEE 
Trans. Wireless Comm., vol. 8, no. 7, July 2009. 
[19] Z. Shi, M. C. Reed and M. Zhao, “On Uplink Interference Scenarios 
in Two-Tier Macro and Femto Co-existing UMTS Networks,” 
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communicaion and Networking, Vol. 
2010, Article No. 4, January 2010. 
[20] X. Li, L. Qian and D. Kataria, “Downlink Power Control in Co- 
Channel Macrocell Femtocell overlay,” Proc. of 43rd Annual 
Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, pp. 383 – 388, 
2009. 
[21] V. Chandrasekhar, M. Kountouris and J. G. Andrews, “Coverage in 
Multi-Antenna Two-Tier Networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Comm., 
vol. 8, no. 10, 2009. 
[22] http://www.mindservices.com.au/index.php?option=com_content&vi
ew=article&id=85:rf-planningtoolls&catid=65:library-references 
&Itemid=61, [retrieved March 2012]. 
[23] http://www.actix.com/our-products/radioplan/index.html, 
[retrieved 
March 2012]. 
[24] RPS manual, available with RadioWave Propagation Simulator kit. 
 
 
 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

