Application of Mobile Technology in Delivery Process of Postal Operator 
 
Juraj Vaculík  
AIDC lab, Faulty of operation and economy of transport and 
communication, University of Zilina 
Zilina, Slovakia 
email: juraj.vaculik@fpedas.uniza.sk  
Marián Chladný  
AIDC lab, Faulty of operation and economy of transport and 
communication, University of Zilina  
Zilina, Slovakia 
email: chladny@fpedas.uniza.sk 
 
 
Abstract—This 
paper 
focuses 
on 
the 
possibility 
of 
implementing 
Radio 
Frequency 
Identification 
(RFID) 
technology in logistic processes with a focus on the final phase 
of delivery to the addressee. Via SMS, the addressee is 
informed that he will receive a delivery, and our intention is 
that the sender is also notified by SMS when the consignee is 
taken over. The intention of our work is to improve the postal 
services using modern technology.  
Keywords-RFID 
Technology; 
Mobile 
Services; 
Postal 
Operators; Process of Delivery 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
It is important for people to be informed - to obtain and 
receive information when they need it and on what interest 
them. In the current era of information technology, it is not a 
problem to obtain needed information and also to provide 
them. In our research, we focused on the new technology in 
the postal sectors and on the final phase of delivery. The 
proposed solution of delivery (a letter or parcel) is by using 
RFID technology that gives an identifier to each shipment - 
tag by which it is possible to track the shipment. In reality, it 
means that the recipient is informed about the coming 
consignment via SMS in advance. Moreover, when the 
delivery is completed, the sender receives the confirmation.  
Although the possibility of notification via SMS is not 
new, in our research, we strive for interoperability between 
different technologies. One technology may not be sufficient, 
but the correct application of specific technologies can bring 
the desired value added. In our case, we focus on 
combination of RFID technology and mobile communication 
in postal processes.  
Presently, one of the challenges in SMS notifications is 
that only the recipient of the consignment is being informed 
of the status of delivery - SMS is a tool for one way 
notification only. Our aim is to apply this technology 
throughout the processing chain, from point to point. This 
way, sender as well as recipient is being updated on the 
status of delivery or the delivery can be optimized in advance 
(e.g., receiving the information from recipient about being 
out of town for next three days). 
At present, the provision of added value to customers and 
the use of advanced innovative technologies can be 
considered as the greatest competitive advantage, especially 
when the companies engaged in the logistics, do not only sell 
products (e.g., delivery from one place to another), but they 
also provide the related services (e.g., notification on 
delivery status, insurance, etc.). Therefore, it is necessary to 
use modern technology which not only saves time when 
handling goods, but also improves the processes of serving 
the end customers. 
The main objective of our research was to confirm the 
assumed interoperability in laboratory environment. In 
Section II, we shortly discuss the usability of RFID 
technology 
in 
practice. 
The 
possibilities 
of 
SMS 
communication is being discussed in Section III. Finally, in 
Section IV, we describe the proposed solution of 
implementation of these technologies in the present postal 
processes.  
II. 
TECHNOLOGY BACKGROUND 
RFID identifier, by which the shipment can be 
monitored, is assigned to each consignment. It is one of the 
key components used in providing information to the 
recipient and sender via SMS. Another key component is of 
course SMS server that arranges the whole communication.  
The advantage of RFID system is that it can be used in 
environments where the humidity, temperature, dust or 
vibrations are preventing the use of bar codes. 
RFID system consists of two basic parts: readers and 
RFID identifiers (carriers of information). The identifiers can 
be active (containing power supply, e.g., battery) or passive. 
The reader is the crucial component of the RFID system.  
Depending on the particular application, it may be stationary 
or mobile. Readers in RFID systems have two functions. The 
first is to broadcast the RF signal and the other is to receive 
information from the RFID identifiers. This information is 
sent to the superior information system, where it is then 
processed. The broadcasted RF signal has two functions as 
well. The first is to ensure detection of an RFID identifier. 
This function is similar for passive and active systems. The 
second function is important in systems using passive chips. 
In these cases, the magnetic field created by the reader is 
used to obtain the energy necessary to send the signal from 
the RFID tags back to reader. Return signal is modulated by 
the information that is stored in it. Some systems used in 
stores for guarding the goods by Electronic Article 
Surveillance (EAS) operate in a manner very similar to 
RFID, although the information is bistable (on/off).  
Complex systems can process additional information 
obtained from RFID tags, such as temperature, position, etc. 
In order to store additional information, RFID tag needs to 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

be equipped with supplementary circuits granting the 
mentioned operations (e.g., temperature sensor). The role of 
the RFID identifier is that when it comes within range of the 
reader, it sends identification. More complex identifiers are 
able to process significantly larger amount of information. 
Each identifier is composed of an antenna, transceiver and 
transponder. At Ultra high frequency (UHF) technology, 
antenna takes the largest part of the RFID identifier. With 
higher frequency band, the size of the antenna decreases. The 
role of the antenna is to receive and transmit the signals. 
When receiving a signal, antenna has double role. One role is 
to generate energy to power the identifier and the second role 
is to process the code which is used by tag in communication 
between the identifier and the reader. Transceiver unit is a 
device containing transmitter and receiver that share 
common circuits. The unit, complemented by the received 
signal, will create the energy necessary for the operation of 
the entire RFID identifier.  
III. 
POSSIBILITIES OF SMS COMMUNICATION 
This section talks about possibility to communicate 
through SMS server (Ozeki) and its connection to RFID 
middleware. 
A. Ozeki SMS Server 
In our laboratory for Automatic Identification and Data 
Capture (AIDC lab), we operate with Ozeki SMS Server. 
Ozeki Informatics Ltd. is a leading supplier of software for 
mobile messages. It offers a program easy to use and rich 
portfolio of telecommunications products for businesses and 
organizations. The company is actively working on 
providing further innovations that increase productivity. 
Using a Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM), 
modem and SMS Internet protocol (IP) technologies, 
products enhance productivity, flexibility, and provide 
significant advantages for professionals to create mobile 
communications services. The server offers two core 
modules: 
 
Short Message Service Point to Point (SMS-PP) - 
one SMS can contain up to 160 characters. Newer 
phones allow sending longer messages, but the 
sender's phone breaks up the longer message to short 
parts and receiving phone merges them into one 
again. Message is sent between two or multi phones 
or applications. 
 
 (SMS-CB) Short Message Service Cell Broadcast 
- these messages use the Cell Broadcast channels. 
They are used, for example, for weather forecasts, 
local news, and traffic situation or for determining 
the actual position. Message is sent to all phones in a 
given area that are turned on and CB is set to the 
appropriate channel. The maximum length of 
message is 93 characters. 
 
In the following part, we discuss the possibilities of the 
first module (SMS-CB): 
 
GSM modem is the core of GSM / General Packet 
Radio System (GPRS) Modem Connection (Fig. 1) 
that allows to use the mobile phone or wireless 
modem connected to the PC (using the data cable) to 
send and receive SMS messages. Mobile phone or 
modem must contain Subscriber Identification 
Module (SIM) cards, which can be bought from any 
GSM service provider. 
 
Figure 1.  Configuration of GSM modem  
 
IP SMS (Fig. 2) consists of protocols Computer 
Interface to Message Distribution (CIMD2) Connection 
(), SMPP Connection (Short Message Peer to Peer), 
UCP Connection Universal Computer Protocol / 
External Machine Interface (UCP / EMI) (Fig. 3). These 
protocols can be used to connect the computer directly 
to the Short Message Service Centre (SMSC) GSM 
service provider. This way, SMS messages can be sent 
and received via the Internet or private IP network. 
 
Figure 2.  IP SMS connection  
 
Figure 3.  UCP connection 
 
 
Pull Interface Connection - Short Message Peer-to-
Peer (SMPP) Push / Pull a special connection that 
implements Unstructured Supplementary Service 
Data (USSD) push / pull communication protocol-
based Comviva FLARES. This protocol can be used 
to connect the standard SMPP. 
 
HTTP Connection Server (HyperText Transfer 
Protocol Server) - enables service providers to use 
the HTTP protocol for the transmission of messages 
coming into operation. This technology is often used 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

in premium rated SMS services (Fig. 4). This 
connection can also be used as "virtual phone" for 
the purposes of software development. 
 
Figure 4.  Architecture of premium value services 
 
 
 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) Connection - 
Connecting the SMTP lets the user to send SMS 
messages via e-mail. Email connection for SMS is 
available with many mobile operators and IP based 
multichannel GSM gateway. 
 
Simple Network Paging Protocol (SNPP) Connection 
(Paging) - This protocol allows the user to send 
messages to pagers via the Internet. 
B. RFID middleware Aton mobile platform 
RFID middleware Aton uses a tool to send SMS. In this 
section, we show how both programs, Aton mobile platform 
(AMP) and Ozeki SMS server, have to be configured in 
order to mutually communicate and send SMS at the desired 
time. The graphical model of RFID information processing is 
stated in Fig. 5.   
 
Figure 5.  The basic structure of the proposed application 
The aim of the solution is the implementation of RFID 
technology in logistics processes with a focus on final 
processing of postal consignments. We focus on informing 
the sender and recipient on the status of the delivery. Via 
SMS, the addressee is informed that he will receive a 
delivery, and our intention is that the sender is also notified 
by SMS when the consignee is taken over. 
It is necessary to configure RFID middleware Aton and 
server Ozeki in the adequate way in order to send an SMS at 
the right time. 
Basic components of our proposed application are:  
 
 
TestDevice - detection gateway scanned tag passes 
through,  
 
Database - a set of tables where data is stored, 
 
InlineSelectProcessor - processor to access and 
read data from the database, 
 
MessageTransformer - processor which is used to 
transform the input message for the correct output, 
 
SMSSender - processor for sending SMS, 
 
Logger - processor that ensures the creation of 
output and logging data. 
 
The 
configuration 
parameters 
of 
SMSSender 
processor (Fig. 6) are set as: 
 
default.sender – OZEKI (name of service) 
 
smpp.password – abc123 
 
smpp.server – address of server 
 
smpp-username – admin 
 
sms.char.maxlength – 0 (without limit) 
 
 
Figure 6.  Settings of SMSSender processor 
Admin username and password ‘abc123’ is standardly 
preset in the software Ozeki. According to the needs, the user 
can change this information. For security reasons, Ozeki 
Company Ltd. recommends to change the name and 
password immediately after software setup. The possibility 
of smpp.server defines the path where the software Ozeki is 
available, for example: 
\\10.15.11.80\\Ozeki\OzekiNG - SMS Gateway. 
Form of message AMP sends to Ozeki 
<message> 
  <from>mobile number</from> 
  <to> 
    <address>number of addressee</address> 
    <address>number of sender</address> 
  </to> 
  <body> 
   text of message 
  </body> 
</message> 
Mobile number must be entered with international prefix 
(e.g., +421 905 555 555).  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

Form of message to be sent to addressee: 
<message> 
<from>+421915879503</from> 
<to><address>+421911870113</address></to> 
<body> Dear Customer. You received the shipment 
no. 1234, it will be delivered to your address 
tomorrow. For another method of service call 
hotline xxx 
</body> 
</message> 
Form of message to be sent to the sender once the 
delivery is taken over by addressee: 
<message> 
<from>+421915879503</from> 
<to><address>+4219114753278</address></to> 
<body> Dear Customer. The shipment no. 1234 
you sent on xx.yy.2016 has successfully seen 
delivered to the addressee.  
</body> 
</message> 
C. Technical components 
We have used a GSM modem Siemens MC35 which 
consists of an external GSM antenna, RS232 serial cable, 
SIM card and the AC adapter (Fig. 7). 
 
 
Figure 7.  Parts of GSM modem   
After installing the necessary Ozeki software, NG SMS 
Gateway is being installed (Fig. 8). 
 
 
Figure 8.  Module of Ozeki system 
After installing a particular module, it is necessary to 
configure the modem before the first connection. Once the 
Ozeki program is open, user will automatically find the 
necessary hardware installed on the computer. 
Fig. 9 shows Ozeki server detecting hardware on serial 
port COM3 (standard for this kind of modem connection).  
In next step, the software correctly retrieves the necessary 
parameters for connection. Consequently, it is necessary to 
set SMS center operator (we used the company Orange 
Slovakia, Inc.), operator number (+421 905 303 303) and 
mobile number of the SIM card (+421 915 879 503). Then, 
there is the possibility to set the modem name, in our case, 
we have chosen GSMModem0. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Name of GSM modem   
Once the configuration is completed, the creation of the 
actual SMS is enabled by choosing “Compose” option from 
menu. In the first selection field, we select the text type of 
SMS (not multimedia SMS, etc.), the mobile number of 
recipient and finally the actual text of message. When SMS 
system Ozeki is connected to the middleware AMP, the 
above described steps are redundant as the text of SMS will 
be imported directly from AMP. The picture of test SMS is 
visible in Fig. 10.  
 
 
Figure 10.  A demonstrative example of SMS messages  
As per Ozeki system configuration, each SMS is stored 
in database of sent SMS.  (Fig. 11). 
 
 
Figure 11.  Database record of sent SMS 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

IV. 
DESIGN OF MAIL DELIVERY PROCESS  
The following part describes the proposed process of 
mail delivery using RIFD technology with an emphasis on 
informing the recipient of the consignment via SMS, as well 
as the sender. The whole process of sending the confirmation 
SMS to the sender is triggered by the initial SMS message 
sent to the addressee (first database record about the 
consignment) and the actual final delivery. In case the 
consignment is not delivered directly to the recipient, but it 
needs to be e.g., picked up in person on post office, the 
system generates SMS informing the recipient about this 
fact. 
If the consignment is being delivered directly to the 
address of the recipient, the sender is informed about the 
successful delivery by the SMS message shown in Fig 12.  
 
Figure 12.  Confirmation message about successful delivery generated by 
Ozeki system 
As stated, there are different ways of making the delivery 
(via the postman, courier, in person pick up on the post 
office, etc.). In our designed process, the confirmation report 
(text differs by the way of actual delivery) is sent in form of 
SMS to the sender. This terminates the whole process of 
delivery. 
Example of processing and delivery of consignment 
using RFID technology and mobile network services that we 
have proposed and tested in our laboratory is pictured in Fig. 
13: 
1. Submission of shipment - The sender brings 
consignment to the delivery office in order to send it 
the recipient. 
2. Expedition of shipment – Except of standard 
information (name of the recipient, address,..), the 
shipment must contain the phone number of both, 
the recipient and the sender; at this point, the 
consignment is equipped by RFID tag carrying data 
that will be recognized by AMP middleware. 
3. Transportation by postal courses - at the beginning 
of transportation, RFID tag is scanned and 
information is inserted to the database together with 
the time and date of scanning and code number of 
the actual postal course.  
4. Delivery of shipments – delivery to target post 
office; RFID tag is scanned and database is updated; 
the necessary information is sent to Ozeki system. 
5. SMS message to recipient - Ozeki sends SMS 
message to the recipient; the system automatically 
sends SMS messages to all the addressees about the 
arrival of shipment to distribution center. 
6. Optional feedback of recipient – the recipient can 
inform the post office of being e.g. out of town so 
that the date and time of delivery is adjusted. 
7. Delivery to the recipient – Delivery of the 
consignment to the recipient (to particular address, 
by picking up the consignment at the post office, 
etc.) 
8. SMS message to sender - confirmation message 
about successful delivery is sent to sender. 
 
Figure 13.  Example of proposed process and delivery of consignment 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

V. 
CONCLUSION 
The current trend is to be constantly informed about 
everything that takes place around us. An enterprise, engaged 
in postal services, can improve its services and grant the 
access to more information for its customers by using the 
necessary technology. This is an advantage that will help to 
succeed in the competition for the end customer over the 
others competitors.  
We suggest the model of using RFID technology in the 
postal services. Our intention is that the recipient and the 
sender receive a text message with the shipment status. This 
can be arranged for any consignment in question. In our case, 
we opted for recommended letters or parcels that have been 
equipped with RFID identifier – a tag. The position of the 
shipment is not only tracked, but our designed system can 
also provide reports and send information via SMS. 
Addressee receives the message at the time when the 
consignment reaches the distribution center, so that the 
recipient can choose the method of the delivery. Sender is 
informed about the successful delivery once the shipment is 
taken over.  
Our proposed solution is the combination of RFID 
technology and mobile communication granted via Ozeki 
system. This combination has been proven as the most      
suitable during tests in our laboratory environment. RFID tag 
is the key element of our solution as it carries the essential 
information needed for future processing. Because of this, 
every consignment needs to be equipped by RFID tag. 
Additional information can be included if needed (name, 
address, telephone number); otherwise this information is 
accessible in the database. 
Although we are aware of the financial cost of the 
proposed solution, the level of value added makes the 
investment very attractive. They key features are the 
improvement of information flow, improvement of customer 
service, the possibility of immediate feedback and last but 
not least, it can contribute to the significant delivery time 
reduction. 
The process we propose needs to be perceived as only the 
beginning of future research. It is possible to develop 
solutions such as mobile applications for smartphones used 
for communication with postal operator, to generate new 
services such as Just-in-Place (sending the coordinates of the 
current position) or delivery within the specified time and 
many more. It would be possible to add a workaround for 
sharing the feedback (for example to determine the quality of 
the service or the satisfaction of users). However, these are 
solutions which we are working are the subjects of our future 
research.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
E!7592 AUTOEPCIS - RFID Technology in Logistic 
Networks of Automotive Industry.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Friedlos: Royal Mail posts RFID tags to monitor deliveries. 
[online]. 
[quoted 
6.3.2010]. 
Available 
on 
Internet: 
<http://www.computing.co.uk/computing/ news/2161216/royal-mail-
posts-rfid-tags>. 
[2] S. L. Garfinkel RFID Security and Privacy. [online]. [quoted 
27.3.2010]. Available on Internet: <http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd-
/18/53/35473108.pdf>. 
[3] R. Haq RFID technology in the postal sector. [online]. [quoted 
6.3.2010]. 
Available 
on 
Internet: 
<www.arabian-
supplychain.com/article-2619-rfid_technology_in_the_postal_-
sector/>. 
[4] M. Chladny: Applications of RFID technology in logistics of postal 
operators, diploma thesis, University of Zilina, 2014 
[5] J. Tengler: System for receiving and delivery with the use of RFID 
technology and mobile network services, disertation thesis, 
University of Zilina, 2013 
[6] R. Wessel: Swiss Post Deliveres RFID to Its Parcel Centers, 
Transportation Hubs. [online]. [quoted 6.3.2010]. Available on 
Internet: 
<http://www.rfidjournal.com/ 
article/articleview/-
4270/1/1>.Slovak post, a.s. [online]. [quoted 2014] available on 
Internet 
[7] Wordwide support OZEKI. [online] [quoted 2014] Available on 
Internet.  
[8] OZEKI Informatics Ltd. [online]. [quoted 2014] Available on Internet 
[9] J. Vaculík and J. Tengler: Analysis of the process of identification of 
mail and making them more effective in terms of transport. IPoCC. 
Pardubice 2010. P.303 -308, ISBN 978-80-86530-68-0. 
[10] J. Vaculík and I. Michálek: RFID middleware and web postal 
services, Future role of postal services in the face of new market 
conditions and communication technologies. Pardubice: University of 
Pardubice, 2008, p.152 - 157, ISBN, 978-80-7395-144-3. 
 
 
 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

