Equal Gain Combining SC-FDMA Performance over Correlated Shadowed Rice 
Land Mobile Satellite Channel 
 
Jyoti Gangane1, Mari-Carmen Aguayo-Torres2, Juan Sánchez-Sánchez3, Francisco Blánquez-Casado4 
1,2,4Communications Engineering Dept, 3Ericsson SLU 
1,2,4University of Málaga 
1,2,3,4Málaga, Spain  
1ganganejyoti@gmail.com,2,4{aguayo,fbc}@ic.uma.es,3juan.jesus.sanchez.sanchez@ericsson.com 
 
 
Abstract— Single Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access 
(SC-FDMA) has shown robustness to multipath fading and 
similar characteristics to those of Orthogonal Frequency 
Division Multiple Access (OFDMA). The main advantage of 
SC-FDMA over OFDMA is its lower Peak to Power Average 
Ratio (PAPR). Because of this, Single Carrier Frequency 
Division Multiple Access has been proposed for transmission in 
Land Mobile Satellite (LMS) Systems. The link level 
performance of LMS system is diminished by rapid amplitude 
and phase variations of the received signal. These fluctuations 
are caused by multipath propagation and attenuation due to 
shadowing and can be alleviated by the use of diversity at 
receiver. In this paper, we have investigated SC-FDMA 
performance for Equal Gain Combining (EGC) diversity over 
a correlated Shadowed Rice LMS channel, a generalized Rice 
channel in which the Line of Sight is following Nakagami-m 
distribution and received echoes following an exponentially 
decreasing Power Delay Profile. We show that Interleaved SC-
FDMA performance is better than Localized SC-FDMA. 
Keywords- OFDMA;SC-FDMA;LOS;LMS;Shadowed Rice. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Satellite communication is growing fast in order to 
follow unpredictable increase in demand for improved 
quality 
of service, higher 
capacity 
and ubiquitous 
connectivity. Satellite networks with the terrestrial networks 
are showing fast and strong development. In this regard, the 
use of multicarrier modulation and Multiple Input Multiple 
Output (MIMO) [1] technology are very promising 
candidates to reduce bandwidth requirement and enhance 
capacity and data rates. MIMO technology offers many 
advantages, such as i) Multiuser diversity gain, (ii) Spatial 
multiplexing gain (iii) Coding gain, and Interference 
reduction [1]. 
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) 
has demonstrated to be competent technology for wireless 
communication. The major advantage of OFDM is its 
relatively simple method of handling frequency selective 
fading channels which are normally observed in wireless 
channels [2]. However, OFDM transmission has high Peak 
to Average Power Ratio (PAPR) which increases the power 
back up for operation of Linear Power Amplifier. There are 
many techniques to reduce the OFDM PAPR [3][4] and the 
outcome of that is DFT Spread OFDM [5]. 
Single Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access (SC-
FDMA) is a closely related transmission scheme with the 
same multipath fading mitigation characteristics as that of 
OFDM [6][7]. Though SC-FDMA has shown worse 
performance with Rayleigh fading [8], its performance has 
improved with increase in Line of Sight (LOS) in Rician 
fading [9]. 
SC-FDMA performs DFT spreading in the transmitter, 
before going to Inverse Discrete Fourier Transform (IDFT) 
[5]. The DFT operation in transmitter helps SC-FDMA to 
spread the energy of individual modulation symbols over a 
number of subcarriers in the DFT block. The transmitters in 
SC-FDMA system use different subcarrier to transmit 
information symbols. However, they transmit the subcarriers 
sequentially, instead of in parallel. In relation to OFDM, this 
arrangement 
reduces 
fluctuation 
in 
the 
transmitted 
waveform. Therefore, SC-FDMA signals have naturally 
lower PAPR. However, in a cellular system with severe 
multipath fading, the SC-FDMA signals arrive at the base 
station with inter symbol interference (ISI). At the receiver, 
adaptive frequency domain equalization is used to cancel ISI. 
Depending on how the DFT spread symbols are mapped 
onto the subcarriers in the IDFT block, mapping is classified 
into two types: localized and interleaved. In Localized-SC-
FDMA (L-SC-FDMA), each terminal uses a set of adjacent 
subcarriers to transmit its symbols [10]. In Interleaved-SC-
FDMA (I-SC-FDMA), the subcarriers used by the terminals 
are spread over the entire signal band, and occupied 
subcarriers are equidistant from each other. 
Diversity combining techniques such as Maximal Ratio 
Combining (MRC), Equal Gain Combining (EGC) and 
Selection Combining (SC) are used to mitigate fading in 
wireless channel. It is known that equal gain combing 
receiver yields similar performance to MRC, with lower 
implementation complexity. In an EGC combiner, the output 
of different diversity branches are first co-phased and then 
weighted equally before combining to give resultant output 
[11]. Co-phasing is required to avoid signal cancellation. 
The EGC performance analysis is found in [12]. A 
complete summary of most of the linked work is found in 
[13]. Frequency-Domain (FD) Amplify and Forward (AF) 
single relay SC-FDMA performance with EGC is studied in 
[14]. In [15], we studied the Equal Gain combing SC-FDMA 
performance over unshadowed Rice Land Mobile Satellite 
(LMS) channel.  
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents the system model. Section III describes the channel 
model used to carry out simulation. In Section IV, simulation 
results are presented. Finally, Section V provides the 
conclusion. 
II. 
CHANNEL MODEL 
The link level performance of LMS systems strongly 
depends on the transmission channel between the satellite 
and the mobile user. The statistical models for narrowband 
LMS channels can be classified into two types of fading: 
shadowed and unshadowed Rice fading. When the mobile 
receiver has a clear path to the satellite it is called 
unshadowed fading. In case of shadowed fading, the line of 
sight path is blocked by terrain, vegetation, or human-made 
structures. 
The first shadowed Rice model was proposed by Loo 
[16], where Line Of Sight (LOS) component follows 
lognormal distribution. In this paper, we have used the model 
discussed in [17], where they assumed that the power of LOS 
component is a gamma random variable. G. L Stuber et al. 
[18] discussed that the square root of a gamma variable has 
Nakagami-m distribution. 
In the used channel model, the scattered component of 
the received signal follows Rayleigh distribution and LOS 
follows a Nakagami-m distribution [17] as follows: 
 =	 
	

 −
2	
 
 
(1) 
 =	
2
ΓΩ 
 −
Ω
 
(2) 
where 2	 = 	E	  is the average power of scatter 
component, Γ	  is the gamma function,  = 		/
 !"	 ≥ 0  with  !".   as the variance, and Ω	 =
	E	is the average power of the LOS component. The 
shadowed Rice PDF [17] in terms of a Nakagami parameters 
is as follows: 
&" = 	 ' "
	

 " + )
2	
 *+ ,)	"
	
-. 
   
(3) 
where 	 is the expectation with respect to Y, and */	.  is 
the nth order modified Bessel’s function of the first kind. 
In the proposed satellite channel model, a fixed and 
sufficiently large number of rays are assumed, thus 
eliminating the need to use a Poisson distribution. Power 
Delay Profile (PDP) describes the numbers and position of 
echoes, as well as their average power. In Land Mobile 
system it is usual to consider an exponential PDP [19] with 
parameter 1234	such that the scattered received power for lth 
echo is as follows:  
 
6 =

789: 
,
;<
;89:- 
(4) 
  
For a rural environment, a typical value of	1234 is less than 
1	=> and less than 2 => for a suburban area [20]. The value 
of 1234 used in this paper is 1.17	=>. 
III. 
SYSTEM MODEL 
Figure 1 shows the block diagram of an EGC SC-FDMA 
transmitter-receiver. The input bits to be transmitted are 
converted in complex symbols (e.g. BPSK [8] or QAM [8]) 
using digital modulation techniques. The Nc-point DFT 
operation converts these complex symbols into precoded 
complex symbols 	?@A . The precoded symbols are then 
mapped on a subset of different allocated subcarriers per 
user, i.e., Nc out of M sub-carriers in which the total system 
bandwidth is divided. The mapping can be Interleaved (I-SC-
FDMA) or Localized (L-SCFDMA). After subcarrier 
mapping, a cyclic prefix (CP) is added and complex symbols 
are transmitted. We assume that CP is long enough so that 
the non zero echoes are fitted into it.  
At the receiver, after the removing the CP, the M-DFT 
operation converts the received symbol from the time 
domain to the frequency domain. The received signal is 
given by 
B/ = C/? + D/ 
(5) 
where E	F	{1,2, . . J&} represents the antenna index, J& being 
the number of antennas at the receiver, D/ is a noise vector 
whose entries are i.i.d. complex Gaussian LM0, NO and 
C/	 represents the M × M diagonal matrix whose entries are 
the channel frequency response as seen by the J&	 antennas 
for each allocated subcarrier [21]. These NR signals are 
frequency combined using EGC [21]. 
B =	
∑
B/	 ∗ 
−S ∗ !ETU
VW!TC/	
XY
/Z
	
∑
@Y |C/|
/Z
 
(6) 
after taking Nc-IDFT of YYYY, it is given to the detector. The 
output of detector is estimate of the input bits.  
IV. 
PERFORMANCE RESULTS 
In this section, simulation results are carried to evaluate 
BER performance for the SIMO (1× 2) EGC I-SC-FDMA 
and L-SC-FDMA over shadowed Rice LMS channel. The 
parameters used for simulation are shown in Tables I and II. 
TABLE I. SHADOWED RICE CHANNEL PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT FADING I 
  
bo	
m	
Ω	
Light 
shadowing 
0.158 
19.4 
1.29 
Heavy 
shadowing 
0.063 
0.739 
8.97e-04 
Average 
shadowing 
0.126 
10.1 
0.835 
Different shadowed conditions, Heavy, Light and Average 
are considered while carrying out the simulation. The SIMO 
(1× 2 EGC SC-FDMA performance has been evaluated for 
different antenna correlation factor, number of antennas at 
receiver, and allocated subcarriers. 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 2: BER performance of Interleaved SC-FDMA and Localized SC-FDMA for different antenna correlation factor: Average Shadow fading 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  EGC SC-FDMA Transmitter Receiver scheme 
TABLE II SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
FFT Size  
1024 
Modulation Techniques 
QPSK 
Carrier Frequency 
2.00GHz 
System Bandwidth 
20MHz 
Channel model 
Satellite LMS with 
exponential PDP 
Number of Antennas 
Used 
2, 4 
Equalizers used 
EGC 
1234 
1.17 =>  
  
 
 
Figures 2 and 3 show the BER performance of 
Interleaved SC-FDMA and Localized SC-FDMA for 
Average 
and 
Light 
fading. 
Interleaved 
SC-FDMA 
performance over Average and Light fading is better than 
that of Localized SC-FDMA. In light fading, the LOS 
component has more power than the multipath component. 
The light and average shadowed Rician distribution can be 
represented by the normal Rician distribution with a Rice 
factor of 5.3 and 4.1 dB, respectively [22]. 
Figure 4 shows the BER performance of Interleaved SC-
FDMA for Heavy fading. In case of Heavy fading the Line of 
Sight component has very low power, it behaves as good as 
Rayleigh fading. 
 
 
x 
X	
 
` 
S 
abc(t) 
Subcarrier 
Mapping 
M-IDFT 
P/S 
+ CP 
 
Jd-DFT 
e 
Subcarrier 
De Mapping 
Subcarrier 
De Mapping 
 
Remove CP 
S/P 
 
Remove CP 
S/P 
 
M-DFT 
M-DFT 
 
" 
"bc	(t) 
"bc	f 
Equal 
Gain 
Combining 
Jd-IDFT 
" 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: BER performance of Interleaved SC-FDMA and Localized SC-FDMA for different antenna correlation factor: Light Shadow fading 
Figure 4: BER performance of Interleaved SC-FDMA for different antenna correlation factor and different antennas at receiver: Heavy & Average 
Shadow fading 
 
Figure. 5: BER performance of Interleaved SC-FDMA and Localized SC-FDMA for different allocated subcarriers: Average Shadow fading 
 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Results have shown that performance is similar below certain 
antenna correlation threshold, for Light fading threshold is 
0.5. Note that the existence of LOS (quite powerful for Light 
fading) always provokes certain correlation between signals 
received at different antennas, thus the lack of spatial 
correlation does not further improve the BER performance. 
The results in Figure 4 shows that a higher number of 
receiving antennas improve BER performance over Average 
fading, as expected. 
In Figure 5, the performance for different number of 
allocated subcarriers over Average fading shows that BER 
performance is not greatly modified by	Jd. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper, we have investigated BER performance of 
SIMO (1× 2 EGC for Interleaved and Localized SC-FDMA 
over shadowed Rice LMS channel where LOS component 
follows Nakagami-m distribution. The performance is 
studied under light, average and heavy fading. It is observed 
that, as expected, in all three cases EGC diversity shows 
better performance as compared to SISO SC-FDMA. In case 
of Heavy fading, the performance is worse because LOS 
component has low power. The antenna correlation effect in 
all three types of fading shows that the more antenna 
correlation, the more errors at the detection. However, 
existence of LOS always provokes certain correlation 
between signals received at different antennas thus 
improvement for lower spatial correlation or using more 
antennae is not high. In general, Interleaved SC-FDMA BER 
performance is better than Localized SC-FDMA in shadowed 
Rice fading. The Interleaved SC-FDMA can be best 
transmission scheme for uplink satellite communication with 
EGC 
receiver 
diversity 
technique. 
Further, 
it 
is 
recommended to study the performance of MIMO SC-
FDMA over Land Mobile Satellite channel. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of 
the European Commission through Erasmus Mundus 
External Cooperation Window “Mobility for Life” and 
express their gratitude to the Spanish Government (Plan 
Nacional de I+D+I, TEC2010-18451) and Sinhgad Technical 
Education Society (STES), Pune and University of Pune 
(India), and to Universidad de Málaga – Campus de 
Excelencia Internacional Andalucía Tech. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Arapoglou, K. Liolis, M. Bertinelli, A. Panagopoulos, P. Cottis, 
and R. Gaudenzi, “MIMO Over Satellite: A Review,” IEEE 
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, Vol. 13. No. 1, May 2010, 
pp. 27-51  
[2] J. Bingham. “Multicarrier modulation for data transmission: An idea 
whose time has come,” IEEE Communication Magazine, May 1990, 
pp. 5-14 
[3] P. Eetvelt, G. Wade, and M.Tomlinson, “Peak  to  average power 
reduction for OFDM schemes by selective scrambling,” in Electronic 
Letters, Vol. 32, Oct. 1996,1963-1964 
[4] Y. Rahmatallah, N. Bouaynaya, and S. Mohan "Bit Error Rate 
Performance of Linear Companding Transforms for PAPR Reduction 
in OFDM Systems,” in IEEE Global Communications Conference 
(GLOBECOM 2011), Houston, Texas, December 2011, pp. 1-5  
[5] M. Nisar, H. Nottensteiner, and T. Hindelang, On performance limits 
of DFT spread OFDM systems,” Mobile and Wireless C 
ommunications Summit, 2007, 16th IST, July 2007, pp. 1-4 
[6] A. Czylwik, “Comparision between adaptive OFDM and Single 
Carrier modulation with frequency domain equalization,” in Proc. 
Vehicular Technology Conference 1997 Phoenix, AZ, vol. 2, May 
1997, pp.865-869 
[7] H. Sari, G Karam, and I. Jeanclaude, “Transmission techniques for 
digital terrestrial TV broadcasting,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 33, 
no. 2, pp. Feb. 1995, pp. 100-109 
[8] J. Sánchez-Sánchez, “Analysis of SC-FDMA and OFDMA 
Performance over Fading Channels,” Ph.D. dissertation, Universidad 
de 
Málaga 
(Spain), 
May 
2011. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://hdl.handle.net/ 10630/4689  
[9] J. Gangane, M. Aguayo-Torres, J. Sánchez-Sánchez, and U. 
Fernández-Plazaola, “SC-FDMA Performance over Rician Channel,” 
Proc. 6th IEEE International Conference on Broadband and 
Biomedical Communications (IB2Com), November 2011, Melbourne, 
Australia, pp. 91-96 
[10] U. Sorger, I. Broeckan, and M. Schnell, “IFDMA- A New Spread 
Spectrum Multiple Access Scheme, Multicarrier Spread Spectrum,” 
Kulwer, 1997, pp. 111-118 
[11] A. Annamalai, C. Tellambura, and V. Bhargava, “Equal –gain 
diversity reciver performance in wireless channels,” IEEE Trans. 
Communications, Vol. 48, Oct. 2000, pp. 1732-1745 
[12] N. Beaulieu and A. Abu-Dayya, “Analysis of equal gain diversity on 
Nakagami fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Vol.39, No. 2, 
Feb. 1991, pp.225-234 
[13] M. Simon and M. Alouni, Digital Communication over Fading 
Channels, 2nd ed., New York:,Wiley, 2004 
[14] J. Zang, L. Yang, and I. Hanzo, “Multi –user performance of the 
amplify and forward single relay assisted SC-FDMA uplink,” in Proc. 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference 2009 Fall, Sept. 2009, pp.1-5 
[15] J. Gangane, M. Aguayo-Torres, J. Sanchez, and S. Wagh, “Equal 
Gain Combining (EGC) SC-FDMA Performance over Land Mobile 
Satellite (LMS) Rice Fading Channel,” Proc. IEEE International 
Conference on Computational Intelligence and Computing Research 
(IEEE ICCIC), Dec. 2012, Coimbatore, India, pp.1-5 
[16] C. Loo, “A statistical model for a land mobile satellite link,” IEEE 
Trans. Veh. Technol, Vol. 34, August 1985, pp. 122-127 
[17] A. Abdi, W. Lau, M. Alouni, and M. Kaveh, “A new simple model 
for land mobile satellite channels: first-and second order statistics,” 
IEEE Trans. Wireless Comm., Vol. 2, No. 3, May 2003, pp. 519-528 
[18] G. L. Stuber, Principles of Mobile Communication, Boston, MA: 
Kluwer, 1996 
[19] F. Fontan et al, M. Castro, J. Kunisch, J. Pamp, E. Zollinger, S. 
Buonomo, P. Baptista, and B. Arbesser, “A versatile framework for a 
narrow and wide band statistical propagation model for the LMS 
channel,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, Vol. 43, Dec.1997, pp.431-458 
[20] J. Rees, “Measurements of the wide band radio channel characteristics 
for rural, residential, and subrurban areas,” IEEE Trans. Veh., 
Technol., Vol. 36, Feb. 1987, pp. 2-6 
[21] A. Goldsmith, Wireless Communications, Cambridge University 
Press, 2005 
[22] D. Richard, V. Nee, S. Howard, and R. Prasad, “Direct –Sequence 
Spread Spectrum in a Shadowed Rician Fading Land Mobile Satellite 
Channel,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 
Vol.10, No. 2. February 1992, pp. 350-357 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

