Communication aspect in ICT for Freight Transport System 
Pushpendra Kumar, Belkacem Ould Bouamama 
LAGIS UMR CNRS8219 
Ecole Polytechnique Universitaire de Lille 
Villeneuve d’Ascq, France 
jahan.pushp@gmail.com 
Belkacem.Ouldbouamama@polytech-lille.fr 
Haffaf Hafid 
Faculty of Science, Computer Science Department 
Oran University 
El M’Naouar, Oran, Algeria 
Haffaf.hafid@univ-oran.dz
 
 
Abstract—In the last decade, Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) proved to be a milestone in the field of 
freight transport with the appearance of tracking and tracing 
devices. Different ICTs viz. Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID), wireless sensor nodes and localization systems play 
vital role to improve the performance of the freight transport 
system by saving energy consumption, reducing the service 
cost and increasing the cargo throughput. To achieve these 
requirements, the development of reliable heterogeneous 
communication system among all communicating objects 
becomes a paramount objective. In this paper, we describe 
different kind of existing communication technologies in 
Intelligent Transport System (ITS) domain. Also, we propose 
an intelligent infrastructure integrated with ICTs for the 
operations of Intelligent Automated Vehicle (IAV) in confined 
space like container terminal.    
Keywords-Freight transport system; Intelligent transport 
system; Information and communication technology; Intelligent 
automated vehicle; Port conatiner terminal. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The convergence of conveying, storing and manipulating 
data has led to many new and exciting developments in the 
Intelligent 
Communication 
Technology 
(ICT). 
An 
Intelligent Transport System (ITS) is advanced application 
of ICT which aims to provide innovative and efficient 
services relating to different modes of transport. The 
optimal transport strategy based on real-time information, as 
well as assessments of the transport system demand and 
supply should be given more importance in order to 
improve the productivity of the system. In the information 
society, the ICTs are developing towards an infrastructure 
that will enable new kinds of practices also affecting the 
transport system, for example trucks integrated with 
advanced devices that link the driver cab to the haulage 
operators' systems. 
Intelligent Automated Vehicles (IAVs) are cornerstone of 
the future ITS and can be seen as the logical transition of 
mobile robotics to the scale of vehicles in urban transport or 
in container terminals. In the context of urban transport, by 
enabling vehicles to communicate with each other (Vehicle-
to-Vehicle or V2V) as well as with base stations (Vehicle-
to-Infrastructure or V2I) via wireless communication 
networks can contribute to safer and more efficient roads by 
providing timely information to drivers and concerned 
authorities.  
The problem in freight transport systems is to obtain 
information in ITS over Mobile Relay Network to facilitate 
the necessary information access for drivers on the road. 
The proposed network solution consists of all the RFID 
enabled mobile nodes on road such as RFID tag and reader 
on the traffic light pole, and Wireless Sensor Network 
(WSN). This enables cars to be aware of their position and 
of the vessel they transport. In our case, we are limited with 
a small platform such as seaport confined space where cars 
are IAV nodes, and further works aim to generalize to more 
complex infrastructure.  
This work is performed in part of European project 
Weastflows [24]. The paper is organised as: In Section II, 
the role of ICT in sustainable transport system is described; 
then, in Section III, various ICTs are explained with their 
applications in freight transport system. In Section IV, a 
case of communication in container terminal is discussed. 
Concluding remarks are lead to the last section.  
II. 
ROLE OF ICT IN SUSTAINABLE FREIGHT TRANSPORT 
The key role of ICT for enabling sustainable freight 
transport is in establishing cooperation among logistics 
companies and various actors of freight transport system by 
enabling the real time flow of information. ICT helps to 
build trust among the various actors of the freight transport 
system by encouraging them to share information for 
achieving optimum transport strategies. Another important 
contribution of ICT towards sustainable freight transport 
system is its ability to support intermodal freight transport. 
Various practical applications of ICT in freight transport 
include vehicle tracking, monitoring and control, vehicle to 
vehicle 
communication, 
vehicle 
to 
infrastructure 
communication, security and safety purposes. 
Ollo-López and Aramendía-Muneta [4] examined the 
impact of ICT on competitiveness, innovation and 
environment, and found that use of ICT seems to favor these 
issues. Several applications can be cited thanks to ICT 
development in ITS: Tracking and tracing, localization, 
Monitoring and control, dynamic scheduling, traffic flow 
(optimization), 
weather 
and 
congestion 
information, 
pollution control, safety and security. For example, a trailer 
could be automatically identified, given permission to enter 
370
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

a container yard and instructed where to drop its load. In 
[20], a framework of a devoted highway freight transport 
platform in China is described. Such platform can provide 
the availability of drivers to transport companies by 
destination requests, generating route plans, and returning 
the calculated plans to the users. Furthermore, the 
information is processed through a Geographic Information 
System (GIS) [19] capable to provide accurate and real-time 
weather information on a specific area.  
There are recent trends towards Vehicular ad hoc 
Network (VANET) as they can leverage mobile nodes to 
bridge the gap between information isolated islands. It is a 
flexible and low-cost extension of wired infrastructure 
networks. With its ubiquitous feature, VANET is attracting 
intensive interests in many application areas. Nowadays, the 
spread of unmetered high-speed connections of internet 
allows greater flexibility and can be realized in working 
location. The Internet can be accessed almost anywhere by 
numerous means, including through mobile internet devices, 
mobile phones, data cards and cellular routers.  
Figure 1 shows the flow of information in a freight 
transport network. All the information regarding the 
transport network is communicated to a central data base, 
which is updated with the current situation of the transport 
network. This information includes location of the cargo, 
congestion, 
incidents 
and 
vehicle 
breakdown. 
This 
information is useful for the different actors of the transport 
system, so that they can make the better business strategies 
according to the current situation of the transport network. 
This information flow allows real time control of the 
network to achieve the goal of sustainable transport system. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Information Flow in Freight Transport Network 
 
However, some limitations have to be taken into account 
when choosing some plate-form. First of all, the quality of 
information delivery due to limited range in wireless 
protocols: Most conventional ITS technologies can only 
detect the vehicle in a fixed position. The second 
impediment is the lack of security data exchange, especially 
in wireless case. Coronado et al. [23] proposed secure 
service architecture for logistics covering road haulage, 
infrastructure and port operations. The various problems can 
occur with the implementation of technology including time 
delay to provide reliable information in critical situations, 
some network access are free and other not, lack of 
standardization especially when interoperability is needed,  
reliability, scalability (a huge number of vehicle), 
implementation cost  and network security.  
III. 
ICT TOOLS FOR FREIGT TRANSPORT SYSTEM 
In this section, we discuss about the various technologies 
used in freight transport system. Vehicle telematics system 
which involves telecommunication aspects like GPS, or 
more generally web-based information system can be used 
in trailer tracking and on-board navigation. Also, RFID is a 
type of automatic identification technology, has been 
increasingly used with a great success since the 1990s [2] 
and RFID-RTLS (Real time locating system) is well suited 
for 
container 
tracking. 
Infrastructure-based 
wireless 
communication has experienced a huge diversification of 
radio access technologies while experiencing a steady 
increase of capacity. Table I shows different technologies 
used in freight transport. 
TABLE I.  
ICT TOOLS IN FREIGHT TRANSPORT 
Communica-
tion Mode 
Most used tools  
Applications 
Sensors 
-Intrusive 
-non intrusive 
-embedded 
Geo-fencing, 
Parameters 
evaluation: speed, 
distance, 
Safety 
guidance   
Diffusion 
information 
Panels or bulletin board 
 electronic panels 
 High speaker   
Highway 
example 
Localization 
GPS, 
Galileo, 
Hertzien 
network, 
Vehicle Telematics 
Vehicle tracking 
and tracing, 
Navigation, 
Geofencing 
Tracking 
Identification 
and tracing 
RFID, GSM 3+, RTLS, 
Gyrometer, Inertial center 
Container 
tracking, 
Individual 
product tracking 
 
Cooperative 
systems 
GSM 
UMTS   
 Communication 
(V2V, 
V2I, 
IAVs) 
Dedicated 
Transmission  
GPRS 
(General 
Packet 
Radio Service) 
Radio 
Electric 
specific 
transmission  
Confined space,  
Automatic 
toll 
collection, 
Safety Warning 
Beyond third generation (B3G), wireless networks 
comprise of highly ubiquitous and fast mobile broadband 
access technologies such as WLAN (Wireless Local Area 
Network), HSPA (High Speed Packet Access), or Mobile 
WiMax. Sensor nodes (installed on each vehicle) can collect 
information in order to organize the traffic, especially at 
intersection where we have not traffic light. Sensors should 
be installed on both roadside and intersections. Then, the 
embedded unit can send vehicle parameters (location, speed, 
direction, etc.) using ZigBee (IEEE 802.15.4) to roadside 
units. The challenges today are: how could be developed 
new solutions and integrate them in the existing 
371
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

infrastructure communication and how can heterogeneous 
systems 
involving 
different 
technologies 
exchange 
information through the network, independently from the 
machines or devices they use i.e. interoperability. 
 
Example of interoperable system communication is the 
it839/u-it839. Korea’s “it839”3 project in 2004 has been one 
of the first national future Internet initiatives. It aims at 
funding research in eight different communication services 
(WiBro, DMB, home networks, Telematics, RFID-based, 
WCDMA, terrestrial DTV, and Internet telephony), three 
future network infrastructures (Broadband converged 
networks (BcN), soft infraware, the IPv6 architecture) and 
nine hardware-related businesses. From the point of view of 
services, the Location- and Context-Based Services (LCBS) 
are a new class of services with a high potential in the near 
future in freight transport. The key aspects of LCBS are 
their inherent relations between location coordinates or 
activity-contexts and applications. 
Typical example classes for LCBS are: 
• Intelligent navigation support for mobile users. 
• Geography-dependent information systems and geographic 
multicast communications. 
 
Configuration of ad hoc infrastructures for location or 
context dependent applications in case of rescue/emergency 
situations, spatially and time-limited operations requires a 
decentralized provision of location information within the 
terminal equipment through specific sensors (GPS, active 
badges, user input, etc.). The multi-network access of 
mobile terminal equipment (WLAN, GPRS, UMTS and 
Differential GPS) with horizontal and vertical handover 
capability can be used to improve the accuracy of the 
receiver by adding a local reference station to augment the 
information 
available 
from 
the 
satellites. 
Another 
technology RFID is mostly used in retailing and 
manufacturing environment but recently, it has been used in 
tracking vehicle as well, because using high frequency 
transmission enables readers to get information from great 
distance. The RFID chip typically is capable of carrying 
2000 bytes of data or less. Table II summarizes different 
communications modes in RFID.  
TABLE II.  
DIFFERENT RFID COMMUNICATION MODES 
RFID 
Mode 
Frequency 
/time  
Characteristic 
Application 
Passive 
Time 
has 
non limited 
lifespan 
Tag 
energized 
by 
the 
reader 
Low 
frequency 
Least interference 
from metal, liquid 
Access control 
(airport) 
High 
frequency 
Tracking 
items 
everyday 
Animal 
tracking 
Ultra 
high 
frequency 
3.5 m and up 
Lowest price (no 
battery) 
Pallet or case 
tracking 
(merchandise)  
Active  
200 m read-
range 
3-10 years 
tag life 
 
Beacon 
Presence 
or 
absence of items  
Boolean 
applications or 
detection 
Real 
time 
location 
The 
battery 
periodicaly 
transmits its signal 
Find objects or 
people in real 
time 
 
To resolve the problem of the large transmission 
overhead when the RFID tag information is transmitted in 
IEEE 802.11 wireless LANs, we can consider the frame 
aggregation method being discussed in the IEEE 802.11n 
Task Group. The frame aggregation method has two 
techniques called MSDU (MAC Service Data Unit) 
aggregation and MPDU (MAC Protocol Data Unit) 
aggregation. 
 
For efficiently transmitting in real time RFID tag 
information in IEEE 802.11 wireless LANs, we need to 
combine the multipolling method [3], which enhances the 
PCF protocol using the connectivity information. The 
EPCglobal Network [14] (developed by the M.I.T) is the 
Auto ID international center’s specification and specifies 
major aspects of operation of networked RFID system. The 
EPCglobal network architecture (middleware plate-form) 
can enable readers to identify and monitor RFID products 
and then, access crucial database to query cargos 
information shared through Internet. Furthermore, the 
system is regulated by international standard such as ISO 
6346:1995 and ISO 17363:2007. In the traffic information 
management, RFID can be used to collect information about 
traffic jams. For instance, officials can track the travel time 
of cars on specific motorways, analyses that information and 
then distribute reports about average commuting times to 
drivers, helping them decide which route to take. There are 
two kinds of vehicle tracking: automatic vehicle tracking, 
when the vehicle transmits its location regularly (within 
time interval) and events activated tracking system when the 
tracking system is activated in reaction to some event [15]. 
 
Among tools for positioning problem or geo-
localization, we can cite GPS (or DGPS), GIS and RTLS 
(Real Time Localization System). Also, optical character 
recognition (OCR) and biometric based technology are used 
for vehicle or product identification. A great number of 
physical embedded sensors exist to enhance safety guidance 
to driver (speed, distance, sound sensor etc.) and finally 
many kind of interface or electronic devices allow the driver 
to access to the infrastructure networks (computers, PDA, 
iPad, smart phone, embedded camera, digital billboard etc.). 
Some 
authors 
propose 
a 
Dedicated 
Short 
Range 
Communication (DSRC) such as the ETC system used to 
collect highway tolls. This promising wireless technology is 
capable of handling the information requirements associated 
to road transport. It could facilitate high-speed transmission 
of large volumes of data between a vehicle and equipment 
installed alongside the road. 
 
IV. 
A CASE OF COMMUNICATION IN PORT CONTAINER 
TERMINAL 
 
 
In the recent years, advanced ICTs and IAVs have been 
identified as possible candidates to implement Automated 
Container Terminals (ACT) to improve the performance of 
seaport management. New breakthrough of optimizing the 
372
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

port logistics are achieved for smart container terminals. In 
an ACT, three types of handling facilities are usually used: 
Automated Yard Cranes (AYCs), IAVs and Quay Cranes 
(QCs). IAVs are autonomous vehicles used for horizontal 
transportation and are powered by batteries, which are 
automatically charged at a charging station on the terminal 
apron.  To be aware of its localisation at any time within the 
confined deployment space, an IAV node can include (but 
not necessarily) a GPS circuitry. RTLS is more suitable in 
this case which provides the exact position of a node to 
which the RTLS tag is attached at each time. At least three 
RTLS readers should receive signals from these tags to 
calculate the position by means of an engine which collects 
continuously the signals. In our case, the tags could be 
attached to AYC to play the role of readers, or “Anchor 
nodes”. Reduced Signals Strength Indicator (RSSI), Time of 
Arrival (ToA) and Angle of Arrival (AoA) give 
approximate location of the “tracked” nodes by using 
triangulation computation methods [10]. The second 
problem, in which RFID may play a major role, is the 
identification of an object tagged by a transponder.  This 
RFID localization solution is based on radar principles [18], 
but it couldn’t go further than 200m.   
 
Now, we discuss the technologies to deal with the 
communications 
between 
IAV-to-IAV, 
IAV-to-CBS 
(Central Base Station) and IAV-to-RFID. These can be 
applied in freight transport infrastructure communication. 
The 
European 
project 
CVIS 
(Cooperative 
Vehicle 
Infrastructure Systems) has been investigating the capability 
to link vehicles to the roadside infrastructure through 
seamless communications channels. We distinguish two 
types 
of 
links 
in 
IAV-2-IAV 
and 
IAV-2-CBS 
communications: low rate wireless link to exchange data 
that do not require high transfer speed such as periodic and 
cooperation/coordination based data and high rate wireless 
link to exchange data of important volume such as data to be 
stored in data base or multimedia data, that are known as on 
demand data.  
 
Because of possible interferences, IAV nodes could be 
equipped with a second transceiver such as GSM/GPRS 
technology to allow direct communications without passing 
by CBS nodes or another intermediate IAV nodes. Powerful 
meshing technical equipment such as Meshlium product 
proposed by LibeliumTM company [25] exists today in the 
market. This equipment allows interconnecting several 
wireless technologies at the same time (Wifi, Bluetooth, 
Zigbee, GSM/GPRS) and wired Internet. GPRS [14] has 
been introduced specifically for packet communication in 
GSM, it is described as 2.5G (between 2 and 3 generation) 
and recently enhanced by EDGE (Enhanced Data rates for 
global evolution). It is, thus, much more adequate for the 
application case under consideration. Contrary to voice/data 
communication in GSM (where an FD channel is reserved 
irrespective of the traffic intensity in the uplink/downlink 
direction) all users of a cell share the bandwidth.  
 
For identification problem, we use RFID system in 
which typically a reader is placed on IAV and a tag attached 
to the container [8]. RFID reader and tag communicate 
wirelessly using antennas (see Figure 2). OCR (Optical 
Character Recognition) based system is also used for 
vehicle number plate’s recognition. When a vehicle arrives 
at the terminal gate the OCR system captures its plate 
number, so that the control system records it together with 
the time and date, and verifies if the vehicle is allowed to 
get inside the area. 
 
Interfaces 
(ethernet, 
USB, …)
Battery
Micro 
processor
Flash memory
Transceiver
Interfaces 
(ethernet, 
USB, …)
Battery
Micro 
processor
Flash memory
Transceiver
RFID Reader
Battery
Micro 
processor
Flash memory 
+SDRAM
Transceiver
Battery
Micro 
processor
Flash memory 
+SDRAM
Transceiver
RFID Tag
Air interface
RFID communication protocol
IAV node
Container
Data 
base
 
 
Figure 2. IAV- RFID Communication 
 
 
With regard to the communication architecture, we see 
that there are many standard solutions related to RFID 
technology exists in practice [5][6]. Choosing the right 
RFID tag hardware able to ensure effective and efficient 
communication is critical to the overall solution. The 
choices depend on various factors like amount of container 
information to be stored on the tag, distance requirements, 
and confined space conditions. This communication takes 
place between each IAV and the corresponding container in 
loading/discharging operations using RFID. Real-time 
locating system can also be used for local positioning; it 
allows tracking and identifying the location of objects in 
real time. ISO/IEC 24730-5:2010 defines an air interface 
protocol which utilizes chirp spread spectrum (CSS) at 
frequencies from 2.4 GHz to 2.483 GHz. 
 
Cellular systems such as UMTS are also good candidate 
for IAV-2-CBS communications because it accounts for 
protocol design mobility and data rates can reach up to 21 
Mbps with high speed downlink packet (HSPDA). The 
imminent 4G technologies include Mobile WiMAX, Long 
term evolution (LTE) and HSPA+. The estimated coverage 
range is about 3 Km with a star network topology, LTE has 
a theoretical top download speed of 300Mbps and an 
Upload Speed of 75Mbps. Another candidate for IAV-2-
CBS is Digital Media Broadcasting (DMB) which includes 
digital audio /video Broadcasting (DAB/DVB) however it 
only relies on single frequency and broadcasting [7]. 
Wireless sensor networks (WSN) [13] are a set of nodes that 
373
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

can communicate with each other. Sensor nodes measure a 
desired physical quantity and the base station node collects 
data to perform processing and to connect to the wired area 
network. In [17], two types of sensor nodes are used: mobile 
sinks (to which information is sent) and sensor nodes 
(sensing a physical phenomenon). The intelligent vehicular 
systems emerged as a good candidate for benefiting from 
the WSN’s features. WSN can be used for detecting the 
formation of ice over the road, and many other applications.  
 
 
TABLE III.  
TECHNOLOGIES FOR IAVS COMMUNICATION 
Characteristic  Wifi 
Bluetooth 
Zigbee 
IEEE 
Specification 
802.11x 
802.15.1 
802.15.4 
Operating 
frequency   
2.4 
GHz 
ISM, 5 GHz 
2.4 
GHz 
ISM 
868 
MHz, 
902-
928MHz, 2.4 
GHz ISM 
Data rate 
600 Mb/s 
1 Mb/s 
20-250 Kb/s 
Nominal 
TX 
power 
15-20 dBm 
0-10 dBm 
(-25)-0 dBm 
Nominal range 
30-150 m 
10-100 m 
10-75 m 
Max # of cell 
nodes  
2007 
8 
65,000 
Waking up time 
- 
3 s 
15 ms 
Characteristic  
WIMAX 
UWB 
DSRC 
IEEE 
Specification 
802.16 
802.15.3 
802.11.p 
Operating 
frequency   
10-66 Ghz 
3.1-10.6 
GHz 
5.9 Ghz 
Data rate 
Speed up to 
70Mbps 
100-500 
Mb/s 
27 Mb/s 
Nominal 
TX 
power 
13.5 db 
-41.3 
dBm/MHz 
75 MHz 
Nominal range 
 3-5 km 
And 50 km 
from 
Base-
stat 
10 m 
1000 m 
Max # of cell 
nodes  
 
8 
 
Waking up time 
 
Narrow 
pulse 
 
 
 
The solution we propose is to use wireless sensor 
technology to control merchandise in this phase. The 
technologies integrated in the nodes include some wireless 
sensor device (GPS, sensors and clock) which make it 
possible to control the operations in real time. This allows 
sending relevant alerts in some critic situations and report 
emergency situations. UWB spectrum 3.1-10.6 GHz 
supports high data rate communications up to 480Mbps at a 
short distance (10-15m). Table III summarizes these 
technology choices that can be potential candidates for 
IAVs based data communication system. WLAN is 
recommended for confined regions because of its 100m 
range and low mobility whereas Mobile Wimax (802.16.x) 
is good candidate for high rate of data transfer it supports 
high speed transmission (up to 1Mbps in high mobility and 
70 Mbps in low mobility). The gain of complexity and 
mobility management is due to All-IP core future Networks 
allowing tolerance to multipath and self-interference. 
Currently, 
the 
IEEE 
MAC 
sublayer 
proposal 
for 
UltraWideBand (UWB), namely IEEE 802.15.a adopts the 
carrier 
sense 
multiple 
access/collision 
avoidance 
(CSMA/CA) technique. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In the present work, we discussed about the role of ICT to 
achieve the goal of sustainable freight transport system. 
Various ICTs are described with their potential benefits and 
applications in freight transport system. A case is described 
on communication in port container terminal with 
specifying 
various 
suitable 
technologies. 
The 
communication among IAVs, and infrastructure is explained 
in a container terminal to enhance the productivity of the 
system. Through the container terminal application, we are 
convinced that WSN can be eventually incorporated into 
IAVs to overcome the problems associated to wired sensors.     
In general, the transport system lies on the intersection 
of several domains, which naturally puts pressure on the 
transport sector to stay as sensitive to change. Although it 
has been a great development in this domain but still it is a 
long way to reach sustainability in freight transport. 
Implementation of this use case using a dedicated 
simulation language like NS2, in order to test the network 
communication performances is let to perspectives.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
This work is performed in part of European Project 
‘Weastflows’. Weastflows is an Interreg IVB North West 
Europe (NWE) project funded by the European Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) that aims to encourage a shift 
towards greener freight transport in the NWE region.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C-I. Liu, H. Jula, K. Vukadinovic and P. Ioannou, “Automated guided 
vehicle system for two container yard layouts”, Transportation Research 
Part C 12 (Elsevier), pp. 349-368, 2004. 
374
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[2] S. Yong-Dong, P. Yuan-Yuan and L. Wei-Min, “The RFID application 
logistics and supply chain management”, Research Journal of Applied 
Sciences, Vol. 4, No.1, pp.  57-61, 2009. 
[3] W. Y. Choi, An Efficient Polling Scheme for Enhancing IEEE 802.11 
PCF Protocol, FREQUENZ 59: 268–271, 2005. 
[4] A. Ollo-López and M. E. Aramendía-Muneta, ICT impact on 
competitiveness, 
innovation 
and 
environment, 
“Telematics 
and 
Informatics” (Article in press) 2011. 
[5] S. J. Barro-Torres, T. M. Fernandez-Carames, M. Gonzalez-Lopez and 
C. J. Escudero-Cascon, “Maritime freight  container management system 
using RFID”, The Third International EURASIP on RFID Technology, 
pp. 93-96, 2010. 
[6] Y. Liang and X. Bai, “Design of RFID-Enabled Container Yard 
Management System”, G. Huang et al. (Eds.): DET2009 Proceedings, 
AISC 66 (Springer), pp. 1751–1758, 2009. 
[7] F. Qu, F. Wang and L. Yang, “Intelligent transportation spaces: 
vehicles, traffic, communications, and beyond”, IEEE Communication 
Magazine, Nov. 2010. Vol. 48, No. 11, pp. 136-142, 2010.  
[8] D. Mullen, “The application of RFID technology in a Port” 
http://www.aimglobal.org/technologies/rfid/resources/PortTech.pdf, 
[retrieved: July , 2011] 
[9] Z. Luo, T. Zhang and C. Wang, RFID Enabled Vehicular Wireless 
Query for Travel Information in Intelligent Transportation System, IEEE 
International Conference on RFID-Technologies and Applications, 
2011. 
[10] K. S. Wong, I. W. Tsang, V. Cheung and J. T. Kwok Position 
Estimation 
for 
Wireless 
sensor 
networks; 
IEEE 
Global 
Telecommunications Conference, pp.  2772-2776, 2005. 
[11] M. Forcolin, E. Fracasso, F. Tumanischvili and P. Lupieri, 
EURIDICE-IoT applied to Logistics using the Intelligent Cargo 
Concept, 17th International Conference on Concurrent Enterprising, 
Aachen, Germany, 2011. 
[12] V. Boschian, M. P. Fanti, G. Iacobellis, and W. Ukovich, The 
Assessment of ICT Solutions in Customs  Clearance Operations, IEEE 
International Conference on Systems Man and Cybernetics, Istanbul, 
2010. 
[13] C. Chong and S. Kumar, Sensor networks: Evolution, opportunities, 
and challenges” in Proceedings  of the  IEEE Vol. 91, pp. 1247-1256, 
2003. 
[14] EPC global Inc. The EPC global architecture framework 1.2, 2008. 
[15] Y. Wang and A. Potter, “The application or real time tracking 
technologies in freight transport”, The Third International IEEE 
Conference on Signal Image Technologies and Internet Based-system 
2008. 
[16] M. Mansouri, B. Sauser and J. Boardman “Application of System 
Thinking for Resilience Study in Maritime Transportation System of 
Systems” IEEE International Systems Conference, Vancouver, Canada, 
March 23-  26, 2009 . 
[17] D. Taccomi, D. Miorandi, I. Carreras, F. Chiti and R. Fantacci, Using 
wireless sensor networks to support intelligent transport systems, Adhoc 
Networks Journal (8), pp. 462-473, Elsevier 2010. 
[18] M. I. Skolnik, Radar Handbook, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007. 
[19] F. Reclus and K. Drouad “Geofencing for fleet and freight 
management” 9th International Conference on Intelligent Transport 
Systems, Telecommunications, Lille 2009.  
[20] L. Chen, T. Alfred and C. Wang, “A highway freight transport plate-
form for the Chinese freight Market” IEEE Forum on Integrated and 
Sustainable Transport Systems, Vienna, Austria, June 29, 2011. 
[21] A. M. Zanni and A. L. Bristow, Emissions of CO2 from road freight 
transport in London: Trends and policies for long run reductions, 
ENERGY Policy 38, pp. 1774-1786, Science Direct 2010. 
[22] G. Zacharewicz, J. C. Deschamps and J. Francois, Distributed 
simulation platform to design advanced RFID based freight 
transportation systems. Computers in Industry 62, pp. 597–612, 2011. 
[23] A. E. Coronado, C. S. Lalwani, E. S. Coronado and S. Cherkaoui, 
Wireless Vehicular Networks to  Support Road Haulage and Port 
Operations in a Multimodal Logistics Environment, IEEE International 
Conference on Service Operations and Logistics and Informatics, 
Beijing, 2008. 
[24] http://www.weastflows.eu [retrieved: June,  2012]  
[25] www.libelium.com [retrieved: June,  2012] 
 
 
375
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

