QoS-aware Trafﬁc Ofﬂoading in 4G/WiFi Multi-RAT Heterogeneous Networks:
Opnet-based Simulations and Real Prototyping Implementation
Ahmed S. Ibrahim∗, Ahmed M. Darwish, Shady O. Elbassiouny, and Hani Elgebaly
Intel Corporation, Wireless Communications Lab, Middle East Mobile Innovation Center (MEMIC), Cairo, Egypt
* Electronics and Electrical Communications Department, School of Engineering, Cairo University, Egypt
{ahmed.s.ibrahim, ahmedx.m.darwish, shadyx.o.elbassiouny, hani.elgebaly}@intel.com
Abstract— Multiple radio access technologies (Multi-RAT) Het-
erogeneous Networks (HetNets) are considered as one of the
recent fundamental ideas in next generation mobile networks.
Multi-RAT HetNets aim to increase the network capacity needed
to meet the high data demand of mobile users. In Multi-RAT Het-
Nets, data ﬂow can be ofﬂoaded to unlicensed bands (e.g., WiFi)
to free some of the resources of the 4G licensed band (e.g. LTE or
WiMAX). However, it needs to be guaranteed that the WiFi can
provide the needed Quality of Service (QoS). In this paper, we
propose multiple QoS-aware 4G/WiFi ofﬂoading schemes that try
to maximize the utilization of the WiFi air interface, taking into
consideration the network loading conditions and maintaining the
required QoS. The proposed ofﬂoading schemes are evaluated in
two 4G/WiFi Multi-RAT testbeds. The ﬁrst testbed is based on
the Opnet network simulator, while the second testbed is based
on a real small-cell prototype. The performance evaluation of
these ofﬂoading schemes is shown in a time-cost tradeoff graph.
Keywords- HetNets; LTE; Multi-RAT; Opnet; Prototype;
WiFi; WiMAX.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, there has been increased interest in Heterogeneous
Networks (HetNets) as a means to meet the huge data demand
needed for the current and future mobile applications. For
example, various HetNets topics are actively investigated in
the 3GPP-Long Term Evolution (LTE) [1] and Worldwide In-
teroperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX) IEEE 802.16
[2] standards. Research in HetNets can be divided into two
main topics, namely, multi-tier and multiple radio access
technologies (multi-RAT). The multi-tier HetNets comprise
a hierarchical deployment of low power, smaller footprint
Femto/Pico/Relay stations within a Macro-cell coverage area,
aiming to increase the network capacity and provide reliable
indoor coverage [3]. Interference mitigation (IM) is one of
the challenging topics in multi-tier HetNets, and we have
previously proposed multiple IM techniques that span the time,
frequency, space, and power dimensions [4], [5].
The multi-tier HetNets utilizes one air interface only (e.g.
LTE). However, multiple air interfaces can be utilized too,
which is the case of multi-RAT HetNets [6], [7], [8], [9],
[10], [11], [12], [13]. Multi-RAT HetNets allow the support
of mobile users with more than one air interface, such as the
combination of the licensed 3GPP LTE along with the unli-
censed IEEE 802.11 Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN)
technologies in order to increase the overall network capacity
with reduced cost. It is known that the 4G technology (LTE
or WiMAX) utilizes license bands with more charging cost
compared to utilizing the unlicensed WiFi air interface. Hence,
it is cost-effective to be utilizing the WiFi interface, as long
as it is providing the required service quality.
In the literature, there has been a number of works con-
sidering 3G-based Multi-RAT systems such as [6], [7], [8].
A feasibility study on multiple radio access (MRA) net-
working was introduced in [7] and an implementable MRA
was proposed in [8]. Beyond 3G, Multi-RAT systems were
analyzed with the objective of network capacity maximization
in [9], [10], [11], [12]. Other than capacity-maximization, we
have focused on minimizing the transmission power in [13],
and we have proposed multiple minimum-power LTE/WiFi
ofﬂoading schemes that minimize the transmission power,
while guaranteeing the required QoS.
In this paper, we aim to propose multiple QoS-aware
4G/WiFi ofﬂoading schemes that try to maximize the uti-
lization of the WiFi interface, while maintaining the required
QoS. Maximizing the WiFi utilization, compared to the 4G
utilization, corresponds to lowering the transmission cost. In
order to propose these ofﬂoading schemes, we develop two
independent testbeds. The ﬁrst testbed is based on the Opnet
network simulator [14], in which the available 4G technology
is WiMAX, while the second testbed is based on a real
prototype, in which the available 4G technology is LTE. We
point out that considering more than one 4G technology (LTE
or WiMAX) in more than one testbed (simulations or real
prototype) strengthens this paper and generalizes the presented
ideas.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows. First,
we develop an Opnet-based WiMAX/WiFi multi-RAT HetNet
simulation environment, which consists mainly of a multi-RAT
base station (BS) or small cell and a newly created multi-
RAT UE. Second, we propose a QoS-aware ofﬂoading scheme,
which assigns the users to either the WiMAX or the WiFi
air interface, depending on the network loading condition.
The proposed scheme utilizes the WiFi interface unless it
cannot guarantee the required QoS. Third, we build a real
LTE/WiFi Multi-RAT small-cell prototype and explain how
this prototype can be utilized in sending a video clip over
the two air interfaces (LTE and WiFi). Finally, we propose
two QoS-aware ofﬂoading schemes, implement them on the
small-cell prototype, and evaluate their time-cost performance
tradeoff graph.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next
section, we focus on the Opnet-based Multi-RAT simulation
environment, clarify the problem, and evaluate the proposed
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Fig. 1.
Opnet-based Multi-RAT HetNet.
ofﬂoading scheme. The real LTE/WiFi small-cell prototype is
introduced in Section III, after which two additional ofﬂoading
schemes are proposed. Finally, Section IV concludes the paper.
II. OPNET-BASED QOS-AWARE WIMAX/WIFI
OFFLOADING SCHEME
In this section, ﬁrst we introduce our developed Opnet-
based WiMAX/WiFi Multi-RAT HetNet environment. Second,
we explain our motivation to take into consideration the
QoS while designing the ofﬂoading schemes. Third, we pose
the problem statement. Finally, we propose a QoS-aware
WiMAX/WiFi ofﬂoading scheme.
A. Opnet-based Multi-RAT Heterogeneous Network Model
Fig. 1 depicts a multi-RAT HetNet, which consists of multi-
RAT small cell (or BS), multi-RAT UE, VoIP server, and
core network (server backbone and IP backbone). The multi-
RAT BS along with the VoIP server and the core network are
already built in the Opnet library (v14.5). However, there was
no Multi-RAT UE that can communicate with both WiFi and
WiMAX, which represented our ﬁrst challenge.
Our ﬁrst contribution is to create a novel multi-RAT
(WiMAX/WiFi) UE that can receive the data over either the
WiFi or the WiMAX air interfaces. Fig. 2 depicts the node
model of the proposed Multi-RAT UE in details. As shown, the
set of all the upper layers (e.g. IP) remains untouched as in the
single-RAT node model. On the other hand, the lower layers,
namely, Address Resolution Protocol (ARP) and Media Access
Control (MAC) are duplicated for each interface. The MAC
module is the one differentiating WiMAX from WiFi. We note
that each UE will have one speciﬁc IP address, through which
it can be addressed in the network. This IP address will not be
changed if the UE is utilizing either the WiMAX or the WiFi
TABLE I
WIMAX AND WIFI AIR INTERFACE CONFIGURATION
PARAMETERS.
Parameter
Value
WiMAX PHY proﬁle
OFDMA
WiMAX Bandwidth
20MHz
WiFi PHY proﬁle
Extended rate PHY (802.11g)
WiFi Data rate
11 Mbps
Multipath channel model
ITU Pedestrian A
Pathloss model
Free space
air interface. Moreover, either the small cell or the UE may
decide either to activate the WiMAX or the WiFi air interfaces.
In order to test the performance of the developed HetNet
environment, we assume the UE initiates a VoIP call with the
VoIP server. We note that we focus on real time application
(mainly VoIP) and evaluate its QoS, measured in terms of
Mean Opinion Score (MOS). The VoIP data will be sent over
WiFi or WiMAX to the small cell, which in turn will be
delivered through the core network to the VoIP server. The
VoIP packets from the VoIP server to the UE follow the same
path in reversible order. Table I shows the major conﬁguration
parameters for both WiMAX and WiFi air interfaces.
Fig. 3 depicts the performance of the VoIP application,
measured in MOS, for both the WiMAX and WiFi cases. In
addition, it shows the loading condition on both air interfaces,
to indicate which interface is activated. First, we consider
the case of having WiMAX as the active interface, which is
depicted in Fig. 3 (a). As shown, the load on the WiMAX
network is non-zero, while it is zero for the WiFi case. The
MOS of the VoIP application is around 3.8, which gives great
user experience. Second, the WiFi is activated and the resulting
performance is shown in Fig. 3 (b). Similar to the WiMAX,
we ﬁnd that the WiFi also achieves the same MOS value.
From Fig. 3, we conclude that if the VoIP application is
the only trafﬁc in the network, ofﬂoading to WiFi does not
degrade the MOS below that achieved by the WiMAX. In
such scenario, trafﬁc ofﬂoading from WiMAX to WiFi should
happen immediately once WiFi is available. However, this
might not be necessarily true in case there is other additional
trafﬁc in the network. This case will be discussed in the next
sub-section.
B. Motivation and Problem Statement
In general, we note that there is a major difference between
the WiMAX (IEEE 802.16e) and the WiFi (IEEE 802.11g),
which is the consideration of the QoS classes. Particularly, in
WiMAX each type of application is assigned a speciﬁc class,
which corresponds to the needed QoS. Trafﬁc types with high
QoS class (e.g. VoIP) are assigned resource blocks with high
priority, compared to trafﬁc types with lower QoS classes (e.g.
best effort as in web browsing). On the contrary, in WiFi all
the trafﬁc types are treated equally in the best effort class. This
fact follows mainly from the utilized multiple access scheme,
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Fig. 2.
Newly created Opnet Multi-RAT UE.
namely, Carrier Sense Multiple Access/Collision Avoidance
(CSMA/CA). Hence, in WiFi there is no distinction between
the real time applications and non real time ones. Such issue
may degrade the performance of the VoIP applications sent
over WiFi, once the network gets congested.
In order to investigate this issue, we revisit the multi-RAT
scenario shown in Fig. 1 and apply a best effort background
data trafﬁc of rate 2 Mbps, in addition to the existing VoIP
application. This background data trafﬁc may represent the
accumulation of many UEs accessing the same air interface,
or it may represent data trafﬁc to/generated from the same UE.
Fig. 4 shows the network performance in the case of WiMAX
and WiFi interfaces for 2 Mbps background best-effort data
trafﬁc.
As shown in Fig. 4 (a), the WiMAX air interface maintains
the high value of the VoIP MOS. This high performance is a
result of assigning high QoS class to the VoIP application.
Hence, the WiMAX resource blocks needed for the VoIP
application are always allocated irrespective of the other
background trafﬁc. On the contrary, we ﬁnd in Fig. 4 (b)
that the WiFi air interface dramatically degrades the MOS
of the VoIP application. Such performance degradation is
because the best effort background trafﬁc is competing with
the VoIP application, which results in lower chances for the
VoIP application in accessing the WiFi air interface.
From Fig. 4, we conclude that ofﬂoading from WiMAX
(or 4G in general) to WiFi should not happen automatically
once WiFi access is available. Other factors (e.g. background
trafﬁc) need to be considered to make such ofﬂoading decision.
This ﬁnding represents our motivation to develop a QoS-aware
ofﬂoading scheme that takes into consideration the loading
condition of the network. Consequently, our probem can be
formulated as follows: Given a multi-RAT (4G/WiFi) system,
ﬁnd an ofﬂoading scheme that utilizes the WiFi interface the
most (i.e. minimizes the charging cost), while guaranteeing the
required QoS. The solution to this problem will be proposed
in the next sub-section.
C. QoS-aware Trafﬁc Ofﬂoading Scheme in WiMAX/WiFi
Multi-RAT HetNets
Fig. 5 depicts the ﬂow chart of the proposed QoS-aware
ofﬂoading scheme, and it can be described as follows. Initially,
the 2 RATs are deactivated. Then, the UE senses the total
data rate (loading condition) on each interface. If the loading
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

(a) WiMAX On
(b) WiFi On
Fig. 3.
Performance of WiMAX and WiFi interfaces for VoIP-only network.
(a) WiMAX On
(b) WiFi On
Fig. 4.
Network performance with 2Mbps background best-effort trafﬁc.
rate is higher than a speciﬁc threshold, then it activates the
WiMAX interface. In this case, the WiFi will not be able
to guarantee the required QoS of the real-time application.
Otherwise, it ofﬂoads the trafﬁc to the WiFi interface. Utilizing
our developed Opnet-based HetNet environment, we have
investigated the threshold after which the WiFi breaks down
and starts downgrading the VoIP MOS, and found that to be
1.5 Mbps. In other words, for background trafﬁc higher than
1.5 Mbps, the VoIP MOS degrades as was shown in Fig. 4
(b).
We have implemented the proposed ofﬂoading scheme in
the Opnet-based Multi-RAT environment at the IP process
module of the Multi-RAT UE node, shown in Fig. 2. We have
tested the ofﬂoading scheme by applying different background
trafﬁc rates, which are 1 Mbps and 2 Mbps. Fig. 6 shows the
performance of the ofﬂoading scheme at these two scenarios.
As shown, for 1 Mbps loading scenario in Fig. 6 (a), the
WiFi interface is activated and the MOS is maintained at high
value. In this case, ofﬂoading to WiFi guarantees the required
QoS. As for the higher loading rate (2 Mbps in Fig. 6 (b)),
the WiMAX is activated and the high MOS is maintained.
Hence, our proposed QoS-aware ofﬂoading scheme achieves
the required QoS with minimum charging cost. More precisely,
it ofﬂoads the trafﬁc to the unlicensed minimum-cost WiFi
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

(a) WiFi On at 1 Mbps loading
(b) WiMAX On at 2Mbps loading
Fig. 6.
Network performance with QoS-aware ofﬂoading scheme at different network loading conditions.
Fig. 5.
Flow chart of the QoS-aware trafﬁc ofﬂoading scheme.
only if the required QoS is guaranteed.
III. REAL PROTOTYPE-BASED QOS-AWARE LTE/WIFI
OFFLOADING SCHEMES
In the previous section, we have focused on Opnet-
based multi-RAT simulation environment. In this section, we
present a real prototype that represents the implementation of
LTE/WiFi small cell. Such prototype is extremely necessary
to validate the concept of multi-RAT system and to augment
our simulation testbed with a real one. In this prototype, we
utilize Intel-proprietary LTE software stack, consisting of all
the LTE layers (RRC/PDCP/RLC/MAC). As for the WiFi, we
utilize the commercial Intel 6205 WiFi card, which can be
set to work in the access point mode. Hence, we create an
integrated LTE/WiFi small cell that has both WiFi and LTE
software stacks.
A. Real LTE/WiFi Multi-RAT Prototype
Fig. 7 depicts the system architecture of the implemented
multi-RAT prototype. The prototype consists of two terminals:
the ﬁrst terminal has an integrated LTE/WiFi small cell, and
the second terminal represents the UE side. The LTE data
between the two terminals is physically sent over the Ethernet
cable, which mimics the LTE PHY layer, while the WiFi data
is physically sent over the WiFi air interface. At the small cell
side, the LTE down-link path is represented by the (PDCP-
TX/RLC-TX/MAC-TX) path, and the LTE up-link path is
represented by the (MAC-RX/RLC-RX/PDCP-RX) path. The
WiFi path is represented by the (NDIS/MAC/PHY) path. At
the UE side, we create a simple software client that can
send/receive data to/from the Ethernet and WiFi interfaces.
A photo of the real prototype is shown in Fig. 8. The
small-cell and the UE terminals are shown. In addition, we
have created a WiFi loading environment, which consists of
two terminals having ﬁle transfer between each other. Such
ﬁle transfer causes huge degradation on the WiFi link, which
results in huge WiFi congestion.
In order to test this prototype, we have created a demon-
stration experiment in which a video clip is sent from the
small-cell terminal to the UE terminal via both LTE and WiFi
software stacks. The Ethernet link is used to transfer the LTE
data, while the WiFi is sent over the conventional WiFi air
interface. Initially, a part of a video clip (a number of packets)
is sent over the LTE. Once the WiFi coverage is available,
the transmission is ofﬂoaded to the WiFi. Once the WiFi
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Fig. 7.
System architecture of the LTE/WiFi Multi-RAT prototype.
Fig. 8.
Real setup of the LTE/WiFi Multi-RAT prototype.
network is congested (due to loading the WiFi link with the
ﬁle transfer), the rest of the video transmission is sent over
LTE. Such ofﬂoading scheme was implemented in the multi-
RAT aggregation and coordination function (MRACF) at the
small cell side. At the receiver side, the received packets over
the two interfaces are assembled, and the video is displayed.
The small-cell prototype described above is utilized in eval-
uating the performance of our proposed QoS-aware ofﬂoading
schemes. Particularly, we consider two performance criteria to
evaluate these schemes, namely, the time and the cost. First,
the time metric represents the total number of transmission
slots needed to successfully receive the whole video ﬁle.
Second, the cost metric represents the number of cost units
Fig. 9. Flow chart of the “LTE/WiFi Ofﬂoading Retransmit-Once” ofﬂoading
scheme.
needed to successfully receive the video ﬁle. We assume that
the video ﬁle is divided into a number of packets. Each packet
requires 1 transmission slot and costs 1 unit over LTE and zero
units over WiFi. These cost values reﬂect the fact that WiFi is
unlicensed band, while LTE is a licensed one. The proposed
ofﬂoading schemes are presented in the next sub-section.
B. QoS-aware LTE/WiFi Ofﬂoading Schemes
We propose 2 QoS-aware LTE/WiFi ofﬂoading schemes.
The ﬁrst scheme is entitled “LTE/WiFi Ofﬂoading Retransmit-
Once” and its ﬂowchart is depicted in Fig. 9. In this scheme,
the packets are initially sent over LTE. Once the WiFi coverage
is available, the data is ofﬂoaded to the WiFi air interface. Due
to the created congestion on the WiFi, we have developed an
acknowledgment mechanism that allows the UE to transmit
back to the small cell either a positive acknowledgment (ACK)
or a negative acknowledgment (NACK) for each received
packet. A NACK is declared if a particular packet index is
missing. Once a NACK is declared, the erroneous packet
is retransmitted over the LTE interface. The LTE is utilized
to guarantee a congestion-free retransmission. As for the
next new packet, the WiFi is activated again and it carries
the upcoming packet. Hence, the description in the name
“Retransmit-Once.” This procedure continues until the video
is successfully received.
The
second
QoS-aware
ofﬂoading
scheme,
namely
“LTE/WiFi Ofﬂoading Retransmit-Rest”, is similar to the ﬁrst
one in many aspects except in the response following the
retransmission of the erroneous packet. More precisely, once
an erroneous packet is retransmitted over the LTE, the LTE
air interface is kept active and transmits the rest of the video
packets. Hence, the second scheme utilizes the LTE interface
more and hence it costs more. This is shown in the time-cost
tradeoff curve shown in Fig. 10.
Fig. 10 depicts the different ofﬂoading schemes results
where the x-axis represents the cost of transmission (0 for WiFi
packet and 1 for LTE packet) and the y-axis represents the
total time (in transmission slots) needed to transmit one video
clip of size 23 packets. The “LTE-only” point corresponds
to having LTE transmission only and results in the minimum
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Fig. 10.
Time-Cost tradeoff curve for the LTE/WiFi Multi-RAT ofﬂoading
schemes.
time of 23 units, but with the maximum cost of 23 units.
In order to reduce the cost, we have proposed the 2 QoS-
aware ofﬂoading schemes described earlier. We ﬁnd that the
“LTE/WiFi Ofﬂoading Retransmit-Rest” slightly reduces the
cost to 18, while slightly increasing the time to 24 units.
The extra time units are due to the retransmission time slots
happening because of congestion and packet drop over the
WiFi link.
On the other hand, the “LTE/WiFi Ofﬂoading Retransmit-
Once” reduces the cost much more to 4 units while slightly
increasing the time to 27. Compared to “LTE-only” case, we
ﬁnd that the “LTE/WiFi Ofﬂoading Retransmit-Once” achieves
cost saving of 83% while increasing the time by 15% only. For
reference, we have also plotted the points corresponding to the
WiFi-only transmission. More speciﬁcally, we observe “WiFi-
only without WiFi loading,” which results in both minimum
time and zero cost. If loading is injected, the required time is
increased to 37 units, which is shown in the “WiFi-only with
WiFi loading.”
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have developed 2 4G/WiFi Multi-
RAT testbeds and proposed various QoS-aware ofﬂoading
schemes. In particular, we have developed an Opnet-based
WiMAX/WiFi multi-RAT simulation environment. We have
shown, via this simulation platform, that the WiFi degrades the
VoIP quality as the background trafﬁc rate exceeds 1.5 Mbps.
On the other hand, the WiMAX preserves high quality for the
VoIP application irrespective of the background trafﬁc, as it
guarantees the needed QoS. Consequently, we have proposed
a QoS-aware ofﬂoading scheme that decides either to ofﬂoad
the trafﬁc to the WiFi or to utilize the WiMAX, based on the
network loading data rate. Such ofﬂoading scheme achieves
the required rate with minimum charging cost.
In addition to developing the Opnet-based simulation envi-
ronment, we have also developed a real LTE/WiFi prototype
that can be used to transmit any ﬁle over the 2 air interfaces.
Finally, we have proposed and implemented 2 QoS-aware
LTE/WiFi ofﬂoading schemes and have evaluated the time-cost
performance tradeoff. We have shown that by considering our
proposed QoS-aware ofﬂoading we can achieve cost saving
of 83% while increasing the time by 15% only, compared to
“LTE-only” case.
In the future, we will invesitgate which of the different LTE
layers (PDCP,RLC,MAC) is the best one at which we can
ofﬂoad the data to the WiFi. We will utilize our developed
real LTE/WiFi prototype as a testbed to evaluate the pros and
cons of the different ofﬂoading points.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Nageen Himayat,
Dr. Kirk Skeba, Dr. Shilpa Talwar, Mohamed Fadel, Wafaa
Taie, Mohamed Yousef, and Hossam Samy of Intel Wireless
Communications labs, for their constructive discussions and
cooperation throughout this work.
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP TS36.300 V9.0.0,
“Evoloved universal terrestrial radio access
(E-UTRA) and evolved universal terrestrial radio access network (EU-
TRAN),” 2009.
[2] IEEE 802.16e, “IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks
part 16: Air interface for ﬁxed and mobile broadband wireless access
systems,” 2009.
[3] V. Chandrasekhar, J. G. Andrews, and A. Gatherer, “Femtocell networks:
A survey,” in http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/0803/0803.0952.pdf, 2008.
[4] A. S. Ibrahim, A. Darwish, E. Makled, and H. Elgebaly,
“Adaptive
interference mitigation techniques for femtocells,” Proc. IEEE Wireless
Communication and Networking Conference (WCNC’12), Apr. 2012.
[5] E. Makled, A. S. Ibrahim, A. Darwish, and H. Elgebaly,
“Non-
unanimous power inter-cell interference coordination in heterogeneous
networks,” Proc. the IEEE 75th Vehicular Technology Conference Spring
(VTC’12-Spring), May 2012.
[6] K. Dimou, R. Agero, M. Bortnik, R. Karimi, G. Koudouridis, S. Kamin-
ski, H. Lederer, and J. Sachs, “Generic link layer: a solution for multi-
radio transmission diversity in communication networks beyond 3g,” in
Proc. IEEE Veh. Techn. Conf. (VTC), Sept. 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1672–1676.
[7] G. P. Koudouridis, R. Agero, E. Alexandri, M. Berg, A. Bria, J. Gebert,
L. Jorguseski, H. R. Karimi, I. Karla, P. Karlsson, J. Lundsj, P. Mag-
nusson, F. Meago, M. Prytz, and J. Sachs,
“Feasibility studies and
architecture for multi-radio access in ambient networks,” in Wireless
World Research Forum (WWRF) Meeting, Dec. 2005.
[8] E. Gustafsson and A. Jonsson,
“Always best connected,”
Wireless
communication, IEEE Trans, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 49–55, Feb. 2003.
[9] Y. Choi, H. Kim, S. Han, and Y. Han, “Joint resource allocation for
parallel multi-radio access in heterogeneous wireless networks,” vol. 9,
no. 11, pp. 3324–3329, Nov. 2010.
[10] L. Liu, Y. Wei, Y. Bi, and J. Song,
“Cooperative transmission and
data scheduling mechanism of multiple interfaces in multi-radio access
environment,” in Proc. Global Mobile Congress (GMC), Oct. 2009.
[11] S. Ghamari, M. Schellmann, M. Dillinger, and E. Schulz, “An approach
for automated spectrum reforming for multiple radio access technolo-
gies,” in Proc. Technical Symposium at Telecom World (ITU WT), Oct.
2011.
[12] W. Song and W. Zhuang,
“Multi-service load sharing for resource
management in the cellular/wlan integrated network,”
vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 725–735, Feb. 2009.
[13] M. Fadel, A. S. Ibrahim, and H. Elgebaly,
“Qos-aware multi-RAT
resource allocation with minimum transmit power in multiuser OFDM
system,” Proc. the IEEE Globecom International Workshop on Emerging
Technologies for LTE-Advanced and Beyond-4G (GC’12 Workshop -
LTE-B4G), Dec. 2012.
[14] “http://www.opnet.com/,” v 14.5.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

