    Blockchain and Its Impact on Telecom Networks  
                                         Rajat Kochhar, Barjinder Kochar, Jatinder Singh, Varun Juyal 
                                                                    Ericsson Global Services India (Pvt.) Ltd. 
                                                                                       Gurgaon, India 
   e-mail: {rajat.kumar.kochhar, barjinder.kochar, jatinder.a.singh, varun.juyal}@ericsson.com 
 
Abstract - For the last couple of years, Blockchain has been 
the most talked about technology across a range of industries, 
e.g., currency markets, banks and financial services, supply 
chain, logistics, manufacturing, etc. The telecom industry has 
also shown huge uptake for Blockchain-based solution. Plenty 
of use cases for telecom networks are already proposed and 
proof of concepts solutions are available via many vendors, 
operators, and telecom software companies. Identity 
management, Fraud prevention, Smart contract, Internet of 
Things (IoT) Security, Mobile data tokenization and Initial 
coin offering are some of the use cases which will be offered 
by telecom operators/companies in the very near future. This 
paper discusses in detail some of the important use cases and 
their implementation complexities. This paper also addresses 
how smaller or startup telecom companies/operators can 
leverage the Blockchain opportunity and disrupt the markets 
they are based in. 
Keywords-Blockchain; Consensus Methods; Communication 
Service Provider; Smart Contracts; Initial Coin Offerings.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Blockchain is a decentralized and distributed ledger 
technology that uses algorithms and strong encryption to 
record digital transactions or data in a transparent, secure, 
and anonymous way [1]. Each block typically contains a 
hash pointer as a link to a previous block, a timestamp and 
transaction data. To put it very simply, Blockchain is a data-
structure, like a linked list, where every new block of data 
is cryptographically linked to its predecessor (Figure. 1). By 
design, Blockchains are inherently resistant to modification 
of the data [3]. 
 
       Figure 1. Simple visual representation of Blockchain. 
As seen in Figure 1, this block of data has a unique hash 
which is the address or link to the next block. This chain of 
blocks is copied to all the peers of the network, making it 
distributed in nature, resulting in a chain of blocks known 
as Blockchain. This peer to peer architecture creates data 
redundancy, but ensures that there is no single point of 
failure, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
     Figure 2. Peer to Peer distributed ledger architecture. 
In this paper, we discuss basics of Blockchain 
technology, types of Blockchains, different consensus 
methods. We also suggest in the paper, plenty of Blockchain 
based use cases which can impact telecom networks. This 
paper also talks about how startups or incumbent operators 
can utilize this Blockchain opportunity and disrupt the 
economic and business model of the telecom industry. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section II talks about work done previously on this topic 
and our proposals. Section III describes types of 
Blockchains and compares their characteristics. Section IV 
deals with various consensus methods used in the network. 
Each consensus mechanism has its own pros and cons. We 
will propose multiple telecom use cases based on 
Blockchain in Section V. Section VI deals with business 
impact of Blockchain for startups and small operators. We 
conclude our paper in Section VII. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Many telecom related use cases based on Blockchain 
have been proposed by operators, vendors, and different 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

consultants [1][2][4]. Very few of these proposed use cases 
are under implementation. Some of them are either at proof 
of concept stage while others are still at proposal stage. As 
part of our work for this paper, we researched many use 
cases and their feasibility. We are also proposing new use 
cases which will help operators in monetizing Blockchain 
in telecom networks. Since Blockchain deals with trust and 
security so cases related to identity management, IoT 
security, 
local 
and 
global 
registries 
containing 
subscriber/device data and telecom network transactional 
records are best fit for early Blockchain based use cases in 
telecom. 
As part of our study during this work, we have found 
that use cases monetization will help the operators reduce 
the operational expenditure and will open new sources of 
revenue generation as seen in Section V. 
III. 
TYPES OF BLOCKCHAINS 
Blockchain can be classified into public, permissioned 
and consortium Blockchain depending how it is accessed 
and how the access permissions are granted [3]. 
A. Public Blockchain 
A public Blockchain is a Blockchain that can be 
accessed by anyone (often, anonymously). There are no 
restrictions on who can join and what transaction they can 
post if the transactions are mathematically valid. Although 
members can join the network anonymously (revealing only 
their public key), every transaction that they undertake is 
visible to everyone (public), which can be carefully studied 
to identify the users. Bitcoin is the most famous example of 
public Blockchains [3]. 
In such a network, there is typically an incentive given 
to the participants for executing a computing resource 
intensive consensus protocol (e.g., validate a block using 
Proof-of-work). 
B. Permissioned Blockchain  
A permissioned Blockchain is one in which the 
interaction within the business is restricted to users who 
have the access rights provided by the network owner/s. In 
such a network, non-anonymous validation of blocks or 
interaction with the Blockchain is not permitted. Usually, a 
Certificate Authority (CA) is used to manage access to such 
a network. A Blockchain platform running its network as a 
permissioned network, will determine who can be 
validators and what privileges are given to what users. 
Hyperledger Fabric [6] is one of the most prominent 
example of a permissioned Blockchain framework. 
C. Consortium Blockchain 
It is possible that a single (originating) organization 
will maintain the Blockchain (centralized) and provide 
predefined access rights to interacting parties. Such a 
network typically suits government or regulatory bodies 
who have legal purview over other participants. However, 
it is debatable whether to call such a network a Blockchain 
network, as the ledgers are stored centrally and are not 
distributed among participating nodes. A consortium 
Blockchain provides some of the benefits affiliated with 
permissioned Blockchain — efficiency and transaction 
privacy, for example — without consolidating power with 
only one company. 
 
Figure 3 provides key characteristics of a Blockchain 
based network. 
     
        Figure 3. Key features of a Blockchain network [2]. 
IV. 
CONSENSUS METHODS 
Consensus is a mechanism by which all nodes in the 
Blockchain network agree upon which block (transaction) 
gets added to the chain. Distributed computing existed well 
before Blockchains, but it is these consensus mechanisms 
which ensures that all the nodes in the network agree which 
makes the Blockchain so robust. 
The ability to create honest self-correcting systems 
without the need of third-party to enforce the rules is what 
makes Blockchains so powerful. To enforce the rules, 
several variations of consensus algorithms/protocols are 
used, each with their pros and cons. 
 
A. Proof of Work (PoW) 
The most famous consensus algorithm is Bitcoin’s 
Proof of Work (PoW), which make sure that the subsequent 
blocks in the chains are the only true versions. The 
correctness of the transactions can be verified by any 
participant using network consensus methods and 
cryptographic technologies in the Blockchain network. So, 
effectively the trust is established continuously within the 
network and not by any external central authority or auditor. 
The Proof of Work protocol involves the following: 
a) The miners solve cryptographic and complex 
puzzles to “mine” a block. 
b) These puzzles are designed in such a way which 
makes it hard and taxing on the system as the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

process requires immense amount of energy and 
computations usage.  
c) After solving a puzzle, the miner must present the 
block to the network for verification. Then, it is 
concluded whether are not this block belongs to 
the chain, which is not a simple process. 
 
B. Proof of Stake (PoS) 
 Proof of Stake (PoS) is ideologically different from 
PoW, wherein the complete mining process is done 
virtually and the miners are replaced with validators. The 
validators must lock up some of their coins as a stake before 
the validation process is begun. During the validation 
process, if a block is discovered which they think can be 
added to the Blockchain, it would be validated by placing a 
bet on it. 
If the block’s validation is successful, the block gets 
appended and the validators get a reward which is 
proportionate to the bets they placed. 
 
C. Proof of Activity (PoA) 
  Proof of Activity (PoA) is a hybrid approach that 
combines the previous two consensus algorithms namely 
PoW and PoS. Here, the mining is commenced in the 
traditional Proof-of-Work way, where the miners compete 
to solve a cryptographic puzzle. Importantly, here 
depending on specific implementations, the ‘mined blocks’ 
does not contain any transactions but are more like 
templates. The successfully mined and validated block 
contains only a header and the miner’s reward address. 
D. Proof of Burn (PoB) 
         As can be derived easily, the first three consensus 
algorithms 
are 
quite 
resource-intensive, 
both 
computationally, financially, and energy-wise (massive 
electricity used for upkeep of expensive computer 
hardware and Application Specific Integrated Circuit or 
ASIC cards). To circumvent this drawback, the Proof-of-
Burn (PoB) algorithms lets you ‘burn’ the coins by 
dispatching them to irretrievable addresses. The miners are 
selected randomly to mine on the system. Depending on 
the implementation, the miners may burn the native 
currency or the currency of alternative chain such as 
Bitcoin. The miners have better chance of being selected 
to mine the next block depending on how many coins they 
have burnt. 
E. Proof of Capacity (PoC) 
All the previous algorithms employ a variety of ‘Pay-
to-play’ schemes where miners either have to solve a hard 
cryptographic puzzle, or give coins in stake, or burn some 
coins. Proof-of-Capacity is also in similar lines in that here 
we have to ‘pay’ with hard-disk space. The ones with more 
hard-disk space at stake have better chances of mining the 
next block to earn the reward. 
The Proof-of-Capacity algorithm generates large data 
sets known as ‘plots’ before the mining process, which are 
stored in the hard-drive. The more plots available on the 
hard-drive, the more chances to find the next block in the 
Blockchain. 
F. Proof of Elapsed Time 
To come up with more energy efficient algorithms, 
chipmaker Intel pioneered an alternative consensus protocol 
called Proof-of-Elapsed time. Here, instead of having 
participants solve a cryptographic puzzle, this algorithm 
uses a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) to ensure that 
the blocks are produced in a random lottery fashion, but 
without the required work and hence less resource-
intensive. 
 
Table 1. below provides a comparison between 
different consensus methods. 
       TABLE  I .         DIFFERENT CONSENSUS METHODS 
Consensus 
Algorithm 
 Brief 
Description 
Pros/Cons 
Proof of Work 
(PoW) 
Nodes must 
solve complex 
cryptographic 
puzzles to get 
the right to 
append new 
blocks to the 
chain and get 
the rewards. 
Pros: 
Being the first 
algorithm, it’s 
currently the most 
popular. It’s also 
highly scalable, 
which makes it 
attractive. 
Cons:  
Resource- intensive 
(Computational, 
financial, energy). 
Vulnerable to “51% 
attack” 
Proof of Stake 
(PoS) 
Validators lock 
up some of their 
coins as stake 
after successful 
validation block 
is added to the 
chain. 
Pros: 
No need to solve 
complex 
cryptographic 
puzzles. Fast, 
efficient and uses less 
hardware 
Cons:  
Vulnerable: Someone 
with enough money 
to invest exclusively 
into the destruction of 
this system can do so 
by investing only 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

money, as opposed to 
PoW where they 
should invest money, 
time, expertise, 
hardware, electricity, 
etc.  
Proof of 
Activity (PoA) 
Hybrid approach 
combining PoW 
and PoS. The 
successfully 
mined and 
validated block 
contains only a 
header and the 
miner’s reward 
address. 
Pros: 
Combines best 
features of both PoW 
and PoS 
Cons:  
Less resource- 
intensive 
(Computational, 
financial, energy) 
Proof of Burn 
(PoB) 
Nodes must 
send their coins 
to an 
irretrievable 
address to mine 
a new block. 
The miner 
sending the 
largest number 
of coins get the 
chance to mine a 
new block. 
Pros: 
No need to solve 
complex 
cryptographic 
puzzles. 
Cons:  
Burning coins is 
expensive as there is 
loss of coins. Less 
resource intensive. 
 
Proof of 
Capacity (PoC) 
Large number of 
plots generated 
in hard disk on 
stake, to get the 
right to mine the 
next block. 
Pros: 
Miners does not need 
specialized hardware 
to mine. It 
decentralizes the 
mining process. 
Cons:  
Need lots of hard-
disk space 
Proof of Elapsed 
Time (PoET) 
All nodes 
receive different 
waiting time 
duration, and the 
node with 
shortest duration 
will mine a new 
block. 
Pros: 
Highly energy 
efficient as no 
cryptographic puzzle 
to be solved.  
Cons:  
Reliance on third-
party (Intel). Relies 
on specialized 
hardware 
V. 
TELECOM USE CASES 
A. Identity and Data management 
Identity and data management is a big use case for 
Blockchain which the telecom companies can use to 
generate new sources of revenues. Operators could provide 
their subscribers with an embedded SIM (eSIM) or app that 
creates unique virtual identities for each subscriber which 
are encrypted and stored in a Blockchain. Subscribers can 
use this identity to automatically authenticate themselves 
when visiting e-commerce websites, secure buildings, smart 
vehicles, airplane tickets, and so forth, as well as 
verification of personal documents such as passports, 
driving licenses, birth and marriage certificates, and 
educational degrees. For example, a virtual identity stored 
in a Blockchain using the operator’s app could be used by a 
subscriber to sign into Facebook or Google on a mobile 
device. The benefit of having such a service is that the 
subscriber doesn’t need to provide his or her personal 
details to different service providers to create new accounts 
and complex passwords. The virtual identity stored through 
the operator’s app could be provided to numerous partner 
websites, utility service providers and apps as a unique 
identifier [1]. People will much more easily try new services 
if they do not have to subscribe from scratch –logging in 
with your Google/Facebook account is the best example of 
this.  
This use case will open new sources of revenue for 
the operators and could be a game changer in how we access 
third party sites, apps, government facilities etc. In fact, 
United Nations is already working on a project 
called ID2020 [7] which is a public private partnership 
dedicated to providing identity services to the one billion 
people who live without an officially recognized identity 
and Blockchain is a key technology for this project. 
B. IoT Smart contracts 
A smart contract is a protocol used to facilitate and 
verify the negotiation of a contract. Just like a physical 
contract, smart contract defines the rules and penalties 
around the agreement, but it can also automatically enforce 
them. Industries like insurance, legal services, financial 
services, asset management use smart contracts to enforce 
rules and protocols. For telecom industry, Internet of Things 
(IoT) is one area where Blockchain based smart contracts 
could be extremely useful. 
One of the biggest issues in IoT is how to maintain 
trust and security among millions (if not billions) of sensors 
that are getting connected with the network. The devices in 
the IoT ecosystem are the points of contact with the physical 
world. When IoT platforms use a Blockchain based solution 
for connectivity/authentication, time-consuming workflows 
can be automated in new and unique ways, achieving 
cryptographic verifiability, as well as significant cost and 
time savings in the process.  
C. Decreasing OPEX by proactively using transactional 
network profile 
Telecom operators can save millions of dollars of 
Operational Expenditure (OPEX) by using transactional 
network profile to proactively identify and resolve potential 
network issues. Proactive customer retention efforts are 
kind of process enhancements, service improvements and 
quality initiatives that encourage loyalty by removing the 
causes of defection in the first place. Decreasing OPEX by 
proactively using transactional network profile will also 
help in: 
a) Debugging call related issues 
b) Identification of degraded cells 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

c) Anomaly detection 
d) Compliance and regulatory checking in future 
e) Reducing 
fraud 
between 
collaborating 
operators 
Currently, the primary reason for the increase in 
churner rate is the degradation of quality. Quality 
degradation could be because of frequent dropping of calls 
or lack of throughput. In most of the cases the operators are 
not aware of the issue. Either there is excessive load on the 
cell or there is configuration mismatch or software issue. As 
the operators rely on alarms for action and in most of the 
situation there is no alarms generated for these scenarios. 
 Blockchain 
can 
help 
in 
storing 
network 
transactional data. The persisted data can be studied further 
to detect degraded services, their patterns from the past, and 
reasons behind those patterns. Important Performance 
Monitoring (PM) counters related to cells e.g., Radio 
Resource Connection (RRC) connection successes, 
throughput across a cell for weekday and public holiday can 
be stored on a Blockchain based records. This trend could 
be compared with the current trend of a cell. If the variance 
is quite high, operator could be alerted about the cell. 
Operator can then proactively take action so that customer’s 
experience is not degraded. Even the operator’s customers 
could be informed of the potential issue enhancing the trust 
further. 
D. Initial telecom/network coin offerings 
Initial Coin Offering (ICO) has been a buzzword for 
the last couple of years due to the emergence of so many 
cryptocurrencies in recent past. For the uninitiated, ICOs 
are means of crowdfunding a new cryptocurrency or 
Blockchain based startups. Now, even telecom based 
companies have started to issue telecom/network related 
coins. The ICO are normally related to public Blockchain-
based systems that anyone can participate in and so are the 
“coin offerings”.  
The main rationale behind these network coin offerings 
is that the it allows different models of monetization with 
pricing being governed by external factors rather than 
telecom operators or service providers. ICOs are good way 
of tokenizing mobile data, voice, app based packages and 
other network capabilities. 
E. Mobile data tokenization 
Mobile data plans are normally moderated by operators 
with unused data expiring at the end of every billing cycle 
in most parts of the world. Mobile data rates vary from 
1$/GB to 10$/GB across different operators and regions. 
Millions of dollars of unused data expire every month 
across the world. Even with more than 2 decades of mobile 
connectivity, more than half of the world’s population still 
does not have mobile and data connectivity. The unused 
data could be provided to underprivileged or unconnected 
parts of the planet thereby providing data connectivity. 
A simple Blockchain based exchange could help to 
bridge this gap whereby users can donate or sell their 
unused data plans in the form of tokens to other users. A 
decentralized solution for providing mobile data will enable 
recipients to buy from providers at transparent terms, and 
reduces costs than buying from operators. The use case will 
require partnerships with operators to offer mobile data 
packages and enable user-to-user data transfer. 
F. Global and country-specific registries 
These registries could be databases both short and long 
term where information may get updated once in a week, 
month, or year. These registries could contain lists of 
blacklisted customers, lost devices, number portability 
updates and shared spectrum usage rights and allocations. 
Blockchain-enabled trust and security will be the most 
important differentiating factors which will keep these 
registries different from normal databases and will be 
accessible to different operators. Cross operator registry 
having International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) of 
lost mobiles can be used for identifying and location lost 
devices. Of course, these registries require a lot of 
collaboration among the operators along with regulatory 
framework put in by regulatory body. 
In fact, in May 2018, Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
India (TRAI) has proposed the use of Blockchain based 
ledger to curb the menace of spam or unsolicited 
commercial communication (UCC). 
VI. HOW STARTS UPS , SMALL OPERATORS CAN LEVERAGE 
UPON BLOCKCHAIN OPPORTUNITY  
Blockchain is one technology which could be 
compared to dot com boom of the late nineties. Blockchain 
has the potential to disrupt telecom industry in a big way. 
Different 
startups 
can 
specialize 
with 
innovative 
Blockchain solutions for facets such as virtual SIM card 
provisioning, authentication, national and international 
roaming solutions, micro-payments, customer care, data 
storage on a common cloud across operators. 
Also, the backend operations, such as Operation 
Support System (OSS) and Business Support System (BSS) 
processes like billing of consumers, validation and number 
portability databases can be improved upon using block-
chain. Dent wireless [8] and Airfox wireless [9] are two 
such startups which are disrupting the telecom data markets 
by their unique offerings. Mobile Virtual Network 
Operators (MVNO’s) and tier 2-3 operators can also make 
use of this unique opportunity by offering innovative 
solutions based on Blockchain and challenge the big 
operators. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
Blockchain has been most talked and hyped technology 
of recent years with use cases coming out in almost every 
domain. Although Blockchain in its initial years had been 
centered around currencies, banks and insurance sectors 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

now industries like telecom see greater value from 
Blockchain implementation. Trust and security are 
important from the telecom network point of view. 
Blockchain presents a possible use case due to its inherent 
characteristics, especially in use cases where a third party is 
involved. 
Blockchain will also enable new data monetization 
plans, enterprises will come up with innovative business 
models challenging and disrupting the traditional models 
employed by many of the telecom operators. It is expected 
that within the next few years, the use of Blockchain 
technology by the telecommunications industry will 
become more widespread and eventually become the norm 
in services like identity management, and registries to start 
with. As is often the case with any new technology, 
Blockchain is being developed and implemented at a faster 
rate than the existing regulations and government’s 
frameworks. Regulatory authorities should also enable 
flexible legal and specification frameworks, such as data 
protection laws, for faster implementation of technologies 
such as Blockchain in telecom. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Carlos Alberto Martinez 
- Head of EDOS DP PDG and Juan Jesus Sanchez Sanchez, 
both of Ericsson Malaga, Spain and Neeraj Narang, of 
Ericsson Global India Pvt. Ltd.  for their valuable feedback, 
support, and guidance. The authors will also like to express 
their gratitude towards Nipun Sharma and Praveen Arora, 
both of Ericsson Global India Pvt. Ltd for their comments. 
DISCLAIMER 
This paper reflects the authors own opinions and not 
necessarily those of their employer. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Kochhar, “Blockchain in telecoms: Is it still all hype or 
are we moving towards reality”, Nov. 2017, [online]: 
https://www.telecomstechnews.com/news/2017/nov/17/Blo
ckchain-telecoms-it-still-all-hype-or-are-we-moving-
towards-reality/ , [accessed: June 2018]  
[2]  A. Babu, B. Davis, T. Bruwer, “How Blockchain can impact 
the telecommunications industry and its relevance to the C-
Suite” 
, 
Deloitte 
, 
2016, 
[online]: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/za/Docum
ents/technology-media-
telecommunications/za_TMT_Blockchain_TelCo.pdf 
, 
[accessed: April 2018] 
[3] A. Roychowdhury, “Blockchain fundamentals”, [online] : 
https://arkarc.gitbooks.io/weekend-workbook-Blockchain-
fundamentals/ , [accessed: April 2018] 
[4] E. Velasco-Castillo, “Nine Blockchain opportunities that 
telecoms operators should explore”, Analysys mason, 
Jun.2016, 
[online]: 
http://www.analysysmason.com/Research/Content/Comme
nts/nine-Blockchain-opportunities-Jun2016-RDMY0/ 
, 
[accessed: April 2018] 
[5] “Reimaging telecommunications with Blockchains”, IBM,   
Jan 
2018, 
[online]: 
https://public.dhe.ibm.com/common/ssi/ecm/gb/en/gbe039
01usen/reimagining-telecommunications-with-
Blockchains.pdf , [accessed : Feb 2018] 
[6] Hyperledger, The Linux Foundation project, [online] : 
www.hyperledger.org , [accessed : Feb 2018] 
[7] United Nations Digital Indentity Program, [online] 
:https://id2020.org , [accessed : June 2018] 
[8] Dent Wireless, [online] : https://www.dentwireless.com/ , 
[accessed : May 2018] 
[9] Airfox Wireless, [online] : https://www.airfoxwireless.com/ 
, [accessed : May 2018] 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

