Spectrum Access during Cognitive Radio Mobiles’ 
Handoff  
Emna Trigui, Moez Esseghir, Leila Merghem Boulahia   
Autonomic Networking Environment, ICD/ERA, CNRS UMR STMR 6279 
University of Technology of Troyes (UTT)  
12, rue Marie Curie, 10010 Troyes Cedex, France 
{emna.trigui, moez.esseghir, leila.merghem_boulahia} @utt.fr 
 
 
Abstract — Cognitive radio is an emergent technology in 
wireless networks that aims to improve spectrum’s use by 
allowing opportunist access. Recent research activities related 
to cognitive radio consider static terminals, neglecting the 
impact of user’s mobility. In this paper, we are interested in 
the concept of mobility in cognitive radio networks. Thus, we 
propose an algorithm of spectrum handoff for mobile cognitive 
radio users. Our algorithm presents a decentralized approach 
using multi-agent systems. Each terminal is managed by an 
agent that enables it to negotiate and cooperate with 
neighboring users. During the handoff, agents recover sensing 
information then choose appropriate band to switch if 
spectrum handoff is necessary. Finally, agents use negotiation 
and cooperation methods to insure a more efficient spectrum 
sharing.  
Keywords- Cognitive radio, Dynamic spectrum access, 
Mobility, Spectrum sharing, Spectrum handoff. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recent evolution of wireless technologies is creating 
greater demand in terms of spectrum resources. To 
overcome this problem, researchers have used a new 
paradigm known as cognitive radio (CR) [1] that senses the 
nearby spectrum and tries to utilize it opportunistically. 
Indeed, there are unused spectrum portions (spectrum 
holes), which can be utilized in order to increase the number 
of users and to better distribute the available resources [2]. 
In CR networks [3], there are two types of users: 
licensed or primary users (PUs), and unlicensed or 
secondary users (SUs). PUs can access the wireless network 
resources according to their license. SUs are equipped with 
CR capabilities to opportunistically access the spectrum. 
Researches on CR networks are mainly focused on 
detection and allocation of available spectrum resources, 
leaving terminal mobility issues mostly unexplored. In fact, 
mobility makes spectrum management problem more 
complex notably because of handoff management.  
Due to the above facts, our work focuses on mobility 
management and spectrum sharing for mobile CR terminals 
during the handover. This latter occurs when mobile 
terminal switches from one network point of attachment to 
another one [4]. In CR context, it can come with spectrum 
handoff, which is the change of the used spectrum 
frequency. The goal of managing handoff is mainly to keep 
alive ongoing sessions with the requested quality of service 
(QoS). In the rest of the paper “spectrum handoff” [5] and 
“spectrum mobility” [6] will be used interchangeably. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents related works on spectrum and mobility 
management in CR networks. Next, Section III describes the 
considered scenario. Section IV details our proposed 
solution, depicts the suggested handoff algorithm for mobile 
CR terminals and gives an illustration of the resulting 
dynamic spectrum distribution. Finally, Section V concludes 
the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Since the last decade, a large amount of literature 
already exists on CR. Consequently, several dynamic 
spectrum access approaches have been proposed [6], [7], 
[8], mostly addressing the issues of spectrum sensing and 
spectrum allocation while there is no much research effort to 
address the problems of spectrum handoff. 
The spectrum sensing [7], [9] is a fundamental step to 
detect the presence of PU in CR networks. There are 
different ways in, which CR users are able to perform 
spectrum sensing. Theses ways are classified into two 
categories: Non cooperative and cooperative spectrum 
sensing. Non-cooperative spectrum sensing occurs when a 
CR acts on its own and self-configures according to the 
signals it can detect.  Cooperative spectrum sensing uses a 
central station to receive reports of signals from a variety of 
radio 
users. 
CR cooperation 
reduces problems of 
interference where a CR user cannot hear a primary user 
because of issues such as shading from the PU. Besides, 
channel miss detection phase a problem that may occur 
during sensing phase and it depends necessarily on the 
selected sensing algorithm. In our work, we do not address 
spectrum sensing issues as our research is focused on 
spectrum sharing and mobility. 
Dynamic spectrum allocation and sharing [10] exploit 
temporal and spatial traffic statistics to share more 
221
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

efficiently 
the 
underutilized 
spectrum. 
Game-theory 
approach [11] is the mostly used for spectrum sharing. 
Bargaining, auctions and multi-agent systems are also 
increasingly used.  
Broadly, research works on CR have been concentrated 
on the case of static networks without taking into account 
mobility and handover aspects. Although the mobility-based 
handoff mechanisms have been extensively investigated in 
wireless, cellular and heterogeneous networks [4], [12], 
[13], it is still an open research issue for CR networks.  
Nevertheless, some works like [14], [15] have used CR 
concept to improve mobility management in traditional 
cellular networks. For example in [15], the proposed 
approach enables changes in the base station’s parameters to 
meet the new services requirements in modern wireless 
cellular systems. These changes are performed using agents 
that manage cells via negotiation, learning, reasoning, and 
identification strategies. The principal aim of this solution is 
to reduce interference, HO delay and blocking probability. 
However, it is only suitable for traditional cellular networks 
with a centralized management system.  
Our objective in this paper is to achieve an optimal 
dynamic spectrum sharing and an efficient spectrum 
mobility management by considering the handover in the 
CR networks. Therefore, next, we propose a typical scenario 
and a spectrum handoff algorithm for mobile CR users. 
III. 
SCENARIO 
Most scenarios previously discussed in the literature in 
CR context are restricted to the spectrum management 
between fixed nodes (absence of HO). In this work, we 
consider the scenario of a mobile node, as shown in Fig. 1. 
Mobile cognitive radio terminal (MCT) moves from 
location A towards location B through a set of areas, where 
the space is supposed to be distributed in zones each having 
its own characteristics (frequencies, number of users, etc.).  
The MCT uses initially a spectrum portion already 
assigned to it in the departure zone. This allocation was 
made after detection and decision phases according to the 
MCT resources requirements. Assigned spectrum portion 
can be shared with PU or SUs. 
When moving from one zone to another one, the MCT 
can meet the following scenarios: 
• 
The spectrum portion used by the MCT no longer 
guarantees the QoS required in the new zone. 
• 
The spectrum portion is partially occupied and 
negotiation/ cooperation are possible. This happens 
in the following cases: 
o 
The band is occupied by a PU.  
o 
The band is occupied by one or several SUs. 
o 
PU and a set of SUs coexist in this band. 
• 
Other spectrum portions ensuring a better QoS are 
available in the new zone. 
IV. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
In this section, we first present the basic behavior of the 
MCT. Then we propose an algorithm for dynamic spectrum 
sharing and handoff for the MCT when switching zones. 
Finally, we give an example of the spectrum distribution to 
illustrate our solution. 
A. The basic behavior of mobile cognitive radio terminal 
The state diagram in Fig. 2 details the MCT behavior 
within the same zone. 
During the detection phase, the CR node senses its 
surrounding radio environment to find spectrum holes. This 
detection process continues till discovering available 
spectrum portion (at least one). Then, the CR node starts the 
decision phase to choose the appropriate band based on the 
requested QoS by the running applications on MCT. During 
this phase, the CR node observes and characterizes bands 
and chooses on FIFO bases the first one that satisfies its 
applications’ needs. By using FIFO strategy when selecting 
spectrum portion, we aim to minimize the decision process 
duration. If none of free channels is suitable (for instance, 
insufficient bandwidth or QoS not guaranteed), the CR node 
starts again the spectrum sensing.  
Once the appropriate channel is selected, the CR node 
may share it with other users. Two possible scenarios can 
 
Figure 2. State diagram of cognitive radio node behavior 
 
 
Figure 1. Scenario of mobile cognitive radio node 
222
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

lead to spectrum handoff: (1) a coexisting PU would reclaim 
its radio spectrum resources and thus, the MCT has to move 
immediately to another available portion since a PU has 
always the priority; (2) QoS degradation due to interference 
can also lead to spectrum mobility. 
B. Spectrum handoff algorithm for MCT 
The node mobility imposes new challenges, which 
include the topology change and breaking the continuity of 
services during HO. Hence, the MCT requires a specific 
behavior when switching to new zones (section 3 details 
eventual scenarios). It should know in prior new spectrum 
conditions and should react towards new circumstances. 
Different mechanisms to ensure continuity of service and 
efficient spectrum management are needed. For these 
reasons, we propose an algorithm of spectrum access that is 
executed by the MCT when Handoff occurs (algorithm 1). 
 
In the rest of the paper, we use the following notations: 
• 
QoS(MCT) : Quality of service required by MCT. 
• 
spectrum i(zone j) : Current spectrum portion i used 
by the MCT in zone j. 
• 
spectrum i(zone j+1) : Spectrum portion i that should 
be occupied by the MCT in the new zone j+1. 
We assume that the MCT activates its handoff decision 
algorithm as soon as it comes close to a new zone in order to 
anticipate a possible handover. According to the information 
recorded about its new environment, the MCT updates its 
knowledge base with, among others, spectrum conditions. 
Our proposed solution uses multi-agent systems where 
each CR node is equipped with an agent. Every Agent is 
autonomous and manages its spectrum resources needs in a 
decentralized way. It interacts with other users to insure an 
effective spectrum management. The MCT will then 
negotiate with the PU and cooperate with SUs.  
Negotiation with PU means a discussion indented to 
produce a contract between the MCT and the PU. The PU 
can accept or refuse to share its licensed spectrum portion 
with the requesting SU.  
Cooperation means that MCT and SUs collaborate 
together to share the spectrum. SUs will check whether the 
new distribution of spectrum including new arriving MCT 
still satisfies their network access needs.  
If in the new zone, the current used spectrum is totally 
occupied or if it does not guarantee required QoS then the 
MCT has to execute a spectrum handoff. Otherwise, if the 
spectrum is totally idle, it keeps using it.  
On the other hand, if the current used spectrum is 
partially occupied in the new zone, it is necessary to check, 
which kind of existing users (PU or SU) are there. The MCT 
can distinguish between a PU and an SU either by using a 
particular sensing algorithm [16] or by exchanging (or 
broadcasting) messages with new zone s’ users. 
If a PU is present then the MCT must request its 
approval for spectrum sharing. In case of disagreement, 
MCT has to look for another portion. When the spectrum is 
partially used only by SUs then they should verify the 
sharing feasibility with the MCT. 
 
Through sensing, the MCT can find more than one 
appropriate spectrum portions in the new zone. However, 
our algorithm avoids MCT unnecessary spectrum handoff 
assuming that the current used spectrum is still available in 
the new visited zone and provides QoS requirements. 
In addition, our algorithm insures maintaining PU QoS. 
Indeed, TCM cannot use spectrum unless it receives PU 
acceptance. PU agreement depends on many factors like PU 
QoS, disposal of unutilized appropriate spectrum resources, 
price, etc. In other words, PU would not accept to share its 
spectrum with a TCM if this will degrade PU QoS.  
C. Example of spectrum disribution 
To better understand our proposed algorithm (algorithm 
1) an example of spectrum distribution is depicted in Fig. 3. 
 Initially, the MCT is located in zone1 and uses spectrum 
portion 1. When starting the handover from zone 1 to zone 
2, the MCT discovers that the spectrum portion 1 in use is 
unavailable in zone 2. The spectrum portion 1 is either fully 
used by PUs and/ or SUs or no longer guarantees the 
required QoS. Thus, the MCT switches to an idle spectrum 
Algorithm 1: Spectrum Mobility  management for MCT during Handoff 
If (spectrum i(zone j+1) = fully occupied)  
     Or  (spectrum i(zone j+1)  does not guarantee QoS(MCT)) 
     Then spectrum i(zone j+1)   Choose_new_portion()  // Spectrum Handoff 
Else  
   If (spectrum i(zone j+1) is totally idle)  // Band is totally free 
      Then  
         spectrum i(zone j+1)   spectrum i(zone j)    
         // Continue to use the same spectrum 
      Else 
          If (PU Є spectre i(zone j+1))  
              // If  a PU is using a portion of the spectrum 
 
    Then  
                         If negotiation (PU, MCT)= acceptance 
                            Then spectrum_sharing(PU, MCT) 
                            Else spectrum i(zone j+1)   Choose_new_portion()  
                         End If    
               Else      // If there are one or several SUs in the spectrum 
                         If cooperation (SUs, MCT)= acceptable  
                             // free spectrum portion is sufficient 
                            Then spectrum_sharing (MCT, SUs) 
                             Else spectrum i(zone j+1)   Choose_new_portion() 
                         End If 
          End If 
  End If 
 End If 
Choose_new_portion() function makes the same tests for another 
spectrum hole detected by the sensing algorithm in order to choose a new 
portion to be utilized by the MCT in the new zone. Returns a portion that 
meets MCT access needs without disrupting other available users (PU or 
SU) in the same zone. 
223
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

band, the portion 2. When moving from zone 2 to zone 3, 
the MCT meets a PU, which is partially using the spectrum 
portion 2 in zone 3. The MCT starts a negotiation with the 
PU for spectrum sharing. In our selected scenario, the PU 
disagrees sharing and the MCT runs another spectrum 
handoff to acquire portion 3 (idle in zone 3).  
During the handover from zone 3 to zone 4, the MCT 
detects the presence of SUs. The MCT cooperates with them 
for spectrum sharing. As the available amount of band 
meets the MCT request without affecting the other SUs, the 
MCT continues to use spectrum portion 3 in zone 4. When 
arriving to zone 5, remaining band is not sufficient bringing 
the MCT to a spectrum handoff by switching to portion 4.  
MCT continues to operate in the same band within zone 6 as 
it is totally idle and in zone 7 since the PU accepts here to 
share its spectrum portion. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have addressed the spectrum 
management issues in CR networks and showed the 
limitations considering the mobility. We proposed then a 
spectrum management algorithm that combines terminals 
mobility with negotiations for dynamic spectrum sharing in 
CR networks. We have then illustrated our proposal through 
an example of spectrum distribution. Our solution relies on 
decentralized and multi-agent approach and uses negotiation 
and cooperation mechanisms in order to ensure dynamic and 
efficient spectrum access.  
As future works, we will choose well-defined 
negotiation algorithms and define channels selection 
parameters more precisely. We will also study (in more 
details) agent’s interactions to refine our decision process. 
We will subsequently evaluate the performances of our 
solution through simulations and mathematical modeling. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partly supported by the Ministry of Higher 
Education and Research of France. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Fette, “Cognitive radio technology”, Elsevier, USA, 2006 
[2] Fcc, Et Docket N° 03-222 Notice of proposed rulemaking and 
order, December 2003 
[3] J. Mitola, “Cognitive radio: An integrated agent architecture 
for software defined radio”, PhD thesis, Royal Institute of 
Technology (KTH), Sweden, May 2000 
[4] B. Abuhaija and K. Al-Begain, , “An algorithm for multi 
service continuity in multi radio access cellular networks”, 
12th International Conference on Computer Modelling and 
Simulation, Cambridge, 24-26 Mars 2010, vol.9, p 558–566 
[5] A. Lertsinsrubtavee, N. Malouch, and S. Fdida, “Spectrum 
Handoff Strategies for Multiple Channels Cognitive Radio 
Network”, ACM CoNEXT Conf., Philadelphia, 2010, USA 
[6] F. Akyildiz, W-Y. Lee, M.C. Vuran, and S. Mohanty, “Next 
generation/dynamic 
spectrum 
access/cognitive 
radio 
wireless networks: A survey”, International Journal of 
Computer and Telecommunication Networking, vol. 50, 
n° 13, September 2006, pp. 2127–2159 
[7] S. Haykin, “Cognitive radio: Brain-empowered wireless 
communications”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, vol. 23, February 2005, pp. 201–220 
[8] Q. Zhao and B.M. Sadler, “A survey of dynamic spectrum 
access: signal processing, networking, and regulatory policy”, 
IEEE Signal Processing Mag., vol. 4, n°.3, 2007, pp.79-89 
[9] T. Ycek and H. Arslan, “A survey of spectrum sensing 
algorithms for cognitive radio applications”, IEEE Comm. 
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 11, n°1, pp. 116–160, 2009 
[10] U. Mir, L. Merghem-Boulahia, and D. Gaïti, “On using 
multiagent systems for spectrum sharing in cognitive radios 
networks”. Book chapter, accepted in Formal and Practical 
Aspects of Autonomic Comp. and Networking: Specification, 
Development and Verification, IGI Global, 2010 
[11] Z. Ji and K.J.R. Liu, “Dynamic spectrum sharing: a dynamic 
spectrum sharing: a game theoretical overview”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, 2007, pp. 88–94 
[12] F. Akyildiz, W-Y. Lee, M.C. Vuran, and S. Mohanty, 
“Mobility management in next-generation wireless systems”, 
IEEE, vol. 87, 1999, pp. 1347–1384 
[13] A. Ahmed, “Continuity of Service in Heterogeneous Wireless 
Networks with Multi-agent Systems”, PhD thesis, University 
of Technology of Troyes, October 2010 
[14] E.V. Belmega, S. Lasaulce, and M. Debbah, “Decentralized 
handovers in cellular networks with cognitive terminals”, 3rd 
International Symposium on Communication, Control, and 
Signal Processing (ISCCSP-2008), Malta, 2008, pp. 219–224 
[15] J. Raiyn, “Toward cognitive radio handover management”, 
Annual IEEE 19th International Symposium on Personal, 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communication (PIMRC ‘O8), 
Cannes, France, 15-18 September 2008, pp. 1–5 
[16] T. Newman and T. Clancy, “Security threats to cognitive 
radio signal classifiers”, in Virginia Tech Wireless Personal 
Communications Symposium, June 2009. 
 
Figure 3. Exemple of dynamic spectrum distribution 
224
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

