An End-to-End QoS Performance Evaluation of VoLTE in 4G 
E-UTRAN-based Wireless Networks
Myasar R. Tabany
Wireless Communications Research Lab
School of Systems Engineering, The University of Reading 
Reading, Berkshire, UK
m.tabany@pgr.reading.ac.uk
Chris G. Guy
Wireless Communications Research Lab
School of Systems Engineering, The University of Reading 
Reading, Berkshire, UK
c.g.guy@reading.ac.uk
Abstract— Long Term Evolution (LTE) is the Fourth-
Generation 
(4G) 
mobile 
broadband 
technology. 
Its 
standardization has been finalized by Third-Generation 
Partnership 
Project 
(3GPP) 
in 
Release
8 
technical 
specifications (R8). As users’ demand for higher data rate 
continues to rise, LTE and its ability to cost effectively provide 
fast, highly responsive mobile data services, a scalable 
bandwidth and a reduced latency will become ever more 
important. However, the Evolved Packet Core (EPC) of the 
Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-
UTRAN) based wireless networks (LTE and LTE-Advanced) is 
all-IP Packet-Switched (PS) core network and lacks native 
support for Circuit-Switched (CS) services. This introduces the
problem of how to provide voice services in these networks. 
The controversy around many of the proposed solutions to 
provide a PS voice and the effects of this step on the 
deployment of LTE networks is presented. This paper also 
deals with the Quality of Service (QoS) in a Voice over LTE 
(VoLTE) service. It provides a comprehensive evaluation and 
validation of VoLTE QoS based on the International 
Telecommunication Union standard Recommendations (ITU-
R) and 3GPP standard technical specifications. The initial 
results obtained give clear evidence that the VoLTE service 
fulfills the ITU-R and 3GPP standard requirements in terms of 
end-to-end delay, jitter and packet loss rate. Furthermore, the 
results related to implementing different LTE bandwidths 
clearly reflect how these bandwidths affect the overall network 
performance and end-user experience.
Keywords- VoLTE; E-UTRAN; LTE; QoS; IMS.
I.
INTRODUCTION 
      The Third-Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has 
developed a new technology called Long Term Evolution 
(LTE) in Release 8 (R8) Technical specification [1]. 3GPP 
LTE aims to improve the Third-Generation (3G) Universal 
Mobile Telecommunication System (UMTS) technology to 
meet 
the 
International 
Mobile 
Telecommunications 
Advanced (IMT-A) requirements determined by the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) [2]. Some of 
the agreed features of LTE are a significant increase in data 
rates with up to 300 Mbps downlink (DL) and 75 Mbps 
uplink (UL); a scalable bandwidth of 1.4, 3, 5, 10, 15 and 20 
MHz and a reduced latency [3]. However, the changes in 
this design were significant, with a flat all-IP Evolved 
Packet Core network (EPC) only supporting
Packet-
Switched (PS) services [1]. The EPC lacks native Circuit-
Switched (CS) services support, including voice, which is 
considered as the main revenue for Mobile Service 
Providers (MSPs). This is different from most of the legacy 
UTRAN/GERAN wireless networks such as UMTS, which 
support both CS and PS services [2]. A user always expects 
voice as a basic service provided by the network operator 
and this raises the question of how to provide a voice call 
service to LTE users. The Evolved Universal Terrestrial
Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) is the radio wireless 
access for LTE and LTE-A and its architecture is simpler 
and flatter than Radio Access Network (RAN) in the 3G 
mobile networks as shown in Fig. 1. 3GPP presented the 
technical specifications for the E-UTRAN based networks 
(LTE and LTE-Advanced) in Release 8, 9 and 10. 
According to the 3GPP specifications, there is no guarantee 
that LTE has the ability to fulfil the ITU-R and 3GPP 
technical requirements related to QoS, especially with one 
way VoLTE end-to-end delay of less than 150 ms and a 
minimum of 98% packets successful delivery rate [4]. In 
this work, firstly we introduce a brief comparison between 
the proposed solutions for deploying voice service over LTE 
wireless networks. We also evaluated the VoLTE QoS 
performance in terms of end-to-end delay, jitter and packet 
loss rate. For this purpose, we designed a realistic baseline 
simulation for LTE wireless networks based on 3GPP R8 
technical specifications, including IMS. We then simulated 
different LTE bandwidths and depending on the results we 
investigated the effects of deploying these bandwidths on 
the service quality and end-user experience. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
briefly introduces a description of the VoLTE proposed 
technologies. Section III explains the QoS architecture in 
LTE wireless networks. Section IV describes the designed 
simulation environment. Section V discusses and analyses
the simulation results and finally, we conclude this work in 
Section VI.
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 1.
E-UTRAN System Architecture [5]
II.
DEPLOYMENT OF VOLTE  OVER 3GPP 4G E-
UTRAN -BASED NETWORKS
This paper discusses mainly Voice over LTE (VoLTE) 
technology based on IP Multimedia Subsystem/ Multi Media 
Telephony (IMS/MMTel), which is standardized by 3GPP to 
provide voice service to LTE wireless networks. Other 
proposed technologies such as Circuit Switched Fall Back 
(CSFB), Voice over LTE via Generic Access (VoLGA) and 
Over The Top (OTT) were investigated and described briefly 
in this paper.
A.
VoLTE via IMS /MMTeL
     Voice is a fundamental service to consider in any Next 
Generation Mobile Networks (NGMNs). In fact, IMS with 
MMTel are the key to make this possible and provide a 
required High Definition (HD) telephony system to LTE [2] 
[6]. In VoLTE, a software upgrade is required to the LTE 
network and its PS core network (EPC). VoLTE uses a QoS 
Class Indicator value equal to one (QCI=1) and the 
Conversational QoS class for either originating or 
terminating a voice call.  For more detailed information 
about the procedure of UE to originate a voice call in a 
roaming scenario refer to [7]. According to the 3GPP 
technical specification in [6] IMS is an access independent 
based on the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), defined by 
the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) to support voice 
and other multimedia services. The reference architecture of 
IMS is illustrated in Fig. 2. IMS provides a complete 
solution to handle voice over all-IP and PS wireless 
networks. GSM Association (GSMA) announced in 2010 it 
will consider IMS as a major solution in the one voice 
profile recommendations [8]. 
The first step of User Equipment (UE) to start a voice 
call is an IMS registration. Next the UE obtains the required 
bearers to complete the call followed by IP address 
allocation to be known by other users. Multi Media 
Telephony (MMTel) has originated in 3GPP Release 7. It is 
a service set in the IMS standard architecture that defines 
both Network to Network Interface (NNI) and User to 
Network Interface (UNI) [10].  It offers real time multimedia 
services based on IMS and allows users to use voice and 
other services.  One of the major roles of MMTel is to 
maintain service quality of a minimum performance voice 
and video which support 3GPP codecs. 
Figure 2.
The IMS Reference Architecture [9]
B.
Circuit Switched Fall Back (CSFB)
      CSFB is a 3GPP standard bridging technology between 
the LTE PS and legacy CS wireless networks to obtain CS 
services [11].  The NGMN alliance has recommended CSFB 
to enable non-IMS roaming subscribers to use both PS and
CS voice services in legacy CS networks. The precondition 
in CSFB is the LTE coverage must overlap with 
UTRAN/GERAN. CSFB was specified in the 3GPP 
technical specification in [11]. CSFB is an interim solution 
which is suitable to use when the visiting LTE networks do 
not have IMS or IMS still not fully deployed.  
C.
Voice over LTE via Generic Access (VoLGA)
      VoLGA is a different mechanism which was defined by 
the VoLGA forum in 2009 based on the 3GPP Generic 
Access Network (GAN) specified in [12] and [13]. VoLGA 
connects the LTE PS network with MSC/VLR in 
UTRAN/GERAN using a special gateway called VoLGA 
Access Network Controller (VANC). However, VoLGA has 
not been accepted by the 3GPP standardization body as 
standard technology to provide voice to LTE users, which is 
the biggest disadvantage of this technology.
D.
Over The Top (OTT)
     Over The Top (OTT) means providing voice services 
through third party providers such as Skype or Google Talk.  
This service is provided either free of charge or is relatively
inexpensive. Mobile operators might use OTT when they do 
not want to invest too much on deployment a very 
expensive IMS. However, there is no guaranteed QoS and 
no service continuity using this method, especially when UE 
moves outside an LTE coverage area. Call drop and call 
failure is always possible using this method [13].
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

III.
QOS IN E-UTRAN-BASED WIRELESS NETWORKS
      Quality of Service (QoS) is a concept of providing a 
particular quality for a specific type of service. QoS is one 
of the main and the greatest challenges for the IP-based 
services that lack of a dedicated connection channel. As part 
of the rapid growth of multimedia applications over cellular 
networks, the QoS needs to be maintained a guaranteed
service through wireless networks [14]. It is essential for 
LTE to provide an efficient QoS solution that the user 
experience of each service running over the shared radio 
link is satisfied. Thus, the Evolved Packet System (EPS) 
system selects different QoS data flows for each service.
A)
QoS Architecture in LTE Networks
      3GPP introduced the QoS architecture of the LTE/EPS 
in R8 technical specifications. As can be seen from Fig. 3, 
this end-to-end class-based QoS architecture has been 
introduced to support a mix of Real Time (RT) and non-
Real Time (non-RT) services.
Figure 3.
LTE/EPS Bearer Service Architecture [17]
  The QoS in EPS is based on the data flows concept and 
bearers. Such flows of data are established between the UE 
and the Packet Data Network Gateway (PDN-GW) and 
mapped to bearers, with three individual bearers (Radio, S1 
and S5/S8). The combinations of them provide the end-to-
end QoS support to the LTE system. With the help of 
bearers, a scalar value, referred to as a QoS Class Identifier 
(QCI) with the help of bearers specifies the class to which 
the bearer belongs [15]. Table I illustrates the standardized 
QoS classes.
     
B)
QoS for Voice over LTE (VoLTE)
       For running VoLTE service over LTE networks, two 
default and one dedicated bearers are mostly required [18]. 
The first bearer is the default bearer, which is used for 
signaling messages. IMS uses this default bearer with 
QCI=5 for any SIP signaling related to it. The Packet Delay 
Budget (PDB) in this bearer is 100 ms between the PDN-
GW and the UE with up to 10-6 Packet Loss Rate (PLR). 
This default bearer has the highest priority amongst all other 
QCI classes. The second bearer is also a default bearer, 
which is used for all other TCP-based traffic (e.g., Email). 
Up to 300 ms PDB is allowed in this bearer with a 
maximum of 10-6 PLR. It has the lowest priority among all 
other QCI classes. The last bearer is dedicated bearer. This 
dedicated bearer is used for conversational voice (VoLTE). 
Up to 100 ms PDB is allowed with maximum10-2 PLR. This 
bearer has the second highest priority among all other QCI 
classes and unlike the other default bearers, it is always 
GBR. It is associated with the first default bearer with 
Linked EPS Bearer ID (L-EBI) and has also Traffic Flow 
Template (TFT) which determines the rules of sending and 
receiving IP packets.
TABLE I.
STANDARDIZED QCI CHARACTERISTICS [16]
QCI
Resource 
type
Packet 
error/loss 
rate
Delay
Budget 
QCI 
priority
Example 
services
1
GBR
10-2
100 ms
2
Conversational 
voice
2
10-3
150 ms
4
Real-time 
video
3
50 ms
3
Real-time 
gaming
4
10-6
300 ms
5
Buffered video
5
Non-
GBR
100 ms
1
IMS signaling
6
300 ms
6
Buffered 
video, email
7
10-3
100 ms
7
Voice, RT 
video 
8
10-6
300 ms
8
TCP-based 
services
9
9
IV.
SIMULATION ENVIRONMENTS
      The OPNET modeler from Riverbed Technologies Ltd. 
has been used to design the baseline for the LTE wireless 
network. The practical side of this study started by 
designing a baseline for the LTE wireless network. This 
baseline includes a complete implementation for VoLTE, 
the topic in our study. The LTE baseline network consists of 
seven LTE base stations (eNBs), three mobile stations (UEs) 
in each eNB (total of 21 UEs in the whole network), one IP 
Multimedia System (IMS) in addition to the LTE core 
network (EPC). The designed network contains Application 
Definition, Profile Definition, Mobility Management and 
OPNET LTE configuration entities. In addition, a number of 
wired and wireless links to connect between different nodes 
and the LTE EPC were used. Mobility is implemented with 
node velocity equal to 5 meters per second (m/s). Intra-
frequency is the only handover likely to happen between 
cells of the same frequency. The only path loss model used
in each UE is set to free space with no any obstruction for 
the propogated signal. The UE and the eNB transmission 
power are set to cell size based for both of them. This 
parameter is used to represent the transmission power (in 
wattage) to use for each UE/eNB. 20 MHz FDD bandwidth 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

has been chosen to simulate the physical profile in the LTE 
designed network. In order to give a very realistic scenario 
to the designed network, we assumed that all the 7 eNBs are 
located in London, UK, which will be our simulation work 
space with 1 km eNB radius each. Additionally, we adopted 
a hexagon overlay for the implemented eNBs and put the 
UEs randomly between these eNBs for the same reason. The 
overall network model of the baseline LTE network is 
shown in Fig. 4. The LTE mobile nodes (UEs) are 
programmed and configured to run VoLTE services. The 
lte_wkstn_adv node model is used to
represent a 
workstation with source and destination application running 
over TCP/IP and UDP/IP. Table II shows the important 
configuration parameters of the UEs in the baseline LTE 
network. 
Figure 4.
The Baseline LTE Designed Network (Network 
Model)
TABLE II.
USER EQUIPMENT (UE) CONFIGURATION 
PARAMETERS
PARAMETER
VALUE
ANTENNA GAIN dBi
-1 dBi
MODULATION and CODING 
SCHEME INDEX
9
MULTIPLE CHANNEL MODEL (DL)
LTE OFDMA ITU Pedestrian B
MULTIPLE CHANNEL MODEL (UL)
LTE SC-FDMA ITU Pedestrian B
PATH LOSS MODEL
FREE SPACE
DL MIMO TRANSMISSION
Same NB Setting
NUMBER of RECEIVE ANTENNAS
2
NUMBER of TRANSMIT
1
HANDOVER TYPE
INTRA-FREQUENCY
VELOCITY
5 M/S
MEASUREMENT WINDOW SIZE
100 ms
CELL RESELECTION 
MEASUREMENT THRESHOLD
-112 dBm
        The LTE base stations (eNBs) are programmed and 
configured to provide radio coverage to the UEs in the LTE 
network. The lte_enodeb_3sector_4slip_adv node model is 
used to represent the LTE eNBs. This model of eNBs 
includes 3 sectors in each eNB and can maintain up to 4 
serial line interfaces at a selectable data. Any one of the 7 
eNBs nodes can communicate with one or more UEs, in 
addition to the EPC. The eNBs, UEs and EPC in the design 
network have been programmed in a way such that each one 
of them has a unique ID and name. Table III shows the 
important configuration parameters of the eNBs in the 
designed network. The IMS model is used to deliver High 
Definition (HD) voice and a set of Rich Communications 
Services (RCSs); it also gives a more realistic scenario to 
deliver VoLTE service. The IMS model consists of Proxy 
Call Session Control Function (P-CSCF), Serving-CSCF (S-
CSCF) 
and 
Interrogating-CSCF 
(I-CSCF). 
These 
components are used for the signaling procedures of the 
VoLTE calls between different users in the network.       
The IMS signaling flow in the LTE network requires the 
highest priority as it is the first procedure which is invoked 
towards the establishment of the VoLTE call. Hence, all the 
IMS signaling packets are marked with priority equal to 1 in 
both radio and core networks in the QCI [17]. Note that 1 is 
IMS priority while 5 is the value of IMS QCI.
TABLE III.
EVOLVED NODEB (eNB) CONFIGURATION 
PARAMETERS
PARAMETER
VALUE
ANTENNA GAIN dBi
15 dBi
DUPLEXING SCHEME
FDD
PATH LOSS MODEL
Free Space
BANDWIDTH
20 MHZ
NUMBER OF RECEIVE/
TRANSMIT ANTENNAS
2
HANDOVER TYPE
INTRA-FREQUENCY
DL  MIMO TRANSMISSION 
TECHNIQUE
Spatial Multiplexing
Codewords 2 Layers
MEASUREMENT THRESHOLD 
-44 dBm
eNB SELECTION THRESHOLD
-110 dBm
      The EPC is one entity which includes all the main 
required core network parts; the Mobility Management 
Entity (MME), the Serving Gateway (S-GW), and the 
Packet 
Data 
Network 
Gateway 
(PDN-GW). 
The 
lte_access_gw_atm8_ethernet8_slip8_adv model is used to 
represent the LTE core network. The voice model used to 
generate VoLTE in the designed LTE network is a G.711 
Pulse Code Modulation (PCM) voice codec. A summary of 
the G.711 parameters which have configured in the baseline 
simulation is illustrated in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.
VOICE CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS
PARAMETER
VALUE
VOICE FRAMES PER PACKET
1
TYPES OF SERVICE
Interactive Voice
SILENCE LENGTH (SECONDS)
0.65 Second
TALK SPURT LENGTH 
0.352 Second
COMPRESSION DELAY 
0.02 Second
DECOMPRESSION DELAY
0.02
             
       The VoLTE application in OPNET simulation enables 
two UEs to establish a virtual channel and they can 
communicate using digitally encoded voice signals. Fig. 5
describes the data traffic flow in OPNET LTE simulation 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

between EPC and the LTE eNB through GPRS Tunneling 
Protocol (GTP). GTP tunneling is located at both nodes 
(EPC, eNB) and it is dynamically established between them 
to carry the EPS required bearers shown before in Fig. 3.
The User Datagram Protocol (UDP) is the default transport 
protocol used for this application. The voice data arrive in
spurts called talk spurts that are followed by silent periods.
A talk spurt is an uninterrupted burst or a period of time in 
which the listener does not detect a pause. During a silent 
period, packets are transmitted quite rarely. Internally, the 
voice packets are sent over Real-Time Protocol (RTP) 
streams. Traffic is generated in the network model only 
when the application is active, therefore the traffic duration 
equals the application duration. The voice application in our 
simulation starts at 100 seconds from the simulation start 
time. The period of time before the traffic is generated is 
called warm-up time, which is very important for any 
simulation scenario [4]. The reason why this time is 
important is because any simulation running is started with 
empty systems. During this time all buffers are configured 
before starting the traffic generation.The node and the PHY 
process models of the LTE eNB and LTE UE of our 
simulation are illustrated in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, respectively. 
Figure 5.
GTP Tunneling Between LTE EPC and LTE eNB 
and Data Traffic Flow
Figure 6.
Node and PHY Process Models for LTE Enb
Figure 7.
Node and PHY Process Models for LTE UE
V.
SIMULATION RESULTS 
      The performance evaluation has been conducted in 
terms of different QoS factors such as end-to-end delay, 
packet loss rate and jitter in two main scenarios. 
A.
VoLTE QoS Baseline Scenario 
      The VoLTE end-to-end delay (mouth-to-ear delay) is 
one of the most important factors to consider when we 
measure the VoLTE QoS. It should be strictly maintained 
under reasonable limits and must be carefully monitored. 
End-to-End delay is measured from the ingress of the UE at 
the sender side to the egress of the UE at the receiver side. 
The equation used to calculate this QoS factor based on our 
simulation design is:
VoLTE 
end_to_end_delay= 
Network 
delay+Encoding 
delay+Decoding delay+Compression delay+Decompression 
delay+Dejitter_buffer delay                                             
      Fig. 8 shows end-to-end delay for VoLTE service in the 
baseline LTE network during 600 seconds simulation time. 
The X-axis represents the simulation time in seconds, while 
the Y-axis represents the end-to-end delay in seconds. The 
VoLTE traffic starts at 100 seconds as we mentioned earlier 
(see Section IV for more details). At 100 seconds, the end-
to-end delay was 165 ms.  There was a slight increase in this 
value to become 184 ms and then a gradual decrease until 
reaching its stable level equal to 119 ms. It then continues 
with that value until the end of the simulation. The average 
end-to-end delay for the VoLTE is found 126 ms. This value
fulfills the ITU-R and the 3GPP standard requirements with 
up to 150 ms for one way VoLTE end-to-end delay to 
experience high quality [19] [16]. In fact, an end-to-end 
delay up to 250 ms is still quite satisfactory for the majority 
of users if we considered about 100 ms required delay for 
packet processing and propagation delay in the core network 
[20] [21].
      The VoLTE packet loss rate is another important QoS 
factor to examine. Packet loss rate generally refers to the 
percentage of packets that are lost during the transition from 
the sender to the receiver in the network. Ideally, in VoLTE 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

steady networks, there should be no packet loss [22]. 
However, VoLTE users are still satisfied if this percentage 
is a maximum 2% based on the 3GPP requirements [23] 
[16]. This means, at least 98% of the total transmitting 
packets have to arrive successfully to the final destination.  
The equation to calculate the packet loss rate is as follows:
Packet Loss Rate =                                              * 100 % (2)           
     Fig. 9 demonstrates a comparison between VoLTE 
traffic sent and traffic received. The X-axis represents the 
simulation time in seconds, while the Y-axis represents the 
VoLTE traffic sent/received in packets per seconds. It is 
clear from Fig. 9 that the VoLTE traffic sent/received 
increased sharply after 100 seconds. At 104 seconds, the 
rate of the packets sent was 69.64 packets/second, while on 
the other hand, the number of the packets received was 
67.41 packets/second at the same time. The traffic reaches 
its peak values at 138 seconds and then it stays on this 
steadily level with 1800 packets/second until the end of the 
simulation. Overall, the amount of traffic generated and 
received was almost identical. This is due to the stable LTE 
network that does not involve any congestion by other 
applications. The total number of packets sent/received in 
the 
baseline 
scenario 
were 
290300/290286 
packets 
respectively. The packet loss rate for VoLTE was found to 
be 0.0048%, which is an excellent rate. This result meets the 
ITU-R and 3GPP standard requirements which were
clarified before in Section I.  
      The difference in response time between different 
packets received in the destination side is called jitter. For 
any stable system with steady packet stream, the value of 
this QoS factor should be always 0 as there is no variation in 
the delay of the received packets. However, if the jitter is so 
large then it can cause an out of order situation to the 
receiving packets. This can lead to confusion if the working 
application is a voice service, which results in poor service 
quality. The ITU-R has recommended 25 ms jitter as an 
acceptable value for the delay variation [21]. From Fig. 10, 
it can be seen that the jitter value was - 0.00000136 at time 
120 seconds and then after 6 seconds (time=126 seconds) 
becomes 0 and stayed at this value until the end of the 
simulation. Negative jitter indicates that the time difference 
between the packets at the destination node was less than 
that at the source node. This result indicates clearly that the 
overall jitter value is ideal and reflects that the designed 
system is very stable. 
B.
LTE Bandwidth Implementation Scenario 
      
One of the interesting features of LTE is its ability to 
support scalable bandwidths from 1.4 MHz up to 20 MHz. It 
is necessary to examine the effects of using different LTE 
bandwidths on the service quality and end-user experience. 
In the second scenario, we implemented other bandwidths 
(1.4 MHz and 5 MHz). Fig. 11 compares between end-to-
end delay in the three different LTE bandwidths (1.4, 5 and 
20 MHz). The higher the bandwidth (20 MHz) is the higher 
the data rate supported, as a result, the lowest end-to-end 
delay. 1.4 MHz is the highest end-to-end delay in the same 
figure. However, all the results for all the implemented 
bandwidths are still within the acceptable threshold of 150 
ms. Fig. 12 shows a comparison between the same groups of 
LTE bandwidths, but in this case in terms of the VoLTE 
jitter. For jitter calculation, we used the following formula:
Jitter= (T4–T3) – (T2–T1)                                                (3)    
Where:
T1 and T2: The time of leaving two consecutive packets 
from the source node.
T3 and T4: The time of arrival same packets to the 
destination node.
      Contrary to expectations, Fig. 12 shows that LTE jitter
with 20 MHz has better jitter values than LTE jitter with 5 
MHz, which in turn also, has a better jitter values than 1.4 
MHz as it includes many negative values. These results 
reflect that the higher the data rate gives better jitter 
performance. However, in fact, theoretically, there is no 
direct relation between LTE bandwidth and its jitter. The 
higher bandwidth can affect positively on the end-to-end 
delay, but not necessarily lead to reduced jitter value.
      The downlink (DL) delay in LTE networks is the time 
started from when the traffic arrives at the LTE layer of the 
eNBs until it is delivered to the higher layer of the 
corresponding UEs. On the other hand, the uplink (UL) 
delay in LTE networks is the time started from when the 
traffic arrives at the LTE layer of the UEs until it is 
delivered to the higher layer of the corresponding eNBs. It is 
straightforward to show that the Packet Delay in the DL 
direction is less than the UL direction, although the resulting 
delay in both sides follows the same standard requirements 
of 50 ms one way delay [20]. This is due to the higher 
power in the DL side from the eNBs which is around 43 
dBm, compared to the UE’s power which is about 23 dBm 
in the UL side [17]. The UL/DL delay in the designed LTE 
network for different LTE bandwidths is illustrated in Fig. 
13 and Fig. 14 respectively.  As can be seen from these 
figures, the relation between the UL/DL delay and the LTE 
bandwidth is directly proportional.  The results show that 
there is up to 0.03 seconds DL delay and up to 0.017 
seconds UL delay. These results meet the requirements 
mentioned before, for the one way voice radio UL/DL 
delay.               
Packets sent - Packets received
Packets sent 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 8.
  VoLTE End-to-End Delay
Figure 9.
VoLTE Traffic Sent/Received
Figure 10.   VoLTE Jitter
Figure 11. End-to-End Delay for Different LTE Bandwidths
Figure 12.   Jitter for Different LTE Bandwidths
Figure 13.   LTE Uplink Delay for Different Bandwidths
Burst occurs
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 14.   LTE Downlink Delay for Different Bandwidths
VI.
CONCLUSION
      In this paper, a realistic Voice over LTE (VoLTE),
including IMS over the baseline LTE wireless network was
simulated and its performance in terms of Quality of Service 
(QoS) was evaluated and validated using OPNET modeler 
wireless suite 17.5. VoLTE is a standard technology that is 
required to support packet voice calls over a purely Packet-
Switched (PS) LTE wireless networks. It provides better 
QoS, which results in better end-user experience over 
CSFB, VoLGA and OTT.  In conclusion, this work has 
demonstrated that the simulation results have matched the 
ITU-R and 3GPP standard requirements related to the 
VoLTE over 4G LTE. The simulation results are significant 
in three different QoS respects; end-to-end delay, jitter and 
packet loss rate. It has been found that the overall VoLTE 
end-to-end delay was about 0.12 ms, and its packet loss rate 
was about 0.005%, while jitter was almost 0. Furthermore, 
another different simulation scenario was designed to 
investigate the effects of different LTE bandwidths on the 
VoLTE service quality. Three different LTE bandwidths 
(1.4, 5 and 20 MHz) were implemented and their effects on 
the VoLTE end-to-end QoS and LTE DL and UL delays 
were also studied. The results show that LTE can achieve 
better performance with a 20 MHz bandwidth. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to express their deepest gratitude 
to Riverbed Technologies Ltd., for providing the OPNET 
modeler wireless suite 17.5 licenses required for this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
ETSI TS 136.300, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA) and Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRAN); Overall description; Stage 2,” v8.4.0, April 2008. 
[2]
M. Sauter, Beyond 3G-Bringing networks, terminals and the web 
together: LTE, WiMAX, IMS, 4G Devices and the Mobile Web 2.0: 
Wiley. com, 2011.
[3]
D. Astély, E. Dahlman, A. Furuskar, Y. Jading, M. Lindstrom, and S. 
Parkvall, 
“LTE: 
the 
evolution 
of 
mobile 
broadband,” 
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 47, pp. 44-51, 2009.
[4]
ITU-T Recommendation G.114, “One way transmission time”, 
February 2003.
[5]
C. C. Lin, K. Sandrasegaran, H. Ramli, and M. Xue, "Requirement of 
handover modeling in the downlink 3GPP long term evolution 
system," in Advanced Information Networking and Applications 
Workshops (WAINA), 2010 IEEE 24th International Conference on, 
2010, pp. 305-310.
[6]
ETSI TS 124.237, “LTE; IP Multimedia (IM) Core Network, IMS
service continuity; Stage 3,” v10.3.0, June 2011.
[7]
M. R. Tabany and C. G. Guy, " Performance Analysis and 
Deployment of VoLTE Mechanisms over 3GPP LTE-based 
Networks," International Journal of Computer Science and 
Telecommunications, Vol. 4, Issue. 10, Oct. 2013, pp.1-8.
[8]
R. Ferrus, O. Sallent, and R. Agusti, "Interworking in heterogeneous 
wireless networks: comprehensive framework and future trends," 
Wireless Communications, IEEE, vol. 17, pp. 22-31, 2010.
[9]
3GPP TS 23.228, “Technical specification Group Services and 
System Aspects; IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2, (Release 
9) v9.3.0, March 2010.
[10] ETSI TS 122.173, “UMTS; LTE; IP Multimedia Core Network 
Subsystem (IMS) Multimedia Telephony Service and supplementary 
services; Stage 1,” v10.3.0, April 2011.
[11] ETSI TS 123.272, “Technical Specification Group Services and 
System Aspects; Circuit Switched (CS) fallback in EPS; Stage 2,” 
(Release 10), v9.13.0, January 2013.
[12] VoLGA TS stage 3, “Voice over LTE via Generic Access; Stage 3 
Specification; Phase1,” v1.5.0, June 2010.
[13] 3GPP TR 43.318, “Technical Specification Group GSM/EDGE Radio 
Access Network; Generic Access Network (GAN); Stage 2 (Release 
8),” v8.4.0, February 2009.
[14] L. Li and S. Shen, "End-to-End QoS performance management across 
LTE networks," in Network Operations and Management Symposium 
(APNOMS), 2011 13th Asia-Pacific, 2011, pp. 1-4.
[15] H. Ekstrom, "QoS control in the 3GPP evolved packet system," 
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 47, pp. 76-83, 2009. 
[16] 3GPP TS 23.203, “Technical Specification Group Services and 
System Aspects; Policy and charging control architecture (Release 
10),” v10.6.0, March 2012. 
[17] S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, LTE: the UMTS long term 
evolution: Wiley Online Library, 2009.
[18] GSMA PRD IR.92: “IMS Profile for Voice and SMS, ” March 2013.
[19] Y. Fan, M. Kuusela, P. Lunden, and M. Valkama, "Downlink VoIP 
support for evolved UTRA," in Wireless Communications and 
Networking Conference, 2008. WCNC 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1933-
1938.
[20] J. Puttonen, T. Henttonen, N. Kolehmainen, K. Aschan, M. Moisio, 
and P. Kela, "Voice-over-IP performance in UTRA Long Term 
Evolution downlink," in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2008. 
VTC Spring 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp. 2502-2506.
[21] S. A. Ahson and M. Ilyas, VoIP handbook: applications, 
technologies, reliability, and security: CRC Press, 2008.
[22] Cisco,“Quality of Service for VoIP,” Cisco systems, 2011.
[23] T. Henttonen, et al., "Performance of voip with mobility in utra long 
term evolution," in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2008. VTC 
Spring 
2008. 
IEEE, 
2008, 
pp. 
2492-2496.
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

