Near Field Sensing in Wireless LANs 
Wolfgang Narzt and Heinrich Schmitzberger 
Department of Business Informatics – Software Engineering 
Johannes Kepler University of Linz 
Altenberger Straße 69, 4040 Linz, Austria 
{wolfgang.narzt, heinrich.schmitzberger}@jku.at 
 
 
 
Abstract — Miscellaneous WLAN-based localization me-
thods focus on preferably precise location estimation and 
tracking. However, the infrastructure of a WLAN system 
can also be utilized for relative spatial assessment within 
discrete zones, not using a reference coordinate system. This 
paper proposes a WLAN-based localization prototype that is 
capable of unambiguously distinguishing detached interac-
tion zones, allowing applications to imitate near field com-
munication (NFC). Operation is accomplished by customary 
mobile devices not equipped with NFC technology but a 
WLAN interface. A prototypical payment scenario at cash-
desks in a store proves the concept, where customers are 
required to securely show their electronic store card, i.e., 
bring their mobile device into a near, non-interfering zone to 
their cashier. The paper provides measured figures revealing 
clearly distinguishable interaction zones in WLAN environ-
ments. 
Keywords – Near Field Sensing; Interaction Zones; 
Wireless LAN.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Near Field Communication (NFC) has evolved as the 
preferred technology for applying contactless interaction 
services at near distances. It is therefore considered an 
indispensable paradigm in mobile computing environ-
ments [1]. Several commercial fields of application profit-
ably make use of NFC, e.g., access control systems, pay-
ment systems, or time measurement systems (e.g., using 
RFID chips attached to the shoes of runners at marathon 
events). However, employing NFC implicates disadvan-
tages in terms of non-restrictive mobile interaction: people 
are either required to carry a smart card for each individual 
application or a commercially hardly available NFC-
equipped mobile phone, which accordingly diminishes 
broader utilization. 
The alternative for near range communication, also 
based on radio frequency signals, is Bluetooth [2]. Al-
though, the penetration of Bluetooth is already wide-
spread and has found its way into a majority of state-of-
the-art mobile phones, it has hardly won recognition con-
cerning public mobile applications, primarily due to secu-
rity and privacy concerns of its users. Likewise, Bluetooth 
offers a low bandwidth for service applications and re-
stricts the number of clients to be served by specification. 
In order to overcome these impairments regarding low 
penetration and security issues, we propose a complemen-
tary option for contactless interaction at near distances 
based on Wireless LAN [3]. This technology is widely 
spread and considered as mature and trustworthy. Latest 
investigations on WLAN localization [4] have revealed the 
ability of the Wi-Fi medium to unambiguously recognize 
the presence of mobile devices at very near distances. 
Moreover, WLAN offers a broad service bandwidth and 
comprises elaborate security concepts. Hence, it is an eli-
gible and powerful alternative to NFC in terms of contact-
less interaction at spatial proximity [5] [6]. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 deals with 
selected points of state-of-the-art methods and technology. 
Section 3 gives an insight into the proposed WLAN archi-
tecture for discrete zones separation. Section 4 illustrates 
the applicability of the architecture in the frame of a use-
case scenario. Section 5 provides figures and measured 
results and finally, section 6 concludes the paper and pros-
pects future work. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Near field sensing is a popular method for determining 
the proximity of a mobile user to the known location of 
one or several sensors and has been widely studied on the 
basis of various radio technologies. Hightower and Bor-
riello’s survey on location sensing [7] revealed three dis-
tinct approaches for inferring the proximity of an object or 
a person to a sensor resulting from “a physical phenome-
non with limited range” that is either physical contact, the 
contact of an ID tag (e.g., credit card, RFID tag, etc.) with 
a sensor device whose location is known, or the being in 
range of one or more access points in a wireless cellular 
network. Alternatively interpreted regarding the underly-
ing distance, a separation of the user’s vicinity to a known 
location into three distinct zones of proximity can be con-
cluded, i.e., a direct zone, a near zone, and distant zone. In 
this work we emphasize a different classification using a 
near zone and several graded distant zones for interaction 
(cf. Section 5). Indulska and Sutton refine the term prox-
imity sensor in [8], which according to them describes a 
sensor that locates an entity or device as being within a 
region. In order to accurately estimate a mobile user’s po-
sition however a setup of a number of overlapping proxim-
ity sensors is needed. Given a region with sufficiently 
overlapping sensor ranges, the location can then be trian-
gulated. At its core, the approach accentuated in this work 
231
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

can be seen as a variant of a proximity sensor system. A 
main claim however is to reliably distinguish a greater 
amount of interaction zones. To this end, the proposed 
system utilizes peer-to-peer communication to coopera-
tively narrow down the radio proximity ranges and conse-
quently conclude on more discrete zones.  
The term proximity sensing itself has become popular 
in the course of Bluetooth technology research. As in this 
work, most contributions in the Bluetooth context concen-
trate on signal strength measurements utilizing stationary 
beacons [9] or PCs as sensor stations [10]. In either way, 
location estimation is achieved by detecting the close 
proximity of a mobile device to a beacon or a sensor sta-
tion making use of the limited radio communication range 
of the Bluetooth technology. Another important aspect that 
we are also emphasizing in this paper has been demon-
strated in [11]. Hay and Harle use a localization approach 
that realizes the tracking of mobile phones without instal-
ling additional software. The acceptability of our presented 
system strongly depends on such usability considerations 
in a real-life setup. Consequently, our system avoids any 
form of user-side software modification by solely depend-
ing on a web browser for service consumption.  
In the context of localization accuracy, ultrasound 
technology is considered the most precise sensor technolo-
gy for determining the location of an emitter, allowing 
accuracy results of 10 centimeters and below [12]. In [13], 
the Active Bat system has been presented as one of the 
first systems to utilize ultrasound sensor infrastructure for 
indoor localization using a time difference of arrival 
(TDOA) algorithm to track a user carrying an emitter tag. 
To refine the potential whereabouts of its clients, the back-
end system constructs a bounding region for each Bat 
emitter in relation to the radio zone covered by the nearest 
sensors. Similar to the WPE approach this system com-
bines sensor readings to a fingerprint for each zone to clas-
sify the covered environment into separable regions. 
Another usage of spatial regions was demonstrated by the 
Relate system [14]. Mobile peers equipped with an ultra-
sound sensor were used to study the incorporation of prox-
imity aspects into the user interface and present a toolkit 
API for mobile applications.  
In the last decade of research, the most prominent basis 
platform for near field sensing and interaction was RFID. 
The LANDMARC system [15] proposes stationary dep-
loyed RFID readers as sensors to determine the position of 
active tags within range. For positioning refinement, the 
received signal strength is compared to the measurements 
of reference tags deployed at known positions. A use case 
for RFID localization related to the application presented 
in this paper was discussed in [16]. In their work, sequen-
tially deployed RFID readers provide queue length estima-
tion that senses the proximity of tags passing by. In this 
paper we suggest to apply proximity information in a dif-
ferent way. Derived from the proximity to one or more 
stationary sensors, we associate mobile users with certain 
interaction zones. These zones determine the user’s inte-
raction interface with the back-end server systems. 
Localization in the context of WLAN technology does 
typically no longer involve near field sensing, especially 
because the accuracy achieved by other approaches for 
location estimation allows a much finer location resolution 
(e.g., using particle filters [17]). WLAN provides a higher 
range of signal dispersion as the Bluetooth technology for 
instance, meaning that the communication range between 
two stations comes up to 100 meters in indoor environ-
ments. Applying a straightforward Cell-of-Origin (COO) 
algorithm does not narrow down the client’s location nota-
bly. The NearMe Wireless Proximity Server [6] addresses 
this issue on a proximity sensing basis by applying a peer-
to-peer technique. Instead of computing absolute location 
information of mobile clients, the system determines the 
proximity of two mobile users by mutually exchanging 
lists of Wi-Fi signatures (i.e., lists of access points and 
clients signal strengths). The similarities in the signatures 
help estimating the distance. Similar to the system pre-
sented in this paper, NearMe does not rely on a training 
phase since it uses relative location instead of absolute 
location (e.g., WGS-84 coordinates). A similar neighbor-
hood reasoning localization approach has been described 
in [18]. They improve WLAN-based position estimation 
with ZigBee sensor readings that compensate dynamically 
appearing signal interferences (as provoked by passers-
by). Though such interferences do not affect close proxim-
ity detection achieved by the WPEs, we use a comparable 
technique to improve distant zones separation.  
 
III. 
WLAN-BASED NEAR-FIELD SENSOR NETWORK 
The main design objective for near-field sensing in 
Wireless LANs was to implement a system operating 
without any client pre-requisites but a WLAN interface 
and a mobile internet browser for service access. Commer-
cial availability of WLAN in public places and its integra-
tion into modern mobile phones suggest these goals. In 
addition, sophisticated encryption already realized on 
common WLAN infrastructure, security measures and the 
bandwidth of the 802.11 standard allow for elaborate ap-
plications (e.g., multimedia web applications) as opposed 
to NFC or Bluetooth.  
In our approach, all the processing components are set-
tled in the WLAN infrastructure, aiming at reliably sepa-
rating spatial zones of interaction. Customized networked 
WLAN sensors (i.e., off-the-shelf access points running a 
modified software kernel) utilize proximity recognition by 
evaluating signal peaks of connected devices. The client is 
not requested to emit special tracking signals – the system 
uses the client’s communication traffic originated from 
(web-)service consumption for proximity detection pur-
poses. In contrast to absolute location estimation the sys-
tem does not need a preceding training phase.  
Figure 1 illustrates the system architecture of the near-
field sensor network. The nucleus of our system is con-
tained within conventional access points, further referred 
to as “sniffers”. They are executing an altered Linux oper-
ating system and customized proximity detection software. 
In our setup we use Linksys WRT610N access points with 
232
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

a 533MHz system processor and two separate WLAN in-
terfaces covering the 2.4GHz and the 5GHz frequency 
band). The 2.4GHz band (802.11bgn) is used for proximi-
ty detection and service provisioning. The 5GHz band 
(802.11an) acts as backbone network for the sniffers.  
The hardware platform is capable of concurrently run-
ning the proximity detection algorithms, a web server and 
a database in the background, incorporating service pro-
vider functionality in the sniffers. Optionally, our setup 
supports interfacing with a back-end server to ease the 
integration into existing service infrastructure at potential 
deployment sites. 
As shown in Fig. 1 a sniffer consists of 4 components:  
 
WLAN Signal Strength Sensor
IRP – Interaction Range Processor
P2P Communication Layer
Service Provider
Sniffer
WLAN Signal Strength Sensor
IRP – Interaction Range Processor
P2P Communication Layer
Sniffer
Service Provider
 
Figure 1.  System Architecture 
 
1. A WLAN signal strength sensor is realized as a low-
level daemon process that queries the interface driver 
in raw packet monitoring mode for RSSI (Received 
Signal Strength Indicator) measurements of the mobile 
clients. Its purpose is to supply the second component 
layered above with measurement data in real time. 
2. The interaction range processor (IRP) uses these data 
to separate spatial regions into distinct interaction 
zones. As our proposed setup demands for reliable 
zone separation, the IRP uses unambiguous peak val-
ues to determine the respective interaction zone of a 
mobile client. 
3. In order to allow sniffer cooperation the system entails 
a peer-to-peer communication layer. During an initial 
discovery phase each sniffer executes a simplified vot-
ing algorithm using broadcasts on the backbone net-
work. The first appearing sniffer is assumed the master 
peer, which waits for other sniffers to appear on the 
network until the configuration application is triggered. 
The master peer acts as central instance hosting the 
configuration for defining the sensor network topology 
and additional parameters that represent the setup envi-
ronment. After configuration, each cooperating sniffer 
continuously reports live proximity measurements to 
the master peer, which acts as front-end and determines 
the relative location of inquiring clients on the basis of 
the sensor input delivered by the sniffer network.  
4. Finally, the front-end application offered by the service 
provider differentiates the clients’ locations into inte-
raction zones by applying a set of topology depending 
separation patterns. The system distinguishes the near 
interaction zone (i.e., signal strength measurements of -
25dBi and higher) and several distant interaction zones 
graded by signal strength thresholds. Depending on the 
amount of cooperating sniffers and the characteristics 
of the setup environment the granularity of distant 
zones can be refined. A more detailed discussion on re-
fining these interaction zones is given in Section 5. 
Signal strength fluctuation provoked by people in the 
line of sight between sensor and the inquiring client is 
compensated by using a stationary control signal emitter 
placed behind the region of interest [19] (see Fig. 2). The 
control signal is steadily broadcasted by a WLAN-enabled 
device (e.g., an ordinary access point or a mobile phone) 
and measured at each sniffer. The initial signal strength 
value of the control signal is stored as a reference at each 
sniffer, enabling adjustments for client signal measure-
ments during live operation. 
 
Stationary Control 
Signal Emitter
Sniffer
Sniffer
Sniffer
Region of Interest
Fluctuation
 
Figure 2.  Stationary Control Signal Emitter  
 
IV. 
USE CASES 
Our system has prototypically been implemented for a 
supermarket cash desk scenario under laboratory condi-
tions: four cash desks have been arranged in parallel with a 
distance of about 1.5m to each other. Our application pro-
totype implements an electronic store card utilizable on the 
clients’ mobile phones, which can be “shown” to the cash-
ier on a single button click and automatically associated to 
the correct cash desk and purchase. The challenge in this 
setup is to confidently detect the correct desk by WLAN 
depending on the client’s proximity when the client 
presses the button on his mobile phone. Moreover, it must 
233
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

be assured that several clients in a queue at the same cash 
desk are handled correctly even when they simultaneously 
press their buttons. The setup provides for a sniffer at 
every cash desk mounted at spatial proximity to the cash-
ier. The clients are requested to hold their mobile phones 
close to the appropriate sniffer and press a button in order 
to initiate network traffic, which can be used to explicitly 
determine physical closeness. This further triggers an au-
thentication process to ensure correct association of client 
and service.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Proximity interaction  
 
Figure 3 shows snapshots of the prototypical arrange-
ment: a Linksys access point is used as the sniffer and de-
tects physical closeness of an off-the-shelf mobile phone 
(here: Motorola Defy operating on Android 2.2). The 
browser component of the phone enables the user to con-
sume the provided service of the sniffer recognizable by an 
authorization screen for “showing” the user’s store card, 
which only then offers an enabled button when the phone 
is close enough to the sniffer (a detailed discussion on re-
sults is given in section 5). For confirming the button click 
near the access point every cash desk is equipped with a 
screen showing the customers’ identification data through 
the sniffer service. 
We have arranged this setup in four parallel lines in 
order to simulate a supermarket cash desk scenario with 
customers being simultaneously served at the four desks 
and interfering in the queues. Figure 4 exemplarily illu-
strates that two customers in different lines and at different 
proximity to the cash desk are handled correctly, i.e., they 
are only then identified when their mobile device close 
enough to the access point when pressing the authentica-
tion button. This near zone is intended to manage security 
related interaction (e.g., exchanging customer identifica-
tion data). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Parallel interaction at cash desk scenario 
 
Beyond operations at very close distances (i.e., in the 
near interaction zone), the sniffer sensor network is capa-
ble of distinguishing further discrete interaction zones (cf. 
Section 5) enhancing the variety of applications that can be 
set up upon, e.g., for non critical operations characterizing 
a semi-close area around the sniffers. At the far distance 
zone the system could advert to latest offerings and com-
mon vendor services. In the vicinity of the checkout lines 
customers may be reminded of cross-checking their shop-
ping list, by means of a web-service provided by the su-
permarket, which customers may fill out at home. En-
queued in a checkout line the customers’ waiting time 
could be shortened e.g., by participating in a (yet anonym-
ous) quality survey rewarded with credits. These credits 
can finally be encashed right away in the near interaction 
zone, where the customer is identified for the first time (cf 
Figure 5).  
In general, the sniffer approach contributes to an inno-
vative interaction paradigm in mobile computing environ-
ments, where people are able to trigger electronically con-
trolled actions just at spatial proximity without the needs 
of glimpsing at displays, typing, clicking or pressing but-
tons (cf. [20]). Usually, human attentiveness is required by 
234
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

conventional interaction metaphors via display and/or 
keystroke at the place of event in order to open a gate, buy 
a ticket, start or stop an engine, etc. However, attentive-
ness for pressing a button or glimpsing at a display may 
occasionally be unavailable when the involved person 
must not be distracted from performing a task (e.g. while 
driving in a car) or is handicapped through wearable limi-
tations (e.g. gloves, protective clothing) or disability. As 
the sniffer on the one hand is capable of discretely detect-
ing physical proximity and on the other hand includes a 
customizable service provider component it is possible to 
automatically trigger those actions just at physical close-
ness of a person, i.e., dismissing displays and keypads in 
order to ease human computer interaction.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Interaction zones 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
The majority of WLAN localization systems deal with 
accurate location estimation and user tracking in indoor 
environments to supply location-based services with abso-
lute coordinates of the users’ current whereabouts. This 
work emphasizes the usage of discrete interaction zones 
for application scenarios that benefit from clearly sepa-
rated zones that can be associated with different functio-
nality (e.g., consumer interaction in the supermarket, pub-
lic display interaction, access control systems or elderly 
care scenarios). 
Laboratory-based experiments revealed that signals 
emitted at distances < 30cm (LOS and NLOS) can reliably 
be differentiated from those sent out beyond. Weak signals 
transmitted at distances > 15m also show significant mea-
surement characteristics. Consequently, one single sniffer 
can robustly determine three zones: (i) the near zone iden-
tified 
by 
signal 
strength 
measurements 
greater 
than -25dBi, (ii) the far zone identified by signals less 
than -70dBi referring to distances of > 15m (indoors and 
NLOS), and (iii) the distant zone for measurements in be-
tween these two extremes. 
Table 1 lists the measured signal strengths obtained by 
the sniffer sensor arrangement in the setup described in 
Section 4 (four cash desk lines) using a HTC Desire smart 
phone. The quadruples in the table columns refer to the 
measurements taken by the four sniffers [sniffer0, sniffer1, 
sniffer2, sniffer3]. The highlighted entries mark the respec-
tive sniffer assigned to the cash desk line. The bold-faced 
values in the near zone column illustrate distinct mea-
surement peaks allowing a unique classification.  
 
TABLE I.  
MEASUREMENT RESULTS  
 0m (near zone) 
3m (dist. zone 1) 
9m (dist. zone 2) 
Line0 
[-04, -34, -39, -40] 
[-29, -35, -37, -36] [-45, -41, -41, -38] 
Line1 
[-32, -05, -29, -32] 
[-35, -31, -46, -35] [-38, -40, -46, -40] 
Line2 
[-36, -26, -11, -27] 
[-39, -35, -34, -29] [-46, -43, -41, -41] 
Line3 
[-44, -36, -26, -08] 
[-38, -36, -37, -33] [-42, -47, -44, -41] 
 
 
Even though the measurements related to distant zone 
1 and 2 seem decisive regarding their associated sniffer, 
the signal strength values within this range tend to fluc-
tuate in the order of ±10dBi mainly due to multipath prop-
agation, attenuation provoked by people in the LOS and 
emitter characteristics of different WLAN chipsets. In 
order to robustly separate the two distant zones these fluc-
tuations must be compensated. Hence, we use the collabo-
ratively obtained average value of the measurements to 
mitigate signal variability. Since the strength of the 
WLAN signal decreases logarithmically, the system is able 
to reliably separate four interaction zones in the course of 
our sketched setup arrangement. 
Concerning response times the system is dependent on 
a recurring signal emission (e.g., small UDP packets) of 
the mobile device. In our setup we have chosen an average 
transmission interval of 1.5 seconds, which is slow enough 
not to overload the wireless network backbone and fast 
enough to apply for the use-case. Generally, the transmis-
sion interval (and therefore the response time) is selective-
ly adaptable to specific use-cases. 
In this context, scalability of the system is coherent to 
the physical limits of WLAN. Adding one access point 
likely increases accuracy regarding the distant and the far 
zones. Besides, the setup of the cash-desk scenario re-
strains the users in sequential lines and therefore provides 
constructional boundaries for the number of clients to be 
served by one sniffer. 
235
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
WLAN-based localization mainly focuses on accuracy 
aspects concerning absolute positioning as an indoor alter-
native to GPS. In this work we present a WLAN setup that 
can be used as an alternative to Near Field Communication 
utilizing a proximity-based mechanism to determine rela-
tive spatial associations of mobile users. To this end, we 
have developed a network of wireless proximity sensors, 
i.e., either detached or collectively applicable entities asso-
ciating mobile devices with discrete interaction zones. In 
the course of a prototypical cash desk setup we have ro-
bustly distinguished four interaction zones providing spe-
cific customized services (e.g., store card authorization, 
advertisement delivery, electronic shopping list, etc.). Our 
system is instantly operable without any training effort and 
users can interact without any prerequisites on the client-
side but a WLAN interface. 
Funded results presented in [19] confirm that the accu-
racy of indoor localization benefits from spatial variability, 
i.e., the reflection, diffraction or absorption of the WLAN 
signal by stationary obstacles (such as furniture, walls, 
doors and alike) leading to unique characteristics of each 
potential location spot. Given such characteristics typically 
found in real-life environments the number of distinguish-
able interaction zones is likely to increase, but has not 
been verified, yet. In this context, further investigation has 
to be conducted on filter patterns for separating the zones 
combined with the arrangement of the sniffer sensors (e.g., 
parallel, circle, square, radial, etc.) and also on analytical 
error estimation and on power consumption issues com-
pared to Bluetooth or NFC in order to prove the sufficien-
cy of our proposed model. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Ferscha, M. Hechinger, R. Mayrhofer, M. dos Santos Rocha, 
M. Franz, and R. Oberhauser, “Digital aura,” in Advances in 
Pervasive Computing. A Collection of Contributions Presented at 
the 2nd International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
(Pervasive 2004), vol. 176. Vienna, Austria: Austrian Computer 
Society (OCG), April 2004, pp. 405–410.  
[2] 
G. Lenzini, “Trust-based and context-aware authentication in a 
software architecture for context and proximity-aware services,” in 
Architecting Dependable Systems VI, ser. Lecture Notes in 
Computer 
Science, 
R. de Lemos, 
J.-C. 
Fabre, 
C. Gacek, 
F. Gadducci, and M. ter Beek, Eds. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 
2009, vol. 5835, pp. 284–307, 10.1007/978-3-642-10248-6_12.  
[3] 
C. Holzmann, M. Hechinger, and A. Ferscha, “Relation-centric 
development of spatially-aware applications,” in Proceedings of 
the 17th IEEE International Workshops on Enabling Technologies: 
Infrastructures for Collaborative Enterprises (WETICE 2008). 
Rome, Italy: IEEE CS Press, June 2008.  
[4] 
H. Schmitzberger and W. Narzt, “Leveraging wlan infrastructure 
for large-scale indoor tracking,” in Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications 
(ICWMC 2010), Valencia, Spain, IEEE Computer Society, 2010, 
pp. 250-255. 
[5] 
M. B. Kjaergaard, G. Treu, P. Ruppel, and A. Küpper, “Efficient 
indoor 
proximity 
and 
separation 
detection 
for 
location 
fingerprinting,” in MOBILWARE ’08: Proceedings of the 1st 
international conference on MOBILe Wireless MiddleWARE, 
Operating Systems, and Applications. ICST, Brussels, Belgium, 
Belgium: ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-
Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering), 2007, pp. 1–8. 
[6] 
J. Krumm and K. Hinckley, “The nearme wireless proximity 
server,” in UbiComp 2004: Ubiquitous Computing, ser. Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, N. Davies, E. Mynatt, and I. Siio, Eds. 
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2004, vol. 3205, pp. 283–300.  
[7] 
J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “A survey and taxonomy of 
location sensing systems for ubiquitous computing,” University of 
Washington, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Seattle, WA, UW CSE 01-08-03, August 2001. 
[8] 
J. Indulska and P. Sutton, “Location management in pervasive 
systems,” in ACSW Frontiers ’03: Proceedings of the Australasian 
information security workshop conference on ACSW frontiers 
2003. Darlinghurst, Australia, Australia: Australian Computer 
Society, Inc., 2003, pp. 143–151. 
[9] 
S. Chawathe, “Beacon placement for indoor localization using 
bluetooth,” in Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2008. ITSC 
2008. 11th International IEEE Conference on, 2008, pp. 980 –985. 
[10] J. J. M. Diaz, R. d. A. Maues, R. B. Soares, E. F. Nakamura, and 
C. M. S. Figueiredo, “Bluepass: An indoor bluetooth-based 
localization system for mobile applications,” in Computers and 
Communications (ISCC), 2010 IEEE Symposium on, 2010, pp. 778 
–783. 
[11] S. Hay and R. Harle, “Bluetooth tracking without discoverability,” 
in Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Location 
and Context Awareness, ser. LoCA ’09. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 120–137.  
[12] S. Zhou, H. Feng, and R. Yuan, “Error compensation for cricket 
indoor location system,” in Parallel and Distributed Computing, 
Applications and Technologies, 2009 International Conference on, 
2009, pp. 390 –395. 
[13] O. Woodman and R. Harle, “Concurrent scheduling in the active 
bat 
location 
system,” 
in 
Pervasive 
Computing 
and 
Communications Workshops (PERCOM Workshops), 2010 8th 
IEEE International Conference, 2010, pp. 431 –437. 
[14] G. Kortuem, C. Kray, and H. Gellersen, “Sensing and visualizing 
spatial relations of mobile devices,” in UIST ’05: Proceedings of 
the 18th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and 
technology. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 93–102. 
[15] L. Ni, Y. Liu, Y. C. Lau, and A. Patil, “Landmarc: indoor location 
sensing using active rfid,” in Pervasive Computing and 
Communications, 2003. (PerCom 2003). Proceedings of the First 
IEEE International Conference on, 2003, pp. 407 – 415. 
[16] D. Sanders, S. Mukhi, M. Laskowski, M. Khan, B. Podaima, and 
R. McLeod, “A network-enabled platform for reducing hospital 
emergency department waiting times using an rfid proximity 
location system,” in Systems Engineering, 2008. ICSENG ’08. 19th 
International Conference on, 2008, pp. 538 –543. 
[17] J. Hightower and G. Borriello, “Particle filters for location 
estimation in ubiquitous computing: A case study,” in Proceedings 
of the UbiComp 2004, 2004. 
[18] L.-w. Chan, J.-r. Chiang, Y.-c. Chen, C.-n. Ke, J. Hsu, and H.-h. 
Chu, “Collaborative localization: Enhancing wifi-based position 
estimation with neighborhood links in clusters,” in Pervasive 
Computing, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, K. Fishkin, 
B. Schiele, P. Nixon, and A. Quigley, Eds. Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, 2006, vol. 3968, pp. 50–66. 
[19] M. Youssef, M. Mah, and A. Agrawala, “Challenges: device-free 
passive localization for wireless environments,” in MobiCom ’07: 
Proceedings of the 13th annual ACM international conference on 
Mobile computing and networking. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 
2007, pp. 222–229. 
[20] W. Narzt 
and 
H. Schmitzberger, 
“Location-triggered 
code 
execution — dismissing displays and keypads for mobile 
interaction,” in UAHCI ’09: Proceedings of the 5th International 
on ConferenceUniversal Access in Human-Computer Interaction. 
Part II. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 374–383. 
236
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

