Dynamic Group PCI Assignment Scheme
Xu Zhang1, DiBin Zhou2,Zhu Xiao3 Enjie Liu1, Jie Zhang1 and Andres Alayon Glasunov4
123Institute for Research in Applicable Computing, 4Electromagnetic Engineering
1University of Bedfordshire, 2Hang Zhou Normal University, 3Hunan University, 4School of Electrical Engineering
1Luton, UK, 2Hang Zhou, China, 3Chang Sha, china,4Stockholm, Sweden
Email: 1[xu.zhang1,Enjie.Liu, Jie.Zhang]@study.beds.ac.uk, 2dibinz@zju.edu.cn, 3zhxiao@hnu.edu.cn,4aag@ee.kth.se
Abstract—The Physical Cell Identity (PCI) is used to identify
femtocell in LTE femtocell as the physical layer identity. Due to
the fact that a) the PCIs are normally allocated without planning;
and b) the limitation of the number of PCI, the cross-tier PCI
confusion problem has arisen. The current solution in 3GPP
Release 9 is to use Cell Global Identity (CGI) associated with PCI
to solve this problem of confusion. However, using CGI has many
serious drawbacks. Especially CGI might cause the inbound-
handover is failure. In order to mitigate the CGI problem, this
research proposes a dynamic PCI assignment scheme of DG-
PCI in the macrocell and femtocell environment. The proposed
scheme is tested by using system-level simulation. The simulations
showed that the approach offers an optimal PCI distribution
between macrocell and femtocell. The test showed that the CGI
problem can be solved, and hence increase the successful rate of
inbound-handover. 1
Index Terms—PCI, CGI, LTE femtocell, Graph Colouring, PCI
release
I. INTRODUCTION
A femtocell is a small cellular base station used by oper-
ators to extend indoor service coverage and enhance overall
network performance. Since 2008, it has gradually become a
mainstream technology supported by industrial standardization
bodies such as the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP).
As a consequence, an explosive deployment has been antici-
pated by industry leaders, which pose new challenges [1].
In the LTE femtocell systems, the Physical Cell Identity
(PCI) is used by User Equipment (UE) to identify a femtocell.
Unfortunately, the number of PCIs is limited to 504 and they
are normally allocated without planning and network operator
intervention. Reﬂecting this, the PCI assignment problems
which are called single-tier PCI collision and confusion (con-
ﬂict) have recently been addressed for LTE network [2][3].
In LTE femtocell system, if a large number of femtocells are
deployed under a macrocell coverage area and there are more
than one femtocell-neighbour cells assigned with the same
PCI due to PCI reuse, the network is unable to identify the
femtocell in the measurement report. This may cause inbound-
handover (handover from macrocell to femtocell) preparation
to be directed to a wrong target and results in handover failure
[4]. This is called cross-tier PCI confusion. Moreover, the PCIs
1Our work is supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities (531107040276) and State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services
Networks Open Project (ISN12-05).
reuse in femtocell identiﬁcation is very common and the cross-
tier PCI confusion problem could potentially become quite
destructive.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section II
introduces some related work on PCI allocation; Section III
introduces the proposed approach and some useful deﬁnitions;
Section IV gives the scheme discussion and also proposed a
method as Unutilised femtocells PCI release; Section V is the
performance evaluation for the scheme. In Section VI, we have
the conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
Some related works are described as below:
A. Review on the Latest Standardisation
In order to solve the cross-tier PCI confusion, a Cell Global
Identity (CGI) has been proposed to identify the cells in 3GPP
release 9[5]. This approach temporarily solves the cross-tier
PCI confusion problem. However, compared to PCI, using CGI
has many serious drawbacks.
Firstly, PCI is a reference signal sequence which means
that the UE reads the identity of the target cell in a very
short time - up to 20ms in LTE. Yet, CGI is not a reference
signal sequence, and it needs to be obtained by reading the
system information which requires a large measurement time
gap (e.g., up to 160 ms (milliseconds) for LTE) [5][6].
Secondly, during this relatively long measurement gap (e.g.
160ms), the UE cannot receive or transmit any data to or from
the serving cell, thus, it probably leads to unnecessary service
interruption, such as a call drop in the situation where the
signal strength fades rapidly [5]. This becomes more critical in
a busy and dense network scenario and causes many handover
failures [7].
Lastly, a long measurement time is required to obtain the
system information which causes concerns regarding the UE
battery life[4]. The UE battery life is important for battery-
hungry multimedia applications.
It is therefore preferable to use PCI rather than CGI to
identify cells. However, as mention previously, the PCI has
a conﬂict problem. This research aims to solve the drawbacks
of CGI and meanwhile, mitigate PCI conﬂict in the cross-
tier network environment, with co-existence of macrocell and
femtocell.
101
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

B. Review of the Literature
In [8], the authors proposed a solution for PCI conﬂict
problem in single-tier LTE networks. A Graph Colouring-
based mathematical method has developed for the PCI auto-
conﬁguration of LTE network. Each nodes ID (PCI) is as-
signed a color, and the neighboring nodes get different ID
based on graphic coloring theory.
In [2], the authors proposed to use mobile measurements
to update the Neighbour-Cell-List (NCL) in single-tier LTE
networks, in order to detect PCI conﬂict. The solution proposes
that if the PCI conﬂict appears, the mobile send this informa-
tion to Core Network (CN) and Operation Support System
(OSS) will require the involved conﬂict cells to change their
PCIs.
In the above papers, the authors analysed the PCI conﬂict
issue in single-tier LTE system. However, none of them have
included the impact of the layered structure of a heterogeneous
network with a combination of macrocell and femtocell (cross-
tier network) on the PCI auto-conﬁguration.
In [9], the authors proposed an automation PCI allocation
system (APCIAS) and APCIA method to allocate the PCI in a
cross-tier LTE networks in order to reduce the planning time
of PCI. In the paper, the researchers used the cell information
which includes cell state information, type information and
neighbour list information to create the PCI resource and also
allocate the PCIs.
In [10], the authors proposed an automatic assignment
of femtocell PCIs depending on different access modes for
network optimization in order to reduce the operational expen-
diture for PCI allocation. The proposed scheme autonomously
detects the neighbour cells of target femtocell and sends the
neighbourhood information to the centre controller. By using
a centre controller, the PCIs can be assigned in an optimal
way.
In [6], the authors proposed an approach to reduce the time
spent on femtocell cell selection/reselection. This approach
uses two groups of PCIs, a femtocell group which is a reuse-
PCI-group and a macrocell group which is a unique-PCI-group
When the UE moves into a new marcocell service, it automati-
cally obtains the network information of this macrocell, which
sets certain PCI numbers for macrocell and femtocell. During
the handover process, the UE easily detects whether the target
device is a marcocell or a femtocell by using this informations
and leading to a reduction in unnecessary signalling with the
CN and identiﬁcation time.
In the above papers, the authors proposed the cross-tier PCI
allocation scheme. However, none of them solve the cross-tier
confusion problem.
III. DYNAMIC GROUP PCI ASSIGNMENT SCHEME
This scheme is described as below:
A. Busy Femtocell
In Dynamic Group PCI Assignment Scheme (DG-PCI), the
trafﬁc density information is the most important features to
describe the network situation. Busy Femtocell (BFemtocell)
concept is introduced to describe this. The principle of this
concept is that there might be some femtocells which have a
higher numbers of inbound-handovers than others during the
same time period. For the operators, more attention should be
paid to these BFemtocells in order to maintain a high quality
of service since they have a potentially higher probability to
be involved in cross-tier PCI confusion and result in handover
failure due to CGI drawback.
B. Dynamic PCI Group Assignment
In the proposed DG-PCI, PCIs are categorised into three
groups - CSG group (Closed Subscriber Group), non-GSG
group, and marcocell groups. Furthermore, in CSG and non-
CSG groups, PCIs are further categorised into two sub-groups
- unique and reuse group, shown in Fig. 1. The PCIs are set
according to their group and sub-group, it would be updated
depending on the various environments.
Fig. 1.
Proposed Dynamic PCI Group Structure
Since this dynamic PCI group method is similar to the
proﬁle of proposed the PCI distribution in [6] and [11], it
inherits their advantages such as the fast CSG cell, non-CSG
cell and macrocell selection/reselection.
The unique PCI group is used to offer unique PCI to BFem-
tocells. As we know cross-tier PCI confusion may happen
when reusing PCIs under the large range of macrocell service,
thus, if an approach guarantees unique PCIs being allocated
to femtocells, there will be no confusion in inbound-handover.
For obvious reason, it is sensible to offer the unique PCI to
BFemtocells whenever the system has unique PCI available.
C. The Scheme used for Different Access Policys
3GPP deﬁned three types of cell access modes: closed, hy-
brid and open mode. The following section discusses applying
the scheme in different access scenarios.
1) The cross-tier confusion case in different access modes:
a) For the closed and hybrid access modes: Cross-tier
PCI confusion occurs as follows: during inbound-handover,
after UE has determined that this cell is a closed or a hybrid
cell, the UE needs to obtain the PCI of the target femtocell
to achieve handover. Since there might be multiple femtocells
within the coverage of the Serving Radio Network Control
(SRNC) that have the same PCI ID,cross-tier confusion may
occur.
102
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

b) For the open access mode: Cross-tier PCI confusion
occurs as follows: during the inbound-handover, after the UE
has determined that this cell is an open cell, the UE needs
to obtain the PCI of the target femtocell to achieve handover.
As the femtocell with open access mode operates just like a
normal LTE cells, these cells’ PCI could be included in NCL
of the macrocell. There might be multiple same femtocell PCI
within the NCL of the macrocell which involve the cross-tier
confusion issue.
c) Comparing these confusion cases in different modes:
Three modes contain almost the same process involving the
PCI confusion by using the same PCI. Therefore, giving a
unique PCI to identify BFemtocells in order to mitigate the
drawbacks of CGI is ﬁt for both of the confusion cases.
Fig. 2.
PCI Distribution in femtocell PCI Group
2) The PCI IDs in different access modes distribute in
CSG/non-CSG sub-groups:
a) According to release 9, the System Information Block
Type1 (SIB1) uses two parameters: CSG-Indication and CSG-
Identity: The closed mode cells have a CSG-Identity and CSG-
Indication bit set to TRUE, hybrid model cells have a CSG-
Identity and CSG-Indication bit set to FALSE, open mode cells
do not have the CSG-Identity and CSG-Indication bit set to
FALSE.
b) The PCI IDs in different access modes distribute
in CSG/non-CSG sub-groups: Since the CSG-Identity ID
involves using the PCI ID [14] and both of the hybrid and
close cell mode support CSG-identity ID, closed and hybrid
access mode can be treated as the same CSG group, using the
set range of PCI IDs (CSG-identity ID). The open access mode
is called non-CSG-group also using the set range of PCI IDs
(CSG-identity ID). Moreover, there are two sub-groups in each
CSG-group/non-CSG group, the PCI in unique PCI sub-groups
is used in identiﬁcation of the BFemtocell which may be CSG
or non-CSG mode in order to mitigate the drawbacks of CGI,
and also the reuse PCI sub-group is used in identiﬁcation of
the normal femtocell which may be in CSG or non-CSG mode
as shown in Fig. 2.
D. The Proposed Scheme
The DG-PCI Flow Chat is shown in Fig. 3.
In the graph, PCSG−unique is the number of unique PCIs
for CSG cells; PCSG−reuse is the number of reuse PCIs for
Start
PCSG-unique,0
CN creates the handover 
report by using network 
information  
MME collects the network 
information  
Interval time T
OSS uses the handover 
report to re-allocate 
PCSG-unique and PCSG-reuse 
for femtocells  
Change PCI request 
femtocells change their 
PCIs in order to mitigate 
the CGI drawbacks 
End
PCSG-unique>0 
PCSG-unique=0
Scheme DG-PCI Process
CSG mode  
Determine which PCIs are 
using in CSG cell
Determine the PCSG-unique in 
CSG unique PCI group
Fig. 3.
DG-PCI Flow Chat
CSG cell. Since non-CSG and CSG have most of the same
PCI confusion mentioned early, the process in the proposed
scheme for non-CSG and CSG cell scheme can be considered
the same process. The author provides the CSG mode ﬂow
chat of the proposed scheme process instead of the chat of
both the non-CSG and CSG mode.
IV. DISCUSSIONS OF THE PROPOSED SCHEME
In this section, we will analyse some important issues for
DG-PCI.
A. Determination of the BFemtocell in LTE Femtocell System
In a real network scenario, the handover procedure is associ-
ated with the Mobility Management Entity(MME). During the
inbound-handover, severed femtocell PCI or CGI information
is stored in MME. Due to the fact that PCI is dynamically
allocated and CGI is statically allocated, in order to ensure
the data on the list is available at any time, it is desirable to
use CGI ID for data recording.
MME is connected with a Home Subscriber Server (HSS),
which is responsible for femtocell management, authentication
and authorization, the mapping of PCI to the unique CGI and
the NCL of each femtocell could be obtained from them [12].
This CGI list will be build by using HSS in order to ﬁnd the
corresponding CGI ID depending on the temporary PCI stored
in the MME.
After a interval time of T, the MME will send the recorded
CGI list to CN. CN will build the BFemtocell list (Inbound-
Handover Report) according to the CGI list and permit OSS
[2] to send the updating PCI request to the BFemtocell.
B. Graph Colouring-Based Method in Single-Tier PCI Con-
ﬂict Free
The number of unique PCIs is quite an important issue in
our scheme. The PCIunique is equal to the total number of
PCIs take off the PCIreuse and PCIreuse depends on the
single-tier conﬂict. Reﬂecting this, the PCIunique is relative to
single-tier conﬂict. We support using Graph Colouring-based
mathematical for PCI assignment in order to ﬁnd the minimum
ofPCIreuse and also avoid single-tier PCI conﬂict in cross-tier
LTE femtocell. The method is described as below:
103
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Begin
Do Sort the new femtocells in order by which femtocell has the highest nNeighbours 
// Choose a new cell from the list Celllist in order; 
If    (NNset\{Dset && Nset}!=null) 
Do Pset=NNset\{Dset&&Nset}; 
Do call function PCI_assinment(Pset); 
End
For (set i=0; i<=Celllist.size();i++) 
Do Dset = function Build_PCIset(Celllist[i].dNeighbours); 
Do Nset = function Build_PCIset(Celllist[i].nNeighbours); 
Do NNset = function Build_PCIset(Celllist[i].nnNeighbours); 
Function PCI_assinment(Pset) 
Do Sort Pset in CPCI descending order;
Do Select the first value;
If    (in Neighbours[j], there are some new cells without PCIs) 
Do PCI assignment success; 
//start loop again; 
Else   
If (Uset\{Dset&&Nset}!=null) 
Do Pset=Uset\{Dset&&Nset}; 
Do call function PCI_assinment(Pset); 
Else   
End
Function Build_PCIset(Neighbours) 
For (set j=0; j<=Neighbours.size();j++) 
Do PCIset will not collect this cells' PCI;
Else    
Do  PCIset collect there PCIs in Neighbours; 
Returen PCIset;    
End
//function to find the PCIset for different Neighbours list; 
//function to assign the PCI to new cell; 
If (Aset\{Dset&&Nset}!=null) 
Do Pset=Aset\{Dset&&Nset}; 
Do call function PCI_assinment(Pset); 
Else   
Do process failure; 
// PCI run out  
The main idea of this method is that to ﬁnd the proper PCI
IDs in the NNset of the target femtocell. If we ﬁnd the PCI
IDs in the Dset, it will result in the single-tier conﬂict and if
we ﬁnd the PCI IDs Nset, it will result in cross-tier confusion.
Since the PCI ID are reused to alocate the femtocells, this
method could ﬁnd the minimum of PCIreuse.
TABLE I
PARAMETERS IN PROPOSED METHOD
Name
Meanning
dNeighbours
New cell’s direct neighbours
nNeighbours
New cell’s dNeighbours’ neighbours
nnNeighbours
Neighbours or nNeighbours
Aset/Uset
All available/used PCI in the network
Dset
PCI set of dNeighbours
Nset
PCI set of nNeighbours
NNset
PCI set of neighbours of nNeighbours
Pset
Result set which PCI is choosing from
PCIset
Number of PCI in target Neighbours list
CP CI
Number of times the PCI is used
C. Dynamic PCI Group using in PCI Assignment
Femtocells are plug-and-play devices, if a new femtocell
joins the network, it might interfere with the system balance
which would result in the single-tier conﬂict. Therefore, ide-
ally the PCIs should be able to transfer between different
groups to cope with the dynamic number of femtoells. How-
ever, the number of PCIs in a marocell PCI group is set at
the system level [6], thus this transfer will not be considered
in this research. In this sub-section, we will only consider the
PCI transfer between unique PCI and reuse PCI group.
Unique PCI transfer to reuse PCI group. If there are not
enough reuse PCI to sign new femtocells, the unique PCI
group dynamically transfers its PCIs to reused PCI group in
order to ensure the network has enough PCIs to remain single-
tier conﬂict free. However, if the unique PCI numbers run out,
thats means all PCIs need to be used to ensure the system is
conﬂict free. Unfortunately, our approach does not work in
this extreme case, yet this kind of scenario is rare.
Reuse PCI transfers to unique PCI group. When some
femtocells are turned off, the number of reused PCIs could
be more than the system requested, therefore, some of the
reuse PCIs should be released, this will be analysed in detail
in the next section.
D. Unutilised femtocell PCI Release Method
The PCI release is the decisive feature to obtain unique
PCI resource for scheme DG-PCI. A PCI release method is
proposed in this research to tackle this problem.
This method includes unique and reuse PCI released. The
unique PCI release method releases the femtocells that have
unique PCIs identity. The reuse PCI release is used in dynamic
PCI group to release reused PCIs. The proposed PCI release
is described as below:
Begin
Do Determing the Femtocelloff list; 
// Choose a femtocell from the list 
End
For (set i=0; i<=Femtocelloff.size();i++) 
Do break; 
If    (PCIc in femtocelloff[i]==PCI in femtocellon[j]) 
End
For (set j=0; j<=Femtocellon.size();j++) 
Else    
Do PCIt = PCIc in femtocelloff[i];   
Do Add PCIt to Listunique;   
//jump out current loop; 
Do Determing the Femtocellonlist;  
For (set k=0; k<=Femtocelloff.size();k++) 
Do break; 
If    ((i!=k)&&(PCIc in femtocelloff[i]==PCI in femtocelloff[k]))
       
Else    
//jump out current loop; 
End
End
Do Set a=false; 
If    (a==false) 
Do break; 
Do Set a=true; 
//jump out current loop; 
//Check the PCIc in femtocelloff is used in femtocellon list; 
//Check the PCIc in Femtocelloff is also used by other members in Femtocelloff; 
// PCIc is the PCI of choosen femtocell; 
// PCIc is the unique PCI 
However, there is a problem. If the femtocell is normally
in turn off mode, the CN can easily detect this femtocell and
also execute the PCI release procedure. If the femtocell is not
in normal turn off mode, meaning that the users just unpluged
the power socket to shut down the femtocell, it is difﬁcult
for CN to identify the femtocell statics and results in a failed
reuse PCI release procedure.
In order to solve this problem, ping can be used to check the
femtocell status. Since ping transmits in very small packages,
it will not cause any large signal overload. The MME could
ping the registration femtocells at small constant intervals of
time to check their statics and then report to CN.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A dynamic simulator developed by CWIND [13] group
is used to evaluate the proposed scheme. The goal of the
performance evaluation is to see if the proposed scheme
mitigates the drawbacks of CGI and improves the inbound-
handover quality in a realistic LTE Femtocell network.
104
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

A. Simulation Scenario
Since the femtocell is a free plug-and-play device, we have
set the scenario based on the number of active (means switched
on) femtoells during 24 hours (shown in Fig. 4) which is
similar to the human life timetable. Moreover, there is not a
Fig. 4.
The Various Number of Femtocells in 24 hours
Fig. 5.
The Various Number of Inbound-handover Events in 24 hours.
femtocell trafﬁc model found in the literature, so, the inbound-
handover events are also following the the same pattern, shown
in Fig. 5.
Since this scheme is aiming to reduce the usage of CGI in
the handover procedure, the number of CGI readings in an
hour is chosen to evaluate the performance of this scheme.
In the simulation, the UEs and femtocells will both randomly
occur in the coverage of a macrocell (radius: 400 meters). If
an UE occurs in the coverage of a femtocell, this UE would
be determined as it is doing inbound-handover. Reﬂecting this,
the MME would store the PCI and CGI which are from the
serving femtocell and build the inbound-handover List for this
network. The PCI updating interval time is initially set to
900 seconds, this time gap will be further analysed in future
research. Some parameters are listed in Table II.
Moreover, two types of Femtocell access modes have been
set in this simulation, CSG and non-CSG mode. The differ-
ence between the two modes is that when an UE has been
detected as doing inbound-handover, the CSG femtocells will
check if this UE is accessible or not; where as the non-
CSG femtocells won’t check it. Two distances of femtocell
coverage are simulated: 15 and 50 meters. The different values
of coverage have impacted on amount of single-tier conﬂict
between neighbouring femtocells, the higher the value of
coverage distance, the greater the conﬂict. Public femtocells
such as ones intalled in shopping malls belong to the non-CSG
mode and have 50 meters coverage. Residential femtocells
install in homes are mostly CSG mode which can serve up
to 4 users and have 15 meters coverage, but some non-CSG
residential femtocells are also simulated.
The evaluations are undertaken in two cases: Case 1 is a
CSG mode only simulation, Case 2 simulates both CSG and
non-CSG modes. In Case 1, the number of femtocells is up
to 50. In Case 2 , the number of shopping Mall femtocell is
3, the number of non-CSG residential femtocells will increase
from 10 to 27 and the number of CSG residential femtocells
will increase from 10 to 20.
TABLE II
PARAMETERS FOR SCHEME DG-PCI SCHEME
Parameter
Value
Coverage of macrocell/femtocell
400/15 meters
Coverage of shopping Mall/public place femtocell
50 meters
T
900 Seconds
Number of CSG fetocells (Case 1)
20-50
Number of shopping Mall/public place (case 2)
3
Number of non-CSG fetocells (Case 2)
10-27
Number of CSG fetocells (Case 2)
10-20
B. Simulation Analysis
As can be seen in Figs. 6a and 6b, across the board, in
both cases, the proposed DG-PCI scheme consistently per-
forms better compared to the conventional approach. We also
observed that the performance differs according realisticallyto
the time of the day. This is due to the fact that, when there are
less inbound handovers, the boundary of determining the busy
or not busy femtocell is unclear, which results in inaccurate
judgement.
From Figs. 7a and 7b, our scheme obviously reduces the
number of CGI reading compared to the conventional method.
One can observe that the performance does not proportionally
increase with the number of femtocells, but with the number of
inbound handovers. This is perfectly understandable, because
inbound-handover is what we are concerned with regarding to
PCI allocation.
Comparing Case1 and Case 2, the performance in case 2
is better than case 1. First, this is due to the number of the
UEs that a femtocell supports. In case 1, for home usage,
again, the boundaries of busy or not busy femtocell are not
clear. Reﬂecting this, the scheme is more suitable for open
access which is currently high favoured femtocell deployment.
Second, in case 2, we assigned ﬁxed unique PCI to open
access femtocells. Therefore, we suggest that in the reality,
the network system should offer some independent unique
PCIs for the openly accessed femtocells. We also suggest that
unique PCIs could be considered as a commercial resource
105
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

(a) Case I
(b) Case II
Fig. 6.
DG-PCI and Rel. 9 simulation based on Time
(a) Case I
(b) Case II
Fig. 7.
DG-PCI and Rel. 9 simulation based on Number of Femtocells
which Shopping Malls would need to purchase in order to
have better quality of wireless service for customers.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper proposed the DG-PCI scheme which based on
the concept of the BFemtocell and dynamic PCI allocation and
Graph Colouring-based mathematical method to mitigate the
CGI problems and avoid cross-tier PCI confusion. The pro-
posed scheme is tested by simulation. The results showed that
the approach out-performs the existing approach in: reducing
the number of CGI reading, hence reducing the possible of
handover disconnection. The approach achieved dynamic PCI
allocations in the cross-tier environment.
In terms of the future work, work will be carried out to
optimise the PCI allocations, especially for released PCIs.
Work will also be carried out on optimising the parameter
T, which is the time interval representation of PCI updating,
used in the scheme.
REFERENCES
[1] Jie Zhang and Guillaume de la Roche, ”Femtocells: Technologies and
deployemnt”, 1st ed, 2009.
[2] Mehdi Amirijoo, Pal Frenger, Fredrik Gunnarsson, Harald Kallin, Jo-
han Moe and Kristina Zetterberg, ”Neighbor Cell Relation List and
Physical Cell Identity Self-Organization in LTE”, IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), pp. 37-41, 2008.
[3] 3GPP TS 36.211 V8.6.0, ”Physical Channels and Modulation”, 2009.
[4] Assen Golaup, Mona Mustapha and Leo Boonchin Patanapongpibul,
”Femtocell Access Control Strategy in UMTS and LTE”, IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, Vol. 47, No. 9, pp. 117-123, 2009.
[5] 3GPP TS 36.300, ”E-UTRAN Overall Description”, 2009
[6] Poongup Lee, Jangkeun Jeong, Navrati Saxena and Jitae Shin, ”Dynamic
Reservation Scheme of Physical Cell Identity for 3GPP LTE Femtocell
Systems”, Journal of Information Processing Systems, pp. 207-220, 2009.
[7] David
Lopez-Perez,
Alvaro
Valcarce,
Akos
Ladanyi,
Guil-
laume de la Roche and Jie Zhang, ”Intracell Handover for Interference
and Handover Mitigation in OFDMA Two-Tier Macrocell-Femtocell
Networks”,
EURASIP
Journal
of
Wireless
Communications
and
Networking, Vol. 2010, pp. 1-6, 18-21, 2010.
[8] Tobias Bandh, Georg Carl and Henning Sanneck, ”Graph Coloring
Based Physical-Cell-ID Assignment for LTE networkss”, ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
(IWCMC), pp. 116-120, 2009.
[9] Ting Wu, LanLan Rui, Ao Xiong and ShaoYong Guo, ”An Automation
PCI Allocation Method for eNodeB and Home eNodeB Cell”, Wireless
Communications Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM), pp. 1-4,
23-25, Sept. 2010.
[10] Yi Wu, Hai Jiang, Ye Wu and Dongmei Zhang, ”Physical Cell Iden-
tity Self-Organization for Home eNodeB Deployment in LTE”, Nokia
Siemens Networks wicom-meeting, pp. 1-6, 2010.
[11] 3GPP TS 25.367, ”Mobility procedures for Home Node B (HNB)”,
2009.
[12] 3GPP TR 23.830, ”Architecture aspects of Home NodeB and Home
eNodeB (Release 9)”, 2009.
[13] D. Lopez-Perez, A. Valcarce, G. De La Roche, E. Liu, and J. Zhang,
”Access methods to wimax femtocells: A downlink system-level case
study.”, In IEEE International Conference on Communications Systems,
pp. 1657-1662, 2008.
106
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

