Systematic Review: Techniques and Methods of Urban Monitoring in Intelligent 
Transport Systems 
Lima, S. F., Barbosa, S. A. A., Palmeira, P. C., Matos, L., Secundo, I., Nascimento, R. 
Department of Post-Graduation in Computer Science 
Federal University of Sergipe - UFS 
Sergipe, Brazil 
email: sergio@acad.unit.br; saabarbosa@gmail.com; priscilacopeland@gmail.com; lucas.matos.cc@gmail.com; 
ingrid.secundoo@gmail.com; rogerio@ufs.br.
Abstract— The process of urbanization and the formation of 
large urban complexes influence the increasing complexity for 
the planning, management and operation of urban mobility. 
Everyday problems related to urban mobility, such as 
congestion, quality of urban roads and inefficiency of public 
transport are evident, and can only be solved by the increase of 
technology and intelligence. Studies in Intelligent Transport 
Systems (ITS) act as an efficient solution to improve the 
functioning and performance of traffic systems, reducing 
congestion and increasing safety for citizens. With the 
objective of identifying and analyzing urban monitoring 
techniques, this article presents a systematic review of the 
monitoring techniques, in order to extract traffic behavior on 
the road in real time, making it possible to detect congestion, 
avoid accidents, among others Improvements to urban traffic. 
The significant benefit of this article includes a bibliographical 
research, based on the analysis of the problems related to ITS 
in function of the evolution, the variety and the complexity of 
technologies existing in the last years. 
Keywords- ITS; Urban Monitoring; Open Data; Smart Cities.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the growth of urban centers and the need for agility 
and efficiency in access to services and information, 
connectivity plays a key and essential role in this global and 
digital interaction. In this context, the "Digital Cities" gain 
space and present themselves as a viable path, as can be 
observed in studies that point to the use of technologies in an 
urban context [1]. 
One of the main problems of urban centers today is 
mobility. The connectivity inherent to the "Digital Cities" 
opens a very promising frontier with regard to the control of 
access to information, as can be seen in the works related to 
ITS in China [2][3] and the distributed ITS architectures [4].  
An ITS represents "the application of advanced sensors, 
computers, 
electronic 
devices 
and 
communication 
technologies and integrated strategic management, aiming to 
improve the safety and efficiency of the traffic management 
system" [5]. This interconnectedness of the "Intelligent 
Cities", when applied to the control of urban mobility, aims 
at the search of the efficiency in the displacement and 
fluidity of traffic and, consequently, an improvement of 
quality for the people that interact in this system and depend, 
directly, of the efficiency and Quality of this environment. 
According to Kim [6], "the speed of traffic is an important 
part in communicating the data. For engineers, this data 
complements other traffic information that reflects on road 
network performance and alerts of possible road traffic 
incidents. For drivers, the speed information reflects in the 
drivability. This is easily achieved, unlike other traffic data 
such as volume and density that are harder to relate to. " 
However, 
these 
sources 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies 
(TIC) 
form 
complex 
structures and generate a large volume of data, which present 
great challenges and opportunities, making it difficult to 
offer programs that integrate sensor information and capture 
the physical space In real time. It is worth mentioning that 
open data initiatives are being carried out by governments at 
all levels in order to increase transparency, empower 
citizens, foster innovations and reform public services [2]. 
These initiatives converge with "Smart Cities" and different 
solutions are already in place in cities such as New York, 
Amsterdam, Helsinki, Chicago, Barcelona, Quebec City, 
Rio, Dublin, Nairobi and Manchester at different rates and 
scales. 
In this context, the present article presents monitoring 
techniques with the objective of contributing to a better 
understanding and enrichment for the state of the art in ITS. 
It is worth mentioning that using these techniques, urban 
monitoring, has been extremely efficient, allowing a rigth 
and fast response for the community’s needs, especially on 
intervention in traffic flow and safety. The most types of 
equipment and technological monitoring solutions are 
available for the safety and well-being of society. Some 
related works cited in this review, address several 
techniques, whether they are carried out in a simulated 
environment or real-time environment, but most of them do 
not follow policies of effective urban control, formalized by 
laws, norms and monitoring, that allows the coexistence and 
harmony between citizens, respecting the space of all. 
The structure of the article is organized as follows. In 
section II, we consider the application of a systematic review 
to identify the techniques and methods of urban monitoring 
in ITS. In section III, a literature review to confront authors 
addressing the subject proposed. In section IV, an analysis 
and summary of selected papers about the subject 
researched. And section V, show the research findings. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

II.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW PROTOCOL
This section contains the protocol based on [7], which 
was used to apply the systematic review, whose focus of the 
searches, focused on the identification of the researches that 
present proposals related to techniques and methods of urban 
monitoring in ITS. 
A.
Formulations of questions 
Question: What are the techniques and methods of urban 
monitoring in ITS that use/not Open Data? 
B.
Source Selection Criteria 
Availability of query of articles in databases through the 
web (IEEE Xplorer, ACM Digital Library, DPLP Computer 
Science Bibliography), using the search field Title. The 
following search string used: 
● (intelligent <and> transport <and> system) <and> 
(open <and> data) <and> (urban <and> monitoring) 
C.
Criteria for inclusion of articles 
● Articles should be available for download on the web;
● The articles found must present complete texts of the 
studies in electronic format; 
● Articles should be described in English or Portuguese;
● Articles that have been published in the last 5 years 
(between 2011 and 2016); 
D.
Preliminary screening process for primary studies 
The search strategy will be applied for the identification 
of potential primary studies. With the studies researched, the 
title and summaries will be read. Given the relevance of a 
study, already highlighted in the abstract, it will be selected 
to be read in its entirety. 
E.
Final selection process of primary studies 
It consists of the complete reading of the selected studies 
in the preliminary selection stage. The reviewers will be 
responsible 
for 
making 
a 
general 
summary 
and 
considerations on the results observed in the selected studies. 
III.
LITERATURE REVIEW
The ITS, aim to support the various everyday situations 
related to urban mobility, through the use of technologies 
and interoperability between communication systems, data 
transmission and connectivity. 
Its efficiency in monitoring and agility in the distribution 
of information is essential so that the results regarding the 
optimization of transportation systems are felt by the general 
population that are included in this scenario, allowing a 
better management of the transportation system Urban 
[17][18]. 
The work of Nasim and Kassler [18] can be subdivided 
into six advanced management areas: Advanced Traffic 
Management System, Advanced Traveler Information 
Systems, Advanced Public Transport Systems, Commercial 
Vehicle Operating Systems, Advanced Vehicle Control 
Systems, Electronic Toll Collection. All these subsystems 
have the objective of acting in a specific and targeted manner 
on subareas of transportation management, seeking to 
guarantee the efficiency and quality of urban mobility. 
According to the Open Definition [19], open data is data 
that can be freely used, reused and redistributed by anyone - 
subject to at most the requirement of original source 
allocation and sharing by the same licenses in which the 
information was presented. In other words, the opening of 
data is interested in avoiding a mechanism of control and 
restrictions on the data that are published, allowing both 
individuals and corporations, to exploit this data freely. From 
this perspective, the definition of the term open data presents 
three fundamental norms [20]: availability and access, reuse 
and redistribution and universal participation (areas of action 
and people / groups). 
From the moment that there is a movement to make data 
available, where the three fundamental norms mentioned 
above are respected, it is possible that different organizations 
and systems can work in a collaborative way. This is due to 
the ability of these organizations and systems to interoperate 
the 
data 
that 
have 
been 
opened, 
thus 
increasing 
communication and enhancing the efficient development of 
complex systems [21]. 
IV.
ANALYSIS AND SUMMARY OF SELECTED WORK
After the implementation of the Systematic Review 
Protocol (PRS), 83 scientific articles were initially identified 
(36 articles in the IEEE Xplorer, 28 in the ACM Digital 
Library 
and 
19 
in 
the 
DPLP 
Computer 
Science 
Bibliography), from the keywords used in the three 
databases. Data consulted. When the inclusion and exclusion 
criteria were applied in the reading of the title and abstracts 
of the articles, 6 articles were selected and analyzed in order 
to answer the two questions proposed in the PRS. The 
following is an overview of the work. 
Jérôme et al. [8] show a platform that models and 
simulates applications within the scope of ITS. In the work is 
pointed out an open source framework, called iTETRIS, 
where it is formed by a set of other tools, each one having its 
specificities. These tools are: the Simulation of Urban 
Mobility (SUMO) framework that is responsible for 
simulating vehicle traffic; And a network simulator called 
the NS-3. In addition to these tools, there is a layer of control 
that does all management, keeping the data of each 
application synchronized. According to [8], the methodology 
used resources to analyze and manage applications, such as 
bus lane management, emergency vehicles, dynamic route 
planning, and the study of speed adaptation. This article also 
highlights the benefits that the framework can bring, such as 
reducing travel time, fuel economy or reducing pollutant 
emissions. Also mentioned are the characteristics that stand 
out over other works in the literature, where among these 
particularities mentioned in it, is the possibility of extending 
functionalities, precisely because it is an open source source. 
Despite the benefits mentioned in the article, it was not 
necessary to evaluate the studies in real environments, which 
would imply in the more loyal dimensioning of the results. 
Ilya et al. [9] have an approach for monitoring traffic in 
large urban areas using drone technology. The authors state 
that the use of this technology offers innumerable 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

advantages, such as: ease of access to irregular areas due to 
their small dimensions, coupling of several sensors to 
estimate general conditions of traffic in real time, 
independent monitoring of climatic factors, monitoring of 
offenders The creation of cartographic models of road traffic 
structures, among others. According to [9], Global 
Positioning System (GPS) technologies, although with high 
open-pit accuracy, may be inefficient with respect to the 
signal in areas of dense urban shading. Thus, in the absence 
of GPS signals, an analysis was proposed on the drone 
control system using a bimodal structure. The bimodal 
scheme allows the performance in safe mode of navigation. 
In case of a malfunction, the system allows the equipment to 
remain or return to the point of origin, thus avoiding possible 
accidents on public roads. This prototype was successfully 
tested for the monitoring of the transport infrastructure of the 
city of Orel (Russia). 
Zan et al. [10] present an application was installed in the 
users' smartphone, where the personal data, the travel profile 
(origin, destination, purpose, location and time) and sensor 
data (GPS, time, and Accelerometer). During application 
operation, if your smartphone is connected to a power source 
and the connection is available, the data is automatically 
transmitted to the server. These collected data are analyzed 
for events such as congestion of frequent braking activities, 
speed and travel time variation. With this one can notify the 
drivers of the traffic condition and send driving 
recommendation so that they will be able to make informed 
decisions. Due to the smartphones used by the users of 
different brands and models, it resulted in the inconsistency 
of the data collected. This issue has to be resolved in future 
implementations. 
The results of Fayazi et al. [11] are based on data from 
bus movements in the city of San Francisco. Data bus power 
is provided by NextBus to a number of cities in North 
America in XML. The attributes of interest are the position 
and speed of each vehicle along with its weather identifier 
and the bus identification number. In addition, bus route data 
and bus location locations were extracted from the same data 
stream. Fayazi et al. [11] also demonstrated the feasibility of 
timing estimation of fixed-time traffic lights, for example, at 
intersections in the city of San Francisco the feasibility of 
estimating cycle time, red signal time, green signal start, 
Change of signal programming. The extensive use of 
filtering / preprocessing data is elementary to the successes 
found in [11]. It is noted that the influence of heavy traffic 
conditions on the prediction is not investigated in this work 
neither the adaptive signals were considered. 
Shi et al. [12] used the Bayesian Logic model to predict 
in real time. The probability of an accident occurring, 
logistic regression models were evaluated under Bayesian 
conditions. Therefore, this statistical method is able to handle 
information from different sources. With the rapid 
development in Big Data, it is expected that new data 
sources can be incorporated into this modeling framework in 
the future. 
Unlike other previous real-time traffic safety studies, Shi 
et al. [12] incorporate a reliability analysis to determine the 
conditions under which it is appropriate to trigger safety 
warnings on the expressway. The First-Order Reliability 
Method (FORM) model was constructed based on the real-
time fall forecast model and based on the critical point of the 
CI system, where volume and velocity were obtained. It was 
found that the average peak IC for failures per hour was 
equal to the congestion threshold, which suggested that when 
congestion is detected at a specific location, both congestion 
and safety warnings should be sent to drivers. Also in [12], a 
method of combined real-time congestion and safety 
monitoring in urban expressways was proposed through the 
Multipoint Video Distribution System (MVDS) system. 
Wang et al. [13] designed a monitor urban traffic using 
the Markov model to measure the estimated traffic accuracy 
according to vehicle position and speed. This model takes 
into account the mean, variance, and correlation of the traffic 
in a particular stretch of road being mapped over a given 
period with the impact of granularity on the accuracy of 
traffic estimation so that we can measure the quality of 
service in the system through Granularity function. 
Santos et al. [14] method can be conceptualized as: rule, 
norm, search for truth, detection of errors in the attempt to 
achieve a desired goal. Some authors, in defining method, 
emphasize intelligence and talent in the way they perform 
tasks. Others focus on the aspects of order, path, security and 
economy in the accomplishment of an activity. 
Lakatos et al. [15] show that among various concepts of 
methods we can mention: Method is the "path by which a 
certain result is arrived at, although that path has not been 
fixed in advance in a reflected and deliberate way".  
Method is a way of selecting techniques for evaluating 
alternatives to scientific action. So, while the techniques used 
by a scientist are the fruit of their decisions, the way in 
which such decisions are made depends on their decision 
rules. Methods are rules of choice; techniques are their own 
choices " [15]. 
Method is also the way to proceed along a path. In 
science, methods are the basic tools that order the thought of 
systems in the first place, and in an orderly way the 
scientist's way of proceeding along a path to achieve an 
objective. 
The term method already existed in classical Greek 
(méthodos), having been used by Plato and Aristotle in the 
sense of "ordered study of a philosophical or scientific 
question". The word can be decomposed into the prefix metá 
+ hodós, which means path, path, route. In the generic sense, 
therefore, it is the "way by which a certain result is arrived 
at". In scientific terminology, method can be defined as a set 
of data and rules to proceed, allowing to reach a 
predetermined end. 
Marconi et al. [16] technique is a set of precepts or 
processes that serve a science or art; this technique allow him 
to bring the teorical norms to the practice. Marconi’s 
technique defines the way of proceeding in its smallest 
details, the operationalization of the method according to 
standards. It is a result of experience and requires skill in its 
execution. The same method may involve more than one 
technique. The semantic difference between method and 
technique can be compared to that between gender and 
species. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

In order to discover and analyze the techniques and 
methods most used in the selected articles, the techniques 
and the monitoring methods present in each article, set out in 
Table 1 and 2, were identified where the symbol "✓" 
indicates the existence of the observed characteristic: 
TABLE I. 
MONITORING METHODS 
Methods
[8] 
[9] 
[10] 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
Traffic Management
✓
✓
GPS monitoring
✓
✓
Drone Monitoring
✓
Camera Monitoring
✓
Combined Real Time 
Monitoring
✓
According to Table 1, it is possible to note that the most 
used methods are: "Traffic Management", with two articles; 
And "GPS monitoring", also with two articles. It is assumed 
that these characteristics were the most used, as they are 
responsible for managing the traffic and obtaining the 
location of the transport, respectively. 
TABLE II. 
MONITORING TECHNIQUES 
Techniques
[8] 
[9]
[10] 
[11] 
[12] 
[13] 
Framework for 
simulating vehicle 
traffic
✓
Markov model
✓
Open Data Approach
✓
✓
✓
Use of Monitoring 
Software
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Data Mining
✓
✓
✓
Bayesian Inference
✓
MVDS
✓
PHP Web Interface 
Monitoring
✓
With regard to the most used techniques shown in Table 
2, we have: "Open Data", with three articles; The 
"Monitoring Software", with five articles; And the "Data 
Mining Technique", with three articles. It is assumed that 
these techniques were the most used for being responsible 
for obtaining traffic data in order to analyze and perform 
urban monitoring to find a better solution. 
The author of [22] presented some techniques of traffic 
analysis focusing on urban environments. As an example, we 
have the automatic monitoring by video, through urban 
surveillance cameras, aiming to observe congestion, 
interaction of vehicles and check violations of traffic rules. 
Because of these problems, different classifying algorithms 
were presented in Buch et al. [22], that the authors created in 
order to classify the vehicles and increase the capacity of 
detection level and tracking. The use of these cameras 
became feasible because of the reduction of the cost 
(hardware), causing a great ascendancy in the implantation 
of these cameras, making possible and facilitating the 
analysis of the urban traffic. This area is of great interest to 
ITS and offers several future challenges, such as some 
assessments in challenging weather conditions, among 
others. 
Through the methods and techniques of urban monitoring 
in ITS we can demonstrate that there are several advantages 
related to our suggested approach. The innumerable 
advantages using technologies are increasingly improving 
the way in which we can use these techniques and methods 
for the development of field research. The advantages are 
monitoring traffic offenses, weather factors, locating vehicles 
by GPS, improving traffic congestion through traffic lights, 
etc. 
We propose that ITS, along with these methods and 
techniques described in this article, bring a better 
development in vehicle traffic monitoring so that we can 
differentiate alternative routes from vehicles in congested 
areas. ITS is increasingly improving through existing 
technologies in order to provide better distribution of 
vehicles on a given route. Monitoring methods and 
techniques are conducive to better tracking of alternative 
routes through applications that can assist vehicle drivers 
through these routes and demonstrate the estimated time of 
their commuting from one location to another. 
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this article, work related to the area of intelligent 
transport systems was considered. With the purpose of 
identifying and evaluating urban monitoring techniques. A 
systematic review was presented on the monitoring 
techniques, in order to extract traffic behavior on highways, 
making it possible to detect congestion, avoid accidents, 
among other improvements for urban traffic. 
Due to the investigation, it was noticed how small a 
number of articles correlated with the search theme, this 
shows that the research area is relatively new and at the same 
time shows a research path to be explored. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank the Post-Graduation Department 
of Computer Science at UFS, for the support and 
encouragement of research and investigation with new 
technologies. 
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Kuikkaniemi, G. Jacucci, M. Turpeinen, E. Hoggan,  and J. 
Müller. From space to stage: how interactive screens will change 
urban life. IEEE Computer Society, pp.40-47, 2011. 
[2]
C. Li, Travel Information Service System for Public Travel Based on 
SOA. Beijing Jiaotong University, China, pp.321-324, 2010. 
[3]
T. Zhu, and Z. Liu, Intelligent Transport Systems in China: Past, 
Present and Future. IEEE ICMTMA, pp. 581-584, 2015. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[4]
National ITS Architecture team, “Regional ITS architecture 
guidance”, U.S. department of transportation, 2001. 
[5]
R. Nasim, and A. Kassler, “Distributed Architectures for Intelligent 
Transport Systems: A Survey”, NCCA, pp. 130-136, 2012. 
[6]
K. K. Chin, and C. W. Lee, Trafficscan —Bringing Real-time Travel 
Information to Motorists, Land Transport Authority, Singapore, pp.7-
14, 2009. 
[7]
S. N. Mafra, “Protocolo de Revisão Sistemática” Grupo de 
Engenharia de Software Experimental, Programa de Engenharia de 
Sistemas e Computação (COPPE/UFRJ), 2005. 
[8]
H. Jérôme, et al. 2011. Modeling and simulating ITS applications 
with iTETRIS. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM workshop on 
Performance monitoring and measurement of heterogeneous wireless 
and wired networks (PM2HW2N '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
pp. 33-40, 2011. 
[9]
B. Ilya, V. Vlasov, A. Demidov, and N. Kanatnikov, The Use of 
Multicopters for Traffic Monitoring in Dense Urban Areas. In 
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Electronic Governance and 
Open Society: Challenges in Eurasia (EGOSE '14). ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, pp. 42-44, 2014. 
[10] T. Zan, L. Gueta, and T. Okochi, “Enabling Technology for Smart 
City Transportation in Developing Countries”. Conference Paper 
IEEE Smart City December 2015, pp.170-174. 
[11] A. S. Fayazi, A. Vahidi, G. Mahler, and A. Winckler, "Traffic Signal 
Phase amd Timing Estimation from Low-Frequency Transit Bus 
Data". IEEE Trasactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 
16, no. 1, pp. 19 - 28, 2015. 
[12] Q. Shi, and M. Abdel-Aty, "Big Data applications in real-time traffic 
operation and safety monitoring and improvement on urban 
expressways". Elsevier, Transportation Research part C, vol. 58, pp. 
380 - 394, 2015. 
[13] C. Wang, H. Liu, K. L. Wright, B. Krishnamachari, and M. 
Annavaram, "A Privacy mechanism for mobile-based urban traffic 
monitoring". Elsevier, Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 20, pp. 
1 - 12, 2015. 
[14] I. E. dos Santos, Textos selecionados de métodos e técnicas de 
pesquisa científica.   4. ed., rev., ampl. e atual. Rio de Janeiro: 
Impetus, 2003. 363 p. 
[15] E. M. Lakatos, and M. A. Marconi,  Metodologia científica:  ciência e 
conhecimento científico, métodos científicos ....  São Paulo: Atlas, 
1989. 231 p. 
[16] M. A. Marconi, and E. M. Lakatos, Técnicas de pesquisa:  
planejamento e execução de pesquisa: amostragens e técnicas de 
pesquisa ....  2. tiragem. São Paulo: Atlas, 1982. 205 p. 
[17] T. Zhu and Z. Liu, “Intelligent transport systems in china: Past, 
present and future,” in Measuring Technology and Mechatronics 
Automation (ICMTMA), 2015 Seventh International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2015, pp. 581–584. 
[18] R. Nasim and A. Kassler, “Distributed architectures for intelligent 
transport systems: A survey,” in Network Cloud Computing and 
Applications (NCCA), 2012 Second Symposium on. IEEE, 2012, pp. 
130–136. 
[19] O. Definition. The open definition. http://opendefinition.org/. 
Accessado: 
11/11/2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://opendefinition.org/ 
[20] Open 
Data. 
K. 
Foundation. 
Open 
data 
handbook. 
http://opendatahandbook.org/guide/en/. 
Accessado: 
18/11/2015. 
[Online]. Available: http://opendatahandbook.org/guide/en/ 
[21] S. Isotani and I. I. Bittencourt, Dados Abertos Conectados. Novatec 
Editora, 2015. 
[22] N. Buch, S. A. Velastin and J. Orwell. "A Review of Computer 
Vision Techniques for the Analysis of Urban Traffic". IEEE 
Transactions on intelligent transportation systems, Vol. 12. Nº 3, pp. 
920-939, september 2011. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

