A Bidirectional Semi-Passive DS-CDMA-RFID Transponder for the UHF Band
Andreas Loefﬂer, Ingo Altmann
Chair of Information Technologies
Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nuremberg
Erlangen, Germany
{loefﬂer, altmann}@like.eei.uni-erlangen.de
Abstract—This paper presents a ﬁrst realization of a semi-
passive UHF RFID transponder featuring a direct sequence
code division multiple access channel access method for the
RFID uplink, and, in addition, some limited downlink abili-
ties, including carrier frequency and ﬁeld strength measure-
ments. The paper shows experimental results of the proposed
transponder, which is already included within an UHF RFID
system, containing an RFID reader being able to read out
the transponders’ data. The focus of this work is on the
transponder’s modulator, generating an ASK-like modulation
scheme by impedance miss-matching techniques. This paper
presents results obtained from real life measurements of a
realized UHF RFID transponder qualiﬁed for the application
in CDMA-based RFID systems.
Keywords-Radiofrequency identiﬁcation; UHF; transponder;
Backscatter.
I. INTRODUCTION
Through an increasing number of RFID (Radio Frequency
IDentiﬁcation [1], [2]) tags (transponders), particularly UHF
tags [3]–[6], the need for a fast recognition of innumerable
RFID tags puts great demand on future RFID readers [7]. If
several tags are located within the range of a reader, signals
from some of these tags collide [8]. This is the reason why
anti-collision procedures [9] are widely used to prevent tags
from broadcasting their information simultaneously. Existing
RFID multiple access solutions are based on Time Division
Multiple Access (TDMA [10]). Fig. 1a shows the TDMA
method, pointing out that the tags in the reader’s ﬁeld
transmit their data at different moments in time [1].
A simple TDMA protocol is the well known ALOHA
protocol [11]. Basically, there are two modes the ALOHA
protocol may be used with: pure (unslotted) and slotted
ALOHA [12]. When using pure ALOHA [13], data are being
send at any times the channel is available. Because there is
no control over the starting time, a collision is difﬁcult to
predict. Slotted ALOHA, on the other hand, is based on time
slots which synchronize the start of transmission. Collisions
can be predicted more easily and only happen, if at least
two tags are requesting at the same time a free slot (e.g.,
slot 2, 3 and 5 in Fig. 1a).
The anti-collision procedure of the commonly used RFID
standard EPC Class1 Gen2 [14] is based on slotted ALOHA.
A so called Q-parameter controls the inventory process by
determining the maximum number of possible time slots,
...
Frequency
Power
Time / slots
Tag #1
Tag #1
Tag #1
Tag #2
Tag #3
Tag #3
Tag #3
Tag #4
Tag #4
(a) TDMA: Time Division Multiple Access
...
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
tag2
Frequency
Power
Time / slots
Tag #1
Tag #2
Tag #3
Tag #4
(b) CDMA: Code Division Multiple Access
Figure 1.
Comparison of TDMA and CDMA communication channel
access techniques for RFID
which is set to 2Q. Each transponder in the reading range
of an RFID reader ﬁlls its slot counter with a random
number between 0 and 2Q − 1. Within each round, the
slot counter is decreased by one. Once the slot counter of
one or more tags reaches a zero state, the tag(s) send an
acknowledgment command back to the reader. However, if
tags chose equal random numbers, the tags will collide once
their slot counters are zero. Hence, the choice of Q is a
typical trade-off. Choosing a high Q will lead to a smaller
number of collisions, at the expense of an increasing time
needed for an inventory round. A smaller Q will lead to less
acquisition time, but to more collisions, indeed. In addition,
the usage of TDMA methods pushes the envelope of the
system (time-wise) when a very high number of tags have
to be scanned ion very short time.
The introduction of Code Division Multiple Access
(CDMA [15]) may ﬁnd a remedy (Fig. 1b). The transpon-
ders, each equipped with a unique quasi-orthogonal spread-
ing code, may use the radio channel whenever the transpon-
ders are ready to. The objective is the realization of a DS
176
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

(direct sequence)-CDMA-based RFID system using semi-
passive UHF transponders [16], with the reader providing the
recognition of multiple transponders simultaneously. This
means that the transponders are transmitting data within the
same time range and frequency band (Fig. 1b), in contrast
to the existing systems based on TDMA.
The realized UHF transponders operate in semi-passive
mode, meaning that the digital part of the transponder, i.e.,
the data generation, has an active power supply, whereas
the high frequency (HF) part works in passive mode tak-
ing advantage of the backscatter principle. The attendant
RFID reader, though, is separated into two parts. Part one,
described as transmitting system, generates a carrier wave
at around 867 MHz. Part two, the receiving system, mainly
demodulates the incoming backscattered signals of the RFID
tags.
The work described in this paper is based upon previous
work, e.g., described in [17]. Also, prior work may be found
in this reference. Although it seems there are no big differ-
ences between this work and previous work it can be stated
that this is not a given fact. Several improvements (e.g.,
modulator with higher efﬁciency, new downlink capabilities
of the transponder, higher range, etc.) have been carried out
to push the system’s performance. Also, a complete new
receiving part has been realized in order to accelerate the
inventory rounds.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II depicts the system at a whole, Section III describes
in more detail the structure of the UHF transponder, mainly
focusing on the modulator. The section concludes with
experimental measurements. Section IV outlines the results,
particularly pointing out the received superimposed signals
of multiple transponders. Finally, the paper concludes by
showing references for future work in Section V.
II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
The whole RFID system is built upon three parts; a
transmitting part and a receiving part, both deﬁned as RFID
reader, and a third part, involving one or more CDMA-based
RFID UHF transponders. However, the RFID reader parts
will not be speciﬁed in much detail in this section. Fig. 2
shows the system’s setup.
The transmit part consists of a simple sine wave generator
(TX source) and an antenna (TX antenna) creating the
carrier wave on which the transponders respond using the
backscatter method [1]. The carrier signal is created upon a
tunable, PLL-based RF synthesizer board (within the setup
as in Fig. 2, the PLL is substituted by two frequency
synchronized signal generators). This PLL generates two
sine waves (shifted π in phase), one for the transmitting
part and one for the receiving part (i.e., the demodulator).
The receiving part consists of an antenna (RX antenna),
a LNA (low noise ampliﬁer), an IQ-demodulator and a
succeeding DSP-based platform for the baseband processing.
RFID
antenna
Modulator
TX
antenna
RX
antenna
LO
source
LNA
LO in
RX in
Demodulator +
Baseband processor
I, Q out
RFID
tag
TX
source
µC
Figure 2.
Setup of CDMA-based UHF-RFID system
The reﬂected signals from the transponders are low-noise
ampliﬁed and directly mixed into baseband using a zero-IF
demodulator. The demodulator’s output consists of two I-
and two Q-signals, each of them processed differentially.
The following ﬁltering and amplifying stages handle the
signals differentially, too, in order to hold the current signal-
to-noise ratio at a high level. As an example, the measured
baseband signals at the demodulator’s output, are shown in
Fig. 2 (see oscilloscope) and Subsection III-B. Subsequently,
these preprocessed signals are A/D-converted and pipelined
to a DSP-based acquisition board, dealing with the manda-
tory baseband processing. The DSP is in charge of providing
an appropriate despreading scheme to separate, in terms of
data, various transponders from each other. This is mostly
done through cross-correlation techniques. Some of these
methods are evaluated in [17].
III. DS-CDMA TRANSPONDER
The proposed transponders consist of four main parts.
Part one, the tag antenna, is designed as patch antenna.
Part two (see subsection III-A) is known as backscatter
modulator. This part generates different impedance values
seen by the tag antenna (see [17] for more details) in order
to generate the wanted backscatter modulation scheme [1]
177
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Tag antenna
Modulator
Power
detector for
RSSI mea-
surements
Frequency
detector for
downlink
channel
µC
(a) UHF Transponder: Top
Tag antenna
Modulator
Power detector for
RSSI
measurements
Frequency
detector for
downlink channel
(b) UHF Transponder: Bottom
Figure 3.
Implemented UHF transponder
f in MHz
Magnitude |s11|
RFID antenna reﬂection factor
850
855
860
867.25
875
880
885
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
Figure 4.
Measurement (vector analyzer) of reﬂection factor of RFID tag
antenna within a range of 40 MHz
used along with non-inductive and non-capacitive working
RFID systems. In most RFID systems, the realized backscat-
ter modulation is a mixture between amplitude and phase
modulation [2], [16].
Part three handles the baseband processing of the
transponder, which includes mostly the generation of appro-
priate spreading codes, e.g., gold codes, and data spreading
techniques for the CDMA scheme.
The last part describes a ﬁrst realization of equipping the
transponders with downlink (reader to tag) functionalities.
This is realized using two elements; a frequency counter
(referred to as frequency detector in Fig. 3a, 3b) and
a detector of the incoming ﬁeld strength (referred to as
power detector in Fig. 3a, 3b). By implementing these two
functionalities, the transponder may respond with different
data to different incoming carrier frequencies. On the other
hand, the transponder may use longer respectively shorter
spreading codes according to the incoming ﬁeld strength
(lower respectively higher). This should mild the Near-
Far effect [18], CDMA-based systems have to deal with.
Anyway, the main part of the work focuses on the Antenna
- Modulator effects, i.e., the uplink (tag to reader). A top
and bottom view of the UHF transponder is given in Fig. 3a
and Fig. 3b, respectively.
T1
T2
Modulator
S
Baseband data
(spreaded)
Transponder
Figure 5.
RFID transponder with HF switch as modulator
A. Backscatter Modulator
The RFID tag antenna is designed for the usage with
linear polarized waves at approximately 867 MHz at an
impedance of 50 Ω. The antenna’s gain has been calculated
to G = 6.1 dBi. The measurement of the antenna reﬂection
factor is shown in Fig. 4. The current dimension of the
antenna is still quite high (around 3.5×ISO card size) but
will be reduced to current tag sizes, certainly with the effect
of a lower gain.
To be ﬂexible in designing the modulator and in mea-
suring various effects of the impedance, the choice fell
upon an HF switch (single pole, double throw) for tuning
respectively switching the two different impedances (binary
modulation). Fig. 5 shows the principle of the modulator
designed as HF switch (S in Fig. 5). Examining the resulting
backscatter effect, one has to say, that the well-directed
two miss-matchings between the HF switch terminations
(T1, T2) and the RFID patch antenna generate different
178
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

amounts of energy scattered back to the receiving part of
the RFID reader [2], [16], [19]–[22]. These reﬂected waves
of the transponder differ in amplitude and/or phase. This
difference, indeed, is used by the reader’s demodulator to
recognize the binary states of the transponder’s data and
demodulate them accordingly. The values of the impedances
and therefore the amount of reﬂected energy can be tuned
by varying the terminations (T1 and T2 in Fig. 5) of the
HF switch. A good ﬁrst approach is achieved by inserting
a short circuit on termination T1 and an open circuit on
T2. Feeding the HF switch with spreaded data from the
transponder (i.e., binary ’0’s and ’1’s), leads to impedance
alternations between short and open circuit state, thus gen-
erating backscattered waves with differing phase changes,
leading to a BPSK-like modulation scheme. However, these
signals are superimposed by various scattered waves of
the carrier from the reader, ﬁnally forming an ASK-like
modulation at the demodulator’s input. The following results
of carried out experiments were received by using the setup
as in Fig. 2.
888 MHz
888 MHz
848 MHz
848 MHz
Short
circuit
Open
circuit
867,25 MHz
y-axis
Figure 6.
Smith Chart of the two different binary states of the modulator
(short and open circuit)
B. Measurements
To show the working principle of the proposed system,
measurements were carried out. The ﬁrst measurement in-
cludes the reﬂection factor (i.e., s11) of the RFID transpon-
der’s patch antenna. The second measurement involves the
impedance measurement (i.e., reﬂection factor) of the mod-
ulator for both binary states, open and short circuit. The last
measurements carried out within the setup as of in Fig. 2,
show the demodulated baseband signals of the backscattered
power from one or more tags within IQ constellation and
timing diagrams.
The result of the ﬁrst measurement is shown in Fig. 4,
indicating the absolute value of the measured reﬂection
factor |s11| of the tag antenna used. It can be shown that the
proposed (simulated) s11 at a frequency of fc = 867 MHz
could be approximately hit with an offset of only 250 kHz.
The measurement was carried out in a laboratory environ-
ment.
The measurement results of the modulator are shown in
Fig. 6. As expected, the results of the short circuit states
are on the left side of the Smith chart, whereas the open
circuit states are located at the right side. The frequency
range was limited to 40 MHz with around 867 MHz at the
center. It can be stated, that the measured values show a
good approximation of a BPSK modulation scheme.
The measurement, showing the whole effect of the
transponder’s properties and the principle of the demodulator
board, is shown in Fig. 7. The resulting values of this
measurement are the processed (i.e., ﬁltered and ampliﬁed)
baseband signals of the transponder’s backscatter response.
The four underlying signals (i.e., two differential signals for
the I- and two for the Q-channel, respectively) were sampled
by an oscilloscope. After building the differences (I+−I- and
Q+ − Q-) in order to receive the pure I- and Q-signals, the
resulting signals are shown in an IQ constellation diagram.
It is important to keep in mind, that the measured signals are
sampled DC-free to show the effect of the BPSK modulation.
Showing the full DC-afﬂicted signal, would result into an
ASK modulation scheme (which, of course, is received at
the receiving antenna). Anyway, Fig. 7 not only shows the
baseband signals, it shows signal regions, sorted colored
(white to black) according to their frequency of occurrence.
The more often particular signal states are present within a
given region, the darker the region is. That means, that the
two darkest states at the upper left and lower right, actually
represent the two states of the modulator, i.e., open circuit
and short circuit. The gray states in between the darker states
show the switching operation of the HF switch. A more
detailed view on the measurement showed, that the switching
process from one stable state to the other, is executed in
two different ways (non-reciprocal), as the gray region in
Fig. 7 is divided by a white region. The distance between
RFID reader antenna and transponder is approximately 3 m.
However, further experiments showed a veriﬁed distance of
around 15 m.
The remaining measurements show the complex baseband
signals after mixing and ﬁltering by the demodulator. These
measurements were carried out using up to three transpon-
ders in the reader’s ﬁeld. Current baseband signals with 2
transponders in the ﬁeld are shown in Fig. 8. The number of
ﬁxed signal states is 4, corresponding to 2 transponders. The
reason for that is given by the fact, that the two transponders
respond on the same “wave” emitted by the reader (coherent
backscattering). Therefore, both transponders backscatter
their very own signature on the coherent carrier of the reader.
As each transponder inherits two stable states, the resulting
179
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

waveform consists of 22 states. This issue is exemplary
shown in Fig. 9. Fig. 9a shows the complex baseband signal
with 1 transponder, Fig. 9b with 2 transponders, and Fig. 9c
with three transponders in the ﬁeld. However, the results
describing the currently used CDMA methods (spreading,
despreading) are part of coming up work.
IQ constellation diagram
Inphase (I) component in mV
Quadrature (Q) component in mV
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
very frequent
very unfrequent
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
Figure 7.
IQ constellation diagram showing baseband I- and Q-signals
according to their frequency of occurrence, with black being very frequent
and white being no occurrence at all
IV. RESULTS
The measurement results presented in Subsection III-B
show the basic operation principles of the proposed CDMA-
transponder. Using above realized impedance states, i.e.,
open and short circuit for the transponder’s modulator,
the RFID reader, particularly the receiving system, may
receive ASK-like modulated and spreaded transponder data,
although a BPSK modulation scheme is provided by the
transponder. Having this in mind, the receiver may eas-
ily recognize a lot more transponders simultaneously, by
Time in µs
Voltage in mV
Inphase I+ − I-
Time in µs
Voltage in mV
Quadrature Q+ − Q-
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
25
0
2.5
5
7.5
10
12.5
15
17.5
20
22.5
25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Figure 8.
Differential signals of I- and Q-component at the output of the
demodulator showing two transponders with superimposed CDMA signals
downconverting the spreaded and overlapped data of the
individual transponders into baseband, and by evaluating the
modulated phase and/or amplitude [17] through despreading
techniques. The methods describing these despreading tech-
niques in detail are part of different work.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The work shown in this paper proposes a new semi-
passive DS-CDMA-based RFID transponder system for the
UHF frequency band. The RFID reader uses a transmitting
part to generate the carrier wave, again used by the transpon-
ders to reﬂect the incoming electromagnetic wave using
different reﬂection states. These different states are achieved
within the transponder’s modulator, mainly consisting of an
HF switch, creating impedance miss-matchings (open and
short circuit) against the 50 Ω RFID tag patch antenna, in
order to generate two different reﬂected waves (in terms
of energy). These backscattered waves are received by the
receiving part of the RFID reader for further processing. The
applied CDMA channel access method is used to recognize
transponders responding at an arbitrary point in time.
Further work has to be done by verifying the downlink
part for the transponders, and the data respectively signal
despreading of various transponders in the reading range of
the RFID reader.
Tuning the impedance miss-matchings between modulator
and antenna by applying other elements such as resistors,
capacitors or inductors, or a mixture between them to the
modulator, could provide better readability of the tags.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Fabian Schuh for his
preceding work on this subject.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Finkenzeller, RFID handbook.
Wiley West Sussex,
England, 2003.
[2] K. Finkenzeller and D. M¨uller, RFID Handbook: Fundamen-
tals and Applications in Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Fre-
quency Identiﬁcation and Near-Field Communication. Wiley,
2010.
[3] RNCOS, “Global RFID Market Analysis till 2010,” Aug.
2010.
[4] Frost & Sullivan, “Global Market RFID,” Dec. 2010.
[5] Inﬁniti Research Limited, “Global RFID Market 2010-2014,”
Feb. 2011.
[6] VDC Research Group, “RFID Transponders, ICs & Inlays:
Track 1, Volume 1: The 2009 RFID Business Planning
Service,” 2009.
[7] A.
Loefﬂer,
U.
Wissendheit,
H.
Gerhaeuser,
and
D. Kuznetsova, “A multi-purpose RFID reader supporting
indoor
navigation
systems,”
in
RFID-Technology
and
Applications (RFID-TA), 2010 IEEE International Conference
on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 43–48.
180
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

(a) Measurement: IQ constellation diagram with
1 transponder in the ﬁeld; signal is sampled
at baseband (1 GSps); 2n = 2 signal states
correspond to n = 1 transponder(s)
(b) Measurement: IQ constellation diagram with
2 transponders in the ﬁeld; signal is sampled
at baseband (1 GSps); 2n = 4 signal states
correspond to n = 2 transponder(s)
(c) Measurement: IQ constellation diagram with
3 transponders in the ﬁeld; signal is sampled
at baseband (1 GSps); 2n = 8 signal states
correspond to n = 3 transponder(s)
Figure 9.
Baseband measurements (IQ constellation diagrams) with 1, 2 and 3 transponders in the reading range of the RFID reader; signals are sampled
after baseband processing, i.e., IQ demodulated, ﬁltered and ampliﬁed
[8] D. Shih, P. Sun, D. Yen, and S. Huang, “Taxonomy and survey
of RFID anti-collision protocols,” Computer communications,
vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 2150–2166, 2006.
[9] P. Peris-Lopez, J. Hernandez-Castro, J. Estevez-Tapiador, and
A. Ribagorda, “RFID systems: A survey on security threats
and proposed solutions,” in Personal Wireless Communica-
tions.
Springer, 2006, pp. 159–170.
[10] D. R. Campbell, “MESA: A Time Division Multiple Access
System,” Int’l. Symp. Global Commun., p. 61, Jun. 1964.
[11] N. Abramson, “THE ALOHA SYSTEM: another alternative
for
computer
communications,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
November 17-19, 1970, fall joint computer conference, ser.
AFIPS ’70 (Fall).
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1970,
pp. 281–285. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
1478462.1478502
[12] L. G. Roberts, “ALOHA packet system with and without
slots and capture,” SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev.,
vol.
5,
pp.
28–42,
April
1975.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1024916.1024920
[13] D. Bertsekas and R. Gallager, Data networks (2nd ed.).
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1992.
[14] “Class 1 Generation 2 UHF Air Interface Protocol Standard,”
EPCglobal Inc., 2008.
[15] A. Viterbi et al., CDMA: Principles of spread spectrum
communication.
Addison-Wesley Norwell, MA, 1995, vol.
129.
[16] D. Dobkin, The RF in RFID: passive UHF RFID in practice.
Newnes, 2007.
[17] A. Loefﬂer, F. Schuh, and H. Gerhaeuser, “Realization of
a CDMA-Based RFID System Using a Semi-Active UHF
Transponder,” in Wireless and Mobile Communications, 2010.
ICWMC ’10. Sixth International Conference on, September
2010.
[18] J. Andrews, “Interference cancellation for cellular systems:
A contemporary overview,” IEEE Wireless Communications,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 19–29, 2005.
[19] P. D.-I. B. Rembold, “Optimum modulation efﬁciency and
sideband backscatter power response of rﬁd-tags,” Frequenz -
Journal of RF-Engineering and Telecommunications, vol. 63,
no. 1-2, pp. 9 – 13, Januar 2009.
[20] P. V. Nikitin and K. V. S. Rao, Theory and Measurement
of Backscattering from RFID Tags.
Intermec Technologies
Corporation, 2003.
[21] J. Andersen and R. Vaughan, “Transmitting, receiving, and
scattering properties of antennas,” Antennas and Propagation
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 93 – 98, August 2003.
[22] W. Kahn and H. Kurss, “Minimum-scattering antennas,” IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, vol. 13, no. 5, pp.
671 – 675, September 1965.
181
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

