Blockchain for Enterprise: Overview, Opportunities and Challenges
Elyes Ben Hamida∗, Kei Leo Brousmiche ∗, Hugo Levard ∗† and Eric Thea ∗
∗Institute for Technological Research SystemX, France
Email: elyes.ben-hamida,kei-leo.brousmiche,eric.thea@irt-systemx.fr
†SQLI, France
Email: hlevard@sqli.com
Abstract—The Blockchain technology has received increased in-
terests in recent years, from both the scientiﬁc community and
the industry. This technology represents a major paradigm shift
in the way smart cities solutions will be built, operated, consumed
and marketed in the near future. Even though Blockchains will
have a tremendous potential impact on businesses and societies,
there are many open challenges that need to be carefully tackled.
This article focuses on enterprise Blockchains and provides a
detailed analysis on its core components, technologies and ap-
plications. Finally, various research challenges and opportunities
are discussed.
Keywords–Blockchain; Distributed Ledger Technology; Smart
Contract; Consensus Algorithm; Data Privacy and Security; Scal-
ability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Blockchains have recently attracted increased interests
within the governments, businesses and research community,
with applications in key industries, such as ﬁnance, insurance,
logistics, energy and transportation. Indeed, the blockchain
technology is foreseen as the core backbone of future smart
cities and Internet of Things by enhancing its security, data
management and process automation.
A blockchain [1] is essentially a trustless, peer-to-peer
and continuously growing database (or ledger) of records,
including distributed applications (or smart contracts), that
have been executed and shared among the participating entities.
It enables applications and systems to operate in a fully
decentralized fashion without the need for any third party or
trust authority.
This technology per se is not novel, but is rather a
combination of well-known building blocks, including peer-
to-peer protocols, cryptographic primitives, distributed con-
sensus algorithms and economic incentives mechanisms. A
blockchain is more a paradigm shift in the way applications
and solutions will be built, deployed, operated, consumed and
marketed in the near future, than just a technology. Blockchain
is secure by design and relies on well-known cryptographic
tools and distributed consensus mechanisms to provide key
characteristics, such as persistence, anonymity, fault-tolerance,
auditability and resilience. Indeed, each record in the chain
is veriﬁed by consensus of a majority of the blockchain’s
participants, and once committed on the ledger, cannot be
easily tampered with.
More recently, smart contracts [2] have emerged as a new
usage for blockchains to digitize and automate the execu-
tion of business workﬂows (i.e., self-executing contracts or
agreements), and whose proper execution is enforced by the
consensus mechanism. This makes the blockchain technology
particularly suitable for the management of medical records
[3], notary services [4], users’ identities [5] and reputations
[6], data traceability [7], etc.
However, several challenges will need to be addressed to
unlock the tremendous potential of blockchains, especially
before this paradigm shift becomes technically, economically
and legally viable in business environments. The ﬁrst cate-
gory of these challenges concerns the technical aspects of
blockchains, including in terms of governance (i.e., open,
private or consortium), scalability, data privacy, and validity
of smart contracts. The second set of challenges is related
to the development of viable underlying business models and
incentives mechanisms. Last but not least, the legal aspects
of blockchains represent a challenge, especially in France
and Europe, where this technology should be analyzed in the
light of upcoming new regulations, such as the General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) (Regulation (EU) 2016/679
[8]), and whose objective is to strengthen users’ data privacy
and protection within the European Union.
This article focuses on the technical aspects of blockchains
and their potential beneﬁts to enterprises and industrial use
cases. The remainder of this article is organized as follows.
Section II discusses the technical aspects of blockchains in
terms of taxonomy, system architecture, consensus algorithms
and technologies. Section III provides a classiﬁcation of
blockchains applications and highlights typical use cases in
the ﬁnance, energy, mobility and logistics sectors. Section IV
draws and discusses various research challenges and opportu-
nities. Finally, Section V concludes the article.
II.
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE BLOCKCHAIN TECHNOLOGY
While public blockchains enable parties to make trans-
actions in a secured manner in trust-less environments, they
show certain limitations when applied to industrial use cases.
Indeed, we believe that aspects, such as controlled data re-
versibility (1), data privacy (2), transactions volume scala-
bility (3), system responsiveness (4) and ease of protocol
updatability (5) that are crucial for the majority of corporate
applications are not covered by public blockchain implementa-
tions. These shortcomings led industrials to develop alternative
blockchain technologies tackling the aforementioned aspects
and intended for restricted audience. These technologies can
generally be classiﬁed into two categories: private and con-
sortium blockchains [9]. The distinction between them comes
down to the governance scheme. In private chains, one partic-
ipant rules the whole system whereas members of consortium
blockchains share the authority among them. Nowadays, new
terms and concepts are ﬂourishing for categorizing approaches
between public and private blockchains such as semi-private
or enterprise technologies. However, their differences concerns
the application level and not architectural aspects. For the
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

sake of simplicity and clarity, we will assume that the term
of private blockchain encompasses these different non-public
concepts in the following. In next sections, we overview the
architecture of both public and private blockchain and highlight
their inherent differences.
A. Blockchain Architecture
a) Data structure: The data structure of a blockchain,
whether public or private, corresponds to a linked list of blocks
containing transactions. Each element of the list, has a pointer
to the previous block. Moreover, each pointer of a block
contains the hash of the previous block. This hash is the key
element of the blockchain security. Indeed, if an adversary
tries to modify the content of a block, anyone can detect it
by computing its hash and comparing it to the hash stored
in the next block to see the inconsistence. In order to avoid
this detection, the adversary could try to change all the hashes
from the tampered block to the latest block. However, this
is not feasible without the consenting of more than the half
of the participants (see Section II-A0c). Therefore, modifying
the content of a block is impossible over public chains. On
the other hand, private chains members can easily come to an
agreement off-line and modify data content (1). Private chains
can be seen as append-only databases where the main goal
consists in sharing and syncing data within a consortium.
b) Network and privacy: Along with its data structure, a
blockchain is based on a peer-to-peer network that ties its par-
ticipants. Depending on the implementation of the blockchain,
the network can be public (i.e., anyone can access it) or
private (i.e., only accounts that are allowed can participate).
This restricted access to the network assures data privacy (2).
Moreover, some private blockchains allows to control data
visibility at a more ﬁner grain by enabling data encryption at
transaction level (e.g., [10]). Nodes can read data and ask the
network to add new data, these pending data are then picked
by some special nodes called the miners (also known as block
generators or validators).
c) Security and scalability: Miners, or validators, are
nodes that are willing to share their computational power
to add blocks to the blockchain. The process for selecting
the actual node that will add the next block among all the
validators is referred as a consensus protocol. In a trust-less
public conﬁguration, this consensus is crucial for the integrity
and security of the data. Thus, to prove their commitment
and prevent malicious activity, miners usually have solve a
computationally demanding cryptographic puzzle (i.e., Proof
of Work [11]).
On the other hand, in private chains, since miners or
rather validators are preliminary known and trusted to some
degree, this process of selection can be lowered in terms
of computational power. This reduction of complexity in the
consensus protocol leads directly to an increased scalability in
terms of transactions throughput (3). An overview of the major
consensus algorithm is proposed in section II-B.
d) Forks and responsiveness: Once a miner’s block has
been selected, it is added to the blockchain and the information
is broadcast. Due to network effects, there are cases where
multiple miners blocks are selected, so there are different
versions of the blockchain in different regions of the network.
This is called a fork: the blockchain splits into branches. In this
case, nodes should somehow converge towards acknowledging
a unique and same version of the blockchain. In practice,
the Proof of Work consensus achieves this result by requiring
miners to work on the longest branch that they see. However,
this means that even if a transaction has been validated, we
cannot be sure that it will remain on the main chain. In Bitcoin,
users usually wait 6 blocks of conﬁrmation before considering
a transaction as valid. Thus, there is a correlation between the
probability of fork occurrence and the responsiveness of the
blockchain. On private chains, the use of adapted consensus
algorithm lowers the risk of forks and increases the system
responsiveness by shrinking waiting time for conﬁrmations (4).
e) Forks and updates: In addition, miners software is
sometimes updated to ﬁx bugs or add functionalities. This also
can create forks, as different nodes might handle transactions
differently depending on their software versions. We usually
distinguish:
- soft forks where the transactions considered valid by the new
version are also valid for the old version.
- hard forks where the transactions considered invalid by the
old version might be valid for the new version.
While it is complicated to synchronize the software over public
blockchains due to the huge amount of anonymous participants
and potential disagreements among them, it is easily feasible
on private chains where members know each other and can
quickly come to a mutual agreement (5).
This overview of blockchain architecture components high-
lighted the main differences between public and private imple-
mentations. In the next section, we present major consensus
algorithms used in private blockchains that enables high trans-
action throughput compared to the regular algorithm such as
the Proof of Work or the Proof of Stake.
B. Consensus Algorithms
As we saw in the previous section, generating and adding
blocks to the linked list is a crucial step in terms of security
and scalability. In this section we describe the major consensus
algorithms that are used today in private blockchains by which
participants choose the block generator node (i.e., miner).
1) Proof of Elapsed Time: At each cycle, miners wait for a
given random time. The ﬁrst miner for which the waiting time
has elapsed is selected to validate a block before repeating
this process. In other words, the miner with the shortest wait
time is elected the leader. For instance, this mechanism is used
in Quorum, a permissionned fork of Ethereum [10]. This is
one of the least secured consensus protocol aimed for private
blockchain with high trust among the block makers since
miners can cheat on the random generation.
However, Intel proposed to use Trusted Execution Environ-
ment (TEE) such as Software Guard Extensions (Intel SGX)
to ensure safety an randomness. The idea is to protect code
and data from disclosure or modiﬁcation through the use of
enclaves, which are protected areas of execution [12]. Another
way to prevent miners to cheat and monopolize leadership
on the network is to add a voting consensus on top of the
elapsed time protocol. While this protocol is less secured that
its competitors (without using safety protocols), it remains very
fast and scalable.
2) Leader based consensus: This category gathers algo-
rithms that attempt to solve the problem of agreement in
which distributed/asynchronous processes have to agree on a
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE I. BENCHMARKING OF ENTERPRISE BLOCKCHAIN PLATFORMS AND TECHNOLOGIES.
Company
Platform
Popularity
Activity
(GitHub)
Consensus
Performance
Data
Encryption
Smart
Contract
Virtual
Machine
Oracle
Additional
Features
Coin Sciences
Multichain
Medium
Medium
Round robin
(diversity)
100-1000/s
No
No
No
No
Assets,
streams
J.P. Morgan
Quorum
High
Medium
Time and
vote based
12-100/s
Yes
Yes
EVM
-
-
IBM
Hyperledger
Fabric
High
High
PBFT
10k-100k/s
Yes
Yes
Chaincode
No
-
Coinprism
OpenChain
Medium
Low
Partitioned
Thousands/s
Yes
No
Yes
-
Assets,
side-chains
Chain
Chain Core
High
High
Federated
consensus
N/A
Yes
No
Yes
-
Assets
R3
Corda
Medium
High
BFT, etc.
N/A
Yes
Yes
JVM
Yes
Assets,
market
Monax
Monax
High
Medium
Tendermint
10k/s
No
Yes
EVM
-
-
leader process believed to be valid. While it is mathematically
proven that this problem is impossible to solve [13] (i.e., if
one process fails, the termination/validity of election cannot be
guaranteed), in practice some algorithms manage to achieve the
agreement with a probability close to 1 [14]. This is achieved
by using either an oracle that provides random numbers or
failure detection (or a combination of these) [15][14].
3) Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT): PBFT is
a replication algorithm that is able to tolerate Byzantine faults
[16]. To put it simply, this algorithm ensures the consistency
of consensus as long as 2/3 of the network’s nodes are safe
(i.e., not malicious or faulty). This is enabled by replicating
behaviors (i.e., state machines) of generating nodes and ap-
plying protocols for choosing a leader among them. However,
this method requires that all the generating nodes know each
other since they need to communicate. In other words, all the
parties have to agree on the exact list of participants.
4) Federated Byzantine Agreement (FBA): The FBA con-
sensus protocol breaks the prerequisite of the unanimously
accepted membership list of PBFT by letting any new par-
ticipants to grow the network [17]. Each participant knows
some nodes that are considered as important and waits that the
majority of them and the majority of the rest of the network
agree on a new transaction before considering it as valid. The
main limitation of this protocol remains its performance: it
costs a lot of messages (i.e., communication over the network)
that come with latency.
5) Tendermint: Tendermint is another byzantine fault tol-
erant algorithm based on a state machine that enables nodes
to propose and vote for the next validator [18]. It makes the
assumption that the network is partially synchronized since
the time factor is central to this protocol. For each new block,
a validator node is selected in a round-robbin manner which
has to propose a block. This block is then spread into the
network and has to gather more than two third of votes of
members within a given time period before being added to
the blockchain. However, these members are selected based
on their stake and thus ties trust to resource ownership.
6) Diversity Mining consensus: The mining diversity con-
sensus approach was proposed by MultiChain [19] to resolve
the case where one participant of a private bockchain could
monopolize the mining process. The solution consists in limit-
ing the number of blocks that might be created by one speciﬁc
miner within a given time period. This implicitly enforce a
round robin schema where each permitted miner must create
blocks in rotation. A mining diversity parameter deﬁnes the
strictness of the rotation, where a value of 1 means that every
permitted miner should be included in the rotation, whereas a
value of 0 means no restriction at all.
C. Benchmarking Existing Technologies
Blockchain is currently under extensive research and de-
velopment, leading to a high market fragmentation, with more
than 20 different technologies and frameworks, which have
been released by companies, open-source communities and
universities. Table I compares the key characteristics of some
popular blockchain technologies, especially for the context of
enterprise and consortium based case studies.
III.
APPLICATIONS
A. Classiﬁcation
Many criteria can be used to classify blockchain ap-
plications. We will start here with a technology approach:
we will ﬁrst describe use cases where the blockchain is a
self-sufﬁcient technology, and then move on to explore new
scenarios, where the combination of blockchain and other
technologies/competencies can enable new perspectives.
1) Assets and Data Management: The blockchain can be
used as an immutable distributed ledger where transactions
are timestamped by block, therefore directly enabling asset
tracking, ownership transfert certiﬁcation and history record.
The appearance of Bitcoin and its crytotoken has opened an
incredible potentiality: it is now possible to create a digital
asset that is unique. Indeed, as opposed to a MP3 ﬁle that can
be inﬁnitely duplicate without alteration, it is not possible to
give away a bitcoin without losing it. So from this perspective,
a bitcoin resembles a physical object, except it lives in the
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

digital world, and tying digital asset and diﬁtal identity leads
to proof of ownership.
2) Market Places: The wish to exchange or sell these
digital assets on a peer-to-peer network, i.e., without relying
on intermediary, leads to blockchain-based market places. One
potential beneﬁt from a decentralized market place could be
reduced costs. By removing a trusted third party, and its
associated fees, the created value should be better shared
between the buyer and the seller. Another beneﬁt is the system
resilience, as it is not relying on a central actor that could be a
single point of failure. But more importantly, we could foresee
that this model generates more end-user empowerment. From
an operation perspective, we could rely on peers, for example
for conﬂicts arbitration. From a content perspective, we could
imagine that end-users would have better control about which
of their data is shared, and with whom. For this market place
use case, optimization algorithms and multi-agents simulation
could be used to enrich the trading mechanisms.
3) Data Exchanges and Processes Automation: Smart con-
tracts (a.k.a. chaincodes) are programs that can be used to au-
tomate company internal processes, or even B2B/B2C services.
But in order to be efﬁcient, smart contracts should be combined
with Artiﬁcial Narrow Intelligence (ANI) so that the workﬂow
is smooth and fast. This requires domain speciﬁc data to build
up this machine expertise. Then, ANI-driven calls to smart
contracts will be possible, making the most of automation and
data knowledge. Obviously, this functional layer can sit on
top of the marketplaces deﬁned above, therefore creating new
opportunities for data monetization in an automatic manner
(say between connected objects) or in a permissioned manner
(say a marketplace where the end user keeps control of its
data and decides who can access them, for how long and to
do what).
4) Decentralized Autonomous Organizations (DAOs): A
decentralized autonomous organization (DAO) is an organiza-
tion that relies on rules implemented in smart contracts. This
requires yet another level of sophistication, namely artiﬁcial
general intelligence, to make it fully efﬁcient. One can imagine
that this new type of ventures could decide how to invest
its money to crowdfund projects for proﬁt, how the eventual
beneﬁts from its proceedings should be distributed, how the
governance should evolve in case of disagreement and so on.
So in this example, the DAO fully replicates in the blockchain
world the behavior of a company board. And one can imagine
many other life-similar examples.
B. Case Studies
While we described above the blockchain use cases from
a technology perspective, we can also use a sectorial approach
to map them.
1) Finance and Insurance: The ﬁrst blockchain application
was the cryptocurrency Bitcoin. But many use cases have
followed since. As an example, Chaincore implements the
distributed ledger technology for clearing and settlement, as
a way to lower costs and improve efﬁciency. It can also be
used to issue and trade assets, such as bonds, in a decentralized
market place (see the proof-of-concept from Caisse Des Depots
in France). The blockchain can also help with processes such
as KYC (Know Your Customer), by sharing the proof of
identity and not the data itself between banks (see KYC-
chain as an implementation example). Finally, crowdsharing
an insurance deductible can be a good DAO application in the
insurance sector.
2) Energy: With the rise of solar panels and other green
sources of energy, the energy production is becoming more
decentralized and offers a promising ﬁeld for blockchain appli-
cations. As an example, the distributed ledger technology can
be used to certify the source of energy production, therefore
guaranteeing that it is green. It can also be used to trade
energy at the local grid level, between individual producers
and consumers (see the proof-of-concept from LO3 Energy in
Brooklyn). We can imagine further beneﬁts in the home where
devices can schedule their energy charging to optimize costs
and exchange data autonomously between them.
3) Mobility: In this sector, the distributed ledger technol-
ogy can be used to safely store the car data (for example,
its mileage). Another example is arcade city, which is a
blockchain-based ridesharing platform that matches passengers
and drivers. So this is basically an uber-like service, in a
decentralized architecture. One more example would be a
decentralized transportation ecosystem, where people can use
a same token to ride on a bus, rent a bike or carpool, without
any central authority to organize its operation.
4) Logistics: In this sector, the distributed ledger technol-
ogy can be used to track an asset. For example, Everledger
tracks diamonds to ensure their authenticity, Provenance can
track food origin to guarantee its sanitary safety. Another
example would be using a blockchain to create a collaborative
IT system, which matches transporters and customers timetable
for efﬁcient delivery.
IV.
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Blockchain is currently under extensive research and de-
velopment from both the academia and the industry, however,
there are still major challenges to be overcome before mass
market penetration and adoption. In this section, we highlight
major research directions and opportunities that we believe are
important to investigate.
A. Data Analysis and Visualization
A blockchain being no more than a ledger of transactions
between accounts, data from a blockchain can be seen as no
more than nodes connected by occasionally existing multi-
property edges. Under which structural form should they be
tackled depends on the aimed the analysis. From a blockchain
network supervision point of view, crucial in a private com-
panies consortium, the relevant data aggregation level is the
block, with a time-series scheme. From the point of view of
auditing the quality of the user activity, transactions should
be considered the atomic level to investigate, under a graph
scheme, and more speciﬁcally under a time-varying graph
(TVG) scheme [20].
The aim of efﬁciently auditing a blockchain brings several
challenges:
1) Real-time analysis: Because of the possibility of forks,
there is no such thing as absolute reliability of the data
retrieved from the blockchain. It is decreasingly high toward
the most recent blocks data, as one only get the version
of the ledger stored on a node at a given time, so that a
blockchain-speciﬁc time-dependent reliability weight has to be
determined. This procedure must be highly dependent on the
chosen consortium governance scheme.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

2) Exploitable visual representation of TVG: From a graph
point of view, each edge (transaction) represents a unique
and directed communication bridge between nodes, having an
inﬁnitesimally narrow timewidth. To be able to graphically
analyse a blockchain networks, or to compute common graph
indicators such as centrality or community borders, systematic
smart ways to deﬁne edges weight based on non-Dirac delta
function in time have to be conceived.
3) Smart contract internal transactions unravelling: Un-
less explicitely coded as so, the transactions from and to smart
contracts, or from smart contracts to users, are no written down
in the ledger, and this can be used for transaction obfuscation
allowing token laundering [21], Ponzi scheme [22] or other
uses where the blockchain only serves itself. In order to
determine whether or not blockchain transactions are related to
real-world event, or more generaly what it is used for, studies
on speciﬁc key quality indicators related to smart contract have
to be conducted.
B. Blockchain Audit
Data immutability is generally put forward when referring
to Blockchain technologies. However, as already discussed in
Sub-section II.A.a, the written data could still be tampered
and the blockchain rebuilt as long as the majority of the
participants (or miners) have reached a consensus. This is
especially true in consortium and private blockchains where
the number of miners is generally limited in comparison with
public Blockchains.
In this context, it becomes extremely difﬁcult for a reg-
ulation authority to audit consortium based Blockchains and
to check whether the data and transactions have been tam-
pered with or not. A commonly adopted solution, consists
in piggybacking data hashes from the consortium Blockchain
into the Bitcoin network, by embedding those hashes inside
the OP RETURN ﬁeld of Bitcoin transactions. However, this
contribute in polluting and increasing the size of the Bitcoin
network with nonsense and non-ﬁnancial data.
More recently, alternatives solutions have been proposed
to reduce the impact of piggybacking on public blockchains,
including the concepts of side-chains and notary chains whose
main objective is to make it extremely hard for malicious users
and/or the network participants to alter the blockchain data.
C. Governance
The governance in a private blockchain assigns authority
and responsibility among the consortium members. It deter-
mines nodes that will be able to create blocks (i.e., miners),
to read/write data, to contribute in the consensus mechanism
(e.g., voting for a miner) and/or to participate in decisions for
the system evolution (e.g., software updates, allow new nodes
to join the system etc.). This power distribution has an impact
not only within the system but also on the business model of
the use case.
Costs linked with the system activity such as the system
set-up, its execution or maintenance are shared within the
consortium according to the governance scheme. It also affects
future incomes or losses at a business level since the governing
nodes decide the rules of the system. For example, the majority
of governing nodes can decide to allow the membership a
of new company into the consortium that is concurrent with
a member who has no power over this decision that could
jeopardize the viability of the system.
The viability of the system can also be affected by the
governance deﬁnition. In many cases, to be durable, the
consortium has to be able to grow by allowing new members to
integrate the system. It is the case for example of new services
over blockchain like dematerialized car service books. The
more companies join the consortium such as car manufacturers,
car repair shops or insurance companies, the more durable
and available is the system. On the other hand, the power is
dissolved with the growth of consortium.
One should also take into account the impacts on the
business model when building the governance scheme as it
will be discussed in the next section.
D. Incentives and Business Models
Blockchain solves the issues of trust between actors in
situations of exchange where the temptation of cheating is high
by removing this need of trust. Any business model based on
a solution that would not claim to solve a trust issue would
inevitably fail, as its solution could be replaced by a less
constraining and probably already existing centralized system.
In a blockchain whose users are exclusively individuals,
the pecuniary incentives must ensure that, because members
either receive additional incomes or just lessen their expenses,
they ﬁnd a ﬁnancial interest in participating to the process.
In a consortium of commercial entities however, it should
be pointed out that the simple fact not to be part of the
consortium might represent a handicap that could lead to
loss of turnover or customers attrition, because of the latter
attraction to blockchain promises and interest in ﬁnancial
incentives.
E. Data Privacy
Data privacy is an imperative for enterprise blockchains.
But lets ﬁrst distinguish anonymity and privacy. A transaction
is considered anonymous if we cannot identify its owner,
whereas a transaction is called private if the object and the
amount of transaction are unknown.
We have seen many schemes on public blockchains to
improve privacy: Stealth Addresses, Pedersen Commitments,
Ring signature, Homomorphic encryption, Zero-knowledge-
proof. No scheme can hide the sender, the receiver and the
amount at the same time, so we see actual implementations
mixing these techniques in order to achieve the desired level of
privacy. In addition, there are some known drawbacks such as
computational time, so further research is needed. But we can
expect that these initiatives on public blockchains will drive
improvement on enterprise blockchains privacy as well.
F. Security
Guaranteeing End to End security means identifying vul-
nerabilities and mitigating risks at each element level and at
the system level. This goes beyond looking at the blockchain
building blocks (consensus, distributed network, cryptographic
tools) and includes evaluating the virtual machine, the Smart
Contracts, the Oracle, the user client, the hardware component,
the keys management and PKI, etc. Some areas of research are
the following: Formal veriﬁcation of smart contracts, Usage of
trusted platform modules for key storage, Identiﬁcation of the
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

different types of attack vectors and their counter strategies
(sybil attacks, double spending attacks, distributed denial of
service attacks, botnet attacks, storage speciﬁc attacks, censor-
ship ), Audit (detect issues a priori or a posteriori), Supervision
(detect issues during run time).
G. Scalability
As usual, there is always a trade-off between costs, security
and performance. Because participants are known in enterprise
blockchains, the scalability issue is therefore easier to solve,
as compared to public blockchains. Yet, in order to achieve
scalability, we ﬁrst need to keep in mind the usage context
and the performance metrics we want to optimize: transactions
throughput, validation latency, number of participant nodes,
number of validating nodes, energy costs, computation costs,
storage costs or other criteria? As always, remember the trade-
off principle: A round robin consensus algorithm will scale
well, but the participants need to be honest. A PBFT algorithm
can recover from malicious behaviors (up to 1/3) but the
validating nodes should not be too many (tens of nodes at
most) if the system is to work [23]. All in all, scalability is
an active area of research and we can mention some initiatives
such as: fragmenting the global ledger into smaller sub-ledgers
run by sub-groups of nodes, removing old transactions in
order to optimize the storage, using a hierarchy of blockchains
(transactions are done at a higher level and settled optionally
afterwards in the blockchain), and so on.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
The Blockchain technology represents a major paradigm
shift in the way business applications will be designed, oper-
ated, consumed and marketed in the near future. In this paper,
we analyzed the technical component of this technology and
we provided a taxonomy of applications and use cases. Finally,
we highlighted the major research challenges that need to be
addressed before achieving mass market penetration, including
the issues related to governance, audit, scalability, incentives,
data privacy, security and data analytics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research work has been carried out under the leader-
ship of the Institute for Technological Research SystemX, and
therefore granted with public funds within the scope of the
French Program Investissements d’Avenir.
REFERENCES
[1]
Z. Zheng, S. Xie, H.-N. Dai, and H. Wang, “Blockchain challenges
and opportunities: A survey,” International Journal of Web and Grid
Services, 2017, pp. 1–23.
[2]
K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, “Blockchains and smart contracts
for the internet of things,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, 2016, pp. 2292–2303.
[3]
M. Mettler, “Blockchain technology in healthcare: The revolution
starts here,” in 2016 IEEE 18th International Conference on e-Health
Networking, Applications and Services (Healthcom), Sept 2016, pp. 1–
3.
[4]
“stampd.io: A document blockchain stamping notary app,” accessed:
2017-07-01. [Online]. Available: https://stampd.io/
[5]
A. Yasin and L. Liu, “An online identity and smart contract management
system,” in 2016 IEEE 40th Annual Computer Software and Applica-
tions Conference (COMPSAC), vol. 2, June 2016, pp. 192–198.
[6]
R. Dennis and G. Owen, “Rep on the block: A next generation
reputation system based on the blockchain,” in 2015 10th Interna-
tional Conference for Internet Technology and Secured Transactions
(ICITST), Dec 2015, pp. 131–138.
[7]
F. Tian, “An agri-food supply chain traceability system for china based
on rﬁd blockchain technology,” in 2016 13th International Conference
on Service Systems and Service Management (ICSSSM), June 2016,
pp. 1–6.
[8]
“Regulation (eu) 2016/679 of the european parliament and of the
council of 27 april 2016,” accessed: 2017-07-01. [Online]. Available:
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
[9]
V. Buterin, “On Public and Private Blockchains,” 2015, accessed:
2017-07-01. [Online]. Available: https://blog.ethereum.org/2015/08/07/
on-public-and-private-blockchains/
[10]
“Quorum | J.P. Morgan,” accessed: 2017-07-01. [Online]. Available:
https://www.jpmorgan.com/country/US/EN/Quorum
[11]
S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2008,
accessed: 2017-07-01. [Online]. Available: http://www.cryptovest.co.
uk/resources/Bitcoin%20paper%20Original.pdf
[12]
V.
Costan
and
S.
Devadas,
“Intel
sgx
explained.”
IACR
Cryptology
ePrint
Archive,
2016,
p.
86,
accessed:
2017-
07-01.
[Online].
Available:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2d7f/
3f4ca3fbb15ae04533456e5031e0d0dc845a.pdf
[13]
M. J. Fischer, N. A. Lynch, and M. S. Paterson, “Impossibility of
distributed consensus with one faulty process,” Journal of the ACM
(JACM), vol. 32, no. 2, 1985, pp. 374–382.
[14]
A. Mostefaoui and M. Raynal, “Leader-based consensus,” Parallel
Processing Letters, vol. 11, no. 01, 2001, pp. 95–107.
[15]
L. Lamport, “Paxos made simple,” ACM Sigact News, vol. 32, no. 4,
2001, pp. 18–25.
[16]
M. Castro and B. a. Liskov, “Practical Byzantine fault tolerance,” in
Third Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation
(OSDI), vol. 99, 1999, pp. 173–186.
[17]
D. Mazieres, “The stellar consensus protocol: A federated model
for internet-level consensus,” 2015, accessed: 2017-02-10. [Online].
Available: https://www.stellar.org/papers/stellar-consensus-protocol.pdf
[18]
J. Kwon, “Tendermint: Consensus without mining,” 2014, accessed:
2017-07-01. [Online]. Available: https://cdn.relayto.com/media/ﬁles/
LPgoWO18TCeMIggJVakt tendermint.pdf
[19]
“MultiChain | Open source private blockchain platform,” accessed:
2017-07-01. [Online]. Available: http://www.multichain.com/
[20]
A. Casteigts, P. Flocchini, N. Santoro, and W. Quattrociocchi, “Time-
varying graphs ans dynamic networks,” International Journal of Parallel,
Emergent and Distributed Systems, vol. 27, no. 5, 2012, pp. 387–408.
[21]
M. Moser, R. Bohme, and D. Breuker, “An inquiry into money laun-
dering tools in the bitcoin ecosystem,” in eCrime Researchers Summit
(eCRS), 2013.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–14.
[22]
M. Bartoletti, S. Carta, T. Cimoli, and R. Saia, “Dissecting ponzi
schemes on ethereum: identiﬁcation, analysis, and impact,” CoRR, vol.
abs/1703.03779, 2017.
[23]
M. Vukolic, “The Quest for Scalable Blockchain Fabric: Proof-of-Work
vs. BFT Replication,” Open Problems in Network Security (iNetSec),
2015, pp. 112–125.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

