Cohort-Based Construct for Vehicular Cyber-Physical Systems
Imen Zidi and Abir Ben Ali
CRISTAL Laboratory
National School of Computer Sciences
Manouba, Tunisia
Email: zidi.imen@gmail.com, abir.benali@isetr.rnu.tn
Farouk Kamoun
SESAME Uuniversity
Tunis, Tunisia
Email: farouk.kamoun@sesame.com.tn
Abstract—Ensuring human life safety is inexorably the most
critical objective of Intelligent Transportation System (ITS),
which makes Intelligent Vehicular Network (IVN) the cornerstone
of such system. Hence, in order to overcome network Quality
of Service (QoS) degradation issues, several networking models
for IVN have been proposed in the literature, namely cluster-
based construction, cloud-based construction and platoon-based
construction. Nevertheless, such constructions present several
limitations, in terms of timeliness, connectivity and reliability,
especially in critical environments. Therefore, we propose in this
paper the design of a distributed construction based on “co-
horts” and Neighbor-to-Neighbor (N2N) Communication, and we
present the required cohort-managements distributed algorithms
that ensure optimal IVN cohort-structuring and efﬁciency.
Keywords–Cohort;
Intelligent
Vehicular
Network;
Cyber-
Physical System; Safety.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Saving road user’s life is still the most imminent ques-
tion of transportation systems since the automobile inven-
tion. Tightly associated with the automobile revolution and
the population grown up, the road trafﬁc condition turns
into a critical social issue. The American National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA) announces that 37
461 accidents related fatalities and 4.6 million injuries are
recorded in 2016, and unfortunately this statistic continued to
increase. In addition to, and according to European Transport
Safety Council (ETSC) and NHTSA reports, more than 90%
of road crashes are caused by human errors [1][2]. That is
why, developing an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
is considered as the main solution to achieve the goal of
improving road trafﬁc safety [3]. Thus, during the last decade,
the road trafﬁc safety challenge has attracted an interesting
consideration from both academia and industry. Consequently,
signiﬁcant amount of resources are investigated around the
world to develop safe and reliable ITS.
Initially, researches consider the paradigm of Autonomous
Driving as a keystone for road safety and trafﬁc efﬁciency,
where an autonomous vehicle [2][5] is equipped with several
computing, planning and sensing technologies providing dif-
ferent safety features, with the ability to discharge the human
partially or totally from the driving task. However, autonomous
vehicles are seen as isolated entities and cannot cooperate with
their surrounding (vehicles or road equipment’s). Thereby, a
deaf autonomy cannot respond to the ITS’ goal, which explains
the need for autonomous vehicles cooperation mechanisms.
Thus, tremendous attention was conferred to Collaborative
Autonomous Driving which is mainly based on inter-vehicular
communication, as described in [6].
Communicating vehicles are gathered into an unlimited-
size self-organized network, characterized by dynamic topol-
ogy, where inter-vehicular communication is based on broad-
casting mode. Let us highlight the drawbacks behind this
deﬁnition. Firstly, dynamic topology, caused by nodes’ high
mobility, is causing a grievous problem of dis-connectivity.
Secondly, the broadcasting communication mode is suffering
from the absence of feedback about the sent message recep-
tion/delivery, beside its ability to provoke network overﬂow,
making a serious problem of transmission reliability. In ad-
dition, existing standards proposed in the literature to serve
the vehicular environment are unable to guarantee bounded
latency for safety-critical messages, resulting in a problem of
timeliness.
Motivated by the necessity to surmount those limitations
and by the evolution of distributed algorithms, we propose
to structure the vehicular network into size-bounded vehicular
string, so-called cohort, and we present the required cohort-
managements distributed algorithms that ensure optimal ve-
hicular network cohort-structuring and efﬁciency.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in
Section II, we brieﬂy review the state of the art, by focusing
on IVN and community converging towards such concept. We
propose in Section III a cohort-based construct for Vehicular
Cyber Physical System (VCPS) that we believe is more
suitable for Safety-critical data dissemination. We propose
in Section IV cohort management distributed algorithms. We
conclude the paper in Section V.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Automotive industry has targeted to embed computeriza-
tion into the vehicle driving task [7]. New vehicle models
are integrating new features, impacting essentially the road
trafﬁc safety. The development is going further over time,
and several manufactures around the world, like BMW, Tesla,
Audi, Mobile Eye and Google, are in the race of Autonomous
Driving System (ADS) development.
Autonomous driving system, also known as self-driving
system, is based on on-board perception and sensing technolo-
gies, like radar, lidar, ultrasonic, optical sensors and camera.
Such sensors are used to collect information from their envi-
ronment. The collected data are gathered to create an accurate
representation of the vehicle nearby surrounding. In addition,
this data is also interpreted and analyzed, by an on-board
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

processing unit, to help vehicle moving and reacting to safety-
critical situations that might occur. Nevertheless, this solution
has several limitations, which can be summed up in two points.
•
Perception technologies performances can be lost due
to equipment failure, obstacles and weather condi-
tions. As example we can mention that radar sensors
sight is limited by obstacles, optical and lidar sensors
are inﬂuenced by bad weather conditions, e.g., lidar
sensors cannot see when it rains.
•
Being autonomous means acting according to its own
system rules independently of external intervention
from communication with other vehicles or infrastruc-
tures. This property turns it a passive and isolated
entity, which can be a dangerous source in case of
perception technologies lose.
Consequently, in order to overcome perception technolo-
gies limitations, system diversity and redundancies are re-
quired, similarly, to strategies used in most advanced ﬁghter
planes and deep-space satellites. Deploying a reliable vehicular
communication strategy is a key redundant solution to support
and defend the autonomy capacities. This principle explains
the need for an intelligent vehicular network.
IVN is a vehicular self-organized network, generally pro-
viding the so-called vehicle-to-everything (V2X) communi-
cation, which can be vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) communica-
tion, vehicle-to-infrastructure (V2I) communication, vehicle-
to-pedestrian (V2P) communication, vehicle-to-bicycle (V2B)
communication and vehicle-to-drone (V2D) communication.
The most known and studied form of IVN in the literature, is
Vehicular Ad hoc Network (VANET) [8][9][10]. Hereafter, we
focus only on inter-vehicular communication V2V.
Safe transportation system reposes on real-time safety-
critical (SC) inter-vehicular communication (IV) [11]. Thus,
SC-IV communication algorithms and protocols are needed
to coordinate IVN. IEEE 802.11p [12][13] is considered as
the ﬁrst standard designed for V2V and V2I communications.
But unfortunately, this standard presents evident drawbacks
essentially related to reliability issues, unbounded latency,
security, unfairness of channel dedication. These limitations
make, IEEE 802.11p standard, not suitable for real-time
safety-critical applications. Moreover, the deployment of IEEE
802.11p standard requires huge investment in the network
infrastructure, on-road units [9]. Then, motivated by the global
deployment and commercialization of Long Term Evolution
(LTE), authors in [9] propose an integrated solution for vehicu-
lar communication, both V2V and V2I, so called LTE-V, based
on the time division LTE 4G technology. This proposition is
expected to provide two communication modes: LTE-V-direct
enabling short range direct and decentralized V2V communi-
cation, to support road safety applications requirements low
latency and high reliability, and LTE-V-cell enabling central-
ized V2I communication. In addition, the solution provides
high mobility support, optimized coverage and better resources
allocation. In addition, direct Device-to-Device (D2D) based
LTE V2V communication is proposed to guarantee inter-
vehicular communication requirement in terms of latency and
reliability [14][15][16].
All of these solutions are based on dynamic mesh topology,
where nodes are characterized with a high mobility. Mobil-
ity, dynamic topology and unlimited density present serious
impediments in front of reliability, connectivity and bounded
latency guarantee. To alleviate as much as possible vehicular
environment complexity, we propose to divide the set of
vehicles in the roads into fully-distributed and bounded-size
cyber-physical construct based-on directional communication,
named cohort by G. Le Lann, [11][17]. Details about cohort
are given in the following section.
III.
PROPOSED MODEL/SOLUTION
Breaking down the network into a fully-distributed, linear
and size-bounded segment of consecutive vehicles is mainly
inspired by the notion of platoons, which initially appeared
around 1974. Due to the lack of space we cannot detail
platoons characteristics and limitations, so, we recommend this
work for more information [18].
A. Cohort Introduction and Speciﬁcation
A cohort is a size-bounded ad hoc string of consecutive
vehicles circulating on the same lane. Contrary to platoon,
cohort is a fully-distributed cyber-physical construct based on
perception technologies and directional Neighbor-to-Neighbor
(N2N) communication. According to [11] cohort’s concept is
used to add some structuring to IVN and to achieve the road
trafﬁc safety. Consequently, the cohort construct is advanced,
on one hand, to reduce the number of vehicle involved in
rear-end braking crashes, and on the other hand, to alleviate
interference and collision problems. The safety goals can be
ensured by reducing, dramatically, incident and injury rates.
Thus, safe longitudinal inter-vehicular spacing, as well as
reducing velocities in the course of risk prone maneuvers are
needed. The most important cohort characteristics are depicted
on Figure 1.
A cohort Γ is a set of n ≤ n• (n is current cohort size and
n• is the max cohort size) contiguous vehicles, where the ﬁrst
member is called the cohort head and the last one is named
the cohort tail [17][18]. Every cohort’s member X is assigned
a rank noted rx, where, 1 ≤ rx ≤ n•. The cohort head is
assigned the rank 1 and the cohort tail is assigned the rank
n. A safe longitudinal spacing should be respected between
the same cohort members and between cohorts circulating on
the same lane. The inter-members gap (resp. the inter-cohort
gap), so-called sxy (resp. SH/T ), is bounded as follows s◦ ≤
sxy ≤ s•, (resp. S◦ ≤ SH/T ≤ S•) and tightly depends on
the network density. Every isolated vehicle is considered as an
isolated cohort where n =1.
Vehicles can freely leave their cohorts, by simple deceler-
ation/acceleration or after a changing lane decision. However,
after leaving its cohort, the vehicle X must join another
Figure 1. Cohort Speciﬁcation.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

cohort or creates its own one. Whatever, the decision is,
joining an existing cohort or creating a new one, it cannot
be carrying out arbitrarily. Actually, joining an existing cohort
depends on two main factors, the cohort size, which cannot
exceed the maximum value n•, and the available spacing to
be inserted into, which must respect the constraint of safe inter-
vehicle/cohort spacing.
Therefore, cohort management distributed algorithms are
mandatory in such situation, to indicate the vehicle behavior.
For the lack of space, we highlight, in this work, speciﬁcally,
how a vehicle X must react after a lane changing maneuver
(resp. a highway’s ﬁrst lane entrance). Several use cases are
described hereafter, and different algorithms are proposed to
show how these situations will be overcome.
B. System Model
All the use cases described afterwards, are supposed taking
place on the highway. Then, we assume that the entire IVN
on the highway is broken down into many cohorts of variable
size. Each cohort is formed, as described above, by a bounded
number of nodes moving in the same direction at a similar
velocity. Cohort’s members’ cooperation is ensured by direc-
tional N2N communication. This communication paradigm is
out of the scope of this paper, and for more details about N2N
communication, we can refer to [17][19][20][21][22]. Periodic
control messages exchange, equivalent of beaconing service in
VANET and platoon, is essential for cohort management and
local member data update.
In this paper, we focus on the lane changing maneuver. Ac-
cordingly, different use cases resulting from the lane changing
maneuver are studied hereafter. Every maneuver, taking place
on the road, is divided into cyber and physical phases. Our
researches are concerned with the cyber ones.
Thus, cyber procedures are necessary to perform a safe and
successful maneuver. The lane changing maneuver is governed
by three cyber phases. Author in [19] has proposed a protocol
so-called Zebra Protocol to cover up all these cyber phases.
Details about these phases are given in the next section (IV-
A). Theoretically, the cyber phases, presented there, must
be executed by any vehicle tends to perform a lane change
maneuver, even a highway ﬁrst lane entrance, but practically, in
some situation, only the ﬁrst phase can be performed. Brieﬂy,
the ﬁrst phase consists on diffusing a lane changing request.
This situation can lead to the following hypotheses:
•
The transmitted message m, is lost, and none of the
vehicle X surrounding, had the opportunity to receive
it, and this case is covered by the study in [19].
•
None from the nodes who have received the message
m is eligible to serve in this maneuver. So the eligible
group is empty. In this paper we focus on this case.
The following use cases, studied in this work, result from
the second hypotheses.
After changing its lane, and depending to the global
network density, the vehicle X can be inserted in the middle
of an existing cohort, in the inter-cohort spacing, or, in a free
spacing, typically, the case of low density network.
IV.
COHORT MANAGEMENT DISTRIBUTED ALGORITHMS
A. Middle Cohort Insertion
Let us start, ﬁrstly, by describing the procedure followed
by the vehicle X to change its current moving lane safely. It is
interesting to indicate that the same process is adapted when
a vehicle Y is supposed to enter the highway.
We consider the scenario depicted on Figure 2. A vehicle
X, member of cohort C’, is at the position (x, y) and circu-
lating on lane i, wants to move to the lane i±1. Otherwise,
at time τ, X has the coordinates (x, y) and moving with at
the velocity on the lane i. At the time τ + ε, X wants to be
at the position (x′, y′) on an adjacent lane i±1. This scenario
is covered by three cyber phases, illustrated on Figure 3, as
following:
Phase 1: X informs its surrounding that it wants change
its lane and go to an adjacent one. In this purpose, X transmits
a message m containing its current situational data at the time
τ, called ωτ(X), and the wanted situational data at the time
τ + ε, called ωτ+ε(X). So m has this form; m = [ωτ(X) +
ωτ+ε(X)]. The message m will be received by all the nodes
in the Geocast coverage area of X.
Every vehicle who has received m has to verify its eligibil-
ity to positively response to this request. To test its eligibility,
each node Y will compare its future situational data (at time
τ + ε) with the requested situational date at the same time. If
these information are approximately close, Y announces itself
as an eligible vehicle and informs its neighbors. Else Y ignores
the message. The eligibility test is performed according to the
procedure presented by Algorithm 1. At the end of this cyber
phase a group of eligible vehicles is formed, so-called E. This
group is marked on Figure 3 by the red rectangle.
Algorithm 1: Eligibility Procedure
Data: m ← [ωτ(X) + ωτ+ε(X)]
d ← ωτ+ε(Y )
begin
if ωτ+ε(X) and ωτ+ε(Y ) are close then
// Y declares itself eligible
eligible ←
true
// inform the rest of nodes
generate(meligible)
send(meligible)
else
// Y ignores m
discard(m)
Phase 2: During phase 2, the eligible group members will
cooperate together in purpose to decide the couple of nodes,
who will participate practically in the physical phase of this
maneuver, by creating the necessary spacing to insert X, this
couple are called the actors [19].
This cooperation, is a sort of negotiation between these
nodes and it requires the use of a consensus protocol. Agree-
ment protocols are out of scope of this paper, but it is essential
to mention that our research is based on the agreement protocol
proposed by G. Le Lann in [17]. How the consensus protocol
is working is demonstrated on Figure 3. Every node has to
disseminate its own proposition, noted for example vz. In our
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 2. Middle cohort insertion request geocasting.
situation, vz contains the couple of nodes considered by the
node Z to be suitable as actors. The propositions are collected
and propagated until reaching the two extremities of the E.
When this collecting message arrives to the ﬁrst (resp. last
node) in E, it will be sent in the opposite direction, for example
from the last one to the ﬁrst one, and is-to-it. The messages
coming from the E group extremities will be received by
a same node and this node will take the ﬁnal decision and
disseminate it to the rest of E.
Phase 3: The actors, here are represented by the couple
(Y, Z), will inform X by the decision resulting from the
consensus protocols. This cyber phase ends up by triggering
the maneuver physical phase.
B. Inter-Cohort Spacing Insertion
Let us consider the following scenario, X performs the
geocast and waits, but no response is received. So X deducts
that no vehicle is eligible to participate to its maneuver. Then
X decides to move to the lane i±1. Consequently, two use
cases are possible. After moving to lane i±1, X can be
situated between two contiguous cohorts or in a free spacing.
Free spacing insertion use case will be detailed in the next
subsection, III-C. Hereafter, we focus on the second case.
After changing its lane, as depicted on Figure 4, X is actually
situated in the inter-cohort spacing, SH/T , of two contiguous
cohorts, Γ and Γ′. In such condition X must join Γ or Γ′, or
create its new cohort, if the available space permits, or leave
this space if we are facing a compacted network.
In this section we propose a schema helping X to make
the most suitable decision, in this situation. Furthermore, we
assume that X is the only responsible of its future cohort
selection, and this selection is based-on the distance separating
X and this cohort. We, also, suggest that X will select the
closest cohort, so we proceed as follows:
•
Measure the distance separates X and Γ Tail’s, so-
called DT/X, and the distance separates X and Γ′
head’s, so-called DH/X.
•
Compare DH/X and DT/X, and then make decision.
•
If DT/X is smaller than DH/X, then X will try join
Γ, else X will try join Γ′.
Figure 3. Lane changing maneuver cyber phases demonstration.
This mechanism is presented by the pseudo-code entitled
Algorithm 3. After comparing DH/X and DT/X, if DT/X is
smaller than DH/X, (resp. DT/X is smaller than DH/X) X
will send Cohort Tail Insertion Request to T (Γ tail), (resp.
Cohort Head Insertion Request to H (Γ′ head)), as shown on
Figure 5-b, (resp. Figure 5-a). When the request is received, T
(resp. H) must verify if its own cohort is able to support a new
member, by checking the constraint of cohort size, n < n•.
Consequently, the request will be approved only if n < n• is
true, see Algorithm 2. Then, X’s reaction is depending on T’s,
(resp. H) reply. So, if the request is accepted, X will proceed
according to Algorithm 4, (resp. Algorithm 5);
•
X assigns itself a rank n + 1, (resp. rank 1).
•
Accelerates until DT/X, (resp. decelerate until DH/T )
respects the constraint of inter-vehicular spacing and
DH/X, (resp. DT/X) respects the inter-cohorts gap.
•
Sends a message mx to the rest of the cohort, to help
them updating their local data.
Algorithm 2: Request Acceptance Procedure
Data: n, n•
Result: accept
begin
if (n < n•) then
accept ← true
else
accept ← false
return accept
If the request is rejected, X must react otherwise. So, the
node has to perform the opposite request. X is going to try to
join its successor cohort Γ′, (resp. its predecessor cohort Γ),
by performing, Cohort Head Insertion Request, (resp. Cohort
Tail Insertion Request). And if the request is accepted, X has
to proceed as described above. But the worst case condition is
when the Cohort Head and Cohort Tail requests are rejected.
Accordingly, we propose the following solution: X is going to
verify whether, within the available spacing SH/T , it is able
to create its own cohort. Then, the lower bound of inter-cohort
spacing must be respected.
If SH/T ≪ 2 ∗ S◦ + carsize, then X must leave its
current location. Leaving the current location can train other
type of maneuvers like overtaking, or passing an entire cohort
Figure 4. Inter-cohort spacing insertion illustration.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Algorithm 3: inter-Cohort Spacing Insertion
Data: DH/X, DT/H, S◦, S•, s◦, s•
SH/T ←− DH/X + DT/H + carsize
begin
if (DH/X ≤ S◦ + caresize) then
rx ←− 1
else if (S◦ ≤ SH/T 2.S◦ + carsize) then
if (DT/XDH/X) then
cohortTailInsertionRequest()
else if (DT/XDH/X) then
cohortHeadInsertionRequest()
else
leave()
or even a new lane changing maneuver. Actually, overtaking
and passing an entire cohort is out of the scope of this
work. In addition, it is interesting to mention that, X is also
able to decide to perform one of these options even without
performing cohort insertion request.
C. Free Spacing Insertion
Resume the same scenario described in the beginning of the
last subsection (IV-B), and as mention there, in this section, we
focus on the free spacing insertion use case. After performing
its lane changing maneuver, X is located in a low density lane.
And in this situation, one of the subsequent sub-cases is able
to take pace.
1st sub-case: X goes into an almost empty lane i±1. The
vehicle ﬁnds itself far away from any cohort. Consequently,
X is forced to create a new cohort of size n = 1. Then, X is
going to declare itself as a new isolated cohort by assigning
a rank equal to 1. While respecting the allowed velocity, X
has the choice to accelerate/decelerate to join distant cohorts,
if they existed, or to keep its current speed.
2nd sub-case: In such situation X is located behind some
cohort , as shown in Figure 5-b, and there is no close cohort
following it. Or X is located in front of a cohort , as depicted in
Algorithm 4: Cohort Tail Insertion Request
begin
send(requestToTail)
wait()
if (acceptFromTail == true) then
rx ←− n + 1
if (DT/X ≥ s•) then
accelerate until s◦ ≤ DT/X < s•
send(mx)
else if (acceptFromTail == False) then
if (DH/T ≤ S◦ + carsize) then
decelerate until DH/T ≥ S◦
cohortHeadInsertionRequest()
else if (DH/T ≤ 2.S◦ + carsize) then
decelerate until DT/H ≤ S◦ rx ←− n + 1
else if (DH/T ≥ S◦) then
leave()
Algorithm 5: Cohort Head Insertion Request
begin
send(requestToHead)
wait()
if (acceptFromHead == true) then
rx ←− 1
if (DT/X ≥ s•) then
decelerate until s◦ ≤ DH/X < s•
send(mx)
else if (acceptFromHead == False) then
if (DH/T ≤ S◦ + carsize) then
accelerate until DH/x ≤ S
cohortTailInsertionRequest()
else if (DH/T ≤ 2.S◦ + carsize) then
accelerate until DT/x ≤ S◦
rx ←− 1
else if (DH/T ≥ S◦) then
leave()
Figure 5-a, and there is no cohort ahead. In both possibilities
X has to join . Thus, we have, like in Section IV-B, either
cohort tail insertion request, or cohort head insertion request,
or also create a new independent cohort, with respect to the
inter-cohort gap constraint. The main algorithm, solving this
use case is presented by the pseudo-code, so-called, Algorithm
6.
In fact, within this use case X has more freedom to decide
to create a new isolated cohort or to try to join the existing
one. So, this use case is tightly close to X desire more than
the constraint of available space, like the preceding subsection.
Then, X behavior can be described as follow:
•
X decides to create a new cohort, then, according
to its location, X decelerates/accelerates to create the
necessary inter-cohort gap, and assigns itself rank 1.
•
X decides to join existing cohort, so, depending to
its current location, X will send cohort tail or cohort
head insertion request.
As described above, X will send a cohort tail insertion
request to T, (resp. cohort head insertion request to H). Then,
T (resp. H) treats the received request according to Algorithm
2, and sends its reply to the requestor. According to T’s
response, (resp. H’s response), if the request is accepted, X
Figure 5. Free space insertion illustration.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Algorithm 6: Free Spacing Insertion Algorithm
Data: DH/X, DT/X, S◦, S•
begin
if (X decide to create new cohort) then
if (X is behind ) then
decelerate until S◦ ≥ DT/X ≥ S•
else if (X in front of ) then
accelerate until S◦ ≥ DH/X ≥ S•
else if (X decides to jion an existing cohort) then
if (X behind ) then
cohortTailInsertionRequest()
else if (X is in front of ) then
cohortHeadInsertionRequest()
else
leave()
Algorithm 7: Free-Space Cohort Tail Insertion Pro-
cedure
begin
send(requestToTail)
wait()
if (acceptFromTail == true) then
rx ←− n + 1
if (DT/X ≥ s•) then
accelerate until s◦ ≤ DT/X < s•
send(mx)
else if (acceptFromTail == False) then
decelerate until DT/H ≤ S◦
rx ←− 1
Algorithm 8: Free Space Cohort Head Insertion
Procedure
begin
send(requestToTail)
wait()
if (acceptFromHead == true) then
rx ←− 1
if (DT/X ≥ s•) then
decelerate until s◦ ≤ DT/X < s•
send(mx)
else if (acceptFromHead == False) then
accelerate until DT/H ≤ S◦
rx ←− 1
will proceed according to Algorithm 7, (resp. Algorithm 8).
The major difference between cohort head and cohort tail
insertion procedures proposed for this use case and the ones
described in the above section is the impact of space available
for X to react. In such case, X has sufﬁcient space to act
freely.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we explained the need to structure the IVN
into fully-distributed and bounded-size vehicular strings named
cohorts. These cohorts, cyber-physical systems based on short-
range neighbor-to-neighbor directional communications, are
purposed to alleviate as much as we can the complexity of
vehicular environment and to ensure the road trafﬁc safety,
and to minimize dramatically the collision and interference
problem. In this scope, we proposed, in this work, several
algorithms to manage the vehicular behavior within several use
cases, and for that we focus on the lane changing maneuver. In
our future work we focus on implementing and testing these
propositions.
REFERENCES
[1]
Automated Driving Systems 2.0: A Vision For Safety (reportNo: DOT
HS 812 442), U.S Departement Of Transportation: National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration, September 2017, www.nhtsa.gov.
[2]
Prioritising the Safety Potential of Automated Driving in Europe,
European Transport Safety Council (ETSC), April 2016, www.etsc.eu.
[3]
An assessment of LTE-V2X (PC5) and 802.11p direct communications
technologies for improved road safety in the EU, 5 December 2017,
www.5GAA.org.
[4]
L. Dedon, et al., ”State Strategies to Reduce Highway and Trafﬁc Fatal-
ities: A Road Map for States”, (Washington, D.C.: National Governors
Association Center for Best Practices, February 2018).
[5]
C-Y. Chan, ”Advancements, prospects, and impacts of automated
driving systems”, International Journal of Transportation Science
and Technology, vol. 6, issue 3, Sep. 2017, pp. 208-216, available:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijtst.2017.07.008.
[6]
Y.Y. Nasrallah, I. Al-Anbagi, and H.T. Mouftah, ”Enhanced Algorithms
for the IEEE 802.11p Deployment in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks”,
IEEE 86th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Toronto,
Canada, 2017, pp.24-27.
[7]
D. J. Fagnant and K. Kockelman, ”Preparing a nation for autonomous
vehicles: opportunities, barriers and policy recommendations”, Trans-
portation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, vol. 77, Jul. 2015, pp.
167-181, available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2015.04.003.
[8]
M. Hadded, A. Laouiti, R. Zagrouba, P. Muhlethaler, and L. Azouz
Saidane, ”A Fully Distributed TDMA based MAC Protocol for Vehic-
ular Ad Hoc Networks”. [Research Report] Inria Paris Rocquencourt.
2015.
[9]
S. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Shi, and L. Zhao, ”LTE-V: A TD-LTE-Based
V2X Solution for Future Vehicular Network”, IEEE Internet Of
Things Journal, vol. 3, issue 6, Dec. 2016, pp. 997 - 1005, DOI:
10.1109/JIOT.2016.2611605
[10]
A. Dabboussi, et al., ”Fault Tree Analysis for the Intelligent Vehicular
Networks”, IEEE Middle East and North Africa Communications
Conference (MENACOMM), Jounieh-Lebanon, 2018.
[11]
G. Le Lann, ”Safe Automated Driving on Highways–Beyond Today’s
Connected Autonomous Vehicles”, Complex Systems Design Manage-
ment Conference, Towards smarter and more autonomous systems,
Paris-France, 2017.
[12]
F. Raviglione, M. Malinverno, and C. Casetti, ”Characterization
and Performance Evaluation of IEEE 802.11p NICs”, ACM Work-
shop on Technologies, mOdels, and Protocols for Cooperative Con-
nected Cars (TOP-Cars) Catania-Italy, Jul. 2019, pp. 13–18, available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3331054.3331548.
[13]
S. Baek, I. Lee, and C. Song, ”A New Data Pilot-aided Channel
Estimation Scheme for Fast Time-varying Channels in IEEE 802.11p
Systems”, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 68, Issue
5, May 2019, pp. 5169 - 5172, available: 10.1109/TVT.2019.2906358.
[14]
J. Mei, K. Zheng, L. Zhao, Y. Teng, and X. Wang, ”A Latency
and Reliability Guaranteed Resource Allocation Scheme for LTE V2V
Communication Systems”, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communi-
cations, vol. 17 , Issue 6, June 2018, pp. 3850 - 3860, available:
10.1109/TWC.2018.2816942.
[15]
W. Sun, E.G. Strom, F. Brannstrom, Y. Sui, and K. C. Sou, ”D2D-based
V2V Communications with Latency and Reliability Constraints”, IEEE
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Austin, TX, USA, 2014, pp.1414-
1419.
[16]
Z. Liu, Y. Xie, K.Y. Chan, K. Ma, and X. Guan, ”Chance-Constrained
Optimization in D2D-Based Vehicular Communication Network”, IEEE
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Vol. 68, Issue 5, May 2019, pp.
5045 - 5058, available: 10.1109/TVT.2019.2904291.
[17]
G. Le Lann, ”Fast Distributed Agreements and Safety-Critical Scenarios
in VANETs”, International Conference on Computing, Networking and
Communications, Santa Clara, CA, USA, Jan 2017, pp.7.
[18]
D. Jia, k. Lu, J. Wang, X. Zhang, and X. Shen, ”A Survey on Platoon-
Based Vehicular Cyber-Physical Systems”, IEEE Communication Sur-
veys
Tutorials, vol. 18, issue 1, 2016, pp. 263 - 284, available:
10.1109/COMST.2015.2410831
[19]
G. Le Lann, ”On the Power of Cohorts-Multipoint Protocols for Fast
and Reliable Safety-Critical Communications in Intelligent Vehicular
Networks”, International Conference on Connected Vehicles and Expo
(ICCVE), Beijing, China, Dec. 2012, pp. 35-42.
[20]
A. Adya, P. Bahl, J. Padhye, A. Wolman, and L. Zhou, ”A Multi-Radio
Uniﬁcation Protocol for IEEE 802.11 Wireless Networks”, International
Conference on Broadband Networks, San Jose, CA, USA, Oct. 2004.
[21]
V. Kuo and R. Fitch, ”A Multi-Radio Architecture for Neighbor-
to-Neighbor Communication in Modular Robots”, IEEE International
Conference on Robotic and Automation, Shanghai, China, May 2011,
pp. 5387-5394.
[22]
G. Le Lann, ”Safety in Vehicular Networks-On the Inevitability of
Short Range Directional Communications”, International Conference
ADHOC-NOW, Athens, Greece, 2015, pp. 347-360.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

