Outage Performance and Derivation due to Adjacent Channel Interference 
YoungKeun Yoon, YoungJun Chong 
Radio Technology Research Department 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
ykyoon@etri.re.kr, yjchong@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the mathematical formula 
derivation method of the outage probability and compares the 
mathematical formula with statistical Monte-Carlo (MC) 
simulation results. The outage probability is the factor 
considered in the adjacent channel interference (ACI) impact 
between a victim terminal station and multiple interfering 
terminal stations. For protection of a victim terminal station 
from harmful interference, we would calculate the out of band 
emission limit of an interfering terminal station, too. The 
distribution of multiple interfering terminal stations within a 
cell follows the Poisson point process. The propagation model is 
a composite median pathloss and shadow fading with 
Log-normal distribution. Outage probability is obtained and 
evaluated with various parameters based on Long Term 
Evolution (LTE) Time Division Duplex (TDD) terminal 
stations. 
 
Keywords—mask; interference; block; channel; adjacent 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Due to the increase of the rapid data transmission with 
high capacity and the scarcity of available frequencies, the 
capacity performance of a mobile communication system 
may be reduced. When multiple terminal stations are located 
within the close proximity and the frequency bands are 
assigned in the adjacent bands like the reverse FDD 
(Frequency Division Duplex) assignment, the harmful 
interference among terminal stations may happen. Due to the 
aggregate interference of interfering terminal stations, out of 
band emission of an interfering terminal station should be 
suppressed as lower level than the reference limit level of the 
block edge mask of a terminal station for the protection of a 
victim station. The calculation of the block edge mask is still 
an open research issue. Both a deterministic minimum 
coupling loss (MCL) and a stochastic approach based on the 
Monte-Carlo (MC) simulation have been suggested in [1]. 
MC simulation is a computerized mathematical scheme and 
provides the decision-maker with a range of possible 
outcomes and the probabilities it will occur for any choice of 
action. The result generated is a probability of the 
interference or the outage. MC approach is a statistical 
scheme, which is to distribute a victim terminal station 
amongst a population of interferers. MC method is capable 
of modeling highly complex systems including a cellular 
system like LTE. MCL approach is relatively straight 
forward. MCL method is capable of modeling only a single 
interferer to a single victim station. 
Statistical distribution of the aggregate ACI from multiple 
interferers has been studied in relation to dynamic spectrum 
sharing on the legacy radio systems and the interference 
protection [2]-[3]. Log-normal distribution is used to 
approximate the probability distribution function (PDF) of 
aggregate interfering signals received at the center from 
multiple terminal stations distributed uniformly in an annual 
region with inner radius and outer radius [2].  Log-normal 
approximation does not match well due to a large difference 
of the interference received both from near and far away 
multiple terminal stations, when outer radius is several ten 
times larger than inner radius. In the other hands, the 
Log-normal approximation does work well for a system with 
an exclusive region such as the cognitive radio [3]. 
In this paper, we derive the mathematical formula of the 
outage probability optimized in the approximation for fitting 
with the coexistence of terminal stations of a small radius 
and in the LTE TDD system. This formula is capable of 
calculating the block edge mask and out of band limit for the 
adjacent channel sharing between operators or terminal 
stations. The outage probability means the total outages 
counted as the calculated signal reception level is lower than 
the reference threshold of the signal reception level. To offer 
practical protection limit from the aggregate interference, the 
derived equation’s analytic results are in good agreement 
with the Monte-Carlo simulation ones. 
II. SCENARIO 
Let us consider the scenario shown in Figure 1. 
 
Two LTE systems use adjacent channel frequency bands 
and their cell areas are overlapped. LTE terminal stations 
(UEs) are assumed to be spread homogeneously in the 
coverage of each LTE base station (eNB). One of LTE base 
 
Figure 1.  Geometry for the scenario  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

stations is a wanted transmitter (eNB1) and the other is an 
interfering transmitter (eNB2). A terminal station of a wanted 
transmitter is the victim station (UEv) and terminal stations of 
an interfering transmitter are interfering stations (UEis). The 
assumption is given that interfering stations (UEis) are 
located around any victim station (UEv) and UEis cause the 
potential ACI to a UEv. The distribution of the received 
aggregate ACI to a UEv depends on random variable factors. 
Radom variable factors are the transmission power of UEis, 
the median pathloss, shadow fading, the adjacent channel 
interference ratio (ACIR), and a number of UEis. It is 
assumed that ACIR is a certain value fixed identically for all 
interfering stations. The distribution and the concurrent 
transmission number of terminal stations in the cell are 
random variables. These random variables are used to 
calculate the distribution of the aggregate ACI. 
The assumption of the geometry as shown in Figure 1 is as 
follows. UEv is randomly distributed in the circle of the 
radius d1 of eNB1. UEis are distributed uniformly within the 
radius d2 and an angular ring with both inner radius of  and 
outer radius of δ. The inner radius of  defines a minimum 
distance among terminal stations of UEv and UEis. The outer 
radius of δ is determined to become the maximum radius 
where the distribution area of multiple interfering stations 
becomes an effective interference region because the 
interfering reception power to a victim station is within the 
range of valid values. The propagation model is a composite 
median pathloss and shadow fading with Log-normal 
distribution. Shadow fading model is assumed to have the 
path correlation among terminal stations. 
III. ANALYTIC DERIVATION OF OUTAGE PROBABILITY 
 
Considering 
ACI 
dominant 
environment 
in 
the 
interference, the received signal to interfering power ratio 
(SIR) to UEv is represented as follows. 
 
SIR = 
 ∙  
 
 = 
 ∙  
∑  ∙ ∙   
             = 
 ∙∙∙
∑  ∙ ∙∙∙ =  ∙
∙
∑ ∙         (1) 
 
where: 
  is the transmit power of a wanted transmitter 
 ∑  is the transmit power of interfering stations 
  is the composite median pathloss and shadow 
fading of a wanted transmitter to a victim station 
  is the composite median pathloss and shadow 
fading of an interfering station to a victim station 
    is ACIR, which means the adjacent channel 
interference ratio 
 
Adjacent channel interference gives rise to extraneous 
power of the received signal to a victim station. The adjacent 
channel interference is the sum of the power both that 
interfering stations emit into a victim station’s channel 
known as the unwanted emission and that interfering stations 
pick up from a victim station’s channel known as the 
adjacent channel selectivity (ACS). ACS occurs and do not 
completely eliminate an interfering signals because radio 
frequency (RF) filters required a roll-off. Therefore, a victim 
station emits some power in the adjacent channel picked up 
by an interfering station. An interfering station receives some 
emissions from a victim station’s channel due to the roll off 
of the selectivity filters. 
 , , and  are the parameters of the median pathloss 
model between a victim station and a wanted transmitter, , 
, and  are the parameters of the median pathloss model 
between a victim station and an interfering station.  and 
 
are the Log normal random variables having zero-means, 
variances of σ
, σ
 between a victim station and a wanted 
transmitter link and between a victim station and an 
interfering station, respectively.  is a constant to substitute 
all the constant  values. 
With the log-normal approximation in the denominator of 
(1) PDF and cumulative distribution function (CDF) of SIR 
can be derived. Firstly, we transform the SIR of (1) into a 
SIR in the decibel scale for ease of the derivation. 
 
SIR (dB) = 10log  ∙
∙
∑ ∙ = 10log  ∙
∙ℵ
ℵ  
=  10log() + 10βτ̂ + ℵ
 − ℵ                          (2) 
 
where, x is defined as ln(x) and β is 1/ln(10).  
 
With a few mathematical manipulations the PDF of τ̂  is 
obtained. 
 
PDF (τ̂) =  

 e
 τ̂
, − ln(D) ≤ τ̂ < ∞ 
0,      otherwise
          (3) 
 
Because, both ℵ
 and ℵ  have a Gaussian distribution and 
the submission of the Gaussian random variables is a 
Gaussian random variable [4]. And, ℵ
 or ℵ  has a Gaussian 
distribution:  
 
(ℵ)
  = 

σ√π exp −
ℵμ
σ                         (4) 
 
where, μ = −μ and σ = σ
 + σ
. 
 
The PDF of SIR in dB is obtained through the convolution of 
PDF (τ̂) and (ℵ)
  as follows. 
 
                        () = 

β eθQ(− + )                         (5) 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

where,  =

σ 

β − ln 

 −  −
σ
γ,  =
σ
γ, and Q() 
is defined as ∫

√π
∞

e
  
 
CDF of SIR in dB is derived using integration by parts and 
results are as follows. 
 
() = ∫
() = 

∞
Q(− − ) − eQ(− + )      
(6) 
 
where,  and  are the same as those in (5) 
 
Finally, we can have a formulation for the outage 
probability defining ∆, which is the threshold of the outage 
as follows. 
 
    (  < ∆) = (∆) 
 
                               =  Q(−∆ − ) − e∆Q(−∆ + )  (7) 
 
where, ∆= 

σ 
∆
β − ln 

 −  −
σ
γ,  =
σ
γ 
IV. SIMULATION 
Figure 2 shows the flow diagram of the Monte-Carlo 
simulation. 
 
Step1: The emission power of UEi is set to 23dBm. 
Step2: All LTE terminal stations are randomly distributed 
in the cell. 
Step3: The median pathloss and shadow fading between a 
wanted transmitter and a victim station is calculated. The 
median pathloss and shadow fading between an interfering 
station and a victim station is calculated. 
Step4: The received signal to interfering power ratio (SIR) 
to a victim station is calculated. 
Step5: SIR value is compared with reference threshold 
value of the predefined SIR. Reference threshold value of the 
received signal to interfering power ratio is defined from the 
quality of service of LTE terminal station. If a calculation 
value in Step4 is smaller than a reference threshold, the 
outage is happened and the outage means the blocking event. 
If a calculation value in Step4 is larger than a reference 
threshold, a call of a terminal station is not dropped, goes to 
Step 3. 
Step6: Total outage is counted. 
V. RESULTS 
Let us consider the validation of the derived equation 
using the Monte-Carlo simulation.  
We assumed the coexistence scenario of two E-UTRA 
(LTE) systems, which have the bandwidth of 10MHz and 
assign at adjacent channel bands without the guard band. 
The base station of LTE system known as Evolved Node B 
(eNB) has the transmit power (PeNB) of 46dBm and the 
antenna gain with 12dBi including the feeder loss of -3dB. 
The terminal station of LTE system (UE) has the transmit 
power of 23dBm and the antenna gain of 0dBi. Cell radius (d) 
of eNB is 500m. Inner radius ( ) is 1m when MCL is about 
30dB (including 2dB body loss). Outer radius (δ) is 19m. 
UEs are uniformly distributed within the cell. ACS of a UE is 
33dB. For predicting the radio propagation characteristics, 
both extended Hata model and Motley-Keenan formula are 
used. The extended Hata model [1] applies for calculating to 
the pathloss of the desired link between a wanted transmitter 
(eNB) and a victim station (UE). The Motley-Keenan 
formula [4] applies for the interfered link between interfering 
stations and a victim station in the small cell environment. 
Long term fading known as shadow fading is Log normal 
random variable having zero-mean and variances. The 
variance of σ
 is 12dB for the desired link and the variance 
of σ
  is 4dB for the interfered link. Total pathloss value of 
the communication link is the sum of the median pathloss 
and long term fading value. 
Attenuation factors and the constant of the applied median 
pathloss model are used as follows: attenuation exponent (α1) 
3.52 and constant (C1) 10-2 in the extended Hata model and 
(α2) 2.0 or 3.5and constant (C2) 10-3.15 in the Motely-Keenan. 
The used pathloss equations are shown in (8) and (9). 
 
PLeNB-UE = C1 · d1
-γ1 = 10-2 · d1
-3.52                (8) 
 
PLUE-UE = C2 · d2
-γ2 = 10-3.15 · d2
-2                (9) 
 
Figure 2.  Monte-Carlo Simulation  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 3 shows CDF of the outage probabilities on both 
pathloss attenuation (α2) of 2.0 or 3.5 in the indoor interfered 
links and interfering station densities λ of 2 or 4. BEM OOB 
limit is assumed as -10dBm/10MHz. ACIR is calculated as 
1/((1/ACS)+(1/ACLR)), where, ACLR means the adjacent 
channel leakage ratio. Normally, ACLR of LTE UE defines 
as 30dB+X at the first adjacent channel. In Figure 3, the 
analytic derivation results are in good agreement with the 
Monte-Carlo simulation results. Also, we can find that both 
larger number of interfering stations and lower pathloss 
exponents enhance the accuracy of derivation. This 
enhancement is the reason that large numbers of samples 
make the approximation more precise by central limit 
theorem, and large pathloss exponent does the deviation of 
the interference levels to increase according to the distance 
between interfering users and a victim station. 
Figure 4 shows CDF of outage probabilities on both BEM 
levels of 0dBm or -20dBm in the indoor interfered links. 
Interfering station density (λ) is 2 and the pathloss 
attenuation (α2) is 3.5. Outage probabilities are almost 
consistent on analytical as well as simulation results. In 
Figure 4, we can identify that as we allow more interference 
into adjacent band by increasing BEM OOB limit, the outage 
probability increases due to the increased interference. If we 
set a minimum SIR of 0dB for 0.1 error rate (outage 
probability) in the application, then, BEM OOB limit of 
-20dBm should be selected. Finally, the approximation 
equation of the derived outage probability can be used 
instead of the simulation results and it can also be applied for 
calculating BEM OOB limits that require the outage 
probability of a victim system. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we derived an optimized probability formula 
for outages due to the unwanted emission of the interfering 
LTE stations in the adjacent channel bands. Analytic results 
of the mathematical formula were compared with statistical 
Monte-Carlo (MC) simulation results. For Monte-Carlo 
simulation, it is assumed that terminal stations are uniformly 
distributed around the hot spot cell area. For optimized 
formulation derivation, the composite median pathloss and 
long-term fading have log-normal approximation. 
As a result, the Log-normal approximation performs well 
in spite of a large deviation of interference received from 
both near and far away terminals although there are some 
mismatches in absolute values, when outer radius is 19m and 
inner radius of 1m. Also, we can apply for calculating the out 
of band emission limit of block edge mask. The analytic and 
Monte-Carlo simulation results are useful for current and 
future network system performance analysis. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of  
MSIP/KCA 
REFERENCES 
[1] ECC Report 131, “Derivation of a Block Edge Mask (BEM) for 
Terminal Stations in the 2.6GHz Frequency Bands (2055-2690MHz),” 
Dublin, Jan. 2009. 
[2] R. Menon, R. M. Buehrer, and J. H. Reed, “On the impact of dynamic 
spectrum sharing techniques on legacy radio systems,” IEEE 
Transaction on Wireless Communications, vol. 7, no. 11. Nov. 2008, 
pp. 4198 – 4207. 
[3] K. W. Sung, M. Tercero, and J. Zander, “Aggregate interference in 
secondary access with interference protection,” IEEE Communication 
Letters, vol. 15, no. 6, June 2011, pp. 629 – 631. 
[4] M. J. Nawrochi, M. Dohler, and A. H. Aghvami, Understanding 
UMTS Radio Network Modelling, Planning and Automated 
Optimisation. Chichester: John Wiley and Sons, 2006. 
[5] A. Leon-Garcian, Probability and Random Processes for Electrical 
Engineering, 2nd Edition, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 
1993. 
[6] Y. Shim, I. Lee, and S. Park, “The impact of LTE UE on Audio 
Devices,” ETRI Journal, vol. 35, no.2, Apr. 2013, pp. 332-335.  
Figure 3.  Outage Probabilities for pathloss exponents & an interfering user 
density 
Figure 4.  Outage Probabilities for BEM OOB limits 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

