The Application and Improvement of Temporally Ordered Routing Algorithm in 
Swarm Network with Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Nodes  
 
Zhongqiang Zhai, Jun Du, Yong Ren 
Department of Electronic Engineering 
Tsinghua University 
Beijing, China 
elezzq@gmail.com, du-j11@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, reny@tsinghua.edu.cn 
 
 
Abstract—In recent years, the research and application of 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) network has become a 
significant topic. The mobile ad hoc network established by 
UAV nodes can be more efficient to complete various tasks in a 
harsh environment. Plenty of research focuses on the routing 
protocol, which is an important factor to play group advantage 
of UAVs. In the swarm network with UAV nodes, nodes failure 
or mobility may cause routing failure, which results in 
communication failure or longer delay. The existing routing-
repair mechanisms are accompanied by a great deal of control 
overhead, which cannot solve the problem mentioned above 
effectively. 
This 
article 
analyses 
the 
advantages 
and 
disadvantages of Temporally Ordered Routing Algorithm 
(TORA), and proposes a routing protocol named Rapid-
reestablish Temporally Ordered Routing Algorithm (RTORA). 
RTORA adopts reduced-overhead mechanism to overcome 
adverse effects caused by link reversal failure in TORA. The 
simulation results using OPNET demonstrate that RTORA has 
less control overhead and smaller delay than TORA. 
Keywords-UAV; swarm; routing failure; RTORA; OPNET. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With the development of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
(UAV) and its application in various fields, some 
deficiencies using single UAV to perform tasks are exposed, 
such as limited scope of target search and monitoring, single 
task load and low task timeliness. In the past few years, 
establishing a mobile ad hoc network by multiple UAVs 
became a method to solve the problems above. In such a 
network, UAVs can sense environmental information in a 
wide range, and complete a number of different tasks at the 
same time through information exchange and dynamic task 
allocation. Furthermore, the remaining UAVs can continue 
to perform the task when several UAVs are damaged, which 
can improve the task timeliness. As an important factor to 
play groups advantage of UAVs, the routing protocol has 
been one of the key points in the UAV network. Swarm 
network with UAV nodes is a network that high-density 
UAVs implement a saturated search, detection or attack as a 
swarm through mutual cooperation. Such high-density 
networks are typically deployed in harsh environments. The 
probability of transmission link failure will greatly increase, 
which is caused by damaged relay nodes or neighbor nodes 
moving beyond the transmission range. Rediscovering and 
reestablishing new routes will bring longer delay. Therefore, 
a strategy to solve the problem of routing failure is needed.  
One way to alleviate the issue above is to prevent link 
failure. Mobility Aware Ad hoc On-demand Distance Vector 
Routing (MA-AODV) is proposed to deal with link failure 
caused by mobility in [1]. MA-AODV periodically 
calculates mobility, and chooses the transmission route with 
smaller-mobility nodes. But this method cannot avoid link 
failure completely. Additionally, the period of calculation 
also needs to be considered. Too big value cannot guarantee 
the accuracy of mobility, and too small value will greatly 
increase the control overhead. 
Another approach is to look for a new route after the 
current route is damaged. Some classic on-demand routing 
protocols use this method, e.g., Dynamic Source Routing 
(DSR), Ad hoc On-demand Distance Vector Routing 
(AODV), Temporally-Ordered Routing Algorithm (TORA), 
etc. The node detecting link failure sends a Route Error 
(RERR) message to the source node in DSR [2] and AODV 
[3]. Then, the source node discovers another route to 
destination by broadcasting a Route Request (RREQ) packet. 
TORA [4] repairs the transmission route in the local area 
where the link is interrupted. Some previous studies indicate 
that TORA is adapted to dense ad hoc networks [5][6], 
which will better meet the demand of the swarm network. 
According to the above situation, we propose Rapid-
reestablish TORA (RTORA) routing protocol based on 
TORA to solve routing failure in the swarm network with 
UAV nodes. The simulation results show that RTORA has 
smaller delay and lower control overhead than TORA. 
The paper is organized as follows: Related research is 
presented in Section II. Section III analyzes the TORA 
protocol. In Section IV, we describe the mechanisms of 
RTORA. Section V presents the simulation results of TORA 
and RTORA. The conclusion and future work is given in 
Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
With the focus on Quality of Service (QoS), many 
improved routing protocols about routing failure in the 
Mobile Ad hoc Network (MANET) are proposed. Z. Che-
Aron et al. [7] design the Enhancement of Fault-Tolerant 
AODV (ENFAT-AODV) routing protocol, which uses the 
backup route to solve the problem of current routing failure 
in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN). In [8], the AODV with 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Reliable Delivery (AODV-RD) protocol reestablishes the 
route by the mechanisms of link failure prediction and 
alternate nodes selection. Multiple routes are created to solve 
the problem of link failure in [9]. In those three protocols, 
nodes periodically broadcast HELLO messages to acquire 
the link-status and topology changes, which is the same as 
AODV whose control overhead is huge due to periodic 
HELLO 
packets. 
Furthermore, 
the 
backup 
routing 
establishment and maintenance, as well as reasonable 
alternative nodes selection, will add to the broadcast of 
control packets. In [10], the researcher uses weight hop 
based packet scheduling for AODV routing protocol to 
reduce the queue length caused by link failure in the network. 
The cost of these routing protocols is additional control 
packets, which is advantageous in a sparse network yet 
brings some shortcomings in dense swarm network. Because 
each node has many neighbor nodes in high-density network, 
there will be a large number of control packets in the entire 
network when a node broadcasts a routing update packet, 
which may cause congestion and increase delay. So, the 
control overhead of routing update must be as small as 
possible. 
Researchers improved TORA considering the network 
life, bandwidth demand and load balance respectively in 
[11][12]. These protocols utilize the advantage of link 
reversal mechanism in TORA. The link reversal can be 
defined as follows. At the beginning, the link from node X to 
node Y is allowed to transmit data packets, which is known 
as a downlink. But the link from node Y to node X for 
transmission is prohibited. After the change of node status, 
the link from node Y to node X becomes the downlink. The 
allowable transmission direction of data packets is reversed. 
The link failure is the condition that may cause the change of 
node status. These protocols based on TORA can get the 
anomalies of routes and establish a new transmission path 
quickly. The overhead of updating is controlled in the local 
area, which reduces the overhead and delay. But all of the 
protocols assume that link reversal is successful. In fact, link 
reversal may fail due to the harsh environment, which will 
result in a lot of useless control overhead and increase the 
time to reestablish the transmission. 
The proposed routing protocol in this paper not only 
keeps the advantage in TORA, but also reduces the control 
packets caused by routing reestablishment. 
III. 
TORA PROTOCOL 
As an on-demand routing protocol, TORA responds to 
link failure in the network quickly by link reversal. The 
mechanism limits the overhead at a local scale and avoids the 
control message flooding. Link reversal can increase 
bandwidth utilization and reduce the delay of routing 
reestablishment, which is suitable for high-dynamic mobile 
networks. Moreover, multiple paths from the source to the 
destination are created in TORA, which supports link 
reversal and multipath transmission. 
A. Height Mechanism and Routing Establishment 
A Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) from a source to the 
destination is established by the “height” of nodes in TORA. 
Data packets are only allowed to be transmitted from a 
higher node to a lower node, which is called downlink. The 
height is a 5-tuple (t, oid, r, v, id), of which the first three 
values (t, oid, r) is called “reference level”. The meanings of 
the various parameters are as follows: 
1) Time t; the time of creating the reference level;  
2) Identification oid; the identity of the node creating the 
reference level;  
3) Reflection r; the value of the reflection bit;  
4) Arab values v; the hop-count information relative to 
the destination node;  
5) Identification id; the identity of a node itself.  
The reflection bit is a binary value: “r=0” means the 
reference level has not been reflected; “r=1” means that the 
reference level created is reflected back. 
The “height” of a node is very important for routing 
establishment and link reversal. The value of the “height” is 
the basis to determine the downlink. The strategy to compare 
the “height” of hi (ti,oidi,ri,vi,i) and hj (tj,oidj,rj,vj,j) is shown 
in Fig. 1. 
hi=(ti,oid,ri,vi,i)
hj=(tj,oid,rj,vj,j)
ti=tj
yes
ri= rj
yes
no
ri> rj
vi= vj 
yes
vi> vj
yes
hi>hj
no
hi<hj
i>j 
yes
no
hi>hj
hi<hj
no
ti>tj
yes
hi>hj
hi<hj
no
no
hi<hj
yes
hi>hj
no
 
Figure 1.  The comparison of height in TORA 
Fig. 2 shows a simple network topology. If the source 
node S prepares to send data to the destination node D, it will 
broadcast the routing Query packet (QRY) to its neighbors. 
Each node that receives a QRY while not being the 
destination node will relay the control packet. When the 
destination node D receives the QRY from the source S at T0, 
node D creates the height (T0, D, 0, 0, D), then broadcasts an 
Update packet (UPD). Each node receiving UPD defines a 
height relative to the destination node D, such as node C and 
E in Fig. 2. After node C and E define their heights, they also 
send a UPD to indicate their heights. As a result, their 
neighbors can define the heights too. Finally, all nodes will 
define a height relative to the destination and get the height 
of its neighbors. Each node will also know the downlinks. In 
the storage of a node, its own height, the height of its 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

neighbor nodes and the link-status information will be saved. 
The DAG is formed as shown in Fig. 2. The source node S 
can find two different shorter routes to transmission: S-A-B-
C-D and S-A-B-E-D.  
S
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
(T0,D,0,0,D)
(T0,D,0,1,C)
(T0,D,0,3,A)
(T0,D,0,4,S)
(T0,D,0,4,H)
(T0,D,0,3,G)
(T0,D,0,2,F)
(T0,D,0,1,E)
(T0,D,0,2,B)
 
Figure 2.  DAG of TORA 
B. Strength and Weakness of Link Reversal in TORA 
The nodes losing the last downlink will perform link 
reversal to update the route. We assume that the current 
transmission path is S-A-B-C-D in Fig. 2. If the link from 
node C to node D is interrupted at T1, node C will lose the 
downlink to node D, which results in the change of the 
topology. Firstly, node C replaces previous height with new 
height (T1, C, 0, 0, C), and then sends a UPD with the new 
height. The downlink from node B to node C reverses. 
Secondly, node B has another downlink from node B to node 
E, so it neither changes the height nor generates a UPD. The 
new DAG is shown in Fig. 3. 
S
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
(T0,D,0,0,D)
(T1,C,0,0,C)
(T0,D,0,3,A)
(T0,D,0,4,S)
(T0,D,0,4,H)
(T0,D,0,3,G)
(T0,D,0,2,F)
(T0,D,0,1,E)
(T0,D,0,2,B)
 
Figure 3.  DAG of TORA with new height of node C 
In the above case, the link reversal greatly reduces 
control overhead, and quickly finds another transmission 
path (S-A-B-E-D). Although the multipath in TORA 
supports the link reversal, link reversal failure will still occur 
under some conditions. In Fig. 3, for example, the downlink 
from node E to node D is interrupted at T2, and the route will 
be updated as follows: 
 Node E changes its height: (T2, E, 0, 0, E), and then   
sends a UPD. 
 Node B and F lose the last downlink, and update the 
height: B (T2, E, 0,-1, B), F (T2, E, 0, -1, F), and 
broadcast a UPD severally. 
 Node C, A, G, H perform the same operation: C 
(T2,E,0,0,C), A (T2,E,0,-2,A), G (T2,E,0,-2,G), H 
(T2,E,0,-3,H). 
 Node S changes the reflection bit of the reference 
level and updates the height (T2, E, 1, 0, S), and 
becomes the highest node in the local area. All 
related nodes change the height successively: 
H(T2,E,1,-1,H), 
A(T2,E,1,-1,A), 
G(T2,E,1,-2,G), 
B(T2,E,1,-2,B), F(T2,E,1,-3,F), C(T2,E,1,-1,C). 
 When receiving a UPD from node B and node F, 
node E realizes that the reference level created by 
itself is reflected back. Then node E changes the 
height into NULL (-,-,-,-,E), and broadcasts a cleared 
packet (CLR). Other nodes that receive a CLR delete 
the relational routes and set their heights NULL. 
As we see，the link reversal is invalid. A large number 
of control packets are flooding the network, which results in 
more control overhead and greater delay of routing 
reestablishment. Hence, it has a significant impact on 
network transmission. 
IV. 
RTORA PROTOCOL 
In order to solve the problem resulting from the link 
reversal failure, we must prevent useless control packets 
from flooding. The RTORA protocol adopting reduced-
overhead mechanism can ease this problem effectively.  
Compared with TORA, RTORA also applies the height 
mechanism and the link reversal. Each node stores the 
information including the height list of neighbors and the 
link-status list. RTORA has some differences from TORA: 
The height of a node is defined as a 4-tuple (t, oid, v, id), 
which deletes the reflected bit. Once a node that is not the 
source node performs the link reversal, its height will be 
changed into NULL. The nodes with the height of NULL 
cannot participate in the routing updating until a new QRY 
arrives. Furthermore, the nodes receiving a CLR decide what 
to do according to various situations instead of direct 
deletion in TORA.  
The main principle of routing maintenance is shown in 
Fig. 4. We call it reduced-overhead mechanism. All nodes 
receiving a UPD or CLR update the link-status list and the 
height list of their neighbors, and then check the link-status 
list. If another downlink exists, the nodes do nothing. 
Otherwise, the link reversal will be operated. If the node 
preparing to perform the link reversal is not the source node, 
it will change the height into NULL and send a CLR. On the 
other hand, the node having other neighbors without NULL 
will update its height to become the highest in the local area 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

and send a UPD; the node having no other neighbors will 
create and send a new QRY. 
node receives UPD or CLR
update link-state list
! reversal
link reversal
update height that is the highest 
in local area&&send UPD
create and send QRY
the height changes into 
NULL &&send CLR
another downlink
no downlink
source node&&
other neighbors
Source node &&no neighbors
!source node
 
Figure 4.  The reduced-overhead mechanism of RTORA 
      We still consider the example in Section III. The 
downlink from node C to node D is interrupted in Fig. 2. 
Node C changes the height into NULL and broadcasts a CLR. 
Because node B losing the downlink to node C has another 
downlink to node E, it deletes the information concerning 
node C in the link-status list without changing its own height 
or sending a CLR. The new topology is shown in Fig. 5. 
S
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
(T0,D,0,D)
(-,-,-,C)
(T0,D,3,A)
(T0,D,4,S)
(T0,D,4,H)
(T0,D,3,G)
(T0,D,2,F)
(T0,D,1,E)
(T0,D,2,B)
 
Figure 5.  DAG of RTORA with new height of node C 
If the downlink from node E to node D fails later, the 
sequence of events will happen as follows: 
 Node E will replace the height by NULL, and send a 
CLR. 
 Node B, F, C, A, G, H will change their heights into 
NULL. 
 The source node S has no neighbors whose heights 
are not NULL, so it will delete routing information 
and broadcast a QRY to establish a new DAG. 
The source node becomes a special node due to the 
change of the routing maintenance strategy. If we do not pay 
attention to this situation, a bad influence will appear. As 
shown in Fig. 5, we assume the downlink from S to A fails. 
Node S will change the previous height into NULL and send 
QRY to establish a route. But, in fact, node S only changes 
the height into S (T0, D, 5, S), which is the highest in the 
local area. Then, a new transmission path (S-H-G-F-E-D) 
will be found quickly. 
V. 
SIMULATION AND ANALYSIS 
The network model is built and simulated by OPNET 
[13][14]. We assume that 30 UAV nodes are randomly 
deployed in an area of 4 square kilometers. In order to build 
a dense network, the communication radius of UAV is 
configured with the value of 400 meters. This will ensure 
that there are enough neighbors for every UAV node. The 
main parameters of TORA and RTORA routing protocols 
are given in Table I. These values are most often adopted in 
TORA simulation research. 
TABLE I.  MAIN PARAMETERS OF TORA AND RTORA 
parameters 
value 
Mode of Operation 
On demand 
Beacon Period 
3 second 
Max Beacon Timer 
30 second 
Max Retries 
3 
A. Traffic Configuration and Mobility Model 
Low-resolution video conferencing service is configured 
in the simulation. The source node generates a frame 
(128×120 pixels) at a rate of 10 frames per second. The 
values of main parameters are shown in Table II. The start-
time is allowed for routing initialization. The random 
waypoint (RWP) mobility model is used where nodes move 
randomly in an area of 100 meters radius around its current 
position at the speed of 20 meters per second. The value of 
pause time is set to 0 second. 
TABLE II.  MAIN PARAMETERS OF TRAFFIC 
parameters 
value 
Frame Interarrival Time Information 
10 frames per second 
Frame Size Information 
128×120 pixels 
Start Time 
100 second 
Duration 
End of Simulation 
B. Performance Metrics 
In the swarm network with UAV nodes, node mobility 
will cause link failure. The routing reestablishment 
necessarily 
increases 
control 
overhead 
and 
delay. 
Furthermore, the congestion caused by the broadcasting of 
dense nodes will increase delay too. So we choose control 
overhead and average end-to-end delay as the global 
statistics to consider. 
1) Control overhead; the number of bytes generated by 
routing discovery, routing establishment and routing 
maintenance in one second. 
2) Average end-to-end delay; the delay caused by data 
transmitted from source nodes to destination nodes, 
including the waiting time of routing establishment, 
transmission and propagation delay. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

C. Simulation Results 
In order to guarantee the accuracy of the experimental 
results, five experiments with different simulation seed (100, 
256, 512, 800, 1000) are run. The simulation time is set to 
600 seconds. The results are shown in Fig. 6 and in Fig. 7, 
whose simulation seed is set to 512 (similar to other results 
with different simulation seed). 
 
Figure 6.  The control overhead of TORA and RTORA 
 
Figure 7.  The average delay of TORA and RTORA 
Fig. 6 shows that the control overhead of RTORA is 
reduced by about 56% compared with TORA, which can 
effectively improve network bandwidth utilization and 
reduce the probability of congestion caused by the 
communication overload. In Fig. 7, the delays of two 
protocols are close in the beginning, because the link reversal 
is successful when there are multiple paths. But with more 
link failures, the probability of link-reversal failure increases. 
In this situation, RTORA can quickly inform to the source to 
reestablish route and effectively reduce the control overhead. 
So the average delay is reduced by about 25% compared 
with TORA.  
According to the above results, the routing maintenance 
strategy in RTORA plays the advantages of link reversal 
better. Regardless of success or failure of the link reversal, 
the protocol can quickly reestablish a new transmission path. 
Especially in the highly-dynamic networks, the probability 
of link failure and link-reversal failure greatly increases. If 
link reversal fails, the reduced-overhead mechanism in 
RTORA shortens the time of routing reestablishment and 
minimizes the control overhead. The routing update strategy 
in RTORA can avoid the flooding of control packets, so the 
probability of transmission congestion will be lower. Thus, 
RTORA further improves the delay performance of the 
network. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we analyze the characteristic of swarm 
network with UAV nodes, and discuss the shortcomings of 
current routing protocols. Based on the link reversal in 
TORA, we propose the RTORA protocol that adopts the so-
called reduced-overhead mechanism and thus solves the 
problem resulting from the link-reversal failure in TORA. 
The simulation results show that RTORA has lower control 
overhead and better end-to-end delay performance in the 
harsh environment assumed. We will consider RTORA 
protocol using location-based information in the future work. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Khamayseh, O. M. Darwish, and S. A. Wedian, “Ma-aodv: 
Mobility aware routing protocols for mobile ad hoc 
networks,” in Systems and Networks Communications, 2009. 
ICSNC’09. Fourth International Conference on, 2009, pp. 25–
29, doi: 10.1109/ICSNC.2009.80. 
[2] D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz, “Scalable support for 
transparent mobile host internetworking,” Wireless Networks, 
1995, vol. 1, pp. 311–321, doi: 10.1007/BF01200849. 
[3] C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, “Ad-hoc on-demand distance 
vector routing,” in Mobile Computing Systems and 
Applications. Proceedings. WMCSA’99. Second IEEE 
Workshop 
on, 
1999, 
pp. 
90–100, 
doi: 
10.1109/MCSA.1999.749281. 
[4] V. D. Park and M. S. Corson, “A highly adaptive distributed 
routing algorithm for mobile wireless networks,” in 
INFOCOM’97. Sixteenth Annual Joint Conference of the 
IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. Proceedings 
IEEE, 
1997, 
vol.3, 
pp. 
1405–1413, 
doi: 
10.1109/INFCOM.1997.631180. 
[5] M. Kassim, R. Ab Rahman, and R. Mustapha, “Mobile ad hoc 
network (MANET) routing protocols comparison for wireless 
sensor network,” in System Engineering and Technology 
(ICSET), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, 2011, pp. 
148–152, doi: 10.1109/ICSEngT.2011.5993439. 
[6] P. Kuppusamy, K. Thirunavukkarasu, and B. Kalaavathi, “A 
study and comparison of OLSR, AODV and TORA routing 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

protocols in ad hoc networks,” in Electronics Computer 
Technology, 2011 3rd International Conference on, 2011, vol. 
5, pp. 143–147, doi: 10.1109/ICECTECH.2011.5941974. 
[7] Z. Che-Aron, W. F. M. Al-Khateeb, and F. Anwar, “ENFAT-
AODV: The fault-tolerant routing protocol for high failure 
rate Wireless Sensor Networks,” in Future Computer and 
Communication (ICFCC), 2010 2nd International Conference 
on,2010,vol.1,pp.V1–467,doi:10.1109/ICFCC.2010.5497747. 
[8] J. Liu and F. Li, “An improvement of AODV protocol based 
on reliable delivery in mobile ad hoc networks,” in 
Information Assurance and Security, 2009. IAS’09. Fifth 
International Conference on, 2009, vol. 1, pp. 507–510, doi: 
10.1109/IAS.2009.78. 
[9] V. Ramesh and P. Subbaiah, “Preemptive AOMDV routing 
for mobile Ad-hoc networks,” in Sustainable Energy and 
Intelligent 
Systems 
(SEISCON 
2011), 
International 
Conference on, 2011, pp.622–625, doi: 10.1049/cp.2011.0436. 
[10] D. K. Sharma, C. Kumar, S. Jain, and N. Tyagi, “An 
enhancement of AODV routing protocol for wireless ad hoc 
networks,” in Recent Advances in Information Technology 
(RAIT), 2012 1st International Conference on, 2012, pp. 290–
294, doi: 10.1109/RAIT.2012.6194522. 
[11] D. Dharmaraju, A. Roy-Chowdhury, P. Hovareshti, and J. S. 
Baras, “INORA-a unified signaling and routing mechanism 
for QoS support in mobile ad hoc networks,” in Parallel 
Processing Workshops. Proceedings. International Conference 
on, 2002, pp. 86–93, doi: 10.1109/ICPPW.2002.1039716. 
[12] F. Yu, Y. Li, F. Fang, and Q. Chen, “A new TORA-based 
energy aware routing protocol in mobile ad hoc networks,” in 
Internet, 2007. ICI 2007. 3rd IEEE/IFIP International 
Conference in Central Asia on, 2007, pp.1–4, doi: 
10.1109/CANET.2007.4401666. 
[13] M. Rajput, P. Khatri, A. Shastri, and K. Solanki, “Comparison 
of Ad-hoc reactive routing protocols using OPNET modeler,” 
in Computer Information Systems and Industrial Management 
Applications (CISIM), 2010 International Conference on, 
2010, pp. 530–534, doi: 10.1109/CISIM.2010.5643454. 
[14] X. Chang, “Network simulations with OPNET,” in Simulation 
Conference Proceedings, 1999 Winter, 1999, vol. 1, pp. 307–
314, doi: 10.1109/WSC.1999.823089. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

