Heterogeneous Networks Handover Decision Triggering Algorithm Based on 
Measurements Messages Transfer using IP Option Header
Malak Z. Habeib1, Hussein A. Elsayed2, Salwa H. Elramly3 and Magdy M. Ibrahim4
Electronics and Communication Engineering Dept.
Ain Shams University
Cairo, Egypt
1malakojc@yahoo.com, 2helsayed2003@hotmail.com, 3salwa_elramly@eng.asu.edu.eg, 4magdy_ibrahim@yahoo.com
Abstract—The handover issue is one of the most important 
challenges in the next generation mobile networks. 
Traditional handover triggering conditions mainly based on 
signal strength, while the requirements for other triggering 
conditions such as user controlled handover or service based 
handover become an urgent need; especially when the 
handover is required among different networks. We propose
a simple and easy mechanism for exchanging the handover 
metrics using proof of concept and logical visibility. This 
handover metrics represent the base in which the handover 
decision algorithms are constituted on. Metrics information 
can be transferred not only among different nodes that 
belong to the same radio access technology but also among 
different wireless access technologies as well. In this paper,
we introduce new fields in the IP option header which are 
used for the handover metrics information exchange. We 
focus on some important metrics and how they can be read 
and written in the IP header. This allows any handover 
decision algorithm to openly use our scheme in a flexible 
way.  The choice of the IP protocol comes from the trend of 
the next generation networks, which is based on IP 
networks.
Keywords-handover; vertical; horizontal; mobility; IP 
header; wireless; ping pong effect
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the handover becomes a generic term 
because the Mobile Terminal (MT) not only needs to make 
the handover among different nodes inside the same 
wireless network, but also it needs to make the handover 
among different radio access networks; so it is called 
multi-interface  or multi-mode mobile terminal [1]. If the 
MT requires the handover inside its current wireless access 
network it will be called Horizontal Handoff (HHO) or 
homogeneous handover, while it will be called Vertical 
Handoff (VHO) or heterogeneous handover if it requires 
making the handover among different technologies. Next 
generation wireless networks typically constitute different 
types of radio access technologies [2].
The handover terminology not only linked to the user 
mobility but also non-movable nodes can make the 
handover as well. For example, the user may request the 
handover from one wireless technology to another due to 
the cost factor; which is independent on the mobility.
The generic handover process requires three phases: 
network discovery and measurements phase, taking the 
handover decision based on specific decision criteria phase 
and handover execution phase [3].
Jawad et al. [4] focused on the network selection, and 
how to choose network from a number of available 
networks in a heterogeneous system based on the Quality 
of Service (QoS). They achieved their target by proposing 
an architecture that combines QoS-Broker and network 
selection. For any network with sufficient QoS parameters, 
that matches the user request, the connection to that 
network will be triggered. While their mechanism is 
successful for guaranteeing the required QoS, it lacks of 
other metrics consideration, such as the vehicular speed 
moreover, the QoS-Broker is not an easy solution to 
implement because it requires additional cost.
In [5], George et al. introduce in their paper a network-
based approach for access and interface selection in the 
context of resource management in heterogeneous 
wireless 
environments 
Universal 
Mobile 
for 
Telecommunications Service (UMTS), Wireless Local 
Area Network (WLAN) and Digital Video Broadcasting-
Terrestrial (DVB-T). They interested in designing 
decision criteria by trying to optimize predefined cost 
function; however, they didn’t consider the metrics and 
parameters criteria in their study.
Adiline and Anandha [6] proposed a user centric 
approach 
for 
controlling 
the 
handover 
between 
heterogeneous networks.   In their approach, the mobility 
management is fully controlled by the terminal, and 
network selection is user-centric, power-saving, cost-
aware, and performance-aware. However, they didn’t 
address how the proposed handover metrics is practically 
achieved; moreover, they based the handover execution 
phase only on the Mobile IPv6. As well as, they protocol 
is not open for any wireless network.
A vertical 
handover 
using Media 
Independent 
Handover (MIH) layer is another protocol; this protocol is
proposed by IEEE 802.21 working group [7]. MIH has 
many 
protocols 
which 
are
developed 
for 
the 
heterogeneous networks handover. However, MIH is still 
limited to the handover preparation phase, as well as it 
254
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

lacks
of
triggering
and 
performance 
evaluation 
mechanisms. Dai et al. [8] address the triggering 
condition mechanisms but it is limited to only WLAN and 
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave 
Access 
(WiMAX). Another work related to the vertical handover 
is presented in the literature [9]-[13]. Zhang et al.
introduce an estimation of WLAN network conditions 
based on media access control network allocation vector 
occupancy [9], [10]. They used a Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) to detect the WLAN signal decay, but both of them
didn’t address how to estimate the WiMAX network 
conditions. In [11], Garg et al. introduce a handover 
criterion that combines the location using Global 
Positioning System (GPS) and IEEE 802.21 information 
elements; however, not all mobile terminals have GPS 
capabilities. Paper of [12] proposes handover rules based 
on a theoretically computed throughput, but without 
presenting any method to collect this information. In [13],
Hassawa et al. proposed a generic vertical handover 
decision function, which provides handover decisions 
when roaming across heterogeneous wireless networks.
However, it is very difficult to collect parameters such as 
cost, signal strength and vehicular speed then exchange 
them between MT and network nodes.
There are many handover protocols designed for VHO,
but most of them focused only on the handover execution 
phase. For example, the following literature didn’t show 
how network discovery and measurements collection
phase or handover decision are addressed. For the IP
supporting networks, the Mobile Internet Protocol (MIP)
[14] is a typical mobility enabling protocol. It can be used 
for MIP version 4 (MIPv4) [15] and version 6 (MIPv6) as 
well [16]–[18]. Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) [19] 
facilitates local mobility management. The work in [20] 
introduced a Fast handover for MIP protocol that was used 
to reduce interruption time during handover. In [21], IPv6 
protocol is used to enable a mobile node to configure a 
new Care of Address (CoA), when it changes its subnet. It 
was demonstrated in [22] that, Cellular IP (CIP) protocol 
can offer local mobility and handover support for moving 
nodes. CIP can co-operate with MIP to provide wide-area 
mobility support. In [23], a domain based approach for 
mobility support is proposed, which is called Handover 
Aware Wireless Access Internet Infrastructure (HAWAII). 
The handover issues that include horizontal and vertical 
handover using Hierarchical MIPv6 were discussed by Lee 
[24]. Maltz et al. [25] proposed Transport Control Protocol 
(TCP) connection that can divide the end to end 
connection into two connections: end to proxy and proxy 
to end. In [26], Multimedia Sockets (MSOCKS) uses 
Maltz technique for connection migration that can support 
multiple IP addresses. Seamless IP diversity based 
Generalized Mobility Architecture (SIGMA) [27] and 
Mobile Stream Control Transmission Protocol (mSCTP) 
[28] support soft handoff using IP diversity. Another 
technique is used in [29] to freeze the current TCP 
connection, till making the handover by advertising a zero 
window size to the core network, then unfreezes the 
connection after finishing the handover. Nowadays, 
numerous studies are focused on the mobility supported 
Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) at the application layer 
level [30]. The details of how the SIP protocol can provide 
terminal and service mobility is discussed in [31].
Some of the above mentioned work only focused on the 
handover execution phase, while the rest concentrated on
the triggering conditions of the handover decision phase. 
However, there is no specific study focused on how to 
exchange non-traditional triggering handover information
such as user forced handover or speed based handover 
especially in VHO. The purpose of this paper is to 
introduce a new concept for exchanging the handover 
information using the IP option header.
In this paper, we consider the following hypothesis: any 
user terminal is equipped with more than one wireless 
interface. Moreover, we suppose that, more than one 
wireless access technology is always available for any user
access. We will not expose to how the wireless network is 
discovered or how the handover protocol is executed.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the reason for why we choose the IP protocol as 
a transport layer for handover information exchange. The 
details of events and measurements metrics; which can be 
transferred through the IP option header and used to take
the handover decision, will be discussed in Section III. In 
Section IV, we will introduce a handover decision phase 
algorithm, which based on our proposed new handover 
metrics. The proposed algorithm is called as a ping pong 
and vehicular speed handover decision-based algorithm. 
Finally, Section V presents both paper conclusion and 
future work.
II.
THE IMPORTANCE OF USING THE IP PROTOCOL AS 
A BASE FOR OUR SCHEME
The IP is a dominate protocol that is used for the Next 
Generation Wireless Network (NGWN). The term All IP 
Networks comes from converging all network services that 
are based on the IP protocol; irrespective of whether the 
access is wired or wireless. The NGWN is one network 
that transports all media sources by encapsulating them 
into packets, such as we have on the Internet.
All IP based network has most important advantages 
over its predecessors. First of all, the IP protocol not only 
becomes integrated in all networks but it is also 
independent of the used radio access technologies as well. 
This means that, a core IP network can support different 
wireless access technologies such as cellular, WiMAX and 
WLAN.  Now the core IP network can be evolved 
independently from the access network; this is the key 
advantages of using all IP. Also implementation and 
investment of the IP network is very easy with low costs. 
Moreover, using the IP protocol gives any user the 
255
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

availability to have just one terminal that can support any 
type of service with low cost. All the above mentioned
advantages of using the IP protocol emphasize the right 
choice of the IP protocol as a base for our scheme. 
III.
IP ADDED HANDOVER OPTION HEADER FIELDS
In this section, we introduce new added fields in the IP 
option header for handover purposes.
A.
Normal IPv4 Packet Header Overview
The IPv4 header consists of 20 byte as a mandatory 
header and 40 byte as a variable option header [32]. The IP 
option header is not normally used; it may be used 
according to the need. For example, the security option 
header may be required in all IP packets. The IP option 
header has a variable length according to its type. There 
are two types of the IP option header. Type-1 consists of 
one option byte; and type-2 consists of type, length and 
value fields.
B.
The Handover Fields
The option type ‘11111’ is not assigned for any 
purpose, so that we select this option field to exchange the 
handover related information that is carried directly in the 
header of the IP packet. We can transfer the handover 
information whenever it is needed, without interrupting
any user session. Moreover, this information can be 
inserted directly whenever it is required. This means that, a 
very low delay is taken for the handover information 
exchange from one point to another among different 
network nodes.
C.
Vertical or Horizontal HandoverFlag
This is ‘1’ bit flag that is used to determine whether the 
associated handover information, which is carried in the IP 
header belongs to HHO or VHO. A vertical handover
scenario is required in case the value of this flag equals to 
one,
otherwise a
horizontal handover information 
exchange is required. Using this flag means that, our 
mechanism can be useful not only for HHO scenarios but 
also for VHO.
D.
Handover Counter
This portion of IP option header consists of four bits,
which are used for exchanging the number of handover 
counts among network elements. Four bits means we have 
maximum up to ‘16’ horizontal or vertical handover 
attempts. This field together with vertical or horizontal 
handover flag can be used to decide either it is needed to 
make VHO or HHO. By this way, we are able to count the 
number of vertical or horizontal handover events for a 
specific MT. This information is one of the key factors that 
are used to take a handover decision, especially in the 
VHO.
E.
Forced Handover Flag
The handover decision not only controlled by the 
network itself, but also it may be based on the user choice. 
This is considered
as one of the most important 
requirements of the next generation mobile networks. In 
other words, we need to support user controlled handover 
as well as network controlled handover [33]. The purpose 
of this flag is to make it easy for the MT to request from 
the network or force it to trigger the handover process. In 
this case, the handover decision is taken by the user or MT 
and transferred to the network side in the IP header to 
proceed in handover execution. If the value of this flag
equals zero, the user will leave the handover decision to 
the network hand.
F.
Vehicular Speed Based Handover Flag
This flag is used to give a chance of triggering the 
handover decision based on the vehicular speed. 
Moreover, another field is required to show the vehicular 
speed level; so that the handover decision can be triggered
vertically from one system to another accordingly. The 
levels of the vehicular speed can be handled by a speed 
based handover field, which will be discussed later in the 
next paragraph. The value of this flag controls the 
presence of optional speed based handover field. If we set 
this flag by one this means that, we have vehicular speed 
based handover field, otherwise there is no existence to 
this field at all.
G.
Speed Based Handover Field
The length of speed based handover header consists of 
‘3’ bits that gives ‘8’ permutations. According to the 
vehicular speed level, we can judge which appropriate 
target network suitable for the handover.  Table I states the 
ranges of these ‘8’ vehicular speed levels. We suppose
that, three bits are enough to differentiate among ‘8’ 
vehicular speed levels. 
This field is optional; its presence depends on a 
vehicular speed based handover flag. If the value of this 
flag equals ‘1’ it will report the presence of the vehicular 
speed based handover.
There are many systems that have different coverage 
cell size such as Public Land Mobile Network (PLMN), 
WiMAX, WLAN or Personal Area Network (PAN). So
that more precise vehicular speed levels are required for 
accurate actions. This explains why we have many levels 
that represent these mobility classes.
We prefer transmitting the vehicular speed range 
indicator to exchange the absolute vehicular speed value.  
This is because it will save the header length as long as the 
range is enough to take accurate action. We need to 
confirm the difference between both vehicular speed-based 
handover and handover counter fields. The former not 
only depends on handover counter, but also it depends on 
other key factors. The handover decision can be taken not 
only based on the user mobility factor, but also it can be 
taken based on other factors such as the network cost, 
network load, user choice and many other metrics that can 
trigger the handover. Many of previous factors can trigger 
the handover while they are independent on the mobility. 
So that the handover counter can be used for other 
purposes rather than the mobility in the handover decision.
256
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

TABLE I. 
MOBILITY CLASSES FIELD
Value
Description of mobility classes in Kilo meter per 
hour
000
Vehicular speed 0 km/h 
001
Vehicular speed > 0 km/h to 1Km/h
010
Vehicular speed > 1 km/h to 5 km/h
011
Vehicular speed > 5 km/h to 10 km/h
100
Vehicular speed from 10 to 60 km/h
101
Vehicular speed from 60 to 120 km/h
110
Vehicular speed from 120 to 250 km/h
111
Vehicular speed from 250 to 350 km/h
H.
Service Priority Levels
Priority level field consists of ‘4’ bits this means that,
we have ‘16’ permutations of the service levels. The MT 
can carry service information based on the user setting at 
the terminal side. We can use service priority levels field
to transfer this information. By this way, the handover 
decision can be taken based on the service type. We 
suppose that, there is a table that contains a mapping 
between the service and its corresponding suitable 
network. Moreover, we can transfer the service priority
information which can trigger the change in the current 
serving network. This enhances the availability of taking
the handover decision based on the service type.  Table II 
shows all service priority levels. The term Not Applicable 
(N/A) means that, the corresponding network doesn’t 
support the service right now; however, it may be 
available in the future.
I.
Green Field indicator
This field is used to book a room in the IP header, 
which is particularly dedicated for battery level indication. 
We assign two bits to represent four battery levels. Table 
III shows the proposed battery levels from the strongest to 
the weakest level.
TABLE II. 
SERVICE PRIORITY LEVELS 
Priority ID
Priority level   
0
N/A (Not Applicable)
1
Level1 (Higher priority)
2
Level2
3
Level3
4
Level4
5
Level5
6
Level6
7
Level7
8
Level8
9
Level9
10
Level10
11
Level11
12
Level12
13
Level13
14
Level14
15
Level15 (Lower priority)
TABLE III. 
GREEN FIELD BATTERY INDICATOR
Value
Battery level
00
Strong bateery level
01
Level 2 
10
Level 3
11
Ver low battery level
J.
Uplink /Downlink Flag
This field is ‘1’ bit flag which is used to check the 
direction of exchanged information. From one side, the 
MT can exchange the handover information to the 
network; however, the network from the other side can 
transfer the handover information to the MT. We can use 
this information together with the source and destination 
IP addresses to check the exact path of handover 
information transfer.
This information is useful for different scenarios. For 
example, specific information can be transferred from one 
network node to another different network node. This can 
give the MT information about the availability of its
surrounding wireless networks. This helps the MT during 
its handover discovery phase. Normally, the network 
discovery phase is done by the MT itself not by the 
network, however; we can seek the help of this network 
information in the discovery phase by using this proposed 
flag. Of course, this saves the mobile station battery life 
and guides the MT to make the smooth handover. The 
study of how the network discovery phase is done by the 
network side is out of this research scope.
IV.
PING PONG AND VEHICULAR SPEED HANDOVER
DESCISON-BASED ALGORITHM
This algorithm is mainly based on both the vertical or 
horizontal flag and the handover counter field. We 
introduce this algorithm to avoid the ping pong 
phenomena;
by frequently transferring from serving 
wireless network node to another. In other words, we can 
transfer from vertical to horizontal handover to avoid 
vertical ping pong effect; or transfer from horizontal to 
vertical handover to avoid horizontal ping pong 
phenomena. In this paper, we will focus in avoiding the 
horizontal ping pong effect. This algorithm uses the 
handover counter to count the handover attempts in a 
specific time. We will refer to this time by timer ‘T’; the 
handover decision may be triggered, when the wireless 
access node detects the value of handover counter exceeds 
certain threshold within the time ‘T’.  The handover type 
can be detected by checking the vertical or horizontal
handover flag. Fig. 1 depicts the signaling flow diagram
according to the proposed handover decision algorithm.
We assume the threshold value of horizontal handover 
counter equals ‘10’. If the handover attempts reach this 
threshold within a certain time ‘T’, the vertical handover 
decision will be triggered. Fig. 2 shows the flowchart of 
the proposed algorithm.
The ping pong effect may be caused by the serving 
wireless technology coverage instability. In this case, it is 
recommended to search for another available wireless 
network to serve this user. Moreover, the proposed 
algorithm is also feasible in case we think about certain 
user with multi-interface terminal navigate with WLAN,
while its vehicular speed increasing rapidly see Fig. 3. If 
available, our algorithm recommends the bigger coverage
257
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Figure 1. Signaling flow of horizontal ping pong and vehicular speed 
handover descision-based algorithm.
Figure 2. Flowchart of the horizontal ping pong and vehicular speed 
handover decision-based algorithm.
Figure 3. Triggering vertical handover condition based on horizontal 
ping pong and vehicular speed handover decision-based  algorithm 
betwwen WLAN and UMTS networks.
area supporting technology to deal with either high 
vehicular speed or ping pong handover scenarios.
If the handover counter value is less than or equals to 
‘10’, another counter called supervising counter will be 
incremented; while resetting the value of both handover 
counter and timer ‘T’ by zero. Note that, the supervising 
counter is a software module counter, and it doesn’t 
exchange in the IP option header. Assume that, after 
checking the handover counter we found its value equals
‘10’ in the same time, the vertical or horizontal handover 
flag equals ‘0’. This means that, ten horizontal handover 
attempts are performed.
Now, the network node can take a decision of a 
vertical handover. By the same way, the horizontal 
handover decision is taken in case there are a lot of vertical 
handover attempts are detected. By adding this field, the 
handover performance will be improved very much, and it 
will be easy to have an optimum handover decision.
We have many handover scenarios may be happened. 
Different handover software modules may use these
metrics, which are introduced in our proposed fields; from 
different perspective. This guarantees the flexibility of 
using our scheme.
V.
CONCLUSION
To sum up, we introduce in this paper a mechanism 
that let us use the IP option header for handover 
information exchange. We introduce new IP option header 
fields,
which are dedicated
for handover metric 
information exchange.
We put extra ‘25’ bit in the IP header, which is
normally has at least ‘160’ bit. These extra bits are used to 
introduce new eight handover metrics. Our scheme 
increases the IP signaling overhead by 13.51%; however, 
it gives more varieties for the handover decision 
algorithms to use our proposed metrics.
We also introduce handover decision algorithm that is 
based on our new metrics for both vertical or horizontal 
258
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

flag and handover counter as well. This handover decision 
algorithm gives the flexibility to change the handover from 
horizontal to vertical and vice versa; to avoid the ping 
pong effect and address vehicular speed-based handover.
The choice of IP protocol for handover information 
transfer complies with the trend of the next generation 
wireless network, which is based on IP protocol. Our 
scheme gives the availability to take the handover decision 
not only based on traditional handover measurements such 
as signal strength but also based on new metrics. We 
introduce new added handover information such as 
vertical or horizontal handover flag, forced handover flag 
;which is based on the user desire, handover counter, 
vehicular speed based handover flag, speed based 
handover field, service priority levels, green field that 
indicates to the user equipment battery level and finally the 
uplink /downlink flag. The use of forced handover flag 
guarantees
the availability of
using both network 
controlled and user controlled handover. This is smoothly 
done by easy and simple notification way.
Our proposed mechanism flexibly works for both 
horizontal and vertical handover. Any horizontal or 
vertical handover protocol
can use our proposed 
methodology to enhance its
performance.
Different 
decision algorithms can also use our scheme to enhance 
the handover performance. Moreover, the implementation
of our proof of concept scheme will be left as a future 
work; in which we can move from conceptual to realistic 
level.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. McCann, W. Groting, A.Pandolfi and E. Hepworth, “Next  
generation multimode terminals,” Fifth IEEE International 
Conference on 3G Mobile Communication Technologies, IEEE, 
pp. 143–147, 2004.
[2]
F. Siddiqui and S. Zeadally, "Mobility Management across Hybrid 
Wireless 
Networks: 
Trends 
and 
Challenges,"
Computer 
Communications, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1363–1385, May  2006.
[3]
Z. Lei, “End to end architecture and mechanisms for mobile and 
wireless communications in the Internet,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. 
Computer and Network, Toulouse Univ., Toulouse, 2009.
[4]
M. Jawad, W. Ismael, and M. Singh, “Optimizing network 
selection to support end-user QoS requirements for next generation 
networks,” IJCSNS, vol. 8 no. 6, pp.113-117, June 2008.
[5]
S. Lee et al., “Vertical handoff decision algorithms for providing 
optimized performance in heterogeneous wireless networks,” IEEE 
Trans. Vehic. Tech., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 865–881, Feb. 2009.
[6]
Adiline Macriga, Anandha Kumar, “Mobility management  for 
seamless information flow in heterogeneous networks using hybrid 
handover,” IJCSNS, vol.10 no.2, pp.113-117, Feb. 2010.
[7]
V.Gupta et al., “IEEE P802.21 Tutorial,” July 2006.
[8]
Z. Dai, R. Fracchia, J. Gosteau, P. Pellati, and G. Vivier, “Vertical 
handover criteria and algorithm in IEEE 802.11and 820.16 hybrid 
networks,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, 
pp. 2480–2484, May 2008.
[9]
Q.Zhang et al., “Efﬁcient mobility management for vertical 
handoff between WWAN and WLAN,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 41 no. 11, Nov. 2003.
[10] Q.Zhang et al., “A seamless and proactive end-to-end mobility 
solution for roaming across heterogeneous wireless networks,” 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 22, no. 5, 
pp. 834-848, June 2004.
[11] A.Garg and K.C.Yow, “Determining the best network to handover 
among various IEEE 802.11 and IEEE 802.16 networks by a 
mobile device,” 2nd Int. Conf. on Mobile Technology, pp. 1–6, 
Nov. 2005.
[12] Y.Choi and S.Choi, “Criteria for vertical handoff between IEEE 
802.16e 
and 
802.11 
systems,” 
Joint 
Conference 
on 
Communications and Information, pp. 1–10, Apr. 2006.
[13] A. Hassawa, N. Nasser and 
H. Hassanein, “Generic vertical 
handoff decision function for heterogeneous wireless networks,” 
IFIP Conference on Wireless and Optical Communications, pp. 
239-243, Mar 2005.
[14] C.  Perkins, IP Mobility Support for IPv4, RFC 3220, Jan. 2002.
[15] C. Perkins, IP Mobility Support for Ipv4, RFC 3344, August 2002. 
[16] D. Johnson, Mobile Support in IPv6, RFC 3775, June 2004
[17] N. Montavont, T. Noe¨l, “Handover management for mobile nodes 
in IPv6 networks,” IEEE Commun. Magn. vol. 40, pp. 8, pp. 38–
43, Aug. 2002
[18] S. Vaughan, “Mobile IPv6 and the future of wireless internet 
access,” Computer, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 18–20, Feb. 2003.
[19] A. Salkintzis, “Interworking between WLANs and third-generation 
cellular data networks,” Proceedings of the 57th IEEE Semiannual 
Vehicular Technology Conference, 3, pp. 1802–1806, 2003.
[20] P. McCann, Mobile IPv6 Fast Handovers for 802.11 Networks. 
IETF Mobile IP Group, 2004.
[21] P. Vidales, L. Patanapongpibul, G. Mapp and A. Hopper, 
“Experiences with heterogeneous wireless networks, unveiling the 
challenges,” 2nd International Working Conference on Performance 
Modeling and Evaluation of Heterogeneous _Networks (HET-
ETs), pp. 26 – 28, July 2004.
[22] A. Campbell et al., “Design, implementation, and evaluation of 
cellular IP,” IEEE Pers. Commun., pp. 42-49, Aug. 2000.
[23] R. Ramjee et al., “HAWAII: A domain-based approach for 
supporting mobility in wide-area wireless networks,” IEEE/ACM 
Trans. Net., vol. 10, no. 3,  pp. 396–410, June 2002.
[24] C. Lee, L. Chen, M. Chen and Y. Sun, “A framework of handoffs 
in wireless overlay networks based on mobile IPv6,” IEEE J. Sel. 
Areas Commun. vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 2118–2128, Nov. 2005.
[25] D. Maltz and P. Bhagwat, “TCP splicing for application layer 
proxy performance,” IBM Research Report RC 21139, IBM T.J. 
Watson Research Center, March 1998.
[26] D. Maltz and P. Bhagwat, “MSOCKS: An architecture for 
transport layer mobility,” IEEE INFOCOM, San Francisco, 
California, USA, Vol. 3, pp. 1037–1045, March 29 - April 2, 1998.
[27] S. Fu, L. Ma, M. Atiquzzaman, and Y. Lee, “Architecture and 
performance of SIGMA: A seamless handover scheme for data 
networks,” IEEE ICC, Seoul, pp. 3249–3253, May 2005.
[28] T. Go_, J. Moronski, D. S. Phatak, and V. Gupta, “Freeze-TCP: a 
true end-to-end TCP enhancement mechanism for mobile 
environments,” IEEE INFOCOM, Tel Aviv, Israel, pp. 1537–1545, 
March 26-30, 2000.
[29] S. Koh, M. Chang, and M. Lee, “mSCTP for soft handover in 
transport layer,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 
189–191, March 2004.
[30] RFC3261. SIP: Session Initiation Protocol, June 2002.
[31] H. Schulzrinne and E. Wedlund, “Application-layer mobility using 
SIP,” SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 4 no. 3, 
pp. 47-57, Jul. 2000.
[32] Internet Protocol DARPA Internet program protocol specification, 
IETF Standard RFC791-1981. Available:
<www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc791.txt > 26.4.2011
[33] W. Ma, Y. Fang and P. Lin, “Mobility management strategy based 
on user mobility patterns in wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions 
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 322–330, Jan. 2007.
259
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

