A New Physical Cell Indetifier Structure in Femtocell Networks 
 
Robert Bestak 
Department of Telecommunication Engineering 
Czech Technical University in Prague 
Prague, Czech Republic 
robert.bestak@fel.cvut.cz 
 
 
Abstract—In densely populated areas, a quite high number 
Femto Access Points (FAPs) can be deployed and operate 
under one macro base station. Due to limited number of 
available Physical Cell Identifiers (PCI), these identifiers have 
to be inevitably reused in the network. However, the repetition 
of identifiers under one macrocell results in confusion events at 
the macro base station. To deal with the confusions and 
scarcity of identifiers in a highly dense femtocell environment, 
we propose dividing a macrocell into smaller logical regions, 
called clusters, and enhance the PCI structure about the 
cluster identifier. Additionally, we discuss the assignment 
process of FAPs into particular clusters and analyze possible 
solutions how to implement the new cluster identifier in 
today’s mobile networks.  
Keywords: LTE/LTE-A, femtocells, synchronisation signals, 
cell identifier, implementation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The wireless traffic has significantly grown over the past 
decade and there is no indication this growth will slow down. 
Rather contrary, due to new range of applications, massive 
increase of connected devices and extended usage of video 
oriented applications, there are predictions that the traffic 
growth trend will also continue in the next decade [1]. 
Handling this traffic in an affordable and sustainable way is 
one 
of 
major 
challenges 
of 
emerging 
wireless 
communication systems such as Long Term Evolution (LTE) 
and LTE-Advanced (LTE-A). A cost-effective mean to 
manage 
this 
growth 
represents 
small-cell/local-area 
deployments (i.e., femtocells, picocelles, or metrocells). 
Network densification and thereby bringing network nodes 
physically closer to the users enables handling two shortages 
of present mobile systems: capacity and indoor coverage. 
The low-power nodes make possible to provide high traffic 
capacity and high user throughput locally, e.g., in indoor and 
outdoor hotspots. Hereafter, we focus on the femtocell 
concept.  
Femtocells can be seen as small cells covered by 
inexpensive, low-power base stations that are, in general, 
deployed by customers themselves. These base stations are 
denoted as Femto Access Point (FAP). FAPs are connected 
to mobile operator’s networks using either a wired, or a 
wireless backhaul; e.g., ADSLs, optics, WiFi, or nowadays 
even satellite links [2]. The FAPs can be configured to 
operate either in open access, or closed access, or hybrid 
access [3]. Closed access cells are accessible to a set of 
users, whereas in open access cells any user can get access to 
the network. Finally, in case of hybrid access, the priority is 
given to owner of the FAP but additional selected users can 
be accepted as well.  
Compare to the present macro/micro base stations, the 
number of FAPs within a mobile network can be huge. 
Therefore to enable smooth, simple and mass deployment of 
femtocells, self-organizing concept has to be employed when 
deploying femtocells. Customers cannot be expected to have 
whatever knowledge how to install/configure FAPs, all 
configurations have to be done automatically by FAPs 
themselves, or with a network assistance. 
As in case of conventional macrocell base stations 
(MBSs), among others, a newly introduced FAP needs to be 
assigned a cell identifier that unambiguously identifies the 
cell in the given area. In LTE/LTE-A systems, this 
(macro/femto) cell identifier is called Physical Cell Identifier 
(PCI) and the number of identifiers is limited to 504 PCIs 
[4]. The PCI pool is shared by all types of cells in the 
network (femto, pico, metro, macro, etc.). The PCI is derived 
from LTE/LTE-A physical layer signals known as Primary 
Synchronization and Secondary Synchronization Signal 
(PSS, SSS, [5]). 
A PCI should be selected in such a manner to avoid 
collision (i.e., a PCI is unique in the area that the cell covers, 
see FAPA,B in Fig.1) and confusion (i.e., a cell has no 
neighboring cells that have identical PCI, see FAPE and 
FAPC,D in Fig.1) events [6]. Notice that these events can 
occur as from the point of femtocell level (collision: FAPA -
FAPB, or confusion: FAPC - FAPD) as from the point of 
macrocell level (collision: MBS - FAPA,B, or confusion: 
MBS - FAPC,D,F). 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of collision and confusion events in a macrocell. 
217
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

In view of the fact that FAPs are usually in possession of 
customers, a PCI assignment method has to be automatic and 
adaptive to manage FAPs movement; in case a customer 
decides changing the FAP location. In highly populated 
metropolises, a quite high number of femtocells can operate 
under coverage of one macro base station, e.g., Paris 
population density is about 21 thousands per km2 [7]. Due to 
the limited number of PCIs, the PCIs have to be inevitably 
reused in the network. Thus, confusion events from the point 
of a macro base station can occur (MBS - FAPC,D,F in Fig.1). 
To deal with both confusion events and lack of identifiers, 
we propose: i) increasing number of PCIs, ii) dividing a 
superior macrocell into several smaller regions denoted as 
FAP clusters, and iii) enhancing the PCI structure about FAP 
cluster sub-identifier. Additionally, we discuss possible ways 
of FAP cluster identifier implementation in the LTE/LTE-A 
mobile networks.   
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The next 
section provides brief overview of related works and our 
motivation. Section III details the proposed clustering 
concept. Possible implementation of femtocell cluster in 
mobile networks is presented in section IV. Finally, major 
findings are concluded in the last section. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS AND BACKROUND 
In conventional macrocell deployment, several PCI 
assignment methods have been investigated last couple of 
years [8]. These methods can be in general classified as 
distributed (e.g., random, or radio scanning methods) and 
centralized (e.g., network planning approach, or use of 
specific network entity). Authors usually employ a graph 
coloring approach to cope with the collision/confusion 
problems [9-11]. However, the femtocell deployment has 
certain specificities compare to the macrocell one. These 
include: i) larger number of base stations, ii) unstable 
position of base stations in time, and iii) a base station 
placement is not really managed and controlled by operators. 
To handle femtocell collision/confusion events, authors 
in [12] combine the radio scanning and random methods. 
The former method helps a newly introduced FAP to identify 
neighboring PCIs that are in the second phase omitted when 
randomly choosing a PCI. In the femtocell scenarios, 
researchers mainly focus on how to distribute PCIs among 
different type of cells. For example in [13], authors discuss 
how to split the PCI range among different FAP access 
types, i.e., open, closed and hybrid. The sharing of PCIs 
between macro base station and FAPs are discussed in [14], 
where an automatic PCI allocation method is modified 
according to the PCI utilization and the scale of base 
stations. New dynamic reservation schemes are introduced in 
[15]. The authors present several reserving types and each 
type corresponds to a different femtocell PCI pool. The 
transition among the types depends on the number of 
deployed FAPs, or the number of occurring PCI confusion 
events. However, in all previously mention works, the 
number of considered femtocells is relatively low, the 
number FAP remains below 503 femtocells (one PCI is 
dedicated to the MBS).  
To the best of our knowledge, a research work regarding 
the macrocell-femtocell collision/confusion issue in the 
dense FAP environment has not been carried out. To 
illustrate the problem, let’s consider a simple scenario where 
we randomly distribute femtocells within a macrocell; the 
standard uniform distribution is used to generate FAP 
positions. An example of FAP distribution in a macrocell is 
illustrated in Fig. 2. In this scenario, we would like to just 
demonstrate the problem of high number of femtocells per 
macrocell; femtocell related issues such as cell interferences, 
attenuation of signals, etc. are not taken into account. 
Figure 2.  Example of FAPs placment in macrocell. 
Fig. 3 shows number of femtocells per macrocell for 
different macrocell radius (denoted as Rm in the figure) and 
parameter k that is given as: 
macro
N
i
femto
i
S
S
k 

                              (1) 
where SMacro denotes the macrocell surface, Si
Femto is surface 
of i-th femtocell, and N is number of femtocells per 
macrocell. In this analysis, we consider femtocells to be 
circles with radius (Rf), which is same for all femtocells. 
Thus, the equation (1) can be simplified and rewritten as:  
N r2
k


                                 (2) 
where r represents ratio Rf / Rm. For k = 1, the sum of all 
femtocell surfaces theoretically entirely fulfilled the 
macrocell surface, i.e., femtocells do not overlap. However, 
femtocells can and do overlap and therefore the macrocell 
surface is not entirely fulfilled by femtocells for k = 1. Fig. 4, 
subsequently, shows number of femtocells per macrocell for 
different femtocell radius. Results illustrate that for certain 
combinations of Rf and Rm, we can rather quickly begin 
missing PCI (the LTE max. value of PCI is indicated in both 
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
-100
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
 Y - coordinates
 X - coordinates
218
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 3.  Number of femtocells for various macrocell radius (Rm), Rf = 5m. 
Figure 4.  Number of femtocell for various femtocell radius (Rf), 
Rm = 564m. 
figures by vertical black lines). For example, already in case 
of about 35% of macrocell surface is covered by femtocells 
(Fig. 4, Rf =14m), we run out of unique PCIs.  
In [16], two deployment models are considered for the 
femtocell environment: i) suburban model, and ii) dense-
urban model. In case of the dense-urban model, there are 
assumed 6928 households per km2. Thus, if we consider 
1km2 macrocell and 10% FAP penetration (that gives 693 
households equipped with FAPs), we would need to repeat 
190 PCIs within the given macrocell.   
The previous analysis shows that even if the PCIs are 
ideally distributed and there are no collision/confusions at 
the femtocell level, we start to have macrocell-femtocell 
confusions since PCIs has to be repeated in the given area.  
 
III. 
FAP CUSTER CONCEPT 
As discussed in the previous section, even in case of ideal 
PCI assignment as the number of FAPs in the given 
macrocell exceeds 503, the PCIs have to be inevitably 
repeated and confusion events at the macrocell-femtocell 
level takes place. To deal with this issue, we propose: a) 
increasing PCI range, and b) introducing FAP clusters. The 
FAP cluster concept can be described as follows. 
A superior macrocell (or microcell) is divided into 
several smaller logical regions, called FAP clusters, where a 
FAP cluster is formed by set of neighboring FAPs. A FAP is 
part of a FAP cluster if the FAP can hear (detect) at least one 
FAP of the cluster, i.e., a FAP cluster contains at least two 
FAPs. Thus, a macrocell is composed of at least one (see 
next), or several FAP clusters (see Fig 5).  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  FAP cluster concept. 
Each cluster within a macrocell is assigned a unique FAP 
cluster identifier, called as ClId. Within a FAP cluster, a FAP 
is assigned, if possible, collision/confusion free PCI, denoted 
as PCIcl. Notice that any kind of PCIs assignment methods 
can be used here to avoid collision/confusion events. The 
same PCIcl can be subsequently repeated in other FAP 
clusters (see for example PCIcl = 1 in Fig. 5). The suggested 
PCI structure can be illustrated in Fig. 6.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Enhanced PCI structure. 
All isolated FAPs, i.e., a FAP that cannot detect any 
other FAP in its vicinity, form a FAP cluster called isolated 
FAP cluster (see for example PCIcl = 2, or 6 in Fig. 5). 
Therefore, there is always at least one FAP cluster within a 
macrocell. In the next, we abbreviate the isolated femto 
access point as FAPis and the isolated FAP cluster as 
FAPISCL. The FAPISCL is assigned a predefined, default, value 
of ClId that is known by all MBSs and FAPs in the network, 
e.g., ClId = 0.  
Based on the FAP density evolution, the number of FAP 
clusters can vary in time and from macrocell to macrocell. A 
MBS knows the current number of FAP clusters in its 
macrocell and informs all FAPs under its coverage about the 
ClId values. To do that, MBS/FAP broadcast channels, or 
femtocell backhaul can be employed to distribute this 
information. Notice that if there are only FAPsis in the 
macrocell, the ClId value does not have to be distributed as 
219
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

the ClId is known, which reduces signaling overhead in the 
network. In other words, the today’s way of PCIs 
assignment, without the FAP cluster concept, can be seen as 
if ClId = 0. Thus, the FAP cluster approach can be gradually 
introduced in todays’ networks.     
When introducing a new FAP (FAPnew), the following 
three scenarios can occur; the scenarios and steps are 
summarized in the flow chart in Fig. 7: 
a) Joining an isolated cluster . Not detecting any FAP, 
the FAPnew selects the predefinied value of ClId for the 
FAPISCL. This scenario will mainly occuer in the initial 
phase of FAPs deployment when the number of FAPs 
within a macrocell is small. As stated above, this scenario 
can be also seen as today’s approach without the FAP 
clusters.   
 
 
Figure 7.  Steps when introducing a new FAP within a macrocell. 
b) Joining an existing cluster. Detecting only non-
FAPsis belonging to one, or more FAP clusters, the FAPnew 
selects and joins a cluster in which detects the highest 
number of FAPs. This solution enables keeping FAP 
clusters compact otherwise clusters would become mixed 
with each other.  
c) Creating a new cluster. Detecting one, or more 
FAPs belonging to one, or more FAP clusters, the FAPnew 
selects and joins a cluster (including the FAPISCL) in which 
detects the highest number of FAPs. If the joined cluster 
coresponds to FAPISCL, the FAPnew initiate creation of a new 
FAP cluster that will be composed of all detected FAPis 
(they update their ClId). Thus, the number of FAPISCL is kept 
as low as possible within the macrocell. The FAP cluster 
creation is done with the network/MBS assitance and results 
in updating of ClId value that is spread out in the macrocell. 
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF FAP CLUSTER IDENTIFIER 
To implement the FAP cluster concept in the present 
LTE/LTE-A mobile networks, there can be considered three 
approaches denoted as: a) sub-identifier, b) new identifier, 
and c) alternate transmissions. 
A. Sub-identifier 
The simplest and easiest way to implement the FAP 
cluster identifier, ClId, is to dedicate from the existing PCIs 
range certain PCIs to the FAP cluster identifiers. This is a 
similar approach like propositions in [13-15] where authors 
suggest splitting PCIs range among different type of cells 
(MBSs/FAPs, open/closed/hybrid). However, the small 
number of PCIs still remains a limiting factor, i.e., the 
confusion events at macrocell level remain. Therefore, this 
solution is only reasonable in a case of relatively low density 
femtocell environment where the PCI range reduction can be 
accepted.  
B. New identifier 
In this case, the ClId is considered to be a new 
independent part of the present PCI structure (see Fig. 6).  
The LTE radio frame, 10ms long, is divided into 10 sub-
frames of 1 ms duration. Each sub-frame is further split in 
two 0.5ms slots. A slot contains seven, resp. six, OFDM 
symbols in case of normal cyclic prefix, resp. extended 
cyclic prefix. In LTE-FDD mode, the PSS is embedded in 
the last OFDM symbol and the SSS in the second last 
OFDM symbol, of the sub-frame 0 and 5 in each radio frame 
[5]. The PCI is obtained by decoding PSS in the first phase 
(which represents one of three possible cell identities) and 
then decoding the SSS (which represents one of 168 cell-
group-identities). 
In the frequency domain, 6 Resource Blocks (RB) around 
the DC subcarrier are reserved for transmission of the 
synchronization signals; an RB is formed by 12 subcarriers 
with a subcarrier spacing of 15 kHz.  
Both synchronization signals, PSS and SSS, are based on 
Zadoff–Chu (ZC) sequences [5]. Since the PSS uses only 62 
of the 72 reserved subcarriers (6RBs x 180 kHz), the 
required length of ZC is 63 (62 subcarriers and 1 un-used DC 
subcarrier, which is punctured). Thus, the ZC sequence is 
padded with five zeros at the edges. The same sequence is 
repeated in both PSS symbols.  
Similar to the PSS, the SSS has 62 non-zero elements ZC 
sequence. The 62 elements are an interleaved concatenation 
of two length-31 sequences, each taking 31 different values. 
Contrary to the PSS, the SSS sequence in sub-frame 0 and 5 
are different from each other. 
The FAP cluster identifier can be implemented by 
extending the PSS and SSS signals and called Extended 
Synchronization Signals (ESS), as it is proposed in [17]. 
220
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Within the ESS proposal, the authors propose replacing the 
padding zeros by additional information elements. These 20 
zero-elements can be used for different purposes, in our case 
for implementing the FAP cluster identifier (ClId). In 
comparisons with the solution A (sub-identifier), this 
implementation solution makes possible to increase and 
flexibly adapt PCIs range based on evolution of FAP density 
in a macrocell. For example, allowing 8 FAP clusters would 
extend the PCI range up to 4031 (theoretically) non-
confusion FAPs.  
C. Alternate transmissions 
The third way of implementing FAP clusters could be 
either periodically scrambling the PSS with a ClId specific 
scrambling sequence, or periodically alternate transmissions 
of PSS and ClId in the sub-frame 0 and 5. The switching 
period between PSS and ClId would have to be sufficiently 
long to allow a FAP/terminal to correctly decode the PSS. In 
the first step a FAP/terminal would decode the PSS and in 
the second step the cluster identifier. A drawback of this 
solution represents the extra time the FAP/terminal needs to 
decode the PSS and ClId.     
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we discuss an approach of assigning 
physical cell identifier to FAPs in highly dense femtocell 
environment. We show that in such scenario even if the PCIs 
are ideally distributed among FAPs and there are no 
collisions/confusions from the point of view of femtocells, 
once the number of FAPs under a macrocell exceeds the PCI 
range, the PCIs need to be repeated and we begin to have 
confusion events at macrocell-femtocell level.      
To deal with this problem, we propose a part of 
increasing number of PCI to divide a macrocell into smaller 
logical regions, that we denote FAP clusters, and to enhance 
the current PCI structure about the cluster identifier. Based 
on the FAP density evolution in the macrocell, the number of 
FAP clusters can be progressively adjusted. Finally, three 
possible implementation approaches of the FAP cluster 
identifier within todays’ LTE/LTE-A mobile networks are 
outlined and discussed.   
The main aim of this paper has been to describe the 
principle of the proposed FAP cluster concept and its 
possible implementation and deployment in LTE/LTE-A 
mobile networks. In the next step, we plan to evaluate 
performance of the clustering method via simulation by 
taking into account different scenarios and parameter 
settings. In addition to that, we also intend to investigate 
more 
sophisticated 
methods 
that 
would 
take 
into 
consideration several aspects before deciding, which FAP 
cluster the newly introduced  FAP should join; e.g., positions 
of detected FAPs, number of FAP clusters in the macrocell, 
or number of FAPs in the macrocell.  
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research work was supported by the Grant Agency 
of the Czech Technical University in Prague, grant no. 
SGS13/199/OHK3/3T/13. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Qualcomm, "The 1000x mobile data challenge” Oct. 2012. 
[2] Informa telecoms & media, “Satellite backhaul for rural small 
cells”, 2012. 
[3] A. Golaup, M. Mustapha, and L. B. Patanapongpibul, 
“Femtocell access control strategy in UMTS and LTE” IEEE 
Communication Magazine, Sep. 2009, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 117–
123, doi. 10.1109/MCOM.2009.5277464  
[4] 3GPP TS 36.211, “Physical Channels and Modulation”,  Dec. 
2012. 
[5] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Skold, “4G LTE/LTE-
Advanced for Mobile Broadband”, Academic Press, 2011. 
[6] 3GPP TS 36.902, “Self-configuring and self-optimizing 
network (SON) use cases and solutions”, Mar. 2011. 
[7] Institut 
National 
de 
la 
Statistique 
et 
des 
Etudes 
Economiques, “Commune: Paris (75056) – Theme : Evolution 
et structure de la population “, 2009. 
[8] 3GPP R3-080812, “Solution(s) to the 36.902s Automated 
Configuration of Physical Cell Identity Use Case”. Mar. 2008. 
[9] Y. Liu, W. Li, H. Zhang, and W. Lu, “Graph based automatic 
centralized PCI assignment in LTE. 2010 IEEE Symposium 
on Computers and Communications (ISCC), Jun. 2010, pp. 
919-921, doi:10.1109/ISCC.2010.5546812.  
[10] T. Bandh, G. Carle, and H. Sanneck, “Graph Coloring Based 
Physical-Cell-ID Assignment for LTE Networks,” ACM 
International Conference on Wireless Communications and 
Mobile Computing (IWCMC), Jun. 2009, pp 116-120, doi: 
10.1145/1582379.1582406. 
[11] F. Ahmed, O. Tirkkonen, M. Peltomäki, J-M. Koljonen, C-H. 
Yu, and M. Alava, “Distributed Graph Coloring for Self-
Organization in LTE Networks,” Journal of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering, vol. 2010, Article ID 402831, 10 
pages, 2010. doi:10.1155/2010/402831. 
[12] Y. Liu, W. Li, H. Zhang, and L. Yu, “Distributed PCI 
assignment in LTE based on consultation mechanism”, 2010 
6th International Conference on Wireless Communications 
Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM), Sep. 2010, 
doi:  10.1109/WICOM.2010.5601210. 
[13] 3GPP R1-082762, “LS reply on CSG cell identification”, 
2008.  
[14] T. Wu, L. Rui, A. Xiong, and S. Guo, “An Automation PCI 
Allocation Method for eNodeB and Home eNodeB Cell”, 
2010 
6th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Wireless 
Communications 
Networking 
and 
Mobile 
Computing 
(WiCOM), Sep. 2010, doi:  10.1109/WICOM.2010.5600764. 
[15] P. Lee, J. Jeong, N. Saxena, and J. Shin, “Dynamic 
Reservation Scheme of Physical Cell Identity for 3GPP LTE 
Femtocell Systems”, Journal of Information Processing 
Systems, 
Dec 
2009, 
s, 
Vol.5, 
No.4, 
pp 
207-220, 
10.3745/JIPS.2009.5.4.207. 
[16] Femto 
Forum, 
“Interference 
management 
in 
UMTS 
femtocells”, 2008. 
[17] A. H. Zahran, “Extended Synchronization Signals for 
eliminating PCI confusion in heterogeneous LTE”, Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), Apr. 
2012, pp. 2588-2592, doi: 10.1109/WCNC.2012.6214236. 
 
221
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

