A New Bio-Crypto System Approach to Enhance Security 
 of 4G Mobile Networks 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— This research paper examines the vulnerable 
security elements that MAC management messages in 
WiMAX initial network entry faces. The paper proposes 
an innovative hybrid approach to resolve such 
vulnerability 
problem 
and 
establish 
secret 
communication channels via insecure domains. The 
proposed protocol is based on Bio-crypto systems and to 
improve current security level of authentication and Key 
Exchange between the Subscriber Station SS and the 
Base Station BS. AES-BDK system is defined as the 
integration of Advanced Encryption Standard and 
Biometric Digital Key. Within this integration, AES is 
used for the encryption process for initial ranging 
Request/Response messages RNG_REQ/RSP, while BDK 
generates the secret key. 
 
Keywords- initial ranging; MAC Management Messages; key 
exchange; key genertion; bio-crypto systems. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Computer security experienced a significant and grew 
rapidly over the past few years. Worldwide Interoperability 
for Microwave Access (WiMAX) based on IEEE 802.16e-
2005 for Mobile WiMAX [1]. Bolsters a large number of 
enhanced security features compared to the fixed IEEE 
802.16-2004 [2]. based on security schemes. The initial 
network entry is the most critical process in WiMAX 
networks as it is the foremost step to establish network 
connection while carrying multiple parameters such as 
performance factors and security context between the Base 
Station (BS) and the Subscriber Station (SS) determined in 
the middle of this process. However, security schemes are 
utilized and applied only to normal data traffic after the 
initial network entry process, but not to control messages 
during the initial network entry. BS and SS communication 
in the initial network entry is susceptible to forgery. As a 
result, there can be various security vulnerabilities 
especially unauthenticated messages and unencrypted 
management 
communication 
that 
uncover 
important 
management data. As a consequence, no common key to 
generate message digest is the source of difficulty to 
authenticate these types of messages. According to literature 
survey, little pertinent papers discuss the security issues of 
messages in this process whilst most of these messages are 
very short [3]. Thus, it is an area worthy of interest.  Due to 
this fact, a tradeoff between security and effectiveness is 
being considered in this paper through a new approach of 
enhancing MAC management message security during 
network entry initialization. The proposed scheme is 
applicable to Point to – Multi- Point (PMP), while it could be 
scalable to multiple zones depending on the security 
channels between different Trusted Third Parties (TTP). 
The paper proposes a hybrid protocol relying on Bio-
crypto system. The biometric-crypto system is a combination 
of biometrics and cryptography and is considered a very 
promising technique [3]. Bio-cryptography is an emerging 
technology that inherits the advantages of both and provides 
strong means of protection against attacks targeting MAC 
Management 
messages: 
Ranging 
Request/Response 
(RNG_REQ/RSP) messages. 
The objective of biometric data is to provide privacy, 
cryptographically- secure authentication of human users, and 
non-repudiation by using biometric template of fingerprint. 
Fingerprint minutiae matrix is produced to generate the 
Biometric Digital Key (BDK). To guarantee the security of 
the key, the proposed protocol adds a new message to the 
standard control message. BS uses stored biometric 
templates in the Trusted Third Party (TTP) to fulfill the 
authentication key exchange protocol banking on biometric 
system to authenticate user messages. The produced key is 
used in Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) to encrypt 
user messages. Bio-Crypto system establishes a secure 
channel between SS and BS and vice versa.  
The remaining of this paper is structured along these lines: 
Section II describes the initialization of WiMAX network in 
accordance with amendment IEEE 802.16e, while Section III 
shows cases of the security vulnerabilities of MAC 
management messages. Section IV discusses the previous 
work. Section V introduces the projected approach, while 
Section VI shows the experimental results. Finally, Section 
VII concludes this paper. 
Saeed Ashry 
Abdulatif Elkouny 
Hesham Elbadawy 
Salwa Elramly 
Ahmed ElSherbini 
ITIDA 
Ain Shames University 
NTI 
Ain Shames University 
ITU 
Cairo, Egypt 
Cairo, Egypt 
Cairo, Egypt 
Cairo, Egypt 
Geneva, Switzerland 
sashry@itida.gov.eg 
aelkouny@gmail.com 
heshamelbadawy@ieee.org 
sramlye@netscape.net 
sherbini@mcit.gov.eg 
222
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

II. 
 NETWORK ENTRY INITIALIZATION 
When a SS initializes some synchronization, parameter 
adjustments take place to establish a robust and well-fitted 
link between SS and BS. The performed initial tasks, when a 
SS turns on in the network, include, but not limited to, 
channel acquirement, PHY (Physical Layer) synchronization, 
channel descriptors identification and interpretation. After 
PHY synchronization, MAC (Medium Access Control 
Layer) can detect and identify MAC management messages 
such as DCD (Downlink Channel Descriptors), UCD 
(Uplink Channel Descriptors), DL-MAP (Downlink Map) 
and UL-MAP (Uplink Map). MAC management messages 
determine the contention slots to initial ranging on the UL 
sub-frame. These messages are transmitted by BS on the first 
available DL burst. Different SS and BS messages are 
exchanged to stabilize signal power, frequency and time 
offset [4].  
The initial ranging adjusts transmission until an adequate 
profile is achieved for the link, including synchronization 
issues.  After network entry, when SS is already transmitting 
data, takes place, the periodic ranging, which guarantees that 
transmission, will react to channel changes as well as 
maintain link quality. Periodic ranging exchanges MAC-
PDU (Packet Data Unit) messages between BS and SS, 
while initial ranging uses both contention slots on the UL 
sub-frame and MAC-PDU messages. The SS will transmit a 
ranging request message (RNG-REQ) in one of the initial 
ranging slots. If collision occurs, the SS uses a truncated 
exponential back-off. This message is described in [1]. The 
BS could receive or not the RNG-REQ. If the SS doesn’t 
receive an answer from BS, it retransmits the RNG-REQ 
message after a timeout. If the BS successfully received the 
RNG-REQ, it would return a RNGRSP message using the 
initial ranging CID (Connection Identification) [5]. A 
ranging response message (RNG-RSP) is sent in one of the 
available DL bursts containing the CIDs of the Basic and 
Primary connections to this SS. The RNG-RSP could contain 
power, frequency and time corrections to the SS. This 
message is described in [1].  
III. 
SECURITY VULNERABILITIES OF MAC MANAGEMENT 
MESSAGES 
With a reference to IEEE 802.16-e amendment, the 
security schemes are only applied to standard data traffic 
after the initial network entry process not to control 
messages during the initial network entry. The initial 
network entry is considered the main process in Mobile 
WiMAX network. It is the first gateway to set up a 
connection to Mobile WiMAX. Consequently, numerous 
physical parameters, factors of performance, and security 
contexts between SS and BS are set during the process. In 
Figure 1 the initial network entry in normal process is 
illustrated. 
A. RNG_REQ/RSP vulnerabilities 
This section studies vulnerabilities contained by 
RNG_REQ/RSP in the initial network process. The ranging  
Request (RNG_REQ) message is transmitted by an SS 
requesting and seeking a network join. The message 
integrates the SS's existence meanwhile acts as a request for 
transmission timing, power, frequency and burst profile 
information. The BS responds to the SS request using a 
Ranging Response (RNG_RSP) message. This message is 
composed of important information, such as ranging status, 
time adjusts information and power adjusts information. 
Nonetheless, the RNG_RSP message is neither encrypted 
nor authenticated, it holds no definite status. An attacker 
would manipulate such a leak and execute an attack using 
DoS because SS's action could be conducted by any validly 
formatted RNG/RSP that addresses to it [6][7].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Normal Initial Network Entry Procedure. 
B. Rouge BS 
Other distinguished attacks on wireless networks include 
man-in-the-middle (MITM) attack, namely, Rouge BS. The 
attacker could intercept messages during the process of 
communication establishment or a public key exchange. The 
attacker then retransmits them, counterfeiting the contained 
information in the messages, so that the two original parties 
still seem to be contacting with each other [8].  
IV. 
PREVIOUS SOLUTIONS 
This work is inspired from a number of preceding works 
concerning key exchange during initial network entry. Some 
messages in the initial network entry inject some 
vulnerability such as RNG-REQ/RSP. T. Shon ‘et al.’ [9]. 
Introduces a solution to secure these messages counting on 
the Diffie-Hellman (DH) key agreement. De facto, it can 
secure the message during initial network entry process and 
boost the security grade; however it is still liable to man-in-
the-middle attack. T. Han ‘et al.’ [10]. proposed an 
alternation to DH key agreement protocol to fit into mobile 
WiMAX relying on the presumption that every MS 
possesses its own International Subscriber Station Identity 
(ISSI) from which the MS could generate its Temporary ISSI 
223
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

(TSSI) and the authors postulate that the legitimate BS has 
the hash value H (TSSI). Then they launch their protocol 
which is based on five steps to avert the former attack. T. 
Shon ‘et al.’ [10]. has a concern on the previous solution, as 
it could cause additional overhead when distributing initial 
DH random number. The perspective of this paper contrives 
that this solution does not clarify the source of private and 
public key (p&q) calculations, in addition to time limitation 
for p&q calculation. Furthermore, they have to disseminate 
TSSI to the entire neighbor BS. Hence, there is no security 
for ISSI. M. Rahman ‘et al.’ [11]. utilizes DH key agreement 
so as to secure the initial network entry and encrypt the 
initial management communication. Their adjustment on the 
DH is carried out to dismiss man-in-the-middle breach by 
employing cryptographic sealing function. T. Shon ‘et al.’ 
[9]. are debating over this approach explicating it as obscure 
and providing no clear vision of how the random number is 
generated and distributed to others to use DH scheme. 
Consequently, those authors suggested a modernistic altered 
DH scheme [11]. The schema can be performed using hash 
authentication as well as one of the ranging codes as a prime 
number seed. Furthermore, it uses hash authentication when 
SS singles out one of ranging codes RCi which consists of 
A1 and A2, then transmits only part of RCi (A1 or A2) and 
hash value of RCi. When BS receives a segment of RCi (A1) 
and the hashed value H (RCi), BS obtains A2 from ranging 
code pool using A1, then authenticates MS throughout 
received hash value verification [12]. Therefore, they could 
produce a prime number “p” from the chosen ranging code. 
In a subsequent phase, SS generates the other global 
variables “g” and public/private key pair then sends them to 
BS. If the received key and variables are verified, BS sends 
its public key to MS. Thence, BS and SS commence sharing 
DH global variables and public key with each other at the 
hand of initial network entry ranging process. It is unclear 
whether the protocol steps could counteract the bogus BS 
from sending RCi or not. 
V. 
PROPOSED PROTOCOL  
This paper suggests an approach of securing the 
RNG_REQ/RSP messages. The model is composed of SS, 
BS, and TTP server to manage the authentication and key 
exchange between SS and BS. The protocol assumes that the 
channel between BS and Trusted Third Party (TTP) is 
secured, as illustrated in Figure 2. The protocol uses 
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) as the most popular 
algorithm used in symmetric key cryptography with a 
combination of Biometric data (e.g fingerprint, iris, etc.) to 
generate the BDK. 
A. Setting up a SS User Device 
The SS user firstly captures its biometric data, then 
registers itself to the TTP, and asks the system make its 
biometric template (i.e., fingerprint minutiae matrix), which 
will be stored on both SS device and TTP server. 
 
 
 
B. Biometric Template Protection  
The TTP saves biometric template of SS’s secured. 
Biometric data is stored on protected storage. The 
confidentiality of biometric template can be assured by 
implementing permutation module using obscure scheme. 
Firstly, TTP generates fake minutiae set and inserts it to the 
user’s biometric template. Secondly, for hiding private key, 
polynomial for real minutiae set and polynomial for fake 
minutiae set are established. Finally, the protected biometric 
template is made by combining these results. It consists of 
minutiae’s (location, angle, result) value set [13]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Proposed secure initial network entry using AES-BDK 
C. Biometric Key Generation  
The protocol proposed Biometric Digital Key with 
uniqueness, randomness property that cannot be falsified. 
The SS holds a stored biometric template on its device 
[13][14]. (i.e., fingerprint minutiae). The fingerprint minutiae 
matrix acted as the seed data in Secure Hash Algorithm 
(SHA). The seed data length is selected considering the 
length of key lengths of 128 bits, 256 bits, and 512 bits. Then 
SS starts to generate the initial BDK. The initial BDK is 
formed based on minutiae points. For extracting minutia 
points from fingerprint preprocessing phases should done, 
Image enhancement, Binarize, ridge ending and ridge 
bifurcation. Figure 3 clarifies key generation from minutiae. 
Further to strengthen the security of the key and to 
randomize the BDK between SS and BS, the seed data will 
be based on Data and Time. 
D. Encryption and Decryption phases  
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) is used in this 
protocol as a block cipher which is the most popular 
algorithm used in symmetric key cryptography; see Figure 4 
that clarifies encryption and decryption process using BDK. 
As AES supports key sizes of 128 bits, 256 bits, and recently 
224
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

512 bits. Security increases with the larger key sizes as well 
as the number of rounds (10, 12, and 14, respectively). 
Therefore, the complexity of AES encryption and decryption 
also grows. The proposed protocol is evaluated with the 
different key lengths. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Key Generation from Minutiea Feature. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Encrypt and Decrypt using BDK. 
E. Protocol Steps 
The following steps describe the proposed protocol: 
 
SS starts sending a new message including Data and 
Time encrypted by the initial BDK to the BS Enc 
{Data, Time} + BSID + SSID. 
 
BS receives the Enc message, and then delivers it to 
TTP.  
 
TTP starts searching on its Database by SSID, if TTP 
verifies that it is a real SS, and then the TTP 
retrieves the stored biometric template of SS starting 
to generate the SS initial BDK, and Dec the 
message.  
 
TTP pass the SS initial BDK, the Data and Time to 
the BS. 
 
BS sends the hash value of SS (Data and Time) 
 H (D, T) , as a challenge message to the SS.  
 
SS starts sending the Enc {RNG_REQ} to the BS 
using the new BDK. 
 
SS starts sending the Enc {RNG_REQ} to the BS 
using the new BDK. 
 
BS starts Dec (RNG_REQ). 
 
BS sends the Enc (RNG_RSP) to the SS. 
 
SS starts Dec (RNG_RSP). 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
A prototype implementation of MAC frame structure has 
been developed. PC specifications are CPU Intel Core 2 
Duo CPU 2GHZ, RAM 4GB, O/S Windows 7 SP2.  
The physical layer of model system uses Orthogonal 
Frequency Division Multiplex (OFDM) with basic OFDM 
parameters and with 20 MHz bandwidth TDD mode while 
the frame length is set to 10 ms, modulation code QPSK [4]. 
The scenario frame is illustrated in Figure 5. The illustrated 
protocol, in the previous section, deployed MATLAB script 
for AES encryption, decryption phases, and key generation 
phase conjointly with Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA), to 
produce various key lengths.   
CASIA fingerprint database version 5[16]. is used to 
produce biometric data. To extract biometric templates, 
1000 fingerprint samples were taken from this database. The 
average total time of reading fingerprint image and 
enhancement process is 3.7 sec. The average time process of 
generating the BDK is 0.0003808 sec. The consuming time 
of encryption and decryption processes for the proposed 
protocol is presented in Table 1 in msec. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of  MAC frame structure scenario. 
This performance comparison is made in terms of time 
consumed for encryption and decryption of AES-128 bits, 
AES-256 bits and AES-512 bits. The model employed 
measures time at the start of encryption process and its end 
time while the same process is repeated for decryption. The 
evaluation results show that due to the increase in the key 
length used in AES-512 bits, and consequently, the number 
of rounds for both encryption and decryption boosts.  
 
 
 
225
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

But, the encryption and decryption procedures become 
more complex thereby degrading the speed of the 512 bit 
AES algorithm. Figures 6 and 7 show the consumed time of 
Encrypted/Decrypted REG_REQ and RNG_RSP messages 
using various key lengths, respectively.  
 
TABLE I.  
ENCRYPTION/DECRYPTION TIME  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Time of  Encrypt/Decrypt RNG_REQ with different key 
lengths. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
Figure 7.  Time of  Encrypt/Decrypt RNG_RSP with different key lengths. 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The contributions of this paper are meant to enhance a 
security of PMP initial network entry. This paper proposed a 
new authentication key exchange protocol that enables SS 
and BS exchange parameters securely. The generated BDK 
from fingerprint minutiae is utilized to encipher data 
messages thereafter more securely derived and produced. 
Consequently, this key is not liable to be cracked easily 
[17]. The approach compared AES-256 bits and AES-512 
bits in terms of time taken for encryption and decryption. 
Thus there is a tradeoff between speed and security. The 
proposed approach substantially considers the items of 
privacy, authentication and non-repudiation, to reduce the 
probability of some threats such as eavesdropping, MITM 
attacks. 
In the future, further efforts will be focused to find the 
solution for Mesh network to guarantee the security of the 
network entry. As the PKI authentication uses ECC and is 
an area worth of more research and analysis, a Mesh 
Biometric Certificate X.509 V.3 with ECC is an important 
component of the network security system.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to express my gratitude to Yasser Hashem 
for the useful comments, remarks and engagement through 
the learning process of this research paper. Also, I like to 
thank AbdelRahman El-Mawawi for his great efforts in 
proof reading and reviewing this research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
IEEE 802.16e-2005, ‘IEEE standard for local and Metropolitan Area 
Networks-part 16; Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access 
Systems”, IEEE press, 2005. 
[2] 
IEEE 802.16-2004, ‘IEEE standard for local and Metropolitan Area 
Networks-part 16; Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access 
Systems” , IEEE press, 2004. 
[3] 
P. Stavroulakis and M. Stamp, Handbook of Information and 
Communication Security., Ch.7, BioCryptography, pp. 129-157, 
Springer,2010.   
[4] 
C. Hoymann. “Analysis and performance evaluation of the OFDM-
based metropolitan area network IEEE 802.16”, pp.. 341-363, June 
2005. 
[5] 
H. Hernadnes, F. Quinelato, and A. Alberti. “A Simplified Simulation 
Model for Initial Ranging in IEEE 802.16d WirelessMAN-OFDM”, 
[Online] 
Available:  
http://www.iiis.org/CDs2010/CD2010SCI/CCCT_2010/Abstract.asp?
myurl=TB807EH.pdf /06.2013 
[6] 
T.Shon and W.Choi, “An Analysis of Mobile WiMAX Security: 
Vulnerabilities and Solutions”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
vol. 4658, Augest 2007, pp. 88-97. 
[7] 
T. Nguyen.  “A Survey of WiMAX Security Threats”, Aug. 2009. 
[Online] 
Available: 
http://www1.cse.wustl.edu/~jain/cse57109/ftp/wimax2.pdf /05.2013. 
[8] 
P. Rengaraju, C. Lung, Yi Qu, and A. Srinivasan, ”Analysis on 
Mobile WiMAX Security”, IEEE TIC-STH, Information Assurance 
in Security and Privacy, Toronto, Ontario: Canada, Sept. 2009, pp. 
27-29. 
[9] 
T.Han, N.Zhang, K.Liu, B.Tang and Y.Liu, “Analysis of Mobile 
WiMAX Security: Vulnerabilities and Solutions”, Proc. of 5th int. 
Conf. on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Syst., Germany, Aug. 2008, 
pp.828-833.  
[10] A. Deininger, S. Kiyomoto, J. Kurihara, and T. Tanaka.“ Security 
Vulnerabilities and Solutions in Mobile WiMAX”, International 
Journal of Computer Science and Network Security (IJCSNS), Vol. 7, 
No. 11, Novemeber, 2007. 
[11] M. Rahman, Mir Md. S. Kowsar, "WiMAX Security Analysis and 
Enhancement", proc. of 12th Int. Conf. on Comput. and Inform. Tech 
(ICCIT), 
Dhaka, 
Dec.2009, 
pp. 
679 
– 
684, 
doi:10.1109/ICCIT.2009.5407321. 
[12] T. Shon, B. Koo, J. Park, and H. Chang, “Novel Approach to Enhance 
Mobile WiMAX”, EURASIP J. on Wireless Communication and 
Networking, Republic of Korea, 2010, pp.1-11. 
[13] Y. Chung and K. Moon, “Biometric Certificate Based Biometric 
Digital Key Generation with Protection Mechanism”, IEEE comput. 
Enc  
(RNG_REQ) 
Dec 
(RNG_REQ) 
Enc 
(RNG_RSP) 
Dec 
(RNG_RSP)
AES-
128 
3.23 
3.5575 
5.1414 
6.491 
AES-
256 
3.4005 
3.8486 
5.3823 
6.8198 
AES-
512 
4.05 
4.4035 
5.9293 
7.3486 
 
226
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Soc. Frontiers in the Convergence of Biometric and Inform. 
Technologies, 
Jeju 
City,2007, 
pp. 
709-714. 
doi:10.1109/FBIT.2007.151.  
[14] P. Arul and. A. Shanmugam “Generate a Key for AES using 
Biometric for VOIP Network Security”, Journal of Theoretical and 
Applied Information Technology, Vo.5,No.2,2005, pp. 107- 112. 
[15] H. Lee and T. Kwon “Biometric Digital Key Mechanisms for 
Telebiometric Authentication Based on Biometric Certificate”, pp. 
428-437, 2007. 
[16] “Biometrics Ideal Test” from 
http://iris.idealtest.org/findTotalDbByMode.do?mode=Fingerprint/6.2
013
 
[17]  J. Kim, S. Hong, and B. Preneel “Related-key rectangle attacks on 
reduced AES-192 and AES-256,” In FSE'07, volume 4593 of LNCS, 
Springer, 2007, pp. 225-241. 
 
227
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

