Channel Estimation and Equalization Algorithm for OFDM-Based Underwater
Acoustic Communications Systems
Mhd Tahssin Altabbaa
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Kadir Has University
34083, Istanbul, Turkey
Email: tahsin.altabbaa@khas.edu.tr
Erdal Panayirci
Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Kadir Has University
34083, Istanbul, Turkey
Email: eepanay@khas.edu.tr
Abstract—This paper is concerned with a challenging problem
of channel estimation and equalization for orthogonal frequency
division multiplexing (OFDM) systems in underwater acoustic
(UWA) communications in the presence of Rician fading. The
ambient noise is modeled as a correlated Gaussain noise. We
combine the matching pursuit (MP), for the Doppler shift and
the channel path delays estimation, along with the maximum
a posteriori (MAP) estimation for the channel path gains and
call the resulting algorithm MP-MAP algorithm. As a prior
distribution for the sparse complex-valued channel gains, we
choose a Rician distribution with unknown means and variances.
They are in turn estimated by the maximum likelihood technique.
After the channel equalization, detection of data is implemented
at the receiver. Computer simulations show that the UWA channel
is estimated very effectively and the proposed algorithm exhibits
excellent symbol error rate and channel estimation performance.
Keywords–Underwater acoustic communications; channel esti-
mation; equalization; detection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Due to the importance of underwater acoustic (UWA)
wireless communications, numerous proposals that deal with
the impairments experienced in such environment have re-
ceived quite an attention, especially in the last ten years.
Several underwater applications such as natural disasters pre-
dictors, coastal radars, incoming near-ﬁeld tsunami waves, and
volcanic activity require underwater wireless communication,
where acoustic signals are recognized as the best candidate
for such implementations [1] [2]. However, UWA commu-
nication systems face several challenges such as low speed,
long propagation delay, multipath and fading, and time de-
pendent Doppler effects. Deployment of orthogonal frequency
division multiplexing (OFDM)-based communication systems
for underwater wireless communication is considered to be
promising due to its robustness against large multipath spreads
[3] [4].
Different related studies on UWA communications have
been proposed. Many related studies over different UWA
disciplines such as channel and Doppler estimation and noise
mitigation algorithms are investigated upon realistic and syn-
thetic data. In [5], the authors model the delay spread of an
UWA channel. The proposed study shows a better channel
impulse response (CIR) modeling when out-of-plane scattering
and reverberation are taken into account. The authors of
[6] proposed an algorithm where the receiver can detect the
impulsive noise positions using the signal amplitude in the
time domain, and the impulsive noise and the Doppler shift
estimation are based on the null subcarriers of the OFDM
symbol. A channel estimation for relay-based UWA systems
is investigated in [7]. The authors considered a sparse CIR
and a non-Gaussian channel gains in their channel model.
The expectation-maximization (EM) along with the matching
pursuit (MP) algorithms were employed for the Doppler shift
and the delay estimation. In [8], the authors adopted super-
position coding with OFDM for downlink communication in
the presence of multiple stations (sensors). Based on statistical
representation of each underwater station’s channel state infor-
mation (CSI), a resource allocation mechanism is proposed that
obtains the transmitting power of each subcarrier for each user.
An adaptive channel estimator based on least squares (LS) and
recursive least-squares (RLS) is proposed in [9]. The results
show a promising bit error rate (BER) performance and the
average mean square error (MSE) can be obtained better than
the linear minimum mean square error (LMMSE) or the LS.
The authors of [10] investigated different modulation, channel
estimation, and channel equalization techniques for OFDM-
based and pilot-assisted UWA systems. They assumed in their
simulations a channel that follows a Rayleigh distribution.
Their results show that QPSK, DPSK, and 16QAM are the
most suitable modulation schemes for UWA applications. The
authors of [11] proposed a low computational complexity
channel estimation algorithm based on fast block-Fourier trans-
form (FFT) and orthogonal matching pursuit (OMP) in the
presence of large pilot spacing. In [12], the authors proposed an
OMP-based algorithm for channel coefﬁcients estimation with
no prior CSI knowledge in the presence of doubly selective
channel.
In this paper, we assume a single-transmit and single-
receive antennas and a parametric channel model that obeys
a Rician distribution, where the CSI is known at the receiver.
We model the ambient UWA noise as a correlated Gaussian
noise whose correlation function ﬁts well for realistic UWA
channels. We then employ the MP algorithm on the oversam-
pled version of the received signal for the estimation of the
Doppler shift and the channel path delays of the UWA channel.
Finally, we use the maximum a posteriori (MAP) technique
to estimate the complex-valued sparse channel gains and the
maximum likelihood (ML) technique to estimate the unknown
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

mean and variance parameters of the Rician distributed UWA
channel.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The
underwater channel model is presented in Section II. In Section
III, the system model of the proposed OFDM-based UWA
communication system is described. The iterative channel es-
timation algorithm along with the initialization techniques and
data detection are described in Section IV. The performance of
the proposed approach along with the simulation parameters
are investigated in Section V. Finally, conclusions and future
work are presented in Section VI.
II.
CHANNEL MODEL
In this paper, we consider a sparse multipath channel model
parametrized by a time-varying path delays denoted by τp, p =
0, 1, · · · , L − 1. The time variations of the path delays can be
approximated by a Doppler shift as τp(t) = τp − ζpt [13]
[6]. Note that, the Doppler effect experienced at the receiver
can be different at each path in underwater environments [14].
However, [15] states that the dominant Doppler shift arose
in such environments is due to the motion of the platforms.
Consequently, in our paper we assume a constant Doppler shift,
that is, ζp(t) ≡ ζ. In addition, we assume the channel path
amplitudes do not change over one OFDM symbol duration on
each path and vary independently from symbol to symbol, that
is, hp(t) ≈ hp. Consequently, the sparse time-varying UWA
channel impulse responses (CIRs) with the channel gains can
be characterized by
h(t, τ) =
L−1
X
p=0
hp δ(τ − (τp − ζt)).
(1)
The channel taps at the receiver depend on the underwater
environmental conditions as well as the sea state where each
channel tap can be assumed to obey a different distribution. In
our work, the proposed channel path gains hp follow a Rician
fading, and the channel taps are then considered to be complex
Gaussian random variables with nonzero means. Deﬁne mean
µp and variance σ2
p as the independent real and imaginary
parts of the taps such that, Ωp = E{|hp|2} = 2µ2
p + 2σ2
p
is the power proﬁle of the proposed channel that follows a
Rician fading, where PL−1
p=0 Ωp = 1. However, we consider
the Rician κ-factor for the pth tap as the ratio of the power of
the mean component to the power in the diffuse component,
that is, κp = µ2
p/σ2
p. Consequently, each channel tap can be
expressed as [16]
hp =
s
κpΩp
κp + 1
1 + j
√
2

+
s
Ωp
κp + 1
˜hp
(2)
where ˜hp is denoted as a complex Gaussian random variable
with zero mean and unit variance. However, a Rayleigh dis-
tributed channel model can be considered in (2) when κ = 0.
In addition, we assume that the CIRs remain constant over a
period of one block transmission and vary independently from
block to block.
III.
SYSTEM MODEL
In this work, we consider a direct communication link
in an UWA framework where OFDM scheme is chosen for
its robustness against long multipath spread experienced in
underwater environments, where the derivations and the equa-
tions hold only one OFDM symbol at a time. We assume the
proposed OFDM symbol is equipped with N subcarriers; K
equally spaced subcarriers are modulated by data symbol d[k]
along the system bandwidth B, where k represents the sub-
carrier index of the OFDM symbol, and no data is transmitted
over the remaining N − K subacarriers.
After applying a N-point inverse fast Fourier transform
(IFFT) of the data sequence, a sufﬁcient guard interval (cyclic
preﬁx) of duration Tg is added. Consequently, the equivalent
passband continuous time-domain received signal y(t)
=
s(t) ⊗ h(t, τ) + v(t) can be expressed as
y(t) =
√
2Re
 L−1
X
p=0
hp ej2πfcζtS

ej2πfct

+ v(t),
(3)
where S = s

S(f) =
f0ˆσ2
0
π(f 2 + f 2
0 ) ,
(8)
where ˆσ2
0 is the noise variance, f0 is chosen as a model pa-
rameter of the colored noise autocorrelation function (f0Ts =
0.01, 0.05, 0.1, etc.), and Rv(t, t′) = ˆσ2
0 e−2π|t−t′|f0Ts is de-
ﬁned as the autocorrelation function of the ambient noise.
It can be seen easily from (8) that the noise samples in
VRS are complex-valued and correlated Gaussian distributed
random variables with zero-means. Hence, the autocorrelation
function can be expressed as,
RvRS[m] = Rv

B. ML Estimation of the Parameters {µp, σ2
p}
In order to obtain the ML estimation of the variance σ2
and the mean µ vectors of h, we use the observation model
obtained by MP in (14). Consequently, the mean coefﬁcient
can be expressed by

We consider a comb-type pilot structure with equally
spaced pilot subcarriers in each OFDM block in order to assess
the channel estimator and equalize the channel rapid changes
per block. The mean-square error (MSE) and symbol error
rate (SER) performance are presented as a function of SNR
in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. The curves show a comparison
in performance of the proposed model with the classical MP
channel estimation technique in the presence of quadrature
phase shift-keying (QPSK) and 16-ary quadrature amplitude
modulation (16QAM) signaling formats.
SNR (dB)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Average MSE
10 -4
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
MP algorithm (QPSK )
MP-MAP algorithm (QPSK )
MP algorithm (16QAM)
MP-MAP algorithm (16QAM)
Figure 1. MSE vs. SNR performance comparisons of the MP-MAP and MP
algorithms for different constellations: ϱ = 8, ϑmax = 10−3
As seen from these two ﬁgures, the MP-MAP algorithm
yields better channel MSE and SER performance and outper-
forms the MP estimator in the presence of higher SNR, where
the MP curves shown use the linear MMSE equalizer to detect
the data symbols.
SNR (dB)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Symbol Error Rate (SER)
10 -4
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
MP algorithm (QPSK )
MP-MAP algorithm (QPSK )
MP algorithm (16QAM)
MP-MAP algorithm (16QAM)
Figure 2. SER vs. SNR performance comparisons of the MP-MAP and MP
algorithms for different constellations: ϱ = 8, ϑmax = 10−3
Figs. 3 and 4 investigate the residual Doppler effect on
the MSE and SER performance of the system as a function
of SNR, respectively. It can be seen from these two ﬁgures
that the performance of the channel estimator degrades with
larger residual Doppler effect, whereas the curves of the
proposed approach show better robustness compared to the MP
algorithm alone against the Doppler shifts up to ϑmax = 10−3,
which can be considered as a severe Doppler effect.
SNR (dB)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Average MSE
10 -4
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
MP algorithm max =10 -2
MP-MAP algorithm max =10 -2
MP algorithm max =5x10 -3
MP-MAP algorithm max =5x10 -3
MP algorithm max =10 -3
MP-MAP algorithm max =10 -3
Figure 3. MSE vs. SNR performance of the MP-MAP algorithm for
different Doppler shift rates, ϱ = 8, QPSK Signaling
SNR (dB)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Symbol Error Rate (SER)
10 -4
10 -3
10 -2
10 -1
10 0
MP algorithm max =10 -2
MP-MAP algorithm max =10 -2
MP algorithm max =5x10 -3
MP-MAP algorithm max =5x10 -3
MP algorithm max =10 -3
MP-MAP algorithm max =10 -3
Figure 4. SER vs. SNR performance of the MP-MAP algorithm for different
Doppler shift rates, ϱ = 8, QPSK Signaling
Note that, the value chosen for the oversampling factor
assesses the underwater receiver with a ﬁrm Doppler shift
and delay estimation and consequently a better MSE and SER
performance.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, an efﬁcient channel estimation algorithm is
proposed, named MP-MAP algorithm, for OFDM-based UWA
systems in the presence of an UWA Rician channel with a
correlated Gaussain noise. The channel delays and the Doppler
shift are estimated by the matching pursuit algorithm, where
the unknown parameters of the complex-valued channel gains
are estimated by the maximum a posteriori algorithm. On the
other hand, the variances and the means of the prior pdf of the
channel gains are obtained by a ML estimation algorithm. The
performance of the proposed approach is presented by means
of the minimum mean square estimation of the estimated chan-
nel and the symbol error rate for different signaling formats
and Doppler shifts. Based on the extensive computer simula-
tions performed, it was concluded that the resulting MP-MAP
channel estimation algorithm yields excellent MSE and SER
performances as compared to the conventional approaches. For
future work, the OFDM UWA communication system can be
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

generalized into MIMO-OFDM-based UWA communication
system, and the proposed approach can be extended into an
experimental channel model, taking into consideration a real
underwater environment and parameters.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported in part by Suasis as a
sub-contract of the Turkish Scientiﬁc and Research Council
(TUBITAK) under Grant 1140029.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Bahrami, N. H. H. Khamis, and A. B. Baharom, “Study of underwater
channel estimation based on different node placement in shallow water,”
IEEE Sensors J., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1095-1102, Feb. 2016.
[2]
B. Crosby, A. Rosenberger, and B. Pirenne, “The web-enabled awareness
research network (WARN) project,” in Proc. OCEANS 2015 - MTS/IEEE
Washington, pp. 1-10, 2015
[3]
E. V. Zorita and M. Stojanovic, “Space-frequency block coding for
underwater acoustic communications,” IEEE J. Ocean. Eng., vol. 40, no.
2, pp. 303-314, Apr. 2015.
[4]
S. Akada, S. Yoshizawa, H. Tanimoto, and T. Saito, “Experimental
evaluation of data selective rake reception for underwater acoustic
communication,” in Proc. 2015 International Symposium on Intelligent
Signal Processing and Communication Systems, pp. 514-519, Nov. 2015.
[5]
T. Jenserud and S. Ivansson, “Measurements and modeling of effects
of out-of-plane reverberation on the power delay proﬁle for underwater
acoustic channels,” IEEE J. Ocean. Eng., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 807-821,
Oct. 2015.
[6]
X. Kuai, H. Sun, S. Zhou, and E. Cheng, “Impulsive noise mitigation in
underwater acoustic OFDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol.
65, no. 10, pp. 8190-8202, Oct. 2016.
[7]
E. Panayirci, H. Senol, M. Uysal, and V. Poor, “Sparse channel estimation
and equalization for OFDM-based underwater cooperative systems with
amplify-and-forward relaying,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 64, no.
1, pp. 214-228, Sept. 2016.
[8]
L. Ma, S. Zhou, G. Qiao, S. Liu, and F. Zhou, “Superposition coding
for downlink underwater acoustic OFDM,” IEEE J. Ocean. Eng., vol. 42,
no. 1, pp. 175-187, Jan. 2017.
[9]
X. Shi and Y. Yang, “Adaptive sparse channel estimation based on RLS
for underwater acoustic OFDM systems,” in Proc. Sixth International
Conference on Instrumentation and Measurement, Computer, Communi-
cation and Control, pp. 266-269, 2016.
[10]
M. G. R. Kumar and M. Sarvagya, “Review on enhanced data rate
receiver design using efﬁcient modulation techniques for underwater
acoustic communication,” in Proc. 2016 International Conference on
Advanced Communication Control and Computing Technologies, pp.
313-317, 2016.
[11]
F. yu, D. Li, Q. Guo, Z. Wang, and W. Xiang, “Block-FFT based OMP
for compressed channel estimation in underwater acoustic communica-
tions,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1937-1940, Nov. 2015.
[12]
B. Peng, P. S. Rossi, H. Dong, and K. Kansanen, “Time-domain over-
sampled OFDM communication in doubly-selective underwater acoustic
channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1081-1084, Jun.
2015.
[13]
S. Beygi and U. Mitra, “Multi-scale multi-lag channel estimation using
low rank approximation for OFDM,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol.
63, no. 18, pp. 4744-4755, Sept. 2015.
[14]
S. F. Mason, C. R. Berger, S. Zhou, and P. Willett, “Detection, syn-
chronization, and doppler scale estimation with multicarrier waveforms
in underwater acoustic communication,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun.,
vol. 26, no. 9, pp. 1638-1649, Dec. 2008.
[15]
Y. Chen, L. Zou, A. Zhao, and J. Yin, “Null subcarriers based Doppler
scale estimation for multicarrier communication over underwater acoustic
non-uniform Doppler shift channels,” in Proc. 2016 IEEE/OES China
Ocean Acoustics, pp. 1-6, Jan. 2016.
[16]
H. Nouri, M. Uysal and E. Panayirci, “Information theoretical per-
formance analysis and optimisation of cooperative underwater acoustic
communication systems,” in IET Communications, vol. 10, no. 7, pp.
812-823, 5 5 2016.
[17]
L. Zhang, J. Han, J. Huang, and M. Brandt-Pearce, “OFDM transmis-
sion over time-varying channel with self interference cancellation,” in
Proc. IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing, Communica-
tions and Computing, pp. 743-746, 2014.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

