Modeling and Simulation of Radio Signals Attenuation Using Informed Virtual
Geographic Environments (IVGE)
Mehdi Mekni
University of Minnesota
Crookston, Minnesota, United States
mmekni@umn.edu
Abstract—A radio communication system is a complex dy-
namic phenomenon where transmitter and receiver antennas
are constantly constrained by the physical environment in
which they are deployed. In the real world, radio transmissions
are subject to propagation effects which deeply affect the
received signals because of geographic and environmental
characteristics (foliage and vegetation, buildings, mountains
and hills, etc.). Multi-Agent Geo-Simulation aims to simulate
such phenomena involving a large number of autonomous
situated actors (implemented as software agents) evolving and
interacting within a representation of the physical environ-
ment. Using a geo-computation approach, we propose to use
an Informed Virtual Geographic Environment (IVGE) along
with MAGS paradigm. In addition, we propose a multi-agent
prototype to analyze the attenuation effect due to the radio
signal’s traversal between antennas (simulated as software
agents) through terrain shape, vegetation area, and buildings
using a 3D line-of-sight computation technique.
Keywords-Line of Sight; Excess attenuation; Vegetation and
Foliage; Radio Propagation; Informed Virtual Geographic Envi-
ronments
I. INTRODUCTION
Rapid advances in wireless communications have made
mobile data applications a high-growth area of development.
So far, most applications only focus on geographic data
collection and access using geographic information systems.
However, many emergency management applications need
such geographic data in order to ensure that ﬁeld workers
and command center operators collaborate under acceptable
operating conditions. Under emergency conditions, emer-
gency systems need to quickly establish an ad hoc, ground-
level network of radio stations mounted on temporary com-
mand centers, vehicles, or temporary masts, interacting with
moving ﬁeld operators using mobile devices.
Radio Frequency (RF) communication does have some
limitations that must be considered. The maximum line-of-
sight range between two shoulder-height devices is limited
to 12km considering the curvature of the earth but not
considering refraction of radio waves. The actual range may
be considerably less depending on transmission power and
receiver sensitivity, and the radio signal can be attenuated or
degraded due to obstruction resulting from its interactions
with features on its transmission path. In an urban envi-
ronment, possible obstructions include buildings, trees, and
bridges (Figure 1). The difﬁculty of evaluating an ad hoc
radio network with hundreds of nodes and various levels
of mobility operating in a complex geographic environment
(i.e., rugged terrain, dense foliage, buildings, etc.) motivated
us to use our IVGE model to analyze communication atten-
uation. In order to analyze the communication attenuation
in real geographic environments, we propose to use the
Multi-Agent Geo-Simulation (MAGS) approach involving
an enriched description of the geographic environment rep-
resentation to precisely compute the radio transmission’s
attenuation. The radio transmission is computed using the
line of sight between two points located in the IVGE.
During the last decade, the Multi-Agent Geo-Simulation
(MAGS) approach has attracted a growing interest from
researchers and practitioners to simulate phenomena in
a variety of domains including trafﬁc simulation, crowd
simulation, urban dynamics, and changes of land use and
cover, to name a few [1]. Such approaches are used to
study phenomena (i.e., car trafﬁc, mobile robots, mobile
networks, crowd behaviours, etc.) involving a large number
of simulated actors (implemented as software agents) of
various kinds evolving in, and interacting with, an explicit
description of the geographic environment called Virtual Ge-
ographic Environment (VGE). Nevertheless, simulating such
autonomous situated agents remains a particularly difﬁcult
issue, because it involves several different research domains:
geographic environment modeling, spatial cognition and
reasoning, situation-based behaviours, etc. When examining
situated agents in a VGE, whether for gaming or simulations
purposes, one of the ﬁrst questions that must be answered
is how to represent the world in which agents navigate.
Since a geographic environment may be complex and large-
scale, the creation of a VGE is difﬁcult and needs large
quantities of geometrical data describing the environment
characteristics (terrain elevation, location of objects and
agents, etc.) as well as semantic information that quali-
ﬁes space (building, road, park, etc.). Current approaches
usually consider the environment as a monolithic structure,
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Radio signal propagation: (a) an obstruction-free propagation; (b) propagation obstructed by vegetation and foliage;
and (c) propagation obstructed by buildings.
which considerably limits the way that large-scale, real
world geographic environments and agent’s spatial reasoning
capabilities are handled.
In this project, our goal is to analyze the radio commu-
nication attenuation in complex, dynamic and large-scale
geographic environments. In order to achieve such a goal,
a geographic environment model should precisely represent
geographic features. It should also integrate several semantic
notions characterizing these geographic features. Since we
deal with large-scale geographic environments, it would be
appreciable to have a VGE organized efﬁciently in order
to reduce the spatial computation algorithms such as line-
of-sight algorithms. There is also a need for autonomous
situated agents representing antennas, either transmitters or
receivers which are able to communicate using radio signal
propagation in presence of both static and dynamic obstacles
located in the VGE. Static obstacles correspond to areas that
affect radio signal propagation such as walls, fences, trees,
rivers, etc. Static obstacles also include obstructions result-
ing from terrain elevation (mountains, hills, etc.). Dynamic
obstacles correspond to moving or stationary antennas which
may interfere with the radio communication system.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach to model
and simulate radio communication networks using multi-
agent systems evolving in and interacting with a virtual
geographic environments. The rest of the paper is organized
as follows: in Section II, we provide a brief overview on
related work in the ﬁeld of environment representation and
analysis of radio communications. Section III presents our
methodology for the creation of informed virtual geographic
environments. Section IV highlights the unique properties
of our IVGE model which easily and efﬁciently enable
spatial reasoning algorithms and geometrical computations
such as line-of-sight computation. Section V details the radio
communication analysis tool. Finally, Section VI concludes
and presents our perspectives.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section we provide a brief overview of prior works
related to environment representation, and analysis of radio
communications in virtual environments.
A. Environment Representation
Virtual environments and spatial representations have
been used in several application domains. For example,
Thalmann et al. proposed a virtual scene for virtual hu-
mans representing a part of a city for graphic animation
purposes [2]. Donikian et al. proposed a modelling system
which is able to produce a multi-level data-base of virtual
urban environments devoted to driving simulations [3]. More
recently, Shao et al. proposed a virtual environment rep-
resenting the New York City’s Pennsylvania Train Station
populated by autonomous virtual pedestrians in order to
simulate the movement of people [4]. However, since the
focus of these approaches is computer animation and virtual
reality, the virtual environment usually plays the role of
a simple background scene in which agents mainly deal
with geometric characteristics. Indeed, the description of
the virtual environment is often limited to the geometric
level, though it should also contain topological and semantic
information for other types of applications. Therefore, most
interactions between agents and the environment are usually
simple, only permitting to plan a path in a 2D or 3D world
with respect to free space and obstacle regions.
B. Analysis of Radio Communications
Jiancheng et al. proposed a prediction of mobile radio
propagation by regression analysis of signal measurements,
investigated path loss characteristics of mobile radio signals
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

in urban and rural areas [5]. The results were used to
evaluate the accuracy of Okumura-Hata and Lee prediction
models [6]. In his perspectives on the effects of harmattan
on radio frequency waves, Dajab computed harmattan dust
particle densities in air and observed that attenuation due to
dust particles increases as harmattan intensity increases [6].
Eyo et al. researched into microwave signal attenuation
in harmattan weather along Calabar-Akampkpa terrestrial
line of sight microwave link [7]. Using measured results in
conjunction with some meteorological data they were able
to deduce the mean signal level, fog attenuation, fade depth
and fade margin of the link.
Most works achieved towards on radio propagation mod-
eling and simulation do not consider the geographic environ-
ments in which the communication system is located (See
Figure 2 for an illustration of a typical radio communication
system). Signal specialists currently have limited capabilities
for predicting radio performance in complex geographic
environments that may involve jammers and may have
combinations of open terrain and obstructed locations [8].
Foliated areas, buildings, or terrain may cause obstructions
to the radio line-of-sight path [9]. Therefore, there is a
need for a communication analysis tool that helps ﬁll this
void [10]. We propose to use geo-computation techniques
in order to build a tool for the analysis of radio com-
munications attenuation involving a geometrically-accurate
and semantically-informed virtual geographic environment
model. This tool is an easy to use, stand-alone, GUI-based
application that runs on a PC and provides a rich set of
functionalities to aid the user to compute the total path loss
of a given operational scenario that is directly coupled to an
operational area using reliable GIS data.
This tool enables the user to plan radio deployments and
determine link connectivity using actual radio parameters,
taking into account the presence of obstacles, while ac-
counting for the excess attenuation due to terrain, foliage
(vegetation), and building obstructions. To compute the total
path loss, our tool uses the following parameters: height
of transmitter antenna (meters), height of receive antenna
(meters), transmitter antenna position (x, y, z), receiver
antenna position (x, y, z), and frequency of operation (GHz).
III. COMPUTATION OF IVGE DATA
In this section, we present our automated approach to
compute the IVGE data directly from vector GIS data.
This approach is based on four stages which are detailed
in this section (Figure 3): input data selection, spatial
decomposition, maps uniﬁcation, and ﬁnally the generation
of the informed topologic graph.
GIS Input Data Selection: The ﬁrst step of our ap-
proach consists of selecting the different vector data sets
Figure 2: Typical Radio Communication System
Figure 3: The four stages to obtain an IVGE from
GIS data. All the stages are automatic but the ﬁrst.
which are used to build the IVGE. The only restriction
concerning these data sets is that they must respect the same
scale. The input data can be organized into two categories.
First, elevation layers contain geographical marks indicating
absolute terrain elevations. As we consider 2.5D IVGE, a
given coordinate cannot have two different elevations, mak-
ing it impossible to represent tunnels for example. Multiple
elevation layers can be speciﬁed, and if this limitation is
respected, the model can merge them automatically. Second,
semantic layers are used to qualify various types of data
in space. Each layer indicates the physical or virtual limits
of a given set of features with identical semantics in the
geographic environment, such as roads or buildings. The
limits can overlap between two layers, and our model is
able to merge the information.
Spatial Decomposition: The second step consists of
obtaining an exact spatial decomposition of the input data
into cells. This process is entirely automatic using Delaunay
triangulation, and can be divided into two parts in relation
to the previous phase. First, an elevation map is computed,
corresponding to the triangulation of the elevation layers.
All the elevation points of the layers are injected into
a 2D triangulation, the elevation being considered as an
attribute of each node. This process produces an environ-
ment subdivision composed of connected triangles. Such a
subdivision provides information about coplanar areas: the
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

elevation of any point inside a triangle can be deduced
by using the elevation of the three original data points to
form a plane. Second, a merged semantics map is computed,
corresponding to a constrained triangulation of the semantic
layers. Indeed, each segment of a semantic layer is injected
as a constraint which keeps track of the original semantic
data by using an additional attribute for each semantic
layer. The obtained map is then a constrained triangulation
merging all input semantics. Each constraint represents as
many semantics as the number of input layers containing it.
Merging Elevation and Semantics Layers: The third
step to obtain our IVGE consists of unifying the two maps
previously obtained. This phase can be depicted as mapping
the 2D merged semantic map onto the 2.5D elevation map
in order to obtain the ﬁnal 2.5D elevated merged semantics
map. First, preprocessing is carried out on the merged
semantics map in order to preserve the elevation precision
inside the uniﬁed map. Indeed, all the points of the elevation
map are injected into the merged semantics triangulation,
creating new triangles. This ﬁrst process can be dropped
if the elevation precision is not important. Then, a second
process elevates the merged semantics map. The elevation
of each merged semantics point P is computed by retrieving
the corresponding triangle T inside the elevation map, i.e.,
the triangle whose 2D projection contains the coordinates
of P. Once T is obtained, the elevation is simply computed
by projecting P on the plane deﬁned by T using the Z axis.
When P is outside the convex hull of the elevation map
then no triangle can be found and the elevation cannot be
directly deduced. In this case, we use the average height of
the points of the convex hull which are visible from P.
Informed Topologic Graph: The resulting uniﬁed map
now contains all the semantic information of the input layers,
along with the elevation information. This map can be used
as an Informed Topologic Graph (ITG), where each node
corresponds to the map’s triangles, and each arc corresponds
to the adjacency relations between these triangles. Then,
common graph algorithms can be applied to this topological
graph, and graph traversal algorithms in particular. One of
these algorithms retrieves the node, and therefore the trian-
gle, corresponding to given 2D coordinates. Once this node
is obtained, it is possible to extract the data corresponding
to the position, such as the elevation from the 2.5D triangle,
and the semantics from its additional attributes. Several other
algorithms can be applied, such as path planning or graph
abstraction, but they are out of the scope of this paper and
will not be detailed here.
IV. PROPERTIES OF INFORMED VGE
The subdivision of space into convex cells allows us
to preserve the original geometric deﬁnition of the geo-
graphic environment, unlike the grid-based representations
that discretise the environment. Furthermore, the proposed
data reorganization produces triangles that feature good
properties: convexity which facilitates the geometric cal-
culations; support of heterogeneous geometric constraints
(points, segments, polygons); Since each constraint is linked
to its nearest neighbor, it is easy to compute the widths of
the bottlenecks in the virtual geographic environments. The
width computation corresponds to the minimum of borders’
width that are not qualiﬁed as obstacle (Figure 4(a)).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4: (a) Computation of the widths of the bot-
tlenecks; (b) Computation of the ray tracing.
The subdivision of space into convex cells also allows
us to extract an informed topologic graph of the envi-
ronment featuring relatively few nodes compared to grid-
type representations. Additionally, the triangulation is not
dependent on a ﬁxed spatial scale for the environment, but
only on its complexity (number of constrained segments).
It should also be emphasized that curved geometries will
produce a lot of triangles since they are represented by
a large number of constrained segments. However, since
the produced triangulation is represented as a graph, it is
possible to abstract it in order to reduce the number of
elements. All these properties are of interest to address the
issue of line-of-sight computation.
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

A. Line of Sight’s Computation
The spatial subdivision provides a structure of convex
cells which facilitates and accelerates the calculation of
ray tracing in three dimensions. We deﬁne the radius α
using the following information: the position of the origin p;
the direction vector
→
d; and the maximum distance consid-
ered. Let Getfree(Cell) and Getconstrained(Cell) be two
functions returning respectively the list of free (Sfree) and
constrained (Sconst) borders bounding the convex cell Cell.
Let N(Cell, b) be a function returning the normal vector to
the border b which belongs to the cell Cell and directed
towards the inside of the cell. Finally, let us note ℘(β)
the 2X2 rotation matrix of
→
d. The test checking if there
is an intersection between the ray and the border b, which
links the vertices I and J, is performed using the following
expression:
(α ≤ 0) ∧ (β × γ) ≤ 0
(1)
The parameters α, β, and γ, in equation 1, are computed
as detailed in equations 2, 3 and 4.
α = ⃗d · N(Cell, b)
(2)
β = (I + J
2
− p)
(3)
γ = ℘(π
2 · (I − p)) × ((I + J
2
− p) × (π
2 · (J − p))) (4)
The line of sight computation algorithm proceeds as
follows:
• Step 1: the cell Cell containing the source of the line
of sight vector
→
LoS is determined.
• Step 2: an intersection test is performed between
→
LoS
and each border b of Cell.
• Step 3: compute Sfree(Cell) using Getfree(Cell) and
Sconst(Cell) using Getconstrained(Cell).
• Step 4: if no intersection is found with borders from
Sfree(Cell), then
→
LoS must intersect with a border
from Sconst(Cell).
• Step 5: the border b is pushed back to the list of borders
crossed by
→
LoS.
• Step 6: the cell Cell is pushed back to the list of cells
crossed by
→
LoS.
• Step 7: the cell sharing the border b which intersects
with
→
LoS becomes the current cell. Proceed to Step 2.
The line of sight algorithm, due to its low computational
cost, can be extensively used in MAGS involving a large
number of agents evolving in a complex IVGE.
V. ANALYSIS OF RADIO COMMUNICATION
Planning communications links requires the ability to
assess the performance of each link in the presence of a num-
ber of degrading factors. In addition to the normal free space
signal attenuation loss, other losses reduce the signal level.
These additional losses can be caused by obstructions such
as buildings and vegetation (foliage). Analyzing obstruction
losses can be difﬁcult because of the geometric, topologic,
and semantic characteristics of the geographic environment
and the need for path loss models.
We use a ray-tracing approach which determines the path
that a radio signal takes to arrive at the receiver’s position
from a given transmitter within our 3D IVGE. The ray-
tracer implemented in the tool uses optimized algorithms
for detecting direct (i.e., line of sight) paths (Figure 4(b)).
An analytic ray-tracing technique [11] is used rather than
the approximate technique, for example, as used in [12]. For
the analytical approach, the transmitter and receiver are each
modelled as inﬁnitesimally small points such that paths are
computed precisely and cannot be duplicated or missed as
sometimes could happen in the approximate approach. Obvi-
ously, the analytical technique is more precise and reliable.
Our approach computes the total source-to-destination path
length and then determines whether the vector deﬁned by the
source and destination points (locations in the IVGE) passes
through an obstruction area. Doing so, it is able to compute
the total path loss between transmitter and receiver antennas.
One of three cases may occur: 1) Obstruction-Free Path:
Vector does not penetrate any obstruction; 2) Obstruction
Block Penetration: Vector penetrates one or more foliage
obstruction blocks and/or one or more building obstruction
blocks; and 3) Ground Penetration: Vector penetrates the
ground (earth) once or several times.
The computations performed by our tool, to quantify the
path attenuation for each of the three cases deﬁned above,
are based on the following well-established mathematical
models described in [13].
Plane-Earth Attenuation Model: Let Lp be the path
attenuation using the plane-Earth model (dB):
Lp = 40Log(D) − 20Log(Ht) − 20Log(Hr)
(5)
where D is the total source-to-destination path length (me-
ters), and Ht and Hr are the heights of the transmitter and
receiver antennae above ground level, respectively (meters).
Free-Space Attenuation Model: Let Lfs be the path
attenuation using the Free-Space model (dB):
Lfs = 32.45 + 20Log(D) + 20Log(f)
(6)
where D is the total source-to-destination path length
(meters) and f is the RF frequency (GHz).
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Obstruction Block Penetration Model: Let LB be the
path attenuation term due to propagation through a building
obstruction block (dB) [14]:
LB = K1(0.6)f + K2DB
(7)
where f is the RF frequency (GHz), K1 is a constant used to
map the ﬁrst expression above to building penetration data
reported in [13]. K1 = 35; K2 is a constant to account for
the attenuation (per meter) of the signal within the building.
K2 = 1 (dB/m); and DB is the distance that the signal
propagates through the building (meters). The ﬁrst term in
Equation 7 accounts for the penetration into and out of the
building by the signal and was derived from data reported
in [13] using a regression analysis technique. The second
term in the equation above accounts for the attenuation
through the building and is based on data reported by
Willassen in [15].
(a)
(b)
Figure 5: Simulation of radio communications’ atten-
uation; yellow lines correspond to obstacle-free line-
of-sight radio signal propagation; red lines correspond
to obstructed line-of-sight; (1) represents the transmit-
ter antenna implemented using the agent paradigm;
(2) an example of a plane-earth obstruction; (3) an
example of a block-penetration obstruction.
Foliage obstruction Attenuation Model: If the pen-
etration is through a foliage obstruction block, the tool
computes an excess path attenuation term called Lf using
the Wiessberger model [16] as follows:
Lf = 1.33f 0.284.D0.588
f
, 14 < Df
(8)
Lf = 0.45f 0.284.D1.0
f ,
0 ≤ Df ≤ 14m
(9)
where Df is the distance that the signal propagates
through the foliage obstruction (meters) and f is the RF
frequency (GHz). The term ”excess attenuation” refers to
the additional attenuation above the basic transmission loss,
for a given path length, in the absence of foliage. Our
analysis approach applies equations 5 to 9 to calculate the
basic transmission loss for the link. Thus, the total path
attenuation for the obstruction penetration case called Ltotal
is calculated as follows:
Ltotal = max(Lp, Lfs)Deff +sum(Lf)+sum(LB) (10)
where max(Lp, Lfs)Deff means that this term is calcu-
lated at Deff; Deff is the effective path length over which
the Plane-Earth and Free-Space path attenuation model is
applied and is equal to the total path length minus the sum
of the building obstruction block path length segments or
sum(DB); sum(Lf) is the sum of the excess attenuation
terms in dB due to signal propagation through the foliage
obstruction block(s) (dB); and sum(LB) is the sum of
the path attenuation terms due to propagation through the
building obstruction block(s) (dB).
Figure 5 illustrates the agent-based simulation tool that
we developed in order to implement our approach to analyze
the radio signal attenuation in informed virtual geographic
environments. This ﬁgure presents a snapshot of the sim-
ulation at time t0 with an agent representing a transmitter
antenna and several agents representing receiver antennae.
Red lines in Figure 5(a) highlight the strength of the radio
signal attenuation with comparison to an arbitrary user-
deﬁned threshold ∆: (red) for severe signal attenuation,
(green) for acceptable signal attenuation. Moreover, Figure 6
shows how to collect the list of cells crossed by the radio
signal propagation path.
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Using reliable GIS data along with the line of sight
algorithm (ray tracing feature) provided by our IVGE allows
the system to compute the exact locations of intersections
occurring between the radio signal propagation path and the
terrain shape (Figure 5). Our IVGE also allows us to collect
the list of cells crossed by the radio signal propagation path
and to determine which analytic model to apply in order to
precisely compute the path loss.
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 6: The graphic user-interface for the computation of the radio signal line-of-sight; Cells and borders.
We have shown a tool that leverages the enriched descrip-
tion of the IVGE and computes the radio signal attenuation
due to buildings, foliage and ﬁeld obstructions. However,
other phenomena can also degrade the radio signal trans-
mission. Examples of such phenomena include transmitter
power, receiver sensitivity, and radio signal’s absorption,
reﬂection, and scattering from interaction with features on
or near its transmission path. The proposed tool should be
easily extended to take into account absorption, reﬂection
and scattering phenomena when computing the radio signal
attenuation.
In the future, we propose to extend our tool in order to in-
tegrate an advanced ray-tracing process [17] which combines
both the geometric optics and Keller’s [18] geometric theory
of diffraction (GTD). Moreover, we propose to include the
uniform theory of diffraction (UTD) [19] extension to GTD
which removes the inaccuracies close to the incident and
reﬂection boundaries.
To conclude, our geometrically-precise and semantically-
enhanced IVGE enables us to provide wireless network
planners with a tool for the analysis of the communications’
attenuation. In contrast with mathematical models which
only approximate the radio signal attenuation based on a
coarse-grained qualiﬁcation of the geographic environment:
urban, suburban and rural, we compute more precisely the
radio signal propagation path and qualify obstructions in
order to apply the appropriate analytical model.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported in part by the Grant in Aid
provided by the University of Minnesota. The author would
like to thank the reviewers for their valuable comments.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Benenson and P. Torrens, Geosimulation: Automata-Based
Modeling of Urban Phenomena.
John Wiley and Sons Inc.,
2004.
[2] N. Farenc, R. Boulic, and D. Thalmann, “An informed en-
vironment dedicated to the simulation of virtual humans in
urban context,” in Computer Graphics Forum (Eurographics
’99), P. Brunet and R. Scopigno, Eds., vol. 18(3).
The
Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishers, 1999, pp.
309–318.
215
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[3] S. Donikian and S. Paris, “Towards embodied and situated
virtual humans,” in Motion in Games, 2008, pp. 51–62.
[4] W. Shao and D. Terzopoulos, “Environmental modeling for
autonomous virtual pedestrians,” Digital Human Modeling for
Design and Engineering Symposium, 2005.
[5] S. Jiancheng, Z. Taiyi, and L. Feng, “Nonlinear prediction
of mobile-radio fading channel using recurrent least squares
support vector machines and embedding phase space,” in
International Conference on Communications, Circuits and
Systems, ICCCAS’04, vol. 1, 2004, pp. 282–286.
[6] D. D. Dajab, “Perspectives on the effects of harmattan on ra-
dio frequency waves,” Journal of Applied Sciences Research,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1014–1018, 2006.
[7] O. Eyo, A. Menkiti, and S. Udo, “Microwave signal attenu-
ation in harmattan weather along calabar-akampkpa line-of-
sight link,” Turkish Journal of Physics, vol. 27, pp. 153 –160,
2003.
[8] P. Graniero, “A spatial analysis of gps availability and ra-
dio data transmission reliability for real-time, wireless gis
updating in urban environments,” MEMF Lab, University of
Windsor, Dept. of Earth Sciences, Tech. Rep., 2004.
[9] P. Graniero and H. Miller, “Real-time, wireless ﬁeld data
acquisition for spatial data infrastructures,” in GeoTec Event
2003, Vancouver BC, Canada, March 2003.
[10] N. Savage, D. Ndzi, A. Seville, E. Vilar, and J. Austin, “Radio
wave propagation through vegetation: Factors inﬂuencing
signal attenuation,” Radio Science, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. n/a–n/a,
2003.
[11] G. Li, S. Yang, Y. Liu, and Z. Nie, “A variable step length hy-
brid approach for electromagnetic ray tracing in ionosphere,”
Electromagnetics, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 331–340, 2007.
[12] S. Seidal and T. Rappaport, “Site-speciﬁc propagation predic-
tion for wireless in-building personal communication system
design,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 43,
no. 4, pp. 879–891, 1994.
[13] G. Comparetto, J. Schwartz, N. Schult, and J. Marshall,
“A communications analysis tool set that accounts for the
attenuation due to foliage, buildings, and ground effects,” in
MILCOM 2003: Proceedings of the Military Communications
Conference, vol. 1, no. 1, Boston, MA, USA, October 2003,
pp. 1 – 5.
[14] J. Schwartz, G. Comparetto, and J. Marshall, “The communi-
cations resource planning tool,” in Military Communications
Conference, 2003. MILCOM 2003. IEEE, vol. 1, no. 1,
Boston, MA, USA, October 2003, pp. 227–230.
[15] S. Y. Willassen, “A method for implementing mobile station
location in GSM,” Master’s thesis, Norwegian University of
Techniques and Sciences, 1998.
[16] M. Weissberger, “An initial critical summary of models
for predicting the attenuation of radio waves by trees,” in
Final Report Electromagnetic Compatibility Analysis Center,
Annapolis, MD., Annapolis, Md, July 1982.
[17] R. Matschek, “A geometrical optics and uniform theory
of diffraction based ray tracing optimisation by a genetic
algorithm,” Comptes rendus de physique, vol. 6, no. 6, pp.
595–603, July 2005.
[18] J. Keller, “Geometric theory of diffraction,” Journal of the
Optical Society of America, vol. 52, pp. 162–130, 1962.
[19] R. Kouyouijian and P. .Pathak, “A uniform geometric theory
of diffraction for an edge in perfectly conducting surface,” in
IEEE, vol. 62, 1974, pp. 1448–1461.
216
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

