Delay-Aware Network Optimization in LTE Based
High-Speed Railway Wireless Networks
Ali Huseyin Rustem
Department of Electronics
and Communications Engineering
Istanbul Technical Univeristy
Istanbul, Turkey
Email: rustom@itu.edu.tr
Selcuk Cevher
Department of Computer Engineering
Karadeniz Technical University
Trabzon, Turkey
Email: cevhers@ktu.edu.tr
Hakan Ali Cirpan
Department of Electronics
and Communications Engineering
Istanbul Technical Univeristy
Istanbul, Turkey
Email: cirpanh@itu.edu.tr
Abstract—This paper presents an extended joint resource
optimization framework for multi-service transmissions in high-
speed railway (HSR) wireless networks by introducing the
average delay constraint into the dynamic resource management
problem. The system utility is maximized under the constraints of
average delay, queue stability and average power by formulating
a joint stochastic problem, which is transformed into a queue
stability problem. Using Lyapunov drift theory, the queue stabil-
ity problem is decomposed into separate convex subproblems.
Golden section search method is used to achieve a globally
optimal solution for the resource allocation subproblem. Finally, a
distributed dynamic resource management technique is proposed,
and its performance is evaluated under realistic conditions for
HSR wireless networks. Numerical simulations show that our
approach provides an improved throughput performance while
satisfying the average delay requirements.
Keywords—High-speed railway wireless networks; Delay re-
quirements.
I. INTRODUCTION
High-speed railway (HSR) has been deployed worldwide
as the dominant fast public transportation system [1][2]. HSR
infrastructure features an increasing amount of control and
multimedia transmissions to ensure the safety and efﬁciency of
the transportation, and to support the increasing demand from
passengers for the Internet services. Since GSM for railway
(GSM-R) offers limited data transmission capabilities and
inefﬁcient radio resource usage [3], alternative communication
systems should be investigated to support the increasing trafﬁc
demand. Therefore, the deployment of wideband wireless
communication technologies is an urgent need for the opera-
tion of HSR to provide reliable and robust connection with the
central control systems, and to offer seamless Internet access
for passengers. Long Term Evolution (LTE) is envisioned as
the leading candidate to replace GSM-R for the future railway
infrastructures due to its packet-switched network architecture
with high data transmission capacities and low latency [4].
In a conventional cellular network infrastructure, mobile
terminals have a direct communication with the base stations.
This type of direct communication fails in HSR environment
due to high penetration loss, severe Doppler frequency shift,
and high rate of drop calls and handovers [5]. Figure 1
shows an LTE-based HSR network architecture, which avoids
the drawbacks of the conventional HSR infrastructure by
providing a two-hop communication between the passengers
and base stations [1][5]. In this architecture, multiple access
points (APs) are placed within the train, and a relay station
(RS) with powerful antennas is mounted on top of the train.
APs provide the passengers with an indirect communication
with a high transmission rate to the RS, which in turn, directly
communicates with the LTE-compliant base stations (eNBs)
located along the rail line. The evolved packet core (EPC)
network of LTE is connected to eNBs via wired lines, and
provides a high performance communication between the train
and Internet to support the operational and multimedia trafﬁc
along the journey. EPC is composed of Mobility Manage-
ment Entity (MME), Serving Gateway (S-GW) and Packet
Data Network Gateway (PDN-GW). The increasing amount
of wireless trafﬁc in HSR [6] necessitates the development
of radio resource management (RRM) techniques to enable
the efﬁcient resource utilization [1]. However, the design
of such techniques is quite challenging due to the very
dynamic channel conditions between the fast moving train
and eNBs, and the operational and passenger services with
heterogeneous QoS requirements [7][8]. RRM techniques for
HSR wireless networks should jointly optimize the different
aspects of resource allocation, admission and power control
while observing different network constraints to maximize the
Figure 1. LTE-based HSR network infrastructure
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

system performance. This optimization should be performed in
a cross-layer manner by considering the distinctive parameters
of the physical, medium access control (MAC), and application
layers. Furthermore, it should manage the inherent trade-
offs between these layers in a comprehensive close-to-optimal
manner.
The work in [9] investigates the downlink resource allo-
cation in relay-assisted HSR communication systems. It aims
to minimize the average end-to-end delay through scheduling
actions under the service delivery ratio constraints. In [10], an
admission control scheme with the complete-sharing resource
allocation model is proposed for LTE-R system to maximize
the number of admitted services while guaranteeing their
related QoS requirements of each service class. The proposed
admission control scheme gives high priority to on-going
services and guarantees the full use of system bandwidth
resource. The work in [11] studies the utility-based resource
allocation problem in HSR wireless networks by jointly
considering the power control and packet allocation among
services. A joint optimal design of admission control and
resource allocation for multimedia service delivery in HSR
wireless networks is studied in [12]. A stochastic network
optimization problem is formulated to maximize the system
utility while stabilizing all transmission queues under the
average power constraint. Using the same approach as [12], the
work in [13] introduces average delay constraints to the multi-
service transmission problem, with a focus only on resource
allocation and power control.
In this paper, we combine the cross-layer RRM schemes in
[12] and [13] in a more general optimal framework. Thus,
we present a delay-aware optimization framework, which
jointly optimizes the resource allocation, admission and power
control in LTE-based HSR wireless networks. Our framework
extends the previous work [12] by introducing an additional
delay constraint, inspired by [13], to the dynamic network
management of HSR infrastructure, and, hence, maximizing
the throughput performance of the network while jointly
optimizing the aforementioned aspects. Speciﬁcally, we for-
mulate and investigate a cross-layer optimization problem to
jointly optimize the network resources under the constraints
of average delay, queue stability and power to maximize
the system utility. Finally, we propose a dynamic resource
management algorithm to guarantee the joint optimization
of the studied aspects, and evaluate its performance through
numerical simulations showing that our algorithm provides an
improved throughput performance while considering the delay
requirement.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
HSR network constraints are discussed. In Section III, the
stochastic optimization problem is formulated. In Section IV,
the application of the Lyapunov drift theory to solve the
optimization problem is explained. In Section V, problem
decomposition is described, and our dynamic resource man-
agement algorithm is presented. In Section VI, our numerical
results are reported. In Section VII, our paper is concluded.
II. HSR NETWORK CONSTRAINTS
In this paper, we aim at improving the throughput perfor-
mance in HSR wireless networks by dynamically optimizing
the management functions. Our optimization framework con-
siders certain constraints whose averages are evaluated over
the journey of the train. Assuming that a set K ≜ {1, 2, ..., K}
of services is supported by a slot-based HSR wireless trans-
mission network, and ¯x represents the long-term time average
expectation for any quantity x, time average constraints are
explained below:
A. Average Delay
LTE-based HSR wireless networks are envisioned to of-
fer broadband multimedia services for both passengers and
railway operators. These services may be sensitive in varying
degrees to the transmission delay so that heterogeneous delay
requirements must be taken into account when optimizing the
network resources.
Let Wk denote the average time that a packet spends in a
queue k. According to the Little’s law in queuing theory [14],
Wk = Qk λk, where Qk and λk represent the average number
of packets located in the queue (i.e. average queue backlog),
and the average arrival rate of the packets, respectively. Aver-
age delay constraint for any queue requires that Wk be upper
bounded by the maximum time W max
k
during which a packet
can stay in any queue. W max
k
depends on the type and QoS
requirements of the services. Average delay constraint for any
queue k can be expressed as:
Qk ≤ W max
k
λk,
∀k ∈ K.
(1)
B. Queue Stability
Since the LTE-based HSR infrastructure has a packet-
switched network architecture, buffering is involved at net-
working devices requiring the stability of the queues to be
taken into consideration. According to [14], a queue is strongly
stable if it has a bounded time average backlog, Qk ≤ ∞.
Intuitively, if the inequality (1) holds for any queue, it
implies the stability of the queue. Thus, the satisfaction of the
average delay constraint implies the satisfaction of the queue
stability constraint [13].
C. Average Power
In an LTE-based HSR wireless network, channel conditions
dynamically change with respect to the time-varying distance
between the eNBs and the train [6][8]. Therefore, the transmit
power P(t) should be dynamically adjusted according to this
time-varying distance to ensure a reliable communication.
However, at any time slot t during the trip, P(t) must be
limited between the maximum and average transmit powers,
namely, Pmax and Pav, respectively. The average power con-
straint can be expressed as:
P ≤ Pav.
(2)
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The throughput performance of a multi-service stochastic
network can be improved by maximizing:
X
k∈K
φk(rk),
(3)
where φk is a nondecreasing concave continuous utility func-
tion representing the throughput beneﬁt for a service k while
rk represents the average throughput. It is difﬁcult to maximize
this objective function since it requires the maximization of
individual functions of time averages [7]. Therefore, it can
be transformed into the following problem to facilitate the
maximization process:
maximize
X
k∈K
φk(γk)
(4a)
subject to
P ≤ Pav,
(4b)
Qk ≤ W max
k
λk,
∀k ∈ K,
(4c)
γk ≤ rk,
∀k ∈ K,
(4d)
where γk(t) is an auxiliary variable upper bounded by the
average throughput [12].
The dynamics of each queue Qk(t + 1), that is, the number
of packets located in a queue at time slot t+1, are controlled by
admission control action rk(t) and resource allocation action
µk(t) as follows:
Qk(t + 1) = Qk(t) − µk(t) + rk(t),
∀k ∈ K,
(5)
where rk(t) and µk(t) represents the number of newly arrived
packets to be stored into the queue and number of packets
removed from the queue for transmission, respectively. These
control actions should be jointly decided to maximize the
objective function (4a) under the time average constraints.
IV. LYAPUNOV OPTIMIZATION
In this section, similar to [12] and [13], Lyapunov opti-
mization theory is used to transform the original problem into
a queue stability problem by introducing virtual queues. Then,
Lyapunov drift is applied to jointly stabilize these queues. Our
Lyaponuv drift is different from [12] and [13] since we use a
different combination of virtual queues.
A. Queue Stability Problem Transformation
To facilitate the problem transformation and the satisfaction
of the time average constraints, the work in [12] and [13]
introduces the virtual queues Xk(t), Yk(t) and Zk(t) with the
following dynamic update equations:
Xk(t + 1) = max[Xk(t) − W max
k
λk, 0] + Qk(t + 1),
(6)
Yk(t + 1) = max[Yk(t) − Pav, 0] + P(t),
(7)
Zk(t + 1) = max[Zk(t) − rk(t), 0] + γk(t).
(8)
The stabilization of the virtual queues Xk(t), Yk(t) and
Zk(t) ensures that the respective inequalities (4c), (4b) and
(4d) hold [14].
B. Lyapunov Drift
Assuming that X(t), Y(t) and Z(t) represent the re-
spective vectors of Xk(t), Yk(t) and Zk(t), and Θ(t) ≜
[XT (t), YT (t), ZT (t)]T
denotes the combined vector, the
quadratic Lyapunov function is deﬁned as:
L(Θ(t)) ≜ 1
2
X
k∈K
(Xk(t)2 + Yk(t)2 + Zk(t)2).
(9)
The one-slot conditional Lyapunov drift ∆(Θ(t)) at time t is
given by:
∆(Θ(t)) ≜ E[L(Θ(t + 1)) − L(Θ(t))|Θ(t)].
(10)
Minimizing the drift (10) ensures that all virtual queues are
jointly stable and the desired constraints are satisﬁed.
In [12] and [13], the following inequalities are obtained by
squaring the equations (6), (7) and (8) to further simplify the
drift:
Xk(t + 1)2 − Xk(t)2 ≤ Qk(t + 1)2 + (W max
k
λk)2
+ 2Xk(t)(Qk(t + 1) − W max
k
λk),
(11)
Yk(t + 1)2 − Yk(t)2 ≤ P(t)2 + P 2
av
+ 2Yk(t)(P(t) − Pav),
(12)
Zk(t + 1)2 − Zk(t)2 ≤ γk(t)2 + rk(t)2
+ 2Zk(t)(γk(t) − rk(t)).
(13)
Replacing the inequalities (9) and (10), the following inequal-
ity is obtained:
∆(Θ(t)) ≤ 1
2D + E[G(t)|Θ(t)],
(14)
where D is a ﬁnite constant and G(t) is deﬁned to be:
G(t) ≜
X
k∈K
[Xk(t)(Qk(t) − µk(t) + rk(t) − W max
k
λk)
+ Zk(t)(γk(t) − rk(t)) + Yk(t)(P(t) − Pav)].
(15)
Minimizing the drift (10) can be facilitated by minimizing
the upper bound of inequality (14). Since D is constant, it
is sufﬁcient to minimize the expectation E[G(t)|Θ(t)], which
can be achieved by only minimizing E[G(t)] [14]. All queues
can be stabilized while maximizing the sum of the utility
functions by greedily minimizing the following ”drift-plus-
penalty” expression [12]:
E[G(t) − V
X
k∈K
φk(γk(t))],
(16)
where V is a non-negative control parameter that balances
between the maximization of the system utility and the satis-
faction of the constraints.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

V. OUR DYNAMIC RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ALGORITHM
The objective function (16) can be minimized by jointly
optimizing µk(t), rk(t), P(t) and γk(t) at each time slot
t. By isolating these control variables, the objective function
can be easily decomposed into three separated subproblems,
namely, utility maximization, admission control, and resource
allocation.
In [12], utility maximization subproblem is solved by track-
ing Zk(t) to determine the optimum γk(t), while a simple
threshold-based admission control strategy is proposed for
solving the admission control subproblem to obtain rk(t).
Since a larger µk(t) demands a larger P(t), a mixed inte-
ger programming (MIP) problem with a continuous variable
P(t) and an integer variable µk(t) is designed in [13] to
jointly optimize P(t) and µk(t). This MIP problem is then
transformed into an equivalent single variable problem, and
a static resource management algorithm, based on the golden
section search method, is proposed to solve the problem with
a guaranteed global optimality.
We propose a distributed dynamic resource management
algorithm to jointly optimize the network resources by com-
bining the solutions to utility maximization, admission control,
and resource allocation subproblems provided in [12] and [13].
Our algorithm aims at improving the system utility under
average delay, queue stability, and power constraints.
The distributed algorithm is described in Figure 2. All
system parameters and queue vectors are initialized before the
beginning of the trip. Then, during the trip, for each time
slot t and each service k, the three aforementioned subprob-
lems are solved to obtain the optimal control variables. The
auxiliary variable γk(t) is determined according to [12], while
admission control action rk(t) is decided via a threshold-based
admission control strategy by tracking Xk(t). Resource allo-
cation action µk(t) and power control action P(t) are jointly
obtained by calling Static Resource Management Algorithm
in [13]. At the end of each slot t, each queue vector k is
updated according to (5), (6), (7), and (8). This algorithm will
be repeated for all time slots, from the origin station to the
destination station.
Figure 2. Distributed Dynamic Resource Management Algorithm.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
Our algorithm for dynamic resource management is im-
plemented using MATLAB. Table I summarizes the realistic
parameters, according to [7][11][12], used in our simulations.
To perform each simulation, our algorithm is executed for
30,000 time slots during which the train moves between the
centers of two adjacent cells. In this section, we present
comparison results for our scheme and the reference model
in [12]; therefore, we use the piecewise linear utility function
for all services, namely, φk(rk) = νkmin[rk, λk], where νk
represents the service priority.
TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Parameter
Description
Value
Pav
Average power constraint
35 W
Pmax
Maximum transit power
45 W
H
System bandwidth
5 MHz
L
Packet size
240 bits
Ts
Slot duration
1 ms
α
Pathloss exponent
4
λk
Packet arrival rate
25 packet/slot
v
Constant moving speed
350 km/h
R
Cell radius
1.5 km
d0
Distance between BS and rail
50 m
K
Number of services
6
Figure 4 shows the average delay and average power con-
sumption achieved by our algorithm for different values of V .
The priority for all services is selected to be νk = 10 in this
simulation. Figure 4a shows that, in all cases, our algorithm
achieves an average delay which increases with respect to V
until it reaches a saturation point. However, as shown in the
ﬁgure, a larger W max
k
leads to a higher average delay for a
certain value of V . Since the work in [12] does not consider the
delay constraint, the average delay achieved by the reference
model keeps increasing for all values of V without reaching
a saturation point. These results indicate that our algorithm
fully satisﬁes the average delay constraints in our simulations.
On the other hand, Figure 4b demonstrates that our scheme
will cause a slightly larger average power consumption for the
small values of V compared to the reference model while still
satisfying the average power constraint.
Figure 3 presents the throughput performances of our
scheme and the reference model for varying values of V .
W max
k
is selected to be 10 in all cases for this simulation.
For the small values of V within the range [0, 15], the average
throughput for all service priorities (νk) increases with respect
to V . However, Figure 3a shows that the services of higher
priorities achieve a larger throughput performance. On the
other hand, for the larger values of V , the average throughput
achieved by the services with low priorities has a slightly
decreasing trend while continuing to increase for the services
with high priorities. The results in Figure 3a indicate that our
scheme mostly yields better throughput performance than the
reference model for the low values of V . Figure 3b shows that
the performance improvement achieved by our algorithm costs
a slight increase in the average power consumption within
the range of 5 watt. Providing better performance for the low
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

values of V is favorable since high values of V result in more
packets to be admitted into the buffers, which necessitates
larger buffer size and higher power consumption.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Average throughput and average power consumption achieved by
our algorithm for different service priorities.
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Average delay and average power consumption achieved by our
algorithm for different delay requirements.
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper presents an extended joint resource optimization
framework for admission control, power control and resource
allocation in LTE-based HSR wireless networks. Our work
introduces an average delay constraint to the formulation of
dynamic management problem of HSR wireless networks.
A joint optimization problem is designed to maximize the
system utility under the constraints of average delay, queue
stability and average power. The problem is then transformed
into a queue stability problem, which is decomposed into the
separable convex subproblems using Lyapunov drift theory.
Golden section search method is used to solve the resource
allocation subproblem, and a dynamic resource management
algorithm is proposed to achieve the joint optimization of the
network resources. Finally, we perform numerical simulations
which show that our proposed model fully satisﬁes the average
delay requirements and signiﬁcantly improves the throughput
performance of HSR wireless networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by the Scientiﬁc and
Technical Research Council of Turkey, TUBITAK, with grant
no. TEYDEB-1140093.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Xu, G. Zhu, B. Ai, and Z. Zhong, “A survey on high-speed railway
communications: A radio resource management perspective,” Computer
Communications, vol. 86, 2016, pp. 12–28.
[2] D. T. Fokum and V. S. Frost, “A survey on methods for broadband
internet access on trains,” IEEE communications surveys & tutorials,
vol. 12, no. 2, 2010, pp. 171–185.
[3] A. Sniady and J. Soler, “An overview of GSM-R technology and its
shortcomings,” in ITS Telecommunications (ITST), 2012 12th Interna-
tional Conference on. IEEE, 2012, pp. 626–629.
[4] Y. Sun, C.-Y. Lee, J.-m. Jo, J.-h. Lee, and Y.-J. Han, “Study on the
effectiveness of high-speed railway communication and signaling system
based on 4g lte technology,” in Control, Automation and Systems
(ICCAS), 2013 13th International Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp.
402–406.
[5] Y. Zhou, Z. Pan, J. Hu, J. Shi, and X. Mo, “Broadband wireless commu-
nications on high speed trains,” in Wireless and Optical Communications
Conference (WOCC), 2011 20th Annual. IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.
[6] L. Liu, et al. “Position-based modeling for wireless channel on high-
speed railway under a viaduct at 2.35 GHz,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 30, no. 4, 2012, pp. 834–845.
[7] G. Jung and K. M. Sim, “Location-aware dynamic resource allocation
model for cloud computing environment,” in International Conference
on Information and Computer Applications (ICICA), IACSIT Press,
Singapore. Citeseer, 2012
[8] R. He, Z. Zhong, B. Ai, and J. Ding, “An empirical path loss model and
fading analysis for high-speed railway viaduct scenarios,” IEEE antennas
and wireless propagation letters, vol. 10, 2011, pp. 808–812.
[9] S. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, Y. Lei, and Z. Zhong, “Delay-aware on-
line service scheduling in high-speed railway communication systems,”
Mathematical Problems in Engineering, vol. 2014, 2014.
[10] Q. Xu, X. Li, H. Ji, and L. Yao, “Radio admission control scheme for
high-speed railway scenario: An optimal accepted service number ap-
proach,” in Information and Communications Technology 2013, National
Doctoral Academic Forum on. IET, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[11] S. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, Y. Lei, and Z. Zhong, “Utility-based resource
allocation in high-speed railway wireless networks,” EURASIP Journal
on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2014, no. 1, 2014,
pp. 1–14.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[12] S. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, Y. Lei, and Z. Zhong, “Analysis and opti-
mization of resource control in high-speed railway wireless networks,”
Mathematical Problems in Engineering, vol. 2014, 2014.
[13] S. Xu, G. Zhu, C. Shen, S. Li, and Z. Zhong, “Delay-aware dynamic
resource management for high-speed railway wireless communications,”
in Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), 2016 IEEE 83rd.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–5.
[14] M. J. Neely, “Stochastic network optimization with application to
communication and queueing systems,” Synthesis Lectures on Commu-
nication Networks, vol. 3, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1–211.
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

