 
 
Maximal Ratio Combining SC-FDMA Performance over Correlated Ricean Channels 
 
Jyoti R. Gangane 
Electronics and Telecommunication Department 
Sinhgad Institute of Technology 
Lonavala, Pune (India) 
ganganejyoti@gmail.com 
Mari Carmen Aguayo-Torres, Juan J. Sánchez-Sánchez 
Departamento de Ingeniería de Comunicaciones 
University of Malaga 
Malaga (Spain) 
aguayo@ic.uma.es, jjsanch@ic.uma.es 
 
Abstract— Long Term Evolution (LTE) system has selected 
Single Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access (SC-FDMA) 
for uplink transmission. Multiple Input Multiple Output 
(MIMO) can be used in order to improve throughput, 
robustness, coverage and capacity. Although it is well known that 
the performance of SC-FDMA is worse than that of Orthogonal 
Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) for Rayleigh channels, 
the existence of a Line Of Sight (LOS) is able to increase 
SC-FDMA resistance to fading further than that of OFDM. In 
this work, the effect of antenna correlation over SC-FDMA is 
investigated for Rice and Rayleigh fading channels. Performance 
of MRC SC-FDMA is compared to that of ZF and MMSE 
equalizers for several LOS power and antenna correlation 
values. Results show that SC-FDMA coherent combination 
performance is better than that of OFDM for both Rayleigh and 
Rice channels. Influence of fading frequency correlation function 
on SC-FDMA performance is kept under MRC.  
Keywords-SC-FDMA, MRC, Rice 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Single Carrier Frequency Division Multiple Access 
(SC-FDMA) is used for the E-UTRA Long Term Evolution 
(LTE) mobile communication system. SC-FDMA, also 
referred to as Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) spread 
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDM), has 
been selected for uplink transmission for LTE [1]. The main 
important advantage of SC-FDMA compared to standard 
OFDM is its low Peak to Average Power Ratio (PAPR) [2], 
which enables low complexity implementation of mobile 
terminal.  
In general, it is accepted that SC-FDMA link level 
performance is worse than that of OFDM [3]. However, under 
certain conditions, SC-FDMA behavior improves that of 
OFDM. Specifically, the existence of a Line Of Sight (LOS) 
increases SC-FDMA resistance to fading over OFDM [4]. 
Roughly speaking, SC-FDMA BER is obtained from the 
harmonic average of the channel response at the allocated 
subcarriers. On the other hand, BER in OFDM is evaluated as 
the average of the BER for each subcarrier. Under high 
probability of deeply faded subcarriers (as in Rayleigh 
channels), SC-FDMA basically behaves as the worst 
subcarrier. However, the existence of a LOS greatly reduces 
the probability of deep fading. Without that burden, SC-FDMA 
is able to add frequency diversity to an OFDM system, thus 
reducing BER.  
In the receiver at base station, frequency domain Zero 
Forcing (ZF) or Minimum Mean-Squared Error (MMSE) linear 
equalization [5], [6] might be applied. For OFDM, both 
techniques obtain similar results [7]. However, MMSE 
SC-FDMA performance outperforms MMSE OFDM [8][9] 
due to a similar reason to that of the existence of a LOS: 
MMSE modifies the harmonic average previously described by 
including a constant for each subcarrier.  
Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) techniques [10] 
take advantage of the spatial separation between antenna 
elements to create uncorrelated spatial channels and to exploit 
higher levels of the spatial diversity. This improves spectral 
and power efficiency. MIMO techniques are very attractive at 
base station, where large antenna spacing is easily 
accommodated. On the mobile unit, however, single antenna is 
more feasible, thus Single Input Multiple Output (SIMO) 
techniques are advisable for uplink.  
Diversity combining is well known to mitigate the 
performance degradation in multipath fading. Specifically, 
Maximal Ratio Combining (MRC) represents an optimal 
combiner over fading channels: multiple copies of the same 
information signal are blended so as to maximize the 
instantaneous SNR at the output [11]. Exact closed form 
expressions of average symbol error rate (SER) can be found 
for uncorrelated [12] and correlated [13] received Rayleigh 
channels, and certain efforts for analysis under LOS reception 
can also be found [14]. In general, it is well known that 
antenna correlation degrades the system performance as less 
diversity is present at the receiver.  
MRC for received uplink SC-FDMA signals is implicitly 
assumed in many works with multiple antennas at the base 
station [15][6]. However, works regarding evaluation of MRC 
SC-FDMA link level performance for Rice channels and 
studies on the effect of antenna correlation are difficult to find.  
In this paper, BER performance of MRC SC-FDMA 
system is evaluated. The effects of antenna correlation and 
Rice factor on SC-FDMA link level performance are studied 
and compared to those over Rayleigh channel and for OFDM. 
Two distinct realistic channel models [16] are used for 
simulation, as power delay profile greatly influences 
SC-FDMA performance.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, 
we summarize the maximal ratio combining receiver diversity 
scheme. Our system model is described in Section III. In 
Section IV, we evaluate BER of MRC SC-FDMA system by 
simulating a BPSK signaling scheme. Finally, some 
concluding remarks are given. 
II. 
MAXIMAL RATIO COMBINING 
MRC is a SIMO technique allowing coherent combination 
of signals received over a set of antennas. In particular, signals 
from antenna elements are weighted and combined to 
maximize the output Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR).  
428
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
Consider a receiver diversity system with NR antennas as 
shown in Fig. 1. The channel can be expressed as 
     … 

 
(1) 
The received set of signals      … 

 is then 
  

   
(2) 
being n a vector of noise AWGN samples and x the 
transmitted symbol. Let  be the instantaneous SNR for the ith 
branch, which is given by 
γ   

|| 
(3) 
In MRC, all NR branches are combined by the following 
weighted sum: 
  !  """ … "
   # 
(4) 
Power of the instantaneous signal and noise part are 
respectively given as  
$%&'()  
  | "| 
(5) 
and 
$'%*  +#+
 
(6) 
where +,+  represents the usual Euclidean norm. From 
equation (5) and (6) the average SNR for MRC is given as  
-. !  $/&'()
$'%*
 
0 .
|# |
+#+
   
(7) 
Invoking the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality, SNR is 
maximized at 2  34 which yields 
-. !  

++
 
(8) 
Roughly, MRC process corrects the channel phase and 
blends the two received signals in the correct direction. 
Further, signals are amplitude scaled in such a way that 
stronger signals are more influent in the final value. Later, the 
amplitude scaling step makes sure that the received sequence 
has similar amplitude as the transmitted sequence. These steps 
together remove the channel effect and replace the equalizer.  
III. 
SYSTEM MODEL 
We consider Fig. 2 - Fig. 3 system model with one transmit 
and   receive antenna, i.e. a SIMO 1 6   system.  
For a given user, a sequence of transmitted bit is mapped to 
a constellation of complex symbols (e.g. BPSK, QAM). The 
precoded complex symbol X is obtained by performing N-DFT 
operation over the resulting complex sequence x. Then, X is 
mapped on a subset of different allocated subcarriers per user, 
i.e., N out of M sub-carriers in which the total system 
bandwidth is divided. The subset may consist of a group of 
adjacent localized SC-FDMA (L. SC-FDMA) or of distributed 
interleaved SC-FDMA (I. SC-FDMA) subcarriers [2]. Non-
allocated subcarriers are forced to zero. From this point 
onwards transmission is similar to that of OFDMA. 
The channel system with   diversity branches at the 
receiver can be represented by the channel vector  
   7 
(9) 
where 7  is the channel coefficient between the transmit 
antenna and the ith receive antenna. Certain correlation, 
measured through the correlation factor ρ, can exist among 
paths. Moreover, hj can be described by multiple paths, which 
arise from spreading. If there are Nj distinct paths from the 
transmitter to the receiver, the impulse response for this 
channel will be: 
   7:;, =>   ?   @A:;, => 

B

 
(10) 
where t stands for time variability and τ for delay. This is 
the well known tapped-delay line model. Path amplitudes are 
well described by Rayleigh distributed amplitudes varying 
according to a classical Doppler spread and with average 
power as given by the Power Delay Profile (PDP). Moreover, a 
Line of Sight (LOS) component can also exist between the 
transmitter and the receiver. The Rice factor K [10] measures 
the relative strength of the LOS compared to that of the whole 
varying amplitude. It is a measure of the severity of the fading, 
being K = 0 the most severe fading case (Rayleigh fading, i.e. 
no LOS), and K = ∞ the usual Additive White Gaussian Noise 
(AWGN) channel.  
At the receiver, NR different receiving chains are followed 
as shown in Fig. 3. Perfect channel estimation and 
synchronization avoid interference from other users. The cyclic 
prefix is suppressed and an M-DFT operation converts each 
time domain symbol in to a frequency-domain symbol at the 
receiver. After demapping, the received symbols at each 
antenna Yn can be expressed as 
h1
h2
x
y1
y2
y
TX
MRC
combiner
Figure 1.  Transmitter and receiver configuration for MRC 
 
Figure 2.  SC-FDMA transmitter scheme 
429
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
C'  D'E  F 
(11) 
where F is a noise vector whose entries are i.i.d. complex 
Gaussian CG (0, N0) and D  represents the N 6 N diagonal 
matrix whose entries are the channel frequency response as 
seen by antenna n for each allocated subcarrier [10].  
These NR signals are frequency combined using MRC:  
C  
∑
C D
4
IJ
KL
 
∑
IJ |D|M
KL
 
(12) 
After taking IDFT of Y, signal is given to detector. The 
output of detector is the estimated input bit sequence.  
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this section, simulation results are given in order to 
evaluate BER performance for MRC SC-FDMA. LTE settings 
are fixed to those in Table I. Channel profiles described in 
Table II are adopted from ITU-R_M.1225 specs [16] with an 
added direct LOS with Rice factor K. Following figures give 
the BER performance of MRC SC-FDMA for two receiving 
antenna with different antenna correlation ρ, number of 
allocated subcarrier N and Rice factor K. Results are given for 
Vehicular B (VB) and Pedestrian A (PA) channels. For 
comparison, ZF or MMSE frequency equalized single antenna 
detection [9] are also included in figures, as well as several 
results for OFDM.  
Figs. 4 and 5 show BER of MRC without antenna 
correlation over VB channel for Localized and Interleaved 
SC-FDMA, respectively. As it is known, in ZF single antenna 
reception, OFDMA determines the lower bound for SC-
FDMA, while in MMSE. SC-FDMA results are better. It is 
shown that under MRC, SC-FDMA results are also better than 
those of OFDM. Improvement for MRC Localized SC-FDMA 
is slightly higher than that of Interleaved SC-FDMA. 
The effect of channel correlation among antenna can be 
inspected in Fig. 6. Results for Interleaved SC-FDMA over 
channel were as expected: the more antenna correlation, the 
more errors at detection. However, performance under Rice 
fading correlation is less affected by correlation value as direct 
path affect both antenna anyway. Due to the same reason, 
specific frequency correlation function influences less 
SC-FDMA performance under a LOS [9]. However, Fig. 7 
shows that VB channel results are better than those of PA 
channel for MRC Localized SC-FDMA.  
Fig. 8 gives results equivalent to those of Figs. 6 and 7 but 
for OFDM. Note that no effect due to PA or VB channel model 
or localized/interleaved mode exists in OFDM. Effect of 
correlation factor is more noticeable than in SC-FDMA. 
Expected 3dB gain for Rayleigh coherent MRC combination 
(ρ = 1) can be found. 
In Fig. 9, results for VB and PA channels are given for two 
different numbers of allocated subcarriers in Localized and 
Interleaved SC-FDMA. Over VB channel, improvement is 
better for a higher number of subcarriers as the probability of at 
least one very faded pair of carriers is lower. In general, PA 
channel performance is worse as its coherence bandwidth is 
higher.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have investigated BER performance of 
MRC SC-FDMA over Rayleigh and Rice fading channels. It is 
known that ZF SC-FDMA behavior is worse than that of 
OFDM for single antenna systems. However, coherent 
combination of signal received on two antennas improves 
SC-FDMA up to overtake OFDM. Influence of fading 
frequency correlation function on SC FDMA performance is 
kept under MRC. Lower correlation among allocated 
 
Figure 3. MRC SC-FDMA receiver scheme 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
FFT size 
2048 
Modulation Techniques 
BPSK, 16QAM 
Carrier frequency 
2.00 GHz 
System Bandwidth 
20 MHz 
Sampling Frequency 
30.72 MHz 
Number of used 
subcarriers 
4, 32 
Antenna configuration 
1 6 N1, 2, 4Q 
Channel model 
ITU-R VA & PA 
channel 
Equalizers 
MMSE, ZF & MRC 
Number of receiving 
antenna 
1, 2, 4 
TABLE II.  
DELAY SPREAD AND COHERENCE BANDWIDTH FOR 
CONSIDERED CHANNELS 
Channel 
model 
Delay 
spread 
(r.m.s.) 
Coherence 
Bandwidth 
(50%) 
PA 
46 ns 
4.35 MHz 
VB 
4001 ns 
50 KHz 
 
430
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
subcarriers (i.e., higher frequency diversity) improves 
performance of SC-FDMA (VB channels vs. PA fading; 
Interleaved mode vs. Localized).  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of 
the European Commission through Erasmus Mundus External 
Cooperation Window “Mobility for Life” and express their 
gratitude to Junta de Andalucía (Proyecto de Excelencia P07-
TIC-03226), to the Spanish Government (Plan Nacional de 
I+D+I, TEC2010-18451), and to Sinhgad Technical Education 
Society (India). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 3GPP TS 36.211, “Evolved universal terrestrial radio access 
(E-UTRA): physical channels and modulation (Release 8),” 
June 2007 
[2] H. Myung, J. Lim, and D. Goodman, “Single carrier FDMA for 
uplink wireless transmission,” IEEE Veh. Tech. Mag., vol. 1, 
pp.30-38, Sep. 2006 
[3] J. Zhang, C. Huang, G. Liu, and P. Zhang, “Comparison of the 
Link Level Performance between OFDMA and SC-FDMA,” 
Proc. of First Int. Conf. Comm. and Networking in China, 
ChinaCom'06, Oct. 2006, pp.1-6, 25-27 
[4] J.J. Sánchez-Sánchez, U. Fernández-Plazaola, and M.C. 
Aguayo-Torres, “BER analysis for zero-forcing SC-FDMA over 
Nakagami-m fading channel,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech., vol. 60, 
no. 8, 4077 – 4081, Oct. 2011 
[5] T. Lunttila, J. Lindholm, K. Pajukoski, E. Tiirola, and A. 
Toskala, “EUTRAN uplink performance,” Proc. Int. Symp. 
Wireless Pervasive Computing (ISWC’07), San Juan, Puerto 
Rico, pp. 515-519, Jan. 2007 
[6] B. Priyanto, H. Codina, S. Rene. T. Sorensen, and P. Mogensen, 
“Initial performance evaluation of DFT –spread OFDM based 
SC-FDMA for UTRA LTE uplink,” Proc. of IEEE Veh. Tech. 
Conf. (VTC-Spring 2007), Dublin, Ireland, Apr. 2007, pp. 3175-
3179 
[7] Z. Wang, X. Ma, and G. Giannakis, “OFDM or single-carrier 
block transmissions?”, IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 
380 - 394, March 2004 
[8] C. Ciochina, D. Castelain, D. Mottier, and H. Sari, “Single 
carrier space frequency block coding: performance evaluation,” 
IEEE Veh. Tech. Conf., pp. 715-717, Oct. 2007 
[9] J.R. Gangane, M.C. Aguayo-Torres, J.J. Sánchez-Sánchez, and 
U. Fernández-Plazaola, “SC-FDMA performance over Ricean 
channels,” Proc. of IEEE Int. Biomedical and Broadband 
Comm., IB2Com 2011, Melbourne, Australia, Dec. 2011 
[10] A.J. 
Goldsmith, 
Wireless 
Communications, 
Cambridge 
University Press, 2005 
[11] D. Brennan, “Linear diversity combining techniques,” Proc. 
IRE, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 1075–1102, June 1959 
[12] J. Lu, T.T. Tjhung, and C.C. Chai, “Error Probability 
Performance of –Branch Diversity Reception of MQAM in 
Rayleigh Fading”, IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 46, no. 2, Feb. 
1998 
[13] L. Fang, G. Bi, and A.C. Kot, “New Method of Performance 
Analysis for Diversity Reception with Correlated Rayleigh-
fading Signals”, IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech., vol. 49, No. 5, Sept. 
2000 
[14] L. Najafizadeh and C. Tellambura, “BER Analysis of Arbitrary 
QAM for MRC Diversity With Imperfect Channel Estimation in 
Generalized Ricean Fading Channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech., 
vol. 55, no. 4, pp.1239-1248, July 2006 
[15] S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, “LTE – The UMTS Long 
Term Evolution. From Theory to Practice”, Wiley, 2009 
 
[16] International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
(ITU), 
“Recommendation ITU-R M-1255; Guidelines for evaluation of 
radio transmission technologies for IMT-2000,” Tech. Rep. 
1997 
Figure 4. BER of MRC SC-FDMA over Rayleigh fading VB channel 
Figure 5. BER of MRC SC-FDMA over Rice fading VB channel 
 
Figure 6. BER of Interleaved SC-FDMA with MRC for different antenna 
correlation factor over Rice fading VB channel 
431
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
Figure 7. BER performance of localized VB (left) and PA (right) SC-FDMA with MRC for different antenna correlation factor over Rice fading 
 
Figure 8. BER of OFDM with MRC for different antenna correlation factor over Rayleigh (left) and Rice 4dB (right) fading 
 
Figure 9. BER performance of SC-FDMA with MRC for different number of allocated subcarriers over VB and PA Rice fading channels 
 
432
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

