Towards a Methodology for the Development of Routing Algorithms in Opportunistic
Networks
Diego Freire
Dept. of Information and Communications Engineering
Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
email: diego.freire@deic.uab.cat
Sergi Robles
Dept. of Information and Communications Engineering
Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
email: sergi.robles@uab.cat
Carlos Borrego
Dept of Mathematics and Computer Science
Universitat de Barcelona
Barcelona, Spain
email: carlos.borrego@ub.edu
Abstract—This paper introduces a methodology for the de-
velopment of routing algorithms that takes into consideration
opportunistic networking. The proposal focuses on the rationale
behind the methodology, and highlights its most important stages
and components. It also discusses the importance of two core
elements in the process of protocol designing: the scenario
selection, based on essential characteristics, and the choice of
standard evaluation metrics. As of now, there has been no
common methodology for developing new routing algorithms, and
this has led to proposals difﬁcult to compare, to evaluate, and
lacking a rigorous objectivity ensuring fairness. Thus, there is the
urgent need to propose, agree, and use a common methodology
for the development of routing algorithms.
Keywords—Opportunistic networks; routing algorithms; devel-
opment methodology; emulation systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
The efﬁciency and performance of a network depends
completely on the routing algorithm. Nodes can be sparsely or
densely distributed, there can be few or many messages, node
buffers can be small or large, but at the end of the day, the
responsibility of forwarding all messages from the source to
the destination in the best way possible lies with the routing
algorithm. Thus, the development of such protocols is of
paramount importance for the sake of networks in general, and
especially critical in challenged networks like opportunistic
ones. In these last type of networks, nodes are irregularly
distributed, not always accessible and message forwarding is
only possible when there is a transient contact opportunity.
In these conditions, the store, carry and forward strategy of
Delay Tolerant Networking helps connecting the unconnected
parts of the net.
Unfortunately, the process of developing new routing algo-
rithms has not been in the focus of research, and this has led
to disputable quality proposals, difﬁcult to compare between
them, and almost impossible to determine if they suit best for
a given scenario. Although many proposals include simulated
experiments repeated in several conditions, with different data
sets, and even including very detailed network conﬁgurations,
such as radio protocols, and interference models, they still
lack the basic scientiﬁc approach allowing repeatability and
comparison. It is true that many of these papers introduce
the confrontation to other routing algorithms, but even in
this case, the scenario selection and particular conﬁguration
is not guaranteed to observe, intentionally or not, a rigorous
objectivity ensuring fairness. Moreover, few of these proposals
present a ﬁnal implementation showing its feasibility and
allowing a realistic performance evaluation under real world
conditions.
Traditional networks have an end-to-end path available
to transmit messages between nodes, but in Opportunistic
Networks, this end-to-end path may never exist, delays and
disruptions are part of the behaviour; therefore, opportunistic
strategies makes communication possible. In the development
of a routing algorithm, evaluation and testing are done by
some assumptions (e.g., unlimited resources, limited resources,
a limited number of messages, unlimited creation of messages,
among others). These assumptions seek to recreate a real-
world OppNet, but complexity and variability increases within
each characteristic studied.
Consequently, there is the urgent need to propose, agree, and
use a common methodology for the development of routing
algorithms that also takes into consideration extreme scenarios,
such as opportunistic networking. The process has to go from
the basic idea for the routing strategy, to the mathematical
analysis, model, simulation, software implementation of the
algorithm, emulation, and ﬁnally the application of the routing
strategy, testing real code in real scenarios. In this paper, we
get grips with the problem, and introduce the basic rationale
for such a methodology, highlighting its most important stages
and components, and discussing the importance of two core
elements in the process of protocol designing: scenario selec-
tion, based on essential characteristics, and standard evaluation
metrics. We expect this methodology to faster the adoption
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

of a common scientiﬁc approach to the development of new
routing algorithms, and to give ﬁrm leverage in the production
of high quality routing algorithms for OppNet.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
II introduces the state of the art on opportunistic networks,
evaluation strategies and development methodologies. Section
III presents the methodology in our proposal. Then, scenarios
and metrics are shown in Section IV. Finally, Section V
discusses our contributions and implications.
II. RELATED WORK
In this Section, we study the state of the art of the develop-
ment of routing algorithms in the opportunistic networks ﬁeld,
the evaluation strategies and methodology used in development
of new opportunistic routing algorithms
A. Opportunistic networks
An opportunistic network [1], also known as OppNets [2], is
a set of mobile devices commonly called nodes that exchange
information between them exploiting direct communication
opportunities to perform an end-to-end transfer of data. Nodes
communicate with each other even if an end-to-end route never
exist [3]. Furthermore, nodes are not supposed to possess
or acquire any knowledge about the network topology. With
the growth of the use of mobile devices in recent years,
opportunistic networks have become a signiﬁcant ﬁeld of
research. Opportunistic networks allow a ﬂexible and highly
dynamic connection between the nodes [4]. Any node can join
or leave the network at any time.
The applications of opportunistic networks [5] are cellular
network ofﬂoading, communication in challenged areas, cen-
sorship circumvention and proximity-based applications and
Internet of Things (IoT) [6], among others. Topology network
is continuously changing due to the constant movement of
the nodes, and the communication routes between senders
and receivers are neither direct nor static. This communication
capability allows the use of opportunistic networks in new ap-
plications. Before opportunistic networks, applications based
their operation on an end-to-end connection path, however,
when such connection is not possible, opportunistic networks
present a solution, since the information is sent ”opportunis-
tically” hop by hop between source to destination using the
”Store-Carry-and-Forward” approach [7].
B. Evaluation strategies in opportunistic routing algorithms
A standard methodology that allows the evaluation of rout-
ing algorithms in the OppNets ﬁeld does not exist. Neverthe-
less, the nonexistence of a comparing method does not mean
that a comparison is not possible.
One of the main ways of evaluating opportunistic rout-
ing algorithms is measuring their performance when sending
information from a source to a destination. Some authors
model message dissemination performance by analysing ﬁrst
the behaviour of the OppNet when some characteristics of the
network vary, such as density, size of the messages, duration
of the contacts, etc. [8].
Regarding the use of datasets for network behaviour simu-
lation, and according to [9], most authors use several common
scenarios like Haggle [10], MIT [11] or Cambridge [12].
Finding good scenarios to evaluate routing algorithms is not
easy. The elevated cost of deploying real test-beds and the
non-existence of a suitable simulator accounting for all real
characteristics make it really difﬁcult to ﬁnd adequate traces
to perform realistic simulations [9].
C. Methodology in the development of new opportunistic
routing algorithms
A small part of the research community that works on
challenged networks, such as opportunistic networks has
pointed out the necessity of ﬁnding new methodologies in the
development of new opportunistic routing algorithms. Their
concern is focused on involving the engineering process in all
stages between an original network proposal and its validation
in real applications. The problem is that a lot of networks
research proposals in this context rely solely on simulations
to validate the proposed protocols without going any further.
The authors of studies like [13], draw attention to the fact
that network decisions, such as routing or delivery ones are
rarely implemented in real network platforms. Additionally,
if they are, the validation of the proposed code is usually
performed at a very small scale. That is why, there has been an
enormous effort from this part of the research community on
developing new emulation platforms to help with this problem.
By using emulation tools, demanding scenarios can be tested
and provide a a lightweight emulation solution that bridges the
gap between pure simulation and real-world experimentation.
III. METHODOLOGY FOR DEVELOPING ROUTING
ALGORITHMS
Using a sensible, sound methodology is indispensable to
get good routing algorithms. This methodology has to observe
the basic scientiﬁc method, allowing repeatability, fair com-
parison, and common scenario representation. In this Section
we propose the basic steps of the process of developing new
routing algorithms fulﬁlling the aforementioned requirements,
and discuss about the selection of the test scenarios and
performance metrics for comparison.
A. Methodology stages
The methodology has seven well differentiated stages, as
shown in Figure 1:
1) Conception: First it comes the initial idea behind the
algorithm, the conception of the mechanisms. This is normally
triggered by some essential feature of the scenario, such as
high node density, or by a particular theory, such as the history
of encounter of nodes and its transitivity.
2) Model: After the initial stage of conception, the idea
must be reiﬁed into a particular mathematical model, which
can then be analyzed formally.
3) Analysis: Once the proposal is modeled, it can be
analysed. During this analysis, the mechanisms and procedures
can be checked, some theoretical results can be obtained, and
basic limitations can be identiﬁed.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

1.Conception
2.Model
3.Analysis
4.Simulation
5.Implementation
6.Emulation
7.Application
Figure 1. Methodology for developing routing algorithms consisting of seven
stages.
4) Simulation: The next stage is simulation. In a simu-
lator, the model can be tested in a given set of scenarios.
Eventhough these scenarios involve datasets that come from
the real world (e.g., real traces from vehicles or people), or
even if the simulator simulates very accurately all network
protocols involved, the model under evaluation is usually
executed based on pseudo-code. This does not prove that the
system being designed can eventually be deployed and used
for real. Results obtained through simulation can be deceptive,
creating a misleading feeling of scientiﬁc correctness. Indeed,
as observed in [14], the credibility of simulation results tends
to decrease as the use of simulation increases.
5) Implementation: The ﬁnal validation of a routing algo-
rithm should always be based on real full-featured code (ac-
counting for example for memory management or concurrency
issues), rather than on the pseudo-code used in simulations.
In this stage, a code is produced so that the algorithm can be
used on a real scenario. The implementation itself shows the
feasibility of the algorithm.
6) Emulation: Testing real code in real conditions can
be difﬁcult and tricky, especially when these situations may
involve the mobility of hundreds of nodes during hundreds of
hours. Emulation is an approach that helps with this respect,
allowing to run real code in tightly controlled (and repeatable)
conditions. This stage is the link between a proof-of-concept
implementation and the deployment of a software that is useful
in the real world and behaves as predicted.
7) Application:
The last stage of this methodology is
testing the routing algorithm in a real environment, with real
devices and users. This is the ultimate test that shows how the
designed algorithm behaves in the real world and allows to
evaluate.
The application of the methodology should not be strictly
sequential. Some of the work in one stage can help to improve
some of the previous stages. For example, the results of the
analysis can help modifying the model to take into account a
new variable, or the emulation results can help to detect and
correct bugs of the implementation.
Applying a methodology like the one described is necessary,
but not enough to produce good quality routing algorithms.
There are two elements that have also to be considered: the
scenarios, and the performance metrics. The simulation and
emulation stages need some scenarios, including the position
of nodes during a time window and the messages that are
sent along with other information. This is important for two
reasons. In the ﬁrst place, these scenarios have to be public
to reproduce the results at any time, and to fairly compare
different routing algorithms in the same conditions. Secondly,
the scenarios need to be representative of the real environments
the routing algorithm is going to be used in. The second
element to be considered is the performance metrics of the
algorithm. Again, there are two main reasons for this. The
ﬁrst one is that to evaluate how good is a routing algorithm for
a given scenario, there have to be some evaluation functions.
These functions, or metrics, will tell how the network performs
when this routing algorithm is in operation, and thus can
determine for which scenarios it is more appropriate. The
second reason is that these metrics allow a direct comparison
to other protocols for the same scenario.
IV. SCENARIOS AND METRICS IN OPPORTUNISTIC
NETWORKS
Different scenarios and metrics are generally used in articles
to measure the performance of Routing Algorithms. As it is
difﬁcult to reproduce real-world conditions, the use of scenar-
ios tries to create a model of them, assuming performance
will be similar. To be in the safe side, many papers use
several scenarios to show the algorithm has a large scope of
applicability. However, articles use to pay little or no attention
to the selection and deﬁnition of these scenarios, neglecting
the importance they deserve in the signiﬁcance of the results.
A. Components
Scenarios of OppNet consist of a set of nodes and their
positions during a time frame. When analysing the behaviour
of a routing algorithm on a scenario, more details have to be
provided, such as a set of messages (with recipients and size),
and the communication range of the nodes.
Nodes in an OppNet normally communicate wirelessly.
Nodes can receive, drop, store, carry and forward messages.
When a node receives a message, the decision whether a
message must be stored, carried, dropped or forwarded is made
by the routing algorithm. The routing algorithm makes the
decision of which nodes a message is forwarded to.
As we talk before scenarios are a representation of real-
world, therefore their characteristics must help to reproduce
certain real-world behaviour. Among others, the characteristics
of a scenario may include the set of positions, granularity, node
range, node density, and buffer size. For the sake of simplicity,
we can consider the scenario as the set of nodes, the set of
messages and the contacts between nodes:
S = (Nodes, Messages, NodeContacts)
(1)
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

B. Selection of scenarios
As we have seen, scenarios play a very important role for
the development of routing algorithms. As diversity is a key
factor to guarantee representation of real world applications,
different sources of scenarios have to be considered. They can
be synthetically created, which allows to force some scenario
characteristics, like a given node density. They can also come
from real world traces captured in live situations. As suggested
by Kotz et al. in [15], create a new scenario is expensive
and challenging. The Community Resource for Archiving
Wireless Data At Dartmouth (CRAWDAD) allows sharing
data sets across the scientiﬁc community. The real-world data
help us to understand the behaviour of real users. Common
well-known scenarios already used in literature [16], like
Cambridge, Info5, Taxis, MIT or Haggle could also be used
as possible scenarios. Within the many scenarios that have
different characteristics, scenario selection is a crucial part of
the development of a new opportunistic routing algorithm. The
output performance of some scenarios is the same, even that
those scenarios do not share characteristics.
Because it is impossible to test the routing algorithms in all
possible scenarios, making a selection of scenarios is required.
This process have to be scientiﬁcally justiﬁed, to be represen-
tative enough and avoid any possible bias. Just having different
traces that generate different results without analyzing the
entire spectrum of action of the OppNet comprehensively
would result insufﬁcient. These ﬁne selection of scenarios will
act as a representation of the whole scope of opportunistic
networks.
C. All-in-One scenario trap
A valuable scenario aims to be a good representation of
reality. This representation must introduce as many elements
as the real event contains, but this could end up into an
unrealistic task due to the number of characteristics involved.
Our research found more than seventy characteristics used as
tuning settings of the so-called scenarios. Given those seventy
characteristics, even limiting the operativity of each character-
istic as binary, the number of the scenarios is unrealistic to
manage. Therefore, modelling a scenario requires a balance
between simpliﬁcation and real-world accuracy has a direct
implication of usability. Not every characteristic must be taken
into account. Those characteristics that are not involved in
the scenarios are going to be present in the other phases
of the routing algorithm development. Oversimpliﬁcation of
characteristics could lead to a useless representation of the
phenomena, and the results are not useful. Our proposal claims
that instead of build an ”All-in-One” scenario, the development
of a set of different scenarios, where those scenarios must give
different performance results with the same algorithms.
D. Performance metrics
In a scenario, messages have to be delivered from the origin
to the destination taking advantage of the communication
opportunities. To achieve this, in this process, several copies of
the same message are generated. Messages can be successfully
Figure 2. Number of compared-to routing algorithms
delivered, they can be dropped, for example if there is not
enough buffer for them, or they may not reach their ﬁnal
destination, for example because their life time is over. A
metric is a function that gives the measure of a certain property
of a given scenario, such as message drop, latency, node
inter-contact time, delivery ratio, overhead ratio, delivery cost,
average number of hops, wastage index or average delay,
among others.
The evaluation function of an algorithm in a scenario pro-
vides the set of some metric measurements for that scenario, as
shown in (2). The result of this evaluation is multidimensional,
for having just one number to compare different algorithms
does not allow an accurate comparison. An algorithm may
be better for a speciﬁc metric, but worse for another one. It
is the ﬁnal application that will determine which algorithm is
the most appropriate, and therefore it is convenient to preserve
the whole set of metric results to have a better idea on how
the algorithm behaves.
The evaluation function can be represented as:
M = M1, M2, ..., Mn
Eval(A, S, M) = (M1(A, S), M2(A, S), ..., Mn(A, S)) (2)
where Eval is the evaluation function, A is the routing
algorithm, S is the scenario, M is the set of metric functions,
and Mi is the measurement of the metrics.
Metrics should always refer to the same measurable prop-
erties, thus all proposals have to use exactly the same names
for the metrics to avoid confusion.
E. Routing comparison
Our research shows how the performance comparison has
been carried out so far when a new opportunistic routing
algorithm has been presented; and how these practices could
lead up to unfair comparisons. We studied more than 50
opportunistic routing algorithms.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

A comparison helps to evidence the improvement in the
performance of a given task. Figure 2 shows the number of
comparisons founded in the papers on routing algorithms in
the literature. Then, Figure 3 is a cloud graph where edges
indicate that the two routing algorithms connected are directly
compared in some paper. This graph emphasizes the number
of comparisons of a routing algorithm, The bigger the size of
the font, the more times an algorithm has been compared to.
From the literature on routing algorithms, the information
shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3 reafﬁrms our concern about
a fair comparison. We found that approximately a 62% of the
algorithms tests their performance with one or two algorithms
when they are presented. On the other hand, less than 5%
of the reviewed algorithms present a comparison with 6
algorithms. No algorithm which is compared with more than
6 others has been found.
In Epidemic routing, when a message needs to be routed
from a source to a destination, the algorithm sends the message
to all of their reachable neighbours. The algorithm does not
have to make any decision whether to send a message or
not. Having that in mind, the implementation of an Epidemic
algorithm is not difﬁcult at all. Figure 2 shows that most of the
literature makes less than 2 comparisons and Figure 3 indicates
the Epidemic routing is the most compared-to algorithm. That
means that the comparison is centred around Epidemic routing
and that routing algorithms are not been compared between
them. Moreover, the few algorithms used in the comparisons
are those that are implemented in traditional simulators. This
is probably due to fact that the scientiﬁc community is paying
more attention to the simplicity of the experimentation design
rather than to the scientiﬁc soundness.
Our approach is that every algorithm could be evaluated in
a fairway. That means, be able to compare apples with apples.
The use common evaluation function (as deﬁned in (2)) in
the analysis of an algorithm in a scenario provides a determin-
istic outcome, thus avoiding intentional or unintentional bias.
With a methodological performance evaluation, we can pick
the best algorithms of our interest.
We know that opportunistic networks are a challenging ﬁeld;
therefore, the traditional way to develop routing algorithms is
not enough to go from the idea to the application.
V. DISCUSSION
When a new routing algorithm is proposed in the ﬁeld of
opportunistic networking, the proposal uses its own evaluation
metrics and scenarios. Thus, even though these proposals
normally compare their protocol to others, the testing en-
vironment, chosen scenarios, metrics and conditions do not
guarantee that the comparison is totally fair. It is very easy
to, unintentionally, create a bias favouring their own proposal
just by selecting a scenario with some speciﬁc characteristics
for which the algorithm has been designed to take advantage.
In most cases, reproducing the results of a given proposal is
practically impossible because the full scenario data is not
publicly available, the way of applying the metrics is not
completely clear, or simply because the implementations (or
Figure 3. Cloud graph of routing algorithms comparison, edges indicates a
direct comparison between a pair of routing algorithms in a paper
models of the protocol) are not given. As suggested by Bajpai
et al. in [17], the research on computer networks is more and
more accepting research proposals that are non-reproducible
as long as they appear plausible to the manuscript reviewers.
We agree with this study on the importance and challenges on
reproducibility.
This situation applies to routing algorithms in general, but
is particularly notorious in the case of opportunistic networks,
where there is more variety of scenarios and conditions. This
does not facilitate at all the selection of a good routing
algorithm for a certain application, for example, and the
creation process of new protocols is as well weakened for
no validated references are available to fairly compare them
to other proposals.
A way of alleviating these effects and giving better
prospects to the (useful) development of new routing algo-
rithms in ooportunistic networking is by using a methodology
like the one presented in this paper. This can decisively help
on the difﬁcult task of starting a cultural change on routing
algorithm development, proposal evaluation, and algorithm
selection.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have presented a methodology for the de-
velopment of routing algorithms in Opportunistic Networking
based on seven stages. Following this methodology, the devel-
opment of new routing algorithms will improve , increasing
their quality and fair comparison to others. Additionally, we
have discussed the importance of two core elements in the
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

process of protocol designing: the scenario selection and the
choice of standard evaluation metrics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partly funded by Secretaria de Educaci´on
Superior, Ciencia, Tecnolog´ıa e Innovaci´on (SENESCYT,
ECUADOR), by the Catalan AGAUR 2017SGR-463 project,
and by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation
TIN2017-87211-R project.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Dede, et al. ”Simulating Opportunistic Networks: Survey and Future
Directions”. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 2,
pp. 1547–1573, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2017.2782182
[2] C. Borrego, et al. ”A mobile code bundle extension for application-
deﬁned routing in delay and disruption tolerant networking.” Computer
Networks, vol. 87, pp. 59-77, 2015
[3] C. M. Huang, K. C. Lan, and C. Z. Tsai. ”A survey of opportunistic
networks. Proceedings” - International Conference on Advanced In-
formation Networking and Applications, AINA, pp. 1672–1677, 2008.
https://doi.org/10.1109/WAINA.2008.292
[4] R. Kaur, (2017). ”Optimal Technique for Information Uphold due to
discontinuous Communication on AD Hoc Mobile Network”. GADL
Journal of Invention in Computer Science and CommunicationTechnol-
ogy, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 2455–5738, 2017.
[5] S.
Trifunovic,
S.
T.
Kouyoumdjieva,
B.
Distl,
L.
Pajevic,
G.
Karlsson, and B. Plattner. A decade of research in opportunis-
tic networks: Challenges, relevance, and future directions. IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 168–173, 2017.
https://doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2017.1500527CM
[6] M. Cuka, D. Elmazi, M. Ikeda, K. Matsuo, and L. Barolli. ”IoT Node
Selection in Opportunistic Networks: Implementation of Fuzzy-based
Simulation Systems and Testbed”. Internet of Things, vol. 8, pp. 100105,
2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2019.100105
[7] Dede, J. et al. ”Simulating Opportunistic Networks: Survey and Future
Directions”. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 20, no. 2,
pp.1547–1573, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1109/COMST.2017.2782182
[8] E. Hern´andez-Orallo, M. Murillo-Arcila, C. T. Calafate, J. C. Cano, J. A.
Conejero, and P. Manzoni. ”Analytical evaluation of the performance of
contact-Based messaging applications”. Computer Networks, vol. 111,
pp. 45–54, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2016.07.006
[9] M. J. Khabbaz, C. M. Assi, and W. F. Fawaz. ”Disruption-tolerant net-
working: A comprehensive survey on recent developments and persisting
challenges”. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 14, no.
2, pp. 607–640, 2012. https://doi.org/10.1109/SURV.2011.041911.00093
[10] A European Union funded project in Situated and Autonomic Commu-
nications, retrieved 07, 2020. https://ica1www.epﬂ.ch/haggle/
[11] N. Eagle, A. Pentland and D. Lazer, ”Inferring social network structure
using mobile phone data”, Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, vol. 106 no. 36, pp. 15274-15278, 2009.
[12] J. Leguay, A. Lindgren, J. Scott, T. Friedman, J. Crowcroft, P.
Hui, CRAWDAD data set upmc/content, 2006. Retrieved 07, 2020.
http://crawdad.cs.dartmouth.edu.
[13] A. S´anchez-Carmona, F. Guidec, P. Launay, Y. Mah´eo, and S. Robles.
”Filling in the missing link between simulation and application in
opportunistic networking”. Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 142,
pp. 57-72, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2018.04.025
[14] S. Kurkowski, T. Camp, and M. Colagrosso. ”MANET simulation stud-
ies: the incredibles”. ACM SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev.,
vol. 9, no.4 , pp. 50-61, 2005. https://doi.org/10.1145/1096166.1096174
[15] D. Kotz and T. Henderson. Crawdad: A community resource for archiv-
ing wireless data at dartmouth. IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 4, no.
4, 12-14, 2005, https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2005.75
[16] N. Magaia, C. Borrego, P. Pereira, and M. Correia, ”PRIVO: A privacy-
preserving opportunistic routing protocol for delay tolerant networks.”
2017 IFIP Networking Conference (IFIP Networking) and Workshops,
pp.=1-9, 2017
[17] V. Bajpai, M. K¨uhlewind, Mirja, J. Ott, J. Sch¨onw¨alder, and A. Sperotto,
and B. Trammell. ”Challenges with reproducibility”. Proceedings of the
Reproducibility Workshop 2017. 2017. https://doi.org/10.3929/ethz-b-
000197662
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-794-8
ICWMC 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

