Effective ARP Based Call Admission Control (CAC) Scheme for LTE Systems 
Abhishek Nayak, Saurabh Verma, Anurag Jain 
HCL Technologies Ltd. 
Noida, India 
abhishek_n@hcl.com, saurabh_verma@hcl.com, anuragjn@hcl.com 
 
 
Abstract-- In wireless communication technologies like GSM, 
WCDMA, LTE, etc.  Radio is stressed by the various traffic 
conditions, in terms of radio resources to provide the 
admission of new calls and required QoS. There are situations 
and scenarios, where the load takes unprecedented conditions 
and as part of services the requirements may change, like to 
improve on non-blocking calls though recessing on Quality of 
Service (QoS). Though such situations and scenarios are 
intermittent and last for limited periods of time, the 
importance of services becomes operator’s credentials. We 
propose a top-up algorithm, which does not interfere with 
existing admission control mechanism in direct way, but 
provide them with effective Allocation and Retention Priority 
(E-ARP) for each call. This algorithm is based on “inferences 
and intensions based combinational logic”. It works on the 
system 
specific 
inferences 
of 
certain 
parameters 
and 
intentional classification of existing and new demands based on 
weightage-based 
combinational 
logic, 
which 
results 
in 
modification of ARPs into effective ARPs. For evaluation of 
proposed Admission Control (AC) scheme blocking and outage 
probability of calls is used as performance metrics.  
Keywords – LTE, RRM, Admission Control, Effective ARP, SON, 
Self organizing networks, scheduling algorithms, spectral 
efficiency, next generation networks, NGN, radio resource 
management, combinational logic, inferences and intentions. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The task of radio admission control is to admit or reject a 
new connection request referred to as a call, depending on 
whether the required QoS of the new call request will be 
fulﬁlled. Each call request has its own ARP value, which 
describes its relative importance for admission and 
retention. In the proposed scheme we deduce effective ARP 
(EARP) for each call based on our top-up algorithm. The 
algorithm modifies the relative importance of the calls based 
on their inferred impact on the system and intentional bias 
for the services.  
In industry perspective, admission control mechanisms 
are provided through vendor specific algorithms. There are 
various kinds of scheduler algorithms [4][5], available in 
LTE systems, like Proportional Fair, Modified Largest 
Weighted Delay First, and Exponential Proportional Fair 
etc. These algorithms take best use of system and resources 
for the specific load conditions. With the advancement of 
radio technologies like LTE, the spectrum efficiency of the 
system is of much concern from the vendors perspectives; 
that is to say, to provide maximum throughput with the 
limited resources within a system. The operators are also 
compelled for it, as for the sake of maximum Return on 
Investment (ROI). Such algorithms or scheme for admission 
controls become efficient in best possible scenarios. Though 
from a service provider perspective, the scenario changes 
with respect to many factors like multiplicity of applications 
and devices, geo-position, time, whether, social events, 
natural events, power conditions and so on. An operator 
need to plan his services as per, to retain his credentials.  
Some time may have to be intentionally biased, like 
compromise on QoS, service outage, blocking of calls, etc. 
 For LTE networks, where the resources are allocated 
through shared channels and various adaptations like link 
adaptation etc. The efficiency of schedulers could be 
improved 
through 
statistical 
measures 
of 
various 
parameters. These parameters, with respect to each call, 
could be made available at single point to take an inference 
for system specific impact of the call. We have taken into 
consideration QoS Class Identifier (QCI) [7], Allocation and 
Retention Priority (ARP) [7], Guaranteed Bit Rate (GBR) 
[7], Aggregate Maximum Bit Rate (AMBR) [7], Channel 
Quality Indicator (CQI) [1] and Buffer Status Report (BSR) 
[1], as parameters for inferences. 
With the help of EARP based admission control we 
would be able to create intentional models, for the service 
credentials. As for evaluation here we use an intentional 
model, to reduce the blocking and outage probability, in 
simulated LTE set up. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
provides the inference specifics of system parameters used 
for the proposed algorithm. Section III gives the description 
of combinational logic for deduction of effective ARP. 
Section IV contains the advantages of algorithm.  Section V 
of the paper evaluates   the proposed algorithm, for the 
specific intentions like blocking probability, outage and cell 
throughput.  Section VI concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
INFERENCES SPECIFICS 
There are various algorithms [4][5] as part of Radio 
Resource 
Management 
(RRM) 
functionality. 
These 
algorithms provide admission control and resources, based 
on the availability and demands. Though such algorithms 
take care of best and efficient use of resources and system, 
but the traffic load on the system is not always under the 
controlled variations. 
This algorithm approach helps to create intentional bias 
for exiting scheduler and to cater unprecedented traffic 
conditions. 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

This 
is 
an 
inferences-based 
and 
intension-based 
algorithm. This algorithm will be effective into the systems, 
where the inferences for the given parameters could be rated 
fairly on a fixed linear scale. These inferences are basically 
system specific impacts, with respect to parameters taken 
for the inference, for particular call.  
The specifics, to take inferences from the given 
parameters in LTE networks, are being expressed in the 
following way. 
A. Allocation and Retention Priority (ARP) 
The priority level defines the relative importance of a 
resource request; values 1 to 15 are defined, with value 1 as 
the highest level of priority. 
B. QoS Class Identifier (QCI) 
The QCI label for a bearer determines how it is handled 
in the eNodeB.  It is defining the packet forwarding 
requirements, through packet delay budget, and acceptable 
packet loss rate. This parameter could be inferred as real 
time traffic requirements. Table 1 provides standardized 
QoS in LTE networks, as given below. 
 
Table 1.         Standard QoS Identifier for LTE [5] 
QCI 
Bearer 
Type 
Priority 
Packet 
Delay 
Packet 
Loss 
Example 
1 
GBR 
2 
100 
10-2 
VoIP Call 
2 
4 
150 
10-3 
Video Call 
3 
3 
50 
Online 
Gaming (Real 
Time) 
4 
5 
300 
10-6 
Video 
Streaming 
5 
Non-GBR 
1 
100 
IMS Signaling 
6 
6 
300 
Video, TCP 
based services 
e.g., email, 
chat, ftp, etc. 
7 
7 
100 
10-3 
Voice Video 
Interactive 
gaming 
8 
8 
300 
10-6 
Video, TCP 
based services 
e.g., email, 
chat, ftp, etc. 
9 
9 
. 
C. Aggregate Maximum Bit Rate (AMBR) 
Each call would be having AMBR. The demand for the 
radio resource, for that call, would be inferred based on the 
existing load for AMBR. For higher Load the individual call 
impact for radio resource would be less. 
D. Guaranteed Bit Rate (GBR) 
Each call with specified GBR could be inferred as 
reservation for radio resources. Call with higher GBR value 
will require more resources in comparison with the calls 
with lower GBR. 
E. Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) 
 CQI reports, the channel conditions. The value ranges 
from 1 to 15, where 15 indicate the most efficient. We can 
infer it like more data can be transferred using less resource 
blocks for a UE, which reporting higher CQI. The eNodeB 
can use higher Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) to 
send the data. Spectral efficiency increases with higher 
MCS as shown through Figure 1, which provides standard 
data with respect to SNR. 
 
Figure 1.     Spectral efficiency vs. SINR for different MCS [8]. 
F. 
Buffer Status Report (BSR) 
This is a kind of MAC layer control element, carrying 
the information, on how much data is in UE buffer to be 
sent out. The index varies from 0 to 63, where a UE 
reporting Index 0 indicates no buffered data bytes are 
available at UE buffer and 63 indicates that more than 
150000 buffered data bytes are available at the UE buffer. 
This can be inferred as UE traffic durability. 
III. 
CONBINATIONAL LOGIC AND 
DEDUCTION OF EARP 
The concept of EARP is based on the combinational 
logic. This logic depends on the system specific inferences 
for the parameters like QCI, ARP, GBR, AMBR, CQI and 
BSR. 
The 
deduction 
of 
EARP 
is 
done 
through 
combinational logic and classification based virtual 
scheduler, which is biased to intentions given in terms of 
weightage to parameters inferences. 
The inferences could be direct or indirect (conditional, 
i.e., taking other parameter in consideration under specific 
conditions) based on the inference function‟s algorithmic 
decision. 
For example, in some cases, impact on system resources 
by a call, could be inferred based on the combination of CQI 
and BSR values reported. So, for User Equipment (UE) 
reporting better channel condition would require less radio 
resource blocks for the call, in comparison to one reporting 
bad channel condition. But, if the buffer (inferred by BSR) 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

that needs to be transmitted for second UE is very small 
when compared to the buffer of previous UE, in that case, 
impact on resources has to be the combination of CQI and 
BSR. 
Explicitly stating the above example, it would be that 
even since low CQI can be inferred as poor impact on 
system, with intention for spectral efficiency, but could be 
tolerated to the extent BSR value is low. 
That also means to say, that this combinational logic 
basically isolates the „extremes‟ in terms of weightage of 
impact of individual call on the system. This weightage 
factor could be again magnified with intention factor, and 
this eventually helps in classification and deduction of 
Effective ARP or E-ARP through a virtual scheduler. 
 So, inferences of any parameter could be a combination 
of others. This is provided in the form of inferences 
function, implemented by inferences algorithms, as given 
below. 
 
Uij = ƒj (JARP, JQCI, JGBR, JAMBR, JCQI, JBSR)       (1)
 
 
 
Function “ƒ” takes all the parameters, for the call “i”, 
with actual values and provides inferred value “Uij” for 
each parameter “j”. 
The inferred value of each parameter will be weighted 
with specified intentions with respect to the same parameter. 
The combined value with respect to all parameters will be 
used for classification, and that eventually used for the 
virtual scheduler. This combinational logic could be 
canonically represented in diagram below. 
 
Figure 2.     Combinational logic for deduction of E-ARP. 
 
W(i) total weightage of a particular call “i” in the 
system. 
Wj 
corresponds to the intentional weightage of each 
parameter “j”, e.g. ARP, QCI, GBR, AMBR, CQI and BSR. 
Uij 
inferred value of parameters reported for inference 
space. 
A virtual scheduler implements the logic to provide the 
EARP values. It works on the resulted weightage (Wi) and 
existing ARP and deduces EARP through classification 
based regression. 
 
 
IV. 
FORESEEN ADVANTAGE OF THIS 
MECHANISM 
1. Various intentional model could be prepared for 
various traffic conditions in the system 
2. Statistical regression could be performed for the 
EARP 
3. This mechanism is independent of number of 
parameter and could be used in uplink downlink 
separately. 
4. This mechanism is top-up mechanism, which does 
not interfere with existing mechanisms but to 
provide theirs intentional efficiency 
5. This may need not to be in the existing RRM but 
may be in Self Organizing Networks (SON) servers 
etc. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
This top-up algorithm is evaluated over the network 
simulator compliant with 3GPP LTE standards [1][2][3] and 
provide real radio environment as well. This is tested 
against a particular vendor specific RRM and load is 
generated with varying system specific conditions. We 
intend to improve on blocking and outage probability. 
Blocking Probability (Pb) is defined as the ratio of the 
number of blocked users to the total number of users 
requesting admission and retention. Outage Probability (Po) 
is calculated as the ratio of the number of users not fulfilling 
their GBR requirement. 
In the given simulation, when the peak load is reaching 
above 40 calls, with various types of traffic, there is sharp 
increase in blocking rate. After implementing with this top- 
up algorithm, with traffic specific intentions, a significant 
drop in blocking call is observed as show in Figure 3. 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Pb 
Po 
C
e
l
l 
 
T
h
r
o
u
g
h
p
u
t 
 
User traffic (Peak call load) 
Figure 3.     Traffic vs. Blocking Probability Graph. 
 
Similarly, in the given simulation, when the peak load is 
reaching above 40 calls, there is sharp increase in outage 
under specific traffic load. After implementing this top-up 
algorithm, with traffic specific intentions, a significant drop 
in outage rate is observed as show in Figure 4. 
 
 
User traffic (Peak call load) 
Figure 4.     Traffic vs. Outage Probability Graph. 
      After implementing this top-up algorithm, there is 
significant improvement found in cell throughput, in almost 
all the traffic specific load, as shown in Figure 5. 
 
User traffic (Peak call load) 
Figure 5.     Traffic vs. Average Cell Throughput [Mbps]. 
The results showcase the significance of this top-up 
algorithm, in the extreme conditions. As it help to create 
various intentional models to provide control over 
unprecedented load conditions. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE 
WORK 
The results show that the given EARP based AC, unlike 
reference AC, is robust and automatically adjusts to the 
various traffic scenarios, cell load, and user channel 
conditions. Various models (intentions) can be prepared for 
different kind of unprecedented traffic statistically. It can 
also be incorporated in the SON   techniques as part of top-
up intentional modification and control of existing AC 
algorithms. Future studies will address to addition of more 
parameters in the inference space. Such top-up mechanism 
are being studied for SON perspective and would be 
developed for traffic load control and RAN selections. 
The traffic classifications and traffic conditions are 
being studied at various levels in the LTE systems and such 
mechanism could be of help for effective forwarding and 
prioritizations of classified traffics under various traffic 
condition scenarios. 
REFERENCES 
[1]    3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Evolved 
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Medium Access 
Control (MAC) protocol specification; 3GPP TS36.321 version 
10.7.0, Jan. 2013.  
 
[2]   3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Evolved 
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Requirements for 
support of radio resource management; 3GPP TS 36.133 version 
10.8.1, Oct. 2012.  
 
[3]    3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification Evolved 
Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA) and Evolved Universal 
Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN); 3GPP TS 36.300 
version 10.9.0;  Jan. 2013. 
 
[4]    H. Holma  and A. Toskala, “LTE for UMTS: Evolution to LTE-
Advanced”, 2nd Edition, Apr. 2011. 
 
[5]    S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and Matthew Baker, “LTE – The UMTS Long 
Term Evolution: From Theory to Practice”, 2009. 
 
[6]  Y. Fang and Y. Zhang, “Call Admission Control Schemes and 
Performance Analysis in Wireless Mobile Networks” IEEE Trans. 
Veh. Tech. vol. 51, no. 2, Mar. 2002 
 
[7]    3rd Generation Partnership Project; Technical Specification 23.203 
version 10.8.0 Release 10.  
 
[8]    M. Anas, PhD-Thesis; “Uplink Radio Resource Management for QoS 
Provisioning in Long Term Evolution”, Aalborg University, 
Denmark, Jan. 2009. 
 
[9]     K. Spaey, B. Sas, and C. Blondia, “Self Optimizing Call Admission 
Control for LTE Downlink”, „FP7  ICT-SOCRATES‟ workshop, Feb. 
2010. 
 
 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Ref
AC
EARP
AC
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Ref
AC
EARP
AC
1
2
3
4
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Ref
AC
EARP
AC
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

