Anti-Spoofing for Single-Antenna Devices using
Rotational Channel State Information
Avishek Mukherjee∗, Tyler Moody†, Mason Strawn‡ and Manish Osti§
Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Saginaw Valley State University
University Center, Michigan, USA
Email: ∗amukher1@svsu.edu, †tpmoody@svsu.edu, ‡mwstrawn@svsu.edu, §mrosti@svsu.edu
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate the efficacy of using
rotational Channel State Information (CSI) on Anti-Spoofing
methods in indoor wireless networks. Physical layer information
like the CSI often acts like a fingerprint for different locations.
Most Anti-Spoofing (AS) methods leverage this uniqueness to
detect spoofed packets originating from an attacker that claims
to be a genuine user. However, due to the sparsity of wireless
channels, there are times when the CSI from different locations
may look similar and AS systems may fail to detect a spoofed
packet. We propose Rotational Channel State Information - Anti-
Spoofing (RCSI-AS), that uses multiple CSI measurements by
rotating the antenna on an Access Point (AP) at different angles
to greatly improve the detection of spoofed packets. We conducted
real world experiments and found that RCSI-AS can detect
spoofed packets over 99.6% of the time when using multiple
angular configurations at the Access Point (AP) and maintains a
low false positive ratio when comparing packets from the same
user.
Index Terms—Channel State Information, Wireless Networks,
Anti-Spoofing, Wireless Security.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless security has become a critical component of mod-
ern Wi-Fi systems with the rapidly increasing production
of internet capable devices. As the number of connected
devices have increased, so has the potential for different types
of network attacks from adversaries. These include channel
jamming, packet sniffing, replay attacks, packet spoofing and
more. Spoofing, in particular, is a form of attack whereby
an adversary (say, Bob) impersonates a user (Alice) device
by using their IP address to generate packets to a server.
The server may believe these packets originated from Alice
and can inadvertently let Bob access confidential information.
Detection of spoofing attacks has been a topic of interest for
researchers who have proposed anti-spoofing systems to thwart
these types of attacks.
In recent years, a number of anti-spoofing methods have
been developed that rely on the physical layer information of
a wireless packet to determine its authenticity. For example,
one of the authors of this paper developed Time-Bounded
Anti-Spoofing (TBAS) [1] , that uses physical layer char-
acteristics including the Channel State Information (CSI) to
detect spoofed packets. In a wireless system, the CSI between
a transmitter and a receiver is represented as a set of complex
numbers that is measured at the receiver. This is useful in
understanding the channel characteristics and is often used to
set rate and beamforming parameters at the sender. In practice,
the measured CSI is actually a representation of the multi-
path components of the wireless signal from the transmitter
to the receiver, due to physical phenomena like scattering,
diffraction etc. Thus, in addition to measuring the channel
coefficients, the CSI can also be thought of as a fingerprint
for a receiver-transmitter location pair. To be more specific,
changing the location of either device will result in a different
set of measurements as the wireless signal may now undergo
a different set of reflections, resulting in different paths. The
uniqueness of CSI at different locations can thus be leveraged
to identify if a packet arriving at an AP is genuine or spoofed
by comparing it with a known CSI measurement from the
actual user device.
While the general idea of using CSI measurements to differ-
entiate between users works well, recent studies [2] have also
highlighted the sparse nature of wireless channels, whereby
the CSI from different locations may exhibit similar patterns
making it hard for an Anti-Spoofing system to distinguish
between some locations. The idea behind using rotational CSI
measurements for spoof detection stems from two interesting
observations in industry trends. First, there has been an ex-
ponential increase in Internet of Things (IoT) devices in the
last decade and these devices now form a large percentage
of wireless devices that are constantly communicating with a
server. These devices are low power devices and are usually
equipped with a single antenna for wireless communications.
As such, improvements that rely on antenna diversity may
not always be applied to these devices. Second, modern APs
such as the Archer AXE200 Omni [3], now come equipped
with mechanical antennas that can be rotated automatically
with internal motors. These are capable of quickly rotating to
different angles and are used to optimize the wireless signal
to connected devices.
This poses an interesting question. Can anti-spoofing meth-
ods be improved by using the CSI measurements from different
angles on the AP antenna for devices that are limited to
a single antenna? The answer lies in determining whether
offsetting the antenna at arbitrary angles introduces sufficient
changes in the multi-path components of the signal to be
able to distinguish it from the signal at another location. We
tackle this problem using experimental analysis in real world
locations and propose RCIS-AS - an improved anti-spoofing
algorithm complementary to most existing solutions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICWMC 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

discusses existing research efforts with anti-spoofing. Section
III provides a high level overview of RCSI-AS and some
theoretical background. Section IV discusses the details of
RCSI-AS. Section V evaluates the performance on real world
data. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Anti-spoofing methods that rely on physical layer infor-
mation have been of interest to researchers in recent years.
Typically, detection methods that rely on physical layer in-
formation usually attempt to localize the spoofed packet using
characteristics like the received signal strength [4] [5] or angle
or arrival [6] [7] to distinguish between users. RCSI-AS differs
from all of these methods as it solely relies on the channel state
information for detection of spoofed packets.
There has been some related research that uses the CSI
measurements as a fingerprint to detect spoofed packets. These
include prior work done by the authors on Time Bounded
Anti-Spoofing (TBAS) [1] and Time Bounded Anti-Spoofing
on Multiple Input Multiple Output (TBAS-MIMO) systems
[8] which is an extension to TBAS with multiple antenna
configurations. The key idea behind TBAS is that the CSI
for a location does not change in a short interval. When an
AP running TBAS receives a packet from a user, it sends a
dummy packet to the user that forces the user to send back
an ACK in accordance with the 802.11 MAC protocol. If this
was a spoofed packet that was sent by an attacker, the AP may
receive two responses, one from the actual user (if the attacker
does not respond) or a collided signal if both the attacker and
the actual user decide to respond. It can then compare the CSI
from the original packet and the dummy ACK to determine
the authenticity of the request. TBAS was implemented using
Software Defined Radios that uses the CSI measurements as
well as the power and other physical layer information to
achieve low false negative ratios during evaluation. TBAS-
MIMO was an experimental study on extending TBAS to
commercial off-the-shelf wireless cards that only reports the
CSI and no other information. A scenario where the original
TBAS sometimes fails is when the CSI from both the attacker
and the user coincidentally look similar. This is possible due
to the sparsity of wireless channels. TBAS-MIMO attempts
to solve this problem by introducing more spatial diversity
and comparing the CSI from multiple antenna pairs. TBAS-
MIMO also looked at the effects of mobility on the system
and recommended guidelines for implementing TBAS. RCSI-
AS uses a completely different method from both TBAS
and TBAS-MIMO. First, RCSI-AS is targeted towards single
antenna devices that may not always be able to take full
advantage of the recommendations outlined by TBAS-MIMO.
Second, RCSI-AS attempts to introduce spatial diversity by
rotating the antenna on the AP to collect CSI measurements at
different angular configurations within a short interval. Finally,
RCSI-AS periodically probes the user device to frequently
update the CSI measurements from the user.
Other research findings that also rely on the CSI include
Support Vector Machine (SVM) [9] techniques that uses clus-
tering to distinguish CSI measurements from different users
and needs a burn in period. More recent efforts include [10]–
[13] which are actually complementary to RCSI-AS. We also
note that RCSI-AS is much simpler to implement than some
of the methods listed here since RCSI-AS only works at the
AP and no modification is needed on the user device. Finally,
spoof detection methods like [14] [15] are aimed towards 5G
networks with different physical layer characteristics than Wi-
Fi.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0.6
0.8
1
AP antenna at 30°
User Location A
User Location B
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Normalized Amplitude
AP antenna at 60°
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Subcarrier Index
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
AP antenna at 150°
(a) Different user locations
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
AP antenna at 30°
T = 0ms
T =503ms
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Normalized Amplitude
AP antenna at 60°
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Subcarrier Index
0.4
0.6
AP antenna at 90°
(b) Same user location 500ms apart
Fig. 1. CSI measurements at different angles
III. OVERVIEW OF ANTI-SPOOFING IN RCSI-AS
This section provides an overview of RCSI-AS. To keep
things simple, we will consider a 1x1 configuration i.e. the
AP has a single antenna and the user device also has a single
antenna. RCSI-AS works only at the AP and periodically sends
out a burst of C probes, where C is referred to as the angular
configuration or the number of angles the antenna on the AP is
rotated by. The user device receives these probes and responds
with ACK packets that are used to measure the CSI between
the user and the AP. The value of C is determined empirically,
and we found that using C = 3 served a good balance between
accuracy of RCSI-AS and the probe overhead. As an example,
Fig. 1(a) shows the CSI measured from two user devices A
and B at different locations in a classroom. It can be seen
that, when C = 1, or when a single probe is used with the
antenna positioned at 30 degrees, the CSI measured for the two
users look very similar. They seem to be different only by a
constant factor which could be attributed to the hardware gain
applied to signal during measurement. Thus, using the CSI
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICWMC 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

measured from a single antenna, it may not always be possible
to distinguish between two users. However, when using C = 3,
it is clear that the users are different as the CSI measured at
other angles (60 degrees and 150 degrees) look very different
from the first configuration. Thus, RCSI-AS would correctly
be able to distinguish between user locations in this example.
The details on the choice of C can found in Section V.
On the other hand, Fig. 1(b) shows the measured CSI on
3 antennas from the same user measured at the AP around
500 milliseconds apart. It is evident that the CSI looks very
similar at all 3 angles and the CSI values are only offset by a
fixed constant at the AP. This is the key idea behind RCSI-AS,
to increase the spatial diversity when antenna diversity is not
possible.
In the following sections, we expand on the techniques and
heuristics used in RCSI-AS to detect spoofed packets using
multiple angular measurements.
IV. DETAILS OF RCSI-AS
This section outlines the details of the RCSI-AS system.
We note that, while the core idea behind RCSI-AS and its
implementation is completely different from our prior work
on TBAS, some of the mathematical computations, namely
the packet alignment and curve distortion, remain similar as
these are metrics used when comparing the similarity of the
measured CSI between two packets and can be applicable to
any AS system that uses the CSI to detect spoofed packets.
A. Channel State Information
The CSI is measured at the AP and is a set of complex num-
bers representing the summation of the multiple signal propa-
gation paths from the sender antenna to the receiver antenna.
Modern Wi-Fi systems implement Orthogonal Frequency-
Division Multiplexing (OFDM). Thus, the CSI measurement
on each OFDM subcarrier can be approximated as
H =
P
X
p=1
αpeifδp
(1)
where αp and δp denote the amplitude and delay of path p,
and P is the total number of multi-path components from the
sender to the receiver.
RCSI-AS considers the absolute value for each complex
subcarrier when looking at the measured CSI. The phase
values of the measured CSI can sometimes comprise of linear
and non-linear phase errors [16] that make it difficult to utilize
the phase values directly with RCSI-CS.
B. Packet Alignment
As seen in Fig. 1, when measuring the CSI across packets,
the hardware applies a different gain value for each packet.
Thus, before looking at the differences in CSI between 2
packets, the absolute values need to be aligned. The alignment
ratio r between two packets A and B can defined as
r =
PN
j=1 ajbj
PN
j=1 a2
j
(2)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0.6
0.8
1
Same Location
User A
User B
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Subcarrier Index
0.3
0.4
0.5
Amplitude
Different Location
User A
User B
Fig. 2. Effect of alignment on CSI from same location vs different locations
where aj and bj are the measured CSI values at subcarrier
j for A and B, respectively. The top half of Fig. 2 shows
an example of applying the alignment to two packets from
the same location that are only offset by some factor. After
alignment, both signals almost overlap each other and look
very similar in their shape and magnitude. On the other hand,
applying the alignment to packets from different locations will
still result in very different looking packets. It should also be
noted that the alignment ratio is computed for every angular
configuration.
C. Curve Distortion
The Curve Distortion ϵ between two aligned packets A and
B is defined as
ϵ =
PN
j=1(raj − bj)2
PN
j=1(raj)2
(3)
where aj and bj are the aligned CSI values at subcarrier
j for A and B, respectively and r is the alignment ratio.
This is essentially a numeric representation of the relative
difference between two packets. For reference, the ϵ values
in Fig. 1(a) when comparing the CSI for different users
at 30◦, 60◦ and 150◦ are 0.003, 0.17 and 0.35 respectively,
whereas for the same user location, as seen in Fig. 1(b),
these values are 0.0005, 0.001 and 0.002 It is evident that
using multiple angular measurements has a clear advantage
as the probability of two distinct user locations exhibiting
similar channel characteristics at all of the different angular
configurations remains very low.
D. Spoof Detection Threshold
The Curve Distortion is computed for each location pair
across every angle in an angular configuration. Suppose we
use an angular configuration C of the antenna. We can then
define the Spoof Detection Value γ between 2 users X and Y
as
γ = max
{C◦
k} [ϵ(k)]
(4)
where ϵ(k) refers to the kth curve distortion in C. The
ϵ is then compared against a Spoof Detection Threshold
to determine if the packets originated from different user
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICWMC 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

locations. We use a threshold of 0.03 in our evaluation of
RCSI-AS as we found lower distortion values usually just
originate from comparing the Gaussian noise between two
similar CSI signals.
V. EVALUATION
RCSI-AS was evaluated using real world experimental data
collected over the course of one month at different locations
in an university setting. The robustness of RCSI-AS was mea-
sured using its false positive and false negative performance.
The evaluation process is described below.
A. Experimental Setup
As the drivers for routers like the one mentioned in [3]
are proprietary, RCSI-AS was built using commercial off-the
shelf routers fitted with an external motor and a Raspberry
PI to control the rotation of the antenna. An overview of
the hardware setup and architecture is shown in Fig. 3. The
AP used in RCSI-AS is a TP-Link N750 Wireless router.
The router’s firmware was modified with the OpenWrt [17]
tool that enabled greater control of the channel, rate, and
transmission power parameters. In addition, one of the external
antennas of the router was connected to a Dorhea SG90 Micro
Servo Motor that was controlled using a Raspberry Pi 3 Model
B. To measure the CSI, we installed the NexMon CSITool
[18] [19] on a Raspberry PI Model 4 which contains a single
internal antenna. An external laptop was used to send pings to
the router that enabled us to measure the CSI. Some auxiliary
switches were used to facilitate remote operation of these
devices.
Fig. 3. System Architecture
B. Data Collection
We ran several experiments using the Nexmon CSITool at
different locations including classrooms, computing labs and
office spaces. We enabled only a single antenna for the AP
and so the measured CSI was a linear vector representing
the 64 subcarrier values on a 20MHz wireless channel. The
experiments were conducted in an environment with relatively
moderate mobility. This allowed us to simulate different types
CSI data representative of real world wireless channels. Some
example locations can be seen in Fig. 4 where the AP was
kept stationary inside a computer lab while the CSI for
different user locations was measured. For each user location,
Fig. 4. Some Experimental Locations
0
10
20
30
40
50
Subcarriers
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Amplitude
Location 1
Location 2
Location 3
Location 4
Fig. 5. Absolute value of CSI in 4 locations
a total of 5 angular CSI measurements were recorded. These
measurements were recorded at [30◦, 60◦, 90◦, 120◦, 150◦].
We note that these angles were chosen arbitrarily. In other
words, RCSI-AS will work with any configuration of angular
measurements. Our evaluation suite consisted of measurements
from 500 different locations.
C. Data Preprocessing
The CSI measurements were first sanitized by removing
null and pilot subcarrier indexes, as defined in the 802.11ac
standard [20]. These subcarriers do not contain actual measure-
ments and are not considered by RCSI-AS. The absolute value
of some typical CSI measurements after removal is shown in
Fig. 5. In addition, a few more pre-processing operations were
performed.
• It can be seen from Fig. 5 that the subcarriers at both
ends of the measurement seem to attenuate. The exact
cause of this is unknown, although we suspect it is due to
some additional filtering in hardware. Thus, we truncate
the signal by removing 6 subcarriers from both ends of
the measured CSI.
• Sometimes the recorded CSI contains very high spikes
that do not represent actual measurements. We discard
measurements where the number of subcarriers with
spikes exceed 30% of the total number of measured sub-
carriers.
• In some cases, the CSI was only recorded for half
of the bandwidth. These packets were also filtered out
by comparing the average power between the first and
second halves of the CSI measurement and filtering these
packets out if the difference between them exceeded an
order of magnitude.
• After performing the above preprocessing steps, we ob-
served that the measured CSI may still contain some
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICWMC 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

outlier values. Thus a final round of pre-processing is
performed using a Hampel filter to detect these outliers
from the CSI measurements using a median absolute
deviation threshold over a window size of 5. We note that
this does not always smooth out all the outliers, especially
at either end of the measured CSI, but this is a limitation
of the CSITool not RCSI-AS.
• After pre-processing the measured CSI was normalized
with its maximum amplitude set to 1.
D. False Negative Performance
This section describes the false negative performance of
RCSI-AS. The goal of this evaluation is to check how often
RCSI-AS can correctly identify that two users X and Y are
different by comparing their measured CSI. The preprocessed
CSI measurements from all 500 locations was considered for
this evaluation. A random CSI measurement was chosen from
each location. Then, the comparison described in Section IV
was performed for each unique location pair.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Spoof Detector Values
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fraction
30°
60°
90°
120°
150°
Fig. 6. False Negative Performance with Single Angular Configuration
1) Base Case: Fig. 6 shows the cumulative distribution of
spoof detector values (γ) when using angular configuration
of C = 1. It can be clearly seen that in the base case, when
only one angle of the antenna is considered, roughly 8.98%
of the CSI pairs may be misclassified by RCSI-AS as the
same user using a spoof detection threshold of 0.03. A typical
example was shown earlier in Fig. 1(a) where the measured
CSI from two different locations looked similar. Upon further
inspection, Fig. 7 shows a distribution of the location indexes
along with the fraction of misclassifications by RCSI-AS when
considering only the measured CSI at one angle. It can be seen
that for most locations, there is at least one other location
where the measured CSI may coincidentally look similar.
2) Multiple Angular Configurations:
The advantage of
RCSI-AS becomes evident when moving to higher angular
configurations (C > 2), which reduces the probability that
the measured CSI will exhibit similar characteristics across
all angles in C. We looked at the performance of RCSI-
AS for every combination of different angular configurations.
For example, when looking at angular configurations of size
2, the performance of all

Fig. 10. False Positive Performance with higher configurations
1) Base Case: As with the false negative evaluation, we
first establish the performance RCSI-AS when using C = 1.
Fig. 9 shows the cumulative distribution of the spoof detector
values (γ) across each individual angle when comparing the
CSI from a single angular measurement. It can be seen that
the false positive ratio is very good, and the percentage of mis-
classifications is below 5% when using a threshold of 0.03.
2) Higher Configurations: It can be seen from Fig. 10 that
increasing the number of angular configurations has a slight
degradation on the false positive performance. This is expected
since we consider the largest curve distortion value within
each combination. The false positive performance still remains
around 93% when using an angular configuration of C = 3
values. In addition, Fig. 11 shows the distribution of the error
values on all subcarriers when comparing the signals after
alignment at every angle. The distribution is mostly smooth
and the differences mainly arise from the quantization and
noise in the measured CSI.
Fig. 11. False Positive Performance when using higher configurations
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We proposed RCSI-AS, a novel anti-spoofing system based
on rotational channel state information on commodity wireless
APs. We implement a motorized system that allows rotation of
the antennas of an AP to measure the CSI at multiple angles.
RCSI-AS works by periodically sending multiple probes to a
user device at different angular configurations. This allows
RCSI-AS to detect spoofed packets even when the CSI at
different locations may exhibit similar characteristics at one
angular position of the antenna. We evaluated RCSI-AS using
real world experiments in 500 different locations and found
that RCSI-AS can detect packets from different locations
over 99.60% of the time when using 3 or more angular
configurations. At the same time, when looking at packets
from the same user location RCSI-AS will correctly identify
packets from the same user over 95% of the time. RCSI-AS
is aimed at single antenna devices which may not always be
able to take advantage of anti-spoofing methods that rely on
antenna diversity. We are currently looking into extensions to
RCSI-AS that can reduce the probe overhead even further and
also assess its performance in high mobility environments.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Liu, A. Mukherjee, Z. Zhang, and X. Liu, “TBAS: Enhancing Wi-
Fi Authentication by Actively Eliciting Channel State Information,” in
2016 13th Annual IEEE International Conference on Sensing, Commu-
nication, and Networking (SECON), pp. 1–9, 2016.
[2] R. He, B. Ai, G. Wang, M. Yang, C. Huang, and Z. Zhong, “Wireless
Channel Sparsity: Measurement, Analysis, and Exploitation in Estima-
tion,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 113–119, 2021.
[3] “AXE11000
Tri-Band
Wi-Fi
6E
Router.”
https://www.tp-
link.com/us/home-networking/wifi-router/archer-axe200-omni/, 2013.
[4] Y. Chen, W. Trappe, and R. P. Martin, “Detecting and Localizing
Wireless Spoofing Attacks,” in 2007 4th Annual IEEE Communications
Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications and
Networks, pp. 193–202, 2007.
[5] J. Yang, Y. Chen, W. Trappe, and J. Cheng, “Detection and localization
of multiple spoofing attackers in wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 44–58, 2013.
[6] H.-C. Chen, T.-H. Lin, H. T. Kung, C.-K. Lin, and Y. Gwon, “Determin-
ing RF angle of arrival using COTS antenna arrays: A field evaluation,”
in MILCOM 2012 - 2012 IEEE Military Communications Conference,
pp. 1–6, 2012.
[7] J. Xiong and K. Jamieson, “SecureAngle: Improving Wireless Security
Using Angle-of-Arrival Information,” Association for Computing Ma-
chinery, 2010.
[8] A. Mukherjee, A. W. Garvin, S. E. Sanchez, and Z. Zhang, “Experi-
mental Evaluation of Time Bounded Anti-Spoofing (TBAS) in MIMO
Systems,” in GLOBECOM 2017 - 2017 IEEE Global Communications
Conference, pp. 1–6, 2017.
[9] H. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Liu, J. Yang, and Y. Chen, “Practical User Authen-
tication Leveraging Channel State Information (CSI),” Association for
Computing Machinery, 2014.
[10] J. K. Tugnait, “Detection of Pilot Spoofing Attack Over Frequency Se-
lective Channels,” in 2018 IEEE Statistical Signal Processing Workshop
(SSP), pp. 737–741, 2018.
[11] C. Li and A. Sezgin, “Spoofing attack detection in dynamic channels
with imperfect CSI,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06185, 2021.
[12] X. Li, K. Huang, S. Wang, and X. Xu, “A physical layer authentication
mechanism for IoT devices,” vol. 19, pp. 129–140, 2022.
[13] Z. Jiang, J. Zhao, X.-Y. Li, J. Han, and W. Xi, “Rejecting the attack:
Source authentication for Wi-Fi management frames using CSI Infor-
mation,” in 2013 Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM, pp. 2544–2552, 2013.
[14] W. Li, N. Wang, L. Jiao, and K. Zeng, “Physical Layer Spoofing Attack
Detection in MmWave Massive MIMO 5G Networks,” vol. 9, pp. 60419–
60432, 2021.
[15] D. Spoljar, K. Lenac, D. Zigman, and M. Marovi´c, “A Mobile Network-
Based GNSS Anti-Spoofing,” in 2018 26th Telecommunications Forum
(TELFOR), pp. 1–3, 2018.
[16] H. Zhu, Y. Zhuo, Q. Liu, and S. Chang, “Pi-splicer: Perceiving accurate
csi phases with commodity wifi devices,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 2155–2165, 2018.
[17] “OpenWrt: A Linux kernel based operating system for embedded
solutions.” https://openwrt.org/, 2022.
[18] M. Schulz, D. Wegemer, and M. Hollick, “Nexmon: The C-based
Firmware Patching Framework.” https://openwrt.org/, 2017.
[19] F. Gringoli, M. Schulz, J. Link, and M. Hollick, “Free Your CSI:
A Channel State Information Extraction Platform For Modern Wi-Fi
Chipsets,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Workshop on Wire-
less Network Testbeds, Experimental Evaluation & Characterization,
WiNTECH ’19, p. 21–28, 2019.
[20] “IEEE Standard for Information technology – Telecommunications
and information exchange between systems,” IEEE Std 802.11ac-2013,
pp. 1–425, 2013.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICWMC 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

