A Comparative Study on Mobile Content Delivery Networks  
 
Mohammad H. Al Shayeji, Sa’ed Abed, Aisha E. Bourahma, M.D. Samrajesh  
 
Computer Engineering Department, College of Computing Sciences and Engineering, 
Kuwait University, Kuwait 
e-mail: m.alshayeji@ku.edu.kw, s.abed@ku.edu.kw , eng.aisha.e@gmail.com, 
sam@differentmedia-kw.com  
 
 
Abstract— The exponential growth of mobile devices has a 
significant role in the generation and sharing of digital content. 
A Content Delivery Network (CDN) is a collection of servers 
and networking components used for effective delivery of 
content to end-users. As access to mobile-based applications 
tend to grow, Mobile Content Delivery Networks (MCDNs) 
play a crucial role in distributing digital content to mobile end 
users. MCDNs improve the delivery of content by providing 
the user requested data from closer location there by 
decreasing the network traffic and latency. However, there is a 
lack of study on the various mobile content delivery models 
available. In this paper, we classify the different approaches of 
MCDN based on caching and replication, and study their 
features, and their functionalities. Moreover, we describe the 
various merits and demerits of each mobile content delivery 
method. 
Keywords- Caching; Media Streaming; Mobile Content 
Delivery Networks; Replication; Wireless Network.  
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Today, mobile devices are very popular and they produce 
and consume significant amount of digital data.  Together 
with data produced from fixed devices, digital content grow 
exponentially due to popular applications such as mobile 
television, mobile Video on Demand (VoD), social media, 
live traffic information, location based services and much 
more [9]. There is a need for efficient delivery of digital 
content to the end users [15]. Delivery of content to mobile 
devices is much more challenging than fixed devices as the 
bandwidth, signal strength, energy etc. of the devices play a 
crucial role in the delivery and transfer of the content.  
Customary fixed Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) 
provide a scalable and cost-effective way of content delivery. 
However, the design of existing CDNs is inadequate for 
wireless devices where the end users mobility is high. 
Mobile Content Delivery Network (MCDN) improves the 
delivery of content by providing the user requested data from 
a closer location. Mobile network operators can achieve up 
to 30% faster mobile content delivery as well as up to 20% 
reduction in mobile data traffic using MCDN [8].  
A classification and survey of CDNs is presented in [16].  
It described a regular CDN’s organizational structure, 
content distribution mechanisms, and user request redirection 
techniques. The paper mapped the classification to existing 
CDNs to demonstrate its applicability and analyze CDNs. 
Moreover, it identified the strength and weaknesses. 
However, it does not consider mobile CDN implementations. 
A survey on content delivery acceleration in mobile 
networks is presented in [5]. The paper classified the 
acceleration solutions in mobile networks into 3 main 
sections: first the mobile system evolution, second the 
content and network optimization, and finally the mobile 
data offloading. However, it only considered mobile CDN in 
the mobile system evolution. 
Streaming media content for mobile CDN is presented in 
[22]. This approach streams content for large-scale mobile 
media delivery services. The MSM-CDN is a virtual overlay 
network placed on top of Internet Protocol (IP) networks; it 
is a set of managed or self-managed overlay nodes that work 
together to deliver media streams to mobile users. However, 
an implementation of the proposed method is not performed 
and evaluated. 
The challenges of video distribution and mobility 
management, with respect to Quality of Service (QoS) and 
Quality of Experience (QoE) is presented in [18]. The paper 
concluded that MCDN enhances video transport using 
caching strategies. Moreover, the paper proposed a complete 
MCDN framework based on popularity based approach. The 
paper did not consider other performance aspects of MCDN 
apart from the popularity of content. 
In this paper, we present a comparative study of different 
MCDNs implementations and their features. Moreover, we 
analyze the various advantages and disadvantages for each 
method and contrast between them. We focus on content 
availability and content retrieval mechanism using caching 
and replication.  The paper is organized as follows. The 
related works on CDN and MCDN is presented in Section II. 
The study and comparative analysis of various MCDN is 
presented in Section III. Section IV concludes the paper and 
presents the future directions. 
 
 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Figure 1. Typical CDN infrastructure 
 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A Content Delivery Network (CDN) is collection of 
interconnected servers used for effective delivery of content 
to end-users [6]-[7][16]. CDN’s infrastructures can be 
centralized, decentralized or hierarchical. The delivery of 
content is done using content replication. The best 
replication strategy makes effective content delivery and 
overcomes traffic congestion. CDN based replication or 
caching strategy is done by placing different edge servers 
(i.e. surrogate server) near the users to act as a mirror to the 
original content server [1][18]. The content can be either 
static or dynamic, audio or video, text or image or a full web 
page. Content is placed in at least one server in the network. 
The original content server is generally termed as source 
server. 
All CDNs have the following connections: the first is 
between the original content provider and the CDN 
providers; the second is from CDNs provider to the Internet 
service provider. Even though CDNs have improved the 
delivery of services to the user, it is not efficient for mobile 
users, as the mobility of users impacts the performance, and 
mostly the user demand in this situation is dynamically 
varying. Moreover, there are lots of other constraints that 
mobility imposes on the system such as signal strength, 
energy etc. Hence, mobile CDNs play an important role in 
delivering content to mobile end users [14]. 
A Mobile CDN is a network of servers, systems and 
mobile devices that cooperate and work together for an 
effective delivery of content to end users using a wireless 
network [12]. The goal of a mobile CDN is similar to that of 
typical CDNs, that is, to serve content to end users with low 
latency and high performance. In addition, Mobile CDN 
optimizes content delivery to end user regardless of various 
constrains in the mobile networks [8]. 
A typical infrastructure of mobile CDNs is shown in 
Figure 1. The figure comprises of the following parts: (a) 
Wired 
CDN 
infrastructure 
and (b) Wireless 
CDN 
infrastructure [15].  The wired part has the elements of the 
typical CDN but with different management algorithms (i.e., 
links between origin servers and surrogate servers, surrogate 
servers with network elements such as routers, switches 
3G/GSM enabled base station and Wi-Fi enabled access 
point). The wireless infrastructure part contains the links 
between static and mobile devices. The basic communication 
here is (a) between the client and the edge of the wireless 
network (i.e., Wi-Fi or cellular), (b) between the edge of the 
wireless network and the surrogate server, (c) between the 
surrogate server and the origin server. 
Information dissemination based mobile CDN(s) is presented 
in [15]. The recent advancements in wireless networking 
infrastructure and the challenges in mobile CDNs are 
discussed. Moreover, the paper investigated the network 
infrastructures of mobile CDNs, and explored on how 
information dissemination can be improved using MCDN.  
MCDN works in ad-hoc networks such as MANET 
(Mobile Ad hoc NETwork) or VANET (Vehicular Ad hoc 
NETwork). MANET is a self-configuring infrastructure less 
network of mobile devices connected wirelessly [3][19][23], 
and VANET uses vehicles as mobile nodes to create a 
mobile network. Our paper focuses on the mobile content 
delivery in network that could either be one with a 
centralized infrastructure or an ad-hoc network. The 
communication in the centralized infrastructure is between 
the end users and the wireless access point or base station of 
the cellular network. In case of an ad-hoc network, the 
communication is between the end user and the wireless 
content provider.  
III. 
COMPARATIVE STUDY OF MCDN  
We study six MCDN approaches. 1) Mobile Dynamic 
Content Distribution Network (MDCDN) [1]. 2) Mobile 
Streaming Media Content Delivery Network (MSM-CDN) 
[22]. 3) A popularity based approach for the design of 
mobile content delivery networks [18]. 4) SCALAR: 
Scalable data lookup and replication protocol for mobile ad 
hoc networks ‎[2]. 5) Novel architecture for a mobile content 
delivery network [21]. 6) Mobile caching policies for 
Device-to-Device (D2D) content delivery networking [11]. 
Figure 2 shows the classification of MCDN based on caching 
and replication.   
Table 1 presents a comparison of different approaches in 
MCDN. The approaches are of type either content replication 
or caching or mixed type. The design in [18] uses the most 
accurate and effective calculation of popularity; however, the  
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE 1.  COMPARISON OF MOBILE CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS (MCDN) 
 
 
 
traffic between the nodes and the core router is high. 
MDCDN uses a predictable heuristic algorithm to determine 
the exact replication in each node. The temporal and spatial 
client demand are considered, it reconfigures the system, 
such as to minimize network traffic. MSM-CDN replicates 
data based on 3 factors 1) popularity, 2) size of the segment, 
and 3) cacheability. The popularity-based approach for the 
design of mobile content delivery networks [18] uses two 
levels of popularity,  global and regional,  to determine the 
content to replicate.  Scalar uses Reactive Replication (RR)  
mechanism for replication. Moreover, the replication 
decision depends on the cost and the location of the request. 
Scalar is suitable for any kind of data either static, or 
dynamic including video streaming.   The Novel 
Architecture uses Proxy Mobile Internet Protocol (PMIP) 
[21]. Mobile caching for Device-to-Device (D2D) [11] is 
more reliable as content is stored in devices such that it 
minimizes the average caching failure rate. 
Table 2 lists the merits of the different MCDNs. The 
ability of uploading content by the end user using mobile   
S# 
Approach   
Type 
Description 
1 
MDCDN : Mobile 
Dynamic Content 
Distribution 
Network [1] 
Replication 
 
Content replication or removals of previously created 
replicas in the servers are done based on spatial distribution 
of client demand for that object.  
 
A predictable demand online heuristic algorithm is used to 
reach the exact replication in each node with the lowest 
redundancy between nodes. 
 
Content replication is either  total  content or partial content  
2 
MSM-CDN : 
Mobile Streaming 
Media Content 
Delivery Network 
[22] 
Mixed - 
Replication 
and Caching  
 
 
A customizable media management system that can be 
either centralized or distributed or hierarchical is used 
 
Both push and pull data strategies are applied. 
 
Replicating data depends on 3 factors 1) popularity, 2) size 
of the segment and 3) cacheability.  
3 
A popularity based 
approach for the 
design of Mobile  
Content Delivery 
Network  [18] 
 
Caching 
 
A centralized system management for video distribution. 
 
Two levels of popularity are used 1) global and 2) regional. 
 
The system is integrated with dynamic adaptive streaming 
over Internet and the videos are partitioned into several 
segments. 
4 
SCALAR: Scalable 
data lookup and 
replication protocol 
for mobile ad hoc 
networks [2]  
Replication 
 
Works based on virtual backbone construction algorithm. 
 
Reactive Replication (RR) mechanism is used for 
replication. 
 
The replication decision depends on the cost and the 
location of the request. 
5 
Novel Architecture 
for a Mobile 
Content Delivery 
Network [21] 
Caching 
 
Proxy Mobile Internet Protocol version 6 (PMIPv6) based 
mobile CDN aims to reduce the link stress and hop count. 
 
Cache servers are placed with the Local Mobility Anchor 
(LMA) and Mobile Access Gateway (MAG). 
 
Proxy mobile IPv6 provides session continuity when 
roaming.  
6 
Mobile caching 
policies for Device-
to-Device (D2D) 
content delivery 
networking [11] 
Caching 
 
Designates mobile devices as caching servers, which 
provides near-by devices popular contents on demand. 
 
Content is stored such as to minimize the average caching 
failure rate. 
 
Presents a low-complexity search algorithm, which offers 
dual searching algorithm. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE 2.  MERITS OF THE DIFFERENT MOBILE CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS (MCDN) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Classification of Mobile Content Delivery Networks (MCDN) 
S# 
Approach   
Merits  
1 
MDCDN : Mobile Dynamic 
Content Distribution Network 
[1] 
 
The replication mechanism is simple. 
 
The decision of replica location depends on the geographical 
demands such as to reduce the total network traffic [26]. 
 
The management of the system is distributed and executed by 
each node independently [24]. 
2 
MSM-CDN : Mobile 
Streaming Media Content 
Delivery Network [22] 
 
Its flexibility and modularity allows it to be scalable. 
 
Video uploading from mobile user to the infrastructure is 
supported [15]. 
 
Supports stream scheduling. 
 
The system can deliver a full video or a segment of the video. 
3 
A popularity based approach 
for the design of Mobile  
Content Delivery Network  
[18] 
 
 
Efficient popularity calculations for small number of regions. 
 
Takes advantage of the correlation between two adjacent nodes 
eases the problem of request routing.  
 
Supports different sizes of nodes caches depending on regional 
requests [22]. 
4 
SCALAR: Scalable data 
lookup and replication 
protocol for mobile ad hoc 
networks [2] 
 
Due to its virtualized backbone structure, its ability to be scaled 
up is high. 
 
Effective for MANET implementation. 
 
Suitable for any kind of data either static or dynamic including 
video streaming. 
5 
Novel Architecture for a 
Mobile Content Delivery 
Network [21] 
 
Do not require any supplementary space as the cache servers are 
placed with the LMA and MAG. 
 
Offers session continuity for highly mobile end users.  
 
The overall network traffic is reduced by minimizing link stress.  
6 
Mobile caching policies for 
Device-to-Device (D2D) 
content delivery networking 
[11] 
 
The performance of optimal caching probability is compared 
Equal caching Probability (EP) and High-Priority-First selection 
(HPF). 
 
The search algorithm has low complexity hence offers better 
search performance.  
Mobile Streaming Media Content Delivery Network MSM-CDN   
Mobile Content Delivery Networks (MCDN) 
Caching   
Replication  
 
MDCDN: Mobile Dynamic Content Distribution 
Network  
 
SCALAR: Scalable data lookup and replication 
protocol for mobile ad hoc networks 
 
A popularity based approach for the design of MCDN  
 
Novel Architecture for a MCDN 
 
Mobile caching policies for device-to-device (D2D) 
CDN 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE 3.  DE-MERITS OF THE DIFFERENT MOBILE CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS (MCDN) 
 
 
device to the MCDN server is missing in most approaches. 
SCALAR 
is 
effective 
for 
mobile 
ad-hoc 
network 
implementations. Caching in [21] uses PMIP and the cache 
servers are placed with the LMA and MAG therefore it does 
not require additional space. Highly mobile end users may 
move from one location to another hence session continuity 
is essential. The network traffic is reduced by minimizing the 
link stress, i.e., the total traffic. Mobile caching policies 
when compared, D2D [11] outperforms Equal caching 
Probability (EP) and High-Priority-First selection (HPF).  
Moreover, the search algorithm has low complexity, hence 
offers faster searches.  
The demerits of the approaches are given in Table 3.   In 
MDCDN [1], the probability of content misses in the closest 
node to the user is high since the replication in each node has 
sharp boundaries [11]. It supports only download data. 
Moreover, if user requests different content extensive content 
replacement is done [25]. In Mobile Streaming Media 
Content Delivery Network MSM-CDN [22], network 
congestion may occur when entire videos are replicated. The 
S# 
Approach   
De-merits 
1 
MDCDN : Mobile 
Dynamic Content 
Distribution Network  
[1] 
 
The probability of content misses in the nearest node to the user is 
higher [11]. 
 
The data is available in the closest server (to the client) only after the 
other client requested it, not before the request [5]. Hence, the first user 
will have delay. 
 
Extensive content replacement is done since it depends on user requests 
[25][20]. 
 
User can only download data; user upload is not possible [15]. 
2 
MSM-CDN : Mobile 
Streaming Media 
Content Delivery 
Network [22] 
 
Too many customizations make the system sensitive to errors and 
failures.  
 
The ability of delivering a full video is applicable for small networks, 
but for larger networks, network data congestion may occur.  
3 
A popularity based 
approach for the design 
of Mobile  Content 
Delivery Network  [18] 
 
 
All popularity database recorded should be send to a core router in ∆T, 
which increases the network traffic. 
 
Complex and not realistic to be implemented for large number of 
regions. 
 
Applicable for centralized Mobile CDN only [15]. 
 
A user cannot upload data, only downloading is allowed. 
4 
SCALAR: Scalable data 
lookup and replication 
protocol for mobile ad 
hoc networks [2] 
 
Not recommended for centralized network. 
 
Has computation overhead since it has extensive computations and 
complex replication mechanisms. 
5 
Novel Architecture for a 
Mobile Content Delivery 
Network [21] 
 
Ideal for multimedia content not suitable for other applications  
 
As multiple Local mobility anchors (LMA) are configured, LMA 
selection becomes an issue [10]. 
6 
Mobile caching policies 
for Device-to-Device 
(D2D) content delivery 
networking [11] 
 
The regularity conditions for Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions 
are not mentioned in the paper [13]. 
 
Energy of the mobile device is not considered while considering the 
device for caching [11]. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

popularity based [18] has an extra overhead in sending data 
to core routers. Moreover, it is designed for centralized 
CDN. User uploads are not allowed. Scalar [2] uses complex 
replication mechanism and is ideal for distributed MCDN. 
Novel architecture [21] is ideal for multimedia content and 
not suitable for other applications as the MCDN is based on 
media caching. However, when multiple Local Mobility 
Anchor (LMA) is configured, LMA selection becomes an 
issue [10]. Mobile caching policies for D2D [11] is based on 
Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) However, the regularity 
conditions for KKT conditions are not specified. Moreover, 
while selecting candidates for caching, the mobile device’s 
energy is not considered [11]. Peer-to-peer file sharing 
applications using CDN is growing in popularity nowadays 
[26]. However, most existing CDNs have not capitalized it. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
We presented a study of six different implementations of 
Mobile 
Content 
Delivery 
Network 
(MCDN). 
The 
comparison study examines the strategy used for content 
delivery i.e., replication, caching or mixed type (replication 
and caching). A description of each approach is presented. 
Moreover, the advantages and disadvantages of each 
approach are detailed.  For a commercial CDN provider, 
adapting the MSM-CDN approach is most suitable.  As the 
usage of social media is growing, a framework that depends 
on dissemination of data based on users access pattern and 
profile is more effective. Additionally, the study finds that in 
most MCDN implementations, the ability of uploading 
content by end user using mobile devices to the MCDN 
servers was missing. As a part of future work, we plan to 
design and develop a new algorithm for effective content 
uploads in MCDN using P2P approach. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Wagner et al. "Mobile dynamic content distribution networks." 
Proceedings of the 7th ACM international symposium on Modeling, 
analysis and simulation of wireless and mobile systems. ACM, 2004, 
pp. 87-94 
[2] A. Emre and Ö. Özkasap. "SCALAR: Scalable data lookup and 
replication protocol for mobile ad hoc networks." Computer 
Networks, Vol 57(17),   2013, pp. 3654-3672. 
[3] C. Nikhil. "Web distribution systems: Caching and replication”. 
Available: 
http:/www. 
cse. 
wustl. 
edu/jain/cis788-99/web—
caching/index.html, 1999 (last accessed date August 25, 2015) 
[4] D. Ashutosh, and H.Schulzrinne. "MarconiNet: overlay mobile 
content distribution network." Communications Magazine, IEEE 
42.2, 2004, pp. 64-75. 
[5] H. Tao et al. "On accelerating content delivery in mobile networks." 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE 15.3: 2013, pp. 1314-
1333. 
[6] Wikipedia, 
Available: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Mobile_ad_hoc_network (last accessed date August 25, 2015) 
[7] Wikipedia, Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_CDN (last 
accessed date August 25, 2015) 
[8] CDN 
Networks 
, 
Available: 
http://www.cdnetworks.com/products/mobile-cdn/ (last accessed date 
August 25, 2015) 
[9] S. Ioannidis, A. Chaintreau, and L. Massoulie. "Optimal and scalable 
distribution of content updates over a mobile social network." 
INFOCOM 2009, IEEE. 2009, pp. 1422-1430. 
[10] A.F. Izmailov and M.V. Solodov. "Karush-Kuhn-Tucker systems: 
regularity conditions, error bounds and a class of Newton-type 
methods." Mathematical Programming 95.3, 2003,  pp. 631-650. 
[11] J. Kang et al. "Mobile caching policies for device-to-device (D2D) 
content delivery networking." Computer Communications Workshops 
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2014 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, 2014, pp. 
299-304. 
[12] C.A. La et al. "Content Replication in Mobile Networks." Selected 
Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on 30 (9): 2012, pp. 1762-
1770. 
[13] X. Li et al. "Green Tube: power optimization for mobile video 
streaming via dynamic cache management." Proceedings of the 20th 
ACM international conference on Multimedia. ACM, 2012, pp. 279-
288. 
[14] M. Liebsch and F.Z. Yousaf. "Runtime relocation of CDN Serving 
Points-Enabler for low costs mobile Content Delivery." Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2013 IEEE, 
2013, . pp. 1464-1469. 
[15] L. 
Nicholas, 
G.Pallis, 
and 
M.D. 
Dikaiakos. 
"Information 
dissemination in mobile CDNs." Content Delivery Networks. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,2008, ,  pp. 343-366. 
[16] A.M.K.Pathan and R. Buyya. "A taxonomy and survey of content 
delivery networks." Grid Computing and Distributed Systems 
Laboratory, University of Melbourne, Technical Report, 2007, pp. 1-
44. 
[17] P. Debashish, et al. "Edge Caching in a Small Cell Network." Int. J. 
Net. Tech. Sys 2.1  , 2014, pp 41-46. 
[18] R. Daniele. "A popularity-based approach for the design of mobile 
content 
delivery 
networks." 
Available: 
http://tesi.cab.unipd.it/44283/1/A_popularity-
based_approach_for_the_design_of_mobile_content_delivery_networ
ks.pdf , 2013. 
[19] H.Safa, F. Deriane, and H. Artail. "A replication based caching 
strategy for MANETs." Mobile and Wireless Networking (iCOST), 
2011 International Conference on Selected Topics in. IEEE,  2011, 
pp. 139-144 
[20] Z. Su et al. "Consistency and update in mobile overlay networks." 
Communications and Networking in China, 2008. ChinaCom 2008. 
Third International Conference on. IEEE, 2008, pp. 1029-1033. 
[21] K. I. M. Taekook et al. "Novel architecture for a mobile content 
delivery network based on proxy mobile IPv6." IEICE Transactions 
on Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications and Computer 
Sciences 97.3, 2014, pp 907-910. 
[22] S.Wee et al. "Research and design of a mobile streaming media 
content delivery network." Multimedia and Expo, 2003. ICME'03. 
Proceedings. 2003 International Conference on. Vol. 1. IEEE, 2003. , 
pp. 1-5. 
[23] Y.Xu, H.C. Lee, and V.L Thing. "A local mobility agent selection 
algorithm for mobile networks." Communications, 2003. ICC'03. 
IEEE International Conference on. Vol. 2. IEEE,  2003, pp. 1074-
1079. 
[24] F.Z. Yousaf et al. "Mobile CDN enhancements for QoE-improved 
content delivery in mobile operator networks." Network, IEEE 27, 
2013, 2  pp. 14-21. 
[25] J.Zhang, G.Shlomo and T.Andrew  "Using mobile phones to improve 
offline access to online information: Distributed Content Delivery." 
Mobile IT Convergence (ICMIC), 2011 International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2011, , pp. 54-57. 
[26] M. Stiemerling,  M. Scharf, S. Kiesel, and S. Previdi, ALTO 
Deployment Considerations,2015  
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

