Radiation Pattern Behaviour of Reconfigurable Asymmetry Slotted Ultra 
Wideband Antenna 
 
 
Yusnita Rahayu  
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering 
Universiti Malaysia Pahang 
Kuantan, Pahang 26600, Malaysia 
Email: vannebula2001@yahoo.com 
 
Azlyna Senawi 
FIST 
Universiti Malaysia Pahang 
 Kuantan, Pahang 26300, Malaysia 
Email: Azlyna@ump.edu.my 
 
Razali Ngah 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
Johor Bahru, 81310, Malaysia 
Email: razalin@fke.utm.my 
 
 
Abstract-This paper presents the results of radiation pattern 
measurement of small reconfigurable slotted ultra wideband 
(UWB) antennas. The measurements were conducted by using 
RF measurement and instrumentation facilities, software tools 
available at WCC of Universiti Teknologi Malaysia. The 
original antenna’s geometry proposed is slotted antenna with L 
and U slots. Then the slots modifications are applied in order 
to achieve band-notched characteristics. These proposed 
antennas are having band notched frequencies at Fixed 
Wireless Access (FWA), HIPERLAN and WLAN bands. The 
band-notched operation is achieved by incorporating some 
small gaps instead of PIN diodes into the slot antenna. It is 
found that by adjusting the total length of slot antenna to be 
about a half-wavelength or less at desired notched frequency 
[1-3], a destructive interference can take place, thus causing 
the antenna to be non-responsive at that frequency. It was also 
observed that the measured radiation patterns, H-planes, are 
omni-directional with slightly gain decreased at boresight 
direction for measured frequencies. There are also more 
ripples occurred in the measured pattern compared with the 
simulated one.  
  
Keywords-component; 
antenna; 
antenna measurement; 
radiation pattern; ultra wideband; band-notched antenna. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This section reviews the concept of reconfigurable 
antennas that reuse their entire geometry for band-notched 
frequency applications. Various techniques used have been 
reported in literature [1-9].  
In [1], there are two varieties of slotted antennas which 
have a frequency notched reported, a triangular notch and 
elliptical notch. Both antennas have frequency notch 
characteristics where the arc length of slots form a half 
wavelength resonance structure at particular frequency, thus 
a destructive interference takes place causing the antennas 
to be non-responsive at that frequency. Other types of this 
kind antenna was reported in [4], a band notched UWB 
antenna using a slot-type split ring resonator (SRR) was 
found very effective in rejecting unwanted frequency, such 
as that for WLAN service, in terms of its selectivity and 
small dimension. The SRR is composed of two concentric 
split ring slots and proposed for band stop application, since 
it provides high Q characteristic. The slotted SRR was 
positioned near the feeding point to provide more coupling 
with the field. A multiple band-notched planar monopole 
antenna using multiple U-shape slots for multi band wireless 
system was also presented in [5]. The half wavelength U-
shape slots were symmetrically inserted in the centre of the 
planar element. In order to generate the two band-notched 
characteristics, three U-shape slots were proposed. An 
alternative antenna design without using slot to obtain band-
notched characteristic was proposed in [6]. The antenna 
consists of two same size monopoles and a small strip bar at 
the centre showing the band rejection performance in the 
desired frequency bands. More examples of reconfigurable 
antenna are available in [7-9]. 
In this paper, new proposed reconfigurable UWB 
antennas are designed by adopting the half wavelength slot 
structure techniques. This paper mainly focuses on 
reconfigurable notch band through the introduction of new 
slots, L and U slots, on patch antenna. The current 
distribution on patch surface is disturbed by the introduction 
of new slots, which is responsible for the notch in frequency 
band. Section II will discuss the antenna geometry and the 
techniques to design new reconfigurable slotted antennas. 
These proposed antennas are having band notched 
frequencies. The band-notched operation is achieved by 
incorporating some small gaps instead of PIN diodes into 
the slot antenna. The term of small gaps in this paper will 
refer to switches. The switches are used to short the slot in 
pre-selected positions along the circumference. The length 
of the slot antenna can be lengthened or shorted by closing 
or opening the switches, allowing for a change in the 
notched frequency. Then the performances of reconfigurable 
antennas, in terms of VSWR and radiation patterns, will be 
discussed and evaluated in Section III. Finally, summary 
will be given in Section IV. 
II. 
ANTENNA GEOMETRY 
Fig. 1 shows the original proposed antenna structure 
printed on the FR4 substrate of εr = 4.6. The pentagonal 
antenna is vertically installed above a ground plane (lgrd) of 
11 mm. The optimum feed gap (h) to the ground plane is 
found to be 1.5 mm. The dimension of substrate is chosen to 
be 30 x 30 mm2 (Wsub x Lsub) in this study. Antenna has a 
pentagonal patch with a width (w) of 15 mm and a length (l) 
of 12 mm. This shape is as variation of rectangular shape 
with bevel techniques. The couple slots, L and U, are 
designed very carefully by studying the current flow 
distribution which will give input impedance improvement.  
81
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

The slots proposed on patch effectively change its 
electrical length over a very wide bandwidth. Slot 
dimensions of the proposed antenna are listed in Table 1. 
The slot width is 0.5 mm in order to improve the bandwidth 
above 10 GHz. 
 
Lsub
Wsub
lgrd
Unit
 [mm]
ls1
ls2
ls3
ls4
w
l
h
w
2
 
 
Figure 1. Geometry of L and U slotted antenna 
 
TABLE I DIMENSION OF L AND U SLOT 
Description 
L and U Slots 
Symbol 
Size [mm] 
Slot length 
Is1 
6 
Is2 
9 
Is3 
3 
Is4 
6.5 
Frequency (GHz)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Return Loss (dB)
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Simulated L and U slotted antenna
Measured L and U slotted antenna
 
Figure 2. The measured and simulated return loss L and U slotted antenna 
 
The simulated and measured return loss is shown in Fig. 
2. The measured return loss is slightly shifted to the 
simulated one, but they still cover 2.5 GHz to 10.1 GHz as 
what the UWB required. The length of L slot is 14.5 mm 
approximately equal to 0.25λ at 5.3 GHz, and the length of 
U slot is 11.5 mm approximately equal to 0.4λ at 10.3 GHz. 
The original geometry of slotted antenna is taken as a 
reference to form new modified L and U reconfigurable 
slotted antennas. The modified antennas are designed for 
having 
reconfigurable 
frequency 
notched 
at 
FWA, 
HIPERLAN, and WLAN as shown in Fig. 3. There are 
maximum six switches used to provide the reconfigurable 
function. No especial matching network is used and the 
matching properties are solely determined by the placement 
of the switches. The dimensions of antenna and substrate are 
kept equal to the original model. The length of L and U slots 
are similar to the previous length, except two additional slot 
lengths, Is20 and Is21. The additional slots are very critically 
determined by the frequency notched band characteristics. 
Licensed band at FWA for point to multipoint radio 
systems assigned by Malaysian Communications and 
Multimedia Commissions (MCMC) for 3.4 to 3.7 GHz is 
considered 
giving 
potential 
interference 
to 
UWB 
application. 
Therefore, 
the 
antenna 
had 
notched 
characteristic at this band is also proposed.  
For the simulation purposed, the switches are considered 
as ideal switches and are modeled as small patches that 
connect or disconnect the adjacent slot, changing the 
antennas’ slot length. 
82
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

ls19
ls18
ls17
ls16
ls20
ls21
off
on
ls19
ls18
ls17
ls16
ls20
ls21
off
on
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
#1
#2
#3
#4
#5
#6
                                                                                 
        (a)                                             (b) 
ls19
ls18
ls17
ls16
ls20
ls21
off
on
ls19
ls18
ls17
ls16
ls20
ls21
off
on
#6
#5
#4
#3
#2
#1
#3
#2
#1
#4
#5
#6
                                       
(c)                                              (d) 
Figure 3. Switching configuration for L and U slotted antennas: (a) 
without notched, (b) notched at FWA, (c) notched at HIPERLAN, (d) 
notched at WLAN 
For prototype development, the gaps are created in the 
UWB antenna pattern, which are represented as switches. 
The selection of PIN diodes as switches is based on their 
low cost, higher speed and they have better insertion losses 
at higher frequency than FET switches. 
In Fig. 3, the switches have different colors for on and 
off state condition. Blue color represents the on state 
condition and red color for the off state condition. In order 
to provide the UWB characteristic, the switches are placed 
as shown in Fig. 3(a). Three switches of #2, #3, and #4 are 
in the off state position. Other switches of #1, #5, and #6 are 
in the on state condition. When the switches are in the off 
state condition, the gap between slots occurs and the current 
flowing to the gap. When the switches are in the on state 
condition, there is no current flowing to the slots. Thus it 
forms continuous slots. The switches of #2 and #3 are 
incorporated to the first additional slot (Is20) which is 3.5 
mm of slot length. The switch of #4 is attached to the 
second additional slot (Is21) which is 2.5 mm of slot length. 
The frequency notched characteristic antenna at FWA is 
shown in Fig. 3(b). All switches are in the on state position 
(continuous slot). Total slot lengths are 32 mm or 
approximately equal to 0.4λ at 3.7 GHz. The total slot 
lengths mean the sum of slot lengths of L, U and additional 
slots. Fig. 3(c) and Fig. 3(d) present the frequency notched 
characteristic 
antenna 
at 
HIPERLAN 
and 
WLAN, 
respectively. To reject interference from HIPERLAN, the 
switches of #1, #4, and #6 are in the off state position while 
switches of #2, #3, and #5 are in the on state position. It is 
investigated that by inserting those switches in the off state 
condition broke the connection between slots. This break 
connection has reduced the slot length to be 20.75 mm or 
approximately equal to 0.33λ at 5.2 GHz. Thus, the antenna 
has frequency notched at HIPERLAN. The total slot length 
is measured from the length of connecting slots. 
The configuration of switches in Fig. 3(d) have resulted 
an antenna with frequency notched at WLAN. It is shown 
that the switch of #5 set in the off state position in order to 
reduce the slot length, while the switch of #6 is set in the on 
state position. This is the only different while compared to 
the HIPERLAN configuration. Total slot lengths are 18 mm 
or approximately equal to 0.33λ at 5.75 GHz and measured 
from the length of connecting slots. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Fig. 4 shows the simulated VSWR for reconfigurable 
modified L and U slotted antennas. By varying the slot 
lengths and break the connection between slots using 
switches, the proposed frequency notched is achieved. The 
FWA notched band is obtained from 3.57 GHz to 3.86 GHz 
with the total slot length of 32 mm at 3.7 GHz, which is the 
centre frequency. While the HIPERLAN and WLAN 
notched bands are from 4.84 GHz to 5.33 GHz and 5.53 
GHz to 6.02 GHz, respectively. 
Frequency (GHz)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
VSWR
0
2
4
6
8
10
Notched at FWA
Notched at HIPERLAN
Notched at WLAN
 
Figure 4 
Simulated VSWR for reconfigurable modified L and U slotted 
antennas 
It is noted that beyond the frequency notched bands, the 
VSWR is kept to be less than 2. With the notched band’s 
characteristic, the antenna has ability to reconfigure its 
frequency that only responsive to other frequencies beyond 
the rejection band within UWB bandwidth. 
83
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

 
Figure 5. Simulated and measured E and H planes at 4 GHz for antenna 
notched at FWA 
Once the resonance frequencies were identified, 
principal radiation patterns were taken to characterize the 
operational 
performance 
of 
each 
antenna. 
These 
measurements were conducted in indoor anechoic chamber 
room. The probes available in the chamber room are in the 
frequency ranges of 3.95 – 5.85 GHz and 8.95 – 12 GHz, 
respectively. The existing chamber employed the spherical 
near field measurement. 
Comparison between measured and simulated radiation 
patterns for these proposed antennas are plotted in Fig. 5 to 
Fig. 8. All radiation patterns were measured at 4 GHz and 
5.8 GHz for both E and H planes. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the 
radiation patterns of antenna notched at FWA for 4 GHz and 
5.8 GHz, respectively. 
From Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, there are slightly back-lobes 
present for the E-planes for both frequencies. Both H-planes 
are omni-directional with slightly gain decreased at 
boresight direction. More distortions occur in the measured 
patterns compared with the simulated ones. This is due to an 
enhanced perturbing effect on the antenna performance 
caused by the feeding structure and cable at these 
frequencies. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Simulated and measured E and H planes at 5.8 GHz for antenna 
notched at FWA 
During measurement process, several requirements are 
needed to take into consideration. Obtaining true patterns 
depends primarily on accurately positioning the probe, 
accurately measuring the field, and eliminating distortions 
in the field introduced by the room, tracks, or probe [10]. 
The room reflections must be lower than the basic side-
lobes level and the probe must have low reflections. The 
probe position must be accurate to give better tolerance 
corresponding to the side-lobe level. In a spherical near-
field range, the spherical measurement surface will be 
imperfect due to inaccuracies of the positioners and 
misalignment of these positioners [11]. 
Fig. 7 shows the radiation patterns for antenna notched 
at HIPERLAN. The E and H planes measured at 4 GHz and 
5.8 GHz.  
84
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Simulated and measured E and H planes at 4 GHz and 5.8 GHz 
for antenna notched at HIPERLAN 
Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 present the simulated and measured E 
and H planes for antenna notched at WLAN for both 
frequencies of 4 GHz and 5.8 GHz, respectively. It is 
observed that the measured E planes for antenna notched at 
HIPERLAN broader than the measured E planes for antenna 
notched at FWA. Both H planes are omni-directional. The 
overall H-planes patterns retain a satisfactory omni-
directionality (less than 10 dB gain variation in most 
directions) over the entire bandwidth in both simulation and 
experimental. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Simulated and measured E and H planes at 4 GHz for antenna 
notched at WLAN 
 
4 GHz 
4 GHz 
4 GHz 
4 GHz 
5.8 GHz 
5.8 GHz 
85
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

 
Figure 9. Simulated and measured E and H planes at 5.8 GHz for antenna 
notched at WLAN 
IV. 
SUMMARY 
New slotted reconfigurable antennas with band notched 
characteristics at FWA, HIPERLAN, and WLAN band have 
successfully designed and developed. The new models are 
obtained from modification of previous models without 
degrading their performance. In order to reconfigure their 
frequency notched band, six switches are attached to the 
antenna. It is shown that by varying the slot length, the 
frequency notched antennas are performed at certain 
frequency.  
Simulated and measured radiation patterns for proposed 
slotted reconfigurable antennas at 4 GHz and 5.8 GHz have 
been examined. They show acceptable results where the 
overall H-planes for both frequencies providing omni-
directional patterns. But, more ripples occur in the measured 
E-planes radiation pattern. This is due to some errors during 
measurement process.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank Research and 
Innovation Department of Universiti Malaysia Pahang for 
supporting this research and Wireless Communication 
Centre (WCC) of Universiti Teknologi Malaysia for 
cooperating and facilitating this research measurement.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. G. Schant, G. Wolenec, and E. M. Myszka. 
Frequency Notched UWB Antenna. Proc. IEEE 
Conference on Ultra Wideband Sys and Tech. 2003. pp. 
214-218.  
[2] Y. Kim and D. H. Kwon. CPW-Fed Planar Ultra-
Wideband Antenna Having a Frequency Band Notch 
Function. Electronics Letters. April, 2004. Vol. 40(7): 
pp. 403-405.  
[3] S. W. Su, K. L. Wong, and F. S. Chang. Compact 
Printed Ultra-Wideband Slot Antenna with a Band 
Notched Operation. Microwave & Optical Techni. 
Letters. April, 2005. Vol. 45(2): pp. 128-130. 
[4] J. Kim, C. S. Cho, and J. W. Lee. 5.2 GHz Notched 
Ultra-Wideband 
Antenna 
Using 
Slot-type 
SRR. 
Electronics Letters. March 16, 2007. Vol. 42(6). 
[5] W. S. Lee, W. G. Lim, and J. W. Yu. Multiple Band-
Notched Planar Monopole Antenna for Multiband 
Wireless Systems. IEEE Microwave and Wireless 
Components Letters. Sept., 2005. Vol. 15(9). 
[6] S. Hong, K. Chung, and J. Choi. Design of a Band-
Notched Wideband Antenna for UWB Applications. 
Antennas 
and 
Propagation 
Society 
International 
Symposium. IEEE. 2006. 
[7] Kenneth C. L. Chan and Yi Huang. A Compact Semi-
Circular Disk Dipole with Notched Band for UWB 
Applications. The Institution of Engineering and 
Technology Seminar on Ultra Wideband Systems, 
Technologies, and Applications. 2006. pp. 226-230. 
[8] K. Chung, J. Kim, and J. Choi. Wideband Microstrip-
Fed Monopole Antenna Having Frequency Band Notch 
Function. IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components 
Letters. November, 2005.Vol. 15(11). 
[9] Y. Kim and D. H. Kwon. Planar Ultra Wideband Slot 
Antenna with Frequency Band Notch Function. 
Antennas 
and 
Propagation 
Society 
International 
Symposium. IEEE. 2004. 
[10] Gary E. Evans. Antenna Measurement Techniques. 
Boston, London: Artech House. 1990. 
[11] G. Hindman and Allen C. Newell. Simplified Spherical 
Near-Field Accuracy Assessment. Technical Paper. 
Nearfield System, Inc. 2004. 
5.8 GHz 
5.8 GHz 
86
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

