An Analysis of the Interference Problem in Wireless TDMA Networks
Anuschka Igel and Reinhard Gotzhein
Networked Systems Group
University of Kaiserslautern, Germany
{igel,gotzhein}@cs.uni-kl.de
Abstract—Communication in wireless networks raises the
so-called interference problem, which means that the transfer
of a message from some node a to a receiving node b can be
disturbed by the overlapping transmission of another node c
in interference range of node b. There are several approaches
to solve this problem, such as the exclusive reservation of
network-wide synchronized time slots in interference range
of both sender and receiver, which we formalize and study in
this paper. We ﬁrst show that the interference problem can be
solved if each node knows the current communication and
interference topology of the network and the transmission
reservations of all nodes at any time, and if reservations take
place in a coordinated manner. We then analyze how far this
global status information can be reduced while preserving the
solvability of the interference problem. We apply our ﬁndings
to evaluate some existing reservation protocols concerning
their abilities to solve the interference problem, and identify
possible shortcomings.
Keywords—interference
problem;
reservation;
TDMA;
neighborhood; wireless network.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless networks are a commonly used technology
these days. Basic problems of wireless networks, such
as varying channel quality, interference due to concurrent
transmissions, and energy shortage, have been addressed
by a variety of sophisticated approaches to channel cod-
ing and medium arbitration. However, today’s prevailing
contention-based medium access techniques are highly
prone to frame collisions when applied in multi-hop
networks, due to the interference problem, which is il-
lustrated in Figure 1. The ﬁgure shows the topology and
a scenario of a wireless multi-hop network. The topology
distinguishes communication links for data transfer, and
interference links that may prevent successful data transfer
if used concurrently. For simplicity, we assume that in this
network, all nodes use the same frequency and code. In the
scenario, nodes a and b want to exchange a message m.
For a successful transfer, it is necessary but not sufﬁcient
that all nodes in communication range of node b (except
a) stay silent while m is being transmitted. If, e. g., a
transmission of node c, which is in interference range of
node b, overlaps with a’s transmission, the transfer would
fail.
To solve the interference problem, a variety of exclusive
reservation schemes using TDMA (Time Division Multiple
Access), FDMA (Frequency Division Multiple Access),
CDMA (Code Division Multiple Access), SDMA (Space
Division Multiple Access) or combinations thereof are
conceivable (see [1]).
In this paper, we study exclusive reservation schemes
based on TDMA, where time slots are synchronized
network-wide with an upper bound for clock offset. A
synchronization protocol with this property has been pub-
lished in [2]. To improve bandwidth usage, we additionally
consider SDMA. We stipulate that if two nodes a and
b want to communicate, they must reserve a free time
slot s exclusively in interference range of a and b. More
precisely, this means that s is not yet reserved for reception
by any other node in interference range of a, nor for
transmission by any other node in interference range of
b. It is obvious that by always following these reservation
rules, overlapping transmissions are safely avoided, and
the interference problem is solved.
In this paper, we formalize the interference problem
and deﬁne a global reservation criterion that builds on
complete status information to solve the problem in a
TDMA / SDMA setting. Because this criterion is too ex-
pensive to be implemented, we then examine how far the
complete status information can be reduced while still
solving the interference problem. This, ﬁnally, leads to
a local reservation criterion based on a reduced network
view and derived localized reservation status predicates,
which we prove to be equivalent to the global criterion.
Finally, we assess existing reservation protocols concern-
ing their abilities to solve the interference problem, and
identify possible shortcomings. In our future work, we
plan to devise efﬁcient reservation protocols based on the
local reservation criterion, with nodes learning about their
relevant reservation status by simply observing reservation
trafﬁc.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we
formally deﬁne our network model. The global reservation
criterion is deﬁned in Section III. In Section IV, we
provide an equivalent local reservation criterion that is
based on a reduced network view. In Section V, we an-
alyze existing reservation protocols, discuss related work
in Section VI, and draw conclusions in Section VII.
II. NETWORK MODEL
We now introduce our network model, which distin-
guishes between (wireless) communication and interfer-
ence links. We say that a node a is in communication range
of a node b if a transmission of a is received correctly by
b. Node a is in interference range of b if a transmission
of a can prevent the correct reception of a concurrent
transmission of some other node c to b.
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 1.
Illustration of the interference problem.
Deﬁnition 1. Let V be a set of nodes. Then (wireless)
communication and interference links are formally ex-
pressed by the following relations:
• CL =Df
{(a, b) ∈ V ×V : a is in communication range of b}
• IL =Df
{(a, b) ∈ V × V : a is in interference range of b}
We assume that there is only one antenna per node,
which means that a node can neither receive nor detect
any interference while transmitting. Furthermore, we
assume that all links are bidirectional, which can be
achieved in practice by taking suitable detection measures.
These assumptions are formalized by requiring CL and
IL to be irreﬂexive and symmetric. In addition, CL ⊆ IL
holds (we call this consistency criterion).
Based on the relations CL and IL, we deﬁne our model
of a (wireless) network, which is a graph with two kinds of
edges representing communication and interference links,
and where all pairs of nodes are connected through a path
of communication links.
Deﬁnition 2. Let V be a set of nodes, CL and IL be
relations expressing communication and interference links,
respectively. A (wireless) network is formally modeled as
a directed graph G = (V, L, E), where L = {cl, il} is a
set of labels, and E ⊆ V × V × L is a set of edges. The
set E = Ecl ∪ Eil is composed of the following subsets:
• Ecl =Df {(a, b, l) ∈ V × V × L : l = cl ∧ CL(a, b)}
(communication links)
• Eil =Df {(a, b, l) ∈ V × V × L : l = il ∧ IL(a, b)}
(interference links)
In addition, the communication subgraph Gcl =Df
(V, {cl}, Ecl} has to be connected, i. e., ∀ a, b ∈ V
:
∃ p
=Df
(vp
1, . . . , vp
|p|+1)
∈
V + such that ∀ i
∈
{1, . . . , |p|} : (vp
i , vp
i+1, cl) ∈ Ecl, vp
1 = a and vp
|p|+1 =
b. We require that p is a cycle-free path, i. e., no node
occurs more than once in p. The length |p| of p is its
number of edges. The communication distance between
two nodes a, b ∈ V is deﬁned as
dGcl(a, b) =Df
min
p ∈ PGcl(a,b)|p| ,
where PGcl(a, b) is the set of all cycle-free communication
paths starting in a and ending in b. The interference
distance dGil is deﬁned analogously.
Since CL and IL are irreﬂexive, no node has a
communication or interference link to itself. Since the
relations are symmetric, all links are bidirectional, i. e.,
∀ (a, b, l) ∈ E :
(b, a, l) ∈ E, which is equivalent to
regarding an undirected graph. In the following, we write
G = (V, E) to refer to a network G = (V, L, E), since
the labeling is ﬁxed.
We assume that the Single Network Property holds,
which means that all nodes are connected via some
path of communication links (this is already covered by
Deﬁnition 2), and no other nodes in interference range
that apply a different MAC protocol are active in the same
frequency band. This property can be satisﬁed in real
environments by sufﬁcient topology control combined
with standardization measures and / or frequency and
spatial division. Furthermore, slot reservation is a long-
term functionality, which requires a sufﬁciently stable
network topology to prevent frequent loss of reservations
due to link breaks.
Next, we introduce several notions of neighborhood
between nodes:
Deﬁnition 3. Let G = (V, E) be a (wireless) network,
a ∈ V and i ≥ 0 an integer value.
i) The i-hop communication and interference neighbor-
hoods of a are deﬁned as
CNi(a) =Df {b ∈ V : dGcl(a, b) = i} .
INi(a) =Df {b ∈ V : dGil(a, b) = i} .
ii) The maximal i-hop communication and interference
neighborhoods of a are deﬁned as
CN≤ i (a) =Df {b ∈ V : dGcl(a, b) ≤ i} .
IN≤ i (a) =Df {b ∈ V : dGil(a, b) ≤ i} .
In the following, we also denote 1-hop communication
neighbors simply as neighbors. From the deﬁnition, it
follows that the 0-hop communication/ interference neigh-
borhood of a node is the node itself. Since neighborhood
is deﬁned w. r. t. the shortest path, i-hop neighbors are
not (i + j)-hop neighbors for any j > 0. However, i-
hop neighbors are also maximal (i + j)-hop neighbors
for every j ≥ 0. Because of the consistency criterion,
CN1(a) ⊆ IN1(a) holds for all a ∈ V .
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

B
Figure 2.
Illustration of the global reservation criterion.
Deﬁnition 4. Let G = (V, E) be a (wireless) network,
a ∈ V , P(a) ⊆ V and R(a) ⊆ V be unary relations over
V . Then we deﬁne
P(R(a)) =Df {c ∈ V : ∃ b ∈ R(a) : c ∈ P(b)}
Note that for all a ∈ V and i ≥ 0, the sets CNi(a),
CN≤ i(a), INi(a) and IN≤ i(a) are relations according
to Deﬁnition 4.
An example illustrating Deﬁnition 4 is the (1-hop) inter-
ference neighborhood of the communication neighborhood
of a node a, which is denoted by IN1(CN1(a)). Note that
a ∈ IN1(CN1(a)) holds, provided CN1(a) ̸= ∅.
III. GLOBAL RESERVATION CRITERION
We assume that time is structured into macro slots,
which are subdivided into consecutively numbered micro
slots. The set of micro slots will be denoted by S in the
following; the notions micro slot, time slot and slot will
be used interchangeably. If a slot is reserved, then this
reservation holds for all following macro slots, until it is
released.
We now formally state the global reservation criterion
F s
T X(a, b), deﬁning whether a time slot s ∈ S is free
for transmissions from node a to node b, where b is in
communication range of a. Informally, this means that s
is currently reserved neither for reception by any node
in interference range of a, nor for transmission by any
node in interference range of b. The reservation criterion
is called global, because it is based on global knowledge
about network topology and reservation status.
Deﬁnition 5 (Reservation status). Let G = (V, E) be a
network, and s ∈ S be a time slot. The reservation status
T Xs ⊆ V × V of slot s deﬁnes, for all pairs of nodes
a, b ∈ V , whether s is reserved for transmissions from a
to b, provided b ∈ CN1(a). The following relations are
derived from T Xs:
• T Xs(a) =Df ∃ b ∈ V : T Xs(a, b)
s reserved for transmission by node a
• RXs(a, b) =Df T Xs(b, a)
s reserved by node a for reception from b
• RXs(a) =Df ∃ b ∈ V : RXs(a, b)
s reserved for reception by node a
Please note that the derived relations do not carry any
additional status information, but are introduced for better
readability of the global reservation criterion:
Deﬁnition 6 (Global reservation criterion). Let G =
(V, E) be a network, a, b ∈ V , b ∈ CN1(a), s ∈ S be
a time slot, and T Xs be the reservation status of slot s.
The global reservation criterion F s
T X deﬁnes whether s is
free for transmissions from a to b:
F s
T X(a, b) =Df∀ c ∈ IN≤ 1 (a) : ¬ RXs(c) ∧
∀ d ∈ IN≤ 1 (b) : ¬ T Xs(d)
We recall that IN≤ 1 (a) and IN≤ 1 (b) include nodes
a and b, respectively. Therefore, the deﬁnition covers
the necessary condition that both a and b have reserved
s neither for transmission nor for reception. From the
deﬁnition, it follows immediately that the interference
problem can be solved if each node knows the current
communication and interference topology of the network
and the sending reservations of all nodes.
Figure 2 illustrates the global reservation criterion
F s
T X(a, b). In the ﬁgure, all nodes whose T Xs reservation
status is required to solve the interference problem are
highlighted by the outer shape. This includes all nodes in
interference range of a and b (inner shapes), and nodes
c and d, but not node e. Nodes outside the interference
range of a (e. g., c and d) have to be considered if the
relation RXs is not directly available but is derived from
T Xs. If, for example, a value RXs(f, g) is needed, it is
derived from T Xs(g, f).
IV. LOCAL RESERVATION CRITERIA
In this section, we transform the deﬁnition of the global
reservation criterion F s
T X(a, b) into two local forms by re-
placing global predicates with local ones, thereby reducing
the status information required to solve the interference
problem. Local predicates are predicates that are deﬁned
from the point of view of a single node. We proceed in two
steps: In Section IV-A, we introduce a local deﬁnition that
is based on local knowledge about nodes in interference
neighborhood, and show that it is equivalent to the global
deﬁnition. In Section IV-B, we introduce an assumption
about interference neighborhood such that only local
knowledge about nodes in communication neighborhood is
required to solve the interference problem, which provides
a basis for feasible reservation protocols.
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

a
b
c
d
RXs(c)
RXs(a)
Bs
T X,I(a, c)
NAs
T X,T X(a, b)
NAs
T X,I(a, b)
T Xs(b)
Bs
RX,I(b, d)
T Xs(d)
Figure 3.
Topology pattern and local predicates to deﬁne the local reservation criterion with interference neighborhood.
A. Local Reservation Criterion with Interference Neigh-
borhood
In this section, we assume that nodes have access to
reservation status information of nodes in communication
and interference neighborhood. From this status infor-
mation, nodes can derive local predicates, which they
can use to determine whether the reservation criterion is
satisﬁed. Figure 3 shows a topological pattern that we
use to deﬁne the local reservation criterion. Interference
links are represented by dashed lines, communication links
(which are also interference links) by solid lines. The
arrow indicates that there is a request to reserve some slot
s for transmission from a to b. To check the reservation
criterion, status information expressed by local predicates
that are listed beneath the nodes is required. An arrow
from a predicate P to a predicate Q denotes that P is
used to derive Q. A dashed arrow indicates that predicate
values may not be directly available, which is the case if
the corresponding node is in interference range, but not in
communication range.
The global reservation criterion F s
T X(a, b) (see Deﬁ-
nition 6) assumes b ∈ CN1(a) and is based on global
predicates T Xs and RXs:
F s
T X(a, b) =Df ∀ c ∈ IN≤ 1 (a) : ¬ RXs(c) ∧
∀ d ∈ IN≤ 1 (b) : ¬ T Xs(d)
≡ ¬ RXs(a) ∧ ∀ c ∈ IN1(a) : ¬ RXs(c) ∧
¬ T Xs(b) ∧ ∀ d ∈ IN1(b) : ¬ T Xs(d)
To ﬁnally replace global predicates in this deﬁnition, we
start by deﬁning two local predicates:
Deﬁnition 7. Bs
T X,I(a, b) =Df b ∈ IN1(a) ∧ RXs(b)
Slot s is blocked (B) for transmission (T X) at node a
because of possible interference with a reception of b, with
b in interference range (I) of a.
Deﬁnition 8. Bs
RX,I(a, b) =Df b ∈ IN1(a) ∧ T Xs(b)
Slot s is blocked (B) for reception (RX) at node a because
of possible interference with a transmission of b, with b in
interference range (I) of a.
Obviously,
T Xs(a, b)
implies
Bs
T X,I(a, b)
and
RXs(a, b) implies Bs
RX,I(a, b). However, the predicate
T Xs (RXs) carries the additional information which
node is the sender (receiver) in slot s. Inserting these
predicates, F s
T X(a, b) can be restated as:
F s
T X(a, b) ≡ ¬ RXs(a) ∧ ∀c ∈ IN1(a) : ¬ Bs
T X,I(a, c) ∧
¬ T Xs(b) ∧ ∀d ∈ IN1(b) : ¬ Bs
RX,I(b, d)
In this deﬁnition, some predicates are local to the
transmitting node a, while others are local to the receiving
node b. We now deﬁne further predicates to obtain a
deﬁnition of F s
T X(a, b) that is entirely local to a:
Deﬁnition 9. NAs
T X,T X(a, b) =Df
b ∈ CN1(a) ∧
T Xs(b)
Slot s is not available (NA) for transmission from a to b,
because b has already reserved this slot for transmission.
Deﬁnition 10. NAs
T X,I(a, b) =Df b ∈ CN1(a) ∧ ∃ c ∈
IN1(b) : Bs
RX,I(b, c)
Slot s is not available (NA) for transmission from a to b
because of a possible interference with a transmission of
some node c in interference range of b.
Inserting these predicates into the restated predicate
F s
T X(a, b) above yields:
F s
T X(a, b) ≡ ¬ RXs(a) ∧ ∀c ∈ IN1(a) : ¬ Bs
T X,I(a, c) ∧
¬ NAs
T X,T X(a, b) ∧ ¬ NAs
T X,I(a, b)
Please note that ﬁrst, this restatement of F s
T X(a, b)
is equivalent to the deﬁnition of the global reservation
criterion. Second, it is based on local knowledge about the
reservation status of nodes in interference neighborhood of
node a only, therefore, it is a local deﬁnition of F s
T X(a, b).
It now remains to be shown how node a can determine its
local values of these predicates.
We observe that the value of RXs(a) can directly be
obtained from the list of current reservations of a. To
determine the values of Bs
T X,I, the RXs values of all
interference neighbors of a are needed, which, however,
may be out of communication range. NAs
T X,T X(a, b) can
be derived from the T Xs values of b. Finally, to calculate
NAs
T X,I(a, b), the Bs
RX,I values of b are needed. For
b to calculate its Bs
RX,I values, the T Xs values of its
interference neighbors are needed.
Obviously, although the above deﬁnition of F s
T X(a, b)
is local, there still exists no reservation protocol that
can solve the interference problem in the general case,
as an exchange of status information with all nodes in
interference neighborhood would be required.
B. Local
Reservation
Criterion
with
Communication
Neighborhood
To determine the values of predicates Bs
T X,I(a, c)
and Bs
RX,I(b, d) of nodes a and b, status information
of interference neighbors c and d is needed. Since
these
neighbors
may
not
be
in
communication
range, it is not obvious how this information can
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

a
b
c
d
e
f
RXs(c)
Bs
T X,C(e, c)
RXs(e)
RXs(a)
Bs
T X,I(a, c)
NAs
T X,T X(a, b)
NAs
T X,I(a, b)
Bs
T X,C(a, e)
T Xs(b)
Bs
RX,I(b, d)
Bs
RX,C(b, f) Bs
RX,C(f, d)
T Xs(f)
T Xs(d)
Figure 4.
Topology pattern and local predicates to deﬁne the local reservation criterion with communication neighborhood, with IN1(a) =
CN1(a) ∪ CN2(a).
be acquired. Recall that in our deﬁnition of network,
we stipulate that all nodes are connected via some
path of communication links. Therefore, two nodes in
interference range are always connected by a path of
length ≤ n − 1, where n is the number of nodes in
the network. If we additionally assume that we can
control the topology to a certain extent, we may limit
the communication distance of nodes in interference
range to a value d, with 2
≤
d. This means that
∀ a ∈ V : IN≤ 1 (a) ⊆ CN≤ d (a) holds. For conservative
decisions, we further assume that all nodes with a
communication distance of at most d are in interference
range, i. e., ∀ a ∈ V : IN≤ 1 (a) ⊇ CN≤ d (a). On the
whole, this means ∀ a ∈ V : IN≤ 1 (a) = CN≤ d (a) or
∀ a ∈ V : IN1(a) = CN≤ d (a) \ a, respectively.
In the following, we assume d = 2, which means that
all nodes in interference range, but not in communication
range have a communication distance of 2. This means that
in the following, ∀ a ∈ V : IN1(a) = CN1(a) ∪ CN2(a)
holds. Figure 4 extends the topological pattern of Figure 3,
capturing this assumption and adding auxiliary predicates
of nodes in communication range that are used to replace
predicates of nodes in interference neighborhood. The
meaning of arrows is as in Figure 3.
Deﬁnition 11. Bs
T X,C(a, b) =Df b ∈ CN1(a) ∧ RXs(b)
Slot s is blocked for transmission at node a because of
a possible interference with a reception of b, with b in
communication range (C) of a.
Deﬁnition 12. Bs
RX,C(a, b) =Df b ∈ CN1(a) ∧ T Xs(b)
Slot s is blocked for reception at node a because of a
possible interference with a transmission of b, with b in
communication range (C) of a.
Note that the deﬁnition of Bs
T X,C(a, b) (Bs
RX,C(a, b))
slightly differs from the deﬁnition of Bs
T X,I(a, b) (see
Deﬁnition 7) (Bs
RX,I(a, b) (see Deﬁnition 8)), as nodes
in communication range instead of interference neighbor-
hood are considered. We remark that the formal deﬁni-
tions of NAs
T X,T X(a, b) and Bs
RX,C(a, b) are the same.
However, for conceptual clarity, we prefer to use two
predicates.
Based on the assumption IN1(a) = CN1(a) ∪ CN2(a),
the predicates Bs
T X,I and Bs
RX,I can be derived from
the reservation status of nodes in communication range
as follows:
Bs
T X,I(a, b) =Df b ∈ IN1(a) ∧ RXs(b)
≡
b ∈ (CN1(a) ∪ CN2(a)) ∧ RXs(b)
≡
(b ∈ CN1(a) ∧ RXs(b)) ∨
(b ∈ CN2(a) ∧ RXs(b))
≡
Bs
T X,C(a, b) ∨ ∃ c ∈ CN1(a) :
(b ∈ CN1(c) ∧ RXs(b))
≡
Bs
T X,C(a, b) ∨ ∃ c ∈ CN1(a) :
Bs
T X,C(c, b)
Bs
RX,I(a, b) =Df b ∈ IN1(a) ∧ T Xs(b)
≡
(b ∈ CN1(a) ∧ T Xs(b)) ∨
(b ∈ CN2(a) ∧ T Xs(b))
≡
Bs
RX,C(a, b) ∨ ∃ c ∈ CN1(a) :
Bs
RX,C(c, b)
This way, a can derive the Bs
T X,I values from its own
Bs
T X,C values and those of its neighbors (in general, the
Bs
T X,C values of all nodes in CN≤ d−1 (a) would be
needed). The Bs
T X,C values can in turn be determined by
each node from the RXs values of its neighbor nodes. The
Bs
RX,I values of b can be calculated from its own Bs
RX,C
values and those of its neighbor nodes (again, in general
the Bs
RX,C values of all nodes in CN≤ d−1 (b) would be
needed). The Bs
RX,C values can in turn be determined by
each node from the T Xs values of its neighbors. This way,
a can derive F s
T X(a, b) by aggregating the predicates of
its neighbors.
V. ASSESSMENT OF EXISTING RESERVATION
PROTOCOLS
In this section, we apply the local reservation crite-
rion with communication neighborhood to assess exist-
ing reservation protocols for wireless networks. In many
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

protocols, available bandwidth is modeled as an abstract
number (statistical reservations), for example Ticket-Based
Probing [3], the Liao01 Protocol [4] or Trigger-Based
Distributed Routing [5]. By their nature, these reserva-
tion protocols do not guarantee collision freedom, since
bandwidth cannot be reserved exclusively. Therefore, we
restrict ourselves to protocols with TDMA approaches,
i. e., protocols supporting the exclusive reservation of time
slots (deterministic reservations).
Some deterministic approaches, namely Bandwidth
Routing [6], On-Demand QoS Routing [7] and On-
Demand Link-State Multi-Path QoS Routing [8] use
CDMA in addition to TDMA to resolve conﬂicts between
neighboring nodes. However, they do not distinguish
whether slots are free for sending or free for receiving,
which can lead to an unnecessary blocking of slots. Other
protocols can be classiﬁed as pure TDMA approaches,
which in addition make this distinction. The Forward
Algorithm [9] is based on AODV [10] and calculates local
maxima for adjacent links, which are propagated during
route discovery. The slot reservation is done during route
reply. In the Liao02 Protocol [11], each node keeps track
of the slots of all nodes in its 2-hop-neighborhood and
the corresponding slot states (reserved or free) in send
and receive tables. Information about the 1-hop and 2-hop
neighborhood of a node is recorded in a separate table.
The reservation is done during route reply. We observe that
these reservation protocols consider the slot states Bs
RX,I,
Bs
T X,I and NAs
T X,I only for nodes in communication
range, but not in interference range. This clearly limits
their scope and functionality, as collision freedom cannot
be guaranteed despite reservation.
In the following, we will look at two protocols support-
ing deterministic reservations in more detail, namely the
Race-Free Bandwidth Reservation Protocol [12] and the
Distributed Slots Reservation Protocol (DSRP) [13].
A. Race-Free Bandwidth Reservation Protocol
The Race-Free Bandwidth Reservation Protocol [12]
is an improvement of [11]. It is an on-demand, source-
based protocol, whose objectives are to support parallel
reservations and to avoid reservation races, which can
occur if reservations are processed simultaneously.
The protocol structures time into TDMA frames consist-
ing of control phase and data phase. In the control phase,
each node has an exclusive control slot, which can be used
to dynamically reserve data slots in the data phase.
For each node in 1-hop and 2-hop neighborhood, send
and receive tables recording slot states are maintained.
Besides the states free and reserved of [11], an additional
state allocated is used for unconﬁrmed reservations. We
note that the distinction between conﬁrmed and uncon-
ﬁrmed reservations is useful for a (distributed) reservation
algorithm, but not required in our analysis of the interfer-
ence problem.
A wait-before-reject strategy is used, which means that a
QoS request is not rejected, if enough slots are expected to
become available with a predetermined acceptable delay.
To realize this, time-to-live timers are used, which reset
a slot status from allocated to free if the corresponding
request is not conﬁrmed within a predeﬁned amount of
time. Thus, reservation races can occur, if the slot status
is set back to free too soon.
All nodes periodically broadcast their send and receive
tables to their 1-hop and 2-hop-neighbors. In addition,
status updates are sent asynchronously when a slot state
is changed from free to allocated or from allocated to
reserved. It follows that the status information of the
predicates RXs and NAs
T X,T X is available, typically with
some delay. In addition, the values of the predicates Bs
T X,I
and NAs
T X,I are available, however, restricted to nodes in
communication range. From this, it follows that collision
freedom of data frames cannot be guaranteed despite
reservations. Also, propagation of slot status information
can only take place in the (exclusive) control slot of a
node, leading to some delay. Therefore, a QoS request
could be started by a neighbor before the status update
has been made. This could in fact lead to interference
due to double reservations of slots by neighboring nodes,
which the protocol claims to eliminate.
B. Distributed Slots Reservation Protocol
The Distributed Slots Reservation Protocol (DSRP) [13]
is an on-demand slot reservation protocol for QoS routing
in TDMA networks. The main objective is the reuse of
time slots. For example, slots with least conﬂict to other
mobile hosts or slots used by other mobile hosts can be
preferred.
As in [12], time is structured into TDMA frames con-
sisting of control and data subframe, which are subdivided
into slots. However, control slots are not exclusively
reserved for a particular node, which means that there is
contention for medium access, which may cause collisions
and unpredictable delays (e. g., of QoS requests).
Besides the hidden and exposed terminal problems, two
main problems considered are slot shortage for self-route
(because of an inappropriate slot choice, a pending QoS
request cannot be granted) and slot shortage for neighbor-
ing routes (because of an inappropriate slot choice, another
QoS request cannot be granted).
The slot states forming the (global/ local) reservation
criterion are considered by the slot inhibited policies,
but interference is only considered between nodes in
communication neighborhood. Since the information is not
maintained proactively as in [12], it has to be exchanged
when needed. A potential sender x collects information
from its neighbors, determines its valid sending slots and
forwards them to the potential receiver y, which derives
the valid slots for a transmission on the corresponding
link. This means that the slot states RXs, Bs
T X,I (limited
to nodes in communication range) and NAs
T X,T X are
determined by x, and NAs
T X,I (also limited to nodes in
communication range) is evaluated by y.
Since this information exchange must happen in the
control subframe, there may be collisions and inaccurate
information due to delays. Furthermore, since the sending
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

slots are not reserved in x when they are forwarded to
y, another QoS request could allocate these slots. Slot
reservation is not done until the QoS reply is propagated
through the network.
A slot adjustment protocol is used to solve the resulting
problems. But since this protocol is only invoked if reser-
vations collide directly at a node, problems could arise if
a neighboring node has reserved this slot in the meantime,
since this information is only kept in the reserving node.
To alleviate the slot shortage problems mentioned
above, slot decision policies are used to determine the
slots allowing the greatest reuse among the available slots.
According to the slot decision policies, the slots used for a
certain link are determined by the node three hops apart,
in order to ﬁnd the most suitable slots. But this means
that the information on valid slots can already be outdated
when the slots to be assigned are calculated.
VI. RELATED WORK
The interference problem in wireless networks has
been extensively studied in previous work, using differ-
ent models to identify conditions for (non-)interference.
For a comprehensive survey of interference models in
wireless ad-hoc networks, we refer the reader to [14].
The purpose of an interference model is to determine
whether a transmission between a pair of nodes may be
successful. In general, this depends on many factors, such
as spatial placement of nodes, environmental conditions,
transceiver and channel characteristics, signal character-
istics and propagation, and temporal channel usage. This
makes the accurate treatment of interference a complex
task. In this section, we focus on network models, which
can be classiﬁed as graph-based models, physical models,
and statistical models:
• Graph-based models deﬁne a network as a set of
vertices representing, e. g., nodes, connected by edges
representing, e. g., communication links. The network
model we use in this paper belongs to this category.
• Physical
models
capture
the
characteristics
of
transceiver and channel with different degrees of
detail, taking, e. g., Signal to Interference plus Noise
Ratio (SINR) into account.
• Statistical models express relevant aspects, e. g., the
transmission characteristics, in terms of a probability
density function.
Graph-based models may be seen as an abstraction of
physical and statistical models, leaving out parameters
such as received signal strength or the probability of
a successful reception. Different kinds of graph-based
models have been applied to interference modeling:
• In the connectivity graph, vertices and edges repre-
sent nodes and communication links, respectively. In
simple interference models, a transmission from a to
b is only disturbed by the overlapping transmission
of another node c ̸= a directly connected to b. In
more sophisticated models, the transmission is also
disturbed by the overlapping transmission of other
nodes with a distance to b of up to 2 or 3 hops.
• In the interference graph, vertices and edges often
represent nodes and interference links, i. e., interfer-
ence between nodes. In [15], vertices represent links,
and edges model interference between links. In both
cases, it is straightforward to identify conditions for
(non-)interference.
• In [16], the connectivity and interference graph are
merged and augmented by sensing links. Here, a
connectivity link implies an interference link, which
in turn implies a sensing link. Connectivity links are
directed (whereas interference and sensing links are
undirected) and exist only if there is at least one
transmission according to the link.
In this paper, we have merged the connectivity and
interference graph to deﬁne the global reservation cri-
terion (Section III) and the local reservation criterion
with interference neighborhood (Section IV-A). We have
then reduced this graph to a connectivity graph in which
interference occurs if a receiver is in maximal 2-hop
neighborhood of another sender. This way, it is feasible
to deﬁne a local reservation criterion that is actually
implementable (Section IV-B). We have decided against
modeling sensing links, as concurrent transmissions of
nodes in sensing range, but not in interference range would
not be harmful.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have analyzed the interference problem
in wireless networks, considering exclusive reservation
schemes based on TDMA, where time slots are synchro-
nized network-wide with an upper bound for clock offset.
For this analysis, we have used a graph-based network
model with edges representing communication and inter-
ference links. In a ﬁrst step, we have deﬁned an obvious
global reservation criterion that solves the interference
problem, however, at the expense of global up-to-date
topology and reservation status. In a second step, we
have rewritten the global criterion into an equivalent local
form, thereby reducing the status information to solve the
interference problem. In a third step, we have rewritten the
local form, assuming that the interference range is limited
to maximal 2-hop communication neighborhood, and have
argued that this local form is actually implementable.
Based on this local form, we have assessed a selection of
existing reservation protocols and have identiﬁed a number
of shortcomings.
In our future work, we will broaden our study of
existing reservation protocols and develop a taxonomy for
their assessment. Furthermore, we will make an effort to
develop reservation protocols that solve the interference
problem by implementing the second local reservation
criterion. We note that it is not clear which additional
assumptions are to be made to solve the problem of
inaccurate or outdated topology and reservation status.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Schiller, Mobile Communications, 2nd ed.
Boston:
Addison-Wesley, May 2003.
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[2] R. Gotzhein and T. Kuhn, “Black Burst Synchronization
(BBS) - A Protocol for Deterministic Tick and Time Syn-
chronization in Wireless Networks,” Computer Networks,
vol. 55, no. 13, pp. 3015–3031, 2011.
[3] S. Chen and K. Nahrstedt, “Distributed Quality-of-Service
Routing in Ad-Hoc Networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1488–1505,
August 1999.
[4] W.-H. Liao, Y.-C. Tseng, S.-L. Wang, and J.-P. Sheu, “A
Multi-path QoS Routing Protocol in a Wireless Mobile
Ad Hoc Network,” in ICN ’01: Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Networking-Part 2.
London,
UK: Springer-Verlag, 2001, pp. 158–167.
[5] S. De, S. K. Das, H. Wu, and C. Qiao, “Trigger-Based
Distributed QoS Routing in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,”
Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 22–35, 2002.
[6] C. R. Lin and J.-S. Liu, “QoS Routing in Ad Hoc Wireless
Networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1426–1438, August 1999.
[7] C. R. Lin, “On-Demand QoS Routing in Multihop Mobile
Networks,” in In Proc. IEEE Infocom, 2001, pp. 1735–
1744.
[8] Y.-S. Chen, Y.-C. Tseng, J.-P. Sheu, and P.-H. Kuo, “An
On-Demand, Link-State, Multi-Path QoS Routing in a
Wireless Mobile Ad-Hoc Network,” Computer Communi-
cations, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 27–40, 2004.
[9] C. Zhu and M. S. Corson, “QoS Routing for Mobile Ad
Hoc Networks,” in INFOCOM 2002. Twenty-First Annual
Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communica-
tions Societies. Proceedings. IEEE, vol. 2.
IEEE, 2002,
pp. 958–967.
[10] C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, “Ad-hoc On-Demand
Distance Vector Routing,” in Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applicatons,
New Orleans, LA, Feb. 1999, pp. 90–100.
[11] W.-H. Liao, Y.-C. Tseng, and K.-P. Shih, “A TDMA-based
Bandwidth Reservation Protocol for QoS Routing in a
Wireless Mobile Ad Hoc Network,” in Proceedings of IEEE
ICC, April–May 2002.
[12] I. Jawhar and J. Wu, “A Race-Free Bandwidth Reservation
Protocol for QoS Routing in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,”
in HICSS, 2004.
[13] K.-P. Shih, C.-Y. Chang, Y.-D. Chen, and T.-H. Chuang,
“Dynamic
bandwidth
allocation
for
QoS
routing
on
TDMA-based mobile ad hoc networks,” Computer Com-
munications, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1316–1329, 2006.
[14] P. Cardieri, “Modeling Interference in Wireless Ad Hoc
Networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 551–572, 2010.
[15] R. Gupta, Z. Jia, T. Tung, and J. Walrand, “Interference-
aware QoS Routing (IQRouting) for Ad-Hoc networks,” in
IN PROC. ICC 2005, SEOUL, KOREA, 2005, pp. 1–6.
[16] J. L. Sobrinho and A. S. Krishnakumar, “Quality-of-
Service
in
Ad
Hoc
Carrier
Sense
Multiple
Access
Wireless Networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1353–1368, August
1999. [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpls/
abs_all.jsp?arnumber=779919 [retrieved: April, 2012]
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

