Using Number of Retransmissions to Improve
Routing in Ad-hoc NETworks
Tiguiane Y´el´emou
Polytechnic University of Bobo Dioulasso,
School of Computer Science, Burkina Faso
Email: tyelemou@gmail.com
Philippe Meseure and Anne-Marie Poussard
University of Poitiers, XLIM CNRS Lab, France
Email: (Philippe.Meseure, anne.marie.poussard)@univ-poitiers.fr
Abstract—In this paper, we analyze the effectiveness of usual
metrics and Quality of Service (QoS) methods used to improve
routing in wireless networks, when considering the erroneous
nature of radio links. We ﬁrst analyze an additive metric based
on Bit Error Rate (BER) and we propose a new metric similar
to hop-count metric where retransmissions are accurately taken
into account. With this number of retransmissions-based metric,
the distance between two adjacent nodes will not be 1, but 1 plus
the cost of retransmissions required on the link. Our approach
is a light and immediate way to evaluate link quality. It does
not imply additional network overhead and costly computation.
To test the efﬁciency of this new metric, we have implemented
it into the well-known Optimized Link State Routing protocol.
Realistic simulation results show that this metric outperforms
traditional metrics like the ones based on delay, BER or Expected
Transmission Count.
Keywords—Wireless networks; QoS metrics; Routing protocols;
OLSR protocol; cross layer approach.
I.
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATIONS
Routing in wireless networks is still an issue. It remains
hazardous to guarantee any quality of service (QoS) for such
networks. Most algorithms compute paths by relying on a
selected metric. This allows them to compare computed paths
and ﬁnd the best. However, most of the used metrics do not
take into account all speciﬁc characteristics of ad hoc wireless
networks such as erroneous links, interference, etc. In this
context, a node may need several attempts to transmit data
successfully. Unfortunately, retransmissions imply additional
delays, decrease throughput and increase communication over-
head in the network. In critical cases, communications fail after
several attempts.
In order to guarantee a certain level of QoS, routing
protocols should be smart enough to pick a stable and good
quality communication route in order to avoid retransmission
and packets loss. In recent years, many QoS approaches have
been proposed that take into account link quality in the choice
of routes. Nevertheless, these methods arise many issues.
Indeed, some approaches rely on link estimation that are hard
to measure in practice (for instance, the bit error rate). Others
require costly analysis of the network and imply a substantial
communication overhead. Finally, some approaches choose
routes that maximize packet delivery ratio, but at the cost of
a high number of intermediate nodes and/or delay.
To make protocols more reliable, an effective and simple
estimation of link quality must be proposed, as well as a link
quality-aware computation of shortest paths . In this paper, we
focus on metrics related to the packet loss rate criterion. First,
the Bit Error Rate (BER) as QoS link criterion is analyzed
and a BER-based metric as an additive metric is designed.
Second, to evaluate link quality, a light, efﬁcient and immediate
solution is proposed and a new metric based on the number
of retransmissions at Medium Access Control (MAC) level
is proposed. With this metric, the shortest path is expressed
not exactly in terms of number of hops but rather in terms
of number of transmissions. In a realistic environment taking
into account obstacles in the propagation medium, these two
metrics (the BER-based and number of transmissions count-
based ones) are tested and compared with those based on
number of hops, delay and Expected Transmission Count
(ETX).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, related work is presented and shortcomings of
commonly used metrics are highlighted. In Section III, a
thorough study of BER-based metric is drawn. In Section IV,
our new metric is described. In Section V, performance results
of the well known Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR)
protocol enhanced with this new metric is presented and
compared with delay, ETX and BER based ones. We conclude
and present some perspectives in Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
Wireless networks offer a lower QoS than wired ones.
To address the QoS requirements of multimedia applications,
several metrics have been proposed and incorporated into
routing protocols for a judicious choice of data transmission
routes. The provided performances have been mixed. In this
section, critical overview of the most commonly encountered
metrics is made. The costs (in terms of routing load and
additional time) generated by measure and use of these metrics
in routing protocols are analyzed. Here, the speech focuses on
Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR)-based metrics. BER-based metric
is analyzed in Section III.
Packet loss in Mobile Ad hoc NETwork (MANET) is due
to many factors. Among them, buffer overﬂows, transmission
loss and link breakages are the most dominant [1]. In addition,
a received packet whose delay is over the tolerable delay
threshold is also considered as a lost packet. Loss caused by
over-threshold delay can only be monitored at the receiver,
requiring a feedback message be sent to the source for QoS
purpose. Packet loss caused by buffer overﬂow and maximum
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

retransmissions exceeding, are the only information that can
be obtained from intermediate nodes. Successful design of a
metric that takes into account all of these components is very
delicate.
Many approaches measure the packet loss rate by injecting
probing packets into the network. A large number of sample
packets are required to accurately estimate a highly variable
link. Shi et al. [2] evaluate the number of probing packets
needed to get an accurate result as follows: N = 1−p
m2p where p
is the packet loss probability and m the coefﬁcient of variation.
According to this formula, we see that this active measurement
scheme is not suitable for MANETs. For example, for a link
with 10% mean packet loss rate (p = 0.1), 900 samples must
be sent on that link to get a measurement result where standard
deviation is within 10% of the loss probability (i.e., m = 0.1).
When each node should send probe packets, these can cause
a large overhead in MANETs, thus skewing the obtained
results. Furthermore, it takes some time for measurements.
For example, if one sample packet is sent every 1 second,
15 minutes are needed to send 900 samples. This shows that
the active measurement scheme is obviously not suitable for
a wireless network particularly in mobility context. In order
to overcome this dilemma (amount overhead), Link Quality
Ranking (LQR) [3] uses the following trade-off. Instead of
estimating a link-layer metric for each link, LQR performs a
pairwise comparison of the physical-layer metrics and selects
the best link. One problem faced when broadcasting probe-
based estimators, is that they decouple link estimation from
data trafﬁc. If a link goes bad and packets are lost, the link
estimate will not reﬂect this change until the next routing
beacon is dropped [4].
The average rates of the link packet loss are commonly
used. Link quality of a route is evaluated by summing the
metric values of every link on the route [5][6]. This way of
using this metric is questionable. The average or the sum of
link quality measurements along one route may hide the worst
link. Indeed, if the quality of a link among one route is rather
bad, the packets can not be delivered successfully although the
average or sum value is rather good.
The PDR metric is often used as a multiplicative metric [7].
A blind multiplication applied to this metric strongly favors
long paths. In such a case, inter-hop interference may be sig-
niﬁcant. Indeed, the intermediate node can not simultaneously
receive a packet from a neighbor upstream and send another
to a downstream neighbor. Additional delay due to intra-
communication interference is often not taken into account.
It has an impact on throughput but not necessarily on packet
delivery ratio.
ETX routing metric [6] is one of the most popular among
this class of metrics. It is developed to improve the perfor-
mance of routing in static wireless mesh networks where hop
count is not suitable. The ETX of a link is calculated using
the forward and reverse delivery ratios of the link. These
delivery ratios are measured using probe packets. For two
adjacent nodes X and Y, X measures probe delivering rate by
determining the ratio between the number of probes received
from Y and the number of expected ones. When X sends
a probe, it includes the calculated ratio in the message. Y
does the same. Hence, each node knows the ratio in both
directions of a link (one is calculated, the other is provided
by the neighbor). The metric is then obtained by:
ETX =
1
PDRX→Y × PDRY →X
(1)
It can be noted that, although ETX distinguishes two PDR
values for respectively upstream and downstream direction, the
obtained link metric is the same for both directions. ETX is
therefore symmetric. We consider this point as a drawback of
the approach. Indeed, if a link is asymmetric, we think that this
link should be used but only for trafﬁc in the reliable direction.
Only ACK messages should be sent in the unreliable direction,
since these messages are small and then are more likely to
be transmitted correctly. Besides, this metric is independent
on network load. A detailed analysis of OLSR [8] with
the original hysteresis [9] and ETX routing metric revealed
that the original hysteresis performs better than ETX-based
protocols in a large dense mesh network. An analysis was then
carried out on the ETX protocols. It revealed that in realistic
networks, using the ETX algorithm, the predicted losses are
twice the actual losses that are experienced even in ideal lab
conditions for 802.11 [8]. Shi et al. [10] present the design
and selection of appropriate routing metrics as the principal
issue to guarantee efﬁcient routing in self-organizing networks.
They attempt to analyze, compare and summarize trafﬁc-based
routing metrics in the Expected Number of Transmissions
(ETX) family. Several studies [11][12][13] have been proposed
to improve the metric, but its fundamental limits remain.
Delay based-metrics are also questionable. Delay at each
node is composed of input queuing delay, processing delay,
output queuing delay, transmission delay, propagation delay,
and retransmission delay. Most of QoS-based delay metric
focus only on transmission delay at MAC layer [14][15], while
the other components of delay take a signiﬁcant portion of the
total hop-to-hop delay. Li et al. [16] consider queuing delay
at network layer, but their estimation method is complex. In
practice, it is not easy to obtain the number of packets waiting
in network-layer buffer.
Delay is closely related to packet loss rate. A packet loss
that induces retransmissions grows delay and also network
congestion signiﬁcantly. These network performance measures
depend on the quality of used links and ambient ﬂow. Delay
and link loss ratios are often subject to high variation. End-
to-end delay changes with network load as interface queue
lengths vary. This can cause routes to oscillate away from a
good path once the path is used. Delay must be calculated
easily to avoid additional delay due to complex process.
In addition to the sensitivity of the link quality criterion
measurement, many authors have questioned the use of these
QoS values. In [2][17][18][19][20], the authors highlight the
complexity and exorbitant cost (overhead and computing time)
of route-discovery approach with admission control processes.
III.
BER-BASED METRIC
The BER criterion characterizes the network at the lowest
level of the transmission chain (physical layer). Measuring
the error rate at this level provides a more reﬁned estimation
of quality of radio links. It allows the study of physical
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

TABLE I.
EXPECTED NUMBER OF TRANSMISSIONS DEPENDING ON
BER.
ber
nbtransmissions
10−5
1.05
10−4
1.51
2.10−4
2.27
3.10−4
3.42
4.10−4
5.15
5.10−4
7.76
phenomena that inﬂuence the quality of communication. This
link quality criterion has a direct impact on packet delivery
rate and average communications delay.
Delahaye [21][22] uses a ray-tracer propagation model
called CRT for a better estimate of the radio channel in
Network Simulator (NS). The BER used in [23][24] is the
result of simulation of this realistic channel model. The use
of this metric in the MANET routing protocols (OLSR, Ad
hoc On-demand Distance Vector, Zone Routing Protocols) has
signiﬁcantly improved PDR and delay. However, this metric
has many drawbacks in actual implementation. The BER
metric is quite hard to measure in practice. A ﬁrst method
consists in injecting probe packets in the network. Knowing
every binary elements that a packet should contain, the receiver
is able to evaluate the bit error rate by counting how many
bits are erroneous. Nevertheless, the packet should be large
enough to allow a precise measure of BER but its size is in
practice limited to the maximal transfer unit of the network.
Note that control packets are too small and cannot be used
to evaluate BER. So, this method generates an additional load
for the network
[25]. Another approach consists in sending
impulses and measuring the impulse response associated with
a transmission. The main drawback is that this method requires
an adapted physical layer. These disadvantages are presented
in [2].
Moreover, using BER as an additive metric induces long
end-to-end transmission path [24]. These long paths with an
overall good BER value would potentially permit a better
packet delivery ratio, but they generate a long delay and
induce a poor throughput. First, long paths increase intra-
communication interference. Second, they also increase the
vulnerability of established routes, particularly in mobility or
dense networks and multi-communication contexts. For all
these reasons, the BER-based metrics remain theoretical.
Against these BER metric limits, we invested a new metric
based on the number of retransmissions required to make a
data transmission over a link successful. We can note that the
number of packet retransmissions is highly related to the bit
error rate ber. If we suppose a multimedia stream with constant
packet size of n bits, the packet error rate is per = 1 − (1 −
ber)n. Furthermore, the expected number of transmissions to
get a successful packet can be computed as the mathematical
expectation of the stochastic variable per. It equals 1/(1−per).
Therefore, the expected number of transmissions is equal:
nbtransmissions =
1
(1 − ber)n
(2)
Table I shows how the expected number of transmissions
depends on BER, for 512-byte-long packets (n = 4096).
We see that when BER equals 4e−4 or more, the expected
number of transmissions is beyond the number of attempts that
a default MAC layer allows to successfully deliver a packet.
If possible, these links should not be used.
We therefore propose a new metric based on the number
of transmissions and more precisely the number of retrans-
missions (that appear when the ﬁrst attempt is not successful).
As shown in Table I, this metric is highly related to BER,
but, it does not require to be measured. It appears as a low-
level but effective measure of the quality of links. This metric
only requires that each MAC layer computes a mean value of
the number of transmissions required to send packets to each
neighbor, including the large ones. It is therefore not a costly
measure. The next section is devoted to this metric.
IV.
RETRANSMISSION-BASED METRIC
In this section, ﬁrst, the choice of route when intra com-
munication interference (different transmissions for the same
communication) is taken into account is discussed. In a second
step, the design of our number of retransmissions-based metric
is presented. In a third step, this metric is compared with the
ETX metric.
In this new metric, the estimated cost of retransmission,
compared to the cost of the ﬁrst attempt, must be evaluated,
and delay seems a convenient way to evaluate it.
Let us evaluate the transmission time between a source
S and its neighbor D. Let’s consider a given constant time t1
corresponding to a successful ﬁrst transmission. If transmission
fails, the additional time for each retransmission is t2. For
more details on different timing at MAC level see [26][17].
To simplify, t1 is supposed to include processing time to pass
from routing level to MAC level, Request To Send / Clear
To sent (RTS/CTS) mechanism [27] time and propagation
time, and t2 includes additional ACKnowledge (ACK) packet
waiting timeout, RTS/CTS mechanism time and propagation
time (hence t2>t1).
Thereby, the delay is:
t = t1 + (n − 1) × t2
where n is the total number of transmissions. We normalize
this equation to get our new metric (called PR for Packet
Retransmission) as follows:
PR = t
t1 = 1 + (n − 1) × a.
(3)
with a = t2
t1
Note that this metric appears as the number of hops
penalized by a weighted number of retransmissions a×(n−1).
It equals 1 if no retransmission is needed, but it can have a
greater value if retransmissions occur. This value can be seen
as an equivalent (but not integer) number of intermediate hops.
PR is therefore an additive metric, since equivalent number of
hops can be cumulated. In a sense, it is an alternative to the
simple number of hops metric: this new metric is based on the
number of intermediate nodes to access a recipient, but unlike
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

the standard number of hops, it takes into account the quality
of links.
To evaluate this metric, the number of packet transmissions
must be determined. This information is available at the MAC
level (it is a part of the communication statistics at the MAC
layer) and, by a cross layer approach, is operated at routing
level. There is no need to use special probes contrary to what
is required in most metrics. When the used packet size is small
(such as hello packet), the number of transmissions is almost
always 1 (no retransmission) when the used link exists. On the
contrary, large packets allow a better estimate of the quality of
a link with this metric. In our protocols, all packets are taken
into account.
Note that a is a mean value that represents retransmission
cost. To calibrate the value of a, we use a statistical approach.
A realistic propagation model taking into account the obstacles,
with data packets in a multi-communication context, allowed
us to ﬁnd the value 1.65 for a with 0.1 as standard deviation.
In-depth study could better reﬁne the value of a. This param-
eter may vary depending on the nature (dense or less dense)
and congestion level of the studied network.
To test the effectiveness of this new metric, it has been
incorporated in OLSR as the metric used for path selection. At
each node, the metric is calculated from the number of retrans-
missions required to make data transmissions successful over
a given link. The obtained information is recorded as a new
ﬁeld in the record of neighbors and is disseminated through
the network thanks to Topology Control (TC) messages. As it
is an additive metric, a path length is computed as the sum of
the metric of each of its links.
V.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we brieﬂy present the ﬁve different proto-
cols implementing the metrics we analyze. Then, we present
our experimental setup and simulation conditions. We conclude
the section with an analysis of simulation results.
A. Routing protocols
We compare the performance of ﬁve routing protocols,
the standard one OLSR-3626 and four modiﬁed ones, OLSR-
delay, OLSR-ETX, OLSR-BER and OLSR-PR.
OLSR-3626 refers to the standard OLSR described in RFC-
3626 [9]. Route selection criterion used in this protocol is the
minimum number of hops needed to reach destination.
The four other protocols are based on standard OLSR.
Basically, they consider another metric than the number of
hops. These metrics are additive: the distances of a route is
the sum of the distance of all elementary links on the route.
A node computes the shortest path, in term of the considered
metric, toward each destination and records it in its routing
table.
OLSR-delay chooses delay as metric. Link delay measures
are based on Hello messages. Considering OLSR-ETX, ETX
metric is implemented like in [28]. The delivery ratio is based
on Hello messages. OLSR with BER consideration (OLSR-
BER) consists in selecting the path with the lowest global BER
described in Section III. OLSR-PR is based on PR metric as
described in Section IV.
TABLE II.
SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Parameters
Values
Network simulator
NS 2
Simulation time
100s
Simulation area
1000m*1000m
Maximum number of transmissions
4
Transmission power
0.1W
Data types
CBR
Data packet size
512 bytes
MAC layer
IEEE 802.11a
B. Experimental setup
To show the effectiveness of new QoS approaches for
protocol enhancements, t work, evaluations often rely on sim-
ulation. Most of the time, experiments do not take into account
any environment parameters when modeling the propagation
channel. They often consider only the direct ray between
transmitter and receiver assuming that no obstacle disturbs
transmissions. Furthermore, other effects such as multiple
paths induced by the environment are not taken into account
although they highly inﬂuence the quality of the received
signal [29][30][31]. If the environment is not considered, the
obtained results are biased and rather optimistic. The inﬂuence
of bad links is thus highly underestimated. To compute more
convincing simulations, we must use a realistic model of wave
propagation taking into account the environment characteris-
tics. Therefore, we enhanced NS2 [32] with a communication
ray-tracer (CRT) simulator that has been developed at the
XLIM-SIC laboratory [21]. Our BER-based protocol directly
relies on BER values computed by this CRT software. The
global parameters for the simulations are given in Table 2.
C. Simulation results
We simulate OLSR protocol based on our new metric and
compare results with standard and the most common enhanced
ones. Communication concerns simultaneous transmissions be-
tween ten source-destination couples during 100s. The number
of hops between transmitters and receivers varies from 2 to
6. To compare the obtained results, we consider two criteria:
packet delivery ratio (PDR) and average end-to-end delay. Our
metric considers both quality of links in terms of transmission
error and some kind of delay estimation to select shortest
paths. It is important to note that, for these results, BER
estimation time for all links is not taken into account. The
BER measurement is supposed completed before the packet
transmission begins. Different protocols are analyzed in ﬁxed-
nodes context.
In this set of simulation scenarios, the number of nodes
increases from 10 to 50. We study the protocols’performance
under the inﬂuence of path breakages in low densities, routing
overhead and new paths in high densities (high network
connectivity).
Fig. 1 shows that all these enhanced OLSR outperform
the standard one (OLSR-3626) in delay. This means that the
shortest path based on the number of hops metric is not suitable
for communications in realistic environment (Couto et. al have
produced the same result [28]). These results show that our
approach (OLSR-PR) always ﬁnds best paths in term of end-to-
end delay than other protocols. Considering the PDR criterion,
OLSR-BER and OLSR-PR outperform the others (Fig. 2).
Very often, OLSR-BER is slightly better than OLSR-PR. The
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

difference does not exceed 10 points. An analysis of simulation
trace ﬁles (statistical results) shows that the paths found by
OLSR-3626 is shorter (in terms of number of hops), followed
by OLSR-PR. The average length of the paths used by OLSR-
BER and OLSR-ETX are the longest.
The best performance of OLSR-PR against OLSR-BER
and OLSR-ETX is due to the intra-communication interference
effect and additionnal processing time at the intermediate
nodes that are larger for the latter. Our new approach allows
to better optimize the number of hops. But the poorer per-
formance of OLSR-3626 is due to the fact that some of the
used links have a very poor quality, resulting in too many
retransmissions.
Regarding PDR parameter as shown in Fig. 2, although
OLSR-PR often seems less efﬁcient than OLSR-BER, a thor-
ough analysis shows that it has delivered more packets (it
provides the best throughput). This has an impact on the end-
to-end delay since additionnal packets delivered by OLSR-PR
and not by OLSR-BER require longer delays, so the average
delay is degrated.
Fig. 1.
Delay evolution with number of nodes.
Fig. 2.
PDR evolution with number of nodes.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND PROSPECTS
We conducted a critical analysis of existing metrics used in
QoS routing, then we proposed a metric based on the number
of retransmissions required to manage data transmission over
a link. With our QoS approach, the distance between a node
and its neighbor will not be 1 but 1 + a ∗ (n − 1) where
n represents the average number of transmissions required
to make transmissions successful and a is a parameter to
weight retransmission cost. We chosed to base a on expected
transmission delay, that is, the ratio between the average delay
required for a retransmission over the delay necessary for an
initial successful transmission. This metric indirectly relates to
BER since the latter affects the number of retransmissions. In
addition, it takes into account the real time network load. Its
estimation does not induce additional routing load or a large
computation time. Without considering the complexity of the
BER measurement, this number of retransmision-based metric
is a compromise between the number of hops metric that does
not take into account the quality of links and metrics based on
packet delivery ratio that induce too long paths.
We integrated this new metric in OLSR. Paths that require
less retransmission are preferred in routing table calculation
process. Simulation results in ﬁxed-nodes context show that
this approach improves the average transmission delay and is
better than traditional metrics. For delay-sensitive applications,
it is better to use a retransmission-based metric to quantify
links.
For better PDR and delay performance, neighbor links and
MPR node selection should be reconsidered. In future work,
we intend to evaluate performances of our new metric in
mobility nodes context.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Chlamtac, M. Conti, and J. J. N. Liu, “Mobile ad hoc networking:
imperatives and challenges,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13 –
64, 2003.
[2]
L. Shi, A. Fapojuwo, N. Viberg, W. Hoople, and N. Chan, “Methods
for calculating bandwidth, delay, and packet loss metrics in Multi-
Hop IEEE802.11 ad hoc networks,” in IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC), pp. 103–107, May 2008.
[3]
M. Zuniga, I. Irzynska, J. Hauer, T. Voigt, C. A. Boano, and K. Roemer,
“Link quality ranking: Getting the best out of unreliable links,” in IEEE
International Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems
and Workshops (DCOSS), pp. 1–8, June 2011.
[4]
R. Fonseca, O. Gnawali, K. Jamieson, and P. Levis, Four-Bit Wireless
Link Estimation. 2007.
[5]
G. Karbaschi and A. Fladenmuller, “A link-quality and congestion-
aware cross layer metric for multi-hop wireless routing,” in IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems Conference,
IEEE, Nov. 2005.
[6]
D. S. J. D. Couto, D. Aguayo, J. Bicket, and R. Morris, “a high-
throughput path metric for multi-hop wireless routing,” Wireless Net-
works, vol. 11, pp. 419–434, July 2005.
[7]
F. Ingelrest and D. Simplot-Ryl, “Maximizing the delivery of mpr
broadcasting under realistic physical layer assumptions,” Journal of
Computer Science and Technology, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 451–460, 2008.
[8]
D. Johnson and G. Hancke, “Comparison of two routing metrics in olsr
on a grid based mesh network,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 7, pp. 374–387,
Mar. 2009.
[9]
T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, “Optimized link state routing protocol
(OLSR),” Oct. 2003. IETF RFC 3626.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

[10]
F. Shi, D. Jin, and J. Song, “A survey of trafﬁc-based routing metrics
in family of expected transmission count for self-organizing networks,”
Computers and Electrical Engineering, vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 1801 – 1812,
2014.
[11]
P. Esposito, M. Campista, I. Moraes, L. Costa, O. Duarte, and M. Rubin-
stein, “Implementing the expected transmission time metric for OLSR
wireless mesh networks,” in Wireless Days (WD), pp. 1–5, Nov. 2008.
[12]
R. Draves, J. Padhye, and B. Zill, “Routing in multi-radio, multi-hop
wireless mesh networks,” in Proceedings of the 10th annual interna-
tional conference on Mobile computing and networking (MOBICOM),
pp. 114–128, 2004.
[13]
A. Cerpa, J. L. Wong, M. Potkonjak, and D. Estrin, “Temporal proper-
ties of low power wireless links: Modeling and implications on multi-
hop routing,” in In ACM MobiHoc, pp. 414 – 425, ACM Press, 2005.
[14]
R. Draves, J. Padhye, and B. Zill, “Routing in multi-radio, multi-hop
wireless mesh networks,” in Proceedings of the 10th annual interna-
tional conference on Mobile computing and networking, MobiCom ’04,
(New York, NY, USA), pp. 114–128, ACM, 2004.
[15]
Y. Yang, “Designing routing metrics for mesh networks,” in In WiMesh,
2005.
[16]
H. Li, Y. Cheng, C. Zhou, and W. Zhuang, “Minimizing end-to-end
delay: A novel routing metric for multi-radio wireless mesh networks,”
in IEEE INFOCOM, pp. 46–54, Apr. 2009.
[17]
S. Su, Y. Su, and J. Jung, “A novel QoS admission control for ad
hoc networks,” in IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), pp. 4193–4197, Mar. 2007.
[18]
B. Bakhshi and S. Khorsandi, “Complexity and design of qos routing
algorithms in wireless mesh networks,” Computer Communications,
vol. 34, no. 14, pp. 1722 – 1737, 2011.
[19]
Z. Wang and J. Crowcroft, “Quality-of-service routing for supporting
multimedia applications,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Commu-
nications, vol. 14, pp. 1228–1234, Sept. 1996.
[20]
K. A. Al-Soufy and A. M. Abbas, “A path robustness-based quality
of service routing for mobile ad hoc networks,” in 2010 IEEE 4th
International Conference on Internet Multimedia Services Architecture
and Application (IMSAA), pp. 1–6, IEEE, Dec. 2010.
[21]
R. Delahaye, Y. Pousset, A.-M. Poussard, C. Chatellier, and R. Vauzelle,
“A realistic physic layer modeling of 802.11g ad hoc networks in out-
door environments with a computation time optimization,” in Proceed-
ings of the Eleventh World Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics
and Informatics (WMSCI), (Orlando, Florida, USA), 2007.
[22]
R. Delahaye, A.-M. Poussard, Y. Pousset, and R. Vauzelle, “Propagation
models and physical layer quality criteria inﬂuence on ad hoc networks
routing,” in Telecommunications, 2007. ITST ’07. 7th International
Conference on ITS, pp. 1–5, June 2007.
[23]
T. Y´el´emou, P. Meseure, and A. M. Poussard, “A new ber-based
approach to improve olsr protocol,” in 2011 Eighth International
Conference on Wireless and Optical Communications Networks, pp. 1–
5, May 2011.
[24]
T. Y´el´emou, P. Meseure, and A. M. Poussard, “Improving zrp perfor-
mance by taking into account quality of links,” in 2012 IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pp. 2956–2960,
April 2012.
[25]
J. Ledy, H. Boeglen, A. Poussard, B. Hilt, and R. Vauzelle, “A Semi-
Deterministic channel model for VANETs simulations,” International
Journal of Vehicular Technology, vol. 2012, pp. 1–8, 2012.
[26]
IEEE, “Wireless lan medium access control (MAC) and physical layer
(PHY) speciﬁcations (IEEE standard 802.11, part 11),” June 1999.
[27]
J. Weinmiller, H. Woesner, J. pierre Ebert, and A. Wolisz, “Analyzing
the rts/cts mechanism in the dfwmac media access protocol for wireless
lans,” 1995.
[28]
D. S. J. De Couto, D. Aguayo, J. Bicket, and R. Morris, “A high-
throughput path metric for multi-hop wireless routing,” in Proceedings
of the 9th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking, MobiCom ’03, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 134–146, ACM,
2003.
[29]
J. Gozalvez, M. Sepulcre, and R. Bauza, “Impact of the radio channel
modelling on the performance of vanet communication protocols,”
Telecommunication Systems, pp. 1–19, 2010.
[30]
W. Hamidouche, R. Vauzelle, C. Olivier, Y. Pousset, and C. Perrine,
“Impact of realistic mimo physical layer on video transmission over
mobile ad hoc network,” in Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Commu-
nications, 2009 IEEE 20th International Symposium on, pp. 187–191,
2009.
[31]
M. G¨unes, M. Wenig, and A. Zimmermann, “Realistic mobility and
propagation framework for manet simulations,” in Proceedings of
the 6th International IFIP-TC6 Conference on Ad Hoc and Sensor
Networks, Wireless Networks, Next Generation Internet, NETWORK-
ING’07, (Berlin, Heidelberg), pp. 97–107, Springer-Verlag, 2007.
[32]
L. Breslau, D. Estrin, K. Fall, S. Floyd, J. Heidemann, A. Helmy,
P. Huang, S. McCanne, K. Varadhan, Y. Xu, and H. Yu, “Advances
in network simulation,” COMPUTER, vol. 33, May 2000.
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

