Smart Relay Protocols for Throughput Optimization using AMC in LTE-Advanced 
Systems  
Saransh Malik1, Sangmi Moon1, Bora Kim1, Daejin Kim1, Youngil Kim2, Kunmin Yeo2 and Intae Hwang1 
1) Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering, 
Chonnam National University, 
Gwangju, Republic of Korea, 
saranshmk@gmail.com, msm0804@naver.com, bora54321@naver.com, djinkim@chonnam.ac.kr and hit@chonnam.ac.kr 
2) Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea, 
yikim@etri.re.kr and kunmin@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— We propose an Adaptive Modulation and Coding 
(AMC) scheme using relay protocols AF, DF and DMF. The 
AMC scheme is used for improving the throughput and 
reliability of a communication system, using different 
modulation and coding schemes. We analyze the performance 
of relay protocols with the AMC scheme and observe that relay 
protocols with the AMC scheme are capable of providing 
better average throughput at a lower Signal to Noise Ratio 
(SNR) level as compared to the conventional scheme with no 
AMC. We perform Monte Carlo simulations based on 3GPP 
Long Term Evolution-Advanced (LTE-A) parameters to prove 
the performance comparison of adaptive Modulation and 
Coding Scheme (MCS) relay protocols with non-adaptive MCS 
relay protocols. The simulation results of the proposed system 
with adaptive MCS prove that among the Amplify-and-
Forward (AF), Decode-and-Forward (DF) and De- Modulate-
and-Forward (DMF), the DMF protocol performs best, at a 
lower SNR value and higher average throughput. 
Keywords-AF; DF; DMF; AMC; LTE-A. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, relaying technology in cellular systems has 
received significant interest. Relay based network architectures 
show promising interest in potential and practical applications as 
LTE-Advanced [1-3]. Cooperative communications can 
exploit the distributed spatial diversity in multiuser systems 
to combat the impairments of wireless channels. This is 
particularly useful when each node can only be equipped 
with a single antenna. Without channel feedback, the 
conventional cooperative protocols, such as Amplify-and-
forward (AF), Decode-and-forward (DF), etc, can offer a 
diversity gain by allowing nodes a fair opportunity to 
transmit messages through their own channel [4-6]. On the 
other hand, if the Channel State Information (CSI) is 
available to the senders, the system can re-allocate the radio 
resource among the senders to improve the communication 
efficiency. Furthermore, all the nodes are allowed to adapt 
their data rates to match the channel conditions, such that the 
throughput is maximized [7-8]. Motivated by this fact, we 
consider adaptive modulation for various protocol systems. 
Adaptive Modulation and Coding (AMC) [9-13] can provide 
high spectral efficiency, meanwhile the reliability of data can 
be guaranteed. Thus, adaptation features make it attractive 
for further research in several areas, in particular if a high 
data rate is among the expected results. Our proposal consists 
then, in the combination of MIMO and AMC schemes in one 
single system: Adaptive-MCS. The optimal selection of the 
coding rate, modulation and relay protocols scheme result is 
an improvement of the data rate and system reliability. The 
goal is to maximize the data throughput and system 
efficiency.  
The structure of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 
describes the system model and adaptive MCS with Relay. 
Section 3 explains the proposed criteria for adaptive MCS 
selection in the relay system, and Section 4 presents the 
simulation results and analysis. Finally, conclusions are 
discussed in Section 5. 
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL AND ADAPTIVE MCS WITH RELAY 
Assume that the channel gains are completely known at 
the transmitter and the receiver and remain unchanged 
during a packet transmission. In a block fading channel, it is 
feasible to implement a reverse link to send back channel 
information, and the assumption is practical. At the relay 
node, we process three protocol types AF, DF and the DMF 
protocol. The AF and DF protocols are considered as 
conventional protocols in the fixed relay system which are 
already adapted by the LTE-A. We analyze the consistency 
and efficiency of the DMF protocol with MCS comparing 
the results with conventional designed algorithms. 
 
Figure 1.  System Model of Relay with AMC based system 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

In Figure 1, we describe the structure of the Adaptive-
MCS system with RN operation. At the Evolved Node B 
(eNB), the data is coded, interleaved, modulated and then, 
transmitted through the channel. Once at the receiver the 
channel condition is estimated with an SNR criterion, and 
this information is sent back to the transmitter, which 
decides which MCS level to use. The previous channel 
condition parameters are stored in a buffer. When the signal 
arrives at the Relay Node (RN), we select the protocols for 
various scenarios by first analyzing the channel parameters 
given by the Channel Evaluator (CE) from the RN–UE link. 
As per the performance of CE, the suitable MCS level is 
chosen for the best average throughput performance. 
Choosing the MCS level means to select a specific code rate 
and modulation scheme according to the estimation of the 
channel conditions. Based on the idea of pre-evaluated 
channel quality, we select the favorable relay protocol. This 
data is then sent to the User Equipment (UE). The UE also 
analyzes the CE, based on the channel condition between 
RN-UE links. If the channel condition is favorable, a high 
order of modulation and code rate are used. Otherwise, a 
low order of modulation and code rate are selected. With the 
appropriate MCS level, AMC can obtain both excellent 
throughput performance and quality for a specific channel 
condition.   
III. 
PROPOSED CRITERIA FOR ADAPTIVE MCS SELECTION 
AND PROTOCOL DESIGN 
Adaptive Modulation and Coding is performed according 
to several SINR regions. Here, we first discuss the region 
boundary for the modulation regarding the modulation 
adaptation among various schemes of modulation as QPSK 
and 16-QAM, with a code rate of 1/3 and 3/4.Let ϒsr and ϒrd 
denote the received SINR of the SR and RD link. PSR & PRD 
can be the error probability for the Source-Relay link and 
Relay-Destination link, respectively. If the RN can obtain 
data correctly with the probability of (1-PSR), the final errors 
are calculated from the detection of the combined SD and 
RD link, PSD. When the relay cannot acquire the data 
correctly at the SR link the probability is given by, PSD. 
Thus, the total BER for this state is given by (1)  
 
 
SR
SD
SR
e
P
P
P
P



)
1(
 
 
  (1) 
We know that BER of M-QAM modulation can be 
obtained as (3)  
 
 
 
        
    
   (2) 
where,      
 
     
   
 
 
 
  , where 
 and  are 
decided by the modulation scheme. But, the above scheme 
is complex for inversion. So, to simplify the above design 
and performance analysis, we model the expression, where 
n is the MCS level, as 
 
  
 
                      
    (3) 
Here, we analyze various characteristics of the scheme 
comprising the Adaptive-MCS with Relay. 
A. Precoding Scheme 
The pre-coding scheme is located at the eNB. This 
improves the system performance by using the estimated 
channel information calculated at the RN. There are several 
techniques used for pre-coding, such as Pre-Zero Forcing 
(ZF) and Pre-Minimum Mean Square Error (MMSE).  
B. Relay Protocols with AMC 
The relay protocols considered in our research paper are 
AF, DF and DMF. We will now evaluate various relay 
protocols with AMC. Figure 2 shows a flowchart of the 
Relay scheme with AMC. Firstly, the Channel State 
Information (CSI) is calculated based on the link condition 
and estimation. Then each protocol is selected as per the 
situation since all protocols have the same amount of 
maximum throughput. Suppose, we select the DMF 
protocol. Then, we check the given MCS level. In the MCS 
level, we then check the type of the code rate and 
modulation. When satisfied as defined by the condition, we 
again check the CSI for the next link of relay and the UE, as 
stored in the buffer at the relay node. Based on the 
estimation of the CSI, we make the error check of the 
present CSI and previous CSI. If the state is true we can 
then calculate the final throughput estimate as per the given 
MCS level; otherwise, we need to recheck the MCS level 
and append the new CSI value in the relay node. Then, we 
need to verify the MCS level for the RN-UE link. Once the 
throughput is estimated, the new data frame, which is 
needed to be transmitted to the UE with lower error 
probability, needs to be verified. The dotted part in the 
flowchart shows the main performance area in the 
algorithm.  
 
Figure 2.  Flow Chart of AMC with Relay Scheme 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

C. AF with MCS 
Simply called an AF protocol, the relay tends to scale 
the received version of the signal and transmits an amplified 
version of it to the destination or UE. It is the most basic 
type of fixed relay. It simply amplifies the received data and 
then forwards it to the UE. The relay is usually not capable 
of performing in a bad channel condition as it amplifies the 
noise factor of the received data vector. But in order to 
compare its performance with a new DMF protocol, we use 
AF for analysis as a reference case of the standard known 
protocol. When MCS is applied to the AF with various code 
rates and modulation schemes we can observe the 
progressive improvement in the case of adaptive MCS [10]. 
As given in Figure 1, when we select the AF protocol, then 
as per the channel condition, the SINR value is estimated 
from the channel evaluator, by using the precoding scheme 
at the RN and the UE.  
D. DF with MCS 
The relay node is for the relay to decode the received 
signal, re-encode it, and then retransmit it to the receiver. 
This kind of relaying is termed as a fixed decode-and-
forward (DF) scheme, which is often simply called a DF 
scheme. 
In the basic DF relaying scheme, we implement SINR 
estimation using precoding methodology, which actually 
evaluates the channel and helps to estimate the SINR value 
with channel quality. The decoding operation is repeated 
multiple times which helps in improving the system 
performance by noise and interference reduction.  
E. DMF with MCS 
DMF protocol signal processing is an alternative to DF 
signal processing to reduce receiver power consumption due 
to channel decoding at the relay as well as to minimize the 
overall delay at the destination. In the DF schemes 
previously described, the relay forwards the source’s 
message only if it is able to successfully decode. However, 
in many applications, channel decoding may not be 
desirable at the relays either due to limited transceiver 
capabilities or due to lack of knowledge of the channel 
codebook. In this case, the signals transmitted by the source 
can only be detected or demodulated on a symbol-by-
symbol basis. At this position there is a need for a relay 
protocol capable of performing much better in decoding 
performance. So, we design a new protocol capable of 
performing in both cases whereby in the bad decoding case 
it is capable of maintaining the high error bits decoding with 
soft decoding and the higher modulation scheme. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
The simulation results are based on the link level Monte 
Carlo simulations. Noise components are the same at all 
channel links, but channel fading component changes 
increase and decrease, based on the links, as eNB-RN link 
and RN–UE link characteristics. Table I shows the 
simulation parameters based on 3GPP LTE-Advanced 20 
MHz bandwidth. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS FOR 20MHZ 
Parameter 
Value 
Carrier Frequency 
2 GHz 
Bandwidth 
20 MHz 
Subcarrier spacing 
15 KHz 
Sub frame Duration 
1 ms 
FFT Size 
2048 
No. of subcarriers/PRB 
12 
Channel 
EPA, EVA, ETU 
Modulation scheme 
QPSK,16 QAM 
Noise 
AWGN 
Relay Node (RN) 
1 
Relaying Protocol 
AF, DF, DMF 
 
A. FER, SER and BER Analysis of AF,DF and DMF 
Protocols 
We will now discuss the error performance and analysis of 
all three protocols in order to clarify their behavior in our 
adaptive MCS relay system. 
 
Figure 3.  FER results with AF,DF and DMF protocols. 
 
Figure 4.  SER results with AF,DF and DMF protocols. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Figure 5.  BER results with AF,DF and DMF protocols. 
Figure 3 presents the Frame Error rate (FER) 
performance for the 3 kinds of protocols. We can clearly 
observe that the performance of the DMF protocol shows a 
very high trade off compared to AF and DF protocol. The 
tradeoff between AF and DF at higher SNR shows very 
little error performance advantage but on the other hand the 
DMF protocol shows explicit performance.   
Figure 4 analyzes the Symbol Error Rate (SER) 
performance analysis of the AF, DF and DMF protocol. 
Compared to Figure 3 the performance of AF, DF and DMF 
show slight improvement in performance. Te simulation 
examines the error probability based on each symbol 
transmission. Therefore, compared to the FER performance 
this figure demonstrates better results, as the error 
encountered in the symbol rate is much more reduced in 
comparison to the frame error of each case. 
Figure 5 shows the Bit Error Rate (BER) analysis, which 
still shows better error performance for DMF compared to 
the AF and DF protocols. Here, we can observe that even at 
an improved error performance than compared than to the 
FER or SER, AF and DF performance are very close at 
lower SNR values, whereas, the performance of DMF still 
shows better results than the conventional protocols. 
B. Non-Adaptive MCS with AF,DF and DMF Protocols 
Table II shows the Non-Adaptive MCS level table, with 
various MCS level for AF, DF and DMF protocols based on 
the code rate, as turbo coding with 1/3 and 3/4. The 
modulation schemes followed in this case are QPSK and 16-
QAM. 
We 
observed 
various 
values 
of 
maximum 
throughputs in different code rates and nodulation schemes.  
The maximum throughput achieved by all the coding 
schemes and modulation schemes are different at various 
levels. The maximum throughput in all MCS is independent 
of the nature of protocol.  
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
NON-ADAPTIVE MCS WITH RELAY 
MCS 
Level 
Protocol 
Code 
Rate 
Modulation 
Max. Throughput
 (Mbps) 
1 
AF 
1/3 
QPSK 
14.4 
2 
AF 
3/4 
QPSK 
21.6 
3 
AF 
1/3 
16-QAM 
28.8 
4 
AF 
3/4 
16-QAM 
43.06 
5 
DF 
1/3 
QPSK 
14.4 
6 
DF 
3/4 
QPSK 
21.6 
7 
DF 
1/3 
16-QAM 
28.8 
8 
DF 
3/4 
16-QAM 
43.06 
9 
DMF 
1/3 
QPSK 
14.4 
10 
DMF 
3/4 
QPSK 
21.6 
11 
DMF 
1/3 
16-QAM 
28.8 
12 
DMF 
3/4 
16-QAM 
43.06 
 
 
Figure 6.  Throughput of Non Adaptive MCS AF Protocol. 
 
Figure 7.  Throughput of Non Adaptive MCS DF Protocol. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Figure 8.  Throughput of Non Adaptive MCS DMF Protocol. 
Figure 6 shows the maximum throughput values at 
different code rates for the AF protocol. The maximum 
throughput for code rate 1/3 with QPSK is observed, of 
approximately 14.4 Mbps. As the code rate is increased in 
the case of the same modulation, we can observe an increase 
in throughput at 21.6 Mbps. However, we have to 
compromise with SNR performance in this case. Similarly, 
with the increase in the modulation scheme, we can observe 
the increase in throughput rate. Finally, we observed that the 
higher the code rate and modulation, the higher the 
throughput but we have compromised the SNR performance 
which is gained at a very high SNR.  
Figure 7 shows the performance analysis for the Non -
Adaptive MCS DF protocol. The maximum throughput is 
the same in the case of AF and DF, as seen in Table 2. But, 
as we observe the values of SNR tradeoff we can see a 
considerable gain in the throughput case. We can observe 
that better decoding schemes improve the relay performance 
for relay code rate and modulation.  
Figure 8 shows the throughput of the Non-Adaptive 
MCS DMF protocol, as the case of AF and DF. We can 
understand that the code rate and modulation is the same for 
all protocols and so is the maximum throughput as seen in 
Table 2. If we look at the SNR Performance we can see that 
the DMF protocol achieves higher throughput at lower SNR 
values. 
C. Non-Adaptive MCS with AF,DF and DMF Protocols 
Table III shows the values for the Adaptive MCS level 
for the AF, DF and DMF Protocol for various values for 
code rate and modulation scheme. We made observations 
and analysis on the basis of Signal-to-Noise-Ratio (SNR) 
and Average Throughput in Mega bit per second 
(Mbps).The rate are chosen based on the best code rate and 
best modulation scheme provided, with the highest 
throughput order [10]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  
ADAPTIVE MCS WITH RELAY 
MCS 
Level 
Protocol 
Code 
Rate 
Modulation 
SNR 
(dB) 
Avg. 
Through-  
put (Mbps) 
1 
AF 
1/3 
QPSK 
21 
12.384 
2 
AF 
1/3 
16-QAM 
36 
26.976 
3 
AF 
3/4 
16-QAM 
51 
42.984 
4 
DF 
1/3 
QPSK 
12 
10.468 
5 
DF 
1/3 
16-QAM 
21 
27.65 
6 
DF 
3/4 
16-QAM 
30 
42.984 
7 
DMF 
1/3 
QPSK 
8 
14.4 
8 
DMF 
1/3 
16-QAM 
14 
27.36 
9 
DMF 
3/4 
16-QAM 
23 
42.984 
 
 
Figure 9.  Adaptive Thorughput of adaptive MCS AF Protocol 
 
Figure 10.  Adaptive Thorughput of adaptive MCS DF Protocol 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Figure 11.  Adaptive Thorughput of adaptive MCS DMF Protocol 
 
Figure 12.  Average Throughput Analysis of Adaptive MCS Relay 
Protocols 
 
Figure 13.  Maximum Throughput Analysis of Adaptive MCS Relay 
Protocols 
Figure 9 shows the average throughput of the adaptive 
MCS AF protocol. We analyzed the new MCS level for the 
specified code rate and modulation schemes for the AF case 
to achieve the average throughput and maximum throughput 
at the same time. The rapid increase in the throughput is 
calculated on the basis of maximum throughput achieved at 
lower code rates and lower modulation schemes. As 
analyzed points are shown in Figure 9 the MCS level 1on 
SNR at an average throughput of 21 dB was 12.364 Mbps. 
Then the MCS level 2 is switched to SNR 36 dB point and 
an average throughput of 26.976 Mbps. Following this, 
MCS level 3 is switched until the maximum throughput is 
achieved at SNR 51dB with an average throughput of 
42.984 Mbps.      
Figure 10 shows the average throughput of the adaptive 
MCS DF protocol. The rapid gain in average throughput is 
observed similarly to the case of AF. As analyzed points are 
shown in Figure 10 the MCS level 4 is selected first on SNR 
at 12 dB at an average throughput of 10.468 Mbps, then the 
MCS level 5 is switched to SNR 21 dB point and average 
throughput of 27.65 Mbps, and then to the MCS level 6 is 
switched till the maximum throughput is achieved at SNR 
30dB and an average throughput 42.984 Mbps. As far as the 
maximum throughput is considered it is the same for all 
protocols.   
Figure 11 shows the average throughput of the adaptive 
MCS DMF protocol. The rapid gain in average throughput 
is observed best in the case of DMF. As analyzed points are 
shown in figure 11 the MCS level 7 is selected first on SNR 
at 8 dB at an average throughput of 14.4 Mbps, then the 
MCS level 8 is switched to SNR 14 dB point and average 
throughput of 27.36 Mbps, and then the MCS level 9 is 
switched till the maximum throughput is achieved at SNR 
23db and an average throughput of 42.984 Mbps.  The 
maximum throughput is considered the same for all 
protocols but the SNR gain is best in the case regarding the 
DMF protocol 
Figure 12 shows the Maximum throughput analysis 
comparing all the protocols in the case of the adaptive relay 
with MCS. Here, we observe that the DMF protocol shows a 
gain of 7 dB compared to the DF protocol. DMF attains the 
maximum throughput at the SNR of 23 dB and the DF gains 
maximum throughput at 30 dB. Similarly, as compared to 
the DF and DMF, AF gains maximum throughput at 51dB 
which is far worse than the case of DF and DMF clearly 
shows an SNR gain of 21 dB. 
Figure 13 shows the performance of the AF, DF and 
DMF Adaptive MCS relay with minimum average 
throughput. This is in contrast with the Maximum 
throughput case where DMF and DF show very close 
performance but the performance of AF and DF show a 
dramatic change in gain and prove AF as the worst. In this 
case, DMF shows the Minimum throughput gain at 2 dB 
with 4.32 Mbps, whereas DF shows a throughput gain at 
SNR 6 dB with 0.768Mbps and AF shows SNR 9 dB and a 
throughput of 0.672 Mbps. This shows that in contrast of the 
maximum 
throughput, 
the 
minimum 
throughput 
demonstrates that the DMF protocol has consistent 
performance at high and low SNR values. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

V. 
CONCLUSION 
We propose an AMC scheme using relay protocols like 
AF, DF and DMF. The behaviors of these protocols are 
analyzed on parameters of FER, SER, BER, maximum 
throughput, average throughput and minimum throughput. 
We use the AMC scheme for improving throughput and 
reliability, because of the nature of different modulation and 
coding schemes. The simulation results of the proposed 
system with adaptive MCS prove that among the AF, DF 
and DMF protocols, the DMF protocol performs best 
specifically at a lower SNR value and also provides better 
average throughput. We observed that the proposed DMF 
protocol is capable of performing with the best performance 
in lower and high SNR values and with high consistency 
and provides the best throughput efficiency. The main 
consideration point in the proposed mechanism is the 
application of the DMF protocol, which when implemented 
with the AMC scheme shows outstanding results compared 
to the conventional AF and DF schemes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of 
Science, ICT & Future Planning), Korea, under the ITRC 
(Information Technology Research Center) support program 
(NIPA-2013-H0301-13-3005) supervised by the NIPA 
(National IT Industry Promotion Agency. This study was 
financially supported by Chonnam National University, 
2012. This research is supported by Korea Research Council 
for Industrial Science and Technology under B551179-12-
07-00.  
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Pabst, B. H. Walke and D. C. Schultz, “Relay-based 
deployment concepts for wireless and mobile broadband 
radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 42, no. 9, Sep. 2004, pp. 
80–89. 
[2] S. W. Peters, A. Y. Panah, Kien T. Truong, and R. W. Heath, 
Jr., “Relay architectures for 3GPP LTE-advanced,” EURASIP 
J. Wirel. Commun. and Network., vol. 2009, Article ID 
618787, 2009, 14 pages. 
[3] S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, LTE, The UMTS Long 
Term Evolution: From theory to practice, Wiley & Sons, Feb. 
2009. 
[4] J. N. Laneman, D. N. C. Tse, and G. W. Wornell, 
“Cooperative diversity in wireless networks: efficient protocol 
and outage behavior," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 
3062-3080, Dec. 2004. 
[5] A. Sendonaris, E. Erkip, and B. Aazhang, “User cooperation 
diversity-part i: System description,” IEEE Transactions on 
Communications, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 1927–1938, Nov 2003. 
[6] A. Sendonaris, E. Erkip, and B. Aazhang, “User cooperation 
diversity - part ii: Implementation aspects and performance 
analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 51, 
no. 11, pp. 1939–1948, Nov 2003. 
[7] G. Holland, N. Vaidya and P. Bahl, “A rate-adaptive MAC 
protocol for multi-hop wireless networks,” Proc. of the 7th 
MobiCom, pp.236-251, Rome, Italy, 2001. 
[8] S.G. Chua and A.J. Goldsmith, “Adaptive coded modulation 
for fading channels”, IEEE Transaction on communications, 
May 1998, pp. 595-6022. 
[9] S.K. Lai, R.S. Cheng, K.B. Letaief,and R.D. Murch, 
“Adaptive trellis coded MQAM and power optimization for 
OFDM 
transmission”, 
IEEE 
Vehicular 
Technology 
Conference, May 1999, pp. 290-295. 
[10] J.H. Lee, G.S. Yoon, I.S. Cho, C.W. Seo, S. Portugal and I.T. 
Hwang,“Design 
and 
Performance 
Analysis 
of 
a 
Communication System with AMC and MIMO Mode 
Selection Scheme”, Journal of The Institute of Electronics 
Engineers of Korea, vol. 47-TC, No. 3, March 2010. 
[11] T. Keller, L. Hanzo, “Adaptive modulation techniques for 
duplex OFDM transmission”, IEEE Transaction on Vehicular 
Technology, Sept 2000, pp. 1893-1906. 
[12] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 2001. 
 
 
 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

