The Advantage of Moving Nodes in Formations in MANETs and M2ANETs 
 
Abdullah Alshehri, John DeDourek, Przemyslaw Pochec 
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of New Brunswick 
Fredericton, Canada 
E-mail: {j0lp6, dedourek, pochec}@unb.ca 
 
 
Abstract—MANETs are self-configuring infrastructure-less 
mobile networks characterized by dynamically changing 
topology and intermittent connectivity. Performance of 
MANETs depends on the movement pattern of their nodes. We 
propose, and simulate in network simulator NS-2, a novel 
group mobility model, a towing formation, and show its 
advantage in controlling the movement of mobile nodes in a 
MANET. In the towing formation model, one of the nodes 
within each formation acts as a leader, with the other nodes, 
called followers, trailing closely. We show the impact of the 
number of towing formations in a MANET network, the 
number of nodes in each towing formation, and the distance 
between the nodes in each towing formation on the data traffic 
through a MANET. The greater the number of formations and 
the greater the size of each formation, the better the 
throughput. 
Keywords-MANET; group mobility; formations; NS-2. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, we observed a heightened interest in 
mobile networks for use in emergency situations and disaster 
recovery. Ideally, such networks would have a limited 
reliance on (existing) fixed infrastructure, be easy to set up 
and resilient to disruptions resulting from hazardous 
environments and infrastructure breakdown. 
The general model of a Mobile Ad hoc Network 
(MANET) fits very well the emergency deployment 
scenarios. MANET is a network consisting of mobile 
autonomous nodes that forward the data among themselves 
without, as opposed to cellular networks, the need for any 
fixed infrastructure [19]. Nodes are relatively inexpensive 
and therefore can be used in large numbers if necessary, to 
facilitate communication. The new M2ANET model [4] 
proposes to use a large number of mobile nodes to create a 
“cloud” of routing nodes, a mobile medium, to facilitate 
communication between designated senders and receivers. In 
M2ANET, when two stations cannot communicate directly, a 
large number of routing nodes is dispersed between them and 
acts as the medium forwarding and routing messages.  
In many situations (i.e., military communications, 
emergency relief, search and rescue) members participating 
in the effort are organized into teams, often with a designated 
leader: an officer leading a platoon of soldiers, a coordinator 
giving directions to a rescue team, etc. Given the available 
resources, it may be advantageous (and economical) to 
organize the members into teams. The leaders may possess 
special qualities, skills, intelligence and equipment that 
distinguish them from the rest of the team.  
If mobile networks were to be organized on some of the 
same principles, we might designate some mobile network 
nodes as leaders. We may then equip these nodes with 
special facilities like advance control and guidance with GPS 
etc., and perhaps even a powered motion facility (e.g. an 
engine), while the other nodes may be left more limited in 
these functions and may only need, for instance, to be guided 
or even to be towed by a leader. Such an approach would 
simplify the control (i.e., decision made at a node, which 
way to move next) of movement in a MANET with a large 
number of nodes: one would only need to guide (a limited 
number of) leaders while the followers would simply tag 
along. In case of simple physical towing, neither a guidance 
system on a towed node, nor any type of communication 
between the leader and the followers would be required. One 
example of such a scenario where the leader is responsible 
for the direction of movement of another object is 
aerotowing a glider by a powered plane; another application 
is a multiple decoy system towed behind a warship [21].  
In this paper, we propose a group mobility strategy based 
on the above scenario where some mobile nodes can 
independently choose their movements, while the other 
nodes are limited in their movements, and limited to 
following the leaders (designated nodes). In MANETs, small 
changes to the movements of nodes can lead to changes in 
network topology and therefore affect the performance 
characteristics, such as throughput. We study the impact of 
having the nodes moving in formations on the performance 
of a MANET running the AODV routing protocol [14].  
In Section II, we present background on MANETs. In 
Section III, dynamic mobility control strategy for MANET 
with formations is proposed based on group behavior. 
Experiments with different group sizes and lengths are 
described, including simulation set up, results and analysis in 
Sections IV and V. Finally, we present the conclusion and 
future work, in Section VI and Section VII, respectively. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
MANET is a kind of wireless network that consists of a 
group of mobile nodes that communicate with each other 
without relying on fixed infrastructure [19]. The Mobile 
Medium Ad hoc Network (M2ANET) is a kind of a 
MANET where the mobile nodes are divided into two 
228
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

categories: nodes that forward the data only and cannot be a 
source or the final destination of any transmission, and the 
nodes that can originate and receive data [4]. The 
forwarding nodes form a cloud of mobile medium that 
enables communication between transmitting nodes. The 
data communication through the mobile medium is affected 
by the properties of the medium: node density, speed, and 
especially the movement patterns, etc. 
The mobility models have been developed to represent 
the node distribution and the movements [5][6][7]. They 
capture the properties of node location, time-varying node 
speed, and the distinct behaviors of the nodes, for example 
following different movement paths. These statistical 
properties of network connectivity are studied and identified 
with the mobility model [8][9][11][12][13].  
The closest to our towing group mobility model is the 
Reference Point Group Mobility (RPGM) proposed by 
Hong et al. [9]. In our towing model, the nodes in a group 
follow the group leader, while in RPGM it is the “logical 
center” that determines the group motion behavior. 
III. 
THE STRATEGY: MOVING IN FORMATIONS 
A. Preliminary 
We assume that all of the nodes have the same 
communication range R. The nodes inside the range are 
called neighbors, and two or more neighbors can 
communicate. Each node has its location, which is simply 
denoted as L (v). The location information can be maintained 
using Global Positioning System (GPS), or by using an 
inertial guidance system. In the experiments we initially 
place the clusters of nodes belonging to formations randomly 
at different locations in area n x n (Fig. 1). Within each 
cluster one node is arbitrarily designated as a leader (node 
with lowest index assigned during the simulation is used).  
We test the communication between one source, S, and one 
destination, D, in every scenario where both S and D are 
stationary and positioned at the opposites sides of the 
experimental area. The number of relay (forwarding) mobile 
nodes depends on the scenario. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. The initial placement of the leaders and the followers. 
B. The Movment of the Leader and the Followers in the 
Towing Group Mobility Model 
We propose a simple model for moving the nodes in a 
formation: each designated leader moves in a random 
direction following the random way point mobility model 
[20], while the followers retrace the path of the leader 
following it at a predetermined distance. The direction 
chosen by the leader not only defines the motion of the group 
leader itself, but it also provides the general motion trend of 
the whole formation.  
In the first set of experiments, the distance between the 
followers ranges from 100 - 110 meters. In the second set, 
the distance was 150 - 210 m. In the simulation we assume 
that the leader L randomly chooses the direction of the next 
move, and sends information to the followers N including 
coordinates and movements. The movement of the followers 
is directly affected by the movement of its group leader, 
where every group member eventually lands on the same X 
and Y coordinates earlier visited by the leader. Every 
follower, N, sends directional information to the next N+1 in 
the same formation F and follows L, etc. When the 
movement of groups of nodes is viewed as an animation it 
looks like if the leader was towing a number of nodes behind 
it (Fig. 2).  
 
Figure 2. Movement and structure of formations of different lengths. 
IV. 
SIMULATION 
The towing group mobility model introduced in the 
previous section was implemented and simulated in NS-2. 
We used AWK scripts to analyze the trace files produced by 
the simulator. 
A. Simulation Environment 
In each case the network consisted of a different number 
of nodes roaming in a 1000 x 1000 meters square with a 
reflecting boundary. The NS-2.34 default settings for 802.11  
legacy mode (Distributed Coordination Function DFC and 
2Mbps links) are used. The transmission range is 250m. The 
data is generated at the source node at rate of 1 Mbps. Every 
packet has a size of 512 bytes. The buffer size at each node is 
50 packets. Data packets are generated following a constant 
bit rate (CBR) process. The experiments we transmit packets 
229
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

from one source to one destination for 900 seconds, and 
measure the effective throughput with increasing mobility 
range and density. The other assumptions are listed below 
and shown in Table 1. 
  
 
The source node, S, is stationary, and is located in 
a specific location on the far left. 
 
The destination node, D, is stationary, and is 
located in a specific location on the far right (see 
Fig. 1). 
 
The distance between S and D is 1000 meters. 
 
Nodes are being generated randomly at random 
locations as clusters.  
 
The intermediate nodes are moving at a constant 
speed of 10m/s. 
 
The distribution of the intermediate nodes is 
divided into a number of formations with different 
lengths (2, 3, or 4) clustered as an initial 
placement, F1, F2,..Fn (Fig. 2). 
 
A leader, L, from each formation is automatically 
elected. 
 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameters 
Simulator 
NS-2.34 
Channel Type 
Channel / Wireless Channel 
Network Interface Type 
Phy/WirelessPhy 
Mac Type 
Mac/802.11 
Radio-Propagation Type 
Propagation/Two-ray ground 
Interface Queue Type 
Queue/Drop Tail 
Link Layer Type 
LL 
Antenna 
Antenna/Omni Antenna 
Maximum Packet in ifq 
50 
Area (n * n) 
1000 x 1000 
Source Type 
(UDP) CBR 
Simulation Time 
900 sec 
Routing Protocol 
AODV 
 
B. Performance Metric 
The network throughput is a metric used to calculate the 
amount of data transmitted from source to destination in a 
specific period of time (in bits per second). It can be 
calculated as: 
               
n time
Observatio
D
node
by
received
bits
of
no
_
_
_
_
_
_
._
 
                   (1) 
V. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
 The experimental results show the average throughput for 
the data transmitted from the source node S to the destination 
node D.  The results are averaged over three experiments and 
plotted with the standard deviation shown as an error bar. 
  We simulated a number of groups of nodes, each with a 
leader (L) and one to three followers behind it. All of the 
followers follow their leaders' X and Y coordinates. Each 
leader with its followers is called a formation. Fig. 3 shows 
the screen shot of the node movements for a number of 
formations each with two followers, all simulated in NS-2 
and visualized using NAM animation tool, e.g., nodes n2, n3, 
and n4 form a formation of 3 nodes (1 leader + 2 followers). 
 
 
Figure 3. Formations of three nodes; NS2 simulation. 
 
A. Case 1: Different Number of Formations 
In Fig. 4, we show the performance of a MANET when a 
different number of formations of different lengths are used. 
The number of formations is varied from 6 to 10, and the 
length of formations is varied from 1 to 4. The graph shows 
that, for a given number of formations, the longer formations 
perform better. It should be noted that longer formations use 
larger number of nodes in total in the experiment: 10 
formations of length 1 require only 10 nodes, while 10 
formations of 4 would use the total of 40 nodes (4 leaders 
and 36 followers). Also, increasing the length of a formation 
we keep the number of leaders the same and add followers 
only, which may be an advantage in some applications.  
 
                      Figure 4. Throughput vs. number of formations. 
 
B. Case 2: Different Number of Nodes 
We tested the scenarios where a given number of mobile 
nodes (24, 36, 48, and 60) was equally divided into a number 
of formations with predetermined length (2, 3, and 4). For 
example, with 36 nodes we had either 18 formations of two 
nodes, or 12 formations of three nodes. We also show the 
effectiveness of increasing the default distance between the 
230
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

nodes in a formation in our group mobility by running two sets 
of experiments one with an average of 100m - 110m and the 
other with 150m - 210m, as illustrated in Fig. 5. 
 
Figure 5. The distance between follower nodes 
 
For a formation of two nodes (the leader and one 
follower), increasing the distance between the nodes 
improves the performance, but only for the cases with 36 and 
48 mobile nodes (Fig. 6). Formations of three always work 
better when the followers keep back at a larger distance (Fig. 
7). However, Fig. 8 shows the opposite: the three followers 
following at a short distance give slightly better throughput 
compared with the scenario when nodes follow at a longer 
distance. One could stipulate that only for short formations, 
the performance is improved with the increased distance 
between the nodes. 
 
 
Figure 6. Throughput with length two formations. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Throughput with length three formations. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Throughput with length four formations. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Throughput for short distance between the nodes for different 
formations. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Throughput for long distance between the nodes nodes for 
different formations. 
 
In all the comparisons, the formation of one node (the 
leader only) consistently gave the best throughput (Figs. 9 
and 10). 
For all other cases, if we set the distance separating the 
nodes in the towing formation to be large and analyze the 
role of the formation size, we see consistent results for all the 
cases with a larger distance between the nodes in a 
formation: for the cases with following distance in the 150-
210m range we notice the shorter the formation the better the 
throughput for all experiments except for the case with the 
smallest number of nodes (24 in Fig. 10). We also noticed 
that there was no performance difference when formations of 
three or four nodes were used in the experiments with 36 and 
more nodes (Fig. 10).  
For all the cases where the distance separating the nodes 
in the towing formation is small, the preference for any 
particular length of the formation is not so clear cut. Moving 
nodes individually (formation of one) is still always the best, 
formation of four is always significantly better than the 
formation of three, and the relative performance of the 
formation of two varies and seems to depend on the number 
of nodes.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented a group mobility mode for 
moving mobile nodes in formations. All the available nodes 
in a network are divided into groups and each group forms a 
formation and moves independently form the others. We 
proposed a mobility model for moving the nodes in a 
formation called “towing”. In the towing formation model 
231
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

one of the nodes within a formation acts as a leader, with the 
other nodes, now called followers, trailing closely.  
The towing formation model was tested by simulation. 
We used the recorded throughput for the CBR traffic 
between designated nodes as the main performance metric. 
We observed that the larger the total number of mobile nodes 
the better the throughput. Also, the larger the number of 
formations, the higher the throughput. Consequently, for a 
given total number of nodes, using shorter formations results 
in more formations being created, and leads to a better 
performance (observed at larger distances separating the 
nodes in a formation). In the case of a fixed total number of 
mobile nodes, increasing the number of formations by 
shortening the formations all the way to only one node, i.e., 
moving 
nodes 
individually 
always 
gives 
the 
best 
performance. For short formations, increasing the distance 
between the followers improves the performance. 
It should be noted that the fact that the best throughput 
was recorded when moving nodes individually does not 
negate the results of this research. As stated in Section I, 
using the towing formation implies having two types of 
nodes: the leaders and the followers. For example, when the 
number of available leaders is limited, one can still improve 
the performance of a MANET by increasing the number of 
followers. As a part of future work, we would like to benefits 
of adding more nodes to a network and the tradeoffs between 
adding the leaders and the followers. We would like to 
investigate forming formations automatically from nodes 
that are not prearranged into clusters.  The (direction of) 
movement of the towing formations could be optimized to 
take a maximum advantage of the guaranteed connectivity 
between the nodes within the cluster to extend the coverage 
area to the maximum. The random movement in free space 
could be replaced with a more realistic model based on the 
actual maps and street layout.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the Ministry of Higher Education 
of Saudi Arabia including the Saudi Cultural Bureau in 
Canada for their support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. K. J. Kumar and R.S. Rajesh, “Performance analysis of 
MANET routing protocols in different mobility models,” 
IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and 
Network Security, vol. 9, no. 2, Feb 2009, pp. 22-29. 
[2] C. M. Cordeiro and D. P. Agrawal, “Mobile ad hoc 
networking,” in Tutorial/Short Course in 20th Brazilian 
Symposium on Computer Networks, May 2002, pp. 125-186.  
[3] D. Goldenberg, J. Lin, A. S. Morse, B. Rosen, and Y. R. 
Yang, “Towards Mobility as a Network Control Primitive,” in 
Proc. of the 5th ACM MobiHoc, 2004, pp. 163-174. 
[4] J. DeDourek and P. Pochec, “M2ANET: a Mobile Medium 
Ad Hoc Network,” Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and 
Practice, WSN 2011, Paris, France, Feb. 2011, pp. 1-4. 
[5] X. Chen, Z. Jiang, and J. Wu, “Mobility control schemes with 
quick convergence in wireless sensor networks,” Parallel and 
Distributed Processing, IEEE International Symposium on, 
April 2008, pp. 1-7, doi: 10.1109/IPDPS.2008.4536119. 
[6]  J. Wu and F. Dai, “Mobility control and its applications in 
mobile ad hoc networks,” Network, IEEE , vol.18, no.4, July-
Aug. 2004, pp. 30- 35,  doi: 10.1109/MNET.2004.1316759. 
[7] F. Bai and A. Helmy, A Survey of Mobility Modeling and 
Analysis in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks, A Survey of Mobility 
Models in Wireless Adhoc Networks,  Kluwer academic 
Publishers, University of Southern California, U.S.A.,  pp. 2-
32, 2004. 
[8] A. Jadbabaie, L. Jie, and A.S. Morse, “Coordination of groups 
of mobile autonomous agents using nearest neighbor 
rules,” Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on , vol. 48, no. 
6, June 2003, pp. 988-1001, doi: 10.1109/TAC.2003.812781  
[9] X. Hong, M. Gerla, G. Pei, and C.-C. Chiang, “A Group 
Mobility Model for Ad Hoc Wireless Networks,” Proc. ACM 
Int',l Workshop Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation of 
Wireless and Mobile Systems (MSWiM), 1999, pp. 53-60. 
[10] J. Hortelano, M. Nacher, J.-C. Cano, C. Calafate, and P. 
Manzoni. “Evaluating the goodness of MANETs performance 
results obtained with the ns-2 simulator,” in NSTools'07, 
Nantes, France, 2007, pp. 1-7. 
[11] S. Gunasekaran and N. Nagarajan, “An Improved Realistic 
Group Mobility Model for MANET Based On Unified 
Relationship Matrix,” Advance Computing Conference, 2009. 
IACC 2009. IEEE International, March 2009, pp. 1270-1274, 
doi: 10.1109/IADCC.2009.480919. 
[12] B. Malarkodi, P. Gopal, and B. Venkataramani, “Performance 
Evaluation of Adhoc Networks with Different Multicast 
Routing Protocols and Mobility Models,” Advances in Recent 
Technologies in Communication and Computing, 2009. 
ARTCom '09. International Conference on, Oct. 2009,  pp. 
81-84, doi:10.1109/ARTCom.2009.29. 
[13] K. Blakely and B. Lowekamp, “A structured group mobility 
model for the simulation of mobile ad hoc networks,” in Int. 
Conf. Mob.Comp. Netw., Proc. 2nd Int. Worksh. Mob. 
Manag. Wirel. Acc. Protoc., Philadelphia, USA, 2004, pp. 
111–118. 
[14] D. O. Jorg, “Performance comparison of MANET routing 
Protocols in different network”, Institute of Computer Science 
and 
Applied 
Mathematics, 
Computer 
Networks 
and 
Distributed Systems, University of Berne, Switzerland, 
Computer Science Project Report,  February 2004. 
[15] H. A. Lagar-Cavilla,  G. Baron, T. E. Hart, L. Litty and E. de 
Lara, “On the robustness of simple indoor MANET 
simulation models,” Ad hoc & sensor wireless networks, 
2007,  pp. 321-354. 
[16] H. Akcan, V. Kriakov, H. Bronnimann and A. Delis, “GPS-
Free Node Localization in Mobile Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” Proc. Fifth Int',l ACM Workshop Data Eng. for 
Wireless and Mobile Access (MobiDE ',06), June 2006, pp. 
35-42. 
[17] L.A. Latiff and N. Fisal, “Routing Protocols in Wireless 
Mobile Ad Hoc Network” - a review, Communications, The 
9th Asia-Pacific Conference on, 2003, pp. 600- 604. 
[18] E. Royer and C. Toh, “A Review of Current Routing 
Protocols for Ad Hoc Mobile Wireless Networks”. IEEE 
Personal Communications 6 (2), April 1999, pp.  46–55. 
[19] C. E. Perkins, Ad Hoc Networking, New York, Addison-
Wesley, 2001.  
[20] T. Issariyakul and E. Hossain, Introduction to Network 
Simulator NS2, Springer, 2009. 
[21] N. Friedman, The Naval Institute Guide to World Naval 
Weapon Systems, Naval Institute Press, 2006 
 
232
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

