TAO: A Time-Aware Opportunistic Routing
Protocol for Service Invocation in Intermittently
Connected Networks
Ali Makke, Nicolas Le Sommer and Yves Mahéo
{Ali.Makke,Nicolas.Le-Sommer,Yves.Maheo}@univ-ubs.fr
IRISA, Université de Bretagne-Sud, France.
Abstract—Handheld devices owned by nomadic people can
form intermittently connected mobile ad hoc networks spon-
taneously. Such networks appear as an attractive solution for
service providers, such as local authorities, in order to extend
a pre-existing infrastructure-based network composed of several
infostations so as to provide nomadic people with application
services in a large scale area (e.g., a city). In such hybrid
networks, intermittent connections are prevalent, and end-to-
end paths between clients and providers cannot be maintained
all the time. Service provisioning thus remains a challenging
problem today in these networks. In this paper, we propose a new
time-aware opportunistic routing protocol called TAO. TAO is
designed for service invocation in intermittently connected hybrid
networks. This protocol makes it possible to select the best next
message forwarder(s) among a set of neighbor nodes based on
the dates of contacts of these nodes with infostations, and tends
to implicitly estimate the distance separating these mobile nodes
and the infostations. This paper gives a detailed description of
this protocol supported with some simulation results.
Keywords-Service invocation; Opportunistic Networking; Discon-
nected Mobile Ad hoc Networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the increasing proliferation of handheld devices
equipped with a wireless interface, such as smart-phones
or internet tablets, new kinds of applications, services or
networks relying on spontaneous communication, interaction
and collaboration can be considered. Such devices, which
can form mobile ad hoc networks spontaneously, can be
exploited in order to extend networks composed of some
sparsely distributed infostations across a large area, (e.g., a
city), and so to create hybrid networks in which infostations
can act as service providers and mobile devices as service
clients. This kind of networks, illustrated in Figure 1, is said
hybrid because they are formed of a ﬁxed part (the set of
infostations connected together via a wired infrastructure) and
a mobile part (the ad hoc network of mobiles nodes). Hybrid
networks could appear as an opportunity for service providers,
such as local authorities, to provide nomadic people with
new ubiquitous services, without resorting to any expensive
infrastructure, such as those provided by Global System for
Mobile Communications (GSM) operator companies.
The ﬁxed part of these hybrid networks can obviously
present various topologies. For instance, the services can
be provided by dedicated servers that can be accessed by
Figure 1.
Example of an intermittently connected hybrid network.
the mobile devices through the infostations, which act as
gateways. We focus in this paper on message routing in the
mobile part of the hybrid network. Consequently, we will
assume, without loss of generality, that a service is provided
by an infostation, directly or via another infostation.
Both the free movements of people and the short commu-
nication range of Wi-Fi wireless interfaces accompanied with
the radio interferences induce some frequent and unpredictable
disruptions in the communication links. These disruptions
entail the creation of disconnected communication-islands
formed near or far from the infostations embedded in the
physical environment (see Figure 1). Moreover, the volatility
of the devices, which are frequently switched off due to their
limited power budget, increases the number of changes in the
network topology. In these networks, which we will qualify
as intermittently connected hybrid networks (ICHN), it is
difﬁcult, and most often even impossible, to maintain an end-
to-end path between two devices thanks to traditional routing
protocols designed for wired networks or thanks to dynamic
routing protocols such as Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector
(AODV) or Optimized Link State Routing Protocol (OLSR).
To cope with these issues, routing protocols devised for net-
works that suffer from frequent and unpredictable disruptions,
such as delay tolerant and opportunistic networks, implement
the “store, carry and forward” general principle. When two
devices cannot communicate directly because they are not in
the transmission range of each other, these protocols make it
possible to exploit other mobile nodes as intermediate relays
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

that can carry a copy of a message when they move and
forward it afterwards to other nodes so that it eventually
reaches its destination. The provision of application services
with this kind of opportunistic and asynchronous communi-
cations has been addressed so far only by a few number
of research works [1], [2], [3], [4]. Mahéo and Said [1],
and Conti and Kumar [3] focus on service provisioning in
opportunistic networks composed solely of mobile nodes. In
[1], the authors propose content-based service discovery and
invocation solutions in order to exploit the redundancy of
the services offered by the mobile devices that can move
freely (i.e., no assumptions are made regarding the mobility
of the devices). Conti and Kumar [3] target networks relying
on social interactions between mobile nodes that act as both
clients and providers of services. Due to the volatility and the
limited resources of the mobile devices, the number of relevant
services that can be offered by these devices are limited in
comparison to those that could be offered in hybrid networks.
Unlike [1] and [3], in Le Sommer et al. [2] the services are
provided by ﬁxed infostations in limited geographical areas.
In [2], mobile devices and infostations are aware of their own
location. Mobile devices can invoke remote infostations thanks
to an opportunistic and location-aware forwarding protocol.
In contrast with the environments we consider, in [2], the
infostations were not connected together. We believe that
the design of routing protocols suited for service discovery
and service invocation in ICHN should take the speciﬁcity
of ICHN into account, namely the interconnection of the
infostations, in particular when deﬁning heuristics or functions
that allow to select among a set of neighbor nodes the node(s)
that are considered as the best relay(s) to reach one of the
infostations.
In this paper, we propose TAO, a new opportunistic and
time-aware routing protocol devoted to service invocation in
ICHN. TAO adopts a temporal heuristic to perform efﬁcient
message forwarding decisions. The basis of our approach is
to take into account the disconnection dates between the ﬁxed
infostations and the mobile nodes. Assuming a homogeneous
speed of the mobile nodes, a node implicitly estimates the
distance from its neighbors to the target infostation and is
able to select the best carriers among them. Our proposal
applies to situations in which routing decisions cannot be taken
according to geolocation information.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
describes protocol TAO, and Section III the evaluation of this
protocol. Related works are discussed in Section IV. Section V
presents our conclusions and gives some perspectives.
II. THE TAO PROTOCOL
TAO aims at supporting the invocation of software services
in ICHN such as those formed by ﬁxed infostations and
portable devices used by nomadic people. The description of
the discovery phase that should occurs before the invocation
is not in the scope of this paper. The remainder of this section
details how service invocation requests and responses are
forwarded by TAO in an ICHN.
A. Assumptions
TAO relies on four main assumptions:
1) Mobile hosts are able to perceive their one-hop neigh-
borhood.
2) Each mobile host is able to temporarily store the mes-
sages it receives, and can associate to each of them some
pieces of information.
3) All the infostations are continuously running and are
connected to each other using a backbone. An infostation
is never out of order and can provide services itself, or
can act as a proxy to another infostation.
4) The time synchronization between mobile devices does
not need to be very accurate, given the low movement
speed of the mobile devices, which are carried by
pedestrians. We can legitimately consider that TAO can
tolerate a clock-shift on the order of half a minute.
B. Overview of TAO
TAO implements the ”store, carry and forward” principle, a
multiple-copy message forwarding algorithm, source routing
mechanisms and a time-stamping-based heuristic that aims
at selecting the best next message forwarder(s) among a
set of neighbor nodes. This heuristic relies on lists of last
dates of contact of a node with its neighbors. Mobile nodes
are expected to use these lists when they are solicited by
a neighbor node that wants to forward a message to an
infostation or to a given mobile node, and to return to this
node their last date of contact with an infostation. These pieces
of information are then processed by the mobile node that
must forward the message in order to select the best next
forwarder(s) to deliver the message to an infostation. Such
an algorithm tends to reduce progressively the area where the
messages are disseminated until reaching their destination (i.e.,
a ﬁxed infostation). Indeed, from a logical point of view, a
node will disconnect from an infostation when it starts moving
away from it, and the distance separating them is increasing
progressively.
In order to improve the service delivery and to avoid the
bad carrier dilemma (i.e., delivering the message to a mobile
node abruptly moving in the wrong way), TAO implements
a multiple-copy message forwarding algorithm. The source
node is ﬁrst expected to forward a copy of this message to
its best neighbors. Later these carriers, and the source node,
will forward a copy of this message only when they encounter
a better carrier than themselves, while a limited number of
copies will be forwarded toward bad carriers. A neighbor will
be considered as a good carrier by a node if the last date of
contact of this neighbor with an infostation is more recent
than its own date of contact, or if this neighbor is a new
neighbor and its last date of contact with an infostation is more
recent than those of the other neighbors. This classiﬁcation
aims at estimating the ability of these intermediate nodes to
deliver the message to an infostation. Furthermore, sometimes
it might be critical to forward copies exclusively to good
carriers, especially if the source node is located remotely from
an infostation. In this case, the major number of neighbors
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

might be classiﬁed as bad carriers, while the contact with a
good carrier is uncertain. Thus in TAO, each mobile node has
a stock of a few number of copies dedicated to bad neighbors.
This number of copies is limited in order to avoid network
overload and resource consumption on mobile devices. Finally,
TAO makes it possible to control the propagation of messages
in the network using two parameters: a lifetime and a number
of hops. When the lifetime is expired or when the number of
hops is zero, the message is removed from the local cache and
will not be forwarded anymore.
Unlike Prophet [5], PropicMan [6] or HiBOp [7], TAO
needs neither to record any large set of history values nor to
use complex algorithms to select the next message carriers.
In TAO, each node maintains 3 kinds of lists: a neighbor
list, a list of last local contacts with infostations and a list
of the last remote contacts with the infostations. These 3
lists will be referred to as NL, LLCI and LRCI respectively
in the remainder of this section. NL contains the one-hop
neighbors of the node and the date of reception of their last
beacon. This set is obtained thanks to a background beaconing
performed periodically by each node. Furthermore, mobile
nodes or infostations are considered disconnected from the
neighborhood of a mobile node if no beacons have been
received from them during a time gap superior to an already
deﬁne disconnection time threshold.
The LLCI list contains a limited number of entries (on the
order of the number of two-hop neighbors). Each entry in-
cludes the IDs of the infostations the node has encountered and
the time of the last beacon it received from these infostations.
The LRCI list is similar to the LLCI list, but it is related to the
neighbor nodes found in the NL list. Each entry of the LRCI
represents the ID of the most recent infostation each neighbor
had contact with and the value of the last contact date.When
a new neighbor joins the one-hop neighborhood of the node it
will directly send the ID and the most recent time of contact
with an infostation to be registered in the LRCI.
TAO is a reactive and an event-driven protocol. Five events
are considered in TAO:
1) The emission of an invocation request by a local client
application.
2) The reception of an invocation request sent by a neigh-
bor node.
3) The reception of a service response sent by a neighbor
node.
4) The arrival of a new neighbor node.
5) The disappearance of a neighbor node.
C. Forwarding of service invocation requests
When a node receives an invocation request from a local
application for a service provided by a remote infostation
(event 1), or when it receives such a request from one of
its neighbors (event 2), the node will process this request
according to the forwarding Algorithm 1. On each message
reception, a mobile node will forward a copy of this message
to Eemit direct neighbors at the most. In this algorithm, the
good carriers will always obtain a copy of the message. The
Algorithm 1 Emission or forwarding of an invocation request.
emission or forwarding of a Service Invocation Message :
if it exists an infostation in the one-hop neighborhood then
forward request to the infostation
remove the Service Invocation Message from the cache
else
check LRCI list for good carriers
for number of emissions is less than Eemit
if good carriers are found then
forward a copy of the Service Invocation Message
Update the best contact time with an infostation relative to this
invocation message
else
if local stock related to this Service Invocation Message > 0
forward a copy of the Service Invocation Message
decrement the stock
endif
endif
endfor
endif
infostation contact time of the best carrier of each invocation
request will be recorded in the lists of the local node in
order to be compared later with those of the new nodes that
appear in the neighborhood of the current carrier. A copy of
each invocation request will only be forwarded toward a new
neighbor if its infostation contact time is more recent than
the locally recorded value. As a result, this process prevents
from forwarding multiple copies to the same node. On the
other hand, bad carriers will receive a copy from the stock
of copies dedicated to them only when the number of good
carriers is less than Eemit in the neighborhood of the carrier
node. The stock will be decremented, and when this stock is
empty no more copies of the message will be forwarded to
the bad carriers.
In order to select the best next carriers among its neighbors,
the local host checks the content of the LRCI list and chooses
the nodes with the most recent infostation contact time. Ser-
vice invocation messages will be stored, carried and forwarded
by intermediate carriers in the same manner.
When a node discovers that it exists in its one-hop neigh-
borhood an infostation, it forwards to this infostation all the
service invocation requests it has in its cache and that are still
valid, and removes them from its cache of messages. This
infostation is expected to either deliver the service itself or
forward the request to the appropriate infostations.
Any invocation request copy will stay alive until its lifetime
expires or its number of hops is zero. Moreover, each message
will store in its header the route it followed to reach the
infostation.
D. Forwarding of service responses
The next event is the reception of the reply from the
infostation toward the client node. The infostation will send
the reply message with a reverse routing, in other words, send
the message back on the route it has just traversed. Reverse
source routing can be reliable if the mobility of the nodes
in the network is relatively slow. In fact, TAO is designed to
function in ICHN, where mobile nodes are volatile and end-
to-end paths between nodes cannot be maintained all the time.
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

As a result, a forwarding mechanism must be applied when the
reverse source routing fails at some point (i.e., a disconnection
in the route is encountered).
Algorithm 2 Management of the forwarding mechanism of
the service response.
emission of a Service Response Message
if the original-service-requester is connected then
forward the Service Response Message to the original-service-requester
remove the Service Response Message from cache
else
if next id recorded in header is connected (reverse source routing) then
forward the Service Response Message
else
scan NL list for a node of id recorded in the header
if id found in the neighborhood then
forward a copy of Service Response Message
remove the id of the node from the header of the message registered in
the cache
endif
endif
endif
When such a disconnection occurs, the node carrying the
message will perform a multiple-copy message forwarding
algorithm dedicated to the service responses (Algorithm 2).
A copy of the service response will be forwarded to the best
neighbors (setting higher priority to the nodes closer to the
destination). Thus, all of the new carriers will try to resume
the source routing process. If they cannot resume this process,
they forward a copy of the message when they encounter a
better carrier than themselves.
E. Management of neighborhood changes
Algorithm 3 Management of the service messages after the
contact with a new neighbor.
forwarding service messages toward the newly arriving neighbor:
if event is arrival then
if the new neighbor is a good carrier or size of stock > 0 then
foreach valid request in the local cache do
forward the request to the new neighbor
endforeach
if the size of the sock > 0 then
decrement the stock
endif
endif
foreach valid response in the local cache do
run algorithm 2
endforeach
endif
The last two above-mentioned events are triggered when
changes occur in the one-hop neighborhood of a node. When
a new neighbor joins the one-hop neighborhood of another
node, the LLCI and LRCI lists are updated using the pieces
of information obtained from the beaconing process. Then,
the current carrier is expected to check if it exists in its
local cache some messages (requests or responses) that should
be delivered. If so, it conditionally forwards copies of these
messages to its new neighbor using Algorithm 3. If the new
neighbor has a date of contact with an infostation that is more
recent than those of the other neighbors of the current carrier,
this one will forward to this new neighbor all the service
invocation requests it has and that are still valid. The service
responses stored locally will be forwarded by the current
carrier to this new neighbor only if this one is the destination
or has been used as intermediate node to forward the request
(i.e., if this one appears in the reverse source path header of
the response).
Algorithm 4 Management of the disappearance of a neighbor
to the mobile node.
disappearance of a neighbor:
if event is disappearance then
if the node is an infostation then
update the LLCI list with the time and the id values of the infostation
included in set NL
endif
if the node is a mobile node then
update the LRCI by eliminating the id and time values of the
respective disconnecting neighbor
endif
endif
As Algorithm 4 shows, when a node is notiﬁed of the
disappearance of an infostation from its one-hop neighborhood
(i.e., from the neighbor set NL), it updates its LLCI list with
the ID and the date of the last beacon of the infostation,
that has been removed from the neighbor set. Otherwise, if
the disconnected neighbor is a mobile node, all the related
information will be removed from the NL and LRCI lists.
III. SIMULATION
In this section, we present the simulation results we ob-
tained for TAO regarding the service delivery performances
in comparison with a simple routing protocol RANDOM. The
RANDOM routing protocol has the same characteristics as
TAO, but instead of relying on the time heuristic implemented
in TAO, RANDOM relies on a random mechanism in choosing
the next carriers of the service invocation messages. The main
objective of these simulations is not to compare the global
performance of TAO with other protocols such as [7], [8]
and [9], but instead to assess the effectiveness of the time
heuristic in delivering messages between a mobile node and
a ﬁxed infostation. The simulations have been performed on
the OMNeT++ network simulator. In these simulations, we
focus on a simple, but realistic, hybrid network composed of
only one infostation providing a service and a set of mobile
devices carried by pedestrians. A part of these pedestrians act
as clients, forming a set of nodes that request services from
the infostation.
A. Setup
The simulation environment we consider is a square open
area of 1 km2. The infostation is located in the middle of this
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

area. All mobile nodes move according to a random waypoint
mobility model with a speed of 0.5 m/s. The communication
range of the mobile devices and of the infostation is approx-
imately 30 m. After discovering the service they are looking
for, the mobile clients invoke this service every 3 minutes.
In our experiments, we have not assigned any lifetime or
maximum number of hops to any message for both protocols.
We ran the simulations for each routing protocol, varying
the number of nodes forming the network. For each setup,
we made 10 simulation runs with a different random seed. A
warm up period of 10 minutes is used in the beginning of the
simulations before clients start to generate invocation request
messages, to allow LLCI, LRCI and NL lists to be initialized.
The simulation is run for another 1 hour before stopping all the
invocation requests from all the clients. Finally, the simulation
is left for 10 minutes to allow all the messages to be delivered.
We present below the obtained results. The objectives of
these experiments was to measure the ability to satisfy the
client service delivery with a small number of message copies,
where we have ﬁxed the number of copies (size of the stock)
to 3 copies for both protocols and the maximum number of
emissions Eemit to 3.
B. Results
Each of the following graphs contain curves for both TAO
and the RANDOM routing protocols, while changing both the
number of clients and the number of mobile nodes forming the
network. The two metrics we are studying are the satisfaction
ratio and the delay. The satisfaction ratio is the percentage of
successful service invocation (i.e., the number of invocations
for which a client node receives their response from an
infostation), while the delay is the total time needed by a
successful invocation message to travel from the client node
toward an infostation and on the way back toward the same
client node.
Satisfaction Ratio
Percentage
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of nodes
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
10 Clients - TAO
10 Clients - RANDOM
20 Clients - TAO
20 Clients - RANDOM
60 Clients - TAO
60 Clients - RANDOM
Figure 2.
Satisfaction ratios of TAO and RANDOM Routing Protocols
First, we analyze the satisfaction ratio of each of the
protocols in order to study the impact of increasing the number
of nodes forming the network on the performance of each
protocol. Three scenarios for each protocol are presented in
Figure 2, where each scenario is characterized by the number
of clients found in the network. As we notice, when having few
nodes in the network, the satisfaction ratio of both protocols
is almost the same. This observation is coherent with what
is expected, because, due to the limited number of neighbors,
TAO and RANDOM will select most of the time the same
carriers. The performance of TAO increases with the number
of nodes forming the network due to the selection of good
carriers among a large set of neighbors. On the contrary, the
performance of RANDOM decreases due to the bad selection
of next carriers.
Average Delay
Seconds
200
400
600
800
1,000
1,200
Number of Nodes
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
10 Clients - TAO
10 Clients - RANDOM
20 Clients - TAO
20 Clients - RANDOM
60 Clients - TAO
60 Clients - RANDOM
Figure 3.
Delay of TAO and RANDOM Routing Protocols
Based on (Figure
3), we notice that when the network
is formed of a few number of nodes, the delay values are
relatively high. This is totally normal, since few nodes with
limited transmission range and random waypoint mobility have
to cover a large area. When the number of mobile nodes
increases in the network, the average delay of RANDOM
remains relatively high due to the random choices of carriers
that contribute in transmitting the invocation messages toward
the infostations. On the contrary, the average delay of TAO
decreases due to the presence of more carriers that can ﬁll
the gap between the client and the infostation and the ability
of TAO in choosing good carriers to perform this operation.
As a result, the mechanism used by TAO to choose among the
carriers of service invocation messages results in shorter delays
and higher delivery ratio than what RANDOM can offer.
Finally, the application we utilized in these primary sim-
ulations was simply a mobile node invoking an infostation
and waiting for the response back. This was done to study
the effect of the time heuristic implemented in TAO. Since
the number of hops and the lifetime message parameters are
directly related to the application and the expected delays
in the targeted network, we did not specify any limits over
these two parameters. So, the number of messages that are
disseminated in the network increases continuously. That’s
why we do not give in this paper details about the network
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

load and the efﬁciency of TAO regarding this point precisely.
Nevertheless, the measurements we conducted show that the
number of messages disseminated by TAO and RANDOM is
approximately the same.
IV. RELATED WORK
TAO combines the originality of being designed to support
service invocation and to speciﬁcally target hybrid intermit-
tently connected MANETs. Indeed, most of the research
work concerning intermittently connected MANETs consider
networks solely formed of mobile devices and multi-purpose
communication. However TAO uses the ”store, carry and
forward” principle and several techniques that are shared with
many protocols in delay-tolerant and opportunistic networking.
In the remainder of this section, we present some representa-
tive routing protocols.
The Message Ferrying paradigm is a mobility-assisted ap-
proach [8]. It introduces non-randomness to the node mobility
and exploits it to provide physical connectivity among nodes.
Two variations are introduced both with movement constraints.
The ﬁrst is targeting the message ferries, which are special
nodes introduced as data carriers toward speciﬁc positions to
collect data. The second forces the clients to move toward the
ferries in order to send and receive messages. Although this
approach ensures reliability, it introduces a lot of constraints
on the mobility of clients, which is considered disturbing and
impractical in real life.
The constraint of intervening with clients’ mobility was
addressed by other protocols that aimed to beneﬁt from the
natural uncontrolled movements of nodes. The most general at-
tempt is the ﬂooding-based routing protocols such as Epidemic
Routing [9]. In such types of protocols, messages are ﬂooded
in the network and stored by all available neighbor nodes. No
precautions are considered to limit the number of messages
exchanged and forwarded. Therefore, network congestion is
very likely to happen, especially in high density regions.
Some approaches resort to probabilistic solutions [5], [6]
and prediction techniques [10] to choose the best relay nodes
for each speciﬁc message. For routing, these protocols rely
on the context and history information in order to compute
delivery probabilities and predictabilities. A history-based
approach such as the one described in [7] relies on an
algorithm to predict the future movements and patterns of
the node and route packets according to these predictions.
Such algorithms can achieve high efﬁciency and delivery ratio,
but the major drawback is assuming that a node is able
to register a large amount of contact history in its buffers,
taking into consideration that the majority of the devices
forming such networks are small portable devices with limited
capabilities and capacities. Moreover, computing histories and
predicting movement patterns is a tricky problem, especially
in environments composed of numerous mobile devices that
move following irregular patterns, such as those held by
pedestrians in a city. On the contrary, TAO simply utilizes
recent history to predict near future. TAO tends to estimate
the distance separating the nodes and the infostations in the
network, relying on the disconnection times recorded locally
by the mobile nodes. By this approach we aim to reduce the
complexity and the resources needed to take correct routing
decisions.
V. CONCLUSION
Intermittently connected hybrid networks is a quiet original
perspective that can be exploited to provide nomadic people
with a wide access to pervasive services, eliminating the need
for any expensive infrastructures, such as those provided by
GSM operators.
In this paper, we have proposed a new simple time-aware
opportunistic routing protocol, called TAO, devoted to service
invocation in ICHN. TAO implements a multiple-copy mes-
sage forwarding algorithm, source routing mechanisms, and a
time-stamping-based heuristic that aims at selecting the best
next message forwarder(s) among a set of neighbor nodes.
TAO is a recent work, and its evaluation through real
conditions is still in progress. TAO will shortly be included in
a service-oriented middleware platform. Furthermore, in the
future, we would like to improve the service delivery process
by implementing a handover mechanism in the infostations,
thus allowing to provide nomadic people with a continuous
access to a given service. Then, a service will be delivered all
the time to the client by the best infostation, which will be,
the most of the time, the nearest infostation.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Mahéo and R. Said, “Service Invocation over Content-Based Com-
munication in Disconnected Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,” in 24th Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applica-
tions (AINA’10).
Perth, Australia: IEEE CS, April 2010, pp. 503–510.
[2] N. Le Sommer, S. Ben Sassi, F. Guidec, and Y. Mahéo, “A Middleware
Support for Location-Based Service Discovery and Invocation in Dis-
connected MANETs,” Studia Informatica Universalis, vol. 8, no. 3, pp.
71–97, September 2010.
[3] M. Conti and M. Kumar, “Opportunities in Opportunistic Computing,”
Computer, vol. 43, pp. 42–50, 2010.
[4] M. Conti, S. Giordano, M. May, and A. Passarella, “From opportunistic
networks to opportunistic computing,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 126–139, September 2010.
[5] A. Lindgren, A. Doria, and O. Schelen, “Probabilistic Routing in
Intermittently Connected Networks,” in Proceedings of the The First
International Workshop on Service Assurance with Partial and Intermit-
tent Resources (SAPIR 2004), Fortaleza, Brazil, August 2004.
[6] H. A. Nguyen, S. Giordano, and A. Puiatti, “Probabilistic Routing
Protocol for Intermittently Connected Mobile Ad hoc Network (PROP-
ICMAN),” in International Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile
and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM 2007).
Helsinky, Finland: IEEE
CS, June 2007, pp. 1–6.
[7] C. Boldrini, M. Conti, J. Jacopini, and A. Passarella, “HiBOp: a History
Based Routing Protocol for Opportunistic Networks,” in International
Symposium on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks
(WoWMoM 2007), M. Conti, Ed.
Helsinky, Finland: IEEE CS, 2007,
pp. 1–12.
[8] W. Zhao, M. Ammar, and E. Zegura, “A Message Ferrying Approach
for Data Delivery in Sparse Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,” in Proceedings
of ACM Mobihoc 2004, Tokyo Japan, May 2004.
[9] A. Vahdat and D. Becker, “Epidemic Routing for Partially Connected
Ad Hoc Networks,” Duke University, Tech. Rep., April 2000.
[10] M. Musolesi and C. Mascolo, “CAR: Context-Aware Adaptive Routing
for Delay Tolerant Mobile Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 246–260, 2009.
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

