System-Level Simulation for the Dependability Improvement 
of UHF RFID Systems 
Vincent Beroulle, Oum-El-Keir Aktouf, David Hély 
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, LCIS 
F-26000, Valence, France 
e-mail: firstname.lastname@lcis.grenoble-inp.fr 
 
 
Abstract— The SafeRFID project targets the improvement of 
Ultra High Frequency Radio Frequency Identification (UHF 
RFID) system dependability using system level simulation and 
emulation. RFID systems are based on low cost components 
(tags) more and more often used in critical applications and 
running in harsh environments (railway, aeronautic, food pro-
duction, product manufacturing). Defects can have different 
origins (1) hardware failures, (2) medium perturbations (elec-
tromagnetic interferences), or (3) software bugs. The main goals 
of this project are (1) to develop hardware and software valida-
tion environments to validate and evaluate methods for detecting 
and diagnosing defects within RFID systems, (2) to develop new 
middleware services to improve the performances of RFID sys-
tems in presence of defects and (3) to develop robust tag architec-
tures. This paper sums up all these complementary solutions 
which have been validated thanks to system level simulation and 
emulation and which have been integrated in a global dependable 
UHF RFID system. The results of this work are (1) the design of a 
robust middleware and of (2) a hardware tag and (3) the evalua-
tion of the dependability of such global RFID systems thanks to 
system level simulation and emulation. 
Keywords— RFID; system level simulation; dependability; 
middleware; tag architectures 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In critical domains, RFID system errors can have cata-
strophic consequences in terms of human safety whereas in 
high quality applications, they can have economic conse-
quences for product quality, manufacturing costs, etc. Moni-
toring RFID systems, which are based on low cost and uncer-
tain components, is thus a must in order to perform on-line 
detection of failures. These failures can result from hardware 
malfunctions (aging effects are particularly sensitive to harsh 
environments), medium disturbances (for example, electro-
magnetic bursts), or software bugs. For example, these failures 
can be due to a broken or a misplaced antenna, RF interfer-
ences, low signal strength, middleware dysfunctions, etc. 
Therefore, the main goal of the SafeRFID project is to propose 
a global strategy for the simulation of RFID system in order to 
develop and evaluate the on-line detection and diagnosis of 
defects in UHF RFID systems in order to enhance the RFID 
systems dependability.  
The objectives of existing RFID middlewares are especial-
ly to manage various data sources in RFID systems and pro-
cess large amount of raw data. Some of them also provide 
error fixing mechanisms such as WinRFID [5]. Other RFID 
middlewares focus on a reliable integration of RFID technolo-
gy into existing applications (SunRFID [6], FlexRFID [7]). 
Fault-tolerance is taken into account in the RFID middle-
ware [8] by detecting abnormal behavior of the system. How-
ever in these middleware no low level information (physical 
information) coming from each reader measurements are 
mixed with the high level information gathered by the numer-
ous readers in the system. 
The classical RFID system on-line monitoring methods are 
based on reader performances monitoring. In fact, to detect 
component or environment failures and defects, many perfor-
mance parameters of the reader can be observed. The classical 
performance parameters observed are the Average Tag Traffic 
Volume (ATTV) and the Read Errors to Total Reads (RETR) 
[4]. ATTV allows determining unusual tag traffic which is a 
symptom of a faulty system. For instance, if between 8:00am 
and 11:00am a reader usually reads 100 tags/hour every day 
and if one day, during the same period, the same reader reads 
only 50 tags/hour, then it can be assumed that a failure or a 
disturbance has occurred. The second parameter RETR con-
sists of counting erroneous reads over the total read attempts 
(correct and faulty) of a specific reader. High RETR means 
there is probably a problem. The evolution of this RETR can 
also be analyzed. These methods can also be used as final 
optimization approaches during RFID system deployment. 
In order to validate RFID systems during design phases, 
several RFID simulators have been proposed in the literature 
[2][3][11], but none of them focuses on the RFID systems 
dependability evaluation. These simulators allow simulating 
the communication protocol between the tags and readers or 
the interactions between the readers and middleware. Thus, 
designers generally use these simulators to perform a func-
tional verification of their systems. For instance, Rifidi [1] 
only fits with RFID system deployment issues; fault simula-
tion with Rifidi would be unrealistic. RFIDSim [3] is a com-
plete RFID simulator; nevertheless its main goal is to evaluate 
RFID protocols and tag hardware characteristics are not mod-
elled. 
This paper gathers the results of the SafeRFID project. This 
project integrates in the same RFID system complementary 
and multi-level solutions for improving the system dependa-
bility. These solutions target the improvement (1) of the tags 
hardware architecture, (2) of the readers fault detection capa-
bility and (3) of the middleware for multi-readers RFID sys-
tems fault diagnosis. In this context, our three main results are: 
(1) two new validation environments, a simulator and a 
FPGA-based emulation platform allowing hardware and soft-
ware RFID systems co-design and fault simulation; (2) new 
on-line test and diagnostic services for RFID middleware, and 
(3) a new tag robust architecture. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

The next sections of this article are organized as described 
in the following. In Section II, two new RFID validation envi-
ronments are described. The first one is a system level simula-
tor which is capable of performing fault injection. The second 
one is an emulation platform (based on FPGA), which is also 
capable of both performing hardware fault injections and mon-
itoring its internal signals. Section III presents two test and 
diagnosis methods, which have been implemented and vali-
dated thanks to these simulators or emulators. This section 
also describes the robust tag architecture developed within the 
SafeRFID project. Section V includes the conclusions of the 
article. 
II. 
VALIDATION ENVIRONMENTS 
This section describes the two validation environments 
which have been developed for the purposes of the SafeRFID 
project. These two environments allow (1) the validation of 
software and hardware RFID components and (2) RFID system 
robustness thanks to fault injection. The first validation envi-
ronment is a complete RFID System Level Simulator. The 
second one is a RFID emulation platform allowing modelling 
and evaluating tag IC digital architecture into actual RFID 
Systems. These two validation environments are compliant 
with the RFID UHF EPC Class 1 Gen 2 standard. 
A. SERFID Simulator: a virtual validation environment 
“Simulation and Evaluation of RFID Systems” (SERFID) is a 
UHF RFID systems simulator. It permits to evaluate RFID 
systems robustness thanks to fault simulation. It models the 
whole RFID system including the numerous hardware tags 
and readers and their electromagnetic environment. An Ether-
net interface is plugged to the simulator so that SERFID can 
be controlled by a distributed middleware, as real readers 
usually are. Thus, SERFID allows validating and optimizing 
middleware implementation. Fig. 1 illustrates a SERFID high 
level view containing several readers and tags.  
 
Figure 1. SERFID high level view model  
with several readers and tags 
SERFID has been developed using the C++ SystemC li-
brary, which is adapted to both hardware and software compo-
nents modeling. SERFID models the communication links 
between each tag and reader using high level functional models 
(Timed Transaction Level Model). The communication links 
between tags and readers have been divided into 2 parts. This 
distinction allows the injection of global defects affecting all 
the tags and readers and the injection of local defects affecting 
only one tag/reader couple. For example, the fault injection 
allows parametric variations on the Bit-Error-Rate (BER) of 
the global or local communication links. More details on this 
simulator are given in [9]. 
B. RFIM: an emulation platform 
In order to evaluate tag digital baseband architectures, sim-
ulation is limited, since this requires low level (at least register 
transfer) time accurate simulation. Emulation is then an appro-
priate tool in order to evaluate tag digital baseband architec-
tures taking into account the whole RFID system. FPGA emu-
lation provides three major advantages over simulation: 
(1) proof of compliance with the standard protocol, as we will 
use an RFID reader known to be compliant with this standard, 
(2) simulation time reduction and (3) in-circuit emulation. In-
circuit emulation provides also the opportunity to inject errors 
within the tag to evaluate its effects within the tag and the sys-
tem. This emulator aims at emulating all type of errors which 
can occur within the digital baseband in order to provide a tool 
for robustness evaluation and countermeasure validation. This 
emulator also allows monitoring the internal tag behavior 
which helps to understand fault propagation within the design. 
Moreover, the proposed monitoring system included into the 
emulator provides a convenient and powerful tool to analyze 
system behaviors. The emulator embeds a fault injection mech-
anism to validate the dependability of the IC. Errors are explic-
itly induced by the deliberate introduction (injection) of faults 
into the system. An emulation platform, the so called RFIM 
(RFID Fault injection and Monitoring) with fault injection 
capability has then been described in [10]. This FPGA based 
emulator is made of an UHF RFID tag with on chip faults 
injection mechanism. 
As shown in Fig. 2, the RFIM platform is divided into eight 
modules: monitoring interface, fault injector, activation of 
injection, event detector, golden and instrumented faulty tags, 
register comparator and embedded microprocessor. The em-
bedded microprocessor controls all the platform modules and 
then permits to perform on-line tag monitoring and to play on-
line fault attacks. The processor allows the on-line capture of 
data in the two tag basebands for analyzing the RFID commu-
nication. The interface monitoring is a mechanism that trans-
ports the internal register values from the tag basebands to the 
microprocessor. This monitoring interface block uses a First-
In-First-Out (FIFO) memory in order to compensate the latency 
of the microprocessor for outputting register values. Faults are 
only injected in the faulty tag. The golden tag, which is always 
fault free served as a reference. The register comparator com-
pares all the internal registers of the golden and the faulty tags. 
This comparison helps the embedded processor to detect and to 
localize faults and errors in the faulty tags. 
Our prototype has been validated into real RFID environ-
ment. It allows both observing and controlling the internal tag 
parameters and data. Thanks to these capabilities, the emulator 
can help designers to evaluate different digital IC architectures. 
This evaluation concerns, on one hand, the validation of the 
tag robustness against environmental aggressions and, on the 
other hand, the validation of the tag security against human 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

attacks. These validations can be performed into real RFID 
system, using commercial readers and other commercial tags. 
Fault 
injector 
Embedded 
Microprocessor 
Activation 
of injection 
Event detector 
Golden tag
Reg Comparator
Faulty tag
Monitoring 
interface
 
Figure 2. RFIM platform for faults injection and monitoring 
This allows quick and accurate validation taking into ac-
count all the complex physical effects involved into RFID 
systems. The spying capabilities of the emulator gives us an 
opportunity to study some types of attacks on RFID system, to 
detect malicious hardware, which disturbs the security of this 
technology and to design and to validate solutions for robust 
and secure architectures. 
III. 
TEST AND DIAGNOSIS METHODS AND TAG ROBUSTNESS 
ENHANCEMENT 
This section describes the three main approaches which 
have been proposed by the SafeRFID project in order to im-
prove UHF RFID system dependability. Each approach is 
embedded on a specific part of the RFID system: the reader, 
the middleware and the tag digital architecture.  
A.  Profile test method 
The Profile test method is inspired by classical monitoring 
techniques (ATTV, RETR), which are based on reader perfor-
mances monitoring. This method, as the classical monitoring 
methods are, is nonintrusive. In this method, we propose to 
measure and compare individual tags performance indicators 
rather than a single global average parameter. To do this, we 
define a new performance metric - called read rate profile – 
individually involving all the tags of the population rather than 
an average value computed for the same population. 
The initialization of our monitoring method requires com-
puting the statistical parameters of the fault free inventory read 
rate profiles. Let us first explain what these inventory read rate 
profiles are. Each tags inventory leads to a specific inventory 
read rate profile, which is the ordered read rate curve of the 
entire tag population. The ‘-‘curve in Fig. 3 represents the 
inventory profile of a fault free inventory occurrence. Then, 
from all these initial inventory profiles, an average read rate 
profile is computed. This average profile is represented by the 
bold curve in Fig. 3. The second step for the initialization of 
our approach consists in computing a threshold for the failure 
detection. This threshold, called limit profile, is represented by 
the ‘+’curve in Fig. 3. An inventory profile with one or more 
tag read rates under this limit implies that the RFID system is 
considered faulty. The ‘•’curve in Fig. 3 illustrates a faulty 
inventory profile with several points under the limit. The limit 
profile is computed using the average profile and the standard 
deviation of each ordered tags. Details on this test approach are 
given in [11] [12] [13]. 
B.  SafeRFID-MW: a middleware for On-Line Testing and 
Diagnostic 
The proposed Profile testing method, as well as most exist-
ing test methods (RETR, ATTV, etc.), operates mainly at the 
reader level. These local results are not capitalized for global 
processing of errors at the whole system level. Consequently, 
in case of distributed RFID systems based on several readers, 
there are no means to determine the whole system state. In our 
work, this issue has been solved by developing a special RFID 
middleware that integrates not only testing operations at the 
level of each reader, but also diagnosis processes at the mid-
dleware level. Our middleware called SafeRFID-MW imple-
ments a diagnosis algorithm called RFID_Diag_Algo. This 
algorithm uses the basic idea of probabilistic diagnosis devel-
oped in the work of Fussel and Rangarajan [14] on multipro-
cessor systems. Nevertheless, the fault model, as well as the 
diagnosis operations has been largely adapted to the RFID 
constraints. RFID_Diag_Algo algorithm performs three steps: 
i) reader partitioning in groups according to some criteria is-
sued by the application (i.e., which readers, read the same 
groups of tags), ii) read rate result comparison in a way that 
ensures a consensus on faulty components, whether readers or 
tags, iii) evaluation of the diagnosis accuracy by applying a 
new probabilistic model suitable to such systems. Details of 
this algorithm are presented in [15][16]. 
Although Low Level Reader Protocol (LLRP) is a complete 
communication protocol that allows notifying communication 
errors between the middleware and the readers, the LLRP pro-
tocol cannot detect failures due to reader misconfigurations or 
some runtime conditions. It can neither determine error causes. 
Therefore, it is not suitable as it for use in applications where 
demands for dependability are critical, especially as the tag-
reader interface is very sensitive to external perturbations and 
may present a random behavior. In the SafeRFID project, the 
LLRP protocol has been extended to take into account errors 
[17]. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

 
Figure 3. Average, limit, fault free and faulty inventory profiles 
A prototype of the SafeRFID-MW has been developed us-
ing the Java language. Different implementations of the prob-
abilistic diagnosis have been analyzed, and we have shown 
which one is better according to the running environment and 
the objectives of the end user [17]. 
C. Tag Robustness Enhancement 
Thanks to RFIM, the most sensitive parts of the tag digital 
baseband architecture have been identified through fault injec-
tion campaigns. The fault injection campaigns consist in 
measuring for a given period the number of times the tag is 
detected by a reader while faults are injected in a part under 
analysis. This experiment has also been done when several 
tags are in front of the reader in order to evaluate the faulty tag 
effects on other tags. The experiments have been carried out 
on all registers of the digital baseband in order to identify the 
most sensitive ones. Experimental results [19] show that only 
a few registers dramatically decrease the system performance 
(i.e., the tag read rate). Fig. 4 hereafter gives the influence of 
the fault injection on the number of times the tag has been 
successfully identified. Light gray gives the value in case no 
faults are injected; dark gray gives the resulting number in 
case faults have been injected within the parameters given in 
horizontal axis. 
At a first glance, we can see that all parameters are not 
equally sensitive. While some faulty parameters reduce the 
number of times the tag has been identified from 4500 to less 
than 500, other ones have a very limited influence on the tag 
response. This can be explained by the role played by the 
parameter during an inventory round, and the refreshment rate 
of the value during the same round. 
We have proposed in a first approach to use hardware re-
dundancy to decrease the fault effects. A Triple Modular Re-
dundancy (TMR) has been applied on the most sensitive regis-
ters identified thanks to the fault injection campaigns. Since 
the tag digital baseband architecture is powered wirelessly and 
has a limited resource, the TMR was chosen to protect the 
most sensitive registers only. Moreover such registers are very 
small which makes the cost acceptable. As shown in Fig. 5, 
the TMR [4] technique consists on the triplication of the target 
component to protect.  
 
Figure 5. Triple Modular Redundancy Protection 
The three resulting outputs from triplication are connected 
to a voter block that compares the three received data and 
elects that of majority. If one of the three components fails or 
suffers a direct SEU. TMR technique implies an area increase 
of the redundant part of more than 200% due to the component 
triplication. It also needs a voter that is implemented just with 
some OR and AND gates for each bit of the triplicated com-
ponent. We have experimentally noted that the use of this 
TMR, improves the read rate in the presence of faults into 
sensitive registers. The proposed protection only adds 30 flip-
flops to the whole circuit. TMR although expensive is in this 
case an acceptable method since thanks to the fault injection 
campaigns the most sensitive elements have been identified in 
a real RFID context, limiting the TMR use to only a few bits. 
We have also proposed and validated a complementary ap-
proach allowing fault detection and diagnosis. This approach 
consists in adding hardware checkers into the tag circuit. 
Some of these checkers are provided by the synthesizable 
assertions available in the Open Verification Library library 
(OVL) and others are designed to monitor tag finite state ma-
chine transitions. The faults detected by the checkers are 
counted 
and 
saved 
within 
the 
tag 
memory.  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1
11
21
31
41
51
61
71
81
91
101
111
Read Rate (%)  
Tag Index 
Fault free profile
Faulty profile
Average profile
Limit profile
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

 
Figure 4. Successful Tag Identifications 
 
Then, a user can read this information through the RFID 
reader and thereafter acquire diagnosis information. This ap-
proach has been implemented and evaluated on RFIM. Details 
on these robust architectures are given in [19] [11]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The SafeRFID project addresses the dependability issues in 
RFID systems. The proposed framework considers both hard-
ware and software components as well as analog and digital 
aspects of RFID systems. Three main layers have been identi-
fied: the hardware layer with tags and readers, the communi-
cation layer represented by the LLRP protocol and the soft-
ware layer including the RFID middleware. The main results 
of this work are: (1) the development of a fault simulator 
(SERFID) and of an FPGA based emulator (RFIM) that allows 
fault injection and test method evaluations, (2) the design and 
implementation of a robust LLRP-compliant RFID middle-
ware prototype that provides fault detection and diagnosis new 
services, and (3) the development of a tag robust architecture 
with self-diagnosis capability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the French National Re-
search Agency project “SafeRFID” [ANR 2010 JCJC 0305 
01] 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. E. Palazzi, A. Ceriali, and M. Dal Monte, “RFID Emulation 
in Rifidi Environment”, in Proc. of the International Symposium 
on Ubiquitous Computing (UCS'09), Beijing, China, Aug 2009. 
[2] C. Angerer, R. Langwieser, “ Flexible evaluation of RFID 
system parameters using rapid prototyping”, RFID, 2009 IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Digital 
Object 
Identifier: 
10.1109/RFID.2009.4911188  Publication Year: 2009 , Page(s): 
42 – 47 
[3] C. Floerkemeier, S. Sarma, “RFIDSim—A Physical and Logical 
Layer "Simulation Engine for Passive RFID “ Automation 
Science and Engineering, IEEE Transactions on  Volume: 6 , 
Issue: 1  Digital Object Identifier: 10.1109/TASE.2008.2007929  
Publication Year: 2009 , Page(s): 33 – 43 
[4] F. Thornton, “How to Cheat at Deploying and Securing RFID”, 
Syngress Publishing ©2007, ISBN 1597492302 9781597492300 
[5] R. Shorey et al., Mobile, Wireless and Sensor Networks : 
Technology, Applications and Future Directions, Chapter 
“WinRFID – A middleware for the enablement of Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) based Applications” B. S. 
Prabhu et al., John Wiley and Sons Inc., 2006. 
[6] Sun Microsystems, Inc., "Sun Java™ System RFID Software 3.0 
Administration Guide," February 2006. 
[7] A. Sengupta, S. Z. Schiller, “FlexRFID: A design, development 
and 
deployment 
framework 
for 
RFID-based 
business 
applications”, Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 12, n° 5, pp. 
551-562, November 2010 
[8] N. Ahmed, “Reliable Framework for Unreliable RFID Devices” 
8th IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and 
Communications 
Workshops 
(PERCOM 
Workshops), 
Mannheim, 2010 
[9] G. Fritz, V. Beroulle, O-E-K. Aktouf, and D. Hély, “SystemC 
Modeling of RFID Systems for Robustness Analysis”, 19th 
International Conference on Software, Telecommunications and 
Computer Networks IEEE SoftCOM 2011Split - Hvar - 
Dubrovnik, September 15 – 17, 2011, IEEE Catalog Number: 
CFP1187A-CDR; ISBN 978-953-290-027-9 
[10] O. Abdelmalek, D. Hély, and V. Beroulle “Fault Tolerance 
Evaluation of RFID Tags”, in IEEE Latin America Test 
Workshop (LATW 2014), Fortaleza, Brésil, 13-16 March 2014 
[11] G. Fritz, V. Beroulle, O. Aktouf, M. D. Nguyen, and D. Hély, 
“RFID System On-line Testing Based on the Evaluation of the 
Tags Read-Error-Rate”, Journal of Electronic Testing: Volume 
27, Issue 3 (2011), Page 267-276, (DOI: 10.1007/s10836-010-
5191-6). 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

[12] G. Fritz, B. Maaloul, V. Beroulle, O-E-K. Aktouf, and D. Hély, 
“Read rate profile monitoring for defect detection in RFID 
Systems”, 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
RFID-
Technologies and Applications (RFID-TA 2011), , pp. 89-94, 
Sitges, Barcelona, Spain, on September 15-16, 2011, IEEE 
catalog number: CFP11RFT-CDR ; ISBN: 978-1-4577-0026-2 
[13] G. Fritz, V. Beroulle, O-E-K. Aktouf, and D. Hély, “Evaluation 
of a new RFID system performance monitoring approach”, 
Design, Automation & Test in Europe, (DATE 2012), 
interactive presentation, Dresden, Gremany, 12-16 march 2012 
[14] D. Fussell, S. Rangarajan, “Probabilistic diagnosis of 
multiprocessor systems with arbitrary connectivity”,  IEEE 19th 
International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, FTCS-
19. Digest of Papers., Chicago, IL, pp. 560-565, 1989. 
[15] R. Kheddam, O. Aktouf, and I. Parissis, “Saferfid-mw: Safe and 
Fault-Tolerant rfid Middleware”, R. Kheddam, O. Aktouf, 
I. Parissis, Journal of Communications Software and Systems 
(jcomms), Special issue on rfid Technologies and Internet of 
Things, Vol. 9, n° 1, mars 2013, pp. 57-73. 
[16] R. Kheddam, O. Aktouf and I. Parissis, “On-line monitoring and 
diagnosis of rfid readers and tags”, 20th ieee International 
Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer 
Networks (softcom 2012), Split, Croatia, 11-13 september 2012, 
pp. 1-9. 
[17] R. Kheddam, O. Aktouf  and I. Parissis, “An extended llrp 
model for rfid system test and diagnosis”, 8th Workshop on 
Advances in Model Based Testing (a-most 2012) dans le cadre 
de 5th ieee International Conference on Software Testing, 
Verification and Validation. Montreal, Canada, 17-21 april 
2012, pp. 529-538. 
[18] R. Kheddam, O. Aktouf, I. Parissis and S. Boughazi, 
“ Monitoring 
of 
rfid 
Failures 
Resulting 
from 
llrp 
Misconfigurations”,  21st ieee International Conference on 
Software, 
Telecommunications 
and 
Computer 
Networks 
(softcom 2013), Split, Croatia, septembrer 2013, pp. 1-6. 
[19] O. Abdelmalek, D. Hély, and V. Beroulle “Emulation of Faults 
Injection on UHF Transponders”, in 17th IEEE Symposium on 
Design and Diagnosis of Electronic Circuit and System (DDECS 
2014), Warsaw, Poland, 23-25 April 2014 
[20] I. Mezzah et al., “Assertion based on-line fault detection applied 
on UHF RFID tag”, 8th IEEE International Design & Test 
Symposium 2013, Maroc (2013)  
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-514-2
ICWMC 2016 : The Twelfth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications (includes QoSE WMC 2016)

