An Optimal Design of Multiplexer Based Conservative Gate in  
Quantum-Dot Cellular Automata 
 
Nuriddin Safoev 
Department of Computer Engineering 
Kumoh National Institute of Technology 
Gumi, Korea 
nuriddinsafoyev@gmail.com 
Jun-Cheol Jeon 
Department of Computer Engineering 
Kumoh National Institute of Technology 
Gumi, Korea 
(Corresponding author) jcjeon@kumoh.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract—Nanotechnology based on Quantum-dot Cellular 
Automata (QCA) is one of the potential alternative technology 
to CMOS. The design of conservative circuits received 
signiﬁcant attention due to error detecting and energy 
conservation. In this paper, multiplexer based conservative 
gate (MX-CQCA) is presented. The property of the gate is 
similar to the Fredkin gate, but MX-CQCA is a conservative 
gate.  
Keywords-Quantum-dot cellular automata; multiplexer; 
conservative gate; MX-CQCA. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The transistor based 
complementary 
metal-oxide-
semiconductor (CMOS) technology is reaching its limited 
point in developing process due to high power consumption, 
limited physical density and high current leakage. Quantum-
dot cellular automata (QCA) is one of the promising nano 
technologies that has attracted researchers to investigate its 
reliability constraints. QCA also offers new type of 
information computation. The basic element of this 
technology is QCA cell. It is square shape structure that 
contains four quantum dots positioned at the corners and two 
free electrons. Electrons can move to any quantum dot in the 
cell through electron tunneling due to coulombic interaction 
between them. In that case, polarizations -1 and +1 are 
encoded as logic binary “0” and “1”, respectively [1][2]. 
QCA standard wire which propagates a logic value can be 
constructed by placing QCA cells side by side as shown in 
Fig. 1(a). Moreover, there is an inverter chain that can be 
constructed using rotated cells, as shown Fig. 1(b). Wire 
crossing in QCA is usually realized with two ways. Coplanar 
wire crossing is achieved using inverter chain. Second type 
of wire crossing is multilayer crossing that uses crossover 
bridge, like CMOS technology [3].   
   Fundamental gates of QCA circuits are inverter and 
majority gates. Any QCA circuits can be built using these 
gates. Majority gate consists of three inputs and one output 
as illustrated in Fig. 1(c) and (1). The three-input majority   
 
 (     )                            (1) 
 
gate performs logic OR operation or logic AND operation by 
fixing polarization one of the input cells to      or 
 
Input = 1
Output = 1
Output = 1
(c)
(a)
Input = 1
Output = 0
(b)
Input A = 1
Input C = 1
Input B = 1
 
Figure 1.  (a) QCA wire, (b) inverter chain, (c) QCA majority gate. 
     , respectively. The inverter is implemented by 
placing two cells diagonally. 
Timing and synchronization of QCA is accomplished by 
cascaded clocking of four phases. QCA clocking is for 
providing with power to all part of QCA circuits and regular 
computation throughout the circuit. The tunneling barrier 
between two dots of the cell starts to rise in the switch phase. 
By taking a certain polarization, the cell stores current 
situation during hold phase. Cell polarization is reduced and 
eventually lost through release and relax phases [4].  
Some defects may occur while positioning cells to 
surface in QCA circuits. They are divided three major 
categories: cell misalignment, cell omission and rotation cell 
defects. In the first category, the defected cell is not properly 
lined up to its neighboring cells. Sometimes misalignment 
cells have no effect on functionality of the circuit, but 
sometimes it may cause the circuit to have unexpected output. 
Cell omission occur when a cell is missing in its position and 
becoming defective. A third type of defects occurs when 
cells are rotated to the other cells [5].  
In this paper, multiplexer based conservative logic gate is 
presented. It can be used to design any majority logic and 
multiplexer logic based testable nonreversible circuits.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Conservative logic is a comprehensive model of 
computation, which explicitly reflects the fundamental 
principle of thermodynamics. It is multiple-output logic 
element that the number of 1s (binary 1) at the inputs is equal 
to its corresponding outputs. Conservative logic network can 
be reversible if one-to-one mapping is maintained between 
inputs and outputs. If one-to-one mapping is not preserved, it 
will be irreversible in nature. There is popular conservative 
gate called Fredkin gate that has three inputs and three 
outputs and also it is universal gate in nature. 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

MX-CQCA
A
B
C
P=AB
Q=AB’+BC
P=B+C
 
Figure 2.  Schematic of MX-CQCA. 
Recently, a multiplexer based conservative gate MX-
CQCA is proposed, as shown in Fig. 2 [6]. Design of this 
gate in QCA requires five majority gates and four clocking 
phases. Conceptually, the target of this work is to improve 
MX-CQCA conservative gate in terms of complexity, 
occupied area and delay factors. In the gate, 13-standart 
functions are represented and these functions are widely used 
in QCA. 
III. 
DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
Commonly conservative gates use to design inverter 
chain. The existing conservative MX-CQCA gate also has 
been designed using coplanar wire-crossing. The proposed 
block diagram is illustrated that one QCA multiplexer and 
two conventional majority gates are built in the diagram, as 
shown Fig. 3. R and P outputs are implemented by 
constructing QCA logic OR and logic AND, respectively.  
Construction of 2-1 multiplexer (2-1 MUX) is built based 
on gate level QCA multiplexer which was proposed in [7]. 
This structure has achieved significant improvements in 
terms of complexity and occupied area, as shown in Fig. 4. 
Moreover, the expected result is correctly simulated without 
delay. The gate level MUX is more suitable in several 
conservative structures. Hence, we also will realize this 
design in our proposed conservative gate for significant 
achievement. 
 
A
B
C
MG
MG
2-1
MUX
Q
R
P
0
1
 
Figure 3.  Block diagram of MX-CQCA. 
 
Figure 4.  QCA design of MUX.  
IV. 
PROPOSED DESIGN 
Based on proposed block diagram, we have designed 
MX-CQCA conservative circuit in Fig. 5. It is coplanar 
structure and consists of 128 QCA cells. Occupied total area 
of the circuit is approximately equal to (         ) as 
well as the output is generated after three clock phases.  
The proposed design and previous design [6] have been 
compared in terms of complexity, area and latency. An 
improvement of the proposed gate has achieved 41% less 
cells, 86% less area and also better latency in comparison.  
 
A
-1.00
B
Q
C
1.00
R
1.00
P
-1.00
 
Figure 5.  Proposed MX-CQCA design.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, MUX based conservative gate has been 
proposed. The sequential circuits can be implemented using 
this gate. The layout and functionality have been done using 
QCADesigner tool version 2.0.3 and all features work well. 
It can be used in testable circuits, as well as in reversible 
ALU designs. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea 
government (MSIP) (NO. NRF-2015R1A2A1A15055749). 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. D. Tougaw and C. S. Lent, “Logical Devices Implemented 
Using Quantum-Dot Cellular Automata,” Appl. Phys, vol. 75, 
pp. 1818–1824, 1994. 
[2] J. C. Jeon, “Low Hardware Complexity QCA Decoding 
Architecture Using Inverter Chain,”, International Journal of 
Control and Automation, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 347-358, 2016. 
[3] N. Safoev and J. C. Jeon, “Low Area Complexity 
Demultiplexer Based on Multilayer Quantum-Dot Cellular 
Automata,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Control 
and 
Automationetism, vol. 9,  pp. 165–178, 2016. 
[4] J. C. Jeon, “Extendable Quantum-Dot Cellular Automata 
Decoding Architecture Using 5-Input Majority Gate”, 
International Journal of Control and Automation, vol. 8, no. 
12, pp. 107–118, 2015. 
[5] R. Farazkish and F. Khodaparast, “Design Characterization of 
a New Fault-Tolerant Full Adder for Quantum-Dot Cellular 
Automata,” Microprocessors and Microsystems, vol. 39, pp. 
426-433, 2015. 
[6] H. Thapliyal, N. Ranganathan, and S.Kotiyal, “Design of 
Testable Reversible Sequential Circuit,” IEEE Trans. VLSI, 
vol. 21, pp. 1201-1209, 2013. 
[7] M. N. Asfestani and S. R. Heikalabad, “A Unique Structure 
for the Multiplexer in Quantum-Dot Cellular Automata to 
Creat a Revolution in Design of Nanostructures,” Physica B, 
vol. 512, pp. 91-99, 2017 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

