Monitoring of Environmental Parameters in Nanoelectronic Fabrication 
 
Mokhloss I. Khadem, Valentin Sgarciu 
Faculty of Automatic Control and Computer Science 
“Politehnica” University of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
sml_ka@yahoo.com, vsgarciu@aii.pub.ro  
 
 
Abstract—Nanoelectronics are the essential hardware enabler for 
electronic product and service innovation in key growth markets 
for global industry, such as telecommunications, transportation 
and medical technology.  dust particles, humidity , temperature 
parameters have big effect for the fabrication area due to the 
newest technologies that are usually very complex and very 
sensitive to the external influences. Dust is one of the major 
problems of the top-down lithographic approaches is that they 
require very clean environments because dust and particulates 
can mask part of the exposed area. For high yields and hence low 
costs, clean rooms must have particulate densities extremely low 
and at sizes much smaller than the lithographic minimum feature 
size. In this context, this paper presents a data acquisition system 
that is capable to monitor and measure three types of 
environmental parameters: dust, temperature, and humidity. 
The remote board containing sensors and processing circuits is 
connected to the server through wireless network. The analogue 
to digital conversion is realized by data acquisition card 
(MDA300). The systems can operate for monitoring and control. 
The sensors communicate wirelessly with selectable sensors via 
three wireless smart sensors: temperature, dust sensor and 
humidity sensor. The software control and the acquired data 
processing are realized with a MOTEVIEW application that is 
capable to simultaneously display the measured data. This paper 
introduces a prototype for an affordable wireless sensors network 
for monitoring air quality. It can work in two modes: online and 
offline. In online mode, the sensors periodically send the readings 
to the base station. In offline mode, the sensors store the readings  
periodically to the internal memory and these readings can be 
collected whenever they are needed. With minimal changes, the 
proposed system can be extended to operate with more types of 
sensors. Using a wireless transmission method between PC and 
remote board, the operation distance of the system can be further 
extended. We obtained encouraging results regarding the 
accuracy of the optical measurements from dust sensors 
connected in the wireless network 
 
Keywords-dust sensors; temperature and humidity sensors; 
wireless network sensors; Mote-VIEW software 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In order to monitor and control dust, humidity and 
temperature in the fabrication processes of electronic 
components and modules has gained an increasing importance 
due to the complexity and sensitivity of the new technologies 
to the influences generated by ambient humidity, dust 
particles, temperature, radiation levels, pressure, etc. 
Due to these facts, when we refer to IC (Integrated 
Circuits) fabrication technologies for example, where 
nanotechnologies are currently in use, the control of 
environmental conditions has become mandatory. Also, in the 
case of printed circuit boards (PCB) an exposure to humid 
ambient conditions for example will cause the absorption of 
moisture that can greatly affect the proper operation of the 
equipment that contains the respective module. The corrosion 
on metallic parts of an electronic assembly is another problem 
generated by the humidity, especially in the fabrication stage 
This paper presents a data acquisition system with Mote-
VIEW software can show the result of measurement 
parameters and the chart view of the network to monitor the 
most 
of 
important 
parameters 
that 
characterize 
the 
environment for PCB fabrication: humidity, dust, temperature.  
The related work is a data acquisition system that is capable to 
monitor and measure some environmental parameters like: 
pressure, temperature and humidity, based on Labview 
software without using wireless sensor network .The presented 
system is a scalable industrial quality monitoring system for 
clean rooms and can be also used as a component of a more 
complex equipment intended for testing and reliability 
evaluation of electronic modules in different environmental 
conditions. 
The environmental effects of dust in nanoelectronic 
fabrication will be described in the 2nd section of this paper, 
following in the 3rd section with the presentation of a wireless 
sensor system proposed for the measurement and monitor of 
the dust, humidity, temperature in a fabrication clean room. In 
the 4th section we describe the monitoring software designed 
in Mote-view for the hardware system, followed by the final 
chapter with the conclusions.  
 
II. 
ENVIROMENT EFFECTS 
Nanoelectronic fabrication technologies originate from the 
microelectronics industry, and the devices are usually made on 
silicon wafers even though glass, plastics and many other 
substrates are in use, microelectronics extension into 
nanoscale (for example NEMS, for nano electro mechanical 
systems) have re-used, adapted or extended micro fabrication 
methods. Micro fabrication is known as "semiconductor 
manufacturing" or "semiconductor device fabrication   is 
actually a collection of technologies which are utilized in 
making microdevices [1]. Micro fabrication is carried out in 
clean rooms, where air has been filtered of particle 
contamination and temperature, humidity, vibrations and 
electrical disturbances are under stringent control.  
Smoke, dust, bacteria and cells are micrometers in size, 
and their presence will destroy the functionality of a micro 
fabricated device. Wafer cleaning and surface preparation 
work a little bit like the machines in a bowling alley: first they 
345
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

remove all unwanted bits and pieces, and then they reconstruct 
the desired pattern so that the game can go on [2]. 
 Moisture can accelerate various failure mechanisms in 
printed circuit board assemblies. Moisture can be initially 
present in the epoxy glass prepare , absorbed during the wet 
processes in printed circuit board manufacturing, or diffuse 
into the printed circuit board during storage. Moisture can 
reside in the resin, resin/glass interfaces, and micro-cracks or 
voids due to defects [3]. 
Higher reflow temperatures associated with lead-free 
processing increase the vapor pressure, which can lead to 
higher amounts of moisture uptake compared to eutectic tin-
lead reflow processes. The processing of silicon wafers to 
produce integrated circuits (IC) involves specific chemistry 
and physics to build up a succession of layers of materials and 
geometries to produce thousands of electronic devices at very 
small dimensions. The conditions under which these processes 
can work to successfully to transform the silicon into ICs 
require the absence of contaminants (dust, humidity, unwanted 
chemical elements etc.). Thus, the process chambers normally 
operate under vacuum, with elemental, molecular, and other 
particulate contaminants rigorously controlled. The ideas 
presented in the above sections support the necessity of 
measurement and monitoring systems for environmental 
conditions in fabrication areas [5]. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
To measure and monitor the dust, humidity, temperature 
values in a fabrication clean room, we propose the distribution 
of several nodes, from N1 to Nn. Each node is a smart sensor 
operating in a Plug-and-Play mode and each node 
communicates to a server, over a wireless network by using 
the IEEE 1451.5-802.11 standard [4].  
This standard will enable sensors and devices to 
communicate wirelessly, eliminating the monetary and time 
costs of installing cables at acquisition points. IEEE is 
currently working on three different standards, IEEE 802.15.4, 
Bluetooth and Zigbee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Dust, temperature, humidity smart sensors. 
In the proposed implementation, 3 sensors are: Sharp 
GP2Y1010AU0F dust sensor that is based on the optical 
principle [6] and LM35 for  temperature [11] and HIH 3605 
for humidity level measurements [10] connected with MDA 
300 data acquisition [12] from crossbow and these sensors 
communicate wirelessly to NI wireless sensor network (WSN) 
from National Instruments devices provide the same quality 
and accuracy as traditional wired measurement systems [14], 
but with increased flexibility, lower costs, and the ability to 
create smart WSN systems based on Mote-VIEW software [7]. 
 Mote-VIEW is designed to be an interface (“client layer”) 
between a user and a deployed network of wireless sensors. 
Mote-VIEW provides users the tools to simplify deployment 
and monitoring. It also makes it easy to connect to a database, 
to analyze, and to graph sensor. The humidity sensor (HIH 
3605) consists of a polymer capacitive sensing element with 
on-chip integrated signal conditioning and a second polymer 
layer to protect against dirt. The humidity sensor has a linear 
voltage output with an accuracy of ±2% RH (relative 
humidity) and ±0.5% RH linearity. If the measurement is 
realized in slowly moving air at 25°C the response time of this 
sensor is of maximum 15s. The LM35 is calibrated directly in 
Celsius degrees and has an sensitivity of a 10.0 mV/°C and an 
0.5°C accuracy over -55°C to +150°C range. This sensor was 
chosen because does not require any external calibration or 
trimming to provide its typical accuracy. 
Figure 1 shows the implementation of a Wireless Sensor 
Network (WSN) based on IEEE 802.15.4, Zigbee and 
communicate wirelessly with the sensor NI WSN-3202 for the 
3 sensors through MDA300 data acquisition system. These 
wireless sensors communicate with the memsic wireless base 
station from Crossbow, which is programmable with the 
Mote-VIEW Software, can communicate with NI wireless 
sensor network (WSN) devices. The network is scalable up to 
many WSN nodes (in a mesh topology); having also the 
features of dual Ethernet ports to provide flexible connectivity 
to other devices in your measurement system, such as 
enterprise-level networks or wired I/O systems. With this 
flexibility, we can configure this network according our 
application to monitoring and measurement of environmental 
parameters which effected in the fabrication of semiconductor 
industries to prevent and malfunction and to increase the yield 
of the production.  
Each node connects with a smart sensor, namely: a dust 
detection device or temperature or humidity, transducer 
interface model (TIM) and Network Capable Application 
processor (NCAP), as shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Environmental monitoring network. 
 
 
346
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

The server acquires the monitoring information from the 
distributed network of smart sensors and processes this data 
via specialized software. Based on the user configured 
thresholds, the server will either take no action, but to record 
the data for statistic purposes, or send a signal to other devices 
for specific tasks, such as air trap shutdown or activating air 
recirculation systems, in case the configured thresholds have 
been surpassed to a critical level. This depends on the specific 
application for which the dust detection sensor or humidity or 
temperature network is used.  
The network consists from 3 nodes via data acquisition 
MDA300 with NI WSN-3202 for dust, temperature and 
humidity. Figure 3, depicts the practical picture of the NI 
WSN 3202 and MDA 300.  
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Real-life pictures of used equipment. 
 
The NI WSN-3202 measurement node is a wireless device 
that provides four ±10 V analog input channels and four 
bidirectional digital channels that we configured on a per-
channel basis for input, sinking output, or sourcing output. 
The 18-position screw-terminal connector delivers direct 
connectivity to sensors and offers a 12 V, 20 mA sensor power 
output that use to drive sensors that require external power. 
The power for the measurement node is similar to NI WSN -
3226 (four 1.5 V, AA alkaline battery cell).    ……………… 
         A 2.4 GHz radio wirelessly transmits data to the WSN 
gateway, where you can connect through Ethernet to other 
network devices. NI-WSN software delivers easy network 
configuration in NI Measurement & Automation Explorer 
(MAX) and data extraction with NI Mote-VIEW software. 
The nonprogrammable WSN-3202 does not include a license 
to target and program the node with the Mote-VIEW Wireless 
Sensor Network (WSN) Module Pioneer.  
 
IV. 
MONITORING APPLICATION OF THE WIRELESS SENSOR 
NETWORK 
The network of wireless sensors in Figure 2 is made out of 
wireless sensors network (WSN) based on IEEE 802.15.4. 
Zigbee and the acquired of data from the sensors are 
periodically read with a selectable multiplexing according NI 
Mote-VIEW software. The performance of the proposed 
measurement and monitoring systems depends mainly on the 
sensors that are used to acquire the environmental data. The 
resolution and conversion time of the (MDA300 data 
acquisition board) analog to digital converter that was used in 
the application is sufficient for the proposed application and 
can be expendable for using with many sensors. The Topology 
view shows a map of the network of Motes, including 
placement and parenting information. This allows the user to 
define and view a topology of their Mote deployment. 
The front panel of the application used for monitoring and 
measurement of environmental parameters is presented in 
Figure 4. As it can be observed, each signal from the sensor is 
displayed. The application allows the user to set the variation 
limits for every channel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. 4 The interface of the application used to display the acquired data 
from sensors 
 
347
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

The experimental results were obtained by using several 
types of dust: sand dust with high granularity, plaster dust and 
smoking ash. Another dust detector has been used as a 
reference, based on the gravimetric principle “D-RC80 
Automatic 
sampling 
device 
for 
Gravimetric 
Dust 
measurements”, used as reference measuring system. The 
output of the sensor is sent through the MDA300 based on 
Mote_view software to the server. 
For the smoking ash, we obtained a fluctuation in the 
results, as shown in Figure 5, with a solid average, which was 
within the values obtained by using the dust detector with the 
gravimetric principle.  
 
 
Figure.5 Graph of smoking ash measurements. 
The experimental results depicted in Table I are 
encouraging 
regarding 
the 
accuracy 
of 
the 
optical 
measurement, compared to the ones made with a gravimetric 
device. The mean values were calculated based on 20 
measurements.  
TABLE I.  
MEAN EXPERIMENT RESULTS 
Type of dust 
Mean measurement with 
our setup 
Gravimetric 
measurement 
Sand 
3.0 mg/s 
3.4 mg/s 
Plaster 
2.9 mg/s 
3.9  mg/s 
Smoking Ash 
1.43 mg/s 
1 mg/s 
 
 We also conducted tests with other two sensors for 
humidity 
and 
temperature, 
that 
were 
sending 
data 
simultaneously to the server and we obtained satisfactory 
average results, having the humidity around point 27%   and 
the  temperature around 22Cº. 
 Based on the user configured thresholds, the server will 
either take no action, but to record the data for statistic 
purposes, or send a signal to other devices for specific tasks, 
such as air trap shutdown or activating air recirculation 
systems, in case the configured thresholds have been 
surpassed to a critical level. This depends on the specific 
application for which sensor network is used.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS  AND  FUTURE WORKS 
Environmental parameters (humidity, dust, temperature, 
etc.) have significant effects on electronic fabrication and 
especially nanoelectronic industries modules and circuits, 
those been necessary to be continuous monitored and 
measured, especially in industrial areas. Each parameter 
sensing device can focus on a specific area and by managed as 
a single entity or in turn it can be used as only one point of 
presence in an area, contributing to the overall accuracy of the 
measurement. The human interaction will be greatly reduced 
by using such a network. Also, compared to human 
observation, the introduction of a smart sensor network is 
more flexible when it comes to dangerous and hostile 
environments where humans can’t penetrate, allowing access 
to information previously unavailable from such close 
proximity. Future work aims at improving the performance 
and durability of smart sensors networks and to prove them as 
a versatile application. We also aim to increase the ability of 
the dust sensors to make discrimination regarding the type of 
dust and based on this to configure the system’s threshold 
value in order to make a decision according to the settings and 
applications. 
 Sensor scheduling can be obtained by enabling the sensor 
nodes to modify communication requirements in response to 
network conditions and events detected. 
From the experience of already existing devices, we can 
expect that in the coming decade a large number of monitoring 
systems for all physical phenomena will emerge, with great 
application in the human health sector, industrial sector and 
the environment. The monitoring system gives excellent 
opportunities to design and configure many types of sensors to 
monitor and control all physical phenomena for many 
applications based on people demands. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
S. Franssila, “Introduction to Microfabrication”, 1st ed, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2004, ISBN 0-470-85106-6. 
[2] 
Oliver Geschke, Klank & Telleman, eds, “Microsystem Engineering of 
Lab-on-a-chip Devices”, 1st ed, John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 3-527-
30733-8. 
[3] 
N. P. Mahalik, “Micromanufacturing and Nanotechnology”, Springer, 
2006, ISBN 3-540-25377-7. 
[4] 
IEEE Instrumentation and Measurement Society “IEEE 1451.5, 
Standard for a Smart Transducer Interface for Sensors and Actuators–
Wireless Communication and Transducer Electronic Data Sheet (TEDS) 
Formats”, TC-9, The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Inc., New York, N.Y. 10016. 
[5] 
K. Weide-Zaagea, W.  Horaudb, H.  Frémont, “Moisture diffusion in 
Printed 
Circuit 
Boards: 
Measurements 
and 
Finite- 
Element- 
Simulations“, 16th European Symposium on Reliability of Electron 
Devices, Failure Physics and Analysis, Microelectronics Reliability, 
Vol. 45, pp. 1662-1667, 2005.  
[6] 
Sheet No.: E4-A01501EN GP2Y1010AU0F Compact Optical Dust 
Sensor, SHARP Corporation, 2006. 
[7] 
Mote-VIEW 1.2 User’s Manual Revision B, January 2006, Crossbow 
Technology, Inc. 
[8] 
T. Defeng, L. Shixing, X. Wujun, and  Z. Yongming “A Fire Monitoring 
System in ZigBee Wireless Network” CYBERC 2010 - The 2nd 
International Conference on Cyber-Enabled Distributed Computing and 
Knowledge 
Discovery 
CyberC 
2010. 
October 
10-12, 
2010. 
Huangshan/China. 
[9] 
L.B. Ruiz , J.M. Nogueira, and A.A.F. Loureiro, “MANNA:A 
Management Architecture for Wireless Sensor Networks” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 116–125, 2003. 
[10] Data Sheet of Humidity Sensor HIH 3605, Honeywell Corporation. 
[11] Data Sheet of Temparature Sensor LM35, National Semiconductors. 
[12]  Data Sheet of MDA300, Data Acquisition Board, Crossbow Technology 
Inc. 
[13]  Data Sheet of Memsic Starter Kit, WSN-START, Crossbow Technology 
Inc. 
[14] Data Sheet of NI WSN 3202, the Programmable Measurement Node, 
National Instruments. 
348
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

