A High-Accuracy DOA-Based Localization Method:
UAV Virtual Multiantenna Array
Jianqiao Cheng
Brussels School of Engineering
Universit´e libre de Bruxelles (ULB)
Brussels, Belgium
Jianqiao.Cheng@ulb.be
Ke Guan
State Key Lab of Rail Trafﬁc Control and Safety
Beijing Jiaotong University (BJTU)
Beijing, China
kguan@bjtu.edu.cn
Franc¸ois Quitin
Brussels School of Engineering
Universit´e libre de Bruxelles (ULB)
Brussels, Belgium
fquitin@ulb.be
Abstract—Reliable location-aware services and corresponding
localization techniques are essential in Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
(UAV) communications. In this paper, localization technology
based on Direction of Arrival estimation is proved to be promising
for UAV channels due to limited angular spread in the air. Then, a
method is proposed to estimate the direction of a ground radio-
frequency transmitter by using a UAV equipped with a single
antenna, which is critical when considering the form factor and
computational capabilities of a UAV. By considering the received
signal at several points along its trajectory, the receiver implicitly
creates a virtual multi-antenna array, which can be used to
estimate the direction of the transmitter. The ﬁrst difﬁculty is
estimating the relative positions of the UAV. The other main
challenge is the Local Oscillator frequency offset between the
transmitter and the UAV receiver, which adds an additional
cumulative phase offset to the received signal at each antenna of
the virtual array.
Index Terms—Direction Finding, DoA Estimation, Localiza-
tion, Multi-antenna System, Radiogoniometry
I. INTRODUCTION
Estimation of the location of passive Radio Frequency (RF)
sources (e.g., emitting radio, etc.) has been a subject of re-
search for decades and plays a signiﬁcant role in many applica-
tions, including radar and sonar processing, search and rescue
missions, and wireless sensor networks [1]. Measurements
used for passive localization can be classiﬁed into four cat-
egories: Time Of Arrival (TOA), Time Difference Of Arrival
(TDOA), Direction Of Arrival (DOA), and Received Signal
Strength (RSS) [2]. Also, in most cases, a basic assumption for
passive localization is that the Line-Of-Sight (LOS) visibility
exists between a transmitter and receiver, as the transmitter
location estimates can be signiﬁcantly biased due to multipath
transmission and shadow fading [3]. While this assumption is
rigid to guarantee in the ground communication channels (e.g.,
a dense urban environment) due to rich obstacles, the LOS path
is easy to establish in the Air-To-Ground (ATG) channels, as
scatters are limited in high altitudes [4]. In other words, the
accuracy of localization services can be signiﬁcantly improved
by utilizing measurements from the sky, and Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) are a promising platform to serve as an aerial
localization node.
The investment in UAVs has surged in recent years due to
their low cost, ease of on-demand deployment, and excellent
mobility. UAVs are widely used in various applications, in-
cluding target reconnaissance, image acquisition, surveillance,
and wireless communication [5]. Furthermore, as an essential
part of the future Low Altitude Platform (LAP) communi-
cation system, UAV has tremendous amounts of excellent
characteristics, such as the high probability of a LOS path,
unencumbered by rough terrain and fewer reﬂections from
obstacles on the ground [6]. Current studies are focusing on
the UAV serves as a mobile terminal (e.g., base stations and
relays), and the UAV serves as new aerial users that access
the cellular network from the sky [7]. Alongside the enormous
connectivity potential, reliable location-aware services are also
essential in UAV-based communications. Therefore, localize
ground users with UAVs is becoming an important topic and
has drawn signiﬁcant attention. For example, UAVs have been
used to localize WiFi devices and GPS jammers [8].
Despite the high potential, performing localization with
UAVs also has some drawbacks: UAVs also have limited
payloads and ﬂight times due to hardware and battery limits.
Therefore, some localization methods are not suitable in UAV-
based scenarios. For example, the TOA-based and TDOA-
based localization systems usually require precise and consis-
tent time synchronization, which is complex in UAV scenarios.
Likewise, DOA estimation uses phase interferometry, i.e.,
the phase differences among the bearing measurements w.r.t.
multiantenna array elements [9]. However, since UAVs are
usually small, the consequent constraints on the size of the
multiantenna array will lead to poor spatial resolution [2].
Ranging localization with RSS methods is attractive due to
their intrinsic simplicity. However, its accuracy is usually not
satisfactory. Therefore, a simple, cost-effective localization
method using a minimum number of UAVs, without heavy
hardware implementation and complex synchronization, is
precious for the development of aerial RF localization.
In this work, we investigate the feasibility of DOA estima-
tion with a UAV equipped with a single antenna only [10].
The unknown signal source to be located is referred to as
the transmitter. The UAV is ﬂying and carried with a single
patch antenna (mounted facing downward), referred to as the
receiver. While the UAV hovers overhead at a certain altitude,
the receiver antenna receives the incoming signal consistently
along the UAV’s trajectory, as shown in Figure 1. Bearing
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

measurements are taken at ﬁxed time intervals during the ﬂight
and are then processed to extract the phase difference at these
observation points. Therefore, we implicitly create a virtual
Multiantenna Array (VMA) in 3D space. Combining these
bearing measurements with UAV’s position, an estimate of the
source’s DOA (including azimuth angle and elevation angle)
is obtained. The receiver antenna at each observation point
can be considered a virtual antenna element in VMA. Like
conventional multiantenna arrays, the element spacing should
be smaller than the half wavelength of the carrier frequency
to avoid aliasing effects.
Fig. 1. UAV virtual array concept. Single UAV receiver equipped with one
single antenna, moves and create a virtual array.
The difﬁculties of such a UAV-based VMA method are
threefold: 1) The aerial channel between UAV stations and
ground users differs signiﬁcantly from conventional terrestrial
channels, and the effect of aerial channel properties (e.g.,
angular spread) on DOA localization needs to be investigated.
2) The relative coordinates of UAV array elements are essential
when calculating the array response vector that necessary for
DOA estimation. 3) The concept of VMA is based on a
consumption that the phase difference is only caused by the
UAV movement. However, this is not the case in practice.
As the Local Oscillator (LO) in transmitter and receiver has
different frequency stability due to manufacturing tolerances
and temperature variations [2], a LO offset usually appears
and caused cumulative phase drifts for the received signal
over time. Common RF devices usually equip with LOs that
containing signiﬁcant LO offset. For this reason, we provide
two methods to compensate for the effect of LO offset, and
their performance is tested in simulations.
In summary, the signiﬁcance of our work lies in proving the
feasibility of the VMA method with cheap, portable hardware
that is already available in modern smartphones. Also, a
UAV-based scenario provides a suitable, favorable propagation
condition for VMA to show localization ability. Furthermore,
by exploiting the potential of UAV’s excellent mobility, our
VMA system does not increase energy consumption or re-
quire multiantenna arrays. The results from simulations and
experiments show that the VMA signiﬁcantly outperforms the
conventional localization algorithms in UAV-based scenarios
in terms of localization accuracy and system simplicity.
Contributions: The main contributions of this paper are as
follows.
• We proposed a technology to localize ground RF trans-
mitters by creating a virtual multiantenna array with a
single UAV platform. The proposed system is easy to
implement for remote electronics.
• The spatial property of the ATG channel is studied with
the ray-tracing method from a localization perspective.
Our simulation results show that angular spreads at the
UAV are minimal, which is beneﬁcial for DOA-based
localization due to limited power dispersion.
• The proposed system is implemented with simulations,
and simulation results prove the feasibility of the VMA
method.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II provides a detailed spatial channel characteristics analysis
of the ATG channel from a localization perspective. Section
III proceeds with the design and system model of the VMA
model. Two algorithms are provided to eliminate the bias
introduced by LO offset. Section IV concludes this paper and
presents our future work.
II. SPATIAL PROPERTY OF UAV CHANNEL
The estimation of the bearing angle is usually estimated
based on antenna measurements with conventional array pro-
cessing algorithms (e.g., Multiple Signal Classiﬁcation (MU-
SIC), Beamforming). Nearly all of these algorithms assume
that the source signal arrives at UAV with a discrete, distinct
angle. This assumption leads to a signal subspace of low rank,
and the low-rank property is exploited to ﬁnd the impinging
direction.
However, in actual spatial channels (e.g., a macro-cell),
several replicas of the signal will be incident on UAV with
multiple angles due to multipath propagation. More specif-
ically, the signal that incident on UAV array may spatially
be distributed (i.e., with an angular spread around a mean
DOA) and no longer propagate along with a plane wave due to
local scatters surrounding the ground transmitter. The angular
spread usually denotes the standard deviation of DOAs from
multipath, also indicates the power dispersion in the angular
domain. Generally speaking, a large angular spread value will
directly degrade the antenna array correlation, which gives rise
to the inaccuracy of the DOA estimation; For small angular
spread, it follows from the consistency that the mean DOA will
only deviate slightly from the true DOA. These mismatches
between the mean DOA and true DOA in the ground channel
is well investigated in [11]. However, very limited research
has thoroughly investigated similar spatial properties in UAV
channels from a localization perspective to the best of our
knowledge.
To ensure the effectiveness of DOA measurements in UAV-
based localization, we investigate the spatial characteristics
of the ATG channel with Ray-Tracing simulations. Given the
purpose of localization, i.e., the UAV-based platform locates
ground users according to their emitted signal, we consider
the ground users serve as Mobile Terminals (MTs, emulating
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

a transmitter), the UAV serves as an aerial receiver (Rx), to
locate ground MTs according to their emitted signal. More-
over, When the carrier frequency does not change (which is
our case), the angular spreads in the uplink and downlink are
equivalent due to the channel reciprocity. Therefore, although
the signal travels from MT to UAV, the channel can still be
referred to as the ATG channel.
(a) Ray-tracing simulation scenarios
(b) One example snapshot from ray-tracing simulations
Fig. 2. The Ray-tracing simulations. (a) The scenario contains 4 linear UAV
trajectories, and 250 MTs randomly distributed on the ground. (b) An example
from the RT simulation results. The solid red line represents the line-of-sight
path, the blue lines represent all the multipath components, including reﬂected
rays, scattered rays and diffracted rays.
Ray-tracing is a powerful map-based hybrid channel mod-
eling approach to describe multipath effects for a given
environment model and deployment conﬁguration [12]. Our
simulations are carried out by using CloudRT, the 3D ray-
tracing software developed by Beijing Jiaotong University. In
this work, we modeled a typical 3D urban city, with 137
buildings under different heights going from 5 m to 70 m.
The total dimensions of the modeled terrain are 650 m by
500 m. The area has 250 ground MTs distributed uniformly
over the whole map, and the MT height is set to 2 m above
ground. The UAV is equipped with a downwards-facing patch
antenna, and MTs are equipped with vertically-oriented dipole
antennas. It is worth mentioning that the tilts of MTs antenna
are randomly distributed but deviate no more than ± 45 ◦
from the vertical direction. Both the UAV antenna and the
MT antenna are vertically polarized with 0 dBi gain, and
the transmission power is set to 0 dBm. The simulation is
conducted by ﬁxing the MT while changing the position of
the UAV along four linear trajectories. Each trajectory has
a length of 450 m and contains 50 UAV positions, with a
resolution of 9 m, as shown in Figure 2(a). Considering that
Long-Term Evolution (LTE) is a reliable technology to support
the required link performance of UAV networks [5], we set
the carrier frequency at 2.6 GHz, corresponding to the LTE
carrier frequencies. Moreover, the UAV altitude in simulations
is conducted at 100 m.
The CloudRT software allows to simulate the direct ray
between transmitters and receivers, ﬁrst- and second-order
reﬂections, diffracted rays along building edges, and diffuse
scatterings on rough surfaces, as depicted in Figure 2(b).
During the simulation, rays are collected, and then a Chan-
nel Impulse Response (CIR) is calculated by the software,
including received power strength, phase, propagation time,
angle of arrival, and angle of departure (for both azimuth and
elevation). Also, the direct path between the UAV and MTs can
be obstructed by obstacles; thus, we have a collection of the
LOS and the Non-Line-Of-Sight (NLOS) cases. For the UAV
altitude to be set to 100 m, we collected 250×50×4 snapshots
in total, containing 28626 LOS cases and 21374 NLOS cases.
For each snapshot, the different Multipath Components (MPC)
between the UAV and MT were recorded. These were used
to determine the Azimuth-Of-Arrival (AOA) spread and the
Elevation-Of-Arrival (EOA) spread. The Probability Density
Function (PDF) of the angular spreads in the LOS scenario
and the NLOS scenario are plotted in Figure 3, where the
PDF function is used to specify the probability of an angular
spread falling within a particular range of values.
(a) Distribution of ASA in LOS
(b) Distribution of ASA in NLOS
(c) Distribution of ESA in LOS
(d) Distribution of ESA in NLOS
Fig. 3.
Distributions of ASA/ESA in LOS scenarios and NLOS scenarios.
The superimposed red curves are lognormal distributions used to model the
PDF.
To better characterize the distribution of angular spreads at
the UAV, the lognormal distribution is chosen to be the most
appropriate function to ﬁt the ASA and the ESA. For example,
in LOS scenarios, the PDF of the ASA can be mathematically
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

expressed by:
fASA (x) =
1
√
2πxσASA
exp
"
− (ln x − µASA)2
2σ2
ASA
#
(1)
where µASA and σASA are the mean and Standard Deviation
(STD) of the ﬁtting PDF, respectively. The ﬁtting of ESA
is similar by replacing parameters µASA, σASA with µESA,
σESA. The value of µ and σ for ASA/ESA spreads in both
LOS and NLOS scenarios are provided in Table I.
TABLE I
LOGNORMAL MODELING PARAMETERS
Parameters
ASA
ESA
LOS
NLOS
LOS
NLOS
µ
0.42
0.52
0.15
0.24
σ
1.01
1.29
0.68
0.91
By comparing the PDF distribution and the established sta-
tistical model, the spatial multipath propagation characteristics
can be observed as follows.
• The ﬁrst observation from Figure 3 is that the ESA and
ASA are distributed over a narrow range less than 10◦
(with an average angular spread around 2.5◦), for both
LOS and NLOS scenarios. These magnitudes are much
smaller than the ESA and ASA in conventional 3D cel-
lular channels, e.g., average ASA around 9◦ and average
ESA around 15◦ in [13]. Such observations indicate that
the spatial dispersion of received power at the UAV side
is very limited, and all the multipath components arrived
at the UAV with similar incident angles. Therefore, the
power-weight mean AOA/EOA is a good representation
of the real bearing to the ground MT.
• In Figure 3, the histograms for both ASA and ESA are
steeper in the LOS scenarios than the NLOS scenarios.
The µ and σ in LOS are also smaller than NLOS.
Therefore, the angular spread in NLOS scenarios tends
to be slightly larger than in the LOS scenarios. This
phenomenon is expected and can be explained by the
fundamental of angular spread: When scattered MPCs
make a considerable contribution to the total received
power, the angular spread will be large; When the LOS
path is dominant among the received power, the angular
spread will be small. In NLOS scenarios where the LOS
path has been blocked by obstacles, the direct signal will
be attenuated; Thus, MPCs will make more signiﬁcant
contributions in the total received power, caused a bigger
angular spread in both azimuth and elevation domain.
The analysis above leads to the following conclusion. In
urban environments, the angular spread at the UAV is minimal,
which means the power dispersion at the UAV is very limited.
Therefore, the DOA-based estimation has a great potential in
UAV-based cellular networks to localize ground targets since
the estimated DOA should be close to the true DOA.
III. UAV VIRTUAL MULTIANTENNA ARRAY SYSTEM
MODEL
A. UAV-based Virtual Array System
The system model of the virtual antenna array is following.
We consider that a single transmitter broadcasts an RF signal
periodically while the UAV-carried receiver is moving. The
periodically transmitted RF signal in our system is in the
form of digital data packets. Both the transmitter and the
receiver know the preamble of the packets. Those preambles
are deﬁned by existing communication standards, e.g., the
Primary Synchronization Signal (PSS) broadcast by the base
stations in LTE standard [9].
As for the DOA localization, the unknown location of
the stationary transmitter in three-dimensional Cartesian co-
ordinates is represented by s = [x, y, z]T (the superscript
T denotes the matrix transpose operator). The knowledge
of UAV’s location is represented by si = [xi, yi, zi]T for
i = 1, . . . , N. Here, i denotes the ith virtual array element
along UAV’s trajectory, and N represents the total number of
these points. Generally, we can determine the location of s as
long as we estimated the DOA, as seen from the UAV. The
DOA, including the AOA ϕ and the EOA θ, is calculated
by analyzing the phase difference in received packets. As
the signal arrives at si from the far-ﬁeld, the DOA at each
observation point is considered the same.
Let us denote s

m

the baseband representation of the
transmitted packet preamble (for m = 1, ..., M) and r

n, m

the m-th baseband sample of the n-th received packet, which
can be represented as:
r

n, m

= h

n, m

∗ s

m

· ej(φ0+2πf0(tn+mTs)) + ω

n, m

(2)
where h

n, m

is the CIR, which provides temporal and spatial
information and power of multipath components. The term
φ0 is the phase of the ﬁrst received packet (which contains
the phase offset and accumulated frequency offset at time t0
between the transmitter and receiver front-ends), f0 is the LO
frequency offset between transmitter and receiver, tn is the
elapsed time between the initial packet and the n-th packet.
The term Ts indicates the receiver sample time and ω

n, m

is an independent and identically distributed Gaussian noise
with distribution ω

n, m

∼ CN(0, σ2). We assume that f0 is
constant during the observation interval at each interception
position, which means the movement of receiver can not
exceed a certain time limit, e.g. a few seconds. The term φ0
is considered constant between multiple received packets [9].
In the following (unless otherwise stated), we will consider a
narrowband LOS channel. The narrowband channel h[n] when
the receiver receives the n-th packet can be written as:
h[n] = α · ej⃗β(ϕ,θ)·⃗r[n]
(3)
where α is amplitude of the channel, ⃗β(ϕ, θ) is the wave
vector, ⃗r [n] is the n-th virtual array coordinate when receiving
the n-th packet relative to initial coordinate, which requires
knowledge of the location of the UAV to within a small
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

fraction of the carrier wavelength. While the UAV ﬂying at a
ﬁxed altitude (as will be considered in the following sections),
the term ⃗β(ϕ, θ) · ⃗r [n] can be developed as
⃗β(ϕ, θ) · ⃗r [n] =2π
λ (x [n] sin(ϕ)cos(θ)+
y [n] cos(ϕ)sin(θ) + z [n] cos(θ))
(4)
where x [n], y [n], z [n] represent the displacement of the
receiver along the x-, y- and z- axis when receiving the n-
th packet.
Combining equations (2) and (3), the full signal model can
be written as:
r [n, m] = α·s [m]·ej(φ0+2πf0(tn+mTs)+⃗β(ϕ,θ)·⃗r[n]) +ω [n, m]
(5)
The main difference between (5) and the received signal
with conventional multi-antenna systems is twofold:
1) the frequency offset f0 does not appear in conventional
multi-antenna systems, since the signal is received on
all antenna elements simultaneously;
2) the coordinates ⃗r [n] are perfectly known in a conven-
tional multi-antenna system, since the array form factor
is known by design.
In principle, the DOA estimation in the virtual array is only
feasible after the LO phase offset caused by f0 is eliminated,
and the relative array element positions ⃗r [n] is known. The
algorithms and techniques to deal with these two challenges
are provided in the next sections.
B. Estimating the relative UAV Coordinates
While UAV is ﬂying in the sky, its coordinates have to
be known with an accuracy of a fraction of a wavelength.
Current UAV-embedded GPS sensors usually far short from
this requirement in higher frequency, but new generations of
GNSS receivers in the near future may allow knowing the
position of the UAV with such precision, especially since
UAVs beneﬁt from excellent satellite visibility. To address this
challenge with off-the-shelf hardware, we add a 3D inertial
measurement unit (IMU) on the UAV-mounted receiver, con-
taining a combination of accelerometers, gyroscopes, magne-
tometers to measure angular velocity and linear acceleration
with respect to the UAV’s body coordinate frame. The relative
position and orientation are characterized by the IMU readings
through so-called dead-reckoning integration algorithms, with
an Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) or an Unscented Kalman
Filter (UKF) [9].
Due to the integration of biases in the IMU processing,
the navigation solution obtained from IMU measurements will
drift from the real trajectory, and the error of the navigation
solution will increase over time. However, for the Wide-Sense
Stationary Uncorrelated Scattering (WSSUS) assumption to
hold [2], the time over which the UAV forms the virtual array
would be short so that the navigation error incurred by the
IMU is also limited. For typical UAV or vehicle speeds, the
required movement duration is up to a few seconds.
C. Local Oscillator Frequency Offset Compensation
To estimate and compensate the LO frequency offset in (5),
we proposed two methods, based on our previous research
in [9], [10]. The ﬁrst method is the Stop-and-Start (SaS)
approach, where the UAV ﬁrst stands still before starting to
move. During standstill, only the LO frequency offset causes
the phase in (5) to change with time and can therefore be easily
estimated. This estimated value f0 is then used during the
movement of the UAV to compensate the LO frequency offset,
where each received subsequent packet can be expressed as
follows:
r′ [n, m] = r [n, m] e−j2πf0·(tn+mTs)
(6)
The compensated signal r′ [n, m] contains the phase inter-
ferometry and can be used directly in conventional DOA
estimation techniques. Although the SaS approach is straight-
forward and easy to implement. This method suffers from two
disadvantages. The most obvious disadvantage is that the SaS
approach restricts the movement of the UAV, as the UAV ﬁrst
needs to stand still before moving. The second disadvantage
is that the LO frequency offset should not change too much
between the moment that the UAV stands still to the moment
that the receiver moves, which might not always be veriﬁed
in practice (especially for low-quality LOs).
The other method is called the joint estimation approach,
which has more advantages in practical applications for pro-
viding higher usage ﬂexibility and no need to stop the UAV
before the movement. In this method, we apply the MUSIC
algorithm with an adapted signal model by including the LO
phase offset into the steering vector of the virtual array. Let
us rewrite (5) by stacking the N received packets in a column
vector:
r [m] = a (f0, ϕ, θ) X [m] + ω [m]
(7)
with the array steering vector lies in a three-dimensional space
over f0, ϕ and θ and deﬁned as:
a (f0, ϕ, θ) =


ej(2πf0t1+⃗β⃗·r[1]))
ej(2πf0t1+⃗β·⃗r[2]))
...
ej(2πf0t1+⃗β⃗·r[N]))


(8)
and X

m

is constant for all virtual antennas, deﬁned as
X [m] = α0 · s [m] · ej(φ0+2πf0mTs)
(9)
By developing the eigen-decomposition of the covariance
matrix of r [m], we can then estimate the nominal DOA and
frequency offset

ˆf0, ˆϕ, ˆθ

via a 3D-MUSIC search, and the
corresponding MUSIC spectrum will exhibit the largest peak
at the estimated DOA due to the orthogonality of the signal
subspace and noise subspace [9].
D. Implementing VMA with Simulations
We have simulated the proposed virtual array system by
using MATLAB software. We illustrate the DOA estimation
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

results under each of the two LO frequency offset compensa-
tion techniques in the next steps. The azimuth ϕ for each path
in (4) is set to a random angle between 0◦ and 180◦ and the
elevation θ is set to a random angle between 0◦ and 90◦. The
LO drift is simulated using the LO model described in [14].
(a) Azimuth estimation for SaS
(b) Elevation estimation for SaS
Fig. 4. Simulation results of the SaS estimation approach based on 2D MUSIC
search (versus ϕ and θ, where f0 is estimated in prior).
Figure 4 shows an example of the MUSIC spectrum of
the SaS method after frequency offset compensation, which
is used to estimate the azimuth and elevation angle simultane-
ously. In this snapshot, a clear peak is observed at azimuth 8◦
and elevation 56◦, which is very close to the true DOA (12◦
for azimuth and 52◦ for elevation).
(a) Joint estimation for Azimuth
(b) Joint estimation for Elevation
Fig. 5.
Simulation results of the joint-estimation approach based on 3D
MUSIC search (versus f0, ϕ, and θ).
Figure 5 presents an example of the joint-estimation method
for the same snapshot in Figure 4. In this case, only the
received packets during the UAV movement were used for
processing. The peak of the spectrum indicates the estimated
LO frequency offset f0, and also the estimated DOA (azimuth
and elevation) corresponding to the peak. A clear peak can
be identiﬁed at 10◦ for azimuth and 55◦ for elevation, close
to the true DOA of 12◦ for azimuth and 52◦ for elevation as
well.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the DoA-based localization is proved to be a
suitable technology for UAVs to locate ground targets due to
limited angular spreads for aerial nodes. A promising method
is proposed to estimate the DOA of a ground RF transmitter
with a UAV equipped with a single antenna. This method
actively exploits the UAV movement, which can effectively
be controlled and leveraged to obtain DOA estimations. By
considering received packets along a planned trajectory, the
UAV receiver creates a virtual multi-antenna array that can
use conventional DOA estimation algorithms. In addition, we
propose two alternative methods to compensate for the local
oscillator frequency offset between ground RF transmitters
and UAV receivers. The feasibility of our UAV virtual array
method is veriﬁed with simulations. Our future work will focus
on evaluating and improving the proposed method’s robustness
and implementing the VMA system with UAV platforms and
software-deﬁned radios. The whole DoA estimation system
will be tested in outdoor scenarios to investigate the effect of
1) the UAV movement states (height, trajectory length); 2) the
hardware conﬁgurations (LO qualities, LO offset compensa-
tion methods); 3) the channel conditions (LOS visibility, SNR,
multipath power).
REFERENCES
[1] B. Ilya and T. Joseph, “Target detection and localization using mimo
radars and sonars,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 54,
no. 10, pp. 3873–3883, 2006.
[2] J. Cheng, K. Guan, and F. Quitin, “Direction of arrival estimation with
virtual antenna array: Observability analysis, local oscillator frequency
offset compensation, and experimental results,” IEEE Transactions on
Instrumentation and Measurement, pp. 1–1, 2021.
[3] J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, T. Dom´ınguez-Bola˜no, X. Cai, Z. Huang, and
X. Yin,
“Air-to-ground channel characterization for low-height uavs
in realistic network deployments,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 992–1006, 2021.
[4] X. Cai, T. Izydorczyk, J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, I. Kov´acs, J. Wigard,
F. Tavares, and P. Mogensen,
“Empirical low-altitude air-to-ground
spatial channel characterization for cellular networks connectivity,”
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 2021.
[5] Z. Yong, Z. Rui, and L. Joon, “Wireless communications with unmanned
aerial vehicles: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 36–42, 2016.
[6] X. Cai, J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, X. Yin, N. Wang, Ai B, Frølund P, and
Y. P´erez, “An empirical air-to-ground channel model based on passive
measurements in lte,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol.
68, no. 2, pp. 1140–1154, 2018.
[7] X. Cai, I. Kov´acs, J. Wigard, and P. Mogensen,
“A centralized and
scalable uplink powercontrol algorithm in low sinr scenarios,” 2020.
[8] P. Adrien, D. Louis, L. Sherman, and E. Per, “Antenna characterization
for uav based gps jammer localization,”
in Proceedings of the 28th
International Technical Meeting of The Satellite Division of the Institute
of Navigation (ION GNSS+ 2015), 2015, pp. 1684–1695.
[9] F. Quitin, P. De Doncker, F. Horlin, and TW. Peng, “Virtual multiantenna
array for estimating the direction of a transmitter: System, bounds, and
experimental results,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol.
67, no. 2, pp. 1510–1520, 2017.
[10] J. Cheng, K. Guan, and F. Quitin,
“Virtual multiantenna array for
estimating the doa of a transmitter in uav-assisted networks,” in 2020
IEEE 31st Annual International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and
Mobile Radio Communications. IEEE, pp. 1–6.
[11] Y. Jin and B. Friedlander, “Detection of distributed sources using sensor
arrays,”
IEEE transactions on signal processing, vol. 52, no. 6, pp.
1537–1548, 2004.
[12] D. He, B. Ai, K. Guan, L. Wang, Z. Zhong, and T. Kurner,
“The
design and applications of high-performance ray-tracing simulation
platform for 5g and beyond wireless communications: A tutorial,” IEEE
Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 10–27, 2019.
[13] R. Zhang, X. Lu, J. Zhao, L. Cai, and J. Wang, “Measurement and
modeling of angular spreads of three-dimensional urban street radio
channels,”
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 66, no.
5, pp. 3555–3570, 2016.
[14] Z. Cristina and T. Patricia, “The clock model and its relationship with
the allan and related variances,”
IEEE transactions on ultrasonics,
ferroelectrics, and frequency control, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 289–296, 2005.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

