A Sensor Networking Architecture for ENTROPY - Energy-Aware Information and 
Communication Technologies Infrastructure Enabling Smart Building Solutions 
 
Aristotelis Agianniotis, Vincent Schülé, Antonio Jara, Mariam Barque, Dominique Genoud 
Institute of Information Systems 
HES-SO VS 
Sierre, Switzerland 
a.agianniotis.in@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—The ENTROPY project aspires to significantly 
contribute to (1) the reduction of energy consumption, and (2) 
the reduction of micro-generated energy losses, in buildings. As 
part of this ongoing project, we have created a sensor 
networking 
infrastructure 
for 
the 
interconnection 
of 
heterogeneous smart sensors and devices, and the aggregation 
and fusion of data from multiple sources. The developed 
architecture provides the relevant and necessary data for the 
further development 
of 
energy-efficiency 
solutions 
for 
buildings with the aim to reduce the energy consumption and 
reduce the micro-generated energy losses. The sensor 
deployment is presented in this article for the two use cases of 
the HES-SO pilot. Ongoing work envisages to utilize the 
deployed infrastructure in conjunction with gamification 
techniques and serious gaming applications to record, and 
analyze the energy behavior of residents, and train them in 
order to adopt more energy efficient behaviors. 
Keywords-Wireless sensor networking; Data aggregation and 
fusion; Smart building; FIWARE platform; Information and 
communication technologies. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ENTROPY project [1] aims to significantly reduce 
the energy consumption and the micro-generated energy 
losses, in buildings. For this to be possible, we have to 
develop a suitable Information and Communication 
Technologies infrastructure for the HES-SO Technopole site 
which will provide the necessary energy-related and 
behavior-related data. In this article, we present the sensor 
networking architecture created for the ENTROPY project, 
and which architecture can be scaled, adapted, and applied to 
other industrial or residential applications. The deployed 
infrastructure will serve as a testbed for the ENTROPY 
project. 
II. 
METHODS AND RESULTS 
In order to facilitate the efficient aggregation of data 
management of smart sensors, we focus on the end-to-end 
interconnection of heterogeneous set of sensor networking 
devices, combined with existing monitoring systems and 
embedded devices, the design and application of efficient 
routing schemes and the efficient metering and storage of the 
collected information. We further take into account of 
Internet of Things (IoT) [2] networking principles for the 
interconnection of the network nodes. We define the whole 
functional and technical model of the smart metering 
process, together with the algorithmic and pilot part. 
Furthermore, we design and implement mechanisms that 
support efficient data aggregation and data fusion of the 
available data from the set of the sensor nodes in the 
networking infrastructure. We design techniques for 
information 
acquisition, 
learning 
and 
managing 
the 
associated knowledge to support the aforementioned 
functionalities, interlinking of collected data with other data 
sources available in the Linked Open Data cloud [3], and 
analyze the best data fusion techniques according to the 
requirements of the project and taking into account Complex 
Event Processing [4] solutions to correlate data coming from 
different data streams in different formats. In ENTROPY 
project, we take advantage of and leverage the tools for 
different functionalities of the FIWARE platform [5]. 
Sensor deployment in selected use cases of the HES-SO 
Technopole site is presented in Fig. 1 for the Institute of 
Information Systems (IIG) and in Fig. 2 for the restaurant 
MIKADO, respectively. The figures show the layouts of the 
two use cases and the specific positions of the installed 
sensors. Concretely, Fig. 1 shows the layout of the IIG and 
the position of installed sensors in the different rooms of the 
IIG (SAP, DUDE, YANN-OFFICE, POLARIS, Cyberlearn). 
Fig. 2 shows the layout of MIKADO with its different areas 
(main and secondary dining room, and kitchen) and the 
sensors currently installed there. 
The sensor networking infrastructure in the HES-SO pilot 
is shown in Fig. 3. The ENTROPY pilot subnetwork 
infrastructure is centralized in the Access Point Dude-lab. 
The internal sensors are connected via Ethernet, Wi-Fi and 
863.3 MHz radio wave. These different technologies give us 
a better flexibility on the sensors’ placement. The Access 
Point then routes the connection towards the context broker 
server. Sensors outside of the network reach, such as the 
sensors of MIKADO, connect directly to the context broker 
server. After the data are collected, information is 
transmitted to the ENTROPY main server outside of our 
pilot infrastructure. 
A minimum of 47 heterogeneous smart sensors and 
devices are interconnected. The devices and sensors consist 
of person counters, air thermometers, electric counters, 
energy meters, luminosity sensors, control valves, windows 
and door switches, CO2 detectors. Further, local weather 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

information and weather forecast is integrated into the 
system. The data aggregation and fusion takes place in 
almost real-time (adequate for the needs of the project). A 
frequency of one minute is adopted for all the data sources, 
with the exception of the weather forecast which occurs on 
an hourly basis. The data are stored in a MongoDB database 
and are available and can be queried at any time. A web 
portal [6] is also developed on which the HES-SO 
Technopole site manager is able to connect for assigning 
sensors to rooms, monitoring and visualizing data streams 
acquired, making queries and exporting data. 
III. 
DISCUSSION 
We have created a sensor networking infrastructure for 
the interconnection of heterogeneous smart sensors and 
devices, and the aggregation and fusion of data from multiple 
sources. The collected data include energy-related and  
behavior-related data. The developed architecture will 
provide the relevant and necessary data for the further 
development of energy-efficiency solutions for buildings 
with the aim to reduce the energy consumption and reduce 
the 
micro-generated 
energy 
losses. 
The 
developed 
architecture is developed for the HES-SO Technopole site 
and can be scaled and adapted to other industrial or 
residential applications. In order to achieve the aim of the 
ENTROPY project, on-going work envisages to utilize the 
deployed infrastructure which provides the data in 
conjunction with gamification techniques and serious 
gaming applications to record, and analyze the energy 
behavior of residents, and train them in order to adopt more 
energy efficient behaviors. To that end, the HES-SO pilot 
and other pilots are involved within the ENTROPY project 
and are working closely with academic and industrial 
partners. 
Figure 1. Sensor installation in the use case of the Institute of Information Systems (IIG). 
Figure 2. Sensor installation in the use case of the restaurant MIKADO. 
Figure 2.
Sensor installation in the use case of the restaurant MIKADO.
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Website of the ENTROPY project: http://entropy-project.eu/ 
2017.05.16. 
[2] C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, 
“Sensing as a service model for smart cities supported by 
internet 
of 
things,” 
Transactions 
on 
Emerging 
Telecommunications Technologies, pp. 81-93, 2014. 
[3]
V. C. Ostuni, T. Di Noia, R. Mirizzi, and E. Di Sciascio, 
“Top-N 
Recommendations 
from 
Implicit 
Feedback 
Leveraging Linked Open Data,” IIR, pp. 20-27, 2014.
 
 
[4] D. C. Luckham, “Event Processing for Business: Organizing 
the Real-Time Enterprise,”. Hoboken, New Jersey: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2012, ISBN 978-0-470-53485-4. 
[5] Website of FIWARE: https://www.fiware.org/ 2017.05.16. 
[6] Web portal of the ENTROPY project: 
 http://entropy.euprojects.net/ 2017.05.16. 
Figure 3. Sensor networking infrastructure in the HES-SO pilot. 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

