Multicriteria QoS-aware Solution in Wireless Multi-hop Networks
Jean Nunes R. Araujo
Graduate Program in Electrical Engineering
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
Email: jeannra@ufmg.br
Claudio de Castro Monteiro
Federal Institute of Education, Science
and Technology of Tocantins
Network Computer Group - GREDES
Email: ccm@ifto.edu.br
Lucas de Souza Batista
Operations Research and
Complex Systems Laboratory
Department of Electrical Engineering
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Email: lusoba@ufmg.br
Abstract—Ad-hoc Wireless Networks provide a major base for
ubiquitous computing development. In such networks, the com-
munication occurs by multiple hops in a shared medium. In order
to meet the different requirements of the applications, routing
solutions aware of Quality of Service (QoS) have been developing.
However, single-criterion strategies are unable to cope with
conﬂicting objectives that commonly appear in these networks.
This work proposes a multicriteria approach that considers End-
to-End Delay (E2ED) and Packet Delivery Probability (PDP) as
vital criteria in the route discovery process. For this purpose,
Optimized Link State Routing Protocol (OLSR) with a modiﬁed
Dijkstra algorithm is applied, wherein the bi-objective problem is
transformed into a mono-objective problem through the epsilon-
constraint technique. Extensive simulations have demonstrated
that the multicriteria method can provide efﬁcient routing in
mobile environments, and it has outperformed the best results of
single-criterion methods in terms of Packet Loss Ratio (PLR) by
nearly 5 - 35 %. The results also have shown the potential of the
model in ﬁnding a proper trade-off in relation to the number of
hops and End-to-End Delay.
Keywords–Multicriteria optimization; Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks;
Quality of Service.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The spread of mobile services has boosted the advance
of wireless networks. Such growth has demanded endeavors
to provide Quality of Service (QoS) and to ensure that the
network resources are spent as fairly as possible. In fact, the
proper provision of quality enables the wireless technology to
be used when limited or no infrastructure is available [1]. In
this context, Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks (MANETs) are repre-
sentative as they have particularly worthwhile features. First,
mobile wireless devices are able to communicate each other
without relying on a ﬁxed infrastructure. Second, messages
can be exchanged collaboratively provided that devices are
able to operate as both router and host. Third, the varying
mobility patterns and the low deployment cost are factors that
can promote the emergence of new applications [2].
Among several relevant problems in MANETs, routing
issue is one of the most challenging. In recent years, efforts
have been directed at proposing new or reformed protocols to
address varied scenarios, from mesh networks to underwater
networks [1]. Up to now, there is no routing protocol that
provides a proper performance in any scenario [3].
Furthermore, applications can have conﬂicting quality re-
quirements, which indicates the need to optimize opposing
objectives. For example, elastic applications, as ﬁle transfer
programs, demand reliable and stable links. On the other hand,
real-time applications, as voice over IP, are extremely sensitive
to delay. As a glimpse, regarding the elastic applications, it
would make sense to minimize the Packet Loss Ratio (PLR),
while for real-time applications, it would be ﬁtting to minimize
the End-to-End Delay (E2ED) [3][4]. Future standardized
routing mechanisms will possibly follow the trend towards
more ﬂexible support to the multiple QoS requirements [3].
Hence, it becomes vital to take into account the performance
trade-offs in the route discovery process [5][6][7][8].
The aim of this paper is twofold. First, the need to take
decisions bearing in mind multiple criteria in ad-hoc networks
is demonstrated. For that, two traditional QoS-aware metrics
were considered, wherein one is applied to minimize E2ED
and the other one is utilized to maximize the reliability of
packet delivery. Second, in order to arrange both metrics in
the route discovery process, the employment of the well-known
scalar epsilon-constraint method [9][10][11] is proposed. The
idea is to turn one of the metrics into a constraint in the
optimization model. As such, the route discovery problem
was modeled as a Constrained Shortest Path Problem (CSPP)
[12]. A modiﬁed Dijkstra’s algorithm was used as the solver.
The routing protocol utilized was the OLSR [13]. In addition,
the selection process of the MultiPoint Relays (MPR) was
adjusted in order to consider both metrics. The hypothesis is
that the multicriteria approach can achieve better results when
recognizing the trade-off between E2ED and PLR.
The proposal was compared to single-criterion solutions
in a Wireless Multi-hop Network with different node speeds
via OMNET++ simulator. Summarily, our solution has reached
consistent reductions in PLR. Moreover, when comparing to
the single-criterion Minimum Packet Loss (MPL) metric, our
solution has obtained routes with a lower average number
of hops, which also has promoted a decrease in E2ED.
Accordingly, our proposal improves the link reliability, without
generating prohibitive delays.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II presents the related works and the motivation.
Section III introduces the multicriteria optimization problem
and presents the suggested mathematical model. Section IV
provides the simulation parameters and investigates the results
by comparing the single-criterion OLSR implementation with
the multicriteria one. Section VI shows the conclusions and
future works.
II.
RELATED WORK AND MOTIVATION
A MANET network is composed of self-organized and
self-manageable devices distributed in a given area [1]. In
addition, messages can be transmitted by multiple hops, that
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

is, the nodes provide support to the network, playing the role
of relays. Therefore, whenever nodes want to “talk” each
other, routes must be established. Routing protocols are in
charge of deﬁning rules and procedures to provide such routes
[2]. However, because of shared medium, interferences and
mobility, links can be constantly broken and frequently rebuilt.
Due to these instabilities, typical from a wireless environment,
it has been a challenge to make feasible the use of applications
which are sensitive to high delay, limited bandwidth, and
recurrent packet losses [3]. In order to address these issues and,
furthermore, meeting the requirements of new applications and
kinds of MANET networks, QoS-aware routing solutions have
emerged [4].
Table I shows distinct quality requirements related to the
main applications that can be made available in a network.
Indeed, forthcoming MANETs will have to deal with a par-
ticular set of constraints in view of the current exigencies of
performance. Therefore, providing QoS guarantees for differ-
ent services is essential to the development and deployment of
future wireless multi-hop networks [4][14].
TABLE I. QOS REQUIREMENTS OF MAIN APPLICATIONS.
ADAPTED FROM [14]
Applications
Bandwidth Sensibility to Delay
Packet Delivery Ratio
Elastic (FTP, Email)
Low
Low
High
Voice over IP
Low
High
Medium
Videoconference
High
High
Medium
Streaming audio
Low
Medium
Medium
Streaming VoD
High
Medium
Medium
Standardized protocols, such as OLSR (Optimized Link
State Routing) and AODV (Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vec-
tor), do not resort to any QoS parameter when building the
routes. Both work with an elementary hop-count metric. While
OLSR uses hop-count to evaluate the shortest path [13], AODV
veriﬁes hop-count to update routing table entries [15]. Given
the need, there is a move in the direction of proposing new
and reformed protocols that are QoS-aware [2][4].
Nevertheless, just including a single QoS metric in the
routing protocol is not enough to offer solutions that cover
each scenario, precisely because the QoS provision changes ac-
cording to the application or the network status. Furthermore,
one application may need the guarantee of several metrics
simultaneously. If these metrics are conﬂicting, it is necessary
to yield solutions that reach a trade-off between them [3].
The authors in [16] identify a diversity of possible re-
quirements to be addressed in a MANET, such as: minimiz-
ing hop-count, minimizing delay, maximizing data delivery,
minimizing energy consumption, minimizing computational
overhead, maximizing route stability, balancing trafﬁc load,
among others. The work also relates these requirements to
the main link evaluation metrics and points out the associ-
ated performance trade-offs. In [17], the authors advance in
the analysis by demonstrating the conﬂicting performances
between some QoS-aware metrics as: Minimum Delay (MD)
and Minimum Packet Loss (MPL). However, in both works,
multiple metrics are not employed.
The reason of satisfying conﬂicting requirements has been
deeply studied in ﬁelds as decision theory and operations
research. The goal is to make effective decisions by pondering
the criteria through an optimization process [11]. Recently,
multicriteria optimization on ad-hoc networks has been draw-
ing attention as a tool to design routing protocols that deal with
more than one QoS parameter. Although it is still an open-
ﬁeld, multicriteria optimization can be a valuable alternative
in search for robust and adaptive solutions that ﬁt in distinct
scenarios [4].
In spite of the diverse multicriteria optimization techniques
available, varying from sophisticated evolutionary algorithms
to outranking methods, the applicability in ad-hoc networks
is restricted to simple approaches [11]. Indeed, since mobile
devices have limited processing and power resources, the
method needs to run as fast as possible [9].
Considering an opportunistic route discovery process in
Mobile Ad-hoc Networks, the authors in [18] propose to incor-
porate some context criteria, such as signal quality, geographic
progress, and node residual energy, when evaluating the link
quality. A weight is assigned to each criterion, composing the
measure called Dynamic Forwarding Delay (DFD). In [19],
the weighted sum method is used in order to minimize the
delay and maximize the throughput in Static Wireless Mesh
Networks.
The research presented in [5] proposes, for proactive rout-
ing in MANETs, a composite-additive utility function that
employs normalized weights for two metrics: delay and energy.
Likewise, in [6] is introduced a solution driven by battery and
queue metrics, taking a normalized weighted additive utility
function as QoS metric. Both solutions utilize OLSR as the
base protocol.
In [7], two metrics for route selection in Multi-hop Wire-
less Ad-hoc Networks are derived, namely, Secrecy Outage
Probability (SOP) and Connection Outage Probability (COP).
The former is concerned with to meet security requirements
and the latter seeks to address the different QoS requirements.
The route selection algorithm uses a control parameter β to
adjust the weights in terms of priority of each metric.
The authors in [8] investigate the trade-off between energy
consumption and end-to-end delay when selecting clusterheads
in Wireless Sensor Networks. The choice of clusterhead is
made by means of a weighted metric where the weights α and
β indicate the importance of energy consumption and end-to-
end delay, respectively. In addition, a Depth-First Search (DFS)
algorithm is proposed to calculate the number of probable
routes from clusterhead nodes to the sink node considering
an end-to-end delay constraint ∆.
As one can see, the weighted sum method is the most
used approach for dealing with more than one criteria in the
optimization process related to Wireless Multi-hop Ad-hoc
Networks. Although it is easy to implement, this method has
some drawbacks. First, ﬁne-tuning of weights is by itself an
optimization problem that implies generating and evaluating
several weight distributions in order to model each scenario.
It means that when one does not have a priori preferences, an
excessive computational processing can be required to obtain a
representative weights distribution [9][11]. Second, distributed
uniformly weights do not ensure a uniform distribution of
points on the Pareto front. Third, these methods are unable
to reach points in non-convex regions of the Pareto front [3].
In [20] is proposed a hybrid routing algorithm which
combines Cellular Automata (CA) with Genetic Algorithm
(GA) in Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks, wherein energy and delay
are considered restrictions in the model rather than metrics to
be weighted. Although the deployment of metaheuristics for
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 1. Multicriteria ad-hoc wireless network
solving the MANET routing problem has gained remarkable
relevance in the last years [21][22], its viability is still unclear
when applying in very dynamic environments. That is because
such stochastic methods can spend much time to reach a
satisfactory solution since the optimization process depends
on an iterative search which involves repeated execution of the
algorithm [3]. Hence, research works have given preference to
scalar techniques.
This paper develops a mathematical model that applies the
epsilon-constraint scalar technique in order to minimize the
E2ED, transforming the PDP into a link constraint. This
strategy, besides being able to reach non-convex regions of
the Pareto front, can generate points in speciﬁc regions that
meet the demand of underlying network [9][10][11]. That is,
when we have a reasonable clarity about the level of quality
to be reached regarding a given metric, this technique can
be more effective in achieving such point. Even though the
model foresees more than two metrics, one can work with
a single metric as the objective function and the remaining
ones as restrictions. However, these constraints need to be
deﬁned accurately, otherwise, there is the risk of rendering
the model unfeasible. In fact, when this is uncertain, ﬁnding
proper constraint for one metric can be as difﬁcult as to ﬁnd
well-suited weights for several path selection metrics. In this
case, one can resort to the underlying layers to deﬁne such
constraints [3], as summarized in Table I.
Apart from demonstrating the associated trade-off between
the two QoS-aware metrics, our proposal presents a feasible
alternative to achieve a better compromise related to conﬂicting
metrics in a mobile network.
III.
QOS MULTICRITERIA SUPPORT IN MANETS WITH
THE EPSILON-CONSTRAINT METHOD
In this section, the mathematical formulation and the
description of the proposed multicriteria routing optimization
method are presented.
A. Mathematical modeling
An Ad-hoc Wireless Network can be deﬁned as a directed
graph G(V, E), where the vertices V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} de-
scribe a ﬁnite set of nodes, and the edges E = {e1, e2, . . . , em}
yield a ﬁnite set of links that connect these nodes. A node sub-
set N(vi) ⊂ V is established within the coverage area of each
node vi, producing a neighborhood that draws the network
topology. In transmission context, there is also a destination
node DN ⊂ V and a source node SN ⊂ V . Each link ek,
k = [1, . . . , m], has an associated cost of packet transmission
wek from vi to vj. If necessary, a subset F of relay nodes
are elected from the neighborhood based on the cost, in order
to build a route RSN,DN = (SN, F1, . . . , Fn, DN) ⊂ V that
connects SN to DN. Figure 1 can be considered a handy
and simple example of a Wireless Multi-hop Ad-hoc Network
drawn by means of the OLSR protocol.
In this paper, the cost is not composed of only one value.
Thereby, as a multiobjective problem, it must be represented by
a vector f : Bm → Rk, wherein each item denotes a function to
be optimized. In general, a minimization problem with multiple
objectives can be deﬁned as
min
x
[f1(x), f2(x), ...., fk(x)]
s.t.
x ∈ S,
(1)
where k is the number of objectives, S is the feasible decision
space, x is the decision variable vector, and fi(x) describes
the scalar value of the i-th objective. A decision vector ˆx ∈ S
belongs to the Pareto-optimal set if there is no other decision
vector x ∈ S such that fi(x) ≤ fi(ˆx), for all i; and fi(x) ̸=
fi(ˆx) for at least one i = {1, . . . , k} [11].
As can be seen in Figure 1, two criteria are pondered
to optimize the path considering the following objectives: I)
minimize the E2ED and, II) maximize the reliability of packet
delivery. The latter can be seen as: minimize the PLR. Thus,
link QoS is represented by a vector f containing two metrics:
Link Delay (LD) and Packet Delivery Probability (PDP). The
objective functions are given as follow:
f1 = fE2ED =
X
(vi,vj)∈E
LD(i,j) × xi,j
f2 = fP DP =
Y
(vi,vj)∈E
PDP(i,j) × xi,j
(2)
The decision variable xi,j is 1 when the node j ∈ N(vi)
belongs to the route. Otherwise, xi,j is 0. The Link Delay
measurement is estimated using the AdHoc Probe algorithm
[23]. This algorithm uses a pair of packets to measure the
dispersion between them. Thus, in a route from SN to DN,
having D as the relay node, fE2ED is given by:
E2ED(SN→DN) = LD(SN→D) + LD(D→DN)
(3)
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Details of calculating the LD metric can be found in
[17][23][24]. In Figure 1, if only LD was employed in the
optimization, the route 2 (SN → DN) would be chosen, in
spite of lower PDP.
The second function aims to maximize reliability in packet
delivery and, consequently, reducing the PLR. This function is
given below
PDPAB = df × dr
(4)
where df and dr are the forward and the reverse delivery ratios,
respectively. The product between them is the probability of
successful transmission from A to B. In a route from SN
to DN, having D as relay node, the end-to-end fP DP is the
product of probabilities related to each link, as follow:
PDP(SN→DN) = PDP(SN→D) × PDP(D→DN)
(5)
In a time window w, each node computes the delivery ratio
by dividing the number of OLSR HELLO messages that should
have been received by the number of OLSR HELLO messages
actually received. Every t seconds, HELLO packets are sent.
Delivery ratio of 100% means all messages were fully received
in period w. More details of calculating the PDP metric can
be found in [17][23][25]. In Figure 1, if only PDP metric
was employed, the route 1 (SN → A → B → DN) would
be chosen, in spite of the larger E2ED and number of hops.
Our proposal aims to minimize E2ED and maintain the
PDP of link equal or above an acceptable threshold. This
threshold will depend on the application requirements or even
network current condition. For this purpose, the bi-objective
problem was modeled as a mono-objective problem applying
the epsilon-constraint method, where the PDP of link was
turned in a constraint into [9]. Therefore, the routes are created
based on a Constrained Shortest Path Problem model (CSPP).
Herein, instead of treating the PDP as an end-to-end metric,
it is evaluated locally along the route. The model is proposed
as follow,
minimize fE2ED =
X
(vi,vj)∈E
LD(i,j) × xi,j
s.t.
PDP(i,k) × xi,k > ϵb, k ∈ N(vi),
X
(vi,vj)∈E
xi,j −
X
(vj,vi)∈E
xj,i = 0, ∀vi ∈ V \{SN, DN},
X
(SN,vj)
xSN,j = 1,
X
(vj,DN)
xj,DN = 1,
xi,j ∈ {0, 1}, ∀(vi, vj) ∈ E
where ϵb is the minimum PDP that a link must guarantee to
be part of the route. Thus, ϵb represents the link reliability,
whose value can be deﬁned a priori or it can be changed
iteratively during network operation. The former option is
employed in this paper, while the latter is an improvement
that relies on probabilistic models, which will be studied in
future researches.
Figure 2. MPRs selection with reliability constraint
The remaining constraints ensure ﬂow conservation and
establish that the ﬁrst node will be the source (SN) and the last
node will be the destination (DN). Finally, decision variables
must have binary values, which describes whether or not a link
belongs to the route.
In Figure 1, if ϵb = 0.6 (60%), the route 3 (SN → D →
DN) would be chosen since it presents the lowest delay among
routes that do not violate the PDP constraint. If ϵb = 0.7
(70%), the route 4 (SN → C → D → DN) would be created.
Note that these promising solutions would be lost in the case
of a single-criterion optimization problem.
As a step towards bi-objective optimization in routing,
a modiﬁed Dijkstra’s algorithm was employed to solve the
CSPP model. The goal is to ﬁnd lower delay paths while
simultaneously bounding the PDP of link for a lower limit.
In short, after comparing the cumulative delay in deciding
between paths, as in common Dijkstra’s algorithm, the PDP
of link is compared to the ϵ constraint. If the PDP is lower
than ϵ, this path is pruned off.
Furthermore, a change in the OLSR protocol was proposed
to bear the desired minimum reliability constraint when build-
ing the Multipoint Relay (MPR) set of a node. When there
are more than one 1-hop neighbors covering the same number
of uncovered 2-hop neighbors, the one with the lowest link
delay and that does not violate the reliability constraint ϵ to
the current node is selected as MPR. Figure 2 illustrates such
procedure. Let us consider ϵ equal to 0.7. Note that the node
M2 has the lowest delay (0.009s), however, the PDP (0.61)
violates the constraint ϵ. Since both M1 and M3 do not violate
ϵ, the one with the lowest delay is selected to be part of the
MPR set.
IV.
SIMULATION RESULTS
Extensive simulations were conducted in OMNET++ 5.0
simulation tool. A sample size of 10 topologies was deﬁned
for each method in order to obtain a conﬁdence level of 95%.
The comparison between the methods was performed using
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) test and Honestly Signiﬁcant
Difference (HSD) test [26]. All the assumptions required to
carry out the ANOVA test were analyzed and the results are
provided in a support information ﬁle [27].
A. Experimental design
The physical layer is implemented using the log-distance
path loss model, where the path loss Pl = Pt − Pr in dB
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

over a distance d is simply deﬁned Pl = 10log(c/4πf)2 +
10log(1/dλ), where c is the speed of light, f is the carrier
frequency of 802.11g (2.4 GHz), d is the distance between
the transmitter and receiver and λ = 2 is the path loss
exponent. The interference is modeled using the SNIR (Signal-
to-interference-plus-noise ratio), where the power of other
transmissions is considered as interference for the signal
power. There is a MAC protocol which deals with the media
contention and ensures that, among the neighbors, only the
addressed receiver will retain the message, while the other
neighbors will discard it. Table II summarizes the remaining
parameters.
TABLE II. SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Conﬁguration
Simulation area
1500 m x 300 m
Simulation duration
500 seconds
Trafﬁc ﬂow
Constant bit rate with UDP transport
Number of ﬂows
10 IP unidirectional ﬂows
Connection rate
5 packets/s
Packet size
1000 bytes
Number of nodes
50 nodes
Mobility pattern
Random Waypoint Mobility
Moving speeds
2, 5 and 10 mps
Pause time between node movements
10 seconds
In addition to the static scenario, moving speeds of 2, 5,
and 10 mps were tried. All the hosts communicate on the same
shared wireless channel and each node has a unique identiﬁer
with at least one transmitter and one receiver. It is assumed
that the effective transmission distance between every node is
equal. Nodes are neighbors when they are in the transmission
range of one another. The OLSR protocol is in charge of
discovering neighborhood. The ﬁxed speciﬁc parameters for
OLSR include: HELLO message interval of 2 seconds, TC
message interval of 5 seconds and time window for PDP
calculation of 20 seconds.
The Mobile Ad-hoc Network has 50 mobile wireless
devices distributed in a given geographic region with two-
dimensional (2D). Routing performances are measured in
terms of PLR, average E2ED, average number of hops, and
Packet Error Ratio (PER).
B. Trade-off analysis
At the beginning, the associated trade-off between E2ED
and PLR was evaluated. The method that applies the LD met-
ric is called Minimum Delay (MD) [24]. Herein, the method
that applies the PDP metric is called Minimum Packet Loss
Figure 3. Packet Loss Ratio and End-to-End Delay trade-off
(MPL) [25]. In an independent batch of 10 simulations of each
method conﬁgured according to Table II, a straightforward
compromise between the quality measures in all mobility
scenarios was identiﬁed. Figure 3 highlights the non-dominated
points.
The MD generates straighter routes, which minimizes the
E2ED. However, packet drops can overly enlarge due to the
increased probability of choosing slower links. On the other
hand, the MPL generates routes with more hops, regardless of
the latency. That decreases the PLR but provokes larger E2ED.
As can be seen in Figure 3, the trade-off is sharp. Furthermore,
as mobility increases, this compromise narrows.
C. Comparison of multicriteria and single-criterion methods
Our method is labeled of EC (Epsilon-constraint) plus
the corresponding minimum PDP constraint. Thereby, four
settings were simulated according to such constraints: ϵb =
(50%, 60%, 70%, 80%).
1) Minimum Delay (MD): MD remarkably achieves less
E2ED than MPL and ECs methods, which is depicted in Figure
4. In fact, the source node usually sends packets directly
to the destination node, if they are in the range area from
one another. Figure 6 indicates such reality when displaying
the average number of hops equal to 1 for all the node
speed set. MD measures the one-way delay through ad-hoc
probe packets. Thus, paths with less Round Trip Time (RTT)
are selected. On the one hand, this reduces the latency in
transmission, but on the other hand, increases the probability of
handling poor quality links. Figures 4a. and 4b. show that the
reduced mobility favors the stability of E2ED. Figures 4c. and
Figure 4. End-to-End Delay to such mobility scenarios:
a) static, b) 2mps, c) 5mps, and d) 10mps.
Figure 5. Packet Loss Ratio to such mobility scenarios:
a) static, b) 2mps, c) 5mps, and d) 10mps.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 6. Average number of hops
4d. present larger variations, precisely because of additional
mobility.
Figure 5 shows that PLR always has values above 50%
in all mobility scenarios. Such poor performance can be
justiﬁed by the distance between nodes of the route, which
promotes the formation of slow and direct links. As nodes
speed increases, drops are even more constant, since the source
and destination are distancing and approaching speedily, which
generates nonstop packet loss due to disconnections, collisions,
and interferences.
If a delay-sensitive trafﬁc is being transmitted, delay-aware
routing protocols can be useful. However, in the simulated
scenarios, E2ED as a single criterion does not reach a proper
trade-off, as the small delay is followed by excessive loss rate.
2) Minimum Packet Loss: MPL selects paths with less
PLR, i.e., those routes with high successful delivery are
preferred, even though it means longer paths, as shown in
Figure 6. Meanwhile, Figure 4 displays that longer routes
augment the E2ED compared to MD. In terms of PLR, Figure
5 reveals that MPL overcomes MD in all mobility scenarios,
having mean values below 50%. The high loss rate identiﬁed
in Figures 5a. and 5b. is due to the fact that in a dense
environment, MPL selects closer nodes, which implies routes
with an additional number of hops, as shown in Figure 6.
This fact naturally contributes to a higher incidence of packet
drops and interferences in the shared medium. Interestingly,
more mobility may shorten the length of path, since a given
relay node can be moving closer to the destination. Note that,
in Figures 5c. and 5d., there was some reduction in drops.
Reliability-aware routing protocols are well-suited to pro-
vide QoS when the application is delay-tolerant, but requires
high delivery rate. Likewise, they may also be feasible for
multimedia applications as long as the delay requirements are
met.
3) Epsilon-Constraints: As shown in Figure 1, in terms
of PLR, the EC multicriteria methods get better results than
single-criterion methods. This is because our model seeks
to minimize the E2ED as long as the PDP requirement is
satisﬁed. Such result is corroborated by the constant average
number of hops displayed in Figure 6. The variability in Figure
5a. (static scenario) is because of ﬁxed density, which leads
to a high need for contention. In Figure 5d., ECs and MPL
obtained equivalent results. Actually, the high mobility impacts
on the efﬁciency of the Dijkstra’s algorithm when dealing with
the imposed constraint. Upon constant and strong mobility,
it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd links that do not violate the reliability
requirement. This condition further generates an increase in the
E2ED, as displayed in Figure 4d. In addition, it is relevant to
record that the OLSR protocol is not suitable for highly mobile
networks due to its proactive characteristic. In this context, the
routes become outdated quickly and the protocol is not able
to rebuild them timely.
In Figure 4, although not achieving the best latency results,
the multicriteria method can be suited to multimedia trafﬁc,
since there was a signiﬁcant decrease in the PLR and the
E2ED remained at a reasonable threshold. In summary, as
speed increases, the delay also increases. However, the PLR
remains stable.
Looking at the underlying layer, the errors caused by
collisions and interferences were analyzed. Packet Error Rate
(PER) is the number of incorrectly received data packets
divided by the total number of packets received. A packet
is declared incorrect if at least one bit is corrupted. Figure
7 demonstrates that delay-aware methods (MD and ECs) have
higher estimated PER. This is due to some factors. In general,
the delay calculation is made through the ad-hoc probes, which
increases the overhead, causing more collisions. In MPL, this
addition of packets is not necessary since, as aforementioned,
the metric calculation is done using short HELLO messages.
Speciﬁcally, MD obtains routes with few hops, generating less
reliable connections, whereas EC methods obtain routes with
more hops than MD, generating additional need of contention,
which adds errors by interferences and collisions. In short, it
is possible to correlate the number of hops to the PER. Mostly,
the PER values of the EC methods are slightly larger compared
to the MD because of the additional hops. This condition is
also evident for the MPL, since, inasmuch as the number of
hops decreases, the PER also decreases.
In terms of PLR compared to the best result of single-
criterion methods, our multicriteria model obtained, in each
scenario, better results of about: 34% in static, 28% in 2mps,
18% in 5mps, and 6% in 10mps. Such results show that
multicriteria optimization in ad-hoc networks can be a valuable
strategy since it encourages the design of intelligent, adaptive
and robust protocols that ﬁt into the dynamic nature of
MANETs.
Figure 7. Average Packet Error Rate
V.
CONCLUSION
Routing plays a key role in the development and spread
of mobile ad-hoc networking. The multi-hop wireless network
technology has gained commercial attention and new appli-
cations have emerged. However, in this context, there exists
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

a crescent demand by QoS levels that are compatible with
these new applications. As MANETs are dynamic networks,
such expectations are difﬁcult to achieve. Now, it is not only
necessary to provide properly and timely routes, but also
manage the scarce resources available. That means conﬂicting
requirements can be found when trying to satisfy such de-
mands, which implies in need to ﬁnd a trade-off solution. The
compromise between delay and reliability exempliﬁes such
challenge.
This work has demonstrated such a trade-off through two
link quality metrics. While MD metric seeks to minimize the
E2ED, MPL metric aims to maximize the reliability of packet
delivery. The introductory contribution of this paper was to
present a multicriteria mathematical model that copes with
both metrics in route optimization process. From our results,
it was concluded that by dealing with the reliability metric as
a constraint, an expressive decrease in PLR can be achieved.
Besides, a handy trade-off can be earned.
In future works, new criteria that consider node residual
energy and link stability will be added. Other mobility models,
such as Gauss-markov, and different network density will
be applied as well. Moreover, it is intended to compare the
proposal to the weighted sum and existing works that take into
account more than one QoS metric. The main target is to create
a ﬂexible and robust model where QoS constraints can be
dynamically adapted to the network conditions and the type of
application, for example. For this purpose, probabilistic models
should be proposed and implemented in an optimization and
decision-making support module that can be used by different
routing protocols. Another relevant challenge is to eliminate
or at least reduce the need for probes to compute the delay.
Time series forecasting methods can be tested, therefore.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Brazilian agencies
CAPES (PROEX), CNPq and FAPEMIG for the ﬁnancial
support.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Loo, J. L. Mauri, and J. H. Ortiz, Mobile ad hoc networks: current
status and future trends.
CRC Press, 2016.
[2]
N. Chakchouk, “A survey on opportunistic routing in wireless commu-
nication networks,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17,
no. 4, 2015, pp. 2214–2241.
[3]
B. B. Jauregui and F. L. Malaina, “New approaches to mobile ad hoc
network routing: application of intelligent optimization techniques to
multicriteria routing,” Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: Current Status and
Future Trends, 2016, pp. 171–200.
[4]
L. Khoukhi, A. El Masri, and D. Gaiti, “Quality-of-service state
information-based solutions in wireless mobile ad hoc networks: A
survey and a proposal,” Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: Current Status and
Future Trends, 2016, p. 279.
[5]
Z. Guo, S. Malakooti, S. Sheikh, C. Al-Najjar, and B. Malakooti,
“Multi-objective OLSR for proactive routing in MANET with delay,
energy, and link lifetime predictions,” Applied Mathematical Modelling,
vol. 35, no. 3, 2011, pp. 1413–1426.
[6]
W. A. Jabbar, M. Ismail, and R. Nordin, “Multi-criteria based multipath
OLSR for battery and queue-aware routing in multi-hop ad hoc wireless
networks,” Wireless Networks, vol. 21, no. 4, 2015, pp. 1309–1326.
[7]
Y. Xu, J. Liu, Y. Shen, X. Jiang, and T. Taleb, “Security/QoS-aware
route selection in multi-hop wireless ad hoc networks,” in Communi-
cations (ICC), 2016 IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2016,
pp. 1–6.
[8]
T.-T. Huynh, A.-V. Dinh-Duc, and C.-H. Tran, “Delay-constrained
energy-efﬁcient cluster-based multi-hop routing in wireless sensor net-
works,” Journal of Communications and Networks, vol. 18, no. 4, 2016,
pp. 580–588.
[9]
A. L. Jaimes, S. Z. Martınez, and C. A. C. Coello, “An introduction
to multiobjective optimization techniques,” Optimization in Polymer
Processing, 2009, pp. 29–57.
[10]
M. Emmerich and A. Deutz, “Multicriteria optimization and decision
making,” LIACS. Leiden university, NL, 2006.
[11]
Y. Collette and P. Siarry, Multiobjective optimization: principles and
case studies.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
[12]
M. Ziegelmann, Constrained Shortest Paths and Related Problems-
Constrained Network Optimization.
VDM Verlag, 2007.
[13]
T. Clausen and P. Jacquet, “Optimized link state routing protocol
(OLSR),” Tech. Rep., 2003.
[14]
J. F. Kurose and K. W. Ross, Computer networking: a top-down
approach.
Pearson, 2013, vol. 6.
[15]
C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, “Ad hoc on-demand distance
vector (AODV) routing,” Tech. Rep., 2003.
[16]
N. Javaid, M. Ullah, and K. Djouani, “Identifying design requirements
for wireless routing link metrics,” in Global Telecommunications Con-
ference (GLOBECOM 2011), 2011 IEEE.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–5.
[17]
N. Javaid et al., “Investigating quality routing link metrics in wire-
less multi-hop networks,” annals of telecommunications-annales des
t´el´ecommunications, vol. 69, no. 3-4, 2014, pp. 209–217.
[18]
Z. Zhao, D. Ros´ario, T. Braun, and E. Cerqueira, “Context-aware
opportunistic routing in mobile ad-hoc networks incorporating node
mobility,” in 2014 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 2138–2143.
[19]
N. A. Alwan, “Performance analysis of Dijkstra-based weighted sum
minimization routing algorithm for wireless mesh networks,” Modelling
and Simulation in Engineering, vol. 2014, 2014, p. 32.
[20]
M. Ahmadi, M. Shojafar, A. Khademzadeh, K. Badie, and R. Tavoli,
“A hybrid algorithm for preserving energy and delay routing in mobile
ad-hoc networks,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 85, no. 4,
2015, pp. 2485–2505.
[21]
Y.-S. Yen, H.-C. Chao, R.-S. Chang, and A. Vasilakos, “Flooding-
limited and multi-constrained QoS multicast routing based on the ge-
netic algorithm for MANETs,” Mathematical and Computer Modelling,
vol. 53, no. 11, 2011, pp. 2238–2250.
[22]
B. Nancharaiah and B. C. Mohan, “The performance of a hybrid
routing intelligent algorithm in a mobile ad hoc network,” Computers
& Electrical Engineering, vol. 40, no. 4, 2014, pp. 1255–1264.
[23]
L. Shi, A. Fapojuwo, N. Viberg, W. Hoople, and N. Chan, “Methods
for calculating bandwidth, delay, and packet loss metrics in multi-hop
IEEE802.11 ad hoc networks,” in Vehicular Technology Conference,
2008. VTC Spring 2008. IEEE.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 103–107.
[24]
W. Cordeiro, E. Aguiar, W. M. Junior, A. Abelem, and M. Stanton,
“Providing quality of service for mesh networks using link delay
measurements,” in Computer Communications and Networks, 2007.
ICCCN 2007. Proceedings of 16th International Conference on. IEEE,
2007, pp. 991–996.
[25]
D. Passos, D. V. Teixeira, D. C. Muchaluat-Saade, L. C. S. Magalh˜aes,
and C. Albuquerque, “Mesh network performance measurements,” in
International Information and Telecommunicatios Technologies Sym-
posium (I2TS), 2006, pp. 48–55.
[26]
D. C. Montgomery, Design and analysis of experiments.
John Wiley
& Sons, 2008.
[27]
J. Araujo. Design and analysis of experiments: Multicriteria QoS-aware
solution in wireless multi-hop networks. [retrieved: 06, 2017]. [Online].
Available:
http://rpubs.com/jeannra/dae-anova-multicriteria-qos-aware
(2017)
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

