Exploiting Movement synchronization to Increase End-to-end file Sharing efficiency 
for Delay Sensitive Streams in Vehicular P2P Devices  
 
Constandinos X. Mavromoustakis 
Department of Computer Science, 
University of Nicosia 
46 Makedonitissas Avenue, P.O.Box 24005 
1700 Nicosia, Cyprus 
mavromoustakis.c@unic.ac.cy 
 
 
Abstract—A significant aspect of wireless systems is the 
intermittent-connectivity experienced by nodes, where sudden 
network partitioning problems rarely allow a connected path 
between a source node and its destination. Replication of any 
requested object and redundancy face the requests’ failures 
whereas they create severe duplications and aggravate the 
capacity of the end-to-end path. This work quantifies the 
parameters that affect the end-to-end efficient transmission by 
taking into consideration the synchronization between moving 
peers in order to assign the requested resources in the end-to-
end path. Synchronization and assignment of the moving 
Mobile Infostation (MI) peer to a certain vehicle is done with 
the introduced Message Ferry (MF) mobile Peer in a 
unidirectional way. A resource assignment cooperation engine 
is being developed with respect to the cooperation model and 
end-to-end capacity using passive message ferries in order to 
efficiently enable delay sensitive streaming. Simulation results 
have shown that the scheme offers high throughput and 
reliability and a robust solution for sharing resources of any 
capacity in dynamically changing mobile peer-to-peer wireless 
environments.   
Keywords-synchronized 
mobility 
scheme; 
partially 
synchronized mobility scheme; file sharing scheme; end-to-end 
efficienc; evaluation through simulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The development of new applications on-the-move, 
demands the exploration of new dynamically adjusting 
approaches that enable reliability in an end-to-end manner. 
Many constraints exist in such networks like resource 
availability whereas the topological scheme followed in 
these infrastructures should be combined with the 
availability of the requested resources and the time-access 
for sharing resources of each device with the synchronized 
motion within a specified time duration t as in real time 
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication, in a cooperative 
manner. A Vehicular Ad-Hoc Network (VANET) is a 
technology that uses moving cars as devices/nodes in a 
dynamically changing network to establish a mobile network 
connectivity. In this paper a reliable file sharing scheme for 
vehicular Mobile Peer-to-Peer (MP2P) devices is proposed 
taking the advantages of moving devices within a specified 
roadmap with different pathways like in real time vehicular 
networks. This work exploits the movements of the devices 
and the passive device synchronization to increase end-to-
end file sharing efficiency through vehicular users and 
mobile Infostations [1]. Through geographical roadmaps 
landscapes where mobile Infostations are set and initialized, 
the passive synchronization enables through the replication 
policy to create a replicated object in order to enable reliable 
file sharing. Role-based Mobile Infostations (MIs) are 
selected based on their velocity, residual energy, remaining 
capacity etc and are assigned according to the passive 
Message Ferry peer. This scheme proved its scalability in 
node’s density since it does not require the knowledge of 
network at any single host. Additionally it does not require 
spatial distributions to efficiently spread information while 
enables reliability in supported mobility without the 
scheduled ‘rendezvous’, whereas it effectively passes the 
requested replicas to designated users. 
The organization of the paper is as follows: Section II 
discusses the related work that has been done on similar 
schemes which use similar approaches for establishing and 
maintaining end-to-end file sharing efficiency. Section III 
then introduces the proposed model on the wireless mobility 
with the exploitation of passive movement synchronization 
to increase end-to-end file sharing reliability and a stochastic 
measure to estimate the end-to-end capacity within the path 
where the requested replicas were created. Section IV shows 
the experimental performance evaluation of the proposed 
scheme and the comparisons done under different convergent 
parameterized conditions. Particular focus was paid on the 
impact of certain movements made by Vehicular-Peer-to-
Peer (VP2P) devices where multi-client applications 
dynamically demand resources directly from certain nodal 
vehicles. For this consideration a stochastic model is 
introduced for the end-to-end capacity measurements and the 
dynamic caching activity of the requested objects onto 
opportunistic neighboring devices.  
II. 
RECENT SCHEMES AND WORK DONE 
Mobility in autonomic communication is an essential 
parameter and along with the user’s demands they pose the 
vision of what self-behaving flexibility should encompass in 
next-generation self-tuning behavior [1]. The capacity of the 
nodes which are traversed in the requested path, can be 
reduced significantly particularly if we are dealing with 
53
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

delay sensitive traffic or bursty traffic [1] whereas the 
underlying end-to-end supporting mechanism should be 
aware of the dynamic movements in a Peer-to-Peer manner. 
Obviously, if the transmission-range of a node increases, 
then the interference it causes will increase and probably the 
number of nodes which will have copy/copies of the packets 
that should be forwarded, will increase. Toumpis and 
Goldsmith [2] define and study capacity regions for wireless 
ad hoc networks with an arbitrary number of nodes and 
topology. These regions describe the set of achievable rate 
combinations between all source-destination pairs in the 
network under various transmission strategies for EC content 
sharing and power control. In this work we consider the 
capacity but in an end-to-end path-request manner and take 
into consideration the variations caused by the dynamic 
movements 
of 
the 
devices/vehicles. 
Most 
existing 
architectures (including Grace [3], Widens [4], MobileMan 
[5]) rely on local information and local devices’ views, 
without considering the global networking context or views 
which may be very useful for wireless networks in 
optimizing load balancing, routing, energy management, and 
even some self-behaving properties like self-organization. 
This work’s contribution is that it associates the 
synchronized movements and connectivity aspects among 
vehicles as well as the connectivity resistance and 
synchronization, whereas the proposed and developed 
scheme increases the end-to-end file sharing efficiency for 
delay sensitive streams in vehicle MP2P devices. The 
scheme extends the advantages offered by the Hybrid Mobile 
Infostation System (HyMIS) architecture proposed by 
Mavromoustakis and Karatza, in [6], where the Primary 
Infostation (PI) is not static but can move according to the 
pathway(s) of the roadmaps. HyMIS adopts the basic 
concept of pure Infostation system in terms of capacity 
service node but it avoids flooding the network with 
unnecessary flow of information. This capacity node plays a 
role of control storage node as Haas and Small mention in 
[7]. Taking the advantages of the proxy caching work done 
by Liu and Xu in [8] this work proposes an exploitation of 
the mobility characteristics of each user by selecting the MI 
peer to be dynamically selected according to characteristics 
such as the residual capacity of the device based on the push-
based activities by other nodes. Heavy emphasis of this work 
has been put on push-based dissemination explored in [9] by 
Little and Agarwal, and in [10] by Lochert et al, and 
analytical 
dissemination 
through 
vehicle-to-vehicle 
propagation proposed by Wu, Fujimoto and Riley [11] as 
well as on some recent findings on practical systems as in 
[12], [13] by Lee et al, and Mahajan et al respectively, for 
pull-based diffusion activities. The scheme is proposing a 
index-based mechanism which will enable the selection of 
the MI in a cluster L. The following section explores the 
passive synchronized mobility model in the end-to-end path 
and presents an analytical model for the end-to-end capacity 
estimations.  
III. 
SYNCHRONIZED MOBILITY MODEL IN THE END-TO-
END PATH AND CAPACITY CONSIDERATIONS 
A. Communicating scheme in Vehicle-to-Vehicle 
communications 
The interactions with roadside equipment can likewise be 
characterized fairly accurately, whereas most vehicles are 
restricted in their range of motion, for example by being 
constrained to follow a paved highway. Automobile high 
speed information interexchange access would transform the 
vehicle’s on-board computer to an essential productivity tool, 
making 
virtually 
any 
web 
technology-using 
pure 
Infostations) available in the car. However a significant 
aspect of wireless systems is the sudden partitioning of the 
connectivity, namely intermittent-connectivity experienced 
by nodes, where sudden network partitioning problems 
prevent the exchange of any requested information. 
Requested object replication and replicas redundancy face 
the requests’ failures whereas they create severe duplications 
and aggravate the capacity of the end-to-end path. Figure 1 
shows the proposed VP2P push and pull procedure in a path 
using the Passive Opportunistic Synchronized Approach 
(POSA) as follows: We have enabled a HyMIS configuration 
where the primary Infostation is not static (PI) but can move 
as the pathway allows called Mobile Infostation (MI). MIs 
enable recoverability for any requested object in the end-to-
end path and it maintains the sharing reliability. As vehicles 
are moving from one direction to the other the i-th vehicle 
(MI) can pull requested resources to i-1, i-2, i-3, i-k, where k 
is the number of peer vehicle in the end-to-end path 
requesting resource Ri. Figure 1 also shows the proposed 
vehicular MP2P push and pull procedure where the i-th 
vehicle is assigned as MI and can pull requested resources to 
i-1, i-2, i-3, i-k, whereas the vehicle which the MI follows 
can then push any of these resources to the i+1, i+2, i+MIk 
vehicle (dash lines denote the push procedure which takes 
place and solid lines denote the pull procedure). Both 
procedures take place until the next and preceding MI is 
reached while i-th node is sharing resources, respectively. 
These notations can also be seen in a more clear form in the 
figure’s 2 pseudocode, which shows a single step for the 
vehicle’s MI transition.  
 
Figure 1.  
The push and pull configuration for Vehicular MP2P devices 
while moving in predetermined paths. 
54
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Set communication Path(A,B, N) 
{ 
If (MI criteria meet==TRUE) 
  Set MI in the Path(A,B, N); 
else  
   form Path(A,B, M) 
Mi
N
∀
∈
 
for  (MI=i;i<k;i++ ) 
k
i
MI
MI
∀
∉
 
pull_requestedObj(Ob_id, Cap, Peers, 
estimated_delay,reputation_degree); 
 for  (MI=j;j>k;j-- ) 
k
j
MI
MI
∀
∉
 
push_requestedObj(Ob_id, Cap, Peers, estimated_delay); 
  
} 
Figure 2.  
Pseudocode for a single round trip step for the vehicle’s MI 
transition in order to enable object replication placement scheme between 
synchronized peers.  
B. Multi-hop mobility model and user’s capacity in the 
end-to-end path 
Resources availability problems can be also faced using a 
local summary of the global system-or clustered information 
of the subsystem-by using the property –well-known in 
distributed systems, of the generically referred concept as 
aggregation by Renesse et al in [14]. MP2P systems require 
to guarantee the availability any requested resources as well 
as to enforce appropriate access control policies. In our 
application scenario we assume that a common lookup 
application is being used in order to enable nodes to 
interexchange locally the requested information objects. As a 
starting measure we estimate the synchronized cooperative 
movements of each vehicle by measuring the motion 
performed while measuring at the same time the reserved 
capacity by each vehicle. Since vehicles are moving in an 
organized and –sometimes- predictable way, the pull and 
push model aggravates the capacity of each device, as in a 
MP2P environment. Through the proposed sharing scheme 
for Vehicle-to-Vehicle communications as well as the 
additional parameters that are being considered, like the 
evaluated end-to-end relay epoch/latency, the mobility 
pattern and the time frame for the allowed promiscuous 
caching introduced in [15] by Mavromoustakis, the proposed 
model enables efficient capacity manipulation in the end-to-
end relay region and efficient data manipulation in the 
intercluster communication. 
By adopting the modified scheme of Mavromoustakis 
and Karatza [6] and enable the role of MI to be adjusted into 
the vehicular devices, the PI and MI are now implemented 
by a certain frontal vehicle and the connectivity, where only 
unidirectional sharing and connectivity occurs.  
When mobility is considered, the design of efficient 
rendezvous data dissemination protocols for enabling 
efficient manipulation and availability of resources is 
complex, and the existing solutions do not consider the 
random 
probabilistic 
movements 
of 
devices 
while 
disseminating data. In order to measure the direction 
movement we enable a probabilistic model for the direction 
of the movement of each device. Each device is associated 
with a random variable which represents the direction 
movement. For the movement this work considers a 
probabilistic Random Walk in a predefined pathway 
represented as a Graph (G) where this G enables as a random 
variable the weights of these random movement. A device 
can perform random movements according to the topological 
graph G = (V,E) where it comprises of a pair of sets V (or 
V(G)) and E (or E(G)) called vertices (or nodes) and edges 
(or arcs), respectively, where the edges join different pairs of 
vertices. This work considers a connected graph with n 
nodes labeled {1, 2, . . . , n} in a cluster 
nL with weight wij ≥ 
0 on the edge (i, j). If edge (i, j) does not exist, we set wij = 0. 
Each node moves from its current location to a new location 
by randomly (probabilistically) choosing an arbitrary 
direction and speed from a given range. Such a move is 
performed either for a constant time for a constant distance 
traveled. Then new speed and direction are chosen. In the 
probabilistic Mobility model is described as a memoryless 
mobility pattern because it retains no knowledge concerning 
its past locations and speed values. In this work a 
Probabilistic Version of the Random Walk Mobility Model 
is used as in [21] by Ibe. In this model the last step made by 
the random walk influences the next one based on the 
stationarity and the correlations between the movements. 
Under the condition that a node has moved to the right the 
probability that it continues to move in this direction is then 
higher than to stop movement. This leads to a walk that 
leaves the starting point much faster than the original random 
walk model. Given that the device/vehicle is currently at 
node i, the next node j is chosen from among the neighbors 
of i with probability: 
∑
=
k
ik
ij
L
ij
w
w
p
                                   (1) 
where in (1) above the pij is proportional to the weight of the 
edge (i, j).  
C. Cooperation model and end-to-end capacity using 
passive message ferries for delay sensitive streaming 
In order to define which requested objects should be 
outsourced onto preceding m-peers a ranking model has 
been applied as follows: To find the rank of an object a1 a2 
. . . am, one should find the number of objects preceding it. It 
can be found by the following function: 
function rank(a1, a2, . . . , am ) 
rank← 1 ; 
for i ← 1 to m do 
for each k<ai 
rank ← rank + N(a1, a2, . . . , ai−1, k) 
Then the new sequence will cache onto other nodes in the 
path the first k-requested objects where k is defined as a 
function of the remaining capacity onto each device as: 
(1
)
inf(
)
N
N
N i
k
N
ρ
=
−
=
∑
                          (1.1) 
where 
ρN
is the utilized capacity and N is the number of 
hops in the end-to-end path. Nodes in the path are moving 
according to the 2-D plane mobility model 
L ⊂ Λ
,
Λ ⊂ ℜ2
. 
A moving square (the 
,...}
,
,
{
3
2
1
Λ
Λ Λ
bounded area) is 
55
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

divided into multiple sub-squares, called cells as in [1], and 
time is divided into slots of equal duration. At each time slot 
a node is in and can be only in one cell. The initial position 
of a node is uniformly chosen from all cells. At the 
beginning of each time slot, the node jumps from its current 
cell to one of its adjacent cells with equal probability. Two 
mobile nodes can communicate with each other whenever 
they are within a distance of d, the transmission range of the 
mobile node. In order not to have an optimistic assumption 
a low density population network is assumed with regards to 
the number of traversing nodes per 
i
Λ . We assume that no 
conspiracy policy exists where nodes somehow conspire 
together not to meet each other forever and move at d>D 
and in parallel.  
The index of each node is being transferred using the 
message ferries that are passively passing from any other 
pathway within the distance of communication range of 
each device. Figure 3 shows this approach where the 
message ferries are crossing any other pathway and at the 
same time being in the distance transmission range of each 
device that they pass from.  
 
Figure 3.  
Passive message ferries where any other device can play the 
role of the messanger regarding the information index.  
Taking into account the delay characteristics, let N be the 
number of source peers in the network (N different end-to-
end paths) and Ci(t) be the service capacity of source peer i 
at time slot t. An end-to-end download can be then depicted 
as a function of time as derived from  Chiu and Young Eun 
in [16] and the 
wLij
 of the end-to-end path in the cluster L 
as: 






≥
>
=
∑
=
s
t
ij
F
C t
s
T
1
( )
0 |
min
                      (2) 
where F is the file capacity defined as {f1, f2, f3, f4, … fn } 
equi-divided file chunks and s a given end-to-end bounded 
allowed delay for this file to be downloaded from any 
numbers of peers in the end-to-end path. The obtained eq. 
(2) derived from Wald’s equation introduced by Ross in 
[17] can therefore be expressed as: 
{
} { }
T
t
C
t
C
F
L
T
t
L
Ε
= Ε


= Ε
∑
=
( )
)
(
1
          (2.1) 
where we can easily extract the slotted amount of file 
chunks that are shared in the end-to-end path. The 
(c)
A   is 
the minimum average capacity offered by each link in the 
path as: 
∑
=
N
Cij t
N
c
A
1
( ))
inf(
1
()
                       (3) 
where 
(c)
A  is the requested and available arithmetic mean 
for the capacity in the path. The average capacity offered by 
the end-to-end path considering all the links in the path of 
the requested file F, can be denoted as
{
( })
( )
t
C
A c
ij L
Ε

.the 
average download time is: 
{ }
L
w
t
C
N F
A c
F
T
ij
N
ij
c
c
Fij
∈
∀
⋅
=
=
Ε
∑
1
( )
()
           (4) 
while it stands that for 
{ }
Fij
ij
ij
T
t
C
t
C
Ε
=
( ))
min(inf(
( )
. 
Let 
,
max(
MI j )
tλ =
Θ
 be the contact rate estimation and 
,
ΘMI j
is the estimated contact time between MI and a 
moving node j, then it stands that a vehicle remains as a MI 
in the path if the following is satisfied:  
( )
ij
ij
A c
t
BW
λ ≥

 where 
ij
tλ is the contact rate in the path 
between i,j and 
ij
BW is the associated bandwidth in the path 
between i,j. The estimation of 
ij
tλ is essential since it can 
determine the time that a mobile node can remain as a MI.  
D. Considering contact interactions for collaborative 
streaming 
In this section we propose a number of social interaction 
parameters which take place in collaboration with the file 
chunk outsourcing of the previous section. The metrics are 
community-oriented and are considering the number of 
created clusters 
CN (t)
 in a specified Relay region of a 
certain transmitter–and a number of receivers (1, N] under 
the relay node pair (u,w |MIi) -as a modified definition of 
[18]- as follows the:   
,
)1
( )
(
)
(
( )
2
)
(
)
(
( )
−
⋅
=
t
I
t
I
t
h
t
C
C N
N
C
N
N
, iff 
( )
( , )
t
W
P
N
x y
u w
>
→ →
  (5) 
where W is the Community streaming factor and is defined 
as the number of existing communities in the intercluster 
communicational links at a given time instant. The 
hN (t)
is 
the number of hops in the existing clusters and the 
( ) ( )
t
I
C N
 is the number of interconnected nodes N in the 
cluster 
CN (t)
. W can be defined according to the 
download 
frequency 
of 
the 
file 
chunks 
in 
the 
intercommunity as follows: 
inactiveChunks
Total dlds t
sharingChunks
DldRate
WN t
( ) #
#
#
( )
⋅
⋅
=
                (5.1) 
where in (1.4) the download rate is considered in contrast 
56
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

with the number of chunks being shared in a specified 
instant time t.  
IV. 
PERFORMANCE  EVALUATION, EXPERIMENTAL 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC) 
 To emulate the scenario described earlier, the need of a 
possible realistic environment must be achieved. DSRC was 
used for the evaluation of the proposed scenario which is 
two-way short- to medium-range wireless communication 
channels specifically designed for automotive use and 
utilizes a corresponding set of protocols and standards [19]. 
Considered to be short to medium range communication 
technology it operates in the 5.9 GHz range. The Standards 
Committee E17.51 endorses a variation of the IEEE 802.11a 
MAC for the DSRC link. DSRC supports vehicle speed up to 
120 mph, nominal transmission rage of 300m (up to 1000 
m), and default data rate of 6 Mbps (up to 27 Mbps). This 
will enable operations related to the improvement of traffic 
flow, highway safety, and other Intelligent Transport System 
(ITS) applications in a variety of application environments 
called DSRC/WAVE (Wireless Access in a Vehicular 
Environment). In the evaluation of the proposed scheme we 
evaluated the Peer-to-Peer/Ad hoc mode (vehicle–vehicle) 
scenario and took into account the signal strength parameters 
and the minimized ping delays between the nodes in the end-
to-end path according to the
i
n
i
p
D
Min
d
∑
=
=
1
, where D is 
the delay from a node i to node j, and 
p
d is the minimized 
evaluated delay in the end-to-end available path. Moreover, 
considering the need of bandwidth for the wireless devices, it 
is necessary to apply efficient routing algorithms to create, 
maintain and repair paths, with least possible overhead 
production. The proposed scenario uses the Zone Routing 
Protocol (ZRP) [20]. The number of nodes varies depending 
on the mobility degree and the distance variations of each 
user within a connectivity scope. The user’s transition 
probability arises from a specified location where certain 
information is pending to be received by this user.  
B. Simulation results of the proposed scenario and 
discussion 
In this section, we present the results extracted after 
conducting the discrete time performance evaluation through 
simulation of the proposed scenario. The simulation used a 
two-dimensional 
network, 
consisting 
of 
100 
nodes 
dynamically changing the topology on a non-periodic basis 
(asynchronously as real time mobile users do). For each 
node, it stands that after random time each node moves at a 
random walk to one of the possible destinations (north, east, 
west, south) in an organized vehicular way. Each link 
(frequency channel) has max speed reaching 10Mb per sec. 
The propagation path loss is the two-ray model without 
fading. The network traffic is modeled by generating 
constant bit rate (CBR) flows. Each source node transmits 
one 512-bytes (~4Kbits) packet. Packets generated at every 
time step by following Pareto distribution, destined for a 
random destination uniformly selected.  
Nodes have at 
any time measures of the information destined for each node 
(for a given time interval) sent by any node.  
Figure 4 shows the network dimensions with the data and 
capacity exchanged through the created clusters. Figure 4 
shows that even when the files that are being exchanged are 
greater than the network dimensions, the proposed scheme 
effectively handles the end-to-end transmissions and enables 
the complete download whereas for this evaluation two 
measures were taken into consideration: the data exchanged 
within the cluster i and the data exchanged with other 
clusters.  
 
Figure 4.  
 Dimensions of the network with the data and capacity 
exchanged through the clusters formed. 
 
Figure 5.  
The delay of the diffusion outsourcing process with the 
simulation time compared with Epidemic and collaborative schedules 
schemes.  
 
Figure 6.  
The average throughput with the neighboring ping delays. 
 
Figure 7.  
The SDR with the community/cluster requests using passive 
message ferries and the generic diffusion methods. 
Figure 5 shows the delay of the diffusion outsourcing 
process with the simulation time compared with two 
different in implementation schemes: the epidemic and 
collaborative schedules schemes. It is easily spotted that fig. 
8 shows the supremacy of the proposed scheme for this 
specific scenario in vehicular P2P systems whereas it shows 
57
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

the effectiveness with the significant robustness in the delay 
diffusion process-which is further minimized. 
 
Figure 8.  
The number of successfully received transmissions over of 
total /25 transmissions with the mean number of sessions created in the 
system. 
Figure 6 shows the average throughput with the 
neighboring ping delays comparing the proposed passive 
message ferries scheme and the generic diffusion cluster 
scheme. Figure 7 shows the SDR with the community/cluster 
requests using passive message ferries and the generic 
diffusion method, whereas in figure 8 the number of 
successfully received transmissions over of total of 25 
transmissions in the path/clustered end-to-end transmission is 
shown, with the mean number of sessions created in the 
system. Finally, figure 9 depicts that neighboring feedback 
can enable better streaming stability in a multistreaming end-
to-end path. 
 
Figure 9.  
Number of participating nodes with the W. 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
In this work, we have proposed a resource assignment 
approach 
while 
synchronized 
in-motion 
nodes 
are 
exchanging resources with bounded end-to-end delay. The 
method encompasses the assignment of the moving-so called- 
Mobile Infostation (MI) peer to a certain vehicle whereas this 
is done with the introduced Message Ferry (MF) mobile Peer 
in a unidirectional way. Passive message ferries are utilized 
as a resource index for the end-to-end path in order to 
efficiently enable delay sensitive streaming. Simulation 
results have shown that the scheme offers high throughput 
and significant end-to-end reliable exchange of resources 
whereas it offers high SDR for completed files.  
Current and future research directions include the 
modeling of the mobility pattern of the peers by using 
approaches like the fractional Brownian motion taking into 
account the global requests and different network partitioning 
parameters as well as evaluating an extended version of the 
proposed scheme in real time. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Mavromoustakis and H. Karatza, “A Gossip-based optimistic 
replication for efficient delay-sensitive streaming using an interactive 
middleware support system”, IEEE Systems Journal, IEEE USA, Vol. 
4, no. 2, June 2010, pp. 253-264. 
[2] S. Toumpis and A. Goldsmith,  “Capacity regions for wireless ad hoc 
networks”,  IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, Vol. 2, 
No. 4,  July 2003, pp. 736-748.  
[3] Daniel G.Sachs et al., “GRACE: A Hierarchical Adaptation 
Framework for Saving Energy”, Computer Science, University of 
Illinois Technical Report UIUCDCS-R-2004-2409, Februrary 2004.  
[4] Dzmitry Kliazovich and Fabrizio Granelli, “A Cross-layer Scheme for 
TCP Performance Improvement in Wireless LANs”, Globecom 2004, 
IEEE Communications Society, pp. 841-844. 
[5] Marco Conti, Gaia Maselli, Giovanni Turi, and Sylvia Giordano 
“Cross layering in mobile Ad Hoc Network Design”, IEEE Computer 
Society, February 2004, pp. 48-51.  
[6] C. Mavromoustakis and H. Karatza, "Segmented File Sharing with 
Recursive Epidemic Placement Policy for Reliability in Mobile Peer-
to-Peer Devices". Proceedings of the 13th Annual Meeting of the 
IEEE International Symposium on Modeling, Analysis, and 
Simulation 
of 
Computer 
and 
Telecommunication 
Systems 
(MASCOTS), Georgia Tech, Atlanta, Georgia, September 26-29, 
2005, pp 371-380. 
[7] 
Z. Haas and T. Small, “Evaluating the Capacity of Resource-
Constrained DTNs,” International Wireless Communications and 
Mobile Computing Conference, pp. 545-550, July 2006. 
[8] 
J. Liu and J. Xu, “Proxy caching for media streaming over the 
Internet,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 88–94, Aug. 2004. 
[9] 
T.D.C. Little and A. Agarwal, "An Information Propagation Scheme 
for VANETs," Proc. 8th Intl. IEEE Conf. on Intelligent Transportation 
Systems (ITSC), Vienna Austria, Sept. 2005, pp. 361-368. 
[10] C. Lochert, B. Scheuermann, M. Caliskan and M. Mauve, The 
feasibility of information dissemination in vehicular ad-hoc networks. 
in Proceedings of the 4th Annual Conference on Wireless On-demand 
Network Systems and Services (Jan. 2007), pp. 92-99. 
[11] H. Wu, R. Fujimoto, and G. Riley, Analytical models for information 
propagation 
in 
vehicle-to-vehicle 
networks. 
IEEE 
Vehicular 
Technology Conference, 2004. VTC2004-Fall. 2004, Sept. 2004, Vol. 
6, pp. 4548-4552. 
[12] Lee, K., et al. First experience with cartorrent in a real vehicular ad 
hoc network testbed. In Proc. of MOVE (2007). 
[13] Mahajan, R., Zahorjan, J., Zill, B. Understanding wiﬁ-based 
connectivity from moving vehicle. In Proc. of IMC (2007). 
[14] R. Van Renesse, K.P. Birman, W. Vogels, Astrolabe: a robust and 
scalable technology for distributed system monitoring, management, 
and data mining, ACM Trans. Comput. Sys. 21 (2).  
[15] C. Mavromoustakis “Synchronized Cooperative Schedules for 
collaborative resource availability using population-based algorithm”, 
submitted to the Simulation Practice and Theory (SIMPRA) Journal, 
Elsevier, Volume 19, Issue 2, February 2011, pp. 762-776. 
[16] Yuh-Ming Chiu and Do Young Eun, "Minimizing File Download 
Time in Stochastic Peer-to-Peer Networks," IEEE/ACM Transactions 
on Networking, Vol. 16, No. 2, pages 253-266, April 2008. 
[17] S. M. Ross, Stochastic Processes, 2nd ed. New York: John Wiley & 
Son, 1996. 
[18] M. Fiore and J. Harri. “The networking shape of vehicular mobility”. 
In Proceedings ACM MobiHoc, pp. 261–272, 2008. 
[19] Dedicated 
short-range 
communications 
(DSRC) 
for 
wireless  
communication 
channels 
found 
on 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dedicated_short-range_communications, 
last accessed on 18 Oct. 2010. 
[20] Z. Haas and M. Pearlman, “The Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP) for Ad 
Hoc Networks”, Internet Draft, draft-ietf-manet-zone-zrp-02.txt, June 
1999.  
[21] Oliver Ibe, Markov Processes for Stochastic Modeling, ISBN-10: 
0123744512, Academic Press (September 16, 2008), pp.512.  
58
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

