Performance Evaluation of MIMO Schemes in 5
MHz Bandwidth LTE System
Ali Jemmali
Departement of Electrical Engineering
Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal
Email: ali.jemmali@polymtl.ca
Jean Conan
Departement of Electrical Engineering
Ecole Polytechnique de Montreal
Email: j.conan@polymtl.ca
Abstract—In this paper, we study the performance of the
MIMO Schemes in the 3GPP Long Term Evolution (LTE) system
with 5 MHz bandwidth. As performances metrics, the Block
Error Rate (BLER) and the Data Throughput are evaluated in
terms of Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) for three different Multi-
Input Multi-Output (MIMO) schemes as deﬁned in LTE stan-
dard. Two transmit diversity schemes known as Space Frequency
Block Codes (SFBC) and Frequency Switched Transmit Diversity
(FSTD) as well as one Open Loop Spatial Multiplexing (OLSM)
scheme are considered in the evaluation. The performance of the
three MIMO schemes are compared to the performance of Single
Input Single Output (SISO) scheme to evaluate the improvement
in BLER and data throughput of the system. The ITU pedestrian
B channel with high order modulation and coding scheme is
considered for the evaluation.
Keywords- Multi-antenna MIMO system, LTE, BLER,
Data Throughput
I. INTRODUCTION
The 3GPP Long Term Evolution is the latest evolution of
the wireless communication systems. LTE is part of the UMTS
standards but includes many changes and improvements iden-
tiﬁed by the 3GPP consortium. The goal of LTE is to increase
the data throughput and the speed of wireless data using a
combination of new methods and technologies like OFDM and
MIMO technics. The LTE downlink transmission is based on
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA).
OFDM is a technique of encoding digital data on multiple
carrier frequencies and it is known to be efﬁcient to improve
the spectral efﬁciency of wireless system. Another important
advantage of OFDM technique is to be more resistant to
frequency selective fading than single carrier system by con-
verting the wide-band frequency selective channel into a set of
many ﬂat fading subchannels. In addition, OFDMA allows for
adding frequency domain scheduling to time domain schedul-
ing. In order to optimize the system data throughput and the
coverage area for a given transmission power, LTE make use
of the Adaptive Modulation and Coding (AMC). In AMC, the
transmitter should assign the data rate for each user depending
on the channel quality from the serving cell, the interference
level from other cells, and the noise level at the receiver. To
achieve the target in terms of data throughput and reliability,
the LTE standard makes MIMO as its essential core. MIMO
was recognized to be a very powerful technique to improve
the performance of wireless communication systems. Multiple
antenna techniques can be used in two different modes namely
the diversity and multiplexing mode. In diversity mode, the
same signal is transmitted over multiple antenna and hence
the reliability of the system is improved by the diversity gain.
In diversity mode, the mapping function of each symbol to
which transmit antenna is called Space Time Block Code
(STBC). In multiplexing mode, two different spatial streams
are sent from two different antennas and hence the data rate
is improved. To study the performance of LTE systems a
MATLAB based downlink physical layer simulator [1] [2] for
Link Level Simulation (LLS) has been developed. A System
Level Simulation [3] of the Simulator is also available. The
goal of the development of the simulator was to facilitate
comparison with work of different research group and it is
publicly available for free under academic non-commercial use
license [2]. The main features of the simulator are adaptive
coding and modulation, MIMO transmission and scheduling.
As the simulator includes many physical layer features, it
can be used in different application in research [3]. In [4],
the simulator was used to study the channel estimation of
OFDM systems and the performance evaluation of a fast
fading channel estimator was presented. In [5] and [6], a
method for calculating the Precoding Matrix Indicator (PMI),
the Rank Indicator (RI) and the Channel Quality Indicator
(CQI) were studied and analyzed with the simulator.
In this paper, the BLER and the Data Throughput of
SISO and MIMO schemes in 5 MHz LTE system for high
Modulation and Coding Scheme (MCS) are investigated in
terms of SNR using the Link Level LTE simulator [1] [2].
The MCS corresponds to Channel and Quality Indicator (CQI)
value of 15 [1].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we present the system and channel model used in
the simulation. In Section III, we present the MIMO schemes
as deﬁned in LTE. A brief review of the diversity schemes used
in LTE systems is given in this section. A brief description of
the Open Loop Spatial Multiplexing (OLSM) scheme is also
reviewed in this section. The simulation results and discussion
334
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

of results will be presented in Section IV. Finally, we conclude
our paper in Section V.
II. SYSTEM AND CHANNEL MODEL
In this section, the structure of the OFDM LTE signal is
described. The OFDM signal has a time and a frequency
domains. In the time domain, the LTE signal is composed
of succesive frames. Each frame has a duration of 10 ms
(Tframe). Each frame is divided into ten equally 1 ms long
subframes. Each subrames consists of two equally long slots
with 0.5 ms time duration (Tslot). For normal cyclic preﬁx
length each slot consists of Ns = 7 OFDM symbols. In the
frequency domain, the OFDM technique converts the LTE
wide band signal into a number of narrowband signals. Each
narrowband signal is transmitted on one subcarrier frequency.
In LTE the spacing between subcarriers is ﬁxed to 15 KHz.
Tweleve adjacent subcarriers, occupying a total of 180 KHz,
of one slot forms the so-called Resource Block (RB). The
number of Resource Blocks in an LTE slot depends on the
allowed system bandwidth. The minimum number of RB is
equal to 6 corresponding to 1.4 MHz system bandwidth. For
20 MHz system bandwidth (Maximum Allowed bandwith in
LTE) the number of RB is equal to 100. In MIMO system
with MR receive antenna and MT transmit antenna, the
relation between the received and the transmitted signals on
subcarrier frequency k (k ∈ 1, ...K), at sampling instant time
n (n ∈ 1, ...N) is given by
yk,n = Hk,nxk,n + nk,n
(1)
yk,n ∈ CMRx 1 is the received vector, Hk,n ∈ CMRx MT
represents the channel matrix on subcarrier k at instant time
n, xk,n ∈ CMTx 1 is the transmit symbol vector and nk,n ∼
CN(0, σ2
n.I) is white, complex valued Gaussian noise vector
with variance σ2
n. Assuming perfect channel estimation, the
channel matrix and noise variance are considered to be known
at the receiver. A linear equalizer ﬁlter given by a matrix
Fk,n ∈ CMTx MRis applied on the received symbol vector
yk,n to determine the post-equalization symbol vector rk,n [6]
rk,n = Fk,nyk,n = Fk,nHk,nxk,n + Fk,nnk,n
(2)
The Zero Forcing (ZF) or Minimum Mean Square Error
(MMSE) design criterion [7] are typically used for the linear
receiver and the input signal vector is normalized to unit
power. In MIMO-OFDM systems, the key factor of link
error prediction and performances is the signal to noise ratio
(SNR) which represents the measurement for the channel
quality information. In practice, there are different measures
and calculation procedures for the SNR in SISO and MIMO
systems. In this study, the SNR is deﬁned as follows [1]:
γk,n = ∥Hk,nxk,n∥2
F
NRσ2n
=
NR
NRσ2n
= 1
σ2n
(3)
III. MIMO SCHEMES IN LTE
From theory it is well known that in MIMO systems
the multiple antennas at the transmitter and the receiver
can be used in two different modes, namely the diversity
and multiplexing modes. Diversity mode can be used in the
receiver (Receive Diversity) or at the transmitter (Transmit
Diversity). Where receive diversity is simply a combining
operation of different replica of the same transmitted signal,
transmit diversity requires a space time coding operation of
the transmitted signal. In LTE the two different modes are
deﬁned. In this section the different MIMO schemes deﬁned
in LTE are described.
A. Diversity Schemes
The transmit diversity techniques are deﬁned only for 2 and
4 transmit antennas and one data stream. When two eNodeB
antennas are available for transmit diversity operation, the
Space Frequency Block Code (SFBC) [8] is used. SFBC is
based on the well known Space Time Block Codes (STBC),
also known as Alamouti codes [9]. STBC is deﬁned in
the UMTS and it operates on pairs of adjacent symbols in
the time domain. As the signal in LTE is two dimensional
(time and frequency domains) and the number of available
OFDM symbols in a subframe is not always even, the direct
application of STBC is not straightforward. In LTE for SFBC
transmission, the symbols are transmitted from two eNodeB
antenna ports on each pair of adjacent subcarriers as follows
[8]:
 y(0)(1)
y(0)(2)
y(1)(1)
y(1)(2)

=

x1
x2
−x∗
2
x∗
1

(4)
where y(p)(k) denotes the symbols transmitted on the kth
subcarrier from antenna port p. One important characteristic
of such codes is that the transmitted signal streams are
orthogonal and a simple linear receiver is required for optimal
performances. Unfortunately, there is no known orthogonal
codes for antenna conﬁgurations beyond 2 x 2 and the SFBC
has been modiﬁed in order to be applied to the case of 4
transmit antennas. The new modiﬁed scheme of SFBC is
known as Frequency Switched Transmit Diversity (FSTD).
The frequency space code for 4 antennas is as follows:
335
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications



y(0)(1)
y(0)(2)
y(0)(3)
y(0)(4)
y(1)(1)
y(1)(2)
y(1)(3)
y(1)(4)
y(2)(1)
y(2)(2)
y(2)(3)
y(2)(4)
y(3)(1)
y(3)(2)
y(3)(3)
y(3)(4)

 =


x1
x2
0
0
0
0
x3
x4
−x∗
2
x∗
1
0
0
0
0
−x∗
4
x∗
3


(5)
The beneﬁts of diversity can be exploited in different
manners. It can increase the reliability of the radio link and it
is quantiﬁed by the so called diversity gain. As a consequence
of the diversity gain the error rate decreases. The data rate can
also be improved logarithmically with respect to the number
of antennas as antenna diversity increases the SNR linearly
[10].
C = Blog2(1 + γ)
(6)
In addition, the coverage area can be improved or, for the
same coverage area, the required power can be reduced. The
diversity gain in MIMO systems is usually characterized by the
number of independent fading diversity branches, also called
Diversity Order. The diversity order is deﬁned as the slope of
the BLER versus SNR curve on a log-log scale. For a MIMO
system with Nt transmit antennas and Nr receive antenna, it
is said that the diversity order is Nd = Nt.Nr. The diversity
order has a dramatic effect on the system reliability since the
probability of one of the diversity branches having high SNR is
higher compared to only one branche. In LTE, the SFBC (2x1)
and FSTD (4x2) have a diversity order of 2 and 8 respectively.
B. Multiplexing Schemes
In Contrast to the diversity mode described in the previous
section, the spatial multiplexing mode, which refers to splitting
the incoming high data rate stream into Nt independent data
streams, is considered, from a data throughput standpoint, as
the most exciting type of MIMO systems. In MIMO system
with Nt transmit antennas, the nominal spectral efﬁciency
can be increased by a factor of Nt if the streams can be
successfully and independently decoded. The factor Nt is
known as Multiplexing Gain. In spatial multiplexing (Nt x
Nr) MIMO system, the maximum data rate grows as [11]:
min(Nt, Nr)log(1 + γ)
(7)
when γ is large.
In LTE, the spatial multiplexing mode is designated as Mode
3 and it is know as OLSM (Open Loop Spatial Multiplexing)
In SISO OFDM systems, the maximal data throughput
depends on the available bandwidth and the parameter of
the OFDM signal, like the number of subcarriers and the
modulation order (QPSK, 16QAM, 64QAM). For a given
frequency band (B) the maximal data throughput in bits per
second can be approximated by the following simple equation
[1]:
Throughput(bps) = NF B.NSC.NOF DM.Nb.ECR
Tsub
(8)
where NF B is the number of Frequency Block in the given
frequency band (B); NSC is the number of subcarrier in one
Frequency Block; NOF DM is the number of OFDM symbols
in one subframe; Nb is the number of bits in one subcarrier;
ECR is the Effective Code Rate, and Tsub is the duration of one
subframe equal to 1 ms. In LTE, NSC and NOF DM are ﬁxed
and equals to 12 and 14 respectively [12]. For 5 MHz (NF B =
25) bandwidth LTE system with 64 QAM Modulation (Nb =
6) and ECR = 0.9, the maximal data throughput that can be
supported by the system is 22.68 Mbps.
B (MHz)
NF B
1.4
6
5
25
10
50
15
75
20
100
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we illustrate the results of the performances
evaluation of three different MIMO schemes in 5 MHz LTE
system using the MATLAB LTE link level simulator [1]. For
comparison purpose, the performance of SISO scheme in the
same system is also evaluated and presented. The three MIMO
schemes are 2x1 (2 transmit antennas and only one receive
antenna) SFBC diversity mode, 4x2 (4 transmit antennas and
2 receive antennas) FSTD diversity mode and 4x2 Open
Loop Spatial Multiplexing (OLSM). The common simulation
settings for the results are summarized in the next Table.
336
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Parameter
Setting
Transmission Schemes
2x1 SFBC; 4x2 FSTD; 4x2 OLSM
Bandwidth
5 MHz
Simulation length
5000 subframes
Channel Type
Pedestrian B
Channel knowledge
perfect
CQI
15
The CQI value used in the simulation determines both
the modulation order (64QAM) and the Effective Code Rate
(0.92).
A. BLER Results
The Block Error Rate (BLER) results of SISO and MIMO
schemes are shown in Figure 1. From the ﬁgure it is clear
that the worst performances corresponds to the SISO curve
(blue curve). The rate of change of the BLER in terms of
SNR give us the estimation of the slope of the curve. As
discussed in the previous sections, the slope of the BLER
curve reﬂects the diversity order of the system. From the
curve it can be observed that the slope is almost equal to
one which means that the diversity order is equal to one
as expected for the SISO conﬁguration. As the modulation
order is 64QAM a relatively high SNR is observed for the
good BLER performance. An SNR of 41 dB is required to
achieve a 10−3 value of BLER. The green curve represents the
BLER results of the 2x1 diversity scheme. Asymptotically, the
slope of this curve can be observed to be equal to two which
corresponds to the diversity order of 2x1 system and hence
a diversity gain of 2 as expected for 2x1 diversity scheme.
An SNR gain can also be observed with respect to SISO
scheme. In fact, it can be observed that to achieve a 10−2
value of BLER, the 2x1 diversity scheme needs about 8 dB
less in SNR. In fact the BLER of 10−2 is achieved with 38
dB of SNR in SISO conﬁguration however the same value
of BLER is achieved with only 30 dB in the 2x1 diversity
scheme. So an SNR gain of 8 dB is clearly observed for the
2x1 diversity scheme. The BLER results of the 4x2 Diversity
scheme are represented by the red curve in Fig.1. In high SNR
region the slope of the curve tends to be equal to 8. This value
corresponds to the diversity order of a 4x2 system and hence a
Diversity Gain of 8 can be observed from the curve. The SNR
gain with respect to SISO conﬁguration is more important than
the case of 2x1 diversity scheme. In this case, an SNR gain
of almost 18 dB at 10−2 value of BLER is obtained. Finally,
the BLER results of the OLSM scheme are represented by
the light blue curve and we can easily observe that the curve
is almost parallel to the curve of 4x2 diversity scheme. This
results is explained by the fact that the OLSM scheme uses
the same antenna conﬁguration as in the 4x2 diversity scheme
and should have the same diversity order, which is equal to
8 (4x2) in this case. However the SNR gain is not the same
as in 4x2 diversity mode but it is almost equal to SNR gain
of 2x1 diversity system at 10−2 value of BLER (8 dB). This
result is explained by the fact that in 4x2 OLSM scheme two
different stream are sent from different antennas.
B. Data Throughput Results
The data throughput results of the three MIMO schemes
are presented in the Fig.2 where they are compared to data
throughput of SISO conﬁguration. The data throughput of
SISO conﬁguration is shown by the blue curve. It can be
observed that as the SNR increase the data throughput increase
and it reaches its maximum at almost 40 dB. As in BLER
results, the high order modulation is behind the high SNR
required to achieve the maximum capacity. Beyond this value,
the data throughput is constant and it corresponds to the
maximum value as calculated in Section III-B. The green
curve in Fig.2 represents the data throughput of the 2x1
diversity scheme. As expected there is no improvement in the
data throughput as in 2x1 diversity scheme the same data is
transmitted from the two antennas and no multiplexing gain
can be achieved. However, the improvement comes from the
fact that to achieve 15 Mbps, the 2x1 diversity scheme requires
5 dB less in SNR with respect to SISO conﬁguration. In other
words, the 15 Mbps is achieved by 30 dB SNR in SISO
conﬁguration and by only 25 dB in 2x1 diversity scheme. For
the 4x2 diversity scheme, red curve in Fig.2, the improvement
is even more and the gain in SNR is almost about 11 dB. It
means that the 15 Mbps data throughput is reached by only
19 dB instead of 30 dB in SISO conﬁguration. In this scheme
also no multiplexing gain is observed as expected because as
in the case of 2x1 diversity scheme only one signal stream
is transmitted over the 4 transmit antennas. The multiplexing
gain can easily be observed in the case of OLSM scheme, light
blue curve. As in this scheme two different signal stream are
transmitted simultaneously multiplexing gain of 2 is observed
and the data throughput is almost doubled in high SNR.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the performance evaluation of three different
MIMO scheme in 5 MHz bandwidth LTE simulation using the
MATLAB LTE simulator is presented. The improvement of
these scheme with respect to SISO conﬁguration is discussed.
The difference between diversity mode and multiplexing mode
and their respective gain in LTE MIMO schemes are also
presented. The results clearly show an important improvement
in terms of BLER and data throughput can be achieved in the
three schemes.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Mehlf¨uhrer, M. Wrulich, J. C. Ikuno, D. Bosanska, and M. Rupp,
“Simulating the long term evolution physical layer,” in Proc. of the 17th
European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO 2009), Glasgow,
Scotland, Aug. 2009.
337
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
SNR (dB)
BLER
BLER, CQI 15, PedB, 5000 subframes
 
 
SISO
TxD (2x1)
TxD (4x2)
OLSM (4x2)
Fig. 1.
BLER Performances of SISO and MIMO LTE Schemes
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
SNR (dB)
Throughput [Mbps])
Throughput, CQI 15, PedB, 5000 subframes
 
 
SISO
TxD (2x1)
TxD (4x2)
OLSM (4x2)
Fig. 2.
Data Throughput of SISO and MIMO LTE schemes with 5 MHz
bandwidth
[2] Online, available http://www.nt.tuwien.ac.at/ltesimulator.
[3] J. Ikuno, M. Wrulich, and M. Rupp, “System level simulation of lte
networks,” in Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC 2010-Spring),
2010 IEEE 71st, may 2010, pp. 1 –5.
[4] M. Simko, C. Mehlfuhrer, M. Wrulich, and M. Rupp, “Doubly dispersive
channel estimation with scalable complexity,” in Smart Antennas (WSA),
2010 International ITG Workshop on, feb. 2010, pp. 251 –256.
[5] S. Schwarz, M. Wrulich, and M. Rupp, “Mutual information based
calculation of the precoding matrix indicator for 3gpp umts/lte,” in Smart
Antennas (WSA), 2010 International ITG Workshop on, feb. 2010, pp.
52 –58.
[6] S. Schwarz, C. Mehlfuhrer, and M. Rupp, “Calculation of the spatial
preprocessing and link adaption feedback for 3gpp umts/lte,” in Wireless
Advanced (WiAD), 2010 6th Conference on, june 2010, pp. 1 –6.
[7] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communication.
Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[8] S. Sesia, T. Issam, and M. Backer, LTE The UMTS Long Term Evolution
From Theory To Practice.
John Wiley, 2011.
[9] S. Alamouti, “A simple transmit diversity technique for wireless commu-
nications,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 16,
no. 8, pp. 1451 –1458, oct 1998.
[10] J. G. Andrews, A. Ghosh, and R. Muhamed, Fundamentals of WiMAX:
Understanding Broadband Wireless Networking. Prentive HALL, 2007.
[11] N. Chiurtu, B. Rimoldi, and E. Telatar, “On the capacity of multi-
antenna gaussian channels,” in Information Theory, 2001. Proceedings.
2001 IEEE International Symposium on, 2001, p. 53.
[12] 3GPP,
“Technical
speciﬁcation
group
radio
access
network,”
http://www.3gpp.org.
338
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

