A System Design for The Integration of RFID Systems  
with Wireless Network Technologies 
 
Mehmet Erkan Yüksel 
Department of Computer Engineering 
Istanbul University 
Istanbul, Turkey 
e-mail: eyuksel@istanbul.edu.tr 
Asım Sinan Yüksel 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
Texas A&M University 
Texas, USA 
e-mail: asyuksel@cse.tamu.edu
 
 
Abstract— RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) is a special 
type of wireless communication that allows automatic 
identification of objects without requiring a line-of-sight. It 
cannot provide the fullest benefits as a standalone technology. 
Efficient and successful RFID applications must be developed 
by smoothly incorporating RFID systems into existing 
infrastructures to improve business processes and data 
management capabilities. In this paper, a system architecture 
that achieves the integration of RFID systems with wireless 
network technologies (e.g., ZigBee, Wi-Fi, WiMAX, cellular 
networks) is presented. A control unit is designed to identify 
objects, gather and manage RFID data, and keep the track of 
RFID tagged objects without any human involvement from 
long distances. A middleware is developed to improve mobile 
applications, provide monitoring our system, route RFID 
information to the related units automatically in a faster, more 
efficient, secure, wide capacitated way without any limitation. 
Our system design resolves the problems caused by lack of 
information, ensures to achieve competitive advantages, has 
longer operating range. In our study, a system design is 
illustrated to show how RFID systems can be integrated with 
wireless communication technologies to collect and manage 
secure real-time information. 
Keywords- Radio frequency identification; active/passive tag; 
Wi-Fi; WiMAX; TinyOS; data gathering; object monitoring 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
RFID is an automatic identification (Auto-ID) and data 
capturing technology that gives an opportunity to identify 
and monitor objects by using a tag that carries information. 
It provides easy, secure and quick data entry, storage and 
transmission. It is used everywhere, such as shops, stores, 
hospitals, pharmaceutical companies, logistic services, etc. 
where real-time data should be used. It improves data 
gathering and management capabilities, raises security level 
of information about objects and resolves problems caused 
by lack of information. The main feature of RFID 
technology is its ability to identify, locate, track, and 
monitor objects automatically without a clear line of sight 
between tags and readers [1]. 
Wireless networks provide the infrastructure to support 
mobile connectivity to all information sources with high 
performance and availability. They allow users to 
communicate and access applications and information from 
long distances without wires. Most wireless network 
technologies are license free and provide freedom of 
movement and the ability to extend applications to different 
locations. They provide significant cost savings to deploy. 
They offer device mobility and higher reliability because of 
increases in efficiencies, less error-prone cabling and less 
downtime as compared to a wired network. Wireless 
networks have several categories depending on user 
requirements and the size of the physical area that they are 
covering. 
In this study, we present a system design that combines 
the RFID system and wireless networks. Main contribution 
of our study is to design and develop intelligent hardware 
and software components for the integration of RFID 
systems with wireless networks to gather and manage data, 
keep track of objects carrying RFID tags from short or long 
distances. Our design provides a cost-effective solution and 
economic power consumption. It also supports real-time 
detection of RFID tags and remote data collection through 
the underlying wireless network. Our system structure 
consists of spatially distributed devices called control units. 
These devices are equipped with wireless communication 
protocols that allow them to communicate with other 
devices either directly or via multiple hops. They can also 
use sensors to monitor conditions (e.g., temperature, 
pressure, motion, etc.) about objects. Having a control unit 
enables the network devices to identify, track and monitor a 
wider range of objects. Additionally, the wireless network 
can expand the RFID system’s range and provides an RFID 
system in areas where a network infrastructure (e.g., 
Internet) does not exist. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents an 
overview of basic RFID system components. Section III 
presents related work discussing the integration of RFID 
systems with wireless communication technologies. In 
section IV we illustrate various examples of system designs 
that use our control unit and show how RFID systems are 
integrated with wireless networks. Finally, a discussion of 
new challenges and suggestions for future work are 
presented. 
112
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

II. 
OVERVIEW OF RFID SYSTEM COMPONENTS 
Main hardware components of a basic RFID system are 
RFID tags (passive, active and semi-passive), RFID readers, 
and various antenna types. 
An RFID tag consists of a microchip where the 
information about an object is stored, an antenna connected 
to the chip, on-board electronics, and a protecting film layer 
that covers these components. It is used as an electronic data 
carrier, and different information can be written and read in 
its environment. The microchip in RFID tag can store 
information from 64 bit to 8 MByte. This means that the tag 
can carry some important information, such as shipping 
history, order number, customer information, company/staff 
information and serial number. For the purpose of tracking 
the movement of objects, tags can be placed anywhere, such 
as containers, pallets, materials handling equipment, cases 
or even on individual products. Tags can be classified as 
passive (no battery), active (with battery) or semi-passive 
according to their power supply. While active tags use an 
energy source that is integrated to a tag physically, passive 
tags obtain this energy from the readers in the 
communication field. Today, semi-passive tags that have 
some properties of both active and passive tags can be also 
used [1-3]. 
An RFID reader is a specialized radio transmitter and 
receiver that act as a central location for the RFID system. It 
reads tag data by the help of the RFID antennas at a certain 
frequency. The RFID reader is basically an electronic device 
that emits and receives radio signals. It is designed for fast 
and easy system integration without losing performance, 
functionality and security. The reader has a real-time 
processor, an operating system, a memory, and a 
transmitter/receiver unit. The reader is usually classified 
into two types: (1) Fixed reader also called RFID gate is set 
to a definite place. (2) Mobile RFID reader includes a 
wireless interface, precisely Bluetooth, ZigBee or Wi-Fi. 
This device uses short or long-range radio links. It can 
identify, read/write, remotely control and monitor RFID tags 
over wireless communication. It contains some software 
tools to communicate with other mobile RFID readers, 
PDAs, laptops, etc. The Mobile RFID reader facilitates the 
identification of the tags that are in dangerous fields where 
the reading process is difficult [2], [3]. 
An RFID antenna is used as a medium for the purpose of 
tag reading and data collection. In many situations, the use 
of an antenna is important because tag-reading ranges are 
generally small. Although an antenna has very simple 
structure because of its concept, it must be able to receive 
the best signal in low power and adapt to special conditions. 
Antenna must be designed in different sizes, shapes and 
frequency intervals according to the properties and distances 
of the environment where the application will be 
implemented. The antenna can be designed considering 
several factors, such as reading distance, particular product 
types, specific operating conditions, known orientation, 
speed of the tagged objects, reader/controller, arbitrary 
orientation, antenna polarization, environmental changes, 
etc. [2], [3]. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we present several related works and 
projects that are taken place in industrial and academic 
research areas. 
In a study performed by Intel Corporation [4], a Wireless 
Identification and Sensing Platform (WISP) has been 
developed. This platform consists of passive RFID tags and 
includes sensors that provide a very small-scale computing 
platform. It is a viable alternative system for smart dust 
applications, such as monitoring and recognizing human 
indoor activities, tracking items, informing of disasters, 
detecting poisonous gas or radioactivity, etc. 
In [5], researchers from Intel Corporation have presented 
a method and its requirements, design and early experiences 
to obtain and use knowledge of human-object interactions. 
They have developed, built and deployed hands-on RFID 
readers that are embedded in wearable gloves and bracelets 
for detecting use of tagged objects. These autonomous 
readers are connected to sensors, gather data and report 
sensed events wirelessly to a base station. This method 
serves to support real-time analysis of data streams and can 
be applied to activity-based applications, such as health 
monitoring. 
In [6], researchers in NESL (Networked and Embedded 
Systems Laboratory) in UCLA (University of California, Los 
Angeles) have presented a method that provides a cost-
efficient solution for object recognition using the integration 
of RFID systems with mobile sensor networks. They have 
created an application called Ragobots (Real action gaming 
robots) that use small RFID readers. The Ragobots are 
wirelessly collaborated and coordinated to achieve a final 
goal while navigating in a terrain. They move in a random 
walk, search for tags, detect the tags and determine the object 
type based on the information stored on the tags. 
In [7], Bluesoft, a company building Wi-Fi-based 
wireless security and location RFID technology, has 
deployed its real-time location system called AeroScout 
within Legoland Denmark, one of Europe’s largest 
amusement parks. In this system, company’s active tags 
operate using 802.11b wireless LAN technology and can be 
tracked over much larger areas with much fewer readers 
compared with traditional active RFID systems. In the 
Legoland deployment, readers consist of 38 Bluesoft 
AeroScout location receiver units. These units can read an 
AeroScout tag’s 2.4 GHz signal and any other 802.11b-
enabled device. Bluesoft’s system's capability to use their 
preexisting Wi-Fi infrastructure allows AeroScout location 
receivers to be connected to the same cabling used for Wi-Fi 
access points. KidSpotter, a theme park application 
developer, has provided two different software programs. 
One of them links the AeroScout system with mobile phone 
networks while the other one enables the park to analyze tag 
location data to optimize the distribution of visitors within 
the park in real time. 
In study [8], the authors have proposed a prototype that 
combines the RFID systems with wireless communication 
technologies for an in-home health care system to gather data 
and monitor the medication of patients. The prototype 
113
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

includes two parts:  an RFID reader node and a base station 
node used for wireless communication. 
There are numerous other real-world applications related 
to the integration of RFID with wireless networks. Examples 
consist of US Navy’s wireless RFID system to monitor the 
condition of valuable aircraft parts in storage [9], Siemens IT 
Solutions and Services’ cargo-tracking system that combines 
RFID, wireless sensors, GSM and satellite services [10], 
ZigBeef ’s long-range RFID system that helps ranchers and 
rodeos track animals from various distances [11]. 
Most of the related works presented above are the 
applications in which RFID systems are used together with 
wireless sensor networks. However, our study handles this 
issue from a different point of view. The aim of our study is 
to demonstrate how active and passive RFID systems can be 
integrated to wireless networks that contain different 
communication technologies, such as ZigBEE, Wi-Fi, 
WiMAX, and cellular networks. In our implementation, 
several alternative systems that comprise different network 
topologies were designed to accomplish RFID integration. 
Moreover, a microcontroller based adaptable control unit that 
uses intelligent techniques to effectively operate in various 
integrations of RFID with wireless networks were 
developed.  
IV. 
OUR SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
Our system architecture offers an effective, a reliable, 
comprehensive, and low-cost solution to facilitate automatic 
detection and identification of objects from long distances. It 
comprises of one or more control units, a wireless network 
infrastructure, and a middleware. Fig. 1 illustrates our basic 
system architecture. 
 
Figure 1. Our System Architecture 
A. Our Control Unit 
Our control unit is the brain of our system. It has long 
reading/writing ranges. It serves as a mobile mini application 
server between the RFID system and a wireless network. It 
gathers data from tagged objects, processes tag information 
and sends this information to related remote system that 
consists of computers, servers, or base stations. It has more 
advanced specifications than current RFID readers. It runs an 
open-source operating system (TinyOS) [12] which is 
designed for low-power wireless devices. Our control unit 
has several properties: 
 operating anti-collision protocols 
 monitoring RFID system 
 rerouting data about objects to related units on which 
database management system or application software 
works (if necessary) 
 collaborating with wireless network devices and other 
control units  
 remote controlling and management by users 
 ensuring a safe data transfer between RFID tags and 
the back end system 
 real-time data capturing and analyzing 
 sensitive object tracking and localization 
B. Wireless Network Infrastructure 
The wireless network infrastructure can use different 
communication technologies, such as Bluetooth, ZigBee, 
Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11 a/b/g/n), WiMAX (IEEE 802.16/x), and 
cellular networks (e.g., GSM, GPRS, EDGE, CDMA, etc.) to 
provide fast data communication, larger coverage area, and 
Internet access. This infrastructure can be a cloud that 
consists of various network topologies (or clouds) and many 
spatially distributed devices that produce convenient 
communication among themselves. Using a wireless network 
infrastructure will offer several important advantages for our 
system architecture as below: 
 It will enable exchange of communication between 
clouds owned by multiple service providers and 
system resources. 
 It will expand the RFID system’s range and enable 
the RFID system in large areas where a network 
infrastructure (e.g., Internet) does not exist. 
 It will enable both RFID and wireless network 
devices operate collaboratively and coordinately to 
provide the best services and applications. 
 It will create a heterogeneous wireless environment to 
serve the purpose of different requirements, such as 
mobile 
automatic 
identification, 
human-object 
interaction, remote data collection, object monitoring 
and tracking, etc. 
 It will ensure a safe and compressed data transfer, 
information sharing, real-time data management 
between our control units and the back end systems. 
C. Our Middleware 
For our system architecture, we developed a middleware 
that combines active RFID tags, our control unit, the wireless 
network and the back-end system. As shown in Fig. 2, our 
middleware has six modules as follows: data management, 
device management, process management, application 
development, communication, and administration. Eeach 
module does specific tasks on its own. 
114
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

 
Figure 2. Our Middleware Architecture 
Data management module has built-in rules and provides 
gathering, filtering, grouping, and routing of RFID data.  
Gathering helps us to gather data from RFID tags using our 
control unit. Filtering is used to extract definite data that we 
need. It checks data source when data contains unknown or 
undesired data. Grouping uses a clustering algorithm to 
classify data and allows splitting data into groups based on 
identical values in a field. Compression ensures a safe and 
compressed data transfer between the control unit and the 
back-end system. Routing allows to route information to 
related  back-end system in a network.   
Device management module is used to configure our 
control unit without having direct access to the device. It 
allows monitoring RFID system, collaboration with network 
devices and other control units, synchronization to manage 
data flow between control unit and mobile devices. It enables 
multiple users to share mobile devices and access RFID data. 
Process 
management 
module 
offers 
monitoring, 
deploying, optimizing, and integration our system. It 
determines the resources required to operate at the back-end 
system and collect information for carrying out subsequent 
activities of deployment process. It consists of a set of 
services that allow interaction of multiple processes running 
on one or more RFID system.  
Application development module involves creating a set 
of program modules to perform our future tasks. It supports 
an open-source programming model which mobile RFID 
applications can be developed on TinyOS operating system. 
It provides adding new functionalities in the form of loadable 
modules. 
Communication module provides various wireless 
communication protocols to gather and manage data, 
monitor objects due to wireless network infrastructure. It 
also supports RFID anti-collison protocols for best Tag 
readings. It makes the platform independent of both the 
control unit and the wireless network. Several mobile 
devices such as Smart phones, Personal Digital Assistants 
(PDAs), laptops are supported by communication module. 
Administration module defines a set of rules (read, write 
or change) for users to access specific data in every mobile 
application. Depending on the user rules and logon data, the 
end user can make changes in the following settings: number 
formats, language, time zone, control and monitor processes, 
manage user/group policies and applications, etc. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The objective of our study is accomplished by integrating 
hardware 
and 
software 
components. 
The 
hardware 
components are divided into two parts. The first part consists 
of active RFID tags, our control unit, and other RFID 
equipment that are shown on the left sides of Fig. 5 and 6. 
For the RFID equipment, we used several RFID evaluation 
kits [13-15] which includes the RFID reader, active and 
passive RFID tags, antennas, sensors, adaptors, etc. Second 
part is the wireless network that is shown on the right sides 
of Fig. 5 and 6. For creating a wireless network, we used a 
wireless router and network evaluation kit [16] which 
includes various wireless network devices. The Motorola 
development kit [17-21] that is shown at the center of Fig. 5 
and 6 acts as a bridge to combine these two parts. The 
software part consists of a program module developed in 
NesC [22] using Eclipse with NESCDT plug-in [23] to 
control the Motorola development kit and our control unit, 
and a database management system to manage the RFID tag 
IDs of objects attached to them. We used TinyOS operating 
system in our control unit to achieve several operations such 
as sending commands, running anti-collision protocols, 
controlling data signals and communication between RFID 
system and wireless network. Our research has the potential 
of being adapted for use with secure real-time data gathering 
and management applications involving wireless network 
and RFID technologies. 
 
 
Figure 3. Motorola G24 Developer Kit (exterior) 
115
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

 
Figure 4. Motorola G24 Developer Kit (interior) 
 
Figure 5. Integrating RFID Systems with Wi-Fi Networks 
 
Figure 6. Integrating RFID Systems with Mobile WiMAX 
VI. 
RESULTS 
RFID systems are the best choices if the area that will be 
monitored is small. If the requirement is to monitor a small 
number of locations, these systems can be instrumented with 
RFID readers at a low cost.  In case of long ranges, it is 
essential to have high coverage as possible. An important 
disadvantage of RFID readers is that these devices do not 
have a communication network to enable exchange of 
information. Therefore using wireless communication 
technologies will be good choices in terms of infrastructure 
costs since costs associated with Wi-Fi are minimal.  
Because Wi-Fi is widely available, more standardized 
and used across a broad variety of mobile devices, we chose 
to integrate it with our system. During the integration of Wi-
Fi to our systems, we had challenges.  These challenges were 
related to the operating system that we are using in our 
control unit. 
As we discussed in previous section, we used TinyOS as 
our base operating system.  Although TinyOS has extensive 
networking support, it does not support Wi-Fi technology. 
To overcome this challenge, we used TinyWifi [24] as an 
extension of TinyOS [12]. In TinyWifi, applications from 
highly resource constrained sensor networks can easily be 
compiled for resource rich Wi-Fi based networks [24]. This 
solution opens the rich protocol repository of TinyOS to the 
researchers who are studying in wireless communication 
area. 
As a result, TinyWifi enabled us to develop necessary 
TinyOS applications and protocols and execute them directly 
on Linux by compiling for the TinyWifi platform. Using 
TinyWifi as a TinyOS replacement, we successfully 
evaluated the wireless protocols that are originally designed 
for sensor networks.  Our evaluation was based on the test 
applications of TinyOS that demonstrate the functioning of 
radio communication, serial messaging. By using TinyWifi, 
we were able to receive demo sensor measurements, display 
them and build routing trees, which are the variations of 
examples presented in [25]. 
In our future work, we want to evaluate the Zigbee 
protocol stack in our system once Zigbee protocol is fully 
supported by TinyOS. Zigbee protocol stack for TinyOS is 
currently under development and [26] provides open source 
tools for IEEE 802.15.4 and ZigBee.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
Combining RFID systems and wireless communication 
technologies is a promising solution that can increase the 
productivity and give a competitive advantage to those that 
begin to use it first. However, there will be some 
standardization issues.  These issues need to be solved before 
the technology sees wide acceptance.  
Even though there are issues with combining RFID and 
wireless technologies, we successfully evaluated the wireless 
protocols that are originally designed for sensors in our 
system. In our study, we proposed a system architecture that 
is designed to provide RFID users flexibility of wireless 
networks at lowest cost. Additionally, this paper has 
discussed the ways to combine RFID systems with wireless 
communication technologies and its advantages such as cost 
reduction. As a future goal, we want to evaluate the 
integration of Zigbee technology with our system, when it is 
fully supported by the operating system we are using. 
  
116
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

REFERENCES 
[1] K. Finkenzeller, “RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and 
Applications in Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Frequency 
Identification and Near-Field Communication”, 3rd Edition, 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd., West Sussex, UK, 2010, ISBN:978-
0-470-69506-7. 
[2] M. E. Yüksel, “Integration Of The RFID Systems Over 
Wireless Communication Technologies”, Master of Science 
Thesis, Department Of Computer Engineering, İstanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey, Feb. 2010, pp. 4-30. 
[3] M. E. Yüksel and A. S. Yüksel, “RFID Technology in 
Business Systems and Supply Chain Management”, Journal of 
Economic and Social Studies, Vol.1, No. 1, 2011, pp. 53-71. 
[4] http://www.seattle.intel-research.net/wisp/,  
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[5] K. P. Fishkin, M. Philipose, and A. Rea, “Hands-On RFID: 
Wireless Wearables for Detecting Use of Objects”, The 9th 
IEEE International Symposium on Wearable Computers 
(ISWC’05), Osaka, Japan, Oct. 2005, pp. 38-43. 
[6] A. Kansal, J. Friedman, P. L Aghera, B. Vasu, A. Dixit, D. C 
Lee, M. B Srivastava, W. J Kaiser, D. Estrin, and G. 
Sukhatme, "CENS Tech Report: Real Action Gaming Robots 
(Ragobots)", http://nesl.ee.ucla.edu/document/show/32, 
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[7] J. Collins, “Lost and Found in Legoland”, RFID Journal, 
April 28, 2004, http://www.rfidjournal.com/article/view/921, 
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[8] L. Ho, M. Moh, Z. Walker, T. Hamada, and C.-F. Su, “A 
Prototype on RFID and Sensor Networks for Elder 
Healthcare: Progress Report”, Proceedings of the ACM 
SIGCOMM Workshops, PA, USA, August 2005, pp. 70-75. 
[9] M. Roberti, “Navy Revs Up RFID sensors”, RFID Journal, 
June,2004, http://www.rfidjournal.com/article/articleview/990 
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[10] R. Wessel, “Cargo-Tracking System Combines RFID, 
Sensors, GSM and Satellite”, RFID Journal, January 25,2008, 
http://www.rfidjournal.com/article/articleview/3870,  
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[11] C. Swedberg, “ZigBeef Offers Ranchers a Long-Distance 
Cattle Head Count”, RFID Journal, February 21, 2008, 
http://www.rfidjournal.com/article/articleview/3935,  
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[12] http://www.tinyos.net/, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[13] http://www.atlasrfidstore.com/Alien_9900_Developer_Kit_p/
alr-9900-devc.htm, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[14] http://www.impinj.com/products/SubOneCol.aspx?id=5002&t
erms=kit, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[15] http://www.ccsinfo.com/product_info.php?products_id=RFID
kit, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[16] http://www.synapse-
wireless.com/?mainID=3&subID=6&type=product&prodID=
6, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[17] http://www.motorola.com/Business/US-
EN/Business+Product+and+Services/M2M+Wireless+Modul
es, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[18] http://www.motorola.com/Business/US-
EN/Business+Product+and+Services/M2M+Wireless+Modul
es/G24+Lite_US-EN, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[19] http://www.motorola.com/Business/US-
EN/Business+Product+and+Services/M2M+Wireless+Modul
es/G24+Edge_US-EN, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[20] http://www.motorola.com/Business/US-
EN/Business+Product+and+Services/M2M+Wireless+Modul
es/G24+JAVA_US-EN, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[21] http://developer.motorola.com/docstools/sdks/,  
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[22] http://nescc.sourceforge.net/, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[23] http://docs.tinyos.net/index.php/NESCDT-
_An_editor_for_nesC_in_Eclipse, 
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[24] http://www.comsys.rwth-aachen.de/research/projects/tinywifi/ 
Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
[25] M. H. Alizai, B. Kirchen, J. A. B. Link, H. Wirtz, and K. 
Wehrle, “TinyOS Meets Wireless Mesh Networks”, The 8th 
ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems 
(SenSys 2010), Zurich, Switzerland, Nov. 2010, pp. 429-430. 
[26] http://open-zb.net/index.php, Last accessed: April 28, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

