Theoretically Feasible QoS in a MIMO Cellular
Network Compared to the Practical LTE
Performance
Mohamed Kadhem Karray
Orange Labs
38/40 rue G´en´eral Leclerc, 92794 Issy-Moulineaux France
E-mail: mohamed.karray@orange.com
Miodrag Jovanovic
Orange Labs
38/40 rue G´en´eral Leclerc, 92794 Issy-Moulineaux France
E-mail: miodrag.jovanovic@orange.com
Abstract—The objective is to build a global analytical approach
for the evaluation of the quality of service perceived by the users
in wireless cellular networks which is calibrated in some reference
cases.
To do so, a model accounting for interference in a MIMO
cellular system is ﬁrstly described. An explicit expression of users
bit-rates theoretically feasible from the information theory point
of view is then deduced. The comparison between these bit-rates
and practical LTE performance permits to obtain the progress
margins for potential evolution of the technology. Moreover, it
leads to an analytical approximate expression of the system
performance which is calibrated with the practical one. This
expression is the keystone of a global analytical approach for
the evaluation of the QoS perceived by the users in the long run
of users arrivals and departures in the network. We illustrate
our approach by calculating the users QoS as function of the
cell radius in different mobility and interference cancellation
scenarios.
Keywords-MIMO; interference; QoS; cellular; wireless
I. INTRODUCTION
The performance of a MIMO (multiple input and multiple
output) cellular network may be considered from different
points of view. The information theory gives the ultimate
performance of the best possible coding schemes, whereas
real systems deploy practical coding schemes of lower per-
formance. On the other hand, information theory gives closed
form formulae in several cases, whereas practical system
performance is mostly evaluated by simulations such as those
of 3GPP (3rd Generation Partnership Project) [1].
The objective of the present paper is to compare these two
points of views in order to establish an analytical approxima-
tion of practical system performance. Our ultimate aim is to
build a global analytical approach which is ﬁrstly calibrated
using simulation results in some reference practical cases, and
then used to study the relationships between the key network
parameters and the QoS (quality of service) perceived by the
users.
A. Related work
Telatar [2, Lemma 2] gives the capacity of a MIMO channel
with fading and additive white Gaussian noise (without inter-
ference) from the information theory point of view. Different
MIMO conﬁgurations are compared within this context by
Foschini and Gans [3] . Blum et al. [4] study the capacity
of a MIMO cellular network with ﬂat Rayleigh fading. Tulino
and Verdu [5] apply random matrix theory to analyze this
capacity. Tarok et al. [6] study the performance of space-time
coding which generalizes the Alamouti’s codes [7]. Diggavi
and Cover [8] study the worst noise process for an additive
channel under covariance constraints.
The 3GPP [1] evaluates the performance of LTE systems by
simulations. Goldsmith and Chua [9] observed that practical
coding schemes performance may be evaluated by a mod-
iﬁcation of the famous log2 (1 + SNR) Shannon’s formula.
Mogensen et al. [10] have observed that the LTE capacity in
the AWGN context is well approximated by this formula with
a multiplicative coefﬁcient. These ideas will be extended in
the present paper to MIMO cellular networks with fading.
B. Paper organization
In Section II an explicit expression of users bit-rates feasible
from the information theory point of view is given. This
expression is compared to practical system performance in
Section III. The progress margins for potential evolution of
the technology are also presented in this section. Finally, the
global analytical approach is illustrated in Section IV by
evaluating the quality of service perceived by the users in real
cellular networks accounting for their arrivals and departures.
II. THEORETICALLY FEASIBLE BIT-RATES
The aim of the present section is to establish closed-form
expressions of users bit-rates which are theoretically feasible
in MIMO cellular networks.
A. Model
Consider a wireless network composed of some disjoint
geographic zones, called cells, each one being served by a
single base station (BS) with MIMO antennas. The power
transmitted by each BS is limited to some given maximal
value. The network operates Orthogonal Frequency-Division
Multiple Access (OFDMA) which we describe now. The
frequency spectrum (allocated to the considered network) is
divided into a given number of sub-carriers, which are made
available to all base stations. Each BS allocates disjoint subsets
of these sub-carriers to its users. Thus, any given user receives
only other-BS interference; that is the sum of powers emitted
by other BS on the sub-carriers allocated to him by his serving
BS.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Assume that the bandwidth of each sub-carrier is smaller
than the coherence frequency of the channel, so that we can
consider that the fading in each sub-carrier is ﬂat. That is, the
output of the channel at a given time depends on the input
only at the same instant of time. No assumption is made
on the correlation of the fading processes of the different
subcarriers (for a given user and a given BS). However,
the fading processes for different users or base stations are
assumed independent.
Time is divided into time-slots of length smaller than the
coherence time of the channel, so that, for a given sub-carrier,
the fading remains constant during each time-slot and the
fading process in different time-slots may be assumed ergodic.
(Such model for fading generalizes the so-called quasi-static
model where the fading process at different time-slots is
assumed to be independent and identically distributed.)
The codeword duration equals the time-slot, which is as-
sumed sufﬁciently large so that the capacity within each time-
slot may be deﬁned in the asymptotic sense of information
theory. Users perform single user detection; thus the interfer-
ence is added to the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN).
The statistical properties of the interference are not known a
priory since they depend of the codings of the other users.
However the signals transmitted by different base stations are
assumed independent.
B. Notations
The covariance matrix of a random column vector X =
(X1, . . . , Xt)T in Ct is denoted by ΓX = E [XX∗] where
X∗ is the transpose complex conjugate of X. Observe for
future reference that
X∗X =
t
∑
j=1
|Xj|2
(1)
A random vector (X1, . . . , Xt) in Ct is called circularly sym-
metric Gaussian iff it is Gaussian and, each of its components
Xi (i ∈ [1, t]) has i.i.d. centred real and imaginary parts.
Consider the downlink of a wireless cellular network. Let
u be a base station serving some user through a MIMO
channel with t transmitting and r receiving antennas having
the following discrete-time model. At a given time instant n
the channel output Yn ∈ Cr is related to the channel input
Xu,n ∈ Ct by the following relation
Yn = HuXu,n + Jn + Zn,
n = 1, 2, . . .
(2)
where Hu ∈ Cr×t is the fading between the considered user
and his serving base station u (fading is assumed constant
over time for the moment), Jn ∈ Cr is the interference and
the random noises Z1, Z2, . . . are i.i.d. with values in Cr such
that each Zn is circularly-symmetric Gaussian with covariance
matrix ΓZn = NIr where N is a given positive constant and
Ir is the identity matrix of dimension r. The channel input is
subject to a power constraint of the form
1
n
n
∑
k=1
X∗
u,kXu,k ≤ P,
n = 1, 2, . . .
where P is a given positive constant. Using Equation (1) we
see that the above constraint concerns the power aggregated
over all the t transmitters.
For each interfering base station v ̸= u, let Xv,n be
its transmitted signal and Hv be the fading between the
considered user and the base station v (recall that fading is
assumed constant over time). Then the interference equals
Jn =
∑
v̸=u
HvXv,n
(3)
C. Deterministic fading: Feasible rates
Assume in the present section that the fading is determin-
istic; i.e. not random.
The capacity region of the different users from the infor-
mation theory point of view (optimized simultaneously over
the transmitted signals of all the users) is still unknown.
Nevertheless we will show that there is a particular point
within this capacity region (i.e. a feasible set of users bit-rates)
which is easy to establish and express. This point corresponds
to the following assumptions:
(A1) The signals transmitted by different base stations are
independent.
(A2) The signal Xu,n transmitted by the serving base station
is circularly-symmetric Gaussian with covariance matrix
ΓXu,n = P
t It (power equi-partition between the trans-
mitting antennas).
(A3) The signal Xv,n transmitted by each interfering base
station v ̸= u is circularly-symmetric Gaussian with a
covariance matrix Γv = P
t It (again power equi-partition
between the transmitting antennas).
(A4) The transmitted signals are independent from noises.
(A5) The signals transmitted at different time instants are
independent.
The covariance matrix of the interference (3) equals
ΓJ = E [JnJ∗
n]
= E

∑
v̸=u
HvXv,n
∑
v′̸=u
X∗
v′,nH∗
v′


=
∑
v̸=u
HvΓXv,nH∗
v
=
∑
v̸=u
HvΓvH∗
v = P
t
∑
v̸=u
HvH∗
v
where the third equality is due to (A1) and for the fourth one
is due to (A3). By (A4), the interference plus noise Z′
n :=
Jn + Zn is circularly-symmetric Gaussian [2, Lemma 4] with
covariance matrix
N := E [Z′
nZ′∗
n ] = NIr + P
t
∑
v̸=u
HvH∗
v
(4)
Moreover, using (A1)-(A4) the received signal Yn is circularly-
symmetric Gaussian with covariance matrix
ΓY = E
[
(HuXu,n + Z′
n)
(
X∗
u,nH∗
u + Z′∗
n
)]
= P
t HuH∗
u+N
Assumption (A5) permits to restrict ourselves to the mutual
information at a given time-instant; that is
I (Xu,n; Yn) = h (Yn) − h (Yn|Xu,n)
= h (Yn) − h (Z′
n)
= log2 det (πeΓY ) − log2 det (πeN)
= log2 det
(
Ir + P
t HuH∗
uN −1
)
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

where for the ﬁrst equality we use [11, Theorem 1.6.2], for
the third one we use [2, Lemma 2] and where N is given
by (4). Recall that the capacity from the information theory
point of view, denoted by C, is the supremum of the mutual
information over all the distributions of the input signal. Thus
C ≥ log2 det
(
Ir + P
t HuH∗
uN −1
)
The right-hand side of the above equation1 gives a feasible
bit-rate for the considered user. Since our assumptions (A1)-
(A5) are the same for all the users, we get similar expressions
for the feasible bit-rates of the other users and this collection
of bit-rates of the different users is feasible.
Till now we didn’t account for the propagation-losses Lu
and {Lv}v̸=u induced by the distance and shadowing between
the considered user and the serving and interfering base
stations respectively. In order to account for these losses, the
above formula should be modiﬁed as follows
C ≥ log2 det
(
Ir + P
t
HuH∗
u
Lu
N −1
)
(5)
where the noise plus interference covariance matrix N is now
given by
N =NIr + P
t
∑
v̸=u
HvH∗
v
Lv
(6)
Remark 1: Continuous-time. Consider a continuous-time
model of the channel. Let w be the bandwidth of the con-
sidered sub-carrier. The results in the discrete-time extend to
the continuous-time case, but the capacity bounds, such as the
right-hand side of (5), should be multiplied by the bandwidth
w of the considered sub-carrier. In other words, the log2 (·)
should be replaced by w × log2 (·).
D. Ergodic capacity
Consider now a given sub-carrier and multiple time-slots.
Recall that we assumed that the fading for different time-slots
are independent and identically distributed. By the law of large
numbers, the capacity averaged over a large number of time-
slots would approach the so-called ergodic capacity E [C]
where the expectation is with respect to the fading states. No
assumption is made on the distribution of the fading matrix
Hv except that its covariance equals identity; that is
E [HvH∗
v] = Ir,
for all BS v
which means that the fadings of two different transmitting
antennas are decorrelated and that the fading second moment
for a given antenna equals 1. The following proposition gives
a lower bound for the ergodic capacity.
Proposition 1: The ergodic capacity of the channel (2) is
lower bounded by
E [C] ≥ E [log2 det (Ir + SINRHuH∗
u)]
(7)
where the expectation is with respect to the fading Hu with
the serving BS and
SINR =
(P/t) /Lu
N + (P/t) ∑
v̸=u 1/Lv
(8)
which may be viewed as the Signal to Interference and Noise
Ratio per transmitting antenna2.
1which is coherent with [4, Equation (2)]
2 See [5, Equation (3.169)].
Proof: Note that the expectations in the present proof
are with respect to the fading random matrices with the
serving BS Hu and with the interfering BS {Hv}v̸=u. Let
E [·|Hu] designates the expectation conditionally to Hu. By
the properties of the conditional expectation, we have E [C] =
E [E [C|Hu]]. Equation (5) implies that
E [C|Hu] ≥ E
[
log2 det
(
Ir + P
t
HuH∗
u
Lu
N −1
) Hu
]
where N is given by (6). Using the convexity of the function
N 7→ log2
[
det
(
Ir + P
t
HuH∗
u
Lu N −1)]
on the set of positive
deﬁnite matrices of Crxr (see [8, Lemma II.3]) and Jensen’s
inequality, we deduce that
E [C|Hu] ≥ log2 det
(
Ir + P
t
HuH∗
u
Lu
E [N|Hu]−1
)
= log2 det
(
Ir + P
t
HuH∗
u
Lu
E [N]−1
)
≥ log2 det (Ir + HuH∗
uSINR)
where SINR is given by (8). Thus
E [C] = E [E [C|Hu]] ≥ E [log2 (1 + HuH∗
uSINR)]
The right-hand side of (7) may be calculated by using [2,
Theorem 2].
III. THEORETICAL VERSUS PRACTICAL PERFORMANCE
The objective of the present section is to compare the
theoretical expression established in the previous section to
practical LTE performance.
A. AWGN
Consider ﬁrstly a user served by a base station through
an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) SISO channel
without neither fading nor interference for the moment. The
user gets ideally (i.e. in the asymptotic sense of information
theory) a bit-rate given by the famous Shannon’s formula
w log2
(
1 + P/Lu
N
)
where w is the bandwidth allocated to
the considered user, N is the noise power, P is the power
transmitted by the BS and Lu is the propagation-loss (thus
P/Lu is the received power). In order to get rid of the
dependence of the bit-rate on the bandwidth, we deﬁne the
spectral efﬁciency as the ratio of the bit-rate by the bandwidth
which equals log2
(
1 + P/Lu
N
)
in the AWGN context.
Mogensen et al. [10] and the 3GPP [12, §A.2] have observed
that the LTE system spectral efﬁciency in this AWGN context
is well approximated by
s ≃ a log2
(
1 + P/Lu
N
)
(9)
for some constant a < 1 accounting on the one hand for the
gap between the practical coding schemes and the optimal ones
and on the other hand for the loss of capacity due to signalling.
This observation shall be conﬁrmed and the typical value of a
for LTE will be given. Note that the relative difference 1 − a
between the Shannon’s limit and the practical LTE system
may be seen as a progress margin for potential evolution of
the technology in the AWGN context.
In the AWGN context, the 3GPP [12, §A.2] shows that
there is a 25% gap between the practical coding schemes and
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

the optimal ones (in the sense information theory). Moreover,
some of the transmitted bits are used for signalling which
induces a supplementary capacity loss of about 30% (see [13,
§6.8],[14, p.155]); this leads to a = 0.75 × (1 − 0.3) ≃ 0.5
in Equation (9). Figure 1 shows that the spectral efﬁciency
obtained by simulations with Orange’s link tool agrees with
the analytic approximation (9) with a = 0.5.
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
-5
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
Spectral efficiency [bit/s/Hz]
SNR [dB]
Simulations
Analytic approx.
Fig. 1.
Practical performance for AWGN
Remark 2: Indeed the signalling loss depends on the
number of transmitting and receiving antennas. It is about
40/168 = 24%, 48/168 = 29% and 52/168 = 31%
respectively for SIMO 1 × 2, MIMO 2 × 2 and MIMO 4 × 2
(see [13, §6.8],[14, p.155]).
B. Fading and interference
We aim now to account for fading, MIMO and interference.
In this context, let the spectral efﬁciency be the ratio of the
bit-rate averaged over the fading (called ergodic capacity in
the information theory framework) by the bandwidth.
In order to simplify the notation, we denote by S the
analytical (lower bound of the) spectral efﬁciency given in
the right-hand side of (7) pondered by the parameter a = 0.5
obtained in the previous section; that is
S (SINR, t, r) = aE [log2 det (Ir + HuH∗
uSINR)]
(10)
where SINR is the signal to interference and noise ratio (per
transmitting antenna) given by Equation (8).
The question now is what is the practical LTE spectral
efﬁciency compared to the above analytical expression? Is it
better or worse and what is the difference?
In order to get the practical LTE performance, we consider
the output of Orange’s simulator compliant with the 3GPP
recommendation [1] (see this reference for the details of the
simulations) in the so-called calibration case. It corresponds
to MIMO 1×2 with round robin (RR) scheduler. We consider
also other MIMO conﬁgurations and proportional fair (PF)
scheduler, keeping all the other parameters unchanged. In
particular, each base station always transmits its maximal
power (full buffer).
According to [1], the 3GPP simulations consist in gener-
ating several realizations of the users positions, shadowing
MIMO
Scheduler
b
residual stand. dev.
b′
1 × 2
RR
0.83
0.45
0.98
1 × 2
PF
1.02
0.65
1.19
2 × 2
PF
0.67
0.74
1.08
4 × 2
PF
0.49
0.76
0.90
TABLE I
RESULTS OF THE LINEAR FITTINGS.
losses and fading channels. For each user location and each
shadowing realization, the spectral efﬁciency is averaged over
a large number of fadings samples (about 1000). The value
of the SINR including only the distance and the shadowing
effects (and not fading) is also given. Then the spectral efﬁ-
ciency as function of the SINR is compared to the theoretical
relation (10). More speciﬁcally, we make a linear regression
between the spectral efﬁciency obtained from simulations and
the theoretical efﬁciency given by Equation (10); that is we
search for some b such that
s ≃ b × S (SINR, t, r)
(11)
Table I gives the results of the linear ﬁtting (11); i.e. the
values of b and the corresponding residual standard deviation
for different MIMO conﬁgurations3 (the ﬁrst row corresponds
to the calibration case [1, Table A.2.2-1]). Moreover, the 95%-
conﬁdence interval is about b ± 0.01 for all the studied cases.
Figure 2 shows the spectral efﬁciency as function of the
SINR from simulations and from the analytical expression
(right-hand side of (11)) for the calibration case. Observe that
the analytical expression reproduces well the general tendency
of the empirical data obtained from simulations. The ﬁgures
for the other cases listed in Table I are also generated, but not
reproduced in the paper due to their similarity to Figure 2.
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
-10
-5
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
Spectral efficiency [bit/s/Hz]
SINR [dB]
3GPP simulations
Analytical 
Fig. 2.
Simulations versus the analytical expression (right-hand side of (11))
for the calibration case
Remark 3: In order to simplify the calculations we have
also tested a linear regression between the spectral efﬁciency
s obtained from simulations and the AWGN expression (9).
3All the considered cases have a MRC (Maximum Ratio Combining)
receiver, except the MIMO 4 × 2 case which has a MMSE (Minimum Mean
Square Error) receiver. At the base station side, the transmitting antennas are
pairwise cross-polar. In the case MIMO 4 × 2, the two cross-polar pairs of
transmitting antennas are separated by 10 times the wavelength.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Observe from Equation (8) that when noise is dominant against
interference, then
SINR = (P/t) /Lu
N
= P/Lu
N
× 1
t
Thus, in this particular case, the term P/Lu
N
in the right-hand
side of (9) equals SINR × t. Then, in the general case, it is
natural to look for a ﬁtting in the form
s ≃ b′ × a log2 (1 + SINR × t)
The resulting values of b′ are indicated in Table I with residual
standard deviations close to those indicated in the fourth
column of that table.
C. SINR
For the analytical approach we use a similar geometric
pattern of the network (hexagonal) and the same propagation-
loss modeling regarding the distance and shadowing effects
(fading has been already taken into account on the link level
in the previous section) as the 3GPP calibration case [15, Table
A.2.1.1-3] and [1, Table A.2.2-1].
More speciﬁcally, the frequency carrier is 2GHz. The dis-
tance loss model is L = 128.1 + 37.6 × log10(r) [in dB]. A
supplementary penetration loss of 20dB is added. The shad-
owing is modeled as a centered log-normal random variable of
standard deviation 8dB. The following 2D horizontal antenna
pattern is used
A (φ) = − min
(
12
(φ
θ
)2
, Am
)
,
θ = 70◦, Am = 20dB
(12)
The system bandwidth is W = 10MHz, the noise power equals
N = −95dBm (−174dBm/Hz, noise ﬁgure=9dB) and the
transmission power of the base station is P = 60dBm (46dBm
plus G = 14dBi of antenna gain). The network is composed
of 36 hexagons (6 × 6). Each hexagon comprises three sectors
which gives a total of 108 sectors. The distance between the
centers of two neighboring hexagons is 500m. We generate
3600 random user locations uniformly in the network; that is
100 user locations per hexagon in average.
The 3GPP simulations published in [1] are made on a planar
network with random locations of the users. In the present
study, two network models are considered: either planar or
toroidal (to avoid the border effects).
Each mobile is served by the base station with the smallest
propagation-loss (including distance, shadowing and antenna
pattern). In order to facilitate the comparison of our results to
those of 3GPP, we deﬁne the coupling-gain as the antenna gain
G minus propagation-loss L with the serving base station. The
cumulative distribution function (CDF)4 of the coupling-gain
obtained by 3GPP simulations [1, Figures A.2.2-1 (left)] and
by our models are given in Figure 3. This ﬁgure shows that
the results of our planar network are close to those of 3GPP
simulations, whereas those of toroidal network give larger
coupling gain. This is due to the fact that in a planar network
edge users get smaller coupling gain than in the toroidal one.
The SINR for each mobile is calculated by Equation (8),
where u is the index of the serving base station. Figure 4 shows
the CDF of the SINR coming from 3GPP simulations [1,
Figure A.2.2-1 (right)] compared to that resulting from our
4over all the user locations in the network
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
-140
-130
-120
-110
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
CDF
Coupling gain [dB]
3GPP simulations
Planar network
Toroidal network
Fig. 3.
CDF of the coupling gain (antenna gain minus propagation loss)
models. Again our planar model gives closer results to the
3GPP simulations than the toroidal one. Nevertheless, the
difference between the SINRs of the toroidal and the planar
networks is smaller than 0.5dB.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
-10
-5
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
CDF
SINR [dB]
3GPP simulations
Planar network
Toroidal network
Fig. 4.
CDF of SINR
Remark 4: Figure 4 shows that the SINR doesn’t exceed
17dB. Indeed, each mobile served by a given base station
(sector) is at least interfered by the two other sectors on the
same site. The power received from each of these sectors is
at least 10−2 times that received from the serving BS (this is
related to Am = 20dB in Equation (12)). The interference to
signal ratio is consequently larger than 2 × 10−2 i.e. −17dB
which explains the observed upper limit of SINR.
Remark 5: Observe that the SINR deﬁned by Equation (8)
is different from the SINR calculated by 3GPP simulations
which equals
SINR3GPP =
P/Lu
N + P ∑
v̸=u 1/Lv
However, if noise is negligible compared to interference,
then the two SINRs are identical. This is the case in the
considered urban scenario (small cell radius), so we have not
to distinguish between these two SINRs.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Arithmetic mean
Harmonic mean
MIMO
Scheduler
Simus
Analytic
Simus
Analytic
1 × 2
RR
1.01
1.00
0.50
0.69
1 × 2
PF
1.32
1.23
0.80
0.85
2 × 2
PF
1.43
1.41
0.84
1.00
4 × 2
PF
1.54
1.54
0.95
1.18
TABLE II
CELL SPECTRAL EFFICIENCY: COMPARISON OF THE 3GPP SIMULATIONS
AND THE ANALYTIC RESULTS.
D. Spectral efﬁciency
For each mobile we calculate the spectral efﬁciency corre-
sponding to its SINR by relation (11). In order to facilitate
the comparison of our results to those of 3GPP, we deﬁne the
normalized user throughput as the spectral efﬁciency divided
by 10 (this is historically related to the fact there are 10 users
per cell in 3GPP simulations). The CDFs of the normalized
user throughput obtained by 3GPP simulations [1, Figure
A.2.2-3 (left)] and by our model are plotted in Figure 5. The
3GPP distribution is more spread than that of our models;
this is related to the fact that the 3GPP spectral efﬁciency
represents some variability around the analytic one as shown
in Figure 2. Moreover, we observe that the results of the planar
and toroidal models for the network are close to each other.
Thus, the toroidal model is considered for the remaining part
of the paper.
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
CDF
Normalized user throughput [bit/s/Hz]
3GPP simulations
Planar network
Toroidal network
Fig. 5.
CDF of normalized user throughput
Table II gives the arithmetic mean of the spectral efﬁciencies
at the different locations (called cell spectral efﬁciency) for
both 3GPP simulations and analytic approach. The results of
two methods agree for all the considered MIMO and scheduler
conﬁgurations.
Remark 6: Note that the results of the simulations given in
Table II are produced by the simulator of Orange which is
one of the contributors to 3GPP. The values indicated in [1,
Table A.2.2-2] are in fact averaged over the different 3GPP
contributors including Orange. In particular, for the calibration
case (MIMO 1 × 2 with RR scheduler) Orange’s result is 1.01
whereas 3GPP average is 1.1. The variability of the results
amoung the contributors is partially due to the randomness
induced by the shadowing.
IV. USER’S QOS CALCULATION
In order to illustrate the whole analytical approach, we show
now how to calculate the QoS perceived by the users in a
dynamic context; i.e., when users arrive and depart from the
network. Variable bit-rate (VBR) calls such as mail, http, ftp
are considered. Each VBR call aims to transmit some volume
of data at a bit-rate which is decided by the network. Deﬁne
the peak bit-rate at a given location as the bit-rate which may
be allocated to some user in this location assuming that he is
alone in the cell and that all the base stations transmit at their
maximal powers. As observed by Caire and al. in [16, §I], for
the VBR calls the performance at the link level for a given
location should be ﬁrstly averaged over the fading; then these
averages may be used at the queueing theory time scale to
account for call arrivals and departures. Therefore we have a
natural separation of the time scales of information theory and
queueing theory. Assuming a round robin schedular, the peak
bit-rate at each location equals the system bandwidth times
the spectral efﬁciency at that location given by Equation (11).
Let ρ be the trafﬁc demand (in bit/s) per cell; that is the ratio
of the average volume of data per call to the duration between
two call arrivals to the cell. Assume that the trafﬁc demand
is uniformly distributed over the cell and that the users are
allocated equal portions of the available resources (time and/or
frequency). We assume that the users don’t move during their
calls.
In this context, queueing theory [17], [18, Example 10]
shows that the user’s throughput in the long run of the call
arrivals and departures is given by
¯r = max(0, ρc − ρ)
(13)
where ρc is the so-called critical trafﬁc demand which equals
the harmonic mean of the peak bit-rates in the cell if the
users don’t move during their calls. On the opposite, if the
users move during their calls, then the critical trafﬁc demand
equals the arithmetic mean of the peak bit-rates in the cell.
At high mobility, the above formula holds also true with the
appropriate critical trafﬁc demand.
Consider the numerical setting of the calibration case
described in Section III-C. Figure 6 shows the throughput
per user in the cell as function of the cell radius for a
trafﬁc demand density 300kbit/s/km2 (typical value in urban
areas) for both the no-mobility and high mobility cases. We
consider also the case when the interference is completely
cancelled. As expected, the user’s throughput decreases with
the cell radius and ultimately vanishes for some critical cell
radius. Moreover, observe that the mobility improves the user
throughput from the queueing theory point of view as proved
theoretically in [19, §VI]. On the other hand, observe that
the interference cancellation improves performance, but this
improvement decreases as the cell radius increases. For a cell
radius of 0.3km, the interference cancellation increases the
user throughput by a factor of about 7; whereas this factor is
only of about 2 for cell radius of 2km. This is due to the fact
that as the cell radius inceases, the noise becomes dominant
compared to interference.
The analytical approach developed in the present paper
permits to make the parametric study represented in Figure 6
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 0
 10000
 20000
 30000
 40000
 50000
 60000
 70000
 80000
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
User throughput [kbit/s]
Cell radius [km]
No mobility, full interf.
No mobility, cancelled interf.
High mobility, full interf.
High mobility, cancelled interf.
Fig. 6.
User throughput as function of the cell radius in the cases of no
mobility and high mobility (for the calibration scenario)
in about one minute; whereas it would require weeks for the
3GPP simulations.
Remark 7: Table II shows the harmonic means of the
spectral efﬁciency obtained from 3GPP simulations and from
the analytical expression. The difference may be explained
as follows. Recall that the harmonic mean is sensitive to
the minimal value of the considered data; for example if
one of these data is null then the harmonic mean vanishes.
Moreover, Figure 2 shows that the 3GPP spectral efﬁciency
represents some variability around (and in particular comprise
smaller values than) the analytic curve. This explains why the
harmonic means obtained from simulations in Table II are
lower than the analytic ones.
V. CONCLUSION
We describe a simple model of a MIMO cellular network
which permits to obtain an analytical expression of users bit-
rates which are feasible from the information theory point
of view. This expression accounts for the variety of MIMO
conﬁgurations (numbers of transmitting and receiving anten-
nas) and radio conditions (SINR). This expression is compared
to practical LTE performance evaluated by 3GPP simulations
for different cases including the so-called calibration case.
The comparison shows that the analytical expression may
be adjusted to the practical performance by a multiplicative
coefﬁcient which depends on the MIMO conﬁguration but not
on the SINR. Additionally, we show the progress margin for
potential evolution of the technology.
In order to illustrate the whole analytical approach, we
calculate the throughput perceived by the users in the long run
of users arrivals and departures in the network. The analytical
approach permits to make the calculations in a much faster
computing time than a purely simulation approach. The com-
parison of null and high user’s mobility permits to quantify the
effect of this mobility from the queueing theory point of view.
Studying the case when inteference is completely cancelled
permits to quantify the ultimate impovement expected from
the interference cancellation.
The simplifying assumption that the base stations are always
transmitting (even when there are no users to serve) shall be
examined in the future work. Moreover, the QoS for other
service classes such as streaming will be studied.
Acknowledgement: We thank B. Błaszczyszyn (INRIA), M.
Debbah (Supelec) as well as A. Saadani, S. Jeux and A. Jassal
(Orange Labs) for useful discussions related to the present
paper.
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP, “TR 36.814-V900 Further advancements for E-UTRA - Physical
Layer Aspects,” in 3GPP Ftp Server, 2010.
[2] I. E. Telatar, “Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels,” AT&T
Technical Memorandum, June 1995.
[3] G. J. Foschini and M. J. Gans, “On limits of wireless communications in
a fading environment when using multiple antennas,” Wireless Personal
Communications, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 311–335, March 1998.
[4] R. S. Blum, J. H. Winters, and N. R. Sollenberger, “On the capacity of
cellular systems with MIMO,” Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 6,
no. 6, pp. 242 –244, jun 2002.
[5] A. M. Tulino and S. Verd´u, “Random matrix theory and wireless commu-
nications,” Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information
Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, 2004.
[6] V. Tarokh, H. Jafarkhani, and A. R. Calderbank, “Space-time block
coding for wireless communications: performance results,” IEEE J.
Select. Areas Commun., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 451–460, 1999.
[7] S. M. Alamouti, “A simple transmit diversity technique for wireless
communications,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 8, pp.
1451 –1458, oct 1998.
[8] S. Diggavi and T. Cover, “The worst additive noise under a covariance
constraint,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 3072–3081,
2001.
[9] A. J. Goldsmith and S.-G. Chua, “Variable-rate variable-power MQAM
for fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 1218–
1230, 1997.
[10] P. E. Mogensen, W. Na, I. Z. Kov´acs, F. Frederiksen, A. Pokhariyal,
K. I. Pedersen, T. E. Kolding, K. Hugl, and M. Kuusela, “LTE Capacity
Compared to the Shannon Bound,” in Proc. of VTC Spring, 2007, pp.
1234–1238.
[11] S. Ihara, Information theory for continuous systems.
World Scientiﬁc,
1993.
[12] 3GPP, “TR 36.942-V830 Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access
(E-UTRA) - Radio Frequency (RF) system scenarios,” in 3GPP Ftp
Server, Sep. 2010.
[13] ——, “TR 36.211-V910 Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA) - Physical Channels and Modulation,” in 3GPP Ftp Server, Mar.
2010.
[14] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Skold, 4g: LTE/LTE-advanced for mobile
broadband.
Academic Press Inc, 2011.
[15] 3GPP, “TR 25.814-V710 Physical layer aspects for evolved Universal
Terrestrial Radio Access (UTRA),” in 3GPP Ftp Server, 2006.
[16] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Optimum power control over
fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1468–
1489, Jul. 1999.
[17] J. W. Cohen, On regenerative processes in queueing theory, ser. Lecture
Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 1976, vol. 121.
[18] M. K. Karray, “User’s mobility effect on the performance of wireless
cellular networks serving elastic trafﬁc,” Wireless Networks (Springer),
vol. 17, no. 1, Jan. 2011.
[19] T. Bonald, S. Borst, and A. Prouti`ere, “How mobility impacts the
ﬂow-level performance of wireless data systems,” in Proc. of IEEE
INFOCOM, 2004, pp. 1872–1881.
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

