BIG IoT – Interconnecting IoT Platforms From Different Domains – Final Results 
Thomas Jell 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: Thomas.Jell@siemens.com
Arne Bröring 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
Claudia Baumgartner 
VMW Berlin 
Berlin, Germany 
Jelena Mitic 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany
Abstract—The Internet of Things (IoT) is today separated by 
different vertically oriented platforms for integration of all the 
different devices. Developers who aim to access other 
platforms and access that data are forced to manually adapt 
their interfaces to the specific platform API and data models. 
This paper highlights the work of the BIG IoT project that 
aims at launching an IoT marketplace and ecosystem as part of 
the European Platform Initiative (IoT EPI). The project 
finished end of 2018, so we present the setup and the final 
results of the integration of the use cases that have been 
implemented in Northern Germany, Italy and Barcelona. 
Keywords-BigIoT; Connectimg IoT; Interoperability. 
I.
INTRODUCTION THE PROBLEM OF MISSING IOT
INTEROPERABILITY
The idea of the IoT is in widespread use since the last 
few years, collecting sensor data from various application 
domains. However, so far, these IoT platforms do not form a 
vibrant ecosystem. There have been lots of research and 
innovation projects in the context of the IoT. Nonetheless, no 
broadly used professional eco-systems for the IoT exist 
today. One reason for this is the large number of 
stakeholders who are involved in IoT ecosystems. Among 
these are providers of platforms and things, as well as 
application developers, and end users. Another reason for 
this issue are the high entry barriers for developers of ser-
vices and applications. This is caused by the heterogeneity of 
all known IoT platforms. Developers who want to access 
things and additional data from different platforms need to 
manually access them by implementing specific adapters. 
Also, incentives are missing for platform providers to open 
their systems to third parties. 
These different issues all relate to one particular 
challenge: the missing interoperability on the IoT. Today, 
various protocols and standards are available on the IoT [2]. 
This heterogeneity ranges from basic communication 
protocols such as CoAP [3] and MQTT [4], to focused 
standard families, such as oneM2M [5] or OGC SWE [6]. 
II.
THE BIG IOT APPROACH 
Bridging the Interoperability Gap of the IoT (BIG IoT) 
[6] is the project that aims at enabling the access of services 
and applications from multiple IoT platforms, standards and 
domains towards building IoT ecosystems.  
Previous 
EC-funded 
projects 
that 
address 
such 
enablement of IoT ecosystems are, e.g., IoT-A, by providing 
a common architecture, FIWARE that offers Generic 
Enablers as building blocks, or projects such as compose and 
OpenIoT, which offer dedicated IoT platforms to aggregate 
other platforms and systems. BIG IoT will not develop yet 
another platform in order to enable cross-platform IoT 
applications. Instead, to reach the above outlined goal, BIG 
IoT builds up on 3 key pillars for an interoperable IoT 
ecosystem: (1) a common BIG IoT API, (2) well-defined 
information models, and (3) a marketplace to monetize 
access to resources. This approach is illustrated in Figure 1. 
Of central importance is the BIG IoT API, which includes 
functionalities such as ID management and discovery of 
things, access to things on platforms, tasking of things to 
send commands, as well as vocabulary management for 
handling semantics and security management. In order to 
interact with the marketplace, the API implemented by IoT 
platforms supports charging for access to things. The generic 
BIG IoT API as well as the underlying information models 
have been defined in conjunction with the Web of Things 
Interest Group at the W3C for standardization. 
The details of this technical baseline have already been 
specified [8] in a comprehensive architectural design. 
Thereby, particular importance has been given to specific 
security and privacy requirements [7]. While these technical 
considerations build the foundation for the ecosystem to 
function, a crucial aspect to growing an ecosystem is the 
underlying business mod-el. Therefore, the BIG IoT project 
has analyzed various business cases and value networks [9]. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-719-1
ICWMC 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

III.
USE CASES: OVERVIEW AND EXAMPLE 
The BIG IoT project has developed a first prototype of an 
IoT ecosystem with overall 8 IoT platforms using all the 
common BIG IoT API. Among them are platforms from 
most of the partners: Bosch, CSI, Siemens, VMZ, and 
WorldSensing. The use cases to verify the interoperability 
span the mobility domain and include smart parking, bike 
sharing and traffic management. They are demonstrated and 
verified in pilots in Barcelona (Spain), Piedmont (Italy) and 
Berlin/Wolfsburg (NG, Northern-Germany).  
The main focus is put on specifying services integrated 
and offered via the BIG IoT Marketplace. Additionally, 
applications based on the services that are show-cased are 
specified.  The work is executed for all three pilots, taking 
into account the specific characteristics of the infrastructure 
as well as pilot-specific requirements. 
The Northern Germany Pilot focuses in Berlin on the 
already installed network of parking sensors (Siemens) in 
dedicated areas as well as a variety of sensors throughout the 
city (VMZ). 
Additionally a semi public parking area at VMZ’s 
premises will be equipped with radar sensors to detect 
parking vehicles. Provided services and apps will be: 
• 
smart parking,  
• 
smart charging,  
• 
public transport optimization,  
• 
multimodal route optimization,  
• 
parking and charging info and  
• 
reservation of parking spots 
The smart objects are charging stations, parking detectors 
and Wi-Fi probes as well as location sensors on buses, which 
deliver their data to availability services for further provision 
to the BIG IoT ecosystem. The data from those smart objects 
provided by the avail-ability services are used by other 
services or by the end user applications directly. 
The services are  
• 
Parking spot availability,  
• 
Parking spot WMS,  
• 
Parking reservation 
• 
People density estimation on bus, 
• 
People density estimation in area,  
• 
Live bus location,  
• 
Charging station availability and 
• 
Charging station WMS. 
The services support the different applications with 
offerings in terms of raw and aggregated data and 
functionalities. 
We will present the first success story showing the 
integration of parking data from different sources (Berlin, 
Munich, Barcelona) via the already existing Marketplace 
into integrated end user applications. 
IV.
NORTHERN GERMANY PILOT 
This BIG IoT Pilot makes use of innovative solutions 
already in place in the mobility innovation labs Berlin and 
Wolfsburg, 
the 
Northern 
Germany 
headquarter 
of 
automotive industry. The pilot shows how BIG IoT can 
contribute to mobility innovation in metropolitan areas, 
middle-sized towns and the connected com-muter traffic, 
addressing the future needs of urban and rural mobility. The 
pilots´ main target is to enable solutions for efficient parking, 
optimized public transport, better usage of e-mobility 
infrastructure and multimodal mobility information to 
support an efficient and sustainable mobility and a better 
environment.  This is done by providing services and apps 
for 
Smart Parking: Making use of on street Siemens parking 
radar sensors in Berlin and parking detectors in public car 
parks in Wolfsburg. BIG IoT provides a Smart Parking App 
to inform car drivers on location and availability of parking 
spots. Thus, car drivers find the closest parking spots and 
parking search traffic - a major cause for urban traffic stress - 
is reduced.  The sensor data are provided by BIG IoT-
enabled platforms such as Siemens APM (Advanced Parking 
Management) platform and BOSCH Bezirk platform.  In 
addition to parking availability, reservation of parking spots 
will be provided as a service. Being BIG-IoTized enables 
Siemens Smart Parking App to consume any BIG IoT 
parking offerings, helps to extend the geographical coverage 
of parking information and increases business opportunities 
for service providers. Step one on the way to a European 
solution has al-ready been done with the integration of 
WorldSensing parking data of our co-pilot Barcelona – 
enabled by: BIG IoT.  
Public Transport Optimization: Based on Wifi-sensors on 
connected buses Wolfsburg public transport operators get 
better information on bus occupancy and people waiting at 
bus stations. Wifi-sensor data is integrated in BIG IoT 
enabled BOSCH Smart City Platform. This helps to optimize 
vehicle usage and bus line planning to get more customer 
demand oriented public transport services.  
E-Mobility: Where can I find the next free charging 
station to charge my e-car, e-scooter, e-van? By providing 
this crucial information to e-mobility users BIG IoT 
contributes to the success of e-mobility. E-Mobility in Berlin 
picked up speed in 2012 with first charging stations on 
public ground and has been continuously extended to 
presently more than 350 charging points. Location and status 
of more than 350 charging stations in Berlin are currently 
provided via BIG IoT enabled VMZ multimodal mobility 
platform. With higher numbers of e-vehicles the need to 
reserve a charging station will increase in the future. Thus, 
BIG IoT reservation service for charging stations is an 
appreciated Open Call contribution.   
Multimodal Commuter App: This App consumes sensor 
and mobility data coming from various BIG IoT enabled 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-719-1
ICWMC 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

platforms to inform Commuters on the route between Berlin 
and Wolfsburg. The App pro-vides car and public transport 
routing functionalities and guides car drivers to available 
parking spots and charging stations, includes BIG IoT 
offerings for real time traffic information such as traffic 
detectors data, incidents and traffic messages for car and 
public transport. Incorporating diverse data offerings of the 
BIG IoT Marketplace offering collection the App bridges the 
interoperability gap of various platforms to provide a multi-
modal real-time based information system for mobility end 
users. 
V.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
BIG IoT provides the common base for enabling dif-
ferent IoT platforms to access their sensors, data and services 
by a common BIG IoT API and the market-place behind to 
orchestrate exchange. The major results achieved have been: 
• 
Subscribe to marketplace is a couple of lines of 
code, only 
• 
Connect to data source is a couple of lines of code, 
as well 
Effort for integration (as an independent docker con-
tainer) of data has been reduced from days to minutes. More 
and more Data Sources and Services Providers joined and 
join allowing to choose in a rich marketplace. 
Marketplace and all other source code is made avail-able 
open source through an eclipse license. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is supported by the BIG IoT project that has 
received funding from the European Commis-sion's Horizon 
2020 research and innovation program under grant 
agreement No 688038. This article pre-sents the current 
status of work in the project. We thank the consortium 
partners for their feedback and fruitful discussions. The work 
will be further evolved as part of the ongoing architecture 
development in the project. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Kubler, S., K. Främling, A. Zaslavsky, C. Doukas, E. 
Olivares, G. Fortino, C. E. Palau, S. Soursos, I. Pod-nar 
Zarko, Y. Fang, S. Krco, C. Heinz, C. Grimm, A. Bröring, J. 
Mitic, K. Olstedt and O. Vermesan (2016): IoT Platforms 
Initiative. In: Vermesan, O. & P. Friess, Digitising the 
Industry - Internet of Things Connecting the Physical, Digital 
and Virtual World. Chapter 9, pp. 265-292. River Publishers, 
ISBN: 978-87-93379-82-4. 
[2]
Bröring, A., S.K. Datta and C. Bonnet (2016): A 
Categorization of Discovery Technologies for the Internet of 
Things. 6th International Conference on the Internet of Things 
(IoT 2016), 7.-9. November 2016, Stuttgart, Germany. ACM. 
ISBN: 
978-1-4503-4814-0. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=2991561.2991570 
[3]
C. Bormann, A. P. Castellani, and Z. Shelby, “CoAP: An 
Application Protocol for Billions of Tiny Internet Nodes,” 
IEEE Internet Comput., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 62–67, Mar. 2012.  
[4]
IBM and Eurotech, “MQTT V3.1 Protocol Specifi-cation.” 
[Online]. Available:  
http://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/dw/webservices/ws-
mqtt/mqtt-v3r1.html. [Accessed: 24-Apr-2014].  
[5]
J. Swetina, G. Lu, P. Jacobs, F. Ennesser, and J. Song, 
“Toward a standardized common M2M service layer 
platform: Introduction to oneM2M,” Wirel. Commun. IEEE, 
vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 20–26, 2014.  
[6]
A. Bröring, J. Echterhoff, S. Jirka, I. Simonis, T. Everding, C. 
Stasch, S. Liang, and Rob Lemmens, “New Generation 
Sensor Web Enable-ment,” Sensors, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2652–
2699, 2011.  
[7]
Bröring, A., S. Schmid, C.-K.Schindhelm, A. Khelil, S. 
Kaebisch, D. Kramer, D. Le Phuoc, J. Mitic, D. An-icic, and 
E. Teniente (2017, forthcoming): Enabling IoT Ecosystems 
through Platform Interoperability. IEEE Software, special 
issue on: Software Engineering for the Internet of Things. 
[8]
Hernandez-Serrano, J., J.L. Munoz, A. Bröring, O. Esparza, 
L. Mikkelsen, W. Schwarzott and O. Leon (2017, 
forthcoming): On the Road to Secure and Pri-vacy-preserving 
IoT 
Ecosystems. 
2nd 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Interoperability & Open Source Solu-tions for the Internet of 
Things (InterOSS-IoT 2016) at 6th International Conference 
on the Internet of Things (IoT 2016), 7. November 2016, 
Stuttgart, Ger-many. Springer, LNCS. 
[9]
Schmid, S., A. Bröring, D. Kramer, S. Kaebisch, A. Zappa, 
M. Lorenz, Y. Wang and L. Gioppo (2017, forthcoming): An 
Architecture 
for 
Interoperable 
IoT 
Ecosystems. 
2nd 
International Workshop on Interop-erability & Open Source 
Solutions for the Internet of Things (InterOSS-IoT 2016) at 
6th International Con-ference on the Internet of Things (IoT 
2016), 7. No-vember 2016, Stuttgart, Germany. Springer, 
LNCS. 
[10] Schladofsky, W., J. Mitic, A.P. Metzger, C. Simona-to, L. 
Gioppo, D. Leonardos and A. Bröring An Architec-ture for 
Interoperable IoT Ecosystems. InterOSS-IoT 2016 at 6th 
International Conference on the Internet of Things (IoT 
2016), 7. November 2016, Stuttgart, Germany. Springer, 
LNCS. 
[11] T. Jell, A. Bröring, and J. Mitic, BIG IoT – Intercon-necting 
IoT Platforms from different domains - First success story 
IEEE, Proceedings of the ITNG 2017 
[12] T. Jell, A. Bröring, and J. Mitic, BIG IoT – Intercon-necting 
IoT Platforms from different domains - First success story 
IEEE, Proceedings of the ICE 2017 
[13] T. Jell, C. Baumgartner, A. Bröring, and J. Mitic, BIG IoT – 
Interconnecting IoT Platforms from different domains – Use 
case Northern Germany IEEE, Pro-ceedings of the ITNG 
2018 
[14] T. Jell, C. Baumgartner, A. Bröring, and J. Mitic, BIG IoT – 
Interconnecting IoT Platforms from different domains – Final 
Results IEEE, Proceedings of the ICE 2019. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-719-1
ICWMC 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

