On Achieving High Capacity using Small Cells in Multistory Buildings: A Review 
Rony Kumer Saha 
Radio and Spectrum Laboratory 
KDDI Research, Inc.                   
2-1-15 Ohara, Fujimino-shi, Saitama, Japan   
Email: ro-saha@kddi-research.jp 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we review the state-of-the-art 
research studies to present the potential of small cells to address 
the high capacity demands of in-building users in mobile 
networks. In doing so, we explore existing works in three major 
directions toward improving the network capacity, including 
spectrum accessibility, spectral efficiency improvement, and 
network densification. It is shown that the exploitation of the 
Cognitive Radio technology to improve spectrum utilization and 
the 3-Dimensional (3D) spatial reuse of millimeter-wave spectrum 
with in-building multiband-enabled ultra-dense small cells to avail 
additional spectrum using Dynamic Spectrum Sharing can 
address enormous capacity demand in indoor mobile networks.  
Keywords—3D; small cell; network capacity; in-building; 
millimeter-wave; review; mobile network.   
I. INTRODUCTION 
A. Background      
In typical cellular mobile networks, a major portion of the 
data is generated by indoor users at high data rates to support 
rich multimedia services on mobile phones, particularly in 
urban high-rise buildings, many of which encompassing several 
hundreds of apartments. Due to the presence of high external 
wall penetration loss of a building, the scarcity of available 
system bandwidth below 3 GHz, and a limit to the maximum 
transmission power to avoid excessive interference, serving this 
large amount of indoor data at a high rate with an outdoor 
Macrocell Base Station (MBS) is difficult. Hence, it now 
becomes inevitable how to address indoor high data rates and 
enormous capacity demands. 
The received signal capacity at a receiver is a function of 
the distance from the transmitter and available spectrum 
bandwidth. The lower the distance and higher the spectrum 
bandwidth, the better the received signal capacity. The distance 
can be lowered by reducing the cell size so that the transmitter 
and receiver are as close in distance as possible. Figure 1 shows 
the formation of small cells each having a radius r operating at 
the spectrum bandwidth of b from a large macrocell having a 
radius R operating at the spectrum bandwidth of B. 
Clearly, it can be observed that the reduction in the 
macrocell coverage into a number of smaller ones allows 
reusing the same spectrum (B where B=b) spatially (an indirect 
impact toward the spectrum extension), resulting in achieving 
more capacity over a certain area (i.e., 
S
M
C
 x C

where 
M
C
and 
S
C  denote, respectively, the macrocell capacity and the 
total small cell capacity, and x denotes spectrum reuse factor, 
which is 7 in Fig. 1), assuming that the Signal-to-Interference-
plus-Noise-Ratio (SINR) is the same for both the macrocell and 
small cells.  
Note that a small cell is a cellular radio access node that 
provides small coverage (typically in the order of 10 meters) at 
R
A large macrocell 
B
A set of small cells
r
r
r
r
r
r
r
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
R>r
B=b
Spectrum reuse
(a)
(b)
 
Figure 1. Formation of small cells from a large macrocell. 
low power in both licensed and unlicensed spectrum bands to 
serve its users' mobile and Internet services. Small cells can be 
deployed by either users or network operators. Operators use 
them to extend their networks, particularly, to cover dense 
urban areas, where the presence of several high-rise buildings 
is a usual scenario, to provide a good signal quality. Femtocells 
are examples of small cells, and we use the terms “small cell” 
and “femtocell” interchangeably. Hence, because of a small 
coverage and a low transmission power, deploying Small Cell 
Base Stations (SBSs) within buildings as shown in Fig. 2 is 
considered an effective approach to serve such a large amount 
of indoor traffic at a high data rate. 
 
Figure 2. In-building small cell networks. 
From Shannon’s capacity formula given in (1), it can be  
r
2
T
Log
1
L
P
C
B
N
I




 
 








                     (1) 
Outdoor 
macrocell UE
Macrocell 
A multistory building deployed 
with small cells
Mobile network operator 
10 m
10 m
Floor 
...
...
...
...
...
Apartment 
Small cells
A small 
cell UE
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

where 
L
C  ,   , B  , 
rP  , N  , and 
TI   denote, respectively, 
achievable capacity, spectrum reuse factor, available spectrum 
bandwidth, received desired signal power, noise, and received 
total interference signal power. 
observed that the network capacity can be improved mainly by 
addressing three directions, including spectrum accessibility, 
spectral efficiency improvement, and network densification. 
These are shown in a network capacity improvement triangle in 
Fig. 3 along with three directions. Corresponding enabling  
Spectrum 
Accessibility   
Network 
densification 
Spectral Efficiency 
Improvement 
Network Capacity 
Modeling in-building small cells
Horizontal densification 
Vertical densification 
Spatial spectrum reuse
Direct approach 
(Spectrum extension)
Indirect approach
(Dynamic spectrum sharing)
Cognitive Radio 
Interference management
 
Figure 3. Network capacity improvement triangle. 
technologies to improve network capacity indoors using small 
cells deployed in a building are also shown along each direction. 
B. Related Work 
Numerous existing research studies have already addressed 
the enabling technologies along with the three directions [1]-
[13]. For example, Saha [1] and Saha and Aswakul [2] have 
addressed the modeling of in-building small cells in the 
Millimeter-Wave (mmWave) and microwave spectrum bands, 
respectively. By deducing the minimum distance between co-
channel small cells in both intra-floor and inter-floor levels 
subject to satisfying predefined interference thresholds, a 3-
Dimensional (3D) cluster of small cells has been defined such 
that the same spectrum can be reused in each 3D cluster of small 
cells within a building. It has been shown that both horizontal 
densification of small cells on each floor between adjacent 
buildings, as well as vertical densification of small cells 
between floors within each building, can achieve high capacity 
and Spectral Efficiency (SE) indoors. 
Further, Saha [3] has presented how to realize numerous in-
building SBS architectures to enable numerous Dynamic 
Spectrum Sharing techniques by varying the number of 
physical transceivers as well as the number, amount, and 
characteristics of spectra per SBS. Further, using game theory, 
Kamal et al. [4] have presented inter-operator dynamic 
spectrum access (DSA) algorithms. Furthermore, by allowing 
both operators to share a fraction of their licensed spectra, Joshi 
et al. [5] have presented DSS with a view to improving their 
profit gain, as well as fairness.  
Besides, the authors in [6]-[13] have addressed Cognitive 
Radio technology to address spectrum utilization. More 
specifically, Saha [6] has addressed an interweave spectrum 
access technique. Moreover, underlay spectrum access 
techniques by Saha [7], Khoshkholgh et al. [8], and Liang et al. 
[9], whereas hybrid interweave-underlay spectrum access 
techniques by Saha [10], Khan et al. [11], Zuo et al. [12], and 
Mehmeti et al. [13], have been addressed. It has been shown in 
[6]-[7], [10] that each spectrum access can improve the average 
capacity and SE when operating individually, and the hybrid 
interweave-underlay technique provides the best average 
capacity and SE performances of all [10]. Hence, though 
studies in the context of in-building small cells that explore the 
above three directions of network capacity improvement are 
essential, no such study is not obvious in the existing literature.  
C. Contribution  
In this paper, we address this gap by exploiting in-building 
small cells along these aforementioned three directions to 
achieve the high indoor capacity demand of existing and 
upcoming mobile networks. In doing so, we consider reviewing 
mainly the research works in [1]-[3], [6]-[7], [10]. 
Consequently, contents in this paper, in terms of texts, figures, 
equations, and other forms, can be found merged partly or fully 
with the above works. For interested readers, please refer to the 
relevant works for any sort of further information. References 
other than the above works are cited in the appropriate places, 
wherever used.    
D. Organization 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, spectrum 
accessibility is discussed under both direct and indirect 
approaches. Section III covers spectral efficiency improvement 
techniques, particularly, interweave, underlay and hybrid, 
spectrum access approaches. In Section IV, in-building network 
densification and spectrum reuse strategies are presented. 
Performance results based on [1]-[3], [6]-[7], [10] along three 
directions toward achieving high in-building capacity are 
evaluated in Section V. We conclude the paper in Section VI. 
A list of abbreviations is given in Appendix I.   
II. SPECTRUM ACCESSIBILITY 
Because spectrum bands below 3 GHz are almost occupied, 
the high-frequency mmWave spectrum bands have already 
been considered to address the high capacity demand of Fifth-
Generation (5G) and beyond mobile systems, particularly, 
indoors within multistory buildings. In this regard, to address 
the massive deployments of small cells to provide high data 
rates at a short distance, the short-range and the availability of 
a large amount of mmWave spectrum are promising, 
particularly in urban indoor environments. Available spectrum 
for a Mobile Network Operator (MNO) can be increased in two 
major ways as follows: 
 
Direct approach: by adding (licensing) new spectrum 
statically and   
 
Indirect approach: by sharing used spectrum dynamically/ 
opportunistically. 
In the direct approach, a new licensed spectrum can be 
added directly to a mobile system using techniques such as 
Carrier Aggregation (Fig. 4), be it contiguous or noncontiguous. 
However, the traditional direct approaches to extend spectrum 
are no more effective due to the scarcity of radio spectrum 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

availability, particularly below 3 GHz [14], as well as a huge 
cost of licensing spectrum. This asks for exploiting indirect 
approaches to address ever-increasing indoor high data rates 
and capacity demands for MNOs. 
In the indirect approach, the spectrum already used by a 
system 
(primary) 
can 
be 
shared 
dynamically 
or 
opportunistically by another system (secondary) subject to  
. . .
f
fa
fb
+
Licensed spectrum fa
Licensed spectrum fb
fa
Carrier Aggregation 
fb
 
Figure 4. Spectrum access using the Carrier Aggregation approach. 
satisfying the condition that the primary system is not affected 
due to sharing. Such an approach can be termed Dynamic 
Spectrum Sharing (DSS). Small cells indoors can play a crucial 
role in DSS.  
       Based on the number of physical transceivers as well as the 
number, amount, and characteristics of operating spectra of an 
SBS, several small cell base station architectures can be 
realized to address numerous DSS approaches [3]. More 
specifically, in [3], by enabling SBSs with a single-/multiple-
transceiver and operating them at either a single or multiple 
licensed/unlicensed spectra of homogeneous/ heterogeneous 
systems, a total of nine SBS architectures are exploited to 
realize numerous DSS approaches, including Co-Channel 
Shared Access (CSA), Licensed Shared Access (LSA), 
Unlicensed Shared Access (ULA), Authorized Shared Access 
(ASA), Co-primary Shared Access (CoPSA), and Licensed 
Assisted Access (LAA).  
      For convenience, a multi-transceiver multiband enabled 
SBSs operating in the licensed and unlicensed spectrums is 
shown in Fig. 5. One of the transceivers of an SBS operates at  
...
...
...
...
Fl,1+f2+Fl,3+,…,+Fl,xm+
Ful,1+Ful,3+,…,+Ful,xm
SBS 
 
Figure 5. Type 9 SBS.


,
,1
,2
,xm
,
,...,
l x
l
l
l
F
F
F
F

Fl,x 
and 


,
,1
,2
,xm
,
,...,
ul x
ul
ul
ul
F
F
F
F

Ful,x 
denote, respectively, a set of licensed 
spectra of other systems than any mobile system (e.g., satellite systems) and a 
set of unlicensed spectra (e.g., 60-GHz, 5-GHz, and 2.4-GHz) [3]. 
the spectrum of its own MNO, the second transceiver operates 
at the licensed spectrum of a heterogeneous system (e.g., a 
satellite system), and the third transceiver operates at an 
unlicensed spectrum (e.g., 60-GHz unlicensed spectrum) using 
multiple transceivers. Hence, transceiver 1 of an SBS and the 
spectrum of the MBS of its MNO can realize CSA, transceivers 
1 and 2 of the SBS can realize LSA, and transceivers 1 and 3 of 
the SBS can realize LAA [3]. 
To avoid Co-Channel Interference (CCI) when sharing the 
licensed spectrum of homogeneous/ heterogeneous system, 
Almost Blank Subframe (ABS) based Enhanced Intercell 
Interference Coordination (eICIC) based on the following 
principle: An SBS architecture can be configured such that it 
can operate only during non-ABSs per ABS Pattern Period 
(APP) as shown in Fig. 6 is applied to any transceiver of an SBS 
depending on its operating spectrum. An ABS is a Transmission 
Time Interval (TTI) during which no data signal is transmitted  
TAPP1
Frequency (Hz)
.  .  .  . 
.  .  . 
180 
kHz
TAPP2
Time (ms)
An ABS
A non-ABS
1 ms
 
Figure 6. An illustration of the ABS-based eICIC technique [3]. TAPP1 and 
TAPP2 denote APP 1 and APP 2, respectively. 
except for some control signals such as broadcast and 
synchronization signals. An SBS can be scheduled at the same 
frequency as that of another system only during non-ABSs per 
APP [3]. Note that for an unlicensed band, no CCI is considered. 
III. SPECTRAL EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENT 
MNOs in a country facing challenges from enabling 
efficient utilization of its available licensed spectrum. This is 
because the user traffic demand of different MNOs in a country 
varies abruptly over time and space such that the demand for 
the required amount of spectra for different MNOs varies 
accordingly. This causes a great portion of the available 
spectrum allocated to each MNO in a country to be left unused 
or underutilized either in time or space. In recent times, 
Cognitive Radio (CR) has appeared as an enabling technology 
to address this spectrum under-utilization issue. In CR, 
spectrum access is a major function, which prevents collisions 
between primary User Equipments (UEs) and Secondary UEs 
(SUs) to allow sharing the licensed spectrum of one MNO with 
another to increase its effective spectrum bandwidth, resulting 
in improving its spectral efficiency to serve high capacity. 
Based on how the collisions between primary and secondary 
UEs are prevented while accessing any spectrum, there are 
three major categories of spectrum access techniques in CR 
systems, including interweave, underlay, and overlay. In this 
paper, we limit our focus on studying interweave and underlay 
spectrum access techniques.  
In the interweave model, the unused spectrum in time, 
frequency, and geographic location of licensed primary UEs 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

(PUs) can be shared opportunistically by SUs in a dynamic 
shared-use basis without interfering PUs, for example, when 
PUs are inactive [15]. To find an idle spectrum of PUs, SUs 
need to be able to sense the used spectrum of PUs. Once sensed 
idle, SUs can transmit at the maximum power. In [6], an 
Interweave Strategy Based Shared-Use (ISSU) model for the 
dynamic spectrum access of licensed 28-GHz mmWave 
spectrum of one MNO to another under an in-building small 
cell scenario in a country has been proposed and stated as 
follows. The licensed mmWave spectrum of one MNO, i.e., 
primary-MNO (p-MNO) can be allowed to share with small 
cells in a building of another MNO, i.e., secondary-MNO (s-
MNO) only if no UE of p-MNO is present inside the 
corresponding building of small cells of s-MNO to avoid co-
channel interference between UEs of p-MNO and s-MNO. If 
otherwise, no spectrum of p-MNO can be shared with in-
building small cells of s-MNO [6].   
However, in underlay access, SUs can simultaneously 
access the spectrum of PUs at a reduced transmission power to 
serve its users subject to satisfying the interference threshold 
set by PUs. Unlike the interweave access, the underlay access 
does not need any spectrum sensing. However, it suffers from 
the reduced transmission power of SUs to limit CCI to PUs. In 
[7], an Underlay Cognitive Radio Spectrum Access (UCRSA) 
technique for the dynamic spectrum access of licensed 28 GHz 
mmWave spectrum of one MNO to another under in-building 
small cell scenario in a country has been proposed and stated as 
follows. The licensed 28 GHz mmWave spectrum of one MNO 
(i.e., p-MNO) can be allowed to share with small cells in a 
building of another MNO (i.e., s-MNO) subject to operating 
each small cell of the s-MNO at a reduced transmission power 
at any time irrespective of the existence of a UE of the p-MNO 
within the coverage of the corresponding small cell. The 
reduced transmission power is varied in accordance with the 
predefined interference threshold set by the p-MNO [7].  
Though both interweave and underlay have pros and cons 
as aforementioned, the combination of these two spectrum 
accesses can maximize the SE. More specifically, SUs can 
explore interweave access when the spectrum of PUs is idle and 
the underlay access when the spectrum of PUs is busy. In [10], 
a hybrid interweave-underlay spectrum access technique for the 
dynamic spectrum access of the licensed 28 GHz mmWave 
spectrum of one MNO to another under an in-building small 
cell scenario in a country is proposed and stated as follows.  The 
licensed 28 GHz mmWave spectrum of one MNO (i.e., p-MNO) 
can be allowed to share with small cells in a building of another 
MNO (i.e., s-MNO) subject to operating each small cell of the 
s-MNO at the maximum transmission power if no UE of the p-
MNO is present, but at a reduced transmission power if a UE 
of the p-MNO is present [10]. The reduced transmission power 
is varied in accordance with the predefined interference 
threshold set by the p-MNO.  
IV. NETWORK DENSIFICATION 
SBSs can be deployed both in the intra-floor, as well as the 
inter-floor, level of a building, resulting in an ultra-dense 
deployment of SBSs over a certain area of 2-Dimensional (2D) 
physical space within the coverage of a macrocell. Moreover, 
due to the high penetration losses of mmWave bands through 
external and internal walls and floors in any multi-story 
building compared to low-frequency microwave bands, the 
reuse of mmWave bands can be explored in the third dimension 
(i.e., the height of a multistory building), which results in 
reusing the same mmWave band more than once at the inter-
floor level. In addition, the conventional spectrum reuse 
techniques at the intra-floor level in a multistory building can 
be used to facilitate the reuse of mmWave spectra in ultra-dense 
deployed small cells within the building. 
In [1], a minimum separation distance for the intra-floor 
level and inter-floor-level are expressed numerically for the 28 
GHz mmWave spectrum to define a set to SBSs (also called a 
cluster of SBSs) corresponding to the minimum distances both 
intra-floor and inter-floor levels subject to satisfying co-
channel interference constraints in both levels. The size of a 3D 
cluster of SBSs is then defined such that the same spectrum 
bandwidth can be reused in each cluster of SBSs. Figure 7 
shows an example minimum distance constraint-based 3D 
cluster of SBSs with respect to floor n+1. Region of Exclusions 
(RoEs) for both intra-and inter-floor levels are shown with red  
Floor n
Floor n+1
Floor n-1
RoE
cFCBS
Non-cFCBS
f7
f9
f10
f12
f15
f18
f13
f16
f1
f6
f3
f4
f1
f6
f3
f4
f1
f6
f9
f6
f1
Spatial spectrum reuse 
(Intra-floor level)
f7
f1
f6
f3
f4
f9
Spatial spectrum reuse (Inter-floor level)
 
Figure 7. Formation of an in-building 3D cluster of SBSs subject to satisfying 
the minimum distance constraints in both intra-and inter-floor levels to reuse 
the same spectrum in a 3D in-building scenario [2]. 
color lines. Green color circles represent Co-channel SBSs 
(cSBSs) and ash color circles represent non-cSBSs. Hence, 
resources can be reused in every 3 SBSs intra-floor level and 
every alternate floor inter-floor level such that a 3D cluster 
consists of 18 SBSs [2]. 
V. PERFORMANCE RESULTS 
      Default parameters and assumptions used for generating the 
following performance responses can be found in the respective 
references cited (i.e., [1]-[3], [6]-[7], [10]). Hence, regarding 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

spectrum accessibility, with extensive simulation and numerical 
results and analyses, it is shown in [3] that the network capacity 
and SE (Fig. 8) can be improved by exploiting an SBS 
architecture to allow more spectrum to be available using the 
DSS technique. SBS architectures, including Types 9, 8, 7, and 
3, give better SE responses than others due to operating in the  
 
Figure 8. SE responses of numerous SBS architectures [3]. 
60-GHz unlicensed spectrum providing better channel 
responses than that of other licensed spectrums. For further 
information, please refer to [3]. 
Regarding SE improvement, by applying the ISSU model in 
[6], it is shown that the average capacity, as well as the SE, 
performances of an MNO (i.e., an s-MNO) are improved by 
about 150% as shown in Fig. 9. Further, by limiting the  
 
Figure 9. Average capacity and SE performance improvement factors for an s-
MNO with applying ISSU for a single building of small cells [6]. 
transmission power of an SBS to 20% of its maximum power, 
it is shown in [7] that the proposed underlay technique (i.e., 
UCRSA) can improve the average capacity and SE of an MNO 
by about 2.67 times what can be obtained by the traditional 
Static Licensed Shared Access (SLSA) where each MNO is 
allocated exclusively to an equal amount of the licensed 
spectrum as shown in Fig. 10 [7]. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 
11, by limiting the transmission power of an SBS to 20% of its 
maximum power, it is shown in [10] that the hybrid technique 
outperforms both the interweave and underlay techniques when 
each operating individually in terms of SE of an MNO.  
 
Figure 10. Average capacity and SE improvement for an MNO due to 
applying the UCRSA technique over that of the SLSA technique for a single 
building of small cells [7]. 
 
Figure 11. SE improvement factors for an s-MNO due to applying, 
interweave, underlay, and the proposed hybrid inter-weave-underlay 
techniques for a single building of SBSs [10]. 
Finally, regarding the network densification, with extensive 
simulation results in [2], it is shown in Fig.12 that the SE 
increases significantly when employing 3D spatial reuse of the 
 
Figure 12. Impact of applying 3D spatial reuse of mmWave spectra to in-
building small cells on the average SE [1]. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
50
100
Number of Buildings
Average Spectral Efficiency (bps/Hz)
 
 
Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Type 4
Type 5
Type 6
Type 7
Type 8
Type 9
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

same spectrum (i.e., Vertical Reuse Factor (vRF)) to small cells 
within each building as compared to when no reuse is 
considered. Also, in Fig.13, it is shown that the SE improves  
 
Figure 13. Average SE response for numerous 3D spatial reuse factors per 
building with a variation in the number of buildings of SBSs (i.e., hRF) [1]. 
linearly with an increase in Horizontal Reuse Factor (hRF) for 
any value of vRF such that the overall SE improves by a factor 
defined as the product of vRF and hRF, i.e., (vRF×hRF). 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have provided a review on how to explore 
small cells to address the ever-growing high capacity demands 
of indoor users, particularly, in dense urban in-building 
scenarios. In this regard, we have considered exploring major 
three directions toward achieving high network capacity, 
including 
spectrum 
accessibility, 
spectral 
efficiency 
improvement, and network densification. A set of existing 
papers [1]-[3], [6]-[7], [10] highly relevant to the enabling 
technologies along each direction have been reviewed under an 
in-building scenario to present the potentiality of small cells in 
achieving high capacity indoors. Relevant theoretical 
background in the context of in-building small cells has been 
discussed followed by the performance evaluation of major 
enabling technologies along each direction.  
It has been shown that the following approaches along three 
directions can help achieve an enormous amount of in-building 
capacity, required by the existing, as well as future mobile 
networks.       
 
Multi-band multi-transceiver enabled small cells operating 
in the high-frequency millimeter-wave licensed or 
unlicensed spectrum to realize dynamic spectrum sharing 
techniques by exploiting small cell base station 
architectures subject to satisfying co-channel interference 
threshold for the spectrum accessibility,  
 
A hybrid spectrum access model (i.e., interweave-underlay 
spectrum access) in Cognitive Radio Networks for the 
spectral efficiency improvement, and  
 
Exploiting both the vertical and horizontal spectrum reuse 
in small cells deployed densely within buildings for the 
network densification.   
 
 
APPENDIX I 
A LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
Abbreviation  
Description  
2D 
2-Dimensional 
3D 
3-Dimensional 
5G 
Fifth-Generation 
ABS 
Almost Blank Subframe 
APP 
ABS Pattern Period 
BS 
Base Station 
CCI 
Co-Channel Interference  
CR 
Cognitive Radio 
CSA 
Co-channel Shared Access 
cSBS 
Co-channel SBS 
DSS 
Dynamic Spectrum Sharing 
eICIC 
Enhanced Intercell Interference Coordination 
hRF 
Horizontal Reuse Factor 
LAA 
Licensed Assisted Access  
LSA 
Licensed Shared Access 
MBS 
Macrocell Base Station 
mmWave 
Millimeter-Wave  
MNO  
Mobile Network Operator 
p-MNO 
Primary MNO 
PU 
Primary UE 
RoE 
Region of Exclusion 
SBS 
Small Cell Base Station 
SE 
Spectral Efficiency 
SINR 
Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise-Ratio 
SLSA 
Static Licensed Spectrum Allocation 
s-MNO 
Secondary MNO 
sSBS 
Serving SBS 
sSU 
Serving Small Cell UE 
SU 
Secondary UE 
TTI 
Transmission Time Interval 
UE 
User Equipment 
vRF 
Vertical Reuse Factor 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
       This is a review paper, which is mainly based on the 
author’s existing research works [1-3], [6-7], [10] mentioned in 
the reference section below. Consequently, contents in this 
paper, in terms of texts, figures, equations, and other forms, can 
be found merged substantially with that in [1-3], [6-7], [10]. For 
interested readers, please refer to the relevant works for any sort 
of further information. References other than these are cited in 
the paper in the appropriate places, wherever used.    
REFERENCES 
[1] R. K. Saha, “3D Spatial Reuse of Multi-Millimeter-Wave Spectra 
by Ultra-Dense In-Building Small Cells for Spectral and Energy 
Efficiencies of Future 6G Mobile Networks,” Energies, vol. 13, 
no. 7, art. no. 1748, 2020. doi: 10.3390/EN13071748.  
[2] R. K. Saha and C. Aswakul, “A Tractable Analytical Model for 
Interference 
Characterization 
and 
Minimum 
Distance 
Enforcement to Reuse Resources in Three-Dimensional In-
Building Dense Small Cell Networks,” Int. J. Commun. Syst., 
vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 95-118, July 2017, doi: 10.1002/DAC.3240.  
[3] R. K. Saha, “A Tactic for Architectural Exploitation of Indoor 
Small Cells for Dynamic Spectrum Sharing in 5G,” IEEE Access, 
vol. 
8, 
pp. 
15056-15071, 
January 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2966230.  
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[4] H. Kamal, M. Coupechoux, and P. Godlewski, “Inter-Operator 
Spectrum Sharing for Cellular Networks Using Game Theory,” 
Proc. 2009 IEEE 20th International Symposium on Personal, 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, Tokyo, 2009, pp. 
425-429. 
[5] S. K. Joshi, K. B. S. Manosha, M. Codreanu, and M. Latva-aho, 
“Dynamic Inter-Operator Spectrum Sharing via Lyapunov 
Optimization,” IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun., vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 
6365-6381, Oct. 2017, doi: 10.1109/TWC.2017.2722999. 
[6] R. K. Saha, “Interweave Shared-Use Model for Dynamic 
Spectrum Access in Millimeter-Wave Mobile Systems for 6G,” 
Proc. 2020 IEEE 92nd Vehicular Technology Conference 
(VTC2020- Fall), Victoria, BC, Canada, 18-Nov.-16 Dec., 2020, 
pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/VTC2020- Fall49728.2020.9348671. 
[7] R. K. Saha, “Underlay Cognitive Radio Millimeter-Wave 
Spectrum Access for In-Building Dense Small Cells in Multi-
Operator Environments Toward 6G,” Proc. IEEE 23rd 
International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia 
Communications (WPMC), Okayama, Japan, 19-26 Oct. 2020, 
pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/WPMC50192.2020.9309471. 
[8] M. G. Khoshkholgh, K. Navaie, and H. Yanikomeroglu, 
“Interference Management in Underlay Spectrum Sharing Using 
Indirect Power Control Signalling,” IEEE Trans. Wirel. 
Commun., vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 3264-3277, July 2013, doi: 
10.1109/TWC.2013.052813121110. 
[9] W. Liang, K. D. Wang, J. Shi, L. Li, and G. K. Karagiannidis, 
“Distributed Sequential Coalition Formation Algorithm for 
Spectrum Allocation in Underlay Cognitive Radio Networks,” 
IEEE 
Access, 
vol. 
7, 
pp. 
56803-56816, 
2019, 
doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2910720. 
[10] R. K. Saha, “Hybrid Interweave-Underlay Millimeter-Wave 
Spectrum Access in Multi-Operator Cognitive Radio Networks 
Toward 6G,” Proc. Fifteenth International Conference on 
Systems and Networks Communications (ICSNC), Porto, 
Portugal, 18-22 Oct. 2020, pp. 42-48. 
[11] A. U. Khan et al., “HBLP: A Hybrid Underlay-Interweave Mode 
CRN for the Future 5G-based Internet of Things,” IEEE Access, 
vol. 
8, 
pp. 
63403-63420, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2981413. 
[12] P. Zuo, T. Peng, W. Linghu, and W. Wang, “Optimal Resource 
Allocation for Hybrid Interweave-Underlay Cognitive Satcom 
Uplink,” Proc. The 2018 IEEE Wireless Communications and 
Networking Conference (WCNC), Barcelona, Spain, April 2018, 
pp. 1-6. 
[13] F. Mehmeti and T. Spyropoulos, “Performance Analysis, 
Comparison, and Optimization of Interweave and Underlay 
Spectrum Access in Cognitive Radio Networks,” IEEE Trans. 
Veh. Technol., vol. 67, pp. 7143-7157, Aug. 2018, doi: 
10.1109/TVT.2018.2828090. 
[14] R. K. Saha, “A Technique for Massive Spectrum Sharing with 
Ultra-dense In-building Small Cells in 5G era,” Proc. IEEE 90th 
Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), Honolulu, HI, USA, Sep. 2019, 
pp. 1-7. 
[15] M. R. Hassan, G. C. Karmakar, J. Kamruzzaman, and B. 
Srinivasan, “Exclusive Use Spectrum Access Trading Models in 
Cognitive Radio Networks: A Survey,” IEEE Commun. Surv. 
Tuts., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2192-2231, Fourth quarter 2017, doi: 
10.1109/COMST.2017.2725960. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

