Transmission of JPEG2000 Images in an Uplink
Cellular Network with UPA and SCFDE:
A System Description
Moein Shayegannia
Dept. of Engineering Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, Canada
moeins@sfu.ca
Sami Muhaidat
Khalifa University of Science Technology & Research
Abu Dhabi, UAE
muhaidat@ieee.org
Atousa HajShirMohammadi
Dept. of Engineering Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, Canada
atousah@sfu.ca
Abstract—In this paper, we describe a work in progress for
transmission of JPEG2000 images using an unequal power allo-
cation algorithm and single carrier frequency domain equalization
technique over a block fading frequency selective channel. The
optimization algorithm exploits the hierarchical structure of the
JPEG2000 images and uses a distortion model along with the
channel state information for allocating optimal values of power
on each coding pass to minimize the end-to-end distortion. The
single carrier frequency domain equalization technique combats
the negative impact of inter symbol interference and inter carrier
interference in a frequency selective channel. Two antennas at the
transmission terminal are utilized to evaluate the performance
of our system in a multi input single output scenario using
space time block coding scheme. The simulation results present
that integration of the unequal power allocation technique with
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing yields a higher quality
than when single carrier frequency domain equalization is used
instead. In addition, the transmit diversity technique enhances the
peak signal to noise ratio of the received image for about 2.5 dB.
These results prove that our power allocation algorithm is more
compatible with orthogonal frequency division multiplexing than
single carrier frequency domain equalization, and it yields spacial
diversity in a multi transmitter antenna system.
Keywords- JPEG2000; unequal power allocation; single carrier
frequency domain equalization; space time block coding; wireless
image transmission.
I. INTRODUCTION
Transfer of multimedia streams with high reliability of the
received signal, and high data rate over wireless channels is be-
coming more attractive in the current mobile era. The increasing
demand of access to multimedia data and the hostile behavior
of wireless medium impose challenges in maintaining the total
available bandwidth, the total transmission power, and quality
of the transmitted stream. To address these challenges, we need
to alleviate the sources of disturbance in wireless channels, such
as fading, interference, shadowing, path loss, and multipath, by
providing an effective data protection technique.
The inherit redundancy contained within multimedia signals
and bandwidth limitation require compression of image and
video streams before transmission. JPEG2000 is one of the
recent and advanced source coding techniques for image coding.
This standard provides some degrees of protection against errors
in noisy channels with the help of an error-resilient feature. The
error resilient tool is able to detect errors but it can not correct
any of them in the code-stream. Once an error is detected, the
rest of data is discarded and resynchronization mechanism of
the received data is performed [1]. Therefore, the error resilience
tool of JPEG2000, by its own, is insufﬁcient for alleviating sever
channel impairments. A higher degree of protection is achievable
with the aim of the hierarchical structure of JPEG2000 coded
bitstream in which some bits hold more important information
compared to others. This scalable coded bitstream enables us to
provide higher protection over the more important bits. Different
techniques such as Unequal Error Protection (UEP) and Unequal
Power Allocation (UPA) are introduced in the literature to
enhance the transmission of scalable coded bitstreams. The UEP
methods apply Forward Error Correction (FEC) coding with
different coding rates to different portions of the bitstream,
based on the importance of each portion. The UPA techniques
distribute the total available power for transmission of an image
unequally over the bitstream in such a way that more power is
allocated to the more important bits.
Transmission of JPEG2000 images using UEP techniques over
slow fading non-frequency selective channels has been widely
investigated in [2]-[5]. In [2], UEP is achieved in JPEG2000
code-streams by using Reed Solomon (RS) block codes. In [3],
Banister et al. make use of Viterbi algorithm to jointly optimize
source rate and channel rate for the purpose of UEP. In [4], the
authors employ product coded streams which consist of Turbo-
codes and RS codes to obtain UEP. In [5], the authors obtain
UEP using RS channel coding for the header and convolutional
coding for the body of the image bitstream. Protection of
JPEG2000 images over slow fading non-frequency selective
channels using UPA schemes has been reported in [6] and
[7]. Atzori employs an optimized UPA scheme in [6] based
on increasing JPEG2000 image quality as well as RS channel
coding to protect coded bitstream. In [7], we proposed an
optimized UPA scheme based on minimizing the total end to end
distortion of JPEG2000 images, which proved its effectiveness
in improvement of the Peak Signal to Noise ratio (PSNR)
performance and at a lower complexity in comparison with the
existing UEP techniques.
Evaluation of UEP for JPEG2000 image transmission over
frequency selective channels is investigated in [8]-[11]. Houas
et al. prove the efﬁciency of their UEP technique with rate
compatible punctured convolutional codes in an OFDM system
[8]. In [9], the layer structure of the JPEG2000 is exploited by
protecting data in top layer with an FEC code, and the perfor-
mance is analyzed in an OFDM transmission system. In [10],
authors achieve UEP with the means of an optimal joint source-
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

channel coding and consider progressive image transmission
over differentially space-time coded OFDM system. Sethakaset
et al. propose an UEP scheme in the spatial domain through
enhanced beamforming algorithms over closed loop multiple
input multiple output OFDM system [11]. Despite the extensive
reports on the performance evaluation of UEP techniques for
image transmission over frequency selective channels, effective
performance of an optimized UPA scheme for transmission of
JPEG2000 images in frequency selective channels has not been
analyzed. To address this issue, we prove the efﬁciency of
our proposed optimized UPA scheme for frequency selective
channels in [12] by combining the UPA algorithm with the
OFDM technique.
All the literature reports on multimedia data transmission over
frequency selective channels, with UEP or UPA, make use of
OFDM to combat the negative impact of Inter symbol Interfer-
ence (ISI) and Inter Carrier Interference (ICI). The multicarrier
implementation of OFDM technique leads to several drawbacks
including large Peak-to-Average Power Ratio (PAPR) and high
sensitivity to carrier frequency offsets [13]. To tackle these
issues, OFDM is implemented in the base station of a cellular
network for downlink data transmissions, and Single Carrier
Frequency Domain Equalization (SCFDE) is adapted at the end
user station for uplink data transmissions. SCFDE is comparable
with OFDM in terms of complexity, while it avoids the draw-
backs associated with OFDM [13]. In this paper, we integrate
our proposed UPA scheme with SCFDE to provide protection
for uplink transmission of JPEG2000 coded bitstreams in block
fading frequency selective channels. Moreover, we obtain full
spatial diversity in our transmission by using Alamouti’s Space
Time Block Coding (STBC) scheme [14]. Continuation of this
work includes further investigation on the impact of SCFDE and
STBC on the bit budget of the JPEG2000 coded bitstream for
the possible amount of conservation on the bandwidth.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
provides a brief overview of JPEG2000 image coding, Section III
presents the system model, the simulation results are presented
in Section IV, and Section V concludes the paper.
Notations: [·]H and |·| denote the Hermitian transpose and
the absolute value Operations, respectively.[·]ik refers to the
(i, k)th entry of a matrix. [·]i means the ith entry of a vector.
Q represents an N × N FFT matrix whose (i, k)th element is
given by 1/
√
Nexp (−j2πik/N) where 0 ≤ i, k ≤ N − 1.
Bold uppercase letters denote matrices, bold lowercase letters
represent vectors and lowercase letters denote scalar variables.
II. REVIEW OF JPEG2000 IMAGE CODER
In the JPEG2000 image coder, the ﬁrst operation is to (option-
ally) partition a source image into a number of rectangular non-
overlapping blocks called tiles. Then Discrete Wavelet Trans-
form (DWT) is applied to the tile which transforms the samples
into spacial frequency subbands at different levels of resolution.
The ﬁrst level of decomposition consists of four subbands LL1,
LH1, HL1, HH1 [15]. The LL1 subband is the lowest resolution
of the tile and is a down-sampled low-resolution representation
of the original tile-component. The LL1 subband can be further
decomposed by applying DWT. This process can be repeated to
obtain different resolution levels. Then, each resolution of each
tile component is further partitioned into precincts. Within every
subband, each precinct contributes one packet to the code-stream
HL1
HH1
LH1
Precinct
Code-Block
Subband
Resolution 
Level 1
HH2
LH2
HL2
LL3
HL3
LH3
HH3
Fig. 1: Components of a JPEG2000 transformed image
of the image. Precincts are not a partition of image data and do
not impact sample data transformation or coding. Precincts are
used to reconstruct the resolution [2].
Each subband is partitioned into small blocks, called code-
blocks, where quantization and bit-plane coding are initiated.
The packets furnished by the precincts identify their header and
body from the contributions of the code-blocks belonging to the
relevant precinct. Starting from the Most Signiﬁcant Bit (MSB),
the coder scans through the bit-planes of each coding pass.
Each of the coding passes collects the relevant information about
the bit-plane data. Based on the signiﬁcance of a particular bit
location and its neighboring, location of each bit in the coding
passes is decided. The encoder uses this information to generate
a compressed bitstream or a code-stream [1]. Fig.1 illustrates
a 3 layer decomposition of a source image using DWT and its
partitioning into four resolution levels, subbands, precincts, and
code-blocks.
To increase the robustness of the JPEG2000 bitstream against
error propagation along the code-stream, error resilient feature is
introduced in the standard. Small size code-blocks are indepen-
dently coded and included with resynchronization markers. As
a result, errors do not propagate beyond the code-block whose
bit-stream is corrupted, and the markers keep synchronization
between the encoder and decoder in case of occurrence of
bit errors. JPEG2000 standard also provides a mechanism to
combine all the packet headers within the main header. This adds
an advantage to the decoding process of the received data stream,
if the main header can be transmitted in an error-free medium. It
is necessary to correctly decode the header of a packet in order
to extract the code-block contributions to the body of the packet
[1], [15].
III. SYSTEM MODEL
The overall system block diagram that we are implementing
in this study is shown in Fig. 2. We have presented detailed
explanations on the functionality of the JPEG2000 encoder,
Structure Information Retrieval, UPA optimization, and the
Power Adjustment units in [7]. For the sake of completeness,
we present a short overview of these units here. The JPEG2000
encoder transforms the format of an input image into JPEG2000
format and generates a scalable coded bitstream. The Structural
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

JPEG2000
Encoder
Structural
Information
Retrieval
UPA
Optimization
Power
Adjustment
CSI
General Channel
Information
Input
image
JPEG2000
Decoder
Instantaneous
Power
Adjustment
CP addition,
Space Time
block
encoder ,P/S
S/P , CP
removal
Frequency
Domain
Trans.
(FFT)
& Buffer
P/S, linear
Combiner
Decoded
Image
Serial to
Parallel
Buffer
Serial to
Parallel
Buffer
diag(en)
e'total
e'ij
E'n
En
En
xn sn
z1
etotal
Buffer Sn,n+1
z2
MMSE
Equalizer
S/P, Time
Domain
Trans.
(IFFT)
Slicer
Fig. 2: System block diagram
Information Retrieval unit recovers the required information,
such as the number of code-blocks and the number of coding
passes within each code-block, from the source coder and passes
them to the UPA optimization unit. In the UPA optimization
unit runs Simulated Annealing optimization algorithm on the
coded bitstream of the JPEG2000 image. This algorithm aims at
minimizing the total end to end distortion of the received image
by allocating optimal amount of power to each coding pass.
During the process of power allocation, the UPA optimization
unit obtains the total available power to distribute among the
coding passes (e
′
total) from the power adjustment unit. The
UPA optimization unit assumes an Additive White Gaussian
Noise (AWGN) channel for the transmission medium. The
fading impact of the channel is taken into consideration in the
Instantaneous Power Adjustment unit by altering the amount
of power allocated to each coding pass by the UPA algorithm.
In part C, we will describe the functionality of the power
adjustment unit. The bitstream and the power assigned to each bit
are categorized into NB blocks. Before the transmission instant,
every block of data is appended with cyclic preﬁx, and two
consecutive blocks , nth and (n+1)th where (n = 1, 2, ..., NB),
are passed to the Space Time Block Encoder. The received
terminal includes the model of a typical SCFDE receiver.
A. Channel Model
The wireless communication channel is considered to be block
fading frequency selective, where two antennas are used at the
transmitter side, and one antenna at the receive terminal. First,
we will elaborate the transmission model in the case of one
transmit antenna, and then we will expand it to two transmit
antennas in part D. The channel impulse response for the nth
transmission block is given by hn = [h0 h1 ... hm−1]T where m
is the channel memory length and n = 1, 2, ..., NB. We append
the beginning of each transmitting block of data with a size of
N ×1 with the last m samples of the same block to eliminate the
impact of Inter Block Interference (IBI). At the receiver side, the
ﬁrst m samples of every block is discarded and only N samples
are processed. We can account for the addition and removal
of the cyclic preﬁxes by forming the channel into a circulant
matrix for every nth transmission block. Thus, assuming a single
transmit antenna, the received signal is given by
rn = Hn
p
Enxn + vn
n = 1, 2, ..., NB
(1)
where rn is the nth received block of data, Hn is an N × N
circulant matrix for the nth transmission block with entries
[Hn]ik = [hn](i−k) mod N and [hn]i = 0 for i > m − 1. vn
is an N × 1 additive white Gaussian noise vector with mean of
zero and variance of 1/2 per dimension. Since H is a circulant
matrix, it can be eigen-decomposed to form
Hn = QHΛnQ
(2)
Λn is a diagonal matrix of size N×N for the nth transmission
block, in which the diagonal elements are [16]:
[Λn]ii =
√
NqH
i

hn
N−m
z }| {
0 0 ... 0


T
i = 1, 2, ..., N
(3)
where qi is the ith column of the matrix Q. The channel impulse
response varies for every transmission block of data, and so
does the diagonal elements of Λ. These elements are in fact the
eigenvalues of the channel matrix (H).
B. Single Carrier Frequency Domain Equalization Model
In [17], a thorough overview of SCFDE with STBC scheme is
presented, and we use this scheme to form our receiver model.
At the receiver side, initially a serial to parallel conversion
is performed and then the redundant cyclic preﬁx data are
discarded. As known from its name, the equalization of SCFDE
is carried on in the frequency domain. Thus, we transform
the received time domain block rn into frequency domain by
applying the FFT
Qrn = QHn
p
Enxn + Qvn = Λn
p
Enxn + Qvn
(4)
The next step is to equalize the signal using Minimum Mean
Square Error (MMSE) estimator. Our MMSE-SCFDE for the
nth received block is given by a diagonal matrix of size N × N
with the following elements [17]:
[Wn]ii =
[ΛH
n ]ii
|[Λn]ii|2 +
1
SNR
(5)
where SNR is the Signal to Noise Ratio. The output of the
MMSE equalizer will be yn = Wnrn and can be transferred to
time domain by applying the IFFT to recover the original data
given by ˆxn = QHyn. Then we can apply a hard decision slicer
on the recovered data, and pass it to the JPEG2000 decoder to
generate the received image.
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Cyclic
S1(0) Prefix
S1(1)
«...
Cyclic S1(N-1)
Prefix
-S2
*(0)
-S2
*(N-1)
«...
-S2
*(1)
Cyclic
S2(0) Prefix
S2(1)
«...
Cyclic S2(N-1)
Prefix
S1
*(0)
S1
*(N-1)
«...
S1
*(1)
N
m
N
Block(n+1)
N
m
N
m
m
Block(n)
Block(n+1)
Block(n)
Z1
Z2
Fig. 3: Transmission block format for SCFDE-STBC [17]
C. Instantaneous Power Adjustment Unit
Our proposed UPA algorithm in [7] assumes an AWGN
channel at the time of optimal power allocation to the coding
passes. The Instantaneous Power Adjustment unit compensates
for the effect of fading by using the instantaneous values of the
channel impulse response
En =
E
′
n
α +

Pm−1
k=0 hk

2
(6)
where hk is the kth tap channel impulse response for the nth
transmission block and m is the channel memory length or the
total number of taps. E
′
n is the assigned power to the bits within
the nth transmission block and En represents the corresponding
power of the bits after the effect of channel fading is taken into
consideration. α is small constant value which prevents new zero
values in the denominator when the channel is sever and the
fading factor is small. In addition, this constant value avoids
very large adjusted power to keep the power ampliﬁers perform
in their linear region. For this part, we assume that the Channel
State Information (CSI) is available at the receiver side and can
be communicated to the transmitter. There are plenty of papers
in the literature that report on the estimation of CSI using pilot
assisted techniques or blind estimation methods [18], [19].
D. Space Time Block Coding for Transmit Diversity Scheme
In our system design, we employ two antennas at the trans-
mitter side to beneﬁt from spacial diversity. This increases the
reliability of the wireless link and improves the quality of the
received image. We can also conserve energy by maintain similar
received image quality as the single transmit antenna case,
however at a lower transmit power. To explain the functionality
of the space time block encoder unit and the linear combiner unit
in Fig. 2, we follow the proposed transmit diversity methodology
in [17]. The two antennas, deployed at the transmitter terminal in
Fig. 2, send two transmitting blocks of data (z1 and z2) to the
channel. Figure 3 presents the structure of these data blocks.
In this structure, cyclic preﬁxes are appended to each block
and then discarded at the receiver side in order to eliminate
IBI and shape all the channel matrices circulant. An important
assumption that we consider in this part for the transmission of
the STBC structures is that the channel impulse response remains
constant over two consecutive blocks of data. The available
power for transmission at any of the two antennas is half of
its value in the single transmit case. This helps to keep the total
transmit power constant. The linear combiner methodology is
detailed in [17] and we will follow the same principle.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
SNR (dB)
Average PSNR (dB)
 
 
UPA non−frequency selective
UPA−SCFDE 1−tap channel
UPA−SCFDE 2−tap channel
UPA−OFDM 2−tap channel
Fig. 4: PSNR performance comparison between combination of the
UPA algorithm with SCFDE and OFDM
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
We develop our simulation results using Kakadu as the
JPEG2000 image coder to encode image of Lena with a size
of 512×512 at a rate of 0.25 bit per pixel (bpp). We use Binary
Phase Shift Keying as the modulation scheme for the codestream
obtained from the codec, and assume that the header information
is transmitted error free. Based on our previous experiments in
[7], the value of α in (6) is set to be 0.01. We analyze the perfor-
mance of our proposed UPA scheme with SCFDE technique by
calculating the PSNR of the received image transmitted through
block fading frequency selective channels. Figure 4 compares
the PSNR performance of the system when the UPA algorithm
is used alone for image transmission over block fading non-
frequency selective channels, and when it is combined with
either SCFDE or OFDM to eliminate the effects of ISI and
ICI in frequency selective channels. In Fig. 4, a degradation
in the PSNR of the received image is noticeable as the number
of channel taps increases. For example, at an SNR value of
10 dB, integration of UPA and SCFDE lowers the PSNR of
the system in a 2-tap channel for about 6 dB in comparison
with the single tap channel. The latter is also lowered by about
2.2 dB compared to the case where only UPA is used for
transmission over frequency ﬂat channels. However, this loss in
the PSNR performance is not notable when SCFDE is replaced
by OFDM. The reason is that our UPA algorithm eliminates the
effect of channel to compensate for the instantaneous and av-
erage fading. However, SCFDE technique requires the circulant
channel structure to obtain multipath diversity and enhance the
system performance as the number of channel taps increases.
This implies that OFDM is more compatible than SCFDE with
our UPA optimization algorithm to combat the negative effect
of ISI in frequency selective channels, and maintain high quality
of the received image. This ﬁgure also suggests that for SNR
values greater than 18 dB, the proposed system, which combines
UPA and SCFDE, has a superior performance in a single tap
channel in comparison to the other scenarios. Figure 5 illustrates
the improvement in the PSNR performance when two transmit
antennas are employed at the transmitter side using Alamouti’s
STBC scheme. At an SNR value of 10 dB, this diversity scheme
contributes to an increment of about 2.5 dB in the PSNR of
the received image transmitted through 2-tap frequency selective
channel. Thus, we are able to receive the image with a higher
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34
SNR (dB)
Average PSNR (dB)
 
 
2−tap 2Tx
1−tap 1Tx
2−tap 1Tx
1−tap 2Tx
Fig. 5: PSNR performance comparison between different number of
transmitter antennas for combination of the UPA algorithm with SCFDE
quality at the receiver, or conserve energy by bounding the
quality of the received image.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig.6: Visual comparison of ”Lena” at 0.25 bpp, transmitted at SNR=20 dB over
Block fading frequency selective channels (a) 1-tap hannel & 1 transmitter an-
tenna, PSNR=32.70 dB (b) 1-tap channel & 2 transmitter antennas, PSNR=33.74
(c) 2-tap channel & 1 transmitter antenna, PSNR=22.10 (d) 2-tap channel & 2
transmitter antennas PSNR=26.47
Figure 6 presents a visual comparison for transmission of
”Lena” over block fading frequency selective channel using the
UPA algorithm and SCFDE technique. The image is transmitted
through a single and 2-tap channels with different number of
transmitter antennas. It is clear that the visual quality of the
received image is enhanced when the number of transmitter
antennas increases. In addition, increasing the number of channel
taps lowers the quality of the received image.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, JPEG2000 images are transmitted through fre-
quency selective block fading channels using an UPA algorithm
and SCFDE technique. The optimization algorithm allocates
unequal power to each coding pass based on its contribution
to the quality of the received image. The simulation results for
the image of Lena imply that combination of the UPA algorithm
and the OFDM technique leads to a higher image quality than
combining the algorithm with the SCFDE technique, while both
methods combat the negative effects of ISI and ICI. In this paper,
Alamouti’s STBC diversity technique is also incorporated within
the proposed system, and the results prove the effectiveness
of using two transmit antennas, at the transmitter side, in the
PSNR enhancement of the received image. The continuation
of this work is to compare the performance of the system at
different encoder bit budgets when different number of transmit
antennas. This will show us the effectiveness of using two
transmit antennas in preserving bandwidth.
REFERENCES
[1] D.S. Taubman and M.W. Marcellin, JPEG2000: Image Compression Fun-
damentals, Standards and Practices, Kluwer Academic. Publishers, 2002.
[2] A. Natu, D.S. Taubman, ”Unequal Protection of JPEG2000 Code-Streams
in Wireless Channels,”IEEE Global Telecom. Conference, GLOBCOM, vol.
1, pp. 534-538, Nov. 2002.
[3] B.A. Banister, B. Belzer, and T.R. Fischer, ”Robust Image Transmission
using JPEG2000 and Turbo-codes,”Proceedings of the 2000 International
Conference on Image Processing, vol. 1, pp. 375-378, Aug. 2004.
[4] N. Thomas, N. V. Boulgouris, and M. G. Strintzis, ”Optimized Transmis-
sion of JPEG2000 Streams over Wireless Channels,”IEEE Trans. on Image
Proc., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 54-67, 2006.
[5] Y. Wei, Z. Sahinoglu, and A. Vetro, ”Energy Efﬁcient JPEG2000 Image
Transmission over Wireless Sensor Networks,”IEEE Global Telecom. Con-
ference, GLOCOM, vol. 5 , pp. 2738-2743, 2004.
[6] L. Atzori, ”Transmission of JPEG2000 Images over Wireless Channels
with Unequal Power Distribution,” IEEE Trans. on Consumer Electron.,
vol. 49, no. 4., pp. 883-888, 2003.
[7] M. Torki and A. Hajshirmohammadi, ”Unequal Power Allocation for
Transmission of JPEG2000 Images over Wireless Channels,” IEEE Global
Telecom. Conference, GLOBCOM, 2009.
[8] H. Houas, I. Fijalkow, and C. Baras, ”Resource Allocation for the Trans-
mission of Scalable Image on OFDM Systems,”IEEE Inter. Conference on
Comm., ICC, 2009.
[9] K. Munadi, M. Kurosaki, K. Nishikawa and H. Kiya, ”Robust JPEG2000
Image Transmission over Closed-Loop MIMO-OFDM with Limited Feed-
back,”Proceed. of the International Symp. on Circuits and Systems, (IS-
CAS), vol. 2, pp. 432-435, 2003.
[10] Y. Sun, Z. Xiong and X. Wang, ”Progressive Image Transmission over Dif-
ferentially Space-Time Coded OFDM Systems:Research Articles”Journal
of Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 6, no. 8, Dec.
2006.
[11] U. Sethakaset and S. Sumei, ”Robust JPEG2000 Image Transmission over
Closed-Loop MIMO-OFDM with Limited Feedback,”IEEE Int. Symp. on
Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Comm. (PIMRC), pp. 1-5, 2008.
[12] M. Shayegannia, A. Hajshirmohammadi, S. Muhaidat and M. Torki,
”An OFDM Based System for Transmission of JPEG2000 Images Using
Unequal Power Allocation,” accepted at IEEE Wireless Communications
and Networking Conference, WCNC, April 2012.
[13] F. Pancaldi, G. Vitetta, R. Kalbasi, N. Al-Dhahir, M. Uysal and H. Mheidat,
”Single-Carrier Frequency Domain Equalization, ”IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 37-56, 2008.
[14] S. Alamouti, ”A Simple Transmit Diversity Technique for Wireless Com-
munication”IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 16,
no. 8, pp. 1451-1548, 1998.
[15] T. Acharya, and P.S. Tsai, JPEG2000 Standard for Image Compression:
Concepts, Algorithems and VLSI Architecture, John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2004.
[16] A.H. Sayed, Adaptive Filters, Hoboken, New Jersey John & Wiley Sons,
Inc., 2008.
[17] N. Al-Dhahir, ”Single Carrier Frequency Domain Equalization for Space-
Time Block-Coded Transmissions over Frequency-Selective Fading Chan-
nels”IEEE Communications Letters , vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 304-306, 2001.
[18] R. Negi and J. Ciofﬁ, ”Pilot Tone Selection for Channel Estimation in a
Mobile OFDM System,”IEEE Trans. on Consumer Electron., vol. 44, no.
3, pp. 112-1128, 1998.
[19] C. Shin, R. W. Heath, and E. J. Powers, ”Blind Channel Estimation for
MIMO-OFDM Systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Tech., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 670-
685, Mar. 2007.
[20] J.G. Proakis, Digital Communications, Boston McGraw-Hill, 2000.
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

