 
A Proposed Real–Time Scheduling Algorithm for WiMAX Networks 
 
 
Nada M. El-Shennawy 
Computers and Automatic Control Dept 
Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University 
Tanta, Egypt 
Nada_elshennawy@f-eng.tanta.edu.eg 
 
Mostafa A. Youssef                         
Computer Science and Engineering           
E-JUST 
Alexandria, Egypt 
moustafa@cs.umd.edu 
 
Mohamed N. El-Derini 
Vice Rector for Education and Student Affairs 
Pharos University 
Alexandria, Egypt 
nazih.elderini@pua.edu.eg 
Mahmoud M. Fahmy 
Computers and Automatic Control Dept. 
Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University 
Tanta, Egypt 
mfn_288@hotmail.com 
 
Abstract- Over the past few years, there has been a rapid 
growth of new services offered to end users on the Internet, 
such as online video games, video conferences, and multimedia 
services. WiMAX networks are one prominent viable solution 
for wireless broadband access that provides last-mile access to 
the Internet. To satisfy the Quality of Service (QoS) 
requirements of the applications in an acceptable way, an 
efficient scheduling algorithm is needed. In the literature, 
attention was focused on throughput and delay only. Jitter, 
though of great significance, was not taken into account. In this 
paper, we consider jitter, in addition to throughput and delay, 
in order to formulate a three-term dynamic weight function. 
The jitter and delay terms, in particular, are weighted by 
specific 
weighting 
factors, 
whose 
values 
in 
real-time 
applications are different from those in non-real-time 
applications. Simulation results are obtained by OPNET, and 
it is shown that the proposed algorithm outperforms two 
famous previously published algorithms. 
Keywords- WiMAX; QoS; Jitter; Scheduling algorithms; IEEE 
802.16 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Worldwide 
interoperability 
for 
microwave 
access 
(WiMAX) networks are a broadband wireless access 
network technology, designed according to IEEE 802.16 
standard [1, 2, 3].   These promising networks possess a 
multitude of advantageous features such as high data rate, 
large spanning area, and provision for achieving the required 
Quality of Service (QoS) of real-time applications. They act 
as a convenient medium for delivering vital services to end 
users on the Internet, such as video conferences, online video 
games, and multimedia services to end users. 
The QoS plays a major role in determining network 
performance. It has three main parameters, namely, 
throughput, delay, and jitter [4, 5]. A scheduling algorithm is 
needed to allocate the bandwidth to applications in such a 
way as to maximize throughput and minimize delay and 
jitter. The scheduling algorithm should be simple, fair, and 
efficient. 
A good survey about scheduling algorithms in WiMAX 
networks is presented by So-In et al.  [6]. Dhrona et al.  [7] 
have made a comprehensive performance study of uplink 
scheduling algorithms in point-to-multipoint WiMAX 
networks, where simulation analysis was carried out using 
average delay, average throughput, fairness and frame 
utilization. Recently, Kumar and Gupta [8] perform another 
comparative descriptive analysis for various scheduling 
algorithms in WiMAX networks. 
 Among notable scheduling algorithms for WiMAX 
networks are [9, 10, 11]: Weighted Fair Queuing (WFQ), 
Random Early Detection (RED), Fair Queuing (FQ), Deficit 
Round Robin (DRR), Round Robin (RR), Weighted Round 
Robin (WRR), and First-In First-Out (FIFO). We have to 
choose the algorithm which guarantees the best performance. 
In this respect, an algorithm with dynamic bandwidth 
allocation is usually recommended. It is also mentioned in 
[12] that weighted scheduling algorithms are preferred for 
satisfaction of QoS requirements. The reason is that the 
weight corresponds to the number of time slots to be 
allocated to the service class. This number of slots is fixed 
for each WiMAX frame; hence the weight representing the 
number of slots is preferably to be an integer. This means 
that we do not actually need algorithms such as DRR [11, 
12] in which floating point numbers are used. Further, the 
resulting algorithm will be much less sophisticated. 
Other recent attempts have been made by Ali and 
Dimyati [13] and El-Shinnawy et al. [14]. In [13], a 
scheduling algorithm has been developed on the basis of the 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
number of bandwidth requests from Non-Real-Time Polling 
Service (nrtPS). In [14], a priority scheduling algorithm 
based on jitter, minimum rate, delay, and class type has been 
introduced. It was the first time for jitter to appear in a 
scheduling algorithm, but the treatment was confined to 
priority algorithms. 
Jitter [15] is defined as a measure of the variability over 
time of the packet latency across a network. It is a very 
important QoS factor in the assessment of network 
performance. The cause of jitter occurrence is that a packet 
can get queued or delayed somewhere in the network. 
Increasing the jitter value beyond a certain threshold leads to 
missing packets and serious audio problems in real-time 
applications.  
In the present paper, we include jitter explicitly in a 
dynamic weight function. To our knowledge, the weight 
function so formulated implies a new concept. The 
performance attained is better than other algorithms, in terms 
of average throughput, average delay, and average jitter. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, an overview of WiMAX networks is given. Scheduling 
algorithms are reviewed in Section III. Section IV presents 
the details of the proposed approach. Simulation results are 
introduced in Section V. Finally, conclusions and trends for 
future work are reported in Section VI.  
 
        
II. 
ON WIMAX NETWORKS 
WiMAX networks have two basic operation modes [6, 7, 
8]: point-to-multipoint (PMP) connection and mesh 
connection. In the PMP mode, the communications between 
all subscriber stations (SSs) are organized and passed 
through the base station (BS), while in the mesh mode, the 
communication can be achieved directly between subscriber 
stations. WiMAX provides five service classes to support the 
variation of QoS requirements for different applications [1, 
6, 7]. The first class is an unsolicited grant service (UGS), 
which is used to support real-time applications with constant 
data rate such as VoIP(Voice over Internet Protocol) without 
silence suppression. The second class is an extended real-
time polling service (ertPS) class, which is designed to 
support real-time applications with variable data rate such as 
VoIP with silence suppression. The real-time polling service 
(rtPS) is the third service class type. rtPS focuses on real-
time applications with variable data rate such as a Moving 
Picture Experts Group (MPEG) compressed video. The 
fourth service class is a non-real-time polling service (nrtPS) 
class, which is designed for non-real-time variable bit rate 
traffic such as file transfer protocol (FTP). The fifth class is 
the best effort (BE) at, which applications do not make use of 
any specific QoS requirements. 
WiMAX is based on the principles of orthogonal 
frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) [1], which is a 
suitable modulation access technique for non– line-of-sight 
(NLOS) conditions with high data rates. However, in 
WiMAX the various parameters pertain to the physical layer, 
such as the number of subcarriers, pilots, and guard band. 
The WiMAX physical (PHY) layers defined in IEEE 802.16 
standard are: wireless MAN-SC (single carrier), wireless 
MAN SCa, wireless MAN-OFDM (orthogonal frequency 
division 
multiplexing) 
and 
wireless 
MAN-OFDMA 
(orthogonal frequency division multiple access). Details 
about these layers can be found in [1, 2]. OFDMA WiMAX 
frame is divided into two subframes: uplink subframe and 
downlink subframe separated by a Transmit-receive 
Transition Gap (TTG) and a Receive-transmit Transition 
Gap (RTG). The structure of the WiMAX frame is shown in 
Figure 1 [1, 2, 6].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. WiMAX Frame Structure 
 
 
WiMAX provides a Media Access Control (MAC) layer 
that uses a grant request mechanism to authorize the 
exchange of data. Thus, a better exploitation of the radio 
resources, in particular with smart antennas, and independent 
management of the traffic of every user is allowed [16]. 
MAC layer in WiMAX has actions [1, 2, 6], i.e., provides 
QoS, responsible of security and key management, and 
provides power saving mode and idle mode operations. 
MAC layer is divided into three sub-layers. First, a 
convergence sub-layer is designed as a link between the 
higher layers and WiMAX MAC layer. This is done by 
mapping data from the upper layers to the appropriate MAC 
layer. Second, a common part sub-layer, which is responsible 
for bandwidth allocation, connection establishment and 
maintenance for all QoS requirements. Third, a security sub-
layer, which is developed for authentication, security key 
exchange, and encryption. To ensure good performance of 
WiMAX networks for the different requirements of QoS in 
real-time applications, a suitable bandwidth allocation 
algorithm is needed. In the starting of each WiMAX frame, 
the scheduling algorithm computes the bandwidth allocation 
 
k 
K+3 
K+5 
 
 
K+27 
K+30 
 
 
 
S 
S+1 
S+2 
. 
. 
. 
p re a m b le  
FCH 
U L -M A P  
DL 
burst#6 
 
R a n g in g  
 
UL burst#1  
P re a m b le  
FCH 
 
D L -M A P  
DL 
burst#5 
 
UL burst#2  
 
C Q I &  A C K  
 
 
D L -M A P  
DL 
burst#4 
 
 
UL burst#3  
 
UL burst#4  
 
DL 
burst#3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UL burst#5  
DL burst#2 
 
UL burst#6  
 
 
 
 
DL 
TTG 
UL 
RTG 
OFDMA Symbol Number 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
for each subscriber station to send this information in UL-
MAP.  
III. 
EARLIER SCHEDULING ALGORITHMS 
To 
meet 
the 
QoS 
requirements 
of 
multimedia 
applications, a scheduling algorithm is needed to allocate the 
bandwidth to users to satisfy upper bounds on delay and jitter 
and to maximize throughput. Scheduling algorithms can be 
classified into two categories [6]: channel-aware algorithms, 
and 
channel-unaware 
algorithms. 
In 
channel-aware 
algorithms, channel information, such as signal strength, 
signal-to-noise ratio, and received signal power, affects the 
bandwidth 
allocation 
decision. 
In 
channel-unaware 
algorithms, however, no channel information is used. Many 
aware schedulers are proposed in the literature: examples are 
modified largest weighted delay first (M-LWDF) [17] and 
Link Adaptive largest weighted throughput (LWT) [18]. 
Also, the channel-unaware schedulers are the subject of 
many research papers. In [6, 10], the weighted family RR 
algorithm is proposed. This algorithm assigns    one 
allocation for each connection in each serving cycle. In  [6, 
7, 10] WRR assigns a weight value to each connection then 
serves connections according to their allocated bandwidth 
based on weight. The main problem of WRR is that when the 
traffic has a variable packet size, it provides incorrect 
percentage of bandwidth allocation. DRR [11, 16] solves the 
problem of WRR by using two variables for each queue, 
deficit counter (DC) and quantum (Q). Deficit weighted 
round robin (DWRR) [18] is the same as DRR but with a 
new weight variable for each queue and the Q value depends 
on the weight value. Another modification on DRR, named 
modified deficit round robin (MDRR) [20], is operated in the 
same way as DRR but with adding a new parameter called a 
queue priority. 
The above-mentioned scheduling algorithms have the 
following 
drawbacks. 
First, 
in 
weighted 
scheduling 
algorithms, the bandwidths are assigned statically and do not 
vary with the burst changes. Second, no enough attention is 
given to jitter causing problems in real-time applications. 
Finally, priority scheduling algorithms caused starvation in 
low priority classes. According to [6] and to the best of our 
knowledge, no scheduling algorithms take jitter delay into 
account in weighting function when taking the bandwidth 
allocation decision.  
IV. 
THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM 
In WiMAX networks, the BS is responsible for the 
scheduling of service classes for uplink and downlink 
directions. The scheduling algorithm works on the bases of 
the bandwidth requests of SSs in the uplink direction. The 
proposed approach is used as an uplink scheduling algorithm 
in the MAC layer of BS. This approach is a type of weighted 
scheduling algorithms with a dynamic weight equation 
defined in terms of the parameters: throughput and delay as 
well as jitter. These parameters characterize the QoS of the 
application at hand. 
For each type of applications, the importance of these 
parameters is varying. In real-time applications which belong 
to rtPS service class in WiMAX, the QoS parameters are all 
important and none of them can be dispensed with. But, in 
non-real-time applications, which belong to nrtPS class in 
WiMAX, throughput is the only important parameter, since 
non-real-time applications are insensitive to delay and jitter. 
The problem under consideration is concerned with the 
development of a real-time scheduling algorithm for 
WiMAX networks. The bandwidth is to be allocated among 
n queues; that is, n subscriber stations. The proposed method 
depends on the formulation of a dynamic weight function in 
terms of the three QoS parameters: throughput, delay, and 
jitter. To this end, a weight Wi is assigned to queue i as a 
positive factor of the form: 
Wi =  
j
n
1
j
i
N
N
=Σ
     , i=1,2,…….,n                               (1) 
In (1), Ni is expressed as the sum of three terms 
corresponding to contributions of throughput, delay, and 
jitter, respectively. Specifically, we propose the following 
formula for a weight function Ni: 
    
Ni  = Ti + Di +  Ji    ,        i=1,2,……,n                           (2) 
 
The first term Ti, in (2), is the fractional throughput 
contribution to Ni, defined as: 
j
X
n
1
j
Σ
X i
=  
i
T
=
                                                      (3)             
where Xi is the minimum reserved traffic rate for queue i. 
The second term Di is the fractional delay contribution 
Di = (
)
(
j )
j
j
n
1
j
i
i
i
Y /L
 
/L
Y
α
α
=Σ
                                                              (4) 
where Yi is a time-varying average delay, Li is the given 
maximum latency, and αi is a positive delay weighting 
factor. In (4), the ratio Yi/Li (less than unity) expresses the 
proportion of the delay of a particular queue relative to the 
maximum acceptable delay of the network. Further, the ratio 
Yi/Li is weighted by a factor αi, whose value varies according 
to the subscriber station (value of i). This is justifiable since 
each subscriber station is devoted to a particular application. 
The third term Ji is the fractional jitter contribution,  
  
Ji=
(
)




=
Σ
Z /j Kj
j
n
1
j
iZ /Ki
i
β
β
                                                     (5) 
where Zi is a time-varying average jitter, Ki is the given 
maximum jitter and βi is a positive jitter weighting factor. 
The terms in (5) can be interpreted in the same way as in (4).  
Equation 2 is valid for both real- and non-real time 
applications; this implies that the weighting factors αi and βi 
should take on different values of the two types of 
applications. The values of αi and βi for real-time 
applications should be greater than those for non-real-time 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

applications. The reason is the fact that real
are more highly sensitive to delay and jitter. There is no 
apparent way for systematically determining the value of 
and βi. Therefore, we resort to a trial-and
criterion for the choice of the values of α
the performance of the algorithm in WiMAX networks.
begin with arbitrary initial values of αi   
the network performance in terms of throughp
jitter. When the performance is not satisfactory, the values of 
αi   and βi are changed in a prescribed random 
a satisfactory network response is arrived at. 
values of αi   and βi  are then fixed and made use of in 
bandwidth allocation operation of the algorithm. 
simulation results to follow demonstrate the
The computational scheme of the proposed algorithm is 
summarized  in the following consecutive steps:
1) Values for the delay weighting factor 
jitter weighting factor βi are selected
2) For each queue, get the values of
3) Calculate the values of Ti (in (3
(in (5)). 
4) Calculate the three-term weigh
according to (2). 
5) Calculate the weight Wi by virtue of 
6) Divide the bandwidth of the uplink subframe 
among the n queues based on the relationship:
(BW) i= Wi * (UL)BW                               
where BWi  is the bandwidth reserved to queue 
and ULBW   is the total bandwidth
subframe. 
7) The value of the bandwidth of each queue is sent to 
SS. 
8) The service for the queue is continued until the 
bandwidth is ended.  
9) The service is moved between the queues using 
round robin mechanism. 
 
V. 
SIMULATION SETTING AND 
Simulation in this paper is performed by the 
simulator [21]. The network used consists of four WiMAX 
service classes: ertPS, rtPS, nrtPS and BE with applications: 
VoIP, video conference, FTP and HTTP
traffic parameters for each service class are 
                      
   TABLE I. TRAFFIC PARAMETERS
 
Service 
class 
Minimum 
reserved 
traffic rate 
in bps 
Maximum 
sustained 
traffic rate 
in bps 
ertPS 
25000 
64000 
rtPS 
64000 
500000 
nrtPS 
45000 
500000 
BE 
1000 
64000 
 
applications. The reason is the fact that real-time applications 
are more highly sensitive to delay and jitter. There is no 
apparent way for systematically determining the value of αi 
and-error method. The 
criterion for the choice of the values of αi and βi depends on 
the performance of the algorithm in WiMAX networks. We 
 and βi , and estimate 
the network performance in terms of throughput, delay, and 
jitter. When the performance is not satisfactory, the values of 
are changed in a prescribed random manner, until 
a satisfactory network response is arrived at. These final 
then fixed and made use of in the 
bandwidth allocation operation of the algorithm. The 
simulation results to follow demonstrate the  idea.  
The computational scheme of the proposed algorithm is 
in the following consecutive steps: 
the delay weighting factor αi and the 
are selected. 
the values of Yi and Zi. 
3)), Di (in (4)), and Ji 
term weight function Ni 
by virtue of (1). 
Divide the bandwidth of the uplink subframe 
based on the relationship: 
                                           (6) 
is the bandwidth reserved to queue i 
is the total bandwidth of the uplink 
The value of the bandwidth of each queue is sent to 
The service for the queue is continued until the 
The service is moved between the queues using 
AND EXPERIMENTS 
is performed by the OPNET 
consists of four WiMAX 
PS and BE with applications: 
VoIP, video conference, FTP and HTTP, respectively. The 
vice class are listed in table1. 
TRAFFIC PARAMETERS 
Maximum 
latency in 
msec 
Maximum 
jitter in 
msec 
20 
150 
30 
160 
100 
300 
N/A 
N/A 
 
The simulation results are 
scenarios by varying the number of SSs.
consists of one BS serving a 
operation. The frame duration is 5
uplink and downlink subframe. 
x 1000 m square space is used.
from 10 to 60 with ratio 2:3:3:2 
ERTPS:RTPS:NRTPS:BE, 
weighted scheduling algorithm 
MDRR [20] and WRR [6, 7, 10]
jitter are considered as performance metrics.
time is 10 minutes 
Figures 2, 3, and 4 show the simulation results for the 
average throughput, average delay, and average jitter, 
respectively, as functions of the number of SSs
proposed algorithm together with the other two algorithms 
WRR and MDRR, it is clear from these figures th
proposed approach exhibits a better performance than 
and MDRR since it has: 
 
• 
A higher throughput
• 
A lower delay 
• 
A lower jitter  
 
In Figure 2, it is to be noted that the differences between 
the average throughput values in the three scheduling 
algorithms are not appreciable, because the throughput in the 
three algorithms is defined using the same concept.
 
    
Figure 2. WiMAX average 
 
    
0
2000000
4000000
6000000
8000000
10000000
12000000
10 20 30
Average throughput in bps
Number of SSs
The simulation results are obtained using several 
os by varying the number of SSs. Each scenario 
 number of SSs in PMP mode of 
operation. The frame duration is 5 msec, with 50% for each 
subframe. A random topology in 1000 
is used. The number of SSs varies 
10 to 60 with ratio 2:3:3:2 SSs for service classes 
 
respectively. 
The 
proposed 
scheduling algorithm is compared with both 
[6, 7, 10]. The throughput, delay, and 
jitter are considered as performance metrics. The simulation 
4 show the simulation results for the 
average throughput, average delay, and average jitter, 
respectively, as functions of the number of SSs, for the 
proposed algorithm together with the other two algorithms 
WRR and MDRR, it is clear from these figures that the 
proposed approach exhibits a better performance than WRR 
A higher throughput 
t is to be noted that the differences between 
the average throughput values in the three scheduling 
algorithms are not appreciable, because the throughput in the 
three algorithms is defined using the same concept. 
 
WiMAX average throughput vs. number of SSs 
 
30 40 50 60
Number of SSs
WRR
MDRR
Proposed 
Algorithm
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
        
Figure 3. WiMAX average delay vs. 
 
  
 
Figure 4. WiMAX average jitter vs. 
 
The relative superiority of the proposed algorithm can be 
attributed to the inclusion of jitter, in addition to throughput 
and delay, in the weight function Ni (equation 2). Besides, 
the values of the weighting factors αi and 
such away that both delay and jitter are given greater 
attention in real-time applications than in non
applications. In this specific application, it is found tha
best possible values of αi and βi are in the ratio 1:5 and 1:3, 
respectively, in non-real-time and real-time applications.
  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
 
An 
uplink 
dynamic 
channel-unaware 
scheduling algorithm for WiMAX networks 
proposed. It has advantages of conceptual soundness and 
computational simplicity. A weight function, for each queue, 
0
1
2
3
4
5
10
20
30
40
50
60
Average delay in sec
Number of SSs
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
10 20 30 40 50 60
Average Jitter in sec
Number of SSs
 
 
vs. number of SSs 
 
. number of SSs 
superiority of the proposed algorithm can be 
attributed to the inclusion of jitter, in addition to throughput 
(equation 2). Besides, 
and βi are chosen in 
such away that both delay and jitter are given greater 
time applications than in non-real-time 
applications. In this specific application, it is found that the 
are in the ratio 1:5 and 1:3, 
time applications. 
AND FUTURE WORK 
unaware 
weighted 
scheduling algorithm for WiMAX networks has been 
conceptual soundness and 
A weight function, for each queue, 
is formulated as the sum of the respective contributions of 
the QoS parameters: throughput, delay, and jitter. The 
inclusion of jitter is the essential modification that results in 
a more comprehensive weight function.
and βi are introduced in the expressions of delay and jitter 
contributions, respectively. The values of these factors in the 
real-time applications should be di
real-time applications. There is no obvious strategy to choose 
the values of αi and βi ; therefore, a trial
is resorted to. The proposed 
OPNET. Comparison is made with two powerful 
WRR and MDRR. The results demonstrate that 
algorithm outperforms the other two, with respect to 
throughput, delay, and jitter, as functions of the number of 
subscriber stations.  
In a future research work, a systematic method for the 
choice of αi and βi  will be devised. In addition, the 
algorithm will be extended to the channel
interesting challenging task will be focused on the 
application of the algorithm to the newly established 
Term Evolution  (LTE)  networks
 
REFERENCES
[1] J. G. Andrews, A. Ghosh, and
WiMAX:understanding 
broadband 
wireless networking, 
Pearson Education Inc, Feb 2007.
[2] IEEE 802.16e, IEEE Standard for local and metropolitan area 
networks, Air Interface for Fixed Broadband
Systems, Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access 
Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in 
Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, Feb 2006.
[3] C. Cicconetti, A. Erta, L. Lenzini,
“Performance evaluation of the IEEE
support,”  IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., 6, (1), 
38. 
[4] R. A. Talwalkar and M. Ilyas, “Analysis of Quality of Service 
(QoS) in WiMAX Networks,” 16
Conference on Networks, ICON 2008, pp. 1
[5] A. Iera, A. Molinaro, and S. Pizzi, “Channel
Scheduling for QoS and Fairness Provisioning in IEEE 
802.16/WiMAX Broadband Wireless Access Systems,”  IEEE 
Network 21, vol. 5, 2007, pp. 34
[6] C. So-In, R. Jain, and A.K. Tamimi, “Scheduling in IEEE 
802.16e Mobile WiMAX Networks: Key Issues
IEEE Journal on Special Areas in Communications (JSAC), 
vol. 27, no. 2, 2009. 
[7] P. Dhrona, N. Abu Ali, and H. Hassanein,
study of scheduling algorithms in Point
WiMAX networks," IEEE 
Networks LCN, 2008, pp. 843
[8] B. Kumar, and P. Gupta, “Scheduling Algorithms in WiM
Network,” Second International Conference on Advanced 
Computing and Communication Technologies, 
462.  
[9] L.  Jin-Cherng, C. Chun
"Performance Evaluation for Scheduling Algorithms in 
WiMAX Network," International Conference on Computer 
Technology and Development, ICCTD 
WRR
MDRR
Proposed 
Algorithm 
WRR
MDRR
Proposed 
Algorithm
is formulated as the sum of the respective contributions of 
the QoS parameters: throughput, delay, and jitter. The 
sential modification that results in 
a more comprehensive weight function. Weighting factors αi 
are introduced in the expressions of delay and jitter 
. The values of these factors in the 
time applications should be different from those in non-
There is no obvious strategy to choose 
therefore, a trial-and-error technique 
proposed algorithm is simulated using 
OPNET. Comparison is made with two powerful algorithms: 
WRR and MDRR. The results demonstrate that our 
algorithm outperforms the other two, with respect to 
throughput, delay, and jitter, as functions of the number of 
In a future research work, a systematic method for the 
will be devised. In addition, the 
algorithm will be extended to the channel-aware case. An 
interesting challenging task will be focused on the 
application of the algorithm to the newly established Long-
works [22].  
EFERENCES 
and R. Muhamed, Fundamentals of 
WiMAX:understanding broadband 
wireless 
networking, 
Pearson Education Inc, Feb 2007. 
IEEE 802.16e, IEEE Standard for local and metropolitan area 
networks, Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access 
Systems, Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access 
Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in 
Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, Feb 2006. 
C. Cicconetti, A. Erta, L. Lenzini, and E. Mingozzi, 
“Performance evaluation of the IEEE 802.16 MAC for QoS 
IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., 6, (1), 2007, pp. 26–
R. A. Talwalkar and M. Ilyas, “Analysis of Quality of Service 
(QoS) in WiMAX Networks,” 16th IEEE International 
Conference on Networks, ICON 2008, pp. 1-8. 
ro, and S. Pizzi, “Channel-Aware 
Scheduling for QoS and Fairness Provisioning in IEEE 
802.16/WiMAX Broadband Wireless Access Systems,”  IEEE 
Network 21, vol. 5, 2007, pp. 34-41. 
A.K. Tamimi, “Scheduling in IEEE 
802.16e Mobile WiMAX Networks: Key Issues ans Survey,” 
IEEE Journal on Special Areas in Communications (JSAC), 
and H. Hassanein, "A performance 
study of scheduling algorithms in Point-to-Multipoint 
E Conference on Local Computer 
Networks LCN, 2008, pp. 843-850.  
. Kumar, and P. Gupta, “Scheduling Algorithms in WiMAX 
” Second International Conference on Advanced 
Communication Technologies, 2012, pp. 457-
Chun-Lun, and L.  Cheng-Hsiung, 
"Performance Evaluation for Scheduling Algorithms in 
" International Conference on Computer 
Technology and Development, ICCTD '09, 2009, pp. 68-74. 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
[10] A. Al-Howaide, A. Doulat, and Y. Khamayseh, “Performance 
Evaluation of Different Scheduling Algorithms in WiMAX,” 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and 
Applications (IJCSEA), vol. 1, no. 5, 2011, pp. 81-94 
[11] H. Guesmi, S. Maaloul, and R. Tourki, “Design of Scheduling 
Algorithm for QoS Management on WiMAX Networks,” 
Computer Science and Engineering, vol. 2, 2011, pp. 43-50. 
[12] A. Sayenko, O.  Alenan, J. Karhula, and T. Hamalainen " 
Ensuring the QoS requirements in 802.16 scheduling," 
Proceedings of the 9th ACM international symposium on 
Modeling analysis and simulation of wireless and mobile 
systems, 2006, pp. 108 - 117. 
[13] D. Ali and K. Dimyati, “Threshold based Cyclic Polling 
(TbCP): An Uplink Scheduling Agorithm for Mobile 
WiMAX Systems,” International Journal of Information and 
Electronics Engineering, vol. 1, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1-8. 
[14] A. El-Shinnawy, M. Elgazzar, and A. Nassar, “A Multi-Factor 
Scheduling Algorithm for WiMAX Systems,” International 
Journal of Information and Electronics Engineering, vol. 2, 
no. 3, 2012, pp. 347-351. 
[15] C. Demichelis and P. Chimento, “IP Packet Delay Variation 
Metric  for IP Performance Metrics (IPPM),” RFC 3393, 
November 2002. 
[16] S. Omerovic, “WiMAX Overview,” Technical report, 
University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2006. 
[17] M. Andrews, K. Kumaran, K. Ramanan, A. Stolyar, P. 
Whiting, and R. Vijayakumar, “Providing quality of service 
over a shared wireless link,” IEEE Commun. Mag. Vol. 39, 
2001, pp. 150-154. 
[18] Y. Zhang and S. Liew, “Link-adaptive largest-Weighted-
throughput packet scheduling for real-time traffics in wireless 
OFDM networks,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Global 
Telecommunications Conf., St. Louis, MO, vol. 5, 2005, pp. 
5-9. 
[19] J. Lakkakorpi, A. Sayenko, and J. Moilanen, "Comparison of 
Different Scheduling Algorithms for WiMAX Base Station: 
Deficit Round-Robin vs. Proportional Fair vs. Weighted 
Deficit Round-Robin ," IEEE Wireless Communications and 
Networking Conference, WCNC, 2008, pp. 1991-1996.   
[20] H. Kaur and G. Singh, “Implementation and Evaluation of 
Scheduling Algorithms in Point-to-Mutipoint Mode in 
WiMAX Networks,” International Journal of Computer 
Science and Technology (IJCST), vol. 2, 2011, pp. 540-546. 
[21] OPNET Technologies, Opnet modeler Software Package 
available: www.opnet.com.  
[22] S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, LTE - The UMTS Long 
Term Evolution: From Theory to Practice, John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd., 2011. 
 
 
 
 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

