Challenges of Operationalizing PACS on Cloud Over Wireless Networks 
 
Ricardo Ferraro de Souza, Carlos Becker Westphall, Daniel Ricardo dos Santos, Carla Merkle Westphall 
Networks and Management Laboratory 
Federal University of Santa Catarina 
Florianopolis, Brazil 
ricardoferraro@hotmail.com, westphal@inf.ufsc.br, danielrs@inf.ufsc.br, carlamw@inf.ufsc.br 
 
Abstract— 
Clinics 
and 
hospitals 
are 
acquiring 
more 
technological resources to help providing a faster and more 
precise diagnostic, with the goal of making it more dynamic 
and effective. This is pushing health institutions to search for 
more modern equipment, with greater technological features. 
Besides last generation equipment, another problem faced by 
these institutions is enabling the connection of physicians to a 
Picture Archive and Communication Systems (PACS) from 
anywhere. With the use of communication resources 
increasingly present in everyday life, like Wireless-Fidelity 
(Wi-Fi), third generation of mobile telecommunications 
technology 
(3G), 
fourth 
generation 
of 
mobile 
telecommunications 
technology 
(4G), 
Worldwide 
Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMax) and other 
wireless networks that allow the connection of mobile devices, 
it becomes easier and cheaper to provide quality medical 
services at a distance. Diagnoses that needed a doctor to be 
present, for instance, can now be performed from anywhere, 
provided there is an Internet connection. Cloud-based PACS is 
shown to be efficient for archiving medical images, allowing 
access to exams and reports from anywhere, over wireless 
networks, regardless of the platform used for access. 
Keywords - Cloud Computing; PACS; Healthcare Systems; 
Wireless Networks. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Medicine is being perfected through the use of innovative 
technological solutions in various equipment with diverse 
applications, such as image processing, blood analysis, 
surgical assistance and distance patient control. 
Inside hospitals and clinics for diagnostic imaging, it is 
usual to find PACS. PACS have the goal of managing the 
storage and exhibition of medical images. Through 
workstations, doctors have access to the PACS system where 
they manipulate images independently of their physical 
location. 
Specialized physicians achieve diagnosis through the 
analysis of images or the reading of reports. But these 
physicians are not always present where the exam was 
performed, especially in cases where the participation of a 
second doctor is necessary or in the case of training for 
resident physicians. The involvement of these doctors can 
happen with telemedicine.  
Telemedicine comprehends the offering of services 
related to health care in cases where distance is a critical 
factor; such services are performed by health professionals 
using communication and information technologies for the 
interchange of information valid for diagnostics, prevention 
and treatment of illnesses and the continual education of 
health service providers, as well as research [1]. 
The practice of telemedicine is only made possible 
because of significant advances in communication systems. 
The possibility of connectivity to the World Wide Web from 
mobile devices, a constantly evolving technology, allows 
patients to obtain adequate medical care in less-favored 
regions, where there are no doctors or wired Internet 
connection available. Wi-Fi Networks, 3G, 4G, WiMax and 
other wireless networks are being constantly improved with 
higher data transmission rates, allowing access to content not 
explored before, which aim to improve, simplify and 
complement the services related to patient care and make 
them more efficient. 
Cloud computing is currently the main theme of a lot of 
research in information technology. The possibility of 
sharing resources through clusters, virtualization and the ease 
of access to information attracts more and more information 
technology researchers. This technology is also a powerful 
tool to promote the homogenization or virtualization of space 
[2]. 
Images from radiological exams are used in clinics and 
hospitals for medical diagnosis. The inter-relation among 
clinics, hospitals and radiology departments are increasingly 
dependent of the accessibility of these images, from 
anywhere inside or outside of the health care unit [3]. 
The idea is to use cloud as a model for applications being 
delivered as services over the Internet. Cloud services are 
built in such a way that if a machine fails, the system resets, 
in order to prevent the service to crash or that the contractor 
knows that there was some kind of problem. Cloud 
computing enables the growth of processing and storage 
infrastructure for hospitals and clinics without causing much 
impact. Thus cloud based PACS enables medical activity 
from anywhere using computers or devices connected to the 
Internet. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses 
the interoperability of medical equipment and wireless 
networks. Section 3 discusses the fundamentals of cloud 
computing. Section 4 talks about PACS and cloud-based 
PACS. Section 5 cites the performance of wireless networks 
for medical image transmission. Section 6 approaches 
wireless security in medical environments. Section 7 shows a 
scenario where medical images may be accessed by remote 
devices. Section 8 is the conclusion. 
II. INTEROPERABILITY CHALLENGES 
Health charts, medical and laboratory reports, medical 
images and prescribed medicine are some of the items in a 
265
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

medical record, and those records are becoming more and 
more complex. Physicians in hospitals and clinics need a 
flexible resource that allows them accessing information and 
history for each patient, because they work and meet patients 
in several places; they need to be frequently following exams 
and giving support to several people. 
Medical records occupy a great storage space and the 
management of these data is a challenging task for hospitals 
and clinics [4]. To solve those issues, these organizations 
invest large amounts of money in infrastructure for 
communication, processing and storage of exams. Inside this 
infrastructure are equipment for ultrasonography, MRI, CT 
scans and radiography. Figure 1 shows the sending of 
medical images to the PACS. 
 
Figure 1 - Sending DICOM images to the cloud-based PACS 
The modalities, as known equipment’s, send images 
using Digital Image and Communication in Medicine 
(DICOM), a digital standard to store and transmit medical 
images, over a Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) to a 
PACS located on a cloud. Communication from the medical 
equipment to the WLAN is achieved by using a device that 
connects to a Local Area Network (LAN), which in turn 
accesses the PACS that is on the cloud using the Internet. 
III. CLOUD COMPUTING 
The cloud computing approach enables the growth of 
processing and storage infrastructure for hospitals and 
clinics without causing much impact. Internet access and 
computing devices are available in most places, creating 
new opportunities to share and use online resources. A great 
number of Internet features and services like e-mail and 
storage are used daily as a kind of commodity. Patients are 
continuously being monitored undisturbed during their daily 
activities [5]. 
Cloud services are built in such a way that if a machine 
fails, the system readjusts, in order to prevent service 
crashes or the consumer even knowing there was some kind 
of problem. 
The National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) defines cloud computing as "a model for enabling 
ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a 
shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., 
networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that 
can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal 
management effort or service provider interaction" [6]. 
It could be said that cloud computing is the result of the 
union of computational paradigms such as virtualization, 
service level agreements and grid computing, aimed at 
providing on-demand, service-based business models of 
utility computing [7]. 
Cloud computing can be classified into three models 
[6][8]: 
• Software as a Service (SaaS): the customer uses the 
provided software, without being able to control the 
infrastructure. It can be accessed through a web browser or 
directly through the interface of a program; 
• Platform as a Service (PaaS): the customer has control 
over the deployed applications and settings of the 
environment hosting applications in the cloud; 
• Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): the customer can 
deploy and run arbitrary software, and has control over 
operating systems, storage and deployed applications. 
Clouds can be deployed in four ways and security 
policies depend on the business process, the type of 
information and desired levels of service: 
• Private Clouds are managed by the company itself or 
by third parties, this cloud is accessed only by an 
organization; 
• Public Clouds are available to the general public; 
• Community Clouds are shared by companies with 
interests in common; and 
• Hybrid Clouds are a composition between two or more 
implementations of clouds. 
IV. CLOUD-BASED PACS 
The idea of managing the storage of digital images from 
different modalities into a central database, emerged in the 
mid 80s. This database should be a file system that manages 
the storage and answers queries for images and related 
clinical data [9]. 
The system has a central database was called PACS. 
PACS can acquire, transmit, store and display information 
from medical images [10]. Acquire images directly from the 
modalities; store these images in their central database, so 
the hospitals and clinics no longer need to file radiological 
films reducing costs by helping in the preservation of nature 
and besides; PACS can transmit and display medical images 
through stations job. Workstations allow manipulate and 
process medical images. 
PACS systems allow consultations through texts linked 
to images, however consultations through attributes of the 
image itself can facilitate diagnosis [11]. 
A cloud-based PACS solution must grant access to the 
file server from any place or platform [12]. A traditional 
PACS server consists of the following components: DICOM 
repository system and database [13]. The object repository 
calls an infrastructure with storage capacity to support all 
266
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

DICOM exams. The database module supports the DICOM 
Information Model, which contains metadata information 
related to patients, the series of examinations and images. 
When PACS exams are received, the images are stored in 
the DICOM repository and the database is updated with 
elements drawn from examination. 
For doctors, the PACS cloud allows access to historical 
images and the selection of "key images", which are images 
that have a supposed variation in normal patterns. Some 
files emphasize putting medical examination and opinion on 
the case available, so that other doctors can use it as a 
parameter or continue researching the subject. 
V. NETWORK PERFORMANCE CHALLENGES 
Being available on the cloud, medical data may be 
processed by an intelligent or distributed system and sent to a 
medical team for analysis [14].  
Applications that access PACS allow doctors to perform 
diagnosis from any physical location using only a mobile 
device. These devices must have a DICOM application that 
allows the downloading of images using wireless networks, 
and the manipulation of a series of images. 
Large data transfer rates, such as gigabits per second, will 
be available in common places, supporting applications that 
involve the synchronization of local device data with the 
cloud or the pre-caching of data for posterior use [15]. 
Wi-Fi or 802.11 networks are present in places such as 
airports, bus stations, cafes, shopping malls, squares and 
universities, among others. Those networks can achieve 
transmission rates of up to 300 Mbps at varying frequencies, 
allowing adequate access to the images of tests that are in the 
cloud. 
3G networks appear as an alternative to users of mobile 
phones and tablets, especially. These networks reach long 
distances and support data and voice transmission, with rates 
of up to 10 Mbps. The efficiency of access to medical 
images on the cloud will vary based on the data transmission 
rate being used, but those networks allow the physicians to 
access images on distant places and even on the move. 
4G networks, which are totally IP-based, are still used in 
few countries, but may achieve speeds of up to 100 Mbps in 
movement and 5 Gbps while still, making the access of 
pictures on a cloud-based PACS, through mobile devices as 
well as through computers, similar to the access over wired 
networks in CAT 5e and CAT 6 standards. 
WiMax networks were developed to support Wireless 
Metropolitan Area Networks, using the 802.16 protocol, 
allowing rates beyond 1 Gbps, which is higher than the other 
technologies, except 4G, and again enabling the visualization 
of medical images to be as fast as over a wired network. 
VI. SECURITY CHALLENGES 
The security challenges in telemedicine and cloud-based 
PACS can be divided in three main categories: data 
transmission, data storage and data access. 
Currently, medical data is generated in many different 
equipment to be later stored and processed [16], and all of 
these data must be transmitted over different networks, so 
that those who need it may have ubiquitous and time-
independent access to it. 
During transmission, private data will probably transit 
through different types of networks, each with its specific 
security design. Medical data can be generated in equipment 
such as heart rate and blood pressure monitors and transit 
over a Wireless Body Area Network (WBAN), then be 
transmitted to a cloud server over a WLAN to be later 
accessed by a doctor via a 4G WWAN. All of the devices 
used in transmission and storage must ensure security 
properties such as availability, confidentiality, integrity and 
privacy [17]. Among the main threats to private data are 
misuse, malicious disclosure or modification [18].  
The issues in secure data transmission and storage are 
solved by using cryptography in every communication, as 
well as keeping private and sensitive data stored in 
cryptographic devices at all times, while it is not being 
processed. The use of cryptography, however, brings the 
challenges of key management in distributed environments. 
All sensitive and private data stored or in transit must be 
encrypted, and the access points, gateways and other 
communication systems must provide support for it. This 
includes every data that contains medical information or that 
may be used to identify patients and doctors. 
Secure data access is not entirely solved by using 
cryptography. To allow efficient access to medical data, 
good Identity and Access Management procedures are 
necessary. The use of Federated Identity Management is 
extremely useful to allow the collaboration between doctors 
in different institutions and to enable ubiquitous access to 
important data. 
Another primary concern in the manipulation of private 
data is the logging of every access to it, allowing posterior 
audit and possible incident response. 
Accessing patients’ private data in mobile devices brings 
many facilities, but it also presents problems, since this kind 
of device is easily lost or stolen, and even if all important 
data are stored on a cloud, these devices may contain access 
credentials or cached data, so they must also be encrypted. 
A. Federated Identity 
The concept of federated identity is used to provide 
reliability between the medical and health institutions and 
implement secure access. Users are represented by 
identities, which are a "representation of an entity (or group 
of entities) in the form of one or more elements of 
information (attributes) that enable the entity to be 
recognized only within a context" [19]. 
The credentials informed by users are managed by an 
Identity Management System (IMS), which uses Single 
Sign-On (SSO), and ensures the security of users' 
information through a set of functions and capabilities 
called Identity Management (IDM). 
The IMS performs several functions, the most important 
being: 
• 
Provisioning: the practice of providing identities 
within an organization; 
• 
Authentication: making sure that the user that 
makes the access is really who he says he is; 
267
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

• 
Authorization: the process responsible for allowing 
or denying access requests in different parts of the system or 
operations; 
• 
Federation: a group of organizations or Services 
Provide (SPs) which provide a circle of trust in order to 
allow the sharing of information through digital identities 
[20]. 
Entities can be classified into three types: the User, the 
Identity Provider (IDP), responsible for issuing credentials 
and issuing and managing user identities, and the Service 
Provider (SP), which is the entity that provides services to 
users based on their attributes. 
B. Shibboleth 
Shibboleth [21] [22] is an open-source Identity 
Management System developed by Internet2 that enables 
the construction of identity federations and the use of SSO. 
It also allows the sharing of attributes using the Security 
Assertions Markup Language (SAML) standard. It is widely 
used in academic and industrial scenarios to deploy both 
Identity Providers as well as Service Providers. 
Shibboleth is comprised of three main components, the 
identity provider, responsible for managing user identities 
and authentication; the service provider, responsible for 
controlling the access of users to resources; and the Where 
Are You From? (WAYF), responsible for allowing users to 
choose their desired identity provider during authentication. 
Users authenticate with their organizational credentials. 
The identity provider then passes minimal identity 
information, in the form of attributes predefined in an 
agreement, to enable authorization decisions by the service 
providers. 
Federations are formed by the exchange of metadata 
containing digital certificates and other information about 
the entities in the circle of trust. 
VII. PROPOSED SCENARIO 
This work shows a cloud-based PACS solution, allowing 
exams to be performed in various equipment and 
transmitted over wireless networks, so that from any 
connected mobile device a doctor may have access to PACS 
exam images. Figure 2 shows diverse equipment such as 
cellphones, tablets and laptops accessing the cloud-based 
PACS over wireless connections, such as Wi-Fi, 3G, 4G or 
WiMax. 
 
Figure 2 – Accessing PACS through wireless networks. 
The 
PACS 
system 
in 
the 
implementation 
is 
DCM4CHEE [23] [24], with a PostgreSQL database. The 
devices for test access were a laptop, a smartphone and a 
tablet, all of them with the Osirix application. All of them 
are using publicly available 3G and Wi-Fi connections. In 
every case the connection is successful, showing a mean 
time of 20 seconds to download a DICOM exam of a 
lumbar spine containing 100 images. 
Table 1 shows the comparison of mean times for 
accessing a picture, based on different mobile devices and 
wireless networks. The sizes of medical images vary 
depending on the matrix used in its acquisition. In this case 
as the examination of the lumbar spine is the predominant 
matrix, the matrix is 512 X 512, resulting in an image of 1.6 
Mbyte. 
TABLE I. DOWNLOAD TIME OF A APPLE DICOM IMAGE 
Device / Transmission 
Wi-Fi 
3G 
iPhone 
12s 
33s 
iPad 
11s 
28s 
MacBook 
10s 
26s 
All the mobile devices uses, are Apple products 
(MacBook, iPhone a iPad) and they present a flexible 
platform for the development and practice of telemedicine 
with modern high-resolution equipment and high processing 
capacity, besides providing the usability of touchscreen [25] 
[26]. 
Other mobile devices, which are not support by the 
Osirix software, may access PACS directly through a web 
interface. Users accessing the system through the web will 
be authenticated using their federated identities. 
In this case, the user accesses the PACS via browser. 
The system detects that the user is not authenticated and 
redirects him to the WAYF of the federation. The user 
selects his identity provider and informs his credentials, and 
then is automatically redirected to the PACS system where 
he can browse and view the patient exam images. 
268
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

These images can be viewed in two distinct ways. One is 
to download or view the images in their browser, more in 
Joint Photograph Experts Group (JPEG) format. The second 
way is to have the java environment installed on your 
computer or device, so that the user can perform the 
download a jnlp file that will be executed at the opening of 
the viewer, and an extension of the PACS server dcm4chee 
called Weasis. 
The Weasis is a DICOM image viewer developed as 
plugin for dcm4chee PACS, where the user has some 
functions to manipulate images of medical examination of 
the patient. Table 2 shows the opening time of the lumbar 
spine quoted in Table 1 using the two ways of viewing 
described above. Appliances are 2 notebooks with Core i5 
2.53GHz with 2 cores, 4 Giga Bytes of Random Access 
Memory (RAM) and operating system Windows 7 
Professional 64-bit and Ubuntu 12.04 LTS 64-bit. 
TABLE II. DOWNLOAD TIME OF A IMAGE 
 
JPEG 
Weasis 
(DICOM) 
Device / Transmission 
Wi-Fi 
3G 
Wi-Fi 
3G 
Notebook (Win7) 
2s 
4s 
14s 
38 
Notebook (Ubuntu) 
2s 
4s 
13s 
37 
In comparison with Apple devices that use a 
communication protocol direct dcm4chee PACS through the 
method retrieve WADO [24], others equipment also show 
up more efficient with a longer time considering opening 
DICOM images. The display mode of JPEG images is much 
faster but the doctor can see static image, without the power 
of compounding. A JPEG image is not acceptable for 
diagnosis. The processor that owns the computer or device 
has an influence only after the examination to be loaded into 
memory ready to be manipulated. 
Identity Management Implementation 
The PACS system was installed and configured on a 
Windows 2008 Server R2 virtual machine. On this same 
machine 
the 
Shibboleth, 
Apache 
2.2, 
Tomcat 
7, 
OPENLDAP, JASIG CAS, JDK 1.7 and PostgreSQL 9.2 
services were configured. 
Apache was configured to allow the use of Secure 
Sockets Layer (SSL) connections, and also to proxy its 
requests to Tomcat. Tomcat was configured to run the 
authentication and identity management applications. 
The authentication server enables JASIG CAS SSO 
authentication via a web interface passing authenticated 
users to Shibboleth. CAS was set up to search for users in a 
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) directory. 
With the server configured, Shibboleth was installed. 
The IDP application was installed and configured in 
Tomcat. To act as the service provider, the Shibboleth 
application must belong to a federation. TestShib was 
chosen as the federation, because it was created to test 
Shibboleth configurations (SPs and IDPs). An IDP was 
registered informing the hostname and digital certificate 
created earlier. Shibboleth was then configured to use 
TestShib’s metadata. The CAS Client receives shibboleth 
authentication. With this process ready Shibboleth is 
configured and authenticating users from JASIG CAS. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The need for finding more precise diagnostics allowing 
effective treatment for patients pushes for a constant 
technological evolution in medical equipment, as well as 
smartphones, tablets and laptops that are used to access the 
images and the communication of these devices with the 
cloud. 
The presence of communication resources in daily life 
over Wi-Fi, 3G, 4G or WiMax reaching high data 
transmission rates, enables access to medical diagnostics at a 
distance 
using 
Internet-connected 
mobile 
devices, 
downloading 
DICOM 
images 
with 
an 
appropriate 
application. 
The use of a cloud-based PACS has the goal of showing 
the archiving of medical exam images from different 
locations 
in 
a 
centralized 
repository, 
lowering 
the 
investments on storage and processing infrastructure for 
hospitals and clinics. On the cloud, doctors and patients may 
visualize these images through any connected mobile device 
that provides Internet access. 
The test results were satisfactory, considering data 
transmission rates, showing that mobile devices and a cloud-
based PACS present a viable solution for the practice of 
telemedicine. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Health Organization. http://www.who.org. [retrieved: 
December 2008]. 
[2] H. A. Franke, F. L. Koch, C. O. Rolim, C. B. Westphall and 
D. O. Balen, “Grid-M: Middleware to Integrate Mobile 
Devices, Sensors and Grid Computing,” Third International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications, March 
2007, pp. 19-25. 
[3] E. M. B. Junior. “Teleradiology: Central Remote Diagnostic 
Imaging Digital Integrated Portal to a Distributed Medical 
Information. Application of public,” Federal University of 
São Paulo, São Paulo, 2009. 
[4] L. He, X. Ming, W. Ding and Q. Liu, “A Novel Approach To 
Remote Access Picture Archiving And Communication 
System On Mobile Devices Over Wireless Networks,” 
Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI), 2012 IEEE-EMBS 
International Conference on January 2012, pp. 581-583. 
[5] R-D. Berndt, et al., “SaaS-Platform for Mobile Health 
Applications,” Systems, Signals and Devices (SSD), 2012 9th 
International Multi-Conference on March 2012, pp. 1-4. 
[6] E. Brown, Published final definition of Cloud Computing. 
http://www.inovacaotecnologica.com.br/noticias/noticia.php?
artigo=definicao-computacao-em-nuvem&id=010150111128 
[retrieved: December 2011]. 
[7] S. Chaves, R. Uriarte and C. B. Westphall, “Toward an 
architecture for monitoring private clouds,” Communications 
Magazine, IEEE. December 2011, pp. 130-137. 
[8] F. Schubert, C. Rolim and C. B. Westphall, “Application 
Provisioning Algorithms Based on Service Level Agreements 
for Cloud Computing,” IX Workshop Clouds, Grids and 
Applications. 2011. 
[9] A. R. Bakker, “HIS and RIS and PACS,” Picture Archiving 
and Communication Systems (PACS) in Medicine. NATO 
ASI Series Volume 74, 1991, pp 157-162. 
269
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[10] R. L. Arenson, “Picture archiving and communication 
systems,” Western Journal of Medicine on March 1992, pp. 
298–299. 
[11] J. M. Bueno,., F. Chino, A. J. M. Traina, A. J. M. Traina, P. 
M. Azevedo-Marques, “How to Add Content-Based Image 
Retrieval Capability in a PACS,” IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Based Medical Systems – CBMS. 
2002, pp. 321-336. 
[12] L. A. B. Silva, C. Costa, A. Silva and J. L. Oliveira, “A PACS 
Gateway 
to 
the 
Cloud,” 
Information 
Systems 
and 
Technologies (CISTI), 2011 6th Iberian Conference on June 
2011, pp. 1-6. 
[13] YJ. Ni, et al., “Implementation and Evaluation of A PQRM-
based PACS System,” Information Technology Applications 
in Biomedicine, 2007. ITAB 2007. 6th International Special 
Topic Conference on November 2007, pp. 323-326. 
[14] C. Rolim, et al., “Cloud Computing Solution for Patient’s 
Data Collection in Health Care Institutions,” eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2010. ETELEMED '10. 
Second International Conference on February 2010, pp. 95-
99. 
[15] R. Baldemair, at al., “Evolving Wireless Communications: 
Addressing the Challenges and Expectations of the Future,” 
Vehicular Technology Magazine, IEEE. March 2013, pp. 24-
30. 
[16] H. Furtado and R. Trobec, “Applications of wireless sensors 
in medicine,” MIPRO, 2011 Proceedings of the 34th 
International Convention. May 2011, pp.257-261. 
[17] W. Lou and K. Ren, “Security, privacy, and accountability in 
wireless access networks,” Wireless Communications, IEEE. 
August 2009, pp. 80-87. 
[18] M. Ameen, J. Liu and K. Kwak, “Security and Privacy Issues 
in Wireless Sensor Networks for Healthcare Applications,” 
Journal of Medical Systems, Springer. 2012, pp. 93-101. 
[19] M. Leandro, T. Nascimento, et al., “Multi-Tenancy 
Authorization System with Federated Identity for Cloud-
Based Environments Using Shibboleth,” The Eleventh 
International Conference on Network. 2012, pp. 88-93. 
[20] Z. A. Khattak, S. Sulaiman and J. Manan, “A Study on Threat 
Model for Federated Identities in Federated Identity 
Management System,” Information Technology (ITSim), 
2010 International Symposium in June 2010, pp. 618-623. 
[21] M. Erdos and M. SCantor, “Shibboleth Architecture 
Technical Overview Working Draft 02[Z],” Shibboleth 
Project, 2005. 
[22] W. Ying, “Research on Multi-Level Security of Shibboleth 
Authentication Mechanism,” Third International Symposium 
on Information Processing in October 2010, pp. 450-453.  
[23] Open Source Clinical Image and Object Management. 
http://www.dcm4chee.org. [retrived: May 2013]. 
[24] M. J. Warnock, C. Toland, D. Evans, B. Wallace and P. Nagy, 
“Benefits of Using the DCM4CHE DICOM Archive,” Journal 
of Digital Imaging in November 2007, pp. 125-129. 
[25] A. F. Choudhri and M. G. Radvany, “Initial Experience with a 
Handheld Device Digital Imaging and Communications in 
Medicine Viewer: OsiriX Mobile on the iPhone,” Journal of 
Digital Imaging, 2011, pp.184-189. 
[26] G. Shih, P. Lakhani, et al., “Is Android or iPhone the Platform 
for Innovation in Imaging,” Informatics. Journal of Digital 
Imaging, 
2010, 
pp. 
2-7
 
270
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

