Adaptive Cross Layer Approach for Video Transmission Over  
Cognitive UWB etwork 
 
Norazizah Mohd Aripin1,2, Norsheila Fisal1, Rozeha A. Rashid1, A.C.C Lo3 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Universiti Teknologi Malaysia, Johor, Malaysia1 
Department of Electronics & Communication Engineering, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, Selangor, Malaysia2 
Wireless & Mobile Communication Groups, Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands3 
norazizahm@gmail.com, {sheila|rozeha}@fke.utm.my, A.C.C.Lo@tudelft.nl 
 
 
Abstract— The demand of quality of service (QoS) for 
multimedia transmission over wireless network raises huge 
challenges such as time-varying channel conditions, limited 
resources, tight delay constraints, high bandwidth demand 
and complex protocol design. Therefore, there is need to 
efficiently utilize and manage the interactions among 
different layers of the protocol stack using cross layer design 
(CLD) approach in order to provide necessary support for 
video applications. This paper presents our proposed 
strategies for adaptive video transmission over Cognitive 
Ultra Wideband (C-UWB) network using MAC centric CLD 
approach. Generally, the proposed MAC centric CLD 
framework consists of sensing module, adaptive resource 
allocation module and adaptive quantization scale module. 
Two techniques are proposed namely; Basic CLD (B_CLD) 
and Enhanced CLD (E_CLD). In the B_CLD, the decision 
strategies to stream video packets over C-UWB network are 
based on the pre-determined thresholds. On the other hence, 
decision strategies in E_CLD are based on Lagrange 
optimization, which is implemented in the packet reception 
rate (PRR) based resource allocation scheme and adaptive 
quantization scale. Simulation results showed that the 
proposed E_CLD scheme has significantly improved the 
video quality when compared to the Basic CLD scheme and 
the non-CLD scheme. 
Keywords-cross-layer design; cognitive UWB network; 
video transmission 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
One of the major driving forces of a new technology is 
a combination of man’s endless thirst for knowledge, 
unequal intuitive mind and limitless ambition to better his 
life. This is translated into an increasing demand for a low 
cost, higher speed and bandwidth hungry applications that 
run on many consumer electronic devices with seamless 
connectivity. However, the business models in emerging 
wireless systems are bounded with a concept of 
proportional end-user’s cost to the volume of data 
transmitted but with limited bandwidth resources and 
transmission power. Due to this, industry players, 
scientists and academicians are urged to venture a new 
paradigm in offering the technical solutions. Cognitive 
radio (CR) is one of innovative solutions to address the 
issue of congested but inefficient spectrum utilization, 
introduced by Mitola [1].  
In cognitive radio networks, it is the responsibility of 
cognitive users (CUs) to ensure that its existence will not 
cause any harmful interference to the primary user (PU). 
When the wireless systems that are potential candidates for 
cognitive radio are considered, Ultra Wideband (UWB) 
seems to be one of the tempting choices [2]. It is due to its 
potential to fulfill some of the key cognitive radio 
requirements such as causing no interference to PUs, 
bandwidth, transmit power, supporting various throughputs 
and providing adaptive multiple access. In underlay mode, 
C-UWB user is allowed to co-exist in the same spectral 
and temporal domains with the PU by lowering the amount 
of transmit power. This is done by following the FCC rules 
[3], which authorized the use of UWB spectrum with 
spectral mask of -41.3dBm/MHz.Additionally, UWB is 
also known as a popular candidate for high rate data 
transmission over wireless personal area network.  
Specifically on multimedia transmission over cognitive 
UWB (C-UWB) network, the key challenges come from 
the nature of multimedia application and cognitive radio 
itself as follows [1]: 
a) Resource constraint such as spectrum bandwidth, 
transmit power, data rate and time slot access. 
• 
In Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) 
based MAC protocol, the main concerning issue 
is the sharing of time slots among wireless users. 
While in cognitive radio, data transmission and 
sensing activity are usually carried out separately 
at different time. Thus, appropriate time slots 
allocation and optimal scheduling are very 
important 
to 
guarantee 
accurate 
sensing 
information without causing any unintended 
delay. 
b) Dynamic network condition over time due to 
interference, shadowing and multipath fading. 
• 
During good channel condition, it is better to 
transmit data with higher rate to increase the 
throughput. However, it may cause higher bit 
error rate. Therefore, an optimal approach 
between the two conflicting objectives need to be 
addressed carefully. 
c) Heterogeneous video traffic  
• 
Due to frame dependency, loss of certain 
important frame will lead to indirect loss of other 
frames and may caused higher distortion impact. 
Hence, each video frame should be treated 
differently according to their frame priority, 
dependency and size. 
d) Stringent delay constraint  
• 
Delays of less than 200 milliseconds are required 
for 
interactive 
applications, 
such 
as 
videoconferencing, surveillance etc., while for 
multimedia streaming applications delays of 1-5s 
are tolerable. Packets that are arrived after their 
display time are discarded at the receiver side. 
163
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

In cognitive networks, there is need for greater 
interaction among different layers of the protocol stack in 
order to achieve the end-to-end goals and performance in 
terms of resource management, security, QoS or other 
network goals. Therefore, cross layer design approach is 
needed. Cross layer design approaches can be categorized 
into application adaptation, application-centric adaptation, 
middle 
layer 
centric 
approach, 
middleware-based 
adaptation, and autonomous adaptation [8]. In this paper, 
we proposed a MAC centric cross layer design that is 
aware of MPEG-4 QoS requirements and PHY channel 
conditions to address the issue of multimedia transmission 
over C-UWB network. It is called a MAC centric CLD 
because the optimization and decisions are carried out by 
the MAC layer. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 
II presents the design concept of our proposed CLD which 
involve PHY, MAC and APP layer. In Section III, detail of 
the CLD functional components namely; video traffic 
module, adaptive resource allocation module, adaptive Q-
scale module and sensing module are elaborated. Results 
and analysis are given in Section IV. Finally, conclusion 
and future recommendations are drawn in Section V. 
II. 
THE PROPOSED CROSS LAYER DESIGN CONCEPT 
CLD plays a vital role at the design stage of CR 
system. The general key idea in CLD is to select the 
appropriate parameters which can be manipulated to gain 
a dramatic positive impact. Fig. 1 shows the layers 
involved, the parameters used and the adaptation actions 
performed in the proposed CLD design. The design goals 
are quantified in terms of PSNR, job failure rate (JFR) 
and user’s perspective view. PSNR serves as an objective 
measure of the reconstructed video with respect to the 
uncompressed video frame. While JFR is defined as a 
ratio of total number of frames that are failed to be 
transmitted and total frames transmitted. 
At the bottom, PHY layer is responsible in sensing 
the UWB wireless channel condition. Since sensing and 
data transmission are done separately at different time, 
optimal sensing period should be allocated at the MAC in 
order to obtain accurate sensing information while at the 
same time avoiding intolerance additional delay for video 
packet transmission. SNR of data packet is chosen as a 
link quality indicator, so as to detect spectrum availability. 
Practically, SNR is more reliable parameter because it is 
obtained after completion of demodulation process at the 
receiver [2]. The sensed information is then shared with 
the MAC and APP layer for optimal cross layer strategies. 
At the APP layer, MPEG-4 video is encoded with 
different quantization scale during pre-process. The goal 
of pre-process video encoding is to prepare the video for 
adaptive quantization (Q) scale and hence allow rate 
adaptation during network simulation. The Q-scale is 
optimally adapted in accordance to the channel 
conditions. Detail of the Q-scale adaptation is elaborated 
in Section III-D. Heterogeneous video traffic is 
considered with attributes that are represented in terms of 
frame dependency, frame type, frame size and delivery 
deadline. At the MAC, optimal resource allocation is 
performed in accordance to UWB wireless channel 
conditions, QoS target set by the APP layer and queue 
status. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Layers involved, parameters used and action required in the 
proposed CLD 
 
The optimal decisions are then forwarded to the 
respective layers for actions. At the APP layer, the Q-level 
is adjusted at every start of the GOP structure to maintain 
the synchronization and refresh of motion prediction 
algorithm. Due to adaptive Q-scale at the APP layer, the 
data rate at the PHY layer is also adaptive. Conversely, 
MAC layer schedules the sensing and data transmission in 
accordance to the varying channel conditions and the 
target packet reception rate (PRR). This will effectively 
reduce the unnecessary resource consumption and hence 
improve the system performance. Video frames are then 
scheduled for transmission in accordance to their 
attributes. The CLD design is simplified with no routing 
protocol and UDP is adopted at the transport protocol. 
This assumption is valid because UWB is targeted for 
WPAN with coverage within 10m and thus no hopping is 
required. 
Centralized topology is adopted with one of the C-
UWB nodes acts as a central controller surrounded 
uniformly by several others C-UWB nodes. The central 
controller is assigned as a common receiver while the other 
C-UWB nodes are assigned as transmitters with MPEG-4 
video application. 
III. 
CLD FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS 
The proposed functional components of the CLD for 
multimedia transmission over cognitive UWB consists of 
video traffic module, resource allocation module, 
scheduler module, sensing module and adaptive Q-scale 
module. These components perform the actual cross 
layering task to support efficient wireless video 
transmission over cognitive UWB network. The state 
machine diagram and the algorithm are as shown in Figs. 2 
and 3 respectively. 
Initially, the target packet reception rate (PRR), 
optimal sensing time and delivery deadline are pre-
determined for each C-UWB node. We assumed that the 
central controller knows the target QoS in advance. 
Referring to Fig. 2, the MAC centric CLD manager 
receives all required parameters from the CLD functional 
modules that involve APP, MAC and PHY layer for 
necessary parameter optimization. Once the optimized 
parameters are determined, it will be sent back to the 
respective layers for further actions.  
CLD 
Objectives 
PSNR 
 
 
Job 
failure 
rate 
 
User’s 
perspec
tive 
view 
APP 
MAC 
PHY 
SNR, sensing time 
Queue status, time 
slot allocation 
 
Frame priority, 
size, delivery 
deadline, target 
Resource 
allocation & 
packet 
scheduling 
Adaptive 
data rate 
Adaptive Q-
scale 
Layers 
Parameters used 
Actions 
164
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

At every video frame, C-UWB users trigger the central 
controller about its intention to perform local sensing. The 
C-UWB users report their sensing information to the 
central controller to be fused for the final decision of PU 
presence. The time of packet delivery is checked with the 
delay deadline to determine whether the packets in queue 
are expired or not. If expired, the packets are discarded 
from transmission. The Q-scale adaptation is carried out at 
the start of every GOP structure marked by the I-frame. 
Optimal resource allocation is performed based on the 
parameters passed from the APP and PHY layer. The 
optimized timeslot allocation, Q-scale and average of 
sensed SNR are then updated and passed back to the APP 
and MAC layer for packet transmission. 
The MAC protocol is basically motivated from 
IEEE802.15.3 [10]. Each super frame starts with a beacon 
period (BP), during which the central controller sends the 
beacon containing network synchronization and control 
message. Then, C-UWB nodes can access the channel 
using contention-free with mechanisms that is based on 
slotted TDMA. However, the proposed MAC CLD 
eliminates the need of dedicated channel time slot request 
from each C-UWB nodes to the central controller and 
hence reduced the delay. 
A. Sensing Module 
The sensing module is responsible in monitoring the 
SNR level of each cognitive UWB users in the network. 
The SNR is represented by; 
B
P L
SR
ij
ti
= η
  
 
(1) 
Where Pti is average transmit power of node i, Lij is signal 
power attenuation, η is background noise energy and B is 
bandwidth. To calculate the signal power attenuation, 
UWB Tarokh’s propagation model [7] is adopted as 
follows: 
 
0
0
10
0
;
)]
(
10 log
[
d
d
S
d
d
L
L
ij
ij
ij
>
+
+
=
α
  
(2)
 
where L0 is path loss at reference distance, α is path 
loss exponent, S   is shadowing, d0 is a reference distance 
and dij is the distance between the useri and userj. From (2), 
the bit error rate (BER) and energy per bit can be 
calculated directly. 
Local sensing is performed by each cognitive UWB 
user, while the central controller fuses the overall SNR 
information for cooperative sensing decision. In a 
cooperative spectrum sensing system using OR-Rule, the 
PU is considered to be present if any of the CU detects the 
presence of the PU. Assuming that there are  identical 
and independent cognitive radios in the cooperative 
spectrum sensing system, the cooperative probability of 
detection Qd and probability of false alarm Qf using OR-
rule data fusion are given by: 
 = 1 − ∏
1 − ,




  
 
 (3) 
 = 1 − ∏
1 − ,




   
 
 (4) 
where Pd and Pf are the probability of detection and 
probability of false alarm of a stand-alone cognitive radio 
respectively. To ensure almost accurate information of the 
instantaneous channel conditions, local sensing is triggered 
at every video frame interval. Assuming a worst case 
scenario for C-UWB, our previous findings in [11,12] 
proposed 14µsec as the optimal sensing time for 
multimedia transmission over cognitive UWB. The results 
proved that only minimal overhead is introduced from 
sensing activity and the impact to video transmission is 
also minimal. 
 
Figure 2. State machine diagram of the proposed CLD 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The proposed CLD algorithm 
ALGORITHM: Wireless video transmission basic-CLD 
 
IITIALIZATIO: 
 
 
// To determine the frame type (I, P, B), size and 
dependency 
Video traffic characterization ( ); 
SET target PRR;  // The set target QoS for video 
application 
SET delivery deadline;  
SET optimal sensing time; 
REPEAT 
 
FOR every video frame DO 
//check delay delivery constraint 
 
IF (T_delivery <  T_deadline) THE 
Sensing ( ); // to obtain channel condition status 
 
IF (video frame is I-frame) 
 
Q-scale adaptation ( ); // Q-scale is 
changed at the start of new GOP 
ELSE 
// Q-scale unchanged 
ED IF 
Queue ( ); // to obtain queue status 
Resource allocation ( ); //to determine time slot allocations 
ED IF 
ED FOR 
Update number of time slots allocation 
Update average sensed information 
Update Q-scale 
n = n + 1; // Update iteration 
UTIL n = max_n; // repeats algorithm until the last video 
frame 
165
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

B. Heterogeneous Video Traffic Module 
The role of video traffic module is to identify and 
classify the MPEG-4 video traffic in terms of frame type, 
frame size, dependency, delivery deadline and distortion 
impact. Delivery deadline, T_deadline is defined as the 
time by which the data units (DUs) must be decoded to be 
useful. It corresponds to the decoder timestamp in MPEG 
terminology. Each DU represents one of the I,P or B 
frames. Distortion impact is defined as the amount by 
which the distortion at receiver decreases if the DU is 
decoded on time at the receiver. Each DUj has a distortion 
impact, ∆dj  which is assumed to be constant for all the 
GOPs. The overall distortion can be computed as the 
initial distortion, d0 (ie: the distortion when no DUs are 
decoded) minus the sum of decrease ∆d over all the DUs 
that have been decoded on time. Both sensing and video 
traffic module are responsible in providing appropriate 
sensing information and traffic classification to the MAC 
layer. 
C. Adaptive Resource Allocation Module 
Since the network traffic is bursty, a fixed assignment 
of time or frequency slots to users is proven inefficient. In 
a case of basic CLD, linear adaptive resource allocation is 
adopted. In this case, the instantaneous SNR, SNRi is 
compared with the two thresholds; SNRlow and SNRhigh. 
SNRlow is obtained when the BER target of 10-4 is 
achieved, while SNRhigh is determined when the BER 
target of 10-6 is achieved. Details on how the SNR 
threshold is determined can be found in [11]. Based on the 
works, SNRlow is set to -3dB while SNRhigh is set to -1dB. 
When the channel condition falls within this allowable 
operating region, the time slots are assigned as follows; 

 = 70 ∗ 
 +  210 
 
(5) 
Mi is the allocated time slots for user i. The equation 
above is derived from linear correlation between SNR 
value and the allocated time slot. 
Linear adaptive resource allocation is then further 
improved in the enhanced CLD scheme by also 
considering the instantaneous SNR and packet reception 
rate (PRR) of other cognitive users in the network. We 
named the technique as PRR based resource allocation and 
details of the algorithm can be found in [13-14]. To ensure 
efficient resource distribution among users, queue status is 
also considered before the actual time slot, Mi_actual is 
assigned. Assuming the number of packets in queue is 
N_queue and Lmin is the minimum data packet length 
allowed, the actual time slot assignment for PRR based 
resource allocation algorithm is as shown in Figure 4. 
Following the conditions, wastage of resources are reduced 
efficiently. 
D. Adaptive Quantization Scale Module 
Distortion of the decoded video may originates from 
the quantization incurred at the decoder. In order to 
maintain the target BER for multimedia application, we 
proposed to adjust the Q-level in accordance to UWB 
wireless channel condition. The change in source rate may 
result in the fluctuation of the encoded video quality. To 
overcome this problem, source coding rate is only adjusted 
at the start of each GOP. It is known that larger step size 
(higher Q-scale) results in a lower bit rate and larger 
amount of distortion. Hence, the optimal Q is also related 
to a well known rate-distortion (R-D) optimization 
problem; minimize distortion D, subject to a constraint Rc 
on the number of bits used, R. The constrained problem is 
as follows: 
Min {D} subject to R< Rc 
 
(6) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Algorithm for the proposed adaptive resource allocation module 
 
The above optimization problem can be elegantly solved 
using Lagrangian optimization and becomes; 
Min { J }, where  =  +                          (7) 
where the Lagrangian R-D functional J is minimized for a 
particular value of the Lagrange multiplier, λ. Previous 
study had shown that [15]; 
 = 0.85 ()"  
 
(8) 
At sufficiently high rates, the distortion impact can be 
approximated as; 
 ≅ (2)"/12     
 
  (9)                      
In the basic CLD scheme, the optimal Q-value is 
obtained through exhaustive search. While in Enhanced 
CLD scheme, the optimal Q-value is obtained by adopting 
the leaky bucket concept. For both schemes, the optimal λ 
is calculated using equation (8) in order to evaluate its 
impact to distortion. 
IV. 
SIMULATION PARAMETER 
Simulations were divided into 3 stages namely; pre-
process, network simulation and post-process. During pre-
process, video samples are pre-encoded.  The pre-process 
is performed only once and the generated trace files can be 
used over and over by new network simulations. While 
network simulations were carried out using NS-2. The post 
process is mainly deal with decoding the compressed 
video, calculating the performances and displaying the 
decoded received video. Tables 1, 2 and 3 show the 
parameter settings used. The target PRR and BER are set 
to 92% and 10-6 respectively to meet the QoS requirement 
of multimedia application. 
TABLE 1. MPEG-4 ENCODER SETTING 
Parameter (unit) 
Settings 
Video input 
Akiyo, Foremen, Coastguard 
Group of Picture 
12 
Frame rate (frame/sec) 
30 
Frame deadline (sec) 
1/30 
Frame size (width x height) 
176 x 144 

 = 
%
1 + ∑
(1 − 
)
(1 − '(,()
)
(*
(+
 
//Calculate the initial resource using PRR based resource 
allocation 
//Check the queue status for actual resource allocation 
IF (N_queue = 0) 
 
Mi_actual = L_min 
ELSE IF (Mi < N_queue*210µsec) 
Mi_actual = Mi  
ELSE IF (Mi ≥ N_queue*210µsec) 
 Mi_actual = N_queue*210µsec 
166
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Quantization scale 
2-31 
Number of frames 
423 
TABLE 2. MAC LAYER SETTING 
Parameter (unit) 
Settings 
Super frame size (µsec) 
1-65536 (adaptive) 
Packet size (byte) 
2000 
PHY header time (µsec) 
15 
MAC header (byte) 
16 
Header check sequence, HCS (byte) 
2 
Frame check sequence, FCS (byte) 
4 
Short inter frame space, SIFS (µsec) 
10 
IP/UDP/RTP header (byte) 
48 
Acknowledgement 
Immediate 
Retransmission 
3 
TABLE 3: NETWORK SETTING 
Parameter (unit) 
Settings 
Path loss exponent (dB) 
1.7 
Shadowing (dB) 
2.8 
Path loss at reference distance (dB) 
50.5 
Modulation 
QPSK 
Channel bandwidth (MHz) 
528 
Data rate 
100Mbps 
V. RESULT & ANALYSIS 
Table 4 summarizes the highest PSNR obtained at 
different UWB channel conditions and its corresponding 
optimal Q-value obtained through heuristic approach. As 
expected, the optimal Q-value moves towards higher 
value 
when 
channel 
condition 
becomes 
worse. 
Conversely, the Q-value is small when the channel 
condition is good. Meaning, smaller Q-value is chosen to 
reduce source coding distortion. When the assigned Q-
value is higher than the optimal Q-value, the source 
distortion will increase (due to lower source rate). On the 
other hand, if the assigned Q-value is smaller than the 
optimal Q-value, more packets are generated per video 
frame and thus would lead to higher JFR. These explain 
why degradation in PSNR performance happened when 
non-optimal Q-value is used. 
Akiyo, Foreman and Coastguard video sequences are 
used in the simulations to represent low, medium and high 
motion video respectively. In the non-CLD scheme, each 
user is assigned with fixed amount of time slot all the time 
regardless of their instantaneous channel conditions and 
the QoS. Alternatively, Basic CLD scheme adopted the 
linear resource allocation with Q-value adaptation. The 
video quality is further improved in the E_CLD scheme 
by utilizing Lagrange optimization in the PRR based 
resource allocation and Q-scale adaptation. Table 5 shows 
the performance in terms of average PSNR over the whole 
video frames. It is evident that the proposed Basic CLD 
and E_CLD scheme are more beneficial to high motion 
video (Coastguard) than the low motion video. Close 
observation of the PSNR value at each video frame shows 
that the proposed Basic CLD and E-CLD scheme give 
significant performance enhancement during bad and 
medium channel conditions. This really gives an 
advantage to cognitive UWB network, which is targeted 
for low SNR region to coexist with the PU. However, 
during good channel conditions, it is observed that the 
non-CLD scheme outperformed the proposed CLD 
schemes. E_CLD also outperformed Basic CLD scheme 
in terms of the average JFR. While the JFR for non-CLD 
scheme is the worst.  
The performance can be much more appreciated if 
observed from the user perspective view as illustrated in 
Figs. 5, 6 and 7 below. However, due to page limitation, 
we present the video quality improvement difference 
between the non-CLD scheme and Basic CLD scheme. 
The figures obviously demonstrate that the received video 
quality is almost undecipherable when subjected to the 
non-CLD scheme during bad channel condition. 
TABLE 4: OPTIMAL QP FOR VARIOUS CHANNEL CONDITIONS 
Distance 
(m) 
Average SIR 
(dB) 
Optimal 
QP 
Optimal PSR 
(dB) 
1 
15.280 
2 
42.32 
2 
10.143 
2 
42.32 
3 
7.169 
2 
42.32 
4 
5.026 
2 
42.32 
5 
3.398 
2 
42.32 
6 
2.034 
2 
42.32 
7 
0.912 
2 
42.32 
8 
-0.090 
2 
42.32 
9 
-0.900 
5 
32.76 
10 
-1.737 
13 
24.92 
11 
-2.420 
10 
24.27 
12 
-3.080 
15 
22.57 
13 
-3.660 
15 
20.62 
TABLE 5: AVERAGE PSNR FOR VARIOUS VIDEO SAMPLES 
Video 
Sequence 
on-CLD 
[dB] 
Basic CLD 
[dB] 
E_CLD [dB] 
Akiyo 
28.68 
29.08 
30.21 
Foreman 
15.21 
16.68 
18.06 
Coastguard 
13.66 
17.02 
18.31 
TABLE 6: AVERAGE JFR FOR VARIOUS VIDEO SAMPLES 
Video 
Sequence 
on-CLD 
(%) 
Basic CLD 
(%) 
E_CLD (%) 
Akiyo 
3.5 
1.0 
0 
Foreman 
4.7 
2.2 
1.1 
Coastguard 
6.9 
2.6 
0.8 
 
 
(a) 
No CLD, frame 59, PSNR= 12.76dB 
(b)  Basic CLD, frame 59, PSNR= 28.52dB 
Figure 5. Subjective evaluation of the low motion video (Akiyo) 
 
167
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

 
(a) 
No CLD, frame 64, PSNR= 12.78dB  
(b) Basic CLD, frame 64, PSNR= 18.19dB 
Figure 6. Subjective evaluation of the medium motion video (Foreman) 
 
 
(a) 
No CLD, frame 25, PSNR= 14.5dB 
(b) Basic CLD, frame 25, PSNR= 21.37dB 
Figure 7. Subjective evaluation of the high motion video 
(Coastguard) 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper highlighted our proposed Basic CLD 
scheme and E-CLD scheme that is aware of the varying 
channel conditions and the target QoS at the APP layer in 
allocating sufficient time slots and in choosing the optimal 
quantization scale. We conclude that SNR is the main 
parameter to be considered in the CLD approach. 
Changing SNR channel conditions lead to different 
optimal Q-value. The proposed MAC centric CLDs had 
proven to be successfully improved the received video 
quality when. We believed that the CLD design can be 
further improved if more intelligent packet scheduling is 
adopted. Additionally, other optimization methods such as 
particle swamp optimization shall be considered to speed 
up the computation time for optimization and hence further 
reduce the end to end delay. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to express their gratitude to Research 
Management Center (RMC) of Universiti Teknologi 
Malaysia, Universiti Tenaga Nasional, Ministry Of 
Science, Technology & Innovations (MOSTI) of Malaysia 
and Islamic Development Bank (IDB) for the financial 
support of this project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Mitola III. “Cognitive Radio an integrated agent architecture for 
software defined radio,” Ph.D thesis, KTH Royal Institute of 
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, 2000 
[2] H. Arslan, S. Yarkan, and Mustafa E. Sahin, “Cognitive Radio, 
Software Defined Radio and Adaptive Wireless Systems”, 
Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-5542-3, 2007 
[3] FCC Spectrum Policy Task Force, “Report of the spectrum 
efficiency working group,” Nov 2002. [Online-May,2nd 2011] 
http://www.fcc.gov/sptf/reports.html 
[4] H. Kushwara, Y. Xing, R. Chandamouli, and H. Heffes, “Reliable 
Multimedia Transmission Over Cognitive Radio Networks Using 
Fountain Codes”, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol 96. No 1 January 
2008, pp. 155-165. 
[5] H. Shiang and M. Schaar, ‘Queing-Based Dynamic Channel 
Selection for Heterogeneous Multimedia Applications Over 
Cognitive Radio Networks’, IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, 
2008, pp 896-909. 
[6] I. A. Akyildiz, T. Melodia, and K. R Chowdhury, “A Survey on 
Wireless Multimedia Sensor Networks”, Computer Networks 
(Elsevier), Vol. 51, Issue 4, 2007, pp. 921-960. 
[7] M. Younis, M. Eltoweissy and A. Wadaa, “On Handling QoS 
Traffic in Wireless Sensor Network”, Proceedings of the 
International Conference Hawaii International Conference on 
System & Sciences (HICSS-37), Big Island, Hawaii, January 2004. 
[8] F. Fu and M. van der Schaar, “A New Systematic Framework for 
Autonomous Cross-layer Optimization”, IEEE Transactions on 
Vehicular Technology, Vol. 58, No. 4, May 2009, pp. 1887-1903 
[9] S. Ghassemzadeh and V. Tarokh, ‘The Ultra-Wideband Indoor 
Path Loss Model’, IEEE P802.15-02/208r1-SG3a and IEEE 
P802.15-02/277r0-SG3a 
[10] IEEE802.15.3 Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC) and 
Physical (PHY) Layer Specifications for High Rate Wireless 
Personal Area Networks, September 2003 
[11] N. M. Aripin, Rozeha A. Rashid, N. Fisal, and S.K.S Yusof, 
“Evaluation 
of 
Required 
Sensing 
Time 
for 
Multimedia 
Transmission Over Cognitive Ultra Wideband System”, IEEE 
International Conference on Ultra Modern Technology (ICUMT), 
October 2009, pp. 1-5. 
[12] N. M Aripin, Rozeha A. Rashid, N. Fisal, A.C.C Lo, S.H.S. 
Ariffin, and S.K.S. Yusof, “A Cross Layer Approach in Sensing 
and Resource Allocation for Multimedia Transmission over 
Cognitive UWB Networks”, EURASIP Journal on Wireless 
Communications and Networking, Volume 2010, Article ID 
467813, 10 pg 
[13] Norazizah Mohd Aripin et.al, “Joint Resource Allocation and 
Sensing Scheduling for Cognitive Ultra Wideband”, The 
Australasian 
Telecommunication 
Networks 
and 
Applications 
Conference (ATNAC) 2010, pp. 66-71 
[14] Norazizah Mohd Aripin, Rozeha A. Rashid, and N. Fisal, “Issues 
in Resource Allocation & Sensing Scheduling for Multimedia 
Transmission Over Cognitive UWB Networks”, Wireless World 
Research Forum 2010. 
[15] G. J Sullivan and T. Wiegand, “Rate Distortion Optimization for 
Video 
Compression”, 
IEEE 
Signal 
Processing 
Magazine, 
November 1998, pp. 74-90. 
168
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

