Linear Node Movement Patterns in MANETS 
 
Mohammed Alzaylaee, John DeDourek, Przemyslaw Pochec  
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of New Brunswick 
Fredericton, Canada 
e-mails: {m.alzaylaee, dedourek, pochec}@unb.ca 
 
 
Abstract— MANETs are mobile, self-configuring networks of 
wireless mobile devices that have no fixed infrastructure 
configuration. Movement of the nodes affects the operation of a 
MANET. Because of the node movement MANETs need to rely 
on robust routing protocols. We focus our investigation on the 
impact of movement patterns on operation of a MANET. Of 
particular interest is linear movement patterns similar to those 
observed in some man-made objects. We investigate the 
operation of a MANET under four different linear movement 
patterns by simulating a MANET running the AODV routing 
protocol.  The best results were obtained with nodes moving 
perpendicularly to the geographical direction of packet 
forwarding. 
 
Keywords- mobility models, MANET; M2ANET; ns-2; AODV 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A network which links several devices and relies on radio 
signal frequency is known as a wireless network. A Mobile 
Ad Hoc Network (MANET) is connected by radio links and 
consists of self-reliant mobile nodes [1]. The nodes move 
and operate without any central control as individual 
autonomous systems. They move freely in any direction and 
links among these devices change frequently. The dynamic 
movement pattern that these nodes follow influences the 
overall network performance. Different movement patterns 
can be categorized with respect to mobility models 
[2][3][4]. Examples of realistic models that have been 
suggested include obstacle mobility and pathway mobility 
[5]. In these models, there are pre-determined pathways and 
obstacles, which determine the movement of nodes and 
propagation of signals in a wireless network. 
Linear node movement occurs in practice in man-made 
system. Examples of these include: movement of machines 
on a factory floor, bus routes following a city grid, and most 
interestingly some plane routes. For example, typical flight 
corridors for transatlantic flights show close to parallel paths 
of nodes (planes) as illustrated in Figure 1.  In this paper, we 
present the results of investigation into different mobility 
models with practical applications for MANETs. Instead of 
using the most common random mobility (exemplified by 
setdest in ns-2) we propose moving nodes along mostly 
straight paths, possibly adjusting direction periodically. 
Such a movement pattern should be easier to realize in 
practice, as the nodes would be moving essentially 
following a predefined track, like a train moving on rails 
between two stations back and forth.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. North Atlantic Tracks for the eastbound crossing on the evening 
of May 4, 2006 [6]. 
In Section II, we present background on MANETs and 
principal routing protocols. Different linear movement 
patterns for MANETs and simulation of these movements in 
ns-2 are discussed in Section III. Experiments with different 
linear movement patterns are in Section IV. Finally, we 
present the experimental results in Section V, followed by 
conclusion and future work. 
 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
A MANET is comprised of interconnected nodes, which 
make use of communication paths that are allowing multi-
hop activity. They offer distinct advantages and are versatile 
for some particular applications and environments. There 
are no fixed or prerequisite base stations or infrastructures; 
therefore, their creation and usage is not time consuming 
and can occur at any given point in time and at any place. 
MANETs have a fault-resilient nature, given that they are 
not operating a single point of failure and are very flexible. 
The deletion and addition of new nodes, forming new links 
are a normal part of operation of a MANET [1][7][8]. A 
group of nodes can facilitate communication between 
distant stations forming a mobile medium, as introduced in 
[9]. These benefits of MANETs have resulted in many 
applications in hostile environments including military, 
police, 
rescue 
and 
other 
hostile 
or 
disorganized 
environments.  
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

MANET research and deployment are aided by the fact 
that they use small and relatively inexpensive wireless 
communication devices. Simulators like ns-2 include 
models for wireless nodes, links and protocols and can be 
used for experimenting with MANETs [10].  The 
simulations rely on numerous parameters, which include not 
only the patterns of communication but also the model for 
mobility.  
Future expectations are that MANETs will be deployed in 
various scenarios that tend to have complex connectivity 
dynamics and node mobility. A good example would be a 
MANET on a battlefield wherein the soldiers' movement is 
dictated by their commander. For a citywide MANET, maps 
or obstacles limit the movement of the nodes. Note that 
mobility of the node and its properties are specific to the 
application in question; therefore, mobility properties that 
are widely varying possess the ability to greatly impact the 
performance of the various routing protocols. To cope with 
these specific requirements of MANETS, highly adaptive 
protocols based on flooding [11][12][13] and on dynamic 
routing [14][15][16] were developed. In our paper, we 
propose and analyze a number of variants of motion with 
spatial dependencies: our vertical and horizontal motions are 
similar to the Column Mobility Model (CMM), and square 
and specified area motions are similar to the Reference 
Point Group Mobility (RPGM) introduced in [17]. In 
addition to different motion types, we also investigate the 
relation between the direction of the motion itself and the 
geographical direction of the data transfer. For experiments 
in our research we considered using one of the two popular 
MANET routing protocols supported in ns-2 simulator: 
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) and Ad hoc On-Demand 
Distance Routing (AODV). Both DSR and AODV share a 
similar on-demand behavior route discovery for ad hoc 
networks, but with different mechanics for routing. 
However, AODV outperforms the DSR routing protocol 
when simulating a large number of nodes as in our 
experiment [7]. This is why AODV is used in modeling 
MANETs in this report. 
III. 
INVESTIGATION OF SELECTED LINEAR MOVEMENT 
PATTERNS 
Setdest [10] is a tool built into ns-2 [10] and uses a random 
mobility model to generate random movements for the 
nodes using a pause and move strategy. In this strategy, a 
next movement and speed are independent of the previous 
move. In this paper, we investigate the MANET 
performance under a scenario with constrained node 
movement. More specifically, we investigate the node 
movements that are still random but confined to a single 
direction, a line, and are similar to some real movements. 
For example a rail car can move only forward and back but 
not sideways. We assume that the MANET is composed of 
many such nodes, but it is used to carry the data between 
two defined (and fixed) nodes. This type of a model is 
called Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network (M2ANET) and is 
based on the concept of mobile medium introduced in [9]. 
The references to “vertical” and “horizontal” are based on 
the movement direction as observed in the ns-2 simulator on 
a computer screen. Horizontal corresponds to the movement 
of the nodes in the general geographic direction of packet 
forwarding, 
and 
vertical 
corresponds 
to 
the 
path 
perpendicular to the one defined above.  
A. Vertical motion 
In this motion, each node is initially assigned an X 
coordinate randomly, which stays the same during the 
simulation, while the Y coordinates the changes for each 
move. Each node is assigned a random destination located 
on the vertical line defined by the node X coordinate and 
moves to this destination at a random speed. The process is 
repeated until a node reaches the destination.  
Destination
 
Figure 2. Vertical motion. 
Destination
 
Figure 3. Horizontal motion. 
B. Horizontal motion 
This movement motion does exactly the opposite of the 
vertical movement.  The Y’s coordinate remains the same, 
while the X’s coordinate changes for each move during the 
simulation time. This type of motion is similar to the 
movement of planes on the path shown in Figure 1, with the 
exception that some of the planes (if they were controlled by 
random number generators) would be turning back midway. 
C.  Square motion 
This movement motion allows the nodes to move in a 
square path with different speeds for each node during the 
simulation time. This square path is defined to be a 100*100 
square in the experimental area and is the same for each 
node. Each node takes a random position at first. Then it 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

moves to the right by adding 100 to its initial position. Then 
it moves up by 100 from its previous position. Finally, it 
moves to the left by adding 100 to the previous position. A 
full square path is followed by each node and repeated until 
the end of the simulation time. 
D. Specified area motion 
This movement motion keeps the nodes moving randomly 
based on values generated the Java Math library function 
Math.random() in a specified area (200*200 in our 
experiment). Each node has an initial random position at the 
start of the simulation. Then each node moves to a new 
randomly assigned position but does not go beyond 
200*200 from the node’s first initial position during the 
simulation time. (The displacement along each axis is 
calculated mod 200). 
E.  Simulation environment 
The simulation time for our experiment is set to be 1000 sec 
in a topology of size 1000m * 1000m. We tested different 
node density starting from 5 nodes up to 100 nodes, which 
includes the two stationary nodes. We run the simulation 10 
times for each node density and then we calculate the 
average of these runs. Node transmissions are simulated 
using the 802.11 ns-2 model, and the packets are forwarded 
using the AODV protocol. 
 
For comparison, we also simulated random motion using 
the standard ns-2 setdest utility. For performance evaluation, 
since we always have the same number of packets sent, we 
only need to quantify packets that are received at the 
destination node. This is the same as using the packet 
delivery as a main performance metric in the experiment. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
A. Base case scenario with setdest results 
The base case scenario in our experiment used the setdest 
utility to generate random movements for the nodes. The 
experiment for this movement was run 10 times for each 
node density and the average of packet delivery was 
calculated. In Figure 2, the three curves represent the number 
of packets received at three different speeds. The graph 
shows that at high densities the number of packets received 
at the destination node decreases as the maximum speed 
increases from 25, 50 to 500 m/s. This result is based on the 
random movement generated from setdest in ns-2.  
 
 
Figure 4. Random motion results. 
B. Vertical motion result 
In this scenario, where the nodes are moving only up and 
down (i.e., perpendicular to the geographical direction 
between the source and destination) during the simulation 
with random speeds, we observe the average packets 
received at the destination node density during 10 
experiments.  Figures 5 and 6 illustrate the comparison of 
different motions in low and high average speed. The graphs 
show that the number of received packets increases with the 
increase in number of mobile nodes (which increase node 
density), up to a point when certain number of nodes is 
reached (35 in our experiments). At this point the node 
density is no longer the primary factor in delivery of 
packets. After this node density is reached, the node speed 
becomes the primary deciding factor in how many packets 
are delivered. 
C. Horizontal motion result 
The horizontal motion, as explained before, allows the 
nodes to move only in the direction of (i.e., defined by a line 
between) the two stationary nodes, which is in the 
horizontal motion experiment would be right and left. In this 
experiment, we also run the simulation 10 times for each 
node density, and calculated the average of packets 
received. As illustrated in Figures 5 and 6, the overall trends 
are similar to the vertical motion, except that the vertical 
motion reaches a higher packet delivery, which is 
particularly pronounced at high node speeds. A closer 
inspection of the simulation runs revealed that in case of 
horizontal motion some mobile nodes had their initial 
random position assigned too far from the two stationary 
nodes that these nodes were out of range to deliver the cbr 
packets.  
For both motions that we create, Figure 5 shows no 
difference for the delivery rate at lower speed, whereas with 
the higher speed, we can see from Figure 6 that vertical 
motion has a better performance based on the packet 
delivery. 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

D. Square path motion result 
In the square path, we combined the vertical and horizontal 
motions into one set of moves and we limited the extent of 
movement to a square path. Therefore, each node moves 
only 100*100 from its initially random position and this 
would have an impact on the network connectivity at low 
node densities. Indeed, the observed performance (Figures 5 
and 6) was lower than horizontal and vertical motion at 
lower node densities, and similar to these two at higher node 
densities.  
E. Specified area motion result 
Specified area motion keeps the nodes move randomly but 
in limited square shaped area, which is in our experiment 
200m * 200m from the topology size 1000m *1000m. With 
the specified area motion, the nodes are also moving in a 
confined area. Despite the randomness of the movement, the 
observed performance is the worse of the four movement 
types investigated in this paper. 
 
F. Comparing  four different motions  
At both high and low speeds the specified area motion type 
delivers the least number of packets and vertical motion 
delivers the most. Square motion is more reliable at high 
speeds than horizontal motion, but less reliable at low 
speeds. This is because square motion performs both 
vertical and horizontal motion and at lower speeds suffers 
loss of connectivity during the horizontal motion and 
vertical motions that occur while out of range. For all 
motions at high node density, movement speed becomes the 
primary factor in reliability and with a fewer packet 
delivered at high speed. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Comparing different motions with low speed. 
 
 
     From our experiment, we notice that when there is no 
motion among the nodes then, depending on the initial 
positions of the nodes, either zero percent (no path from 
source to destination expect) or 100 percent (path exists) of 
the packets will be delivered. In this case, the possibility of 
receiving all the packets rises with increased node density. 
As soon as the nodes start to move, the packet delivery 
starts to decrease. When we have the nodes distributed 
randomly in our experiment topology, there are no packets 
received when we have very low node density. Once we 
have 20 or more nodes distributed randomly, there will be 
either zero or 100 percent of the packets received. The 
higher the node density, the better are the chances of having 
the packets delivered. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTUR WORK 
In this paper, we presented four different node movement 
patterns for use in MANETs. They include: the horizontal 
movement in which the nodes move in the geographical 
direction of forwarding packets, the vertical movement 
(perpendicular to the above), the movement in a square 
paths, and the movement in a specified area. We observed 
that the movement of the nodes affects the performance of 
packet delivery in the simulated MANET. 
As expected, we observed that the speed of the movement 
affects the performance of the MANET in all movement 
types. More packets are dropped with larger maximum 
speeds at higher node densities. For example, for the 
horizontal motion the average packet delivery in the 
simulation with 40 nodes was 93% at low speed and only 
80% at high speed. Our experiments show that the vertical 
motion (i.e., motion perpendicular to the direction of 
forwarding packets) is better than the horizontal motion 
(i.e., motion in the direction of forwarding packets) at a 
given node density. For example, in experiments at high 
speed, 89% of packets are delivered in a network with 
vertical node movements vs. 80% in case of the horizontal 
movement (both in the simulation of a network with n=40 
nodes). The horizontal motion causes the most displacement 
for the node relative to the source and destination nodes. 
Once the nodes are out of range by horizontal motion, they 
continue to be out of range and do not forward data. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Comparing different motions with high speed. 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Based on our results, we suggest further testing of all the 
movements with changing multiple parameters, such as 
increasing or lowering the experimental area, changing the 
size of the specified area size in one of the movement 
models, changing the routing protocols, varying speed, and 
node density, etc.  Furthermore, other movement patterns 
can be investigated in simulation and in an actual physical 
MANET experiments. It would also be of interest to model 
the movement of all transatlantic flights over the North 
Atlantic and see if a MANET network could be established 
if all the planes were equipped with suitable transceivers.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
This work is sponsored and funded by the Ministry of 
Higher Education of Saudi Arabia through the Saudi 
Arabian Cultural Bureau in Canada. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Basagni, M. Conti, S. Giordano and I. Stojmenovic (Ed.). Mobile Ad 
Hoc Networking. IEEE/Wiley Press, 2004. 
[2] F. Bei, and A. Helmy, “A survey of mobility models in wireless Ad hoc 
Networks. California: University of California”, USA, 2004. 
[3] M. Dorigo, V. Maniezzo, and A. Colorni, “The Ant System: 
Optimization by a colony of cooperating agents”, Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, Part B: Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on, 26 (1), 1996, pp. 
29-41. 
[4] A. B. McDonald and T. F. Znati, “A mobility-based framework for 
adaptive clustering in wireless ad hoc networks”, IEEE Journal on Selected 
Areas in Communications, Vol 17, No. 8, Aug 1999, pp. 1466-1487. 
[5] D. P. Agrawal and Q. A. Zeng, Introduction to wireless and mobile 
systems, third edition. Thomson Engineering, 2011.  
[6] North Atlantic Tracks. (2012, October 18). In Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. 
Retrieved 
06:36, 
June 
5, 
2013, 
from 
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=North_Atlantic_Tracks&oldid=5
18517067. 
[7] M. R. Pearlman and Z. J. Hass, "Determining the optimal configuration 
for the zone routing protocol," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, vol. 17, no. 8, pp. 1395-1414, Aug. 1999. 
[8] S.Sarkar, T.G.Basavaraju et al,"Ad hoc Mobile Wireless Networks, 
Principles, Protocols and Applications", Auerbach Publications - 2008.  
[9] J. DeDourek and P. Pochec, (2011), M2ANET: a Mobile Medium Ad 
Hoc Network, Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and Practice, WSN 2011, 
Paris, France, pp. 1-4. 
[10] T. Issariyakul and E. Hossain, "Introduction to Network Simulator 
NS2 ", Springer, ISBN: 978-0-387-71759-3, 2009 
[11] S. Pleisch, M. Balakrishnan, K. Birman, R. van Renesse, “MISTRAL: 
Efﬁcient Flooding in Mobile Networks”, Proc. ACM MobiHoc, pp. 1–12, 
2006. 
[12] P. Chan, and Y. Dong,, “Performance Evaluation on URL Distribution 
using Flooding in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs)”, Southeast 
Conference, Kennesaw, Kennesaw, GA, USA, 2005, pp. 70-80 
 [13] S. Murthy, and J.J Garcia-Luna-Aceves, "An efficient routing 
protocol for wireless networks", ACM Mobile Networks and Applications 
Journal, Special issue on Routing in Mobile Communication Networks, 
1996, pp. 183-197. 
[14] G. Di Caro and M. Dorigo “Mobile agents for adaptive routing,” 
System Sciences, Proceedings of the Thirty-First Hawaii International 
Conference on, Volume: 7 , 6-9 Jan 1998 Page(s): 74 -83. 
[15] V. Park and M.S. Corson, “A Highly Adaptive Distributed Routing 
Algorithm for Mobile Wireless Networks,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’97 
(April 1997),.pp. 1405-1413. 
 [16] C. E. Perkins and P. Bhagwat “Highly dynamic destination sequenced 
distance vector routing (DSDV) for mobile computers” SIGCOMM ’94—
Computer Communications Review, 24(4):234–244, 1994. 
[17]  N. Aschenbruck, E. G. Padilla, and P. Martini, “A survey on mobility 
models for performance analysis in tactical mobile networks”, Journal of 
Telecommunications and Information Technology, vol.2, 2008, pp. 54-61.   
 
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

