An Overview of Underwater Sensor Networks 
 
Christina Peach and Abdulrahman Yarali  
Telecommunication Systems Management 
Murray State University 
 Murray, KY, USA 
{cpeach, ayarali}@murraystate.edu  
 
 
Abstract—It is becoming clear that underwater sensor 
networks are needed to predict natural disasters, provide 
scientist research for marine life exploration, and to advance 
military capabilities. These underwater sensor networks pose 
great challenges to our existing technologies used in terrestrial 
sensor networks, mainly due to the acoustic waves used in 
water. These waves behave differently than the radio waves on 
land. The purposes of this research paper is to provide a better 
understanding of an underwater sensor network architecture, 
basic characteristic, applications, and examine the propagation 
limitations of acoustic communication. We also provide an 
overview of modulations and medium access controls. 
Keywords-Underwater sensor; architecture; applications; 
propagation; modulation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Underwater Sensor Networks’ (UWSN) are made up of 
many sensor nodes and Autonomous Underwater Vehicles 
(AUVs). Together, these sensor nodes and AUVs allow 
researchers and the military to actively monitor the ocean. 
Underwater sensor networks make it possible to conduct 
search missions, record climate changes, provide pollution 
control, study marine life, conduct survey missions, tactical 
surveillance, and predict natural disturbances in the ocean. 
There has been an increased interest in building UWSN due 
to the fact that, these networks have the ability to monitor, 
investigate, and track underwater occurrences that are 
important to our national security and off shore exploration. 
Many characteristics of these networks make their 
construction challenging, and difficult to implement. These 
characteristics include: limited bandwidth capacity, high 
error probability, large propagation delays, fouling, 
corrosion, high bit rate errors, limited battery power, and 
temporary losses of connectivity. Another key characteristic 
is that, the sensor nodes and autonomous underwater 
vehicles must have the capability to self-configure 
themselves. The devices should be able to coordinate their 
configurations, 
location 
information, 
and 
movement 
information with each other. Data must also be sent back to 
an on-shore station. The technology that enables the 
application is wireless underwater acoustic networking. 
Underwater communications is not new. In 1945, there was 
a need to communicate with submarines in the United 
States. The development of an underwater telephone was the 
solution, as outlined by Akyildiz et al. [1]. However, 
underwater networking really has not been extensively 
explored. Underwater sensor networks use acoustic 
communications based on acoustic wireless communication. 
Radio waves can travel long distances underwater, but must 
travel along very low frequencies. The frequency range 
typically used is 30-300 Hz. This frequency range requires 
extraordinary transmission power and very large antennas. 
In this paper, we discuss the aspects of underwater 
sensor networks that create challenges in design, types of 
applications, underwater sensor architecture, modulation, 
and the available medium access control protocols. 
II. 
APPLICATIONS 
Underwater sensor networks are needed for several 
applications. The military can use this technology for mine 
reconnaissance. Mine reconnaissance is when autonomous 
underwater vehicles equipped with optical sensors perform 
assessments on objects that appear to be mines and detect 
whether they are in fact, mine like materials. They also use 
the networks for distributed tactical surveillance. In this 
application, sensors are used along with AUVs that work 
together to monitor an area for targeting, intrusion detection, 
surveillance, submarine warfare, and reconnaissance. A 
surveillance system is able to detect divers, submarines, and 
other vehicles based on data, sensors collect. These systems 
have higher accuracy rates than typical sonar systems.  
There are also many geological applications that make 
use of an underwater sensor network. Sensor networks can 
monitor seismic activity along the ocean floor to measure 
earthquakes and predict an approaching tsunami. This data 
allows coastal areas to be notified and warned in time to 
evacuate the immediate danger area. Environmental 
monitoring applications allows for the detection of 
pollution, and how it is affecting marine life. The data can 
monitor chemical, biological, and even nuclear pollution in 
any body of water giving a more sophisticated analysis of 
water quality as outlined by Heidemann et al. [5].  
Sensors can also monitor winds and ocean currents to 
predict the weather in a more reliable fashion. Climate 
change can also be monitored and studied along with the 
human effects on ecosystems, and biological tracking of 
fish. Applications to assist navigation can be useful to boat 
operators in shallow waters to determine potentially 
dangerous objects under water. Assisted navigation 
applications can also be used to find sunken boats and 
wreckage. Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are 
useful in many applications because they do not require 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

cables, tethers, or remote control. These devices are 
inexpensive and can reach any depth in the ocean and can be 
used in environmental monitoring and oceanography 
applications. One of the most common AUVs is small 
submarines armed with many sensors. 
III. 
ARCHITECTURE 
There are two types of architectures including: two-
dimensional (see Fig. 1) architecture and three-dimensional 
architecture (see Fig. 2) as outlined in [1]. Static two-
dimensional are used for environmental monitoring where 
sensor nodes are anchored to the ocean floor. These nodes 
are interconnected to underwater sinks. The sinks are in 
charge of relaying information from underwater to the 
surface station. They have a vertical acoustic transceiver and 
a horizontal acoustic transceiver. Horizontal transceivers 
communicate directly to the sensor nodes to send command, 
configurations, and collect monitored data. The vertical 
transceivers relay the data back to the surface. The on-shore 
station also has a transceiver that will handle multiple 
transmissions from the sinks. The sinks can be connected 
with underwater sensors by either a direct link or by a multi 
hop path. The easiest way to connect to the sensors is 
through a direct link, but is most likely not the most energy 
efficient way to connect. By using direct links, the 
throughput is also reduced due to acoustic interference. The 
acoustic interference comes from the high transmission 
power being used. The key difference in multi hop systems 
is that the information is relayed through intermediate 
sensors until it reaches the sink. This increases the network 
capacity and saves energy, which are two important aspects 
in underwater sensor networks. 
The three-dimensional architecture is normally used 
when you want to identify or observe happenings that 
cannot be looked at with the sensor nodes attached to the 
ocean floor. In these networks, the sensor nodes float at 
various depths to observe any occurring phenomenon. These 
sensors could be placed on buoys with varying wire lengths 
to achieve different depths. Although this would be the 
easiest approach, floating nodes on buoys allows for 
problems involving tampering. For example, if the military 
is carrying out a surveillance of an enemy the nodes could 
be detected and disabled easily. The nodes are more 
susceptible to weather conditions, and multiple buoys could 
confuse boaters navigating the open waters. These reasons 
make this approach not very desirable.  
Another approach would be to fasten nodes to the ocean 
bed. Once anchored, floating devices are attached that can 
be filled with air to achieve a variation in depth placement. 
The depth is determined by the wire length as in the first 
approach, but the nodes here have their own electric motors 
that can change the wire length on demand. There is still a 
disadvantage with this approach as well. Ocean currents 
could interfere with the system’s ability to maintain the 
desired depths [1]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture for 2D underwater sensor networks. [1] 
 
 
Figure 2.  Architecture for 3D underwater sensor networks.[1] 
IV. 
AUTONOMOUS UNDERWATER VEHICLES 
AUVs are important to the network design. One 
objective for them is to become less dependent of on-shore 
communication and move toward relying solely on local 
intelligence. Recovering AUVs to recharge their batteries 
can be a cumbersome task; therefore, solar systems seem to 
be a viable option. Solar energy will increase the AUVs 
overall lifetime and they will be able to gather data 
continuously for several months before any human 
intervention is needed. Two kinds of AUVs used in 
explorations are called drifters and gliders. These are 
oceanographic instruments that do not need the same level 
of sophistication as small submarines. Drifters work with 
the current. They have the capability to move vertically, but 
drift along with the current. Their main purpose is to take 
various measurements at different preset depths. Gliders are 
powered by a battery and use hydraulic pumps create 
changes in their buoyancy to move through the water. They 
are equipped with a GPS device that allows them to be 
located once they climb to the surface. Typically, these 
devices can only operate for a few weeks to a few months, 
and can reach depths of 200 meters to 1500 meters. Gliders 
move very slowly through the water which allows them to 
conserve battery power and increase their lifetime [1]. 
V. 
UNMANNED UNDERWATER VEHICLES 
The use of Unmanned Underwater Vehicles (UUV) is 
important to improve system efficiency. The Department of 
Defense, Homeland Security and the military are extremely 
interested in the capabilities and advantages that unmanned 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

underwater vehicles possess. The military has conducted 
several test deployments of this type of vehicle as outlined 
by Garreiro et al. [4]. Some of the test deployments included 
UUVs are: Remote Environmental Measuring Units 
(REMUS) [4], Mid-sized Autonomous Research Vehicle 
(MARV) [14], 21” Unmanned Underwater Vehicles 
(21UUV) [4], and Manta Test Vehicle (MTV) [4]. REMUS 
was 7.5 inches in diameter and was deployed for testing 
hundreds of times. It used acoustic communications with 
both oceanographic and chemical sensors. MARV is a mid-
sized autonomous research vehicle that was 12.75 inches in 
diameter. It demonstrated various technologies under 
thruster based hover payload with low speed control. 
21UUV is 21 inches in diameter and has been tested in the 
water over one hundred times. This vehicle demonstrated 
vision based navigation, photo mosaic, and side scan sonar 
imagery. This device was used for autonomous controller 
experiments where it was a test bed and weapon launch 
using MTV. MTV is a manta test vehicle that was tested in 
the water over ninety times for unmanned weapon launches. 
This vehicle had advanced network communications with 
ISR suites including RADINT, SIGINT, Optics, and IR. The 
military branch testing these UUVs is the NAVY. The 
military would like to have a family of not only unmanned 
underwater vehicles but also just unmanned sensor vehicles. 
These vehicles would include advanced sensors such as 
smart skins and Nano-sensors that work in conjunction with 
distributed underwater networks. The potential advanced 
payloads would allow for attacks to the enemy without 
being seen. Missile launching would be executed from 
underwater. Unmanned underwater vehicles might just be 
the weapons of the future, providing the military with high 
energy lasers and advanced weaponry [4].  
The one thing that slows down the development of these 
weapons is the guidance laws that must be followed. These 
laws require vehicles to have onboard navigation guidance 
controls that enable vehicles to work with each other to 
achieve proper positions and orientation. Missile guidance 
requires line-of-sight guidance laws, command-to-line-of-
sight guidance laws, proportional navigation guidance laws, 
and optimal guidance laws. The majority of the missile laws 
are already implemented in traditional missile weapon 
technologies; however, underwater unmanned vehicles must 
be programmed and tested thoroughly before building the 
weapons of the future as outlined by Sutton et al. [9]. 
VI. 
MODULATION 
The 
electromagnetic 
spectrum 
controls 
all 
communications on land, because telecommunication 
companies have to constantly provide ways to communicate 
over long distances. This is made possible through radio and 
optical systems. These systems also allow for high 
bandwidth capacity on land, whether the power is high or 
low. In the physical layer of underwater sensor networks, 
the communication approach used is acoustic. Acoustic 
waves are the best choice for underwater systems, mainly 
because electromagnetic frequencies are diffused by the 
water. The acoustic communication system allows for better 
communication beyond ten meters as outlined in [5]. 
Acoustic communications have to deal with the network 
performance limits and poor bandwidth efficiency. To 
address these issues modulation schemes are used. The best 
modulation approach to achieve more bandwidth efficiency 
is Frequency Shift Keying (FSK). This approach is resistant 
to channel variations because carrier frequencies are chosen 
using information bits. At the next stage, measured power is 
compared at different frequency levels by the receiver to 
determine what was sent. Therefore, channel estimation is 
not needed because the receiver is using just energy 
detection. A disadvantage of frequency key shifting is the 
use of guard bands. Guard bands are inserted between the 
frequencies to prevent frequency spreading. Time spreading 
also causes interference, and guard intervals must be placed 
between consecutive symbol communications to promote 
channel clearing. These two introductions of guard bands 
and intervals slow down the data rate to an extremely low 
level as outlined in [1].  
In order to use FSK advanced approaches would need to 
be added to improve the low data rate. One approach that 
could be implemented if the bandwidth is not under any 
constraints, would be frequency hopped FSK. Frequency 
hopped FSK removes the requirement of guard intervals to 
promote channel clearing. Another method of modulation 
that has had very little success is called multi-carrier 
modulation. This type of modulation divides the amount of 
bandwidth that is available into overlapping sub bands. This 
makes the duration of the waveform longer for each symbol. 
The sub-bands allow the system receiver to disregard inter 
symbol interference making channel equalization at the 
receiver simpler. This simplification has prompted attempts 
to integrate Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing 
(OFDM) into the underwater channels. The problem with 
this type of multiplexing is that the channels themselves 
have large Doppler spreads allowing for a substantial 
introduction of interference in the subcarriers [5]. Phase 
coherent modulation includes Quadrature Amplitude 
Modulation (QAM) [12] and Phase Shift Keying (PSK) [12] 
is direct transmissions that can be used to promote high data 
rate communication in underwater networks, but also 
introduces inter symbol interference. The interference must 
be addressed at the receiving end of communication. 
There are two modulation approaches that are promising 
for underwater sensor networks. These methods include:  
Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) and Multi-Input 
Multi-Output (MIMO) techniques. CDMA is an up and 
coming technology that is important in acoustic networks. 
This is because this method allows for random, overlapping 
access to communication channels that are being shared in 
the network. CDMA is promising as a viable modulation 
approach to underwater sensor networks. Multi-input multi-
output approaches require a system of multiple transmitters 
and receivers to increase channel capacities linearly. The 
degree in which channel capacities become linear depends 
on how many transmitters and receivers are added to the 
system. This technique looks to be extremely promising for 
underwater acoustic communication as outlined by Manjula 
et al. [6]. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

VII. 
 PROPAGATION 
Propagation in underwater sensor networks poses a 
major challenge for technologies we currently use in 
terrestrial sensor networks. Acoustic waves used for 
underwater networks have a lower loss than the traditional 
radio waves used in other sensor networks. The lower losses 
of these waves make them more suitable for underwater 
applications than radio waves. Acoustic waves travel at five 
orders of magnitude slower than radio waves presenting 
greater challenges that must be overcome with algorithms, 
protocols, and node placement [6]. 
Propagation is affected by several factors underwater. 
Hereafter we describe some of these factors influencing 
propagation. When data travels from one place to another, it 
will always experience some level of power loss. This 
power loss is called attenuation. In underwater acoustic 
channels, propagation delay limits the available range and 
frequency at which the system can function. When greater 
distances are needed to be covered by the system or if 
higher frequencies must be used will have an increase in 
attenuation. Attenuation is also caused when the ocean is 
rough at the propagation medium constraints. 
Surface-bottom reflection and refraction occurs when 
the depth changes the speed at which the data is being 
transferred. Surface-bottom reflection and refraction is 
constantly present in underwater networks because the 
ocean’s velocity changes frequently due to storms, tides, 
and waves. These changes create different levels of 
refraction that must be dealt with, at all levels of the system, 
but particularly in deeper waters [5]. This is especially true 
in large scale systems. Doppler effects are also created due 
to different levels of directional motion that introduce long 
delay spreads and phase distortion. 
Noise is another factor in underwater sensor networks 
that effects the propagation. The propagation medium in 
these networks is constrained by the ocean floor and the 
surface. These constraints cause multipath propagation 
where echoes are created from unwanted reflections. The 
echoes appear as signal burst or as signal transmission 
replications. Multipath propagation allows each of the 
components throughout the underwater sensor network to 
potentially exhibit different forms and levels of attenuation 
as outlined in [5]. Man-made noise caused by boats, power 
plants, and oil pumps along with noise created from 
shipping activity can create propagation delays especially 
where there is lots of boating activity. Ambient noise is 
created by the natural occurrences in the ocean. Tides, 
waves, rain, wind, and seismic activity is categorized as this 
type of noise. 
Acoustic waves carry noise farther than radio waves 
making noise, a more severe problem when dealing with 
acoustic communication. As one can see the variability of 
propagation requires the underwater sensor network to be 
robust in many areas, where in radio communication, the 
variations are more localized and easier to address. There 
are several different propagation models with different 
degrees of complexity and accuracy to simulate and analyze 
an underwater wireless sensor network. Designing an 
efficient and reliable communication channel in underwater 
environment is not an easy task because of speed of acoustic 
signal, propagation delay, multipath interferences, path loss 
due to higher frequency,  and high bit error rate due to phase 
and magnitude fluctuations. Absorption is also increased 
with the range, which causes the increasing drop of SNR 
when the range increases. Figure 3 shows the Signal-to-
Noise Ratio (SNR) increase with distance [11]. 
 
 
Figure 3.  SNR vs. frequency and range for undersea. [11] 
VIII. MEDIUM ACCESS CONTROL 
Medium Access Control (MAC) takes place in the data 
link layer and manages access to the underwater networks 
acoustic communication. To keep the network performance 
at its best MAC protocols must be used. The main objective 
of MAC protocols is to prevent any collisions that could 
occur. These protocols also manage network throughput, 
scalability, adaptability, latency, and energy consumption 
(efficiency) as outlined by Pompili et al. [8]. Medium access 
control can either be contention free or contention based 
protocols. The contention free approach allocates different 
time slots, frequencies, or codes to all of the system nodes 
to avoid collisions in the physical layer. In contention based 
approaches the nodes must compete with one another to use 
the medium. This is all handled on a demand bases, and the 
protocol must work to keep overhead down while still 
preventing any form of collision as outlined by Otnes [7]. 
Some contention free MAC protocols include Frequency 
Division Multiple Access (FDMA) [13], Time Division 
Multiple Access (TDMA) [13], and Code Division Multiple 
Access (CDMA) [13]. FDMA divides the available 
bandwidth into several frequency bands and then places 
guard bands between them. The individual bands are 
assigned to each station where they can send data. Once 
these bands are assigned, they remain those stations until the 
end of communication. Station interference is handled with 
a band pass filter and guard bands that confine and separate 
the transmitter frequencies. FDMA is ideally used with 
stream data because it identifies preset frequency bands and 
uses them for the entire length of communication [3].  
In an underwater sensor network, FDMA would allow 
each individual node to communicate the remaining nodes 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

simultaneously without interference with each other. 
However, because acoustic communication has a limited 
bandwidth capacity and multipath propagation, it creates 
spectral nulls. If the underwater network has several nodes it 
will require a very narrow frequency band for each node. 
Operating the system in this way produces extreme risks of 
complete fading to some of the nodes. For this reason 
FDMA is not considered a viable option for underwater 
networks according to [7]. FDMA could very well be used 
along with clusters using higher frequency bands to create a 
usable hybrid system. TDMA uses only one channel that is 
shared between all of the nodes in the system. This is 
accomplished by timesharing. Frames, or time-intervals, are 
split up into fixed length slots where each node in the 
system is assigned a slot [10]. The node can only transmit 
during its allocated time, and then wait until the frame is 
repeated cyclically back to their time slot before 
transmitting again. In this approach all of the systems nodes 
have to know when their time slot begins and ends which 
adds additional propagation delay into the system. These 
added delays can be compensated by the use of guard times, 
but in underwater systems where propagation delays are 
already high this is not ideal. TDMA does not allow the 
nodes to transmit data simultaneously, so in order to handle 
synchronization it normally adds preamble bits to the 
beginning of each slot [3]. The addition of guard times and 
preamble bits will also degrade the efficiency to some extent 
[7]. CDMA is typically used in cellular technologies. It is a 
spread spectrum technology that takes multiple telephone 
conversations and attaches a certain code that only the 
sender and receiver understand. It then cuts the information 
into bits and transfers them to the receiver to reconstruct [2]. 
CDMA in underwater sensor networks work in much the 
same way. They also use binary (bits) to modulate the data 
with the same speed spectrum concept. This MAC 
technology is a very promising technique for acoustic 
communication. CDMA’s advantage over FDMA is its 
resistance to node fading, because the frequency band is 
used by the entire system of nodes. This is because each 
node uses a unique code with low cross-correlation that 
allows all of the nodes to send and receive data at the same 
time on the same band. There is a trade off when using low 
cross-correlations; they involve long codes. When long 
codes are being used; it lowers data rates that are already a 
challenge in acoustic communications. Doppler effects that 
are present in acoustic channels further reduce the 
correlation properties. Algorithms must be developed that 
are complex for demodulation and multi-user detection 
because CDMA gives network design issues back to the 
physical layer from the data link layer. Frequency hopping 
and direct sequence CDMA could be viable options for 
these modulations. Code division multiple access works best 
when the sound pressure levels are around the same 
magnitude as the systems receivers. If these magnitudes are 
not similar; the system could experience what is known as 
the near far problem. This is when nodes that are closer 
receive transmissions stronger than nodes that are farther 
away. The stronger nodes can project interference that can 
create issues with demodulation and detection of the weaker 
nodes that are farther away. The near far problem would be 
a greater issue with underwater sensor networks residing in 
deeper waters. The advantage that CDMA has over TDMA 
is that it can transmit data simultaneously between nodes. 
However, a CDMA system that experiences the far near 
problem is closely comparable to TDMA systems [7]. Table 
1 shows a comparative performance of access technologies 
for underwater networks. 
TABLE I.  
UNDERWATER CHANNEL PERFORMANCE 
Parameter 
CDMA 
FDMA 
TDMA 
Scalability 
 
 
 
Complexity 
 
 
 
Security 
 
 
 
Synchronization  
 
 
 
Throughput  
 
 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
The development of underwater sensor networks is 
driven by the potential applications. These applications will 
advance our military capabilities to new highs, help us to 
discover organisms we did not know existed, study climate 
changes, and allow for scientific data collection to predict 
natural disasters before they happen. These applications will 
protect our country and the people from disasters and war. 
Discovering new organisms from the data collection taken 
at the bottom of the ocean could possibly be the cures we 
need for diseases such as cancer and AIDS. The challenges 
we face in building these underwater sensor networks must 
be studied extensively to determine the correct technological 
approaches to use in creating them. 
Most of the protocols that are in use have been used on 
land dealing with radio waves. Radio waves are very 
different than acoustic waves in water. The way to combat 
these differences is to find the right combinations of 
equipment and protocols to make hybrid systems to use. 
Hybrid systems can make use of the strengths in each of the 
forms of technology to combat all of the design challenges 
and limitations. Technology trends in underwater sensors 
and instrumentation have led to the miniaturization and 
increased energy efficiency of instruments. Use of advanced 
manufacturing 
technologies, 
such 
as 
Micro-Electro- 
Mechanical Systems (MEMS) and nanotechnology, has 
reduced the size of instruments. Increase of platforms 
functionality while reducing operational costs has been 
achieved by integration of multiple sensors on a single 
platform. The research on underwater networks continues to 
advance, and it is encouraging that one day these 
underwater sensor networks will become a reality that will 
advance our nation to new heights over the next several 
years. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I.F. Akyildiz, D. Pompili, and T. Melodia, “Underwater Acoustic 
Sensor Networks: Research Challenges.” Ad Hoc Networks Jurnal, 
2005, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 257-279, doi: 10.1016/j.adhoc.2005.01.004 
[2] 
J. Fitzgerald, and A. Dennis, “Business Data Communications and 
Networking”. Wiley, 2012, 11th edition, 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[3] 
B.A. Forouzan, “Data Communications and Networking” McGraw-
Hill, 2013, 5th edition 
[4] 
L.G. Garreiro, and A.A. Burke, “Unmanned Underwater Vehicles” 7th 
Annual SECA Workshop and Peer Review, Sep. 2006 
[5] 
J. Heidemann, M. Stojanovic, and M. Zorzi, “Underwater Sensor 
Networks: Applications, Advances, and Challenges.” Philosophical 
Transaction of the Royal Society, Jan. 2012, vol. 370, no. 1958, pp. 
158-175, doi: doi:10.1098/rsta.2011.0214 
[6] 
R.B. Manjula, and M.S. Sunilkumar, “Issues in Underwater Acoustic 
Sensor Networks” International Journal of Computer and Electrical 
Engineering, Feb. 2011, vol. 3, no.1, pp. 101-110 
[7] 
R. Otnes, “Underwater Acoustic Networking Techniques” Springer 
Briefs in Electrical and Computer Engineering, 2012, pp. 1-4, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-25224-2_1 
[8] 
D. Pompili, and I.F. Akyildiz, “Overview of Networking Protocols 
for Underwater Wireless Communications” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, 
Jan. 
2009, 
vol. 
47, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
97-102, 
doi: 
10.1109/mcom.2009.4752684 
[9] 
R. Sutton, W. Naeem, M. Ahmad, and R.S. Burns, “A Review of 
Guidance Laws Applicable to Unmanned Underwater Vehicles” The 
Journal of Navigation, Jan. 2003, vol. 56, no. 1 pp. 15-29, doi: 
10.1017/S0373463302002138 
[10] J. Lee, M. Turnipseed, and L. Brun “Market and Technology Trends 
in Underwater Sensors & Instrumentation” Marine Technology 
Reporter, Nov-Dec. 2012, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 36-39 
[11] M. Stojanovic, "Underwater Acoustic Communications,'' entry in 
Encyclopedia of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, John G. 
Webster, Ed., John Wiley & Sons, 1999, vol. 22, pp. 688-698. 
[12] J.G. Proakis, “Digital Communications”, McGraw-Hill, 2001, 4th  
edition 
[13] T.S. Rappaport, “Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice”, 
Dorling Kindersley, 2009, 2nd edition 
[14] T. Fulton, “Simulation and In-water Testing of the Mid-Sized 
Autonomous Research Vehicle”, Unmanned Maritime Vehicle T&E 
Conference, June 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

