QoS-aware Resource Allocation for In-band
Relaying in LTE-Advanced
Thiago Martins de Moraes, Arturo Antonio Gonzalez, Muhammad Danish Nisar, Eiko Seidel
Nomor Research GmbH
Brecherspitzstr. 8, 81541 Munich, Germany
Email: {moraes,gonzalez,nisar,seidel}@nomor.de
Abstract—Fulﬁlling the heterogeneous quality of service (QoS)
requirements of individual users is a central theme in future
wireless networks. The addition of relay nodes introduces some
new challenges towards achieving this target. In this work,
we study the problem of resource allocation in advanced-relay
scenarios. To this end, we propose the design of an efﬁcient
QoS-aware scheduler that strikes a balance between the latency
and the bit rate requirements of individual trafﬁc ﬂows. The
proposed scheduler is implemented at the donor eNB and the
relay node by adapting to the additional challenges introduced by
the relay node’s wireless backhaul link. Finally, via system level
simulations for the downstream direction emulating trafﬁc with
different bit rate and latency requirements, we demonstrate that
our algorithm is able to multiplex mixed trafﬁc with small or no
violation of the individual QoS requirements, thereby achieving
signiﬁcant gains over baseline approaches.
Index Terms—Quality of service; QoS; Relay; LTE; Resource
allocation; Scheduler; Backhaul link; VoIP; Video; Delay budget;
In-band Relays.
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the key functionalities to improve the cell-edge user
throughput in the Long Term Evolution Advanced (LTE-A) is
the support of relay nodes (RN), [1], which are low power
transmitting nodes typically deployed at the cell-edge or cov-
erage holes. Currently, LTE-A supports only non-transparent
relays, or type-1 relays. These type-1 RNs appear to the User
Equipment (UE) as an eNB with an independent coverage area
whereas to the evolved NodeB (eNB), or base station, they
appear as an UE with special capabilities.
In contrast to an eNB, the RNs do not have a wired
connection to the core network, hence all data from/to the
relay has to be forwarded through a wireless backhaul link
established between the RN and a regular eNB, which, in this
scenario is called Donor eNB (DeNB). Non-transparent (type-
1) relays are classiﬁed depending on the way the backhaul
and access links are multiplexed: When the backhaul and the
relay access radio link use the same frequency band and they
are segregated in the time domain, the relay is referred to
as in-band relay. The relays are classiﬁed as out-band, when
the backhaul link and the relay access links are allocated to
different frequency bands. For in-band relays, special frames
are reserved for the RN communication with the DeNB, the
so-called MBSFN frames. During these frames, the RNs are
only allowed to receive data from the DeNB, and they refrain
from transmitting in order to avoid self interference.
In an advanced relay scenario, the eNBs and RNs have
to host a mix of different trafﬁc types. For instance, while
some users are using Voice over IP (VoIP) services, some
other are browsing, others have active FTP services or have
active video streaming services. Each of these services has
different requirements in terms of bit rate, latency, jitter, delay,
etc. The presence of heterogeneous quality of service (QoS)
requirements, call for the design of sophisticated resource
allocation algorithms, that fulﬁll individual QoS requirements
and ensure that they are not violated.
Although all architectural aspects are deﬁned by the stan-
dard, the resource allocation is still an interesting topic for
research. The fundamental questions that have to be answered
by a resource allocation algorithm, especially in a relay
enhanced scenario are:
• How to split/partition the resources at the DeNB between
the macro UEs (M-UEs) and the wireless backhaul link?
• How to allocate resources at the DeNB and at RN,
in order to satisfy the QoS constraints of the R-UEs
accumulated over both hops?
• How to coordinate the resource allocation at the DeNB
and the RN, so as to reduce the effect of interference on
the access links?
In this work, via the design of our novel resource allocation
algorithm, we focus primarily in answering the ﬁrst two of
these aspects. The last one is being considered for future work.
A. Related Work
Resource allocation for satisfaction of heterogeneous QoS
requirements in presence/absence of relays has been an active
area of research over the past few years. In [2], Liu et. al.
propose a manner of scaling the delay inﬂuence on a QoS
scheduler in a multi-hop wireless mesh network. However,
this work does not consider the relay deployments in LTE-A,
and its speciﬁc requirements.
The support of QoS in LTE-Advanced for mixed trafﬁc
is studied in [3] which divides the trafﬁc types into two
types: real-time trafﬁc and non-real-time trafﬁc. The ﬂows
belonging to the non-real-time trafﬁc are scheduled based on
a proportional fair metric which is scaled by the respective
QoS requirements, and a scaled Max C/I approach is used
to scheduled the real-time trafﬁc. But this work also does not
consider the resource allocation challenges in relay enhanced
scenarios.
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

In [4] and [5], the issue of resource allocation for in-
band relays was studied. However, both of these contributions
focus on resource allocation only for ﬂows with no QoS
requirements.
B. Our Contribution
We focus on the problem of QoS-aware resource allocation
in relay-aided future wireless networks. The description in this
paper is oriented towards in-band relaying in LTE-A, how-
ever the proposed resource allocation mechanism is generic
enough, and can be applied to other relay enhanced network
deployments as well, with heterogeneous QoS requirements.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, while highlighting the challenges associated with
QoS-aware resource allocation in an enhanced relay scenario,
we provide the description of the proposed algorithm. In
Section III, a short description of the simulation setup is
given, followed by the presentation and discussion of the
main simulations results, including comparison with baseline
approaches, in Section IV. Finally, a summary of the major
achievements and outlook for future work in this area are
provided.
II. PROPOSED QOS-AWARE RESOURCE ALLOCATION
IN RELAYING SCENARIOS
A. Two-stage Scheduler Structure
We propose to employ a two-stage scheduler for the OFDM
based downlink LTE system. Our LTE-A scheduler is therefore
composed of two main stages: the time-domain (TD) stage and
the frequency domain (FD) stage. The main function of the
TD stage scheduler is set up a candidate list of users which
are to be scheduled in a particular scheduling round. To this
end, the users are sorted according to predeﬁned rules (e.g.,
round-robin, proportional fair) or a metric computations based
on their individual requirements. The TD scheduler also serves
another propose: it reduces the number of users that will be
forwarded to the next phase (the FD stage) thereby reducing
the complexity of the resource allocation process. After the
users are sorted, the created list is then forwarded to the FD
stage scheduler. It is worth-mentioning here that we assign
pending re-transmissions a higher priority so that they are
always placed on the top of the TD candidate list.
The FD stage scheduler is responsible for the actual al-
location of the frequency resource blocks to the users. All
the resources are visited one by one, and the user with the
highest metric is allocated the current resource block. After
each allocation, the residual QoS requirements (urgency) of the
scheduled user is updated. The allocation process ends when
all the resources have been allocated, or no data is available.
B. QoS Requirements
The QoS requirements are speciﬁed in LTE-A typically via
predeﬁned Quality Class Indicator (QCI) [6]. QCI is an scalar
which refers to a set of ﬁx service parameters that are used in
the packet forwarding decisions. Each one of the nine possible
QCI values deﬁnes the
• delay budget: the maximum acceptable packet delay,
• maximum block error rate,
• service priority index: a scalar ranging from one to nine;
the higher the index, the lower is the service priority.
• some QCIs also specify Guaranteed Bit-rate (GBR); the
speciﬁcation of GBR for a particular service is left open
for the service provider.
In the following, we consider three of these QoS requirements
namely, the delay budget, the GBR, and the priority index,
while designing our QoS aware resource allocation algorithm.
C. Proposed Scheduling Metric
We start our studies by deﬁning the QoS-scheduling metric
which is used to sort the UEs according to the data urgency.
The ﬁrst step towards the deﬁnition of our scheduling metric
is to deﬁne the delay coefﬁcient ωd(n, t) which represents the
effect of the packet delay on the metric computation: For a
packet belonging to the ﬂow n, we deﬁne the delay coefﬁcient
at the time instant t, as follows
ωd(n, t) = exp
(
β dHOL(n, t)
DProﬁle(n)
)
(1)
where dHOL(n, t) is the head of line (HOL) delay of the ﬂow
n at time t, DProﬁle(n) is the delay requirement of the ﬂow
n as speciﬁed in its QCI, and β is an scalar factor which
pronounces the effect of the exponential function.
Using the delay metric from (1), we now deﬁne the overall
QoS-scheduling metric as:
m QoS(n, t) = max
[(GBR(n)
¯R(n, t)
)
, 1
]ρ
· ωd(n, t)
P(n)
(2)
where ¯R(n, t) is the average throughput of the ﬂow n over past
few intervals, while GBR(n) and P(n) are respectively the
guaranteed bit rate and the service priority index of the ﬂow
n as speciﬁed in its QCI. ρ is a factor which emphasizes the
rate metric if their ¯R(n, t) is lower then the required GBR(n).
We observe that the proposed scheduling metric in (2)
consists of two main factors.
• The rate factor deﬁned by the term inside max function
forces the fulﬁllment of the GBR(n): While ¯R(n, t) is
smaller than GBR(n), the factor increases the metric,
otherwise it has no effect on the metric.
• The second factor is ωd(n, t) which has small inﬂuence
in the metric, if the delay is low, but increases the
metric exponentially as the delay gets closer to the packet
deadline.
We propose to employ the scheduling metric in (2) for sorting
the users in the TD scheduling stage and also to assign
resources in the FD scheduling stage, as discussed in Section
II-A. For our simulation results in the next sections, we choose
β = 5 and ρ = 4, respectively to pronounce the exponential
effect of delay budget and GBR constraints.
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

D. Addressing Additional Challenges in Relaying Scenarios
The introduction of the second hop in a relay enhanced
network introduces additional challenges for the support of
QoS-aware services.
First and foremost, in such networks, the downlink resource
allocation for the relay user equipments (R-UEs) has to be
performed in two stages: In the ﬁrst stage, while serving the
M-UEs, the DeNB transfers the user data from its buffers to
the serving relay node by scheduling resources to the backhaul
link. Afterwards, each RN schedules the received data to their
subordinate R-UEs. In other words, a packet destined to a R-
UE has to undergo two scheduling process, and each of them
results in extra packet delay. Therefore, a special attention
has to be given to the ﬂows that are multiplexed through the
RNs. Hence, we deﬁne for the R-UEs the accumulated QoS
requirements as follows:
TDeNB-RN + TRN-UE ≤ DProﬁle(n)
(3)
BUE
TDeNB-RN + TRN-UE
≥ GBR(n)
(4)
where TDeNB-RN is time interval between the packet arrival at
the DeNB until it is received by the RN, TRN-UE is the interval
between the reception in the RN and the time that the packet is
received at the R-UE, and DProﬁle(n) is the delay requirement
of the ﬂow n. Moreover, BUE is the volume of data transferred
in the time interval TDeNB-RN +TRN-UE and GBR(n) is the rate
requirement of the used ﬂow.
Secondly, for in-band relays, the resources in the backhaul
link must be scheduled only during the MBSFN frames.
During these frames, the DeNB has to decide on how to
partition the available resources between the wireless backhaul
link and to the M-UEs. In this regard, we propose to bundle
all the relay UEs (R-UEs) with the same QCI (similar QoS
requirements) into a single ﬂow with aggregate service require-
ments. Afterwards, the scheduler depending on the urgency of
the M-UEs and the aggregated R-UEs ﬂows decides whether
a resource block is to be given to the backhaul link or to the
access link.
As mentioned above, from the scheduling perspective of the
DeNB, the backhaul link is a normal UE link, with QoS re-
quirements of all underlying ﬂows merged into single/multiple
backhaul link “super ﬂow”. Based on (3) and (4), we deﬁne
the GBR requirements for the backhaul link as:
GBR(B) ≥
∑
GBR(n),
(5)
i.e., a sum of GBRs of all underlying ﬂows. Furthermore,
the delay requirement at each scheduling node for the virtual
“super ﬂow” is deﬁned as:
DQoS-B = DProﬁle
N
,
(6)
i.e., we split the QCI-speciﬁed delay budget equally among
the N hops. Thus, we force the scheduler to send the packet
earlier than what it would normally consider in a single
hop scenario, thereby allowing the second hop scheduler the
possibility of delivering the data before the packet deadline. In
our scenario, a packet has to be forwarded through two hops,
namely backhaul and RN access links, thus the maximum
delay allowed at the ﬁrst hop (DeNB) scheduler is restricted
to be:
DQoS-DeNB = DProﬁle
2
.
(7)
Note that, at the second hop (RN) scheduler, we extract the
information of the delay that the packet has already went
through, and adjust the packet HOL delay timer such that the
total packet delay across both hops is still within the DProﬁle
as speciﬁed in the service QCI.
III. SIMULATION SETUP
A. Deployment Scenario
The deployment scenario we have considered for our per-
formance evaluations is a single macro-cell with 1 DeNB and
1, 2, or 4 relay nodes attached to it. Note that in the remainder
of this work, we will only show results for the case of 2 relay
nodes due to the limited space. The macro-cell is modeled
as a hexagon with the DeNB at one corner and the RNs
located along the opposite side. The hexagonal shape thus
resembles one of the three sectors served by the DeNB, which
corresponds to the reduced single-cell layout speciﬁed in [7].
The interference from all neighboring cells at non-negligible
distance to the macro-cell is also considered in the model.
Within the macro-cell, a so-called “hot-spot” scenario is
assumed: A total of 25 UEs are placed such that a pair of 2
UEs (the R-UEs) always ends up in the coverage region of a
relay node and the remaining 21 UEs (the M-UEs) in the cov-
erage region of the DeNB. In addition, all UEs are periodically
relocated randomly within their respective coverage regions.
Due to this automatic re-positioning, no explicit motion model
or handover procedure has been considered in this work.
Finally, we would like to emphasize that the same sequence
of UE positions is replayed when simulating the macro-cell
without any relay nodes, such that the performance can be
directly compared.
B. Macro-cell Conﬁguration
The used channel model complies with the 3GPP Case-
1 for urban macro-cells with an inter-site distance (ISD) of
500 m, as speciﬁed in [1], Table A2.1.1-1. The respective
conﬁguration parameters for the DeNB-UE link are contained
in this table and in the following table, Table A2.1.1-2. We
will only recall the most important ones here for the sake of
completeness:
• Carrier frequency: 2 GHz
• Duplexing and bandwidth: FDD with 10+10 MHz
• TTI duration: 1 ms
• Speed: 3 km/h
• Penetration loss: 20 dB
• Path loss: Only NLOS term (for macro to UE) used
• 3-D antenna pattern with 15 degree electrical downtilt
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

• DeNB antenna height: 32 m
• UE antenna height: 1.5 m
• Minimum distance between DeNB and UE: 35 m
• DeNB Tx power: 43 dBm
While fast fading is considered in our model, we have omit-
ted the log-normal shadowing for now, since the usual 1-D
correlated model proposed in [1] does not lead to meaningful
results when applied across a 2-D plane.
C. Relay Conﬁguration
We also assume 3GPP Case-1 here with 2 outdoor relays,
thus complying with [1], Table A2.1.1.2-2. The respective
conﬁguration parameters for the RN-UE link are contained
in Table A2.1.1.2-3 and A2.1.1.4-3. We will also recall only
the most important ones here:
• Carrier frequency, duplexing, bandwidth, TTI duration,
speed, and penetration loss: same as for macro-cell
• Path loss: Only NLOS term (for relay to UE) used
• 2-D omni-directional antenna pattern with 5 dBi gain,
2Tx and 2Rx antenna ports
• RN antenna height: 5 m
• UE antenna height: same as for macro-cell
• Minimum distance between RN and UE: 10 m
• RN Tx power: 30 dBm
Note that for the DeNB-RN link, we assume a gain of 5 dB to
account for the quasi-stationary reception conditions. A typical
signal to interference and noise ratio (SINR) map of the cell,
indicating also the RN locations, is shown in Figure 1.
D. Trafﬁc Model
In our evaluation, we employ two different trafﬁc types with
their distinct QoS requirements:
• VoIP trafﬁc are emulated using a Constant Bit-rate (CBR)
trafﬁc generator which creates trafﬁc at rate of 128 kbps.
The QCI for this type of trafﬁc is deﬁned as QCI-1 [6]:
The packets are allowed to have a maximum end-to-end
delay of 100 ms, and the service priority is deﬁned as 2.
• A second group of users are using video streaming
services. Due to the limitations of the mobile devices,
Fig. 1.
Typical SINR map of DeNB plus 2 relay nodes (DeNB+2RN)
scenario. Two dark red spots towards the far end of hexagon indicate the
locations of the two relay nodes.
such as processing capabilities, we have chosen to limit
this service to a rate of 256 kbps. The QCI for this type
of trafﬁc is deﬁned as QCI-3 [6]: Maximum packet end-
to-end delay is 300 ms, and the service priority is 5.
The desired CBR is created by our trafﬁc generator using a
ﬁxed packet size of 256 bytes at appropriate time intervals:
8 ms for video and 16 ms for VoIP trafﬁc.
IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS
A. Baseline macro-cell-only scenario
We start our analysis by comparing the behavior of different
ﬂows for the case where DeNB is the only transmitting
node serving the macro-cell. In order to provide a better
understanding of the system behavior, we have divided the
users into two groups:
• One group is formed by the users that would be in the
coverage area of the RNs had they been activated, and
we label these as R-UEs.
• The second group consists of the macro users (M-UEs)
which always connect to the DeNB regardless of the
simulated scenario (DeNB-only, or DeNB+2RNs).
Figure 2 depicts the Cumulative Distribution Function
(CDF) of the per-user throughput and delay for the two trafﬁc
types (VoIP and Video) in each user category (M-UEs and
R-UEs) for the DeNB-only scenario with the proposed QoS-
aware resource allocation strategy. From the throughput CDFs
in Figure 2(a), we observe that VoIP users are able to achieve
their designated GBR requirement to a large extent. The mean
and 5%-ile TP values are 129 kbps and ca. 125 kbps for both
M-UEs and R-UEs. However, the achieved throughput of the
video UEs is signiﬁcantly less as compared to the conﬁgured
GBR. In contrast to the conﬁgured 256 kbps for video users,
the mean and 5%-ile TP values for M-UEs are 226 kbps
and 201 kbps respectively, while for R-UEs these are only
around 208 kbps and 184 kbps respectively. We observe that
R-UEs suffer more as compared to the M-UEs, and this owes
to the fact that they are served over poorer radio conditions.
The impact on M-UEs is basically a consequence of R-UEs
throttling the performance of the overall system.
For the same scenario, we now focus on the end-to-end
packet delay CDFs in Figure 2(b). In line with our observations
regarding Figure 2(a), we note that the packet delays for both
trafﬁc types and for both UE groups is quite high, and quite
often approaching the ultimate delay budget deadline, after
which the packets are discarded at the scheduler. The VoIP
95%-ile delays being 103 ms and 112 ms respectively for
M-UEs and R-UEs. Similarly, the video 95%-ile delays are
around 312 ms and 317 ms respectively for M-UEs and R-
UEs indicating that there is non-negligible network congestion
and packet discard ongoing in the system. Note that the slight
overshoot of delays beyond the delay budget can be attributed
to the extra delay caused by re-transmissions.
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

0
100
200
300
400
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mean TP = 226.48 kbps
5%−ile TP = 201 kbps
Mean TP = 129.23 kbps
5%−ile TP = 126 kbps
Mean TP = 207.93 kbps
5%−ile TP = 184.5 kbps
Mean TP = 129.04 kbps
5%−ile TP = 125 kbps
Throughput [kbit/s]
Throughput Distribution
 
 
Video M−UEs
VoIP M−UEs
Video R−UEs
VoIP R−UEs
(a) Throughput CDFs
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mean Delay = 218.05 ms
95%−ile Delay = 312 ms
Mean Delay = 59.78 ms
95%−ile Delay = 103 ms
Mean Delay = 240.63 ms
95%−ile Delay = 317 ms
Mean Delay = 79.95 ms
95%−ile Delay = 112 ms
Delay [ms]
Delay Distribution
 
 
Video M−UEs
VoIP M−UEs
Video R−UEs
VoIP R−UEs
(b) Delay CDFs
Fig. 2.
DeNB-only scenario with proposed QoS-aware resource allocation. Throughput and delay CDF comparisons for different UE groups (M-UEs and
R-UEs) and trafﬁc types (VoIP and Video).
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mean TP = 251.86 kbps
5%−ile TP = 194.5 kbps
Mean TP = 129.65 kbps
5%−ile TP = 126.5 kbps
5%−ile TP = 259.5 kbps
Mean TP = 130.47 kbps
5%−ile TP = 129 kbps
Throughput [kbit/s]
Throughput Distribution
 
 
Mean TP = 260.9 kbps
Video M−UEs
VoIP M−UEs
Video R−UEs
VoIP R−UEs
(a) Throughput CDFs
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mean Delay = 45.8 ms
95%−ile Delay = 297 ms
Mean Delay = 16.97 ms
95%−ile Delay = 87 ms
Mean Delay = 30.84 ms
95%−ile Delay = 151 ms
95%−ile Delay = 37 ms
Delay [ms]
Delay Distribution
 
 
Mean Delay = 10.41 ms
Video M−UEs
VoIP M−UEs
Video R−UEs
VoIP R−UEs
(b) Delay CDFs
Fig. 3.
DeNB+2RN scenario with proposed QoS-aware resource allocation. Throughput and delay CDF comparisons for different UE groups (M-UEs and
R-UEs) and trafﬁc types (VoIP and Video).
B. Relay enhanced scenario (DeNB+2RN) with proposed
QoS-aware resource allocation
From results in last sub-section, we conclude that though
the QoS-aware resource allocation attempts to fulﬁll the QoS
requirements, the level of satisﬁed users is quite low owing
to the congestion in network. In this sub-section, we consider
the same trafﬁc pattern, but now in a relay enhanced scenario,
where two relay nodes are deployed to assist the DeNB.
In Figure 3, we present the throughput and delay CDFs
for the DeNB+2RN scenario with the proposed QoS-aware
resource allocation strategy. In contrast to Figure 2(a) for the
TP CDF in DeNB-only scenario, in Figure 3(a), we observe
that the rate requirements of both trafﬁc types are fulﬁlled to
a large extent for both UE categories. The mean and 5%-ile
TP values for VoIP trafﬁc type are 130 kbps and ca. 128 kbps
for both M-UEs and R-UEs. For the video UEs, we observe
that performance of R-UEs improve considerably as compared
to that in Figure 2(a). The mean and 5%-ile TP values being
261 kbps and 260 kbps respectively. For the video M-UEs,
we observe that there is still a fraction of M-UEs that are
not able to achieve the designated GBR. The mean and 5%-
ile TP values for video M-UEs are 252 kbps and 195 kbps
respectively.
Next, in Figure 3(b), we plot the CDF of the end-to-end
packet delays for proposed scheme in DeNB+2RN scenario.
Note that the end-to-end packet delay in this scenario cor-
responds to a sum of packet delays experienced over both
hops. We observe that adding relay nodes helps the system
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

0
100
200
300
400
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mean TP = 172.84 kbps
5%−ile TP = 102.5 kbps
Mean TP = 122.92 kbps
5%−ile TP = 89.5 kbps
Mean TP = 260.38 kbps
5%−ile TP = 258.5 kbps
Mean TP = 130.47 kbps
5%−ile TP = 129.5 kbps
Throughput [kbit/s]
Throughput Distribution
 
 
Video M−UEs
VoIP M−UEs
Video R−UEs
VoIP R−UEs
(a) Throughput CDFs
0
100
200
300
400
500
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Mean Delay = 236.16 ms
95%−ile Delay = 373 ms
Mean Delay = 29.4 ms
95%−ile Delay = 133 ms
Mean Delay = 11.63 ms
95%−ile Delay = 24 ms
Mean Delay = 7.68 ms
95%−ile Delay = 15 ms
Delay [ms]
Delay Distribution
 
 
Video M−UEs
VoIP M−UEs
Video R−UEs
VoIP R−UEs
(b) Delay CDFs
Fig. 4.
DeNB+2RN scenario with conventional resource allocation (static resource partitioning plus proportional fair scheduler). Throughput and delay CDF
comparisons for different UE groups (M-UEs and R-UEs) and trafﬁc types (VoIP and Video).
signiﬁcantly, in comparison to the DeNB-only case in Figure
2(b). The mean packet delays for both services are signiﬁcantly
reduced. The reduction for R-UEs delay comes from the fact
that the RN is able to serve them over better radio conditions,
while the reduction for M-UEs delay comes as a consequence
of reduction in resource consumption for R-UEs. Besides the
signiﬁcant reduction of mean packet delays, 95%-ile delays are
also reduced. The VoIP 95%-ile delays are reduced to 87 ms
and 37 ms respectively for M-UEs and R-UEs. Similarly, the
video 95%-ile delays reduce to around 297 ms and 151 ms
respectively for M-UEs and R-UEs. The video R-UEs having
95%-ile delay of around 151 ms owes to the fact that the major
fraction in end-to-end delay for R-UEs comes from the ﬁrst
hop, which in this case is assigned a delay budget deadline of
150 ms. Similar remark holds for the VoIP R-UEs.
In summary, we observe from Figure 3 that once sufﬁ-
cient radio resources are available, the proposed QoS-aware
resource allocation mechanism facilitates to a very large extent
the satisfaction of heterogeneous QoS requirements in terms
of both latency and bit rate simultaneously.
C. Relay enhanced scenario (DeNB+2RN) with conventional
resource allocation
Finally, in this sub-section, we present the throughput
and delay CDFs for the same relay enhanced scenario
(DeNB+2RN), as in last sub-section, but with conventional
resource allocation in place of QoS-aware resource allocation.
To this end, we pursue static resource partitioning [4] at the
DeNB between the macro-access link and the backhaul link.
This static resource partitioning incorporates the fact that the
video users have twice the rate requirement of the VoIP users.
A regular proportional fair scheduler is employed with in the
partitioned spectrum to assign resources to various competing
users.
From Figure 4, we observe an imbalance with regard to
QoS satisfaction of users. In Figure 4(a), we note that though
the TP requirements for R-UEs are easily met, the observed
mean and 5%-ile values for M-UEs are only around 173 kbps
and 103 kbps for video, and around 123 kbps and 90 kbps for
VoIP users. Similar observations can be made from Figure 4(b)
depicting the delay CDF; we note that though the delays for R-
UEs are lower as compared to Figure 3(b), but the degradation
in the performance of M-UEs is rather drastic.
D. Comparison between proposed and conventional resource
allocation
In order to summarize the effectiveness of the proposed
QoS-aware resource allocation scheme for relay enhanced
networks, we present in this sub-section a comparison with
the conventional scheme, in terms of the fraction of satisﬁed
users. To this end, we deﬁne two alternative measures:
• µTP = Fraction of satisﬁed users w.r.t. throughput, deﬁned
as the fraction of users (or samples) that achieve up to
95% of the conﬁgured GBR.
• µDLY = Fraction of satisﬁed users w.r.t. delay, deﬁned as
the fraction of users (or samples) that are served within
the conﬁgured delay limits.
For the DeNB+2RN scenario, the fraction of satisﬁed users
w.r.t. TP and delay are presented in Table I for the proposed
and conventional schemes. Note that the values are obtained
respectively from Figure 3 and Figure 4. It can be seen
that especially for M-UEs, the fraction of satisﬁed users
is appreciably increased by employing the proposed QoS-
aware resource allocation scheme. For instance, the number
of satisﬁed video UEs increase from 8.1% to 88.8% w.r.t.
the achieved throughput, and from 74.7% to 95.3% w.r.t. the
experienced packet delay.
200
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE I
DENB+2RN SCENARIO: FRACTION OF SATISFIED USERS µTP AND µDLY
FOR THE PROPOSED QOS-AWARE (PROP.) VS. THE CONVENTIONAL STATIC
RESOURCE PARTITIONING BASED (CONV.) RESOURCE ALLOCATION
UE type
Fraction of satisﬁed users w.r.t.
achieved throughput
experienced delay
Conv.
Prop.
Conv.
Prop.
Video M-UEs
8.1%
88.8%
74.7%
95.3%
VoIP M-UEs
80.0%
99.4%
90.5%
99.0%
Video R-UEs
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
VoIP R-UEs
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have analyzed the performance of a
QoS-aware scheduler for in-band relaying scenario in LTE-
Advanced systems. The proposed scheduler addresses two
major issues. First, it guides on how to split resources between
macro users and the backhaul link at the DeNB scheduler
via the concept of “super ﬂows”. Secondly, it facilitates
the satisfaction of QoS constraints for the R-UEs that are
scheduled in two distinct hops. The advantage of the proposed
resource allocation scheme in both these aspects has been
conﬁrmed via system level simulations, which show signiﬁcant
gains over conventional approaches, in terms of the fraction
of satisﬁed users.
Further work in this area will target an extension of the
overall resource allocation framework to interference coordi-
nation strategies for relays. We believe that coupling of the
proposed scheme with an efﬁcient interference coordination
on access links [8] will lead to a better performance of the
cell-edge users especially for scenarios with a large number of
relay nodes (i.e., 4-10 RNs), where the interference inside the
macro-cell can easily degrade the overall system performance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Commission’s seventh framework pro-
gramme FP7-ICT-2009 under grant agreement no 2472223
also referred to as ARTIST4G.
REFERENCES
[1] 3GPP TS 36.814, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA); Further advancements for E-UTRA physical layer aspects,”
3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical speciﬁcation.
[2] C. H. Liu, A. Gkelias, Y. Hou, and K. K. Leung, “A Distributed
Scheduling Algorithm with QoS Provisions in Multi-hop Wireless Mesh
Networks,” in 4th IEEE International Conference on Wireless and Mobile
Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob 2008), Avignon,
France, Oct 2008, pp. 253 – 258.
[3] R. Kausar, Y. Chen, K. K. Chai, L. Cuthbert, and J. Schormans,
“QoS Aware Mixed Trafﬁc Packet Scheduling in OFDMA-based LTE-
Advanced Networks,” in The Fourth International Conference on Mobile
Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies UBICOMM
2010, Florence, Italy, Oct 2010, pp. 53 – 58.
[4] G. Liebl, T. M. de Moraes, A. Soysal, and E. Seidel, “Fair Resource Allo-
cation for Inband Relaying in LTE-Advanced,” in 2011 8th International
Workshop on Multi-Carrier Systems & Solutions (MC-SS), Herrsching,
Germany, May 2011, pp. 1 – 5.
[5] Z. Ma, W. Xiang, H. Long, and W. Wang, “Proportional Fair Resource
Allocation for LTE-Advanced Networks with Type I Relay Nodes,” in
IEEE International Conference on Communications ICC2011, Kyoto,
Japan, Jun 2011, pp. 1 – 5.
[6] 3GPP TS 23.401, “General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) enhancements
for Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) ac-
cess,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical speciﬁcation.
[7] Artist4G, “D5.1 - Scenarios, KPIs and Evaluation Methodology for
Advanced Cellular Systems,” Deliverable, Jun 2010.
[8] G. Liebl, T. M. de Moraes, A. Gonzalez, and M. D. Nisar, “Centralized
Interference Coordination in Relay-Enhanced Networks,” in IEEE Wire-
less Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC 2012), Paris,
France, Apr 2012.
201
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

