New Traffic Message Delivery Algorithm  
for a Novel VANET Architecture 
Yueyue Li 
School of Science and Technology 
Nottingham Trent University 
Clifton Lane, Nottingham, NG11 8NS, UK 
yueyue.li@ntu.ac.uk 
Evtim Peytchev 
School of Science and Technology 
Nottingham Trent University 
Clifton Lane, Nottingham, NG11 8NS, UK 
evtim.peytchev@ntu.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—Traffic problems in the field of Intelligent 
Transport System (ITS) have always been an attraction in the 
researchers’ eyes all over the world. To reduce traffic 
congestions, to save travel time, to decrease traffic accidents 
and to provide demanding information exchanges have become 
challenges of today and the future. Current research works 
focus on applying Car-to-Car (C2C) and Car-to-Infrastructure 
(C2I) approaches in infrastructure-less and flexible ad hoc 
networks environment. The routing problem has always been 
one of the most difficult problems in such dynamic 
environment network. This paper presents a novel, designed 
for routing purposes, traffic routing algorithm (TMDA) for a 
novel VANET architecture. The algorithm with the inclusion 
of urban traffic related routing information has been designed 
to be deployed in vehicles, e.g., cars and buses and aims to 
provide proper strategies for the utilization of travel 
information available in many of the vehicles traversing urban 
networks. 
The 
research 
investigates 
and 
compares 
communication performance of the communication system 
under TMDA and the other existing ad-hoc routing protocol 
(e.g., Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector) by a set of 
experiments 
with 
the 
NS-2 
simulator. 
According 
to 
simulation-based performance evaluation, the proposed 
algorithm, TMDA, provides higher efficiency and reliability 
than a popular used broadcasting method for data 
dissemination. 
 
Keywords-ITS; C2C/C2I; ad hoc network; VANET; routing 
algorithm; NS-2 simulation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, much more projects emerge in the field of 
Intelligent Transport System (ITS) because of the increasing 
traffic problems, such as traffic jam and fast accident 
notifications etc.  Fast and reliable real-time traffic 
information is irreplaceable tool to build safe and efficient 
traffic environment. To achieve this goal, traffic objects 
should 
cooperate 
with 
each 
other 
by 
using 
Car-to-Infrastructure 
(C2I) 
and 
Car-to-Car 
(C2C) 
communication approaches, as the communication of 
information is the biggest unutilised fully factor in ITS for 
reducing traffic congestions, saving travel time, decreasing 
traffic accident, improving air pollutions, lowing energy 
consumption and also providing demanding information 
during travels. 
Typical examples adding weight to this concept are C2X 
communications investigated in the following projects of the 
6th 
EU 
Framework 
Programme 
for 
Research 
and 
Technological Development [1]: 60 million EU CVIS 
(Cooperative Vehicle-Infrastructure Systems) Integrated 
Project [2], targeting mobile traffic participants to provide 
wise 
interactions 
between 
mobiles 
and 
transport 
infrastructures for road safety; COOPER (CO-OPerative 
SystEms for Intelligent Road) project [3], aiming at 
cooperative traffic management by exchanging real-time 
traffic information among travellers and fixed roadside 
system to finally enhance road safety on motorways; and 
SAFESPOT integrated project [4], cooperating intelligent 
information exchanges between vehicles and roadside units to 
realize safe and efficient transportations. These projects 
attempt to integrate C2C and C2I applications while existing 
outcomes show that the focal point is C2I solutions, by 
utilizing the supports of roadside units (RSU), access points 
(AP) and cellular base-stations etc. 
While the C2I architectures have been well developed 
nowadays, further problems about the cost of infrastructure 
deployment, the speed of connections and the volume of data 
are considered. Hence, more and more research work and 
projects pay attention to ad hoc networks, which are 
self-organized, dynamical and flexible for solving certain 
urgent social problems, e.g., emergency services and traffic 
information exchanges, etc. [5] with co-operations of other 
practical technologies.  
In this paper, novel Vehicle Ad-hoc Network (VANET) 
architecture for city traffic communications is introduced. 
This framework will create an opportunity for investigation of 
the benefits of car-based acquisition and dissemination of 
traffic information as well as generation and distributed 
implementation of traffic control. For routing purposes, the 
system applies a new Traffic Message Delivery Algorithm 
(TMDA). The defining novelty in this algorithm is the 
presence and utilization of travel route information available 
in many of the vehicles presenting in the traffic e.g., all buses, 
cars using Sat-Nav devices etc.  
Compared with real test-beds [6][7][8], simulations can 
save large expenses to construct a model and allow 
components to execute repeatable tests in diverse targeting 
scenarios. This paper discusses essential simulation issues via 
NS-2 and displays results for investigations of the new routing 
algorithm in the proposed VANET architecture. 
395
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

The paper is structured as follows. Next section processes 
literature reviews on broadcasting techniques and introduces 
the new ideas about essential information being included in 
the transmission messages. Then newly VANET architecture 
with a proposed message delivery algorithm TMDA is 
introduced in details. There are a set of simulation 
experiments 
exhibited 
to 
evaluate 
communication 
performances with the innovative routing protocol. Finally, 
we conclude results and give a future vision. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Presently, a plethora of routing protocols is designed to 
adapt flexible and dynamic ad hoc networks. This paper will 
only concentrate on those studies being directly related to the 
proposed techniques and protocols. 
A. Broadcasting in VANET 
Broadcasting is a basic method used in ad hoc networks. 
The simplest and earliest broadcasting technique is flooding 
methods, as described in [9][10][11]. Each mobile node, 
which receives the packet for the first time, periodically 
broadcasts or rebroadcasts the packet to all neighbours; 
otherwise, the receiver will discard the packet due to 
redundant operations. Ho et al. [12] state that a simple 
flooding method provides minimal state and high reliability, 
particularly being suitable for highly mobility networks, such 
as MANET and VANET.  
The main problem of the simple flooding, also known as 
blind flooding [13], is the high amount of redundant 
broadcasting messages. This is referred as broadcast storm.  
To solve the problem, a few of solutions have been proposed. 
For example, a probability-based method from [14] assumes 
that nodes rebroadcast the received packet depending upon 
the predetermined probability. If the probability reaches 
100%, the scheme is identical to be pure flooding. 
Additionally, an IEEE802.11-based protocol named urban 
multi-hop broadcast (UMB) is designed in [15] to minimize 
the broadcast storm by allowing the farthest vehicles to 
receive and forward data and inform other nodes between 
original 
senders 
and 
itself. 
Meanwhile, 
it 
uses 
acknowledgment messages (ACK) to guarantee high 
reliability of packet delivery. 
As Ros et al. [16] presented, uneven distributions and 
speeds of vehicles are particular characteristics in VANET 
networks. Due to these reasons, VANET has to deal with high 
number of disconnections which may impact on message 
exchanges. U. Lee et al. [17] introduced periodically 
broadcasting methods to neighbours. In this case, one-hop 
neighbours will be able to disperse the message via their 
mobility to more hops of retransmissions. Moreover, Kitani et 
al. [22] present a concept of ‘message ferrying' in 
Inter-vehicle communications, introducing 'bus' as the ferry 
rather than 'car'. It proposes to improve efficiency of 
information sharing in sparse areas depending on buses which 
have regular routes and could collect more traffic information. 
In this paper, our new algorithm attempts to improve 
communication performance by using strategic broadcasting 
mechanism with the inclusion of traffic route information in 
the algorithm. 
B. The inclusion of essential information 
In the traffic area, diverse and changeable communication 
demands and traffic problems can occur at any time. For these 
reasons, maximum and optimum information are expected to 
be included in communication protocols by many research 
and projects. Although there has not been any comprehensive 
and popular message delivery algorithm meeting the 
requirements yet, some researchers have proposed algorithms 
with the inclusion of particular traffic information, for 
example, the inclusion of the acknowledgments into the 
periodic beacons for high reliability [16] and the inclusion of 
vehicles' status and surrounding information in [18], etc.  
So far, on the basis of studies in existing literatures, the 
concept of the inclusion of traffic route information has not 
been proposed and implemented. Certainly, many projects 
assume electronic devices such as GPS are installed in most of 
cars and mobile terminals. Hence, those devices could 
provide route information to car drivers or other traffic 
participants. However, this information cannot be easily 
shared with others unless they are included into the message 
routing protocols. For the proposed purpose, this research 
introduces designing a new message delivery algorithm with 
the inclusion of traffic route information based on a novel 
MANET architecture.  
III. 
THE NOVEL MESSAGE DELIVERY ALGORITHM - TMDA 
A. The proposed VANET architecture 
Wu [6] introduced a VANET architecture that, based on 
the 
background 
of 
Car-to-Car/Car-to-Infrastructure 
communications, 
involves 
spontaneous 
wireless 
communications occurring within a group of wireless mobile 
nodes (Figure 1). The architecture integrates features of 
traditional ad hoc networking technologies and VANET 
technologies, being used in standalone mode or cooperative 
connections to the larger Internet [23]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Novel ad hoc wireless mobile network architecture                   
Ref.: http://www.car-to-car.org/index.php 
Being different from traditional ad hoc networks, this 
communication system utilizes vehicles for routing purposes 
via the inclusion of traffic route information. It recognises 
three types of ad hoc nodes - mobile, semi-mobile and static 
ad hoc nodes. To best exert the functionality of node when 
communications occur, the system specifies three types of 
nodes.  
Mobile nodes, such as cars, are defined as traditional ad 
hoc nodes without pre-conceived route with functions of 
routing and transmitting messages. They could be a major 
group to request traffic information and fast forward 
396
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

messages. Indeed, if the car equips high capability electronic 
devices for message storages, they could carry messages 
anywhere and exchange to others anytime due to the nature of 
arbitrariness. However, most of drivers do not accept to spend 
money on these devices. Hence, car behaviors have to be 
relatively simplified, e.g., broadcasting only. 
Alternatively, bus-nodes, considered as semi-mobile 
nodes – having predetermined route onto which they are 
currently traveling, integrate routing, transmitting and 
gateway altogether to provide a possibility of interconnection 
among other types of networks, e.g., Internet. Although they 
could not move everywhere as cars do, they are able to equip 
powerful devices to offer more communication capabilities 
than other common vehicles. Typical examples are the energy 
of transmission, the range of communications, as well as the 
storage of messages. These are possible to compensate 
discontinuous 
delivery 
occurring 
between 
car 
communications. Moreover, buses and bus-lanes present 
some particularities in urban scenarios. Most of cities specify 
lanes for buses priority to guarantee unimpeded travels for the 
public, even in peak time.  
As far as static ad hoc nodes are concerned, they will 
cooperate with other two types of nodes to provide more 
reliable and specific information if exchanges of a message 
between first two kinds of nodes does not meet users’ 
requirements. In this research, static nodes belong to a kind of 
ad hoc nodes; however, the essence is similar as roadside 
units. The nodes are expected to provide access for larger 
scale of information exchanges. 
B. TMDA overview 
Traffic Message Delivery Algorithm (TMDA) is a novel 
traffic 
routing 
algorithm 
designed 
for 
improving 
communication performance of a particular VANET network 
described in Section A. The difference as compared to another 
routing protocol is that TMDA does not only implement 
single broadcasting approach, such as the simple flooding, 
probability-based 
method, 
area-based 
method 
and 
neighbourhood-based conception [19], but also adopts 
intelligent routing strategies by utilizing the pre-existing 
travel information for message delivery at any given moment. 
It means that the algorithm with the inclusion of traffic route 
information will be embedded in each communication 
mobility node with current advanced information adaptation 
devices and provide optimization routes to messages between 
the source and the destination.  
TMDA utilizes features of each type of nodes for efficient 
and reliable traffic communications. For example, it does not 
only take advantage of arbitrariness of car-nodes, but also 
exploits the benefits of controllable, scheduled, and predicted 
bus-nodes; it does not only allow simple broadcasting 
behaviours of cars, but also make uses of higher capability of 
bus-nodes for properly storing and forwarding the messages. 
Furthermore, TMDA is prone to regional message delivery 
and does not exclude the possibility of Internet access via 
static nodes to spread messages widely.  
C. Algorithm details 
TMDA could be divided into two sections: sending and 
receiving. Procedures are relatively simple for sending the 
message that nodes carry on periodic broadcasting via IEEE 
802.11 within a certain expiry; whereas more considerations 
occur in terms of receiving a message.  Algorithm I is 
showing the pseudo-code of TMDA in message receiving 
section. 
ALGORITHM I.         PSEUDO-CODE OF TMDA IN MESSAGE RECEIVING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Actually, above steps implement a selective forwarding 
mechanism by utilising additional urban traffic related 
information.  The overall aim is to address broadcast storm 
problems. Two main parts are involved in the mechanism.  
One is the idea of I-Route. This is a critical route, e.g., bus 
lanes, used to determine next operations of nodes. Briefly, if 
messages reach I-Routes, they will be faster forwarded 
following the pre-configured directions of the I-Routes; 
otherwise, they are based on developed broadcasting 
strategies only. The nodes on I-Route, regardless the real type, 
are treated as buses. On the basis of I-Route, another concept 
is about ‘farthest node first send’ (FNFS). Once a sender 
delivers a message to all neighbours, the farthest one within 
the transmission range will deal with the message following 
 1 Event: the message has been received 
 2 if msg_id is not in check_list then 
 3    receives the message 
 4 else 
 5    discard the message 
 
 6 Event: the message received from NB or S 
 7 if R = src then 
 8    discard the message; 
 9 else 
10  if R = dst then 
11    inform others to stop broadcasting; 
12  else 
13   if Ps is on I-Routes then 
14     if Pr  is on I-Routes then 
15       when Tc = Td 1, farthest nb forward message;  
16       inform others between <S,R> to stop broadcast; 
17       message is stored longer in this node R; 
18    else 
19      if Dr = Ds then 
20        when Tc = Td2, farthest NB forward message; 
21      else 
22        when Tc = Td3, farthest NB forward message; 
23  else 
24    if Pr is on I-Routes then 
25       when Tc = Td 1, farthest nb forward message; 
26       inform others between<S,R> to stop broadcast; 
27       message is stored longer in this node R; 
28    else 
29      when Tc = Td 1, farthest nb forward message; 
397
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

the priority over others. The priority level is set by delays 
introduced in the following pseudo-code of TMDA. The idea 
is beneficial to control data collisions to a certain degree. 
Message receiving function is divided into two events. 
From line 1 to 5, when a receiver R obtains a message with the 
id msg_id, R should firstly check whether it receives a 
redundant message. Each VANET node has a check_list to 
store received msg_id. Thus if the msg_id is found in the list, 
R discards the message; otherwise, continues the steps of 
another event (line 6 to 29). 
When R receives the message from its neighbours NB or 
source S, it needs to make sure that the message dose not loop 
back. Then if R is the destination node, it simply broadcasts 
back to all neighbours with a stop instruction. Alternately, if R 
is an intermediate node only, steps from line 13 to line 29 are 
focused on. To judge when to forward the message to 
neighbours, r needs to know nb's or s's position (x, y) and its 
own position. This helps to check whether they are on 
I-Routes or not. If both of S and R are on I-Routes, then R 
forwards the message at Td1 which consists of current_time 
(Tc) and a waiting delay d1. Within the transmission range, the 
delay d1 will be reduced accompanying with the increase of 
distance between <S, R>. That is, the farthest R will forward 
message firstly. Additionally, if S is on the I-Route but R is not, 
the moving directions of R and S become important. Same 
direction of R and S (Dr = Ds) makes the forward occur at Td2 
while the message is broadcast at Td3 for different directions of 
R and S.  The value of Td2 or Td3 is different but both consist 
of a current time Tc, a delay according to the distance d1 and a 
pre-configured delay d2 setup by the algorithm. The value 
order is Td1 <Td2 <Td3.   
IV. 
SIMULATION ISSUES 
NS-2 is selected as a well-suitable simulation tool in this 
paper. It uses Tcl (Tool Command Language) to organize 
script files for setting up traffic patterns such as scenarios and 
movements 
and 
also 
communication 
patterns, 
e.g., 
transmission issues. 
A. A City scenario 
In terms of traffic patterns, the focus at this stage is 
#-shaped city scenario (Figure 2). Compared with T-shaped 
patterns in a previous paper [6], this scenario contains more 
traffic situations. 
 
Figure 2.  #-shaped traffic pattern 
#-Shaped city scenario (Figure 2) – a medium scale 
network with possible traffic units consists of intersections, 
horizontal and vertical roads. It can be useful to investigate 
some issues that whether I-Route areas provide efficient 
decisions for message delivery; whether different types of 
nodes work properly to provide high reliability in various 
densities of networks etc. 
Nodes – The term density represents as the number of 
nodes over the network. This paper presents four dense levels 
(Figure 3), from very low to high.  
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Simulation models for example densities of networks 
I-Route – This is a term for a set of special routes 
integrated in our established ad hoc wireless mobile 
communication system. On I-Routes, message transmissions 
obey special strategies and they are expected to support for 
performance improvements. Therefore, I-Routes should have 
a capability to centralize more mobile nodes so that strategies 
can be best used. According to features of buses mentioned in 
previous sections, I-Routes are pre-set to be bus lanes in this 
paper. This point will be further investigated and validated. 
Current simulation models adopt the following I-Route 
patterns, drawn as two lines with arrows in Figure 4.  Future 
more I-Routes could be identified by buses or be 
pre-configured by control centres due to the different 
purposes. 
 
Figure 4.  Simulation model with I-Routes 
B. Transmissions 
Following points, such as transmission range and nodes 
distance etc. are essentially to impact on the design of 
simulation models.    
Distance – The distance of a node-pair varies because of 
simulation initializations and node densities. In our designs, 
the nodes are distributed following the shape of urban lanes 
and the distance between two nodes is chosen randomly but 
between 10 to 150 meters. Actually, the value is decided 
particularly in this research because of real traffic 
considerations. Meanwhile, the transmission range is set as 
the same value. 
Speed – Regarding to the real world conditions, the speed 
of vehicles should be different according to transportation 
conditions, such as the traffic flows, the speed of front nodes 
and the traffic rules etc. Therefore, the speed of nodes is 
assigned randomly when nodes are running with different 
directions. 
Time - Total simulation time for above models is set to 
300 seconds. Message sending time is randomly chosen by 
398
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

NS-2 within the total simulation time. We assume that the 
maximum expire time of message is no more than 60 seconds 
for non-emergency messages. 
Message – Message contains three elements: message size, 
message id and other information, such as source node, 
destination node, current sender, the position of senders, the 
speed of senders, the direction of senders, the message expiry 
and current timestamp. It assumes that only one message is 
transmitted between a pair of nodes each time and the 
minimum number of message over the network at the time is 1 
while the maximum value is 10 in this paper. 
V. 
RESULTS EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS 
A. Network communication performance metrics 
End-to-End Delay Time (EDT) - It refers to the duration 
of a message sent from source to destination over the 
network [21]. Note that the equation (1) is used for 
calculating single-pair of nodes’ delay (EDT). Te stands for 
the end time of a packet delivery and T0 means the start time; 
(2) solves the average delays (EDT) by using the sum of 
single delays (EDT)) and  the number of tests (n).  
EDTe

 EDT (EDT)n

The acceptable maximum delay time is limited as 60 
seconds for non-emergency messages. If the delay time is 
over 1 minute, then packet loss is recorded. 
Message Delivery Ratio (MDR) – It represents a ratio of 
successful message deliveries. In equation (3), a single rate is 
calculated using the number of successful receives (nr) and the 
number of original sends (ns). The final evaluation of this 
paper will follow the results obtained via equation (4) which 
shows the average value of the testing delivery ratios. 
MDR nrns 

 MDR  (MDR)n

B. The Comparison of routing protocols 
AODV – Wireless Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector 
(AODV) routing protocol concerns on mobile ad hoc 
networks (e.g., MANETs) nowadays. It is a reactive routing 
protocol which creates a route for nodes only when they 
demand it, being one of common broadcasting routing 
protocols used currently for both unicast and multicast routing. 
The serious problem is the broadcasting storm, which 
attempts to be avoided and reduced in the proposed routing 
protocol TMDA. 
TMDA – Traffic Message Delivery Algorithm delivers 
messages depending on the concept of pre-configured routes 
(I-Routes) in the city scenarios. On the basis of general 
broadcasting methods, TMDA reduces broadcast storms via 
selective forwarding mechanism, coupled with geographic 
information. 
Table I shows advantages and disadvantages of AODV, 
which have been proposed and validated for long years. 
Following that, the anticipated features of TMDA, being 
given in advance, will be investigated by simulation results in 
later sections. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISONS OF ROUTING PROTOCOLS 
Routing 
Protocol 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
AODV 
[20] 
 
1) On-demand 
2) Destination sequence 
numbers to find latest route 
3) Small control and data 
packet requires few 
bandwidth 
4) Link broken response fast 
5) High reliability in medium 
and large networks 
 
1) stale entries 
2) Multiple RREP 
packets to a single 
RREQ packet causes big 
control overhead 
3) Battery and 
bandwidth consumptions 
TMDA 
 
Anticipated: 
1) Simple broadcasting 
mechanism 
2) No network topology 
maintenance 
3) No complex route 
discovery algorithm 
4) I-Routes are set up for 
controlling packet forwards 
5) Reduction of broadcast 
storm 
 
Anticipated: 
1) Bear with a certain 
delays if nodes are not 
on pre-configured routes 
2) Not good for 
emergency message 
exchanges in sparse 
networks 
C. Results in various dense networks 
Figures 5, 6, 7 and 8 compare EDT and MDR results by 
applying Traffic Message Delivery Algorithm (TMDA) and 
implementing Ad hoc On-Demand Distance Vector (AODV) 
routing protocol in very low, low, medium and high density of 
networks separately. There is an assumption in the 
experiments 
that 
the 
acceptable 
delivery 
time 
for 
non-emergency message is no more than 60 seconds, and 
random source-to-destination pairs are allowed to exchange  
various amount of messages (from 1 to 10) per randomly 
testing time. The overall aim is to investigate whether TMDA 
leads to less EDT and higher MDR in various scenarios rather 
than an another existing routing protocol; how degree the 
amount of messages impact on communication performance; 
and how the trend of EDT and MDR changes in different 
network conditions.  
 
1) High & Medium density 
Figure 5 represents the average EDT and Figure 6 shows 
the trend of MDR in the dense and moderate dense network 
respectively. According to above line charts, TMDA exhibits 
smaller EDT from 1 message to 10 messages per testing time, 
reflecting on the below lines in Figure 5 and higher MDR 
from the above lines in Figure 6 than those obtained from 
AODV protocols. 
 
399
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

  
 
Figure 5.  Delays in the high & medium density of networks 
  
 
Figure 6.  Rates in the high & medium density of networks 
For AODV, the trend of the average EDT in both 
networks goes up accompanied with increases of the message 
number shown in Figure 5; conversely, the ratio displays as 
decreasing status in Figure 6. Therefore, the number of nodes 
over the network and the number of transmission messages 
have significant impacts on the transmission delays and 
reliability. However, the trends of average EDTs and MDRs 
are relatively stable when TDMA is used for message 
deliveries. Particularly in the dense VANET, the average 
value of EDTs is very small, presenting a distinguished gap 
between the line of AODV and the line of TMDA. Oppositely, 
the trend of average MDRs in TMDA keeps in a high level 
(e.g., 80%-100%) while AODV experiences decreasing 
values when increasing the message number from 1 to 10.  
Compared to the results in moderate density of networks, 
the results are notably better in the high density network. One 
of drawbacks inherited from AODV is the broadcast storm 
which is also considered as a major reason of packet loss. If 
10 messages are transmitting over the network, more nodes 
mean higher possibility to generate data collisions over the 
network. As introduced earlier in the paper, TMDA adopts 
delay strategies to reduce broadcast storm and the results 
prove that the packet loss is relatively less prominent.  
Certainly, when the nodes are reduced, both routing 
algorithms are influenced, reflecting on the increasing delays 
and the declining packet ratios, e.g., those in medium density 
of networks. It is understandable that the condition of re-send 
becomes frequent.  
 
2) Low & Very low density 
Figure 7 and Figure 8 display average EDT and MDR in 
low and very low density networks respectively. TMDA 
provides better results than those of AODV. For example, 
EDT lines of TMDA in both networks are lower than those of 
AODV with smaller average delays. Meanwhile, the above 
MDR lines which represent higher successful packet 
deliveries are from TMDA. 
 
 
  
 
Figure 7.  Delays in the low & very low density of networks 
  
 
Figure 8.  Rates in the low & very low of networks 
Usually, a problem of disconnection seriously occurs in 
sparse networks. This is because nodes are not enough to 
forward messages and they are not distributed evenly. The 
problem causes transmission failures as high possibility of 
packet loss within an expiry. If the transmission fails within 
the expiry, AODV provides a sequence of procedures such as 
packet requesting, replying and repairing etc. to deal with 
these failures. However, the mechanism suffers more delays 
because senders should wait reply packets from the 
destination nodes and then judge if they need to re-send again 
or stop sending. For TMDA, it allows senders to continually 
broadcasting the message within the expiry unless they 
receive a redundant message or they receive an instruction 
included in the message to stop broadcasting. This approach 
saves the time for senders to wait the response and also each 
sender needs not to keep a list to record paths for replying 
packets. 
Moreover, TMDA contains I-Route information. Nodes 
on the I-Routes are allowed to have longer storage time than 
nodes on the common lanes. This strategy helps to improve 
the ratio of message deliveries, particularly in sparse networks. 
One of cases in the experiments as follows: suppose a source 
node and a destination node are far from each other and a bus 
running on the I-Route could pass over each other in a certain 
time range.  AODV allows the bus to re-broadcast the 
message within T and the distance takes t for the bus to 
connect with the receiver. Due to T<t, the packet will be 
dropped. Instead, TMDA allows the bus to extend 
re-broadcast time to be T1 (T1 > T >= t), then the message 
could be received. Certainly, in specific cases, the delivery 
time will be very long by using TMDA, but it could be 
accepted with a tolerance limit. In our experiments, we set 
maximum expiry for non-emergency messages to be 60 
seconds. That is, any delay time more than 60 seconds will be 
regarded as final packet loss. 
Besides the above features of I-Routes, they could direct 
message towards assigned directions. If both source and 
destination nodes are on 'I-Route', the delay could be very 
small because nodes on 'I-Route' have the high priority of 
forwarding actions. As in AODV, it lets the message be sent 
with the same rights of broadcasting requests, replies and 
forwarding to all one-hop neighbours. Certainly, if the 
source-to-destination pair is not on the I-Route or not all on 
400
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

the I-Route, the transmission time could be at least the similar 
as AODV results. Generally, the average message delivery 
time, seen in Figure 7, are smaller by using TMDA from 1 
message to 10 messages. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the comparisons of communication 
performance by using different routing protocols in a novel 
VANET architecture. AODV is a published protocol used 
commonly in ad hoc networks, whereas, TMDA is a newly 
created algorithm. It not only adopts principles based on 
existing broadcasting algorithms but also incorporates urban 
traffic route information into the algorithm, utilizing the 
concept of 'I-Route' available in vehicles. The aim of these 
new routing strategies is to alleviate the impact of the 
problems caused by previous routing protocols and also best 
service for the particular implementation background. We 
design a VANET architecture which contains three types of 
ad hoc communication objects - mobile, semi-mobile and 
static ones.  
So far, investigations indicate that TMDA generally 
shows better results than the others one in terms of packet 
delivery time and successful packet delivery ratio in dense, 
moderate dens, sparse and very sparse networks. The future 
work will concentrate on applying the algorithm in a real city 
scenario (e.g., Nottingham city) to further investigate above 
results of simulations. Meanwhile, static nodes are considered 
to be integrated into the architecture for collaboration studies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank all members of the Wireless 
Communications Simulation Modelling group of Nottingham 
Trent University, including Dr. Taha Osman, Dr. Richard 
Germon, Dr. Xiaoqi Ma, Postgraduate Researcher Emad 
Gamati and all other colleagues. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
European Commission Community Research-CORDIS. The Sixth 
Framework Programme in brief. 2002 
[2] 
CIVS 
(Cooperative 
Vehicle-Infrastructure 
Systems), 
[online]. 
Available: http://www.cvisproject.org [April, 2012] 
[3] 
COOPER (CO-OPerative SystEms for Intelligent Road), [online]. 
Available: http://www.coopers-ip.eu [April, 2012] 
[4] 
SAFESPOT, [online]. Available: http://www.safespot-eu.org [April, 
2012] 
[5] 
J. Wu, Handbook on  theoretical and algorithmic aspect of sensor, 
ad hoc wireless, and peer-to-peer networks, United States of America: 
Auerbach Publications Taylor & Francis Group, 2006. 
[6] 
Y. Li and E. Peytchev, Novel ad-hoc wireless mobile communication 
network routing model for location based sensor networks, in 
proceedings of International Symposium on LBS & TeleCartography, 
pp. 383-396, September 2010. 
[7] 
APE: Ad hoc Protocol Evaluation testbed, Department of Computer 
Systems at Uppsala, Sweden. 
[8] 
J. Broch, D.A. Maltz and D.B. Johnson, Quantitative lessons from a 
full-scale multi-hop wireless ad hoc network testbed, in: Proceedings 
of the IEEE Wireless Communications and Network Conference 2000 
(WCNC 2000), Chicago, IL, pp. 992-997. 
[9] 
T. Camp and B. Williams. Comparison of broadcasting techniques for 
mobile ad hoc networks. In Proceedings of The Third ACM 
International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and 
Computing (MOBIHOC 2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun 2002. 
[10] A.M. Hanashi, A. Siddique, I. Awan, and M. Woodward, 
Performance evaluation of dynamic probabilistic broadcasting for 
flooding in mobile ad hoc networks, Simulation Modelling Practice 
and Theory, Volume 17, Issue 2, February 2009, Pages 364-375, 
ISSN 1569-190X, 10.1016/j.simpat.2008.09.012. 
[11] J. Jetcheva, Y. Hu, D. Maltz, and D. Johnson. A simple protocol for 
multicast and broadcast in mobile ad hoc networks. Internet Draft: 
draft-ietf-manetsimple-mbcast-01.txt, July 2001. 
[12] C. Ho, K. Obraczka, G. Tsudik, and K. Viswanath. Flooding for 
reliable multicast in multi-hop ad hoc networks. In Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Discrete Algorithms and Methods for 
Mobile Computing and Communication (DIALM), pages 64–71, 
1999. 
[13] I. Stojmenovic and J. Wu, “Broadcasting and Activity Scheduling in 
Ad Hoc Networks,” Mobile Ad Hoc Networking, S. Basagni, M. 
Conti, S. Giordano, and I. Stojmenovic, eds., pp. 205-229, IEEE Press, 
2004. 
[14] S. Ni, Y. Tseng, Y. Chen, and J. Sheu. The broadcast storm problem 
in a mobile ad hoc network. In Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking 
(MOBICOM), pages 151–162, 1999. 
[15] L.J. Li, H.F. Liu, Z.Y. Yang, L.J. Ge, and X.Y. Huang, Broadcasting 
Methods in Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks, Journal of Software, Vol.21, 
No.7, July 2010, pp.1620−1634 (in Chinese with English abstract). 
[16] F.J. Ros, P.M. Ruiz, and I. Stojmenovic, "Acknowledgment-Based 
Broadcast Protocol for Reliable and Efficient Data Dissemination in 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks," Mobile Computing, IEEE Transactions 
on , vol.11, no.1, pp.33-46, Jan. 2012 
[17] U. Lee, J. Lee, J. Park, E. Amir, and M. Gerla, “FleaNet: A Virtual 
Market Place on Vehicular Networks,” Proc. Third Ann. Int’l Conf. 
Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking and Services, pp. 1-8, 
July 2006. 
[18] J. Fukumoto, Sirokane, Y. Ishikawa, Wada, N. Tomotaka, K. Ohtsuki, 
H. Okada, Analytic method for real-time traffic problems in VANET 
by using Contents Oriented Communications, 7th International 
Conference on ITS, 6-8 June 2007. 
[19] N. Karthikeyan, V. Palanisamy, and K. Duraiswamy, Performance 
Comparison of Broadcasting methods in Mobile Ad Hoc Network, 
International Journal of Future Generation Communication and 
Networking , Vol. 2, No. 2, June, 2009. 
[20] S. Hamma, E. Cizeron, H. Issaka, and J.P. Guedon, 2006. 
Performance evaluation of reactive and proactive routing protocol in 
IEEE 802.11 ad hoc network. In: Proceedings of ITCom 06; ITCom 
06 - next generation and sensor networks,2006-10-02.pp. 638709.  
[21] L. Feeney, B. Ahlgren, A. Westerlund, Spontaneous networking: an 
application-oriented 
approach 
to 
ad 
hoc 
networking, 
IEEE 
Communications Magazine (2001). 
[22] T. Kitani, T. Shinkawa, N. Shibata, K. Yasumoto, M. Ito, and T. 
Higashino, “Efficient vanet-based traffic information sharing using 
buses on regular routes,” May 2008, pp. 3031–3036. 
[23] I. Chlamtac, M. Conti, and J.J.-N. Liu, Mobile ad hoc networking: 
imperatives and challenges, SCIENCE@DIRECT, 2003. 
 
 
 
401
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

