Evaluating Transceiver Power Savings Produced by
Connectivity Strategies for Infrastructure Wireless
Mesh Networks
Pragasen Mudali, Murimo B. Mutanga and Matthew O. Adigun
Department of Computer Science
University of Zululand
South Africa
Email: pmudali, madigun@pan.uzulu.ac.za
Ntsibane Ntlatlapa
Meraka Institute
Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research
South Africa
Email: nntlatlapa@csir.co.za
Abstract—Infrastructure Wireless Mesh Networks (I-WMNs)
are increasingly used to bridge the digital divide in rural areas
around the world. Rural African areas in particular require
energy efﬁcient I-WMNs as the nodes comprising the I-WMN
backbone network may be battery-powered in the absence of
reliable power supplies. A key requirement for the proper
functioning of the I-WMN backbone is that network connectivity
be maintained. Two main types of connectivity strategies exist
in the literature and the more practical Critical Number of
Neighbors (CNN) method is focused upon. Three CNN-based
connectivity strategies are evaluated via simulation to determine
their effect on transceiver power savings when applied to the
I-WMN backbone. The evaluation shows that these strategies
are capable of cumulative transceiver power savings (in excess
of 10%) and that the capacity for transceiver power savings
largely corresponds to the position of a node relative to the
(imaginary) network center. However, the evaluated connectivity
strategies were found not to increase the network lifetime due to
the nature of the network topologies created by these strategies.
This particular result is however dependent upon the node energy
model employed and further experiments with differing energy
models are required to conﬁrm this ﬁnding.
Index Terms—wireless mesh networks; connectivity; power
savings; network lifetime; topology control
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) are increasingly used
as both an inexpensive alternative to broadband provisioning
in urban areas and as a primary method for broadband pro-
visioning in rural areas. The most common form of WMN
deployment consists of a two-tier architecture comprising an
access and a backbone network. This type of WMN is com-
monly referred to as an Infrastructure WMN (I-WMN). Client
devices connect to the I-WMN backbone which is typically
self-organizing and self-conﬁguring. These backbone nodes,
comprising Mesh Points (MPs), Mesh Access Points (MAPs)
and Mesh Portals (MPPs), collaborate to maintain network
connectivity and deliver trafﬁc to the intended destinations.
(see Figure 1).
Despite the stationary nature of the I-WMN backbone,
maintaining network connectivity is made difﬁcult by the
transient nature of wireless links, making them unreliable
Fig. 1.
Infrastructure WMN Architecture [12]
when deployed [1], [2], [3]. Network connectivity is tradi-
tionally assured by ensuring that each device in the I-WMN
backbone utilizes its maximum transceiver power. The use of
maximum transceiver power is disadvantageous, resulting in
high levels of interference, increased contention for the shared
transmission medium, a reduction in network capacity and
unnecessary transceiver power consumption.
Conventional wisdom holds that WMNs do not suffer from
power constraints [4], but in the rural African context where
electrical mains power is often unreliable or more often non-
existent, such an assumption is easily disproved. The I-WMN
backbone is often battery- or solar-powered [5] and thus, in
the rural African context, any power savings are welcomed
such that the operational lifetime of the network may be
maximized. Operating a network at maximum transceiver
power output in this scenario is thus an ill-afforded luxury.
The rural African context also constrains I-WMN deployments
(and their associated QoS mechanisms) to those that are as
autonomous as possible due to the lack of technical expertise
in these areas.
As a result of the inefﬁciencies associated with the use
of maximum transceiver power outputs, several studies have
been undertaken to devise strategies for optimal network
215
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

connectivity (where network connectivity is maintained with
minimal transceiver power outputs). These connectivity strate-
gies have demonstrated that they possess the ability to create
interference-efﬁcient network topologies [6], [7] as well as to
provide route redundancy in some cases [8], [9], [10]. These
connectivity strategies have been shown to produce cumulative
transceiver power savings but, to the best of our knowledge,
the effect of these transceiver power savings on the network
lifetime has not been evaluated.
In this paper, various connectivity strategies based on the
Critical Number of Neighbors approach are evaluated via
simulation to determine the relationship between transceiver
power savings and the network lifetime. The selected con-
nectivity strategies have been subjected to an indoor I-WMN
testbed evaluation [11] and the study presented in this paper
attempts to validate the transceiver power output pattern re-
ported in [11].
The evaluation reported in this paper indicates that the
selected connectivity strategies are able to produce cumulative
transceiver power savings. The extent of the power savings
produced by individual backbone nodes is largely dependent
upon the location of the node relative to the (imaginary) center
of the backbone network. The evaluation also suggests that
cumulative transceiver power savings do not automatically
translate into corresponding extensions of network lifetime.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 provides a review of the connectivity present in the litera-
ture. Section 3 details the simulation setup and measurement
methodologies employed in this study whilst Section 4 con-
tains the performance evaluation of the selected connectivity
strategies. Section 5 concludes the paper.
II. CONNECTIVITY STRATEGIES APPLICABLE TO
WIRELESS MESH NETWORKS
Connectivity in the backbone of infrastructure WMNs can
be achieved by using one of three possible approaches. The
ﬁrst approach speciﬁes that each node utilizes its maximum
transceiver power. The second approach determines the mini-
mum transmission range, also dubbed the Critical Transmitting
Range (CTR), required to maintain a connected network and
the transceiver power output for all nodes is adjusted to sustain
this transmission range. The third approach determines the
optimal number of neighbors to be maintained in order to
ensure network connectivity.
The CTR approach results in the homogeneous assignment
of transceiver powers and may not minimize total transceiver
power output. This approach is highly susceptible to the effect
of outlying nodes that force a high common power level
(or equivalently, transmission range) [13]. Using the CTR to
achieve network connectivity may be done in one of three
ways, each with its own disadvantages. The ﬁrst technique
requires that a central node determine the appropriate CTR and
this value is subsequently broadcast throughout the network.
Each node then automatically adjusts its own transceiver power
output. The second technique also requires that the CTR
is determined at a central location but the network nodes
are manually adjusted to maintain this transmission range,
as described in [14]. The third technique requires that all
nodes broadcast their positions and the CTR is subsequently
determined locally at each node, generating high messaging
overheads. Thus, the practicality of the use of the CTR
approach becomes limited when mobile nodes or dynamic
network sizes are taken into account.
An alternative approach is for each backbone node to
maintain an optimal number of one-hop neighbors, also re-
ferred to as the Critical Number of Neighbors (CNN). This
approach may result in heterogeneous transceiver power out-
puts, potentially maximizing transceiver power savings. In
addition, the CNN is less affected by the distribution and
position of network nodes so there is no need to assume
a uniform or homogeneous backbone node distribution or
a GPS-enabled device. Lastly, maintaining connectivity via
a CNN potentially eliminates human intervention (especially
when a proactive routing protocol is employed) which is of
fundamental importance if true autonomous conﬁguration is
to be realized in WMNs.
The CNN approach possesses the advantage of being dis-
tributed in nature and relying on locally-available information.
This approach is also the most likely to lead to autonomous
power and topology control mechanisms that are able to pro-
duce cumulative transceiver power savings whilst maintaining
network connectivity. Thus, the CNN approach forms the basis
for the work reported in this paper.
Prior research has produced CNN values that are both
independent and dependent of the network size (total number
of nodes), which are discussed below.
A. Network-Size-independent CNN
The work in [15] proposed a CNN of 6 which was later
adjusted to 8 in [16]. The work in [17] suggested that the
transmission range be dynamic and adjusted at the beginning
of every transmission and the modelling of the adaptive
transmission strategy resulted in each node having an optimal
CNN of 3. CNN values of 8 and 6 were also proposed in [18].
It must be noted that these constant CNN values were derived
for the optimization of packet forwarding strategies and that
network connectivity was not explicitly considered.
Works that have taken network connectivity into account
have also produced size-independent CNN values. In particular
the work in [19] shows that the CNN converges to 9 as the
network size approaches ∞. This result is shown to hold when
the connectivity requirement is relaxed such that at least 95%
of the nodes ﬁnd themselves in the giant component of the
original network.
B. Network-Size-dependent CNN
Works taking network connectivity into account have also
provided ranges within which the CNN can be found. The
ﬁrst such work was described in [20] which proposed that the
CNN could be found within the range expressed in 1,
2.186 < CNN < 10.588
(1)
216
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Subsequent research has seen a continuous tightening of
the upper- and lower-bounds, ﬁrstly in [21] and subsequently
in [22]. The work done in [22] found that the network is
asymptotically disconnected with probability 1 as n increases
if each node is connected to less than 0.074 log(n) nearest
neighbors and that the network is asymptotically connected
with probability 1 as n increases if each node is connected
to more than 5.1774 log(n) nearest neighbors, where n refers
to the number of network nodes. This result was shown in
[7] to be valid for square deployment regions containing both
sparse and dense ad hoc networks. A further tightening of the
upper-bound derived in [22] was obtained in [10] resulting in
connectivity being assured with high probability if a maximum
of 2.718 log(n) neighbors are maintained (shown in 2),
CNN < α2.718 log(n)
(2)
where any real number α > 1 and n is the number of
nodes in the backbone network and provided that n < 10000.
Experiments conducted in [22] suggest that the critical value
of α may be close to 1. The connectivity bounds were further
improved in [23] for both directed and undirected graphs, but
it has been shown in [24] that the only way to guarantee full
network connectivity in an ad hoc network is to ensure worst-
case connectivity where each node is connected to every other
network node. These size-dependent CNN-based connectivity
strategies, except for the worst-case strategy, have been shown
to create connected networks with increasing probability as
the network size increases to inﬁnity but to the best of
our knowledge, their effectiveness in extending the network
lifetime has not been previously evaluated.
III. SIMULATION SETUP AND MEASUREMENT
METHODOLOGY
Details of the simulation tools and measurement methodol-
ogy employed are presented in this section.
A. Simulation Setup
The Atarraya simulation tool [25] was used to generate
the network topologies used in the simulation. This tool was
chosen for its emphasis on power control simulations and
was modiﬁed to support I-WMNs. Various network sizes,
randing from 20 to 120 nodes were simulated with uniform
node distribution. The simulated network areas were scaled
to ensure a constant node density. The Atarraya simulator
was also modiﬁed to record node positions and the resultant
transceiver power levels assigned by the selected connectivity
strategies.
In order to determine the resultant network lifetimes when
employing the various connectivity strategies, the network
topologies and the resultant transceiver power levels assigned
to individual nodes by the connectivity strategies, were im-
ported into the ns-2 simulation tool [26]. ns-2 (version 2.34)
was found to possess better support for node energy models1
and Application Layer trafﬁc thus allowing for the analysis of
1The default energy model employed in ns-2 is used in this study.
TABLE I
SIMULATION DETAILS
Simulation Time
100 seconds
Network Size
20–120 nodes
Network Area
300m x 300m – 1000m x 1000m
Routing Protocol
OLSR
Trafﬁc type
CBR with 90% of nodes as trafﬁc sources
Trafﬁc rate
4 pkts per second with a max. of 1000 pkts
Max. transceiver range
100m
Initial energy
1.0 Joule
Transmit Energy
0.6W
Receive Energy
0.3W
the QoS achieved by the various connectivity strategies. The
QoS data is, however, not reported in this paper. Additional
simulation details can be found in Table I.
B. Measurement Methodology
Justiﬁcations for the reported experiments are provided in
addition to highlighting how the various evaluation metrics
were recorded.
1) Network Connectivity: This experiment aims to establish
the effectiveness of the connectivity strategies in maintaining
a connected backbone network. Network connectivity was
determined by the number of entries in the routing tables
of each backbone node. The OLSR routing protocol creates
and maintains an entry for each possible destination node
and the presence of an entry signiﬁes that a route to the
destination exists. Network connectivity is assured when all
nodes can potentially communicate with all other network
nodes, ensuring n2 − n possible routes where n refers to the
number of backbone nodes.
2) Transceiver Power Savings: The aim of this experi-
ment is to determine the magnitude of transceiver power
savings produced. Cumulative transceiver power savings are
determined by the difference between the summation of the
maximum power level of each node and the summation of the
assigned power levels of all backbone nodes.
3) Transceiver Power Assignment: This experiment aims
to establish whether a relationship exists between the assigned
power level and a node’s position in the network. The position
of the imaginary network center is determined. Subsequently,
the distance between every backbone node and the network
center is calculated and plotted against the assigned transceiver
power level.
4) Network Lifetime: The aim of this experiment is to
determine whether the transceiver power savings that have
been achieved will result in an extension to the network
lifetime. Network lifetime is deﬁned as the elapsed duration
until the ﬁrst node exhausts its energy supply. The number of
alive nodes is determined and plotted against the simulated
time.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The connectivity strategies deﬁned by (Xue, Kumar) [22],
(Wan, Yi) [10] and Blough [19] have been chosen for eval-
uation. The Xue, Kumar and Wan, Yi strategies exemplify
217
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

TABLE II
NETWORK CONNECTIVITY
Network
Size
Src-Dest
Pairs
(Max. Power)
Src-Dest
Pairs
(Xue, Kumar)
Src-Dest
Pairs
(Wan, Yi)
Src-Dest
Pairs
(Blough)
20
380
380
380
380
40
1560
1560
1543
1560
60
3540
3539
3501
3527
80
6320
6317
6273
6303
100
9900
9898
9847
9882
120
14280
14277
14196
14256
adaptive CNNs whilst the Blough strategy is representative of
a ﬁxed CNN strategy.
A. Network Connectivity
The network is fully connected at max. transceiver power,
where the number of source-destination (src-dest) pairs is
n2 − n. Table II shows that the Xue, Kumar strategy was
best able to maintain network connectivity as there was little
observed difference in the number of available src-dest pairs
for all network sizes. The Xue, Kumar strategy beneﬁts from
maintaining an adaptive CNN that is based on the size of the
backbone network.
The Wan, Yi strategy also maintains an adaptive CNN but
the CNN is approximately half that maintained by the Xue,
Kumar strategy. Thus, the Wan, Yi strategy does not provide
the same degree of connectivity.
The Blough strategy maintains a ﬁxed CNN for a large
range of network sizes. This strategy is able to maintain full
network connectivity for the smaller network sizes, but does
not perform as well as the Xue, Kumar strategy due to a lower
CNN being maintained at the higher network sizes.
B. Transceiver Power Savings
As shown in Figure 2, all 3 connectivity strategies being
evaluated were found to produce cumulative transceiver power
savings. The extent of the transceiver power savings produced
can be found in Table III. Table III shows that the power
savings produced by the adaptive CNN strategies (Wan, Yi
and Xue, Kumar) remained fairly constant as the network
size increased whilst the ﬁxed-CNN Blough strategy produced
increases in power savings. The Wan, Yi strategy produced
the greatest magnitude of transceiver power savings due to
the lower CNN being maintained. The Xue, Kumar strategy
outperformed the Blough strategy at the smaller network sizes
but the reverse began to occur at the largest network size. This
particular phenomenon is explained by the CNNs required
to be maintained by the Xue, Kumar and Blough strategies
respectively. At a network size in the range [20 : 100] the
CNN maintained by the Xue, Kumar strategy is less than that
required by the Blough strategy. At greater network sizes, due
to the ﬁxed nature of the Blough strategy, the adaptive Xue,
Kumar strategy maintains a greater CNN thus increasing the
transmission range assigned to the nodes, thereby limiting the
magnitude of transceiver power savings produced.
TABLE III
PERCENTAGE POWER SAVINGS ACHIEVED
Network Size
Xue, Kumar
Wan, Yi
Blough
20
33.5
48.4
11.7
40
34.3
46.6
17.3
60
35.4
45.7
21.2
80
33.3
46.5
26.1
100
34.3
44.4
33.5
120
34.1
47.9
38.7
Fig. 2.
Cumulative Transceiver Power Output
C. Transceiver Power Assignment
A closer look at the cumulative transceiver power savings
produced by all three connectivity strategies reveals an in-
teresting trend. Figure 3 depicts the relationship between the
transceiver power levels assigned to individual nodes and the
distance of these nodes from the (imaginary) network center.
The evaluation has found that the nodes closes to the net-
work center produced signiﬁcantly greater transceiver power
savings than nodes at the network edge. This phenomenon
was observed for all the connectivity strategies and across all
the network sizes under evaluation. Edge nodes suffer from
situations where fewer candidate neighbors exist and these
neighbors are not evenly distributed within the the node’s
transmission range but are rather loosely concentrated in a
particular direction.
The correlation between the node position relative to the
network center and the resultant transceiver power output is
not exclusive to uniformly distributed nodes. This phenomenon
has been previously observed in a clustered environment [27]
as well as in a WMN testbed with arbitrary node distribution
[11].
D. Network Lifetime
Figure 4 depicts the impact of the selected connectivity
strategies on the network lifetime of a 120-node network and
it can be seen that the application of the connectivity strategies
does not result in extensions to the network lifetime. All three
connectivity strategies result in the ﬁrst node failing before the
corresponding ﬁrst node failure in the Max. Power scenario.
The reduction in network lifetime attributed to the three
connectivity strategies can be explained by the effect that
218
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

(a) 20 node network
(b) 40 node network
(c) 60 node network
(d) 80 node network
(e) 100 node network
(f) 120 node network
Fig. 3.
Transceiver Power Output vs. Distance from Network Center
the reduction in node transceiver powers has on the resultant
path lengths between source and destination nodes. Lower
transceiver powers require data to traverse more hops to reach
the intended destination. Energy is spent, at each intermediate
node (hop), during packet reception and re-transmission thus
negating the effect of transceiver power savings. In particular,
nodes that still maintain maximum transceiver power outputs
undertake greater packet forwarding responsibilities, thus de-
pleting their energy sources at faster rates than before.
The three connectivity strategies do however lengthen the
duration until the last node depletes its energy supply. This
situation occurs since nodes with lower transceiver powers are
overlooked as intermediaries for packet forwarding if nodes
with higher transceiver powers are available and the nodes
with lower transceiver powers conserve their energy sources
for longer durations thus realizing lifetime extension gains.
The Wan, Yi strategy produces the greatest number of alive
nodes at the end of the simulated time due to the smallest CNN
being maintained whilst the Xue, Kumar strategy produced
the least number of alive nodes due to its maintenance of the
highest CNN.
It must however be noted that the reduction in network
lifetime caused by the evaluated connectivity strategies is not
yet determined to be a universal consequence of the application
Fig. 4.
Network Lifetime Achieved by the Connectivity Strategies
of these strategies as several factors prove inﬂuential. Network
lifetime is highly dependent upon, amongst others:
• the resultant transceiver power assignment which is dic-
tated by the network connectivity strategy being em-
ployed
• the energy consumption model being used
• the routing protocol and routing metric being utilized
• the prevalent trafﬁc conditions
V. CONCLUSION
I-WMN deployments are being employed to bridge the
digital divide in rural areas around the world. The rural
African context requires energy-efﬁcient I-WMNs since it is
highly likely that the nodes comprising these networks will be
battery-powered.
The key requirement for the I-WMN backbone is the
maintenance of network connectivity and several connectivity
strategies exist in the literature. In this paper, three CNN-based
connectivity strategies have been evaluated via simulation to
determine their ability to produce transceiver power savings.
The evaluation has indicated that cumulative transceiver
power savings in excess of 10% can be attained and that the
ability of a node to produce these transceiver power savings
is dependent upon the position of the node relative to the
(imaginary) center of the network. Despite the achievement
of cumulative transceiver power savings, corresponding exten-
sions of network lifetime were not achieved. On the contrary,
decreases in network lifetime were recorded due to the over-
burdening of nodes that maintained the use of the maximum
transceiver power and the longer path lengths that are a side-
effect of transceiver power reductions.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Allen, A. Martin, and A. Rangarajan, “Designing and Deploying a
rural ad hoc community Mesh Network Testbed,” Proc. IEEE Conference
on Local Computer Networks, Nov. 2005, pp. 740–743.
[2] H. Lundgren, K. Ramachandran, E. Belding-Royer, K. Almeroth,
M. Benny, A. Hewatt, A. Touma, and A. Jardosh, “Experiences from
the Design, Deployment and Usage of the ucsb meshnet Testbed,” IEEE
Wireless Communications, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 18–29, 2006.
219
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

[3] J. Camp, J. Robinson, C. Steger, and E. Knightly, “Measurement Driven
Deployment of a Two-Tier Urban Mesh Access Network,” Proc. 4th
International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications and Services,
Jun. 2006, pp. 96–109.
[4] I. F. Akyildiz and X. Wang, “Wireless Mesh Networks,” Wiley: Chicester,
2009.
[5] F. O. Aron, T. O. Olwal, A. Kurien, and M. O. Odhiambo, “Energy
Efﬁcient Topology Control Algorithm for Wireless Mesh Networks,”Proc.
International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Confer-
ence, Aug. 2008, pp. 135–140.
[6] P. Gupta and P. R. Kumar, “Critical Power for Asymptotic Connectivity,”
Proc. IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, Dec. 1998, pp. 1106–
1110.
[7] P. Santi and D. M. Blough, “The Critical Transmitting Range for
Connectivity in Sparse Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Transactions
on Mobile Computing, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 25–39, 2003.
[8] M. D. Penrose, “On k-connectivity for a Geometric Random Graph,”
Random Structures and Algorithms, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 145–164, 1999.
[9] C. Bettstetter, “On the Minimum Node Degree and Connectivity of a
Wireless Multihop Network,” Proc. ACM International Symposium on
Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing, 2002, pp. 80–91.
[10] P. Wan and C. Yi, “Asymptotic critical Transmission Radius and critical
Neighbor Number for k-connectivity in wireless ad hoc networks,” Proc.
ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and
Computing, May 2004, pp. 1–8.
[11] P. Mudali, T. C. Nyandeni, N. Ntlatlapa, and M. O. Adigun,
“A Test-Bed Evaluation of Connectivity Strategies for Infrastructure
Wireless Mesh Networks,” Proc. Southern African Telecommunica-
tions and Network Applications Conference, Sep. 2010. Available at:
http://www.satnac.org.za/proceedings/2010/engineering.htm
[12] X. Wang and A. O. Lim, “IEEE 802.11s Wireless Mesh Networks:
Frameworks and Challenges,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 970–
984, 2008.
[13] V. Kawadia and P. R. Kumar, “Principles and Protocols for Power
Control in wireless ad hoc networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 76–88, 2005.
[14] P. Valera, P. W. Q. Lee, Y. F. Wong, W. K. G. Seah, H. P. Tan, and H. Ju,
“An experimental study on Connectivity and Topology Control in Real
Multi-hop Networks,” Proc. International Wireless Internet Conference,
Nov. 2008, pp. 1:1–1:8.
[15] L. Kleinrock and J. Silvester, “Optimum transmission radii for packet
radio networks or why six is a magic number,” Proc. National Telecom-
munications Conference, Dec. 1978, pp. 4.3.1–4.3.5.
[16] H. Takagi and L. Kleinrock, “Optimal Transmission Ranges for Ran-
domly Distributed Packet Radio Terminals,” IEEE Transactions on Com-
munications, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 246–257, 1984.
[17] B. Hajek, “Adaptive Transmission Strategies and Routing in Mobile
Radio Networks,” Proc. Seventeenth Annual Conference on Information
Sciences and Systems, Mar. 1983, pp. 373–378.
[18] T. Hou and V. O. K. Li, “Transmission Range control in Multihop Packet
Radio Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 34, no. 1,
pp. 38–44, 1986.
[19] D. Blough, M. Leoncini, G. Resta, and P. Santi, “The k-neighbors
Approach to Physical Degree Bounded and Symmetric Topology Control
in ad hoc networks, ” Instituto di Informatica e Telematica, Pisa, Technical
Report IIT-TR-142003, 2003.
[20] P. Hall, “On continuum percolation,” The Annals of Probability, vol. 13,
no. 4, pp. 1250–1266, 1985.
[21] T. Philips, S. Panwar, and A. Tantawi, “Connectivity properties of a
packet radio network model,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 770–777, 1989.
[22] F. Xue and P. Kumar, “The Number of Neighbors Needed for Con-
nectivity of Wireless Networks,” Wireless Networks, vol. 10, no. 2, pp.
169–181, 2004.
[23] P. Balister, B. Bollobas, A. Sarkar, and M. Walters, “Connectivity of
random k-nearest-neighbour graphs,” Advances in Applied Probability,
vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 1–24, 2005.
[24] P. Santi, “Topology Control in Wireless Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks,”
Wiley: Chichester, 2005.
[25] M. A. Labrador and P. M. Wightman, “Topology Control in Wireless
Sensor Networks: With a Companion Simulation Tool for Teaching and
Research,” Springer, 2009.
[26] Network Simulator - ns-2, Available at: http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/ //
Last accessed: 13 Feb. 2011.
[27] P. Mudali, N. Ntlatlapa, and M. O. Adigun, “Evaluating Transceiver
Power Savings Produced by Topology Control in Rural Wireless Mesh
Networks,” Proc. World Wireless Research Forum 25, Nov. 2010.
220
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

