A Protoyping Platform for
Spectrum Sensing in China
Christian Kocks1, Alexander Viessmann2, Peter Jung3
Department of Communication Technologies
University of Duisburg-Essen
47057 Duisburg, Germany
1christian.kocks@kommunikationstechnik.org
2alexander.viessmann@kommunikationstechnik.org
3peter.jung@kommunikationstechnik.org
Lei Chen
Communication Technology Research Dept.
Huawei Tech. Co., Ltd.
hwchenlei@huawei.com
Abstract—Due to the increasing demand on wireless commu-
nications the idea of cognitive radio is of utmost interest. The
TV white space may become the ﬁrst commercial application
of cognitive radio resulting from its advantageous propagation
properties. It allows the usage of secondary communication sys-
tems at non-occupied frequency bands. Within this manuscript, a
prototyping platform for cognitive radio applications is presented.
Its underlying architecture is based on a combination of DSP
and FPGA and relies on the software-deﬁned radio paradigm.
Spectrum sensing algorithms are introduced for the three pre-
dominant Chinese TV standards DTMB, CMMB and PAL-D/K.
Finally, the algorithms’ performance is shown in a comparison
to simulation results. The focus of this manuscript is on a TV
white space prototyping platform and the validation of spectrum
sensing algorithms for the Chinese TV standards DTMB, CMMB
and PAL-D/K.
Keywords—CMMB; Cognitive Radio; DTMB; Prototyping
Platform; PAL-D/K; TV White Space
I. INTRODUCTION
In the recent decade, an increasing interest in the ﬁeld
of cognitive radio (CR) for wireless communication systems
could be discovered. It is considered as a key technology for
signiﬁcantly alleviating the spectrum scarcity. One application
for the CR technology is the TV white space (TVWS). It
refers to non-occupied frequency bands in the TV spectrum,
i.e., below 900 MHz, and is a desirable target for CR-
based spectrum sharing due to its advantageous propagation
properties compared to other frequency ranges on the one hand
and due to its low utilization ratio on the other hand [1]. Hence,
CR in TVWS will probably become the ﬁrst commercial
application that brings CR from concept to reality. In the
United States, the FCC has already made an ofﬁcial request
to allow unlicensed users reusing TV bands without causing
interference to incumbent users [2]. In other countries, the
corresponding regulatory authorities such as the CEPT in the
European Union are developing regulations on the unlicensed
usage in TVWS as well. Besides the regulatory authorities,
standardization organizations such as IEEE 802.22 [3] have
started the standardization for cognitive radio applications.
The spectrum sensing technology has been considered as
a key element of CR and its application to TVWS has
been widely studied. However, a variety of different TV
standards exists, which may differ from country to country,
especially for digital TV standards. While in North America
ATSC (Advanced Television Systems Committee) is deployed,
in Europe, South Asia and Africa, DVB-T/H (Digital Video
Broadcasting - Terrestrial/Handheld) plays the predominant
role. Further standards such as ISDB (Integrated Services
Digital Broadcasting) developed in Japan or DMB (Digital
Multimedia Broadcasting) developed in Korea are also used
in various countries [4]. As a result, it is hardly feasible to
design a universal sensing algorithm for all TV standards.
This manuscript focuses on spectrum sensing for Chinese TV
standards.
There are mainly three terrestrial and handheld TV stan-
dards in China: DTMB (Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broad-
cast) [5] for terrestrial reception, CMMB (China Mobile
Multimedia Broadcasting) [6] for handheld reception and PAL-
D/K (Phase Alternating Line) [7] for analog TV. While other
countries such as the USA have already stopped the provision
of analog TV, the nationwide switchover from analog to digital
TV will not occur until the year 2015. Therefore, the analog
TV will still coexist with the digital TV for many years to
come. As a result, the detection of both analog and digital
signals is necessary for CR implementations.
The United States are the ﬁrst and also most active country
in exploiting the unlicensed usage of TVWS. The spectrum
sensing technology for ATSC signals has been intensively
studied. Several detection algorithms for ATSC and its analog
predecessor NTSC (National Television System Committee)
can be found in IEEE 802.22 standard [8]. In 2008, a sensing
prototype test campaign was organized by FCC [9]. As an
example, Motorola, Philips and I2R have submitted their pro-
totype designs, which have been tested both in the laboratory
as well as in the ﬁeld. The results showed that the ATSC
and NTSC signals can be detected correctly with a certain
probability. As another widely used TV standard, DVB-T
has also been intensively studied with respect to spectrum
sensing. In [10], a robust sensing approach is discussed using
a prototype sensor developed by Philips. Several detection
algorithms for a Chinese standard, i.e., DTMB, have also
421
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

RF Front End 
Daughter Card 
C6455 DSK 
ADC 
AD6655 
IF Diversity 
Receiver 
ADC 
AD6655 
IF Diversity 
Receiver 
FPGA 
Xilinx XC3S400 
Spartan-3 
FPGA 
Xilinx XC3S400 
Spartan-3 
DSP 
TI TMS320C6455 
1.2 GHz 
DSP 
TI TMS320C6455 
1.2 GHz 
EMIF 
EMIF 
TV Tuner 
TV Tuner 
Fig. 1.
Platform Overview for Spectrum Sensing Applications
been studied and published [11], [12]. The focus of this
manuscript is on a prototyping platform developed by the
authors and deployed for the implementation of spectrum
sensing algorithms for the TVWS in China. The prototyping
platform is based on the software-deﬁned radio paradigm [13]
allowing a reconﬁguration of the platform by software. Besides
the prototyping platform, spectrum sensing algorithms for
DTMB, CMMB and PAL-D/K are illustrated including their
measured performance in comparison with simulation results.
This manuscript is structured as follows. In Section II, the
prototyping platform is presented, while, in Section III, the
signal ﬂow for the spectrum sensing operation is addressed.
Section IV gives an overview of the Chinese TV standards
DTMB, CMMB and PAL-D/K. The corresponding sensing
algorithms, which are implemented on the prototyping plat-
form, are presented in Section V. Section VI shows selected
results in a comparison between the simulated algorithms’ per-
formance and the performance measured with the prototyping
platform. Finally, a conclusion is given.
II. SPECTRUM SENSING PROTOTYPING PLATFORM
For the implementation of cognitive radios, an elaborated
prototyping platform is essential. Already during the concept
phase of this prototyping platform, modularity has been a
crucial design constraint. Hence, the platform is designed in a
way that certain parts can easily be replaced by more appropri-
ate parts depending on the system to be implemented and its
underlying requirements. The platform mainly consists of three
printed circuit boards as illustrated in Figure 1. The base board
is a DSP starter kit hosting a powerful DSP TMS320C6455 by
Texas Instruments running at 1.2 GHz. This DSP is responsible
for major parts of the signal processing algorithms on the one
hand and for the overall platform scheduling on the other hand.
Since higher-level programming languages such as C/C++ can
be used for implementing signal processing algorithms, this
DSP-based platform is ideally suited for rapid prototyping.
Algorithms, which have been studied in a simulation environ-
ment before, can easily be implemented to run on the DSP.
Furthermore, the advanced debugging capabilities of this DSP
simpliﬁes locating implementation errors.
Directly attached to the DSP is the mixed-signal daughter
card. While in Figure 1 the core components required for the
spectrum sensing operation are illustrated only, Figure 2 shows
a more detailed block diagram of this daughter card. The
daughter card can, besides the implementation presented here,
also be used as a full communication transceiver. It consists
Clock 
Distribution 
Network 
Clock 
Distribution 
Network 
RX 
RX 
TX 
TX 
External Memory Interface 
of TI C6455 DSP 
External Memory Interface 
of TI C6455 DSP 
FPGA 
Xilinx XC3S400 
FPGA 
Xilinx XC3S400 
ADC 
AD6655 
ADC 
AD6655 
DAC 
AD9957 
DAC 
AD9957 
Connector 
for RF front-end 
Connector 
for RF front-end 
Connector 
for RF front-end 
Connector 
for RF front-end 
FPGA 
Xilinx XC3S400 
FPGA 
Xilinx XC3S400 
JTAG interface 
JTAG interface 
USB 
FTDI 245RL 
USB 
FTDI 245RL 
Fig. 2.
Prototyping Platform: Block Diagram of the Mixed-Signal Daughter
Card
of an Analog Devices AD6655 analog-to-digital converter
(ADC) as well as of an Analog Devices AD9957 digital-to-
analog converter (DAC). Both devices are supplied from an
elaborate clock distribution network, which guarantees highly
stable clocks for the overall platform. Since the focus of this
manuscript is on the spectrum sensing implementation, in the
following only the receiver branch of this daughter card is
considered. The digitized signal coming from the ADC is
directly given to a Xilinx Spartan-3 FPGA for performing
further ﬁltering and decimation operations. Furthermore, the
FPGA is used for synchronizing the spectrum sensing events.
The synchronization information originates from a Huawei
LTE eNodeB. After some fundamental signal processing steps,
the data is buffered within the FPGA and transferred to the
DSP using the Texas Instrument EMIF (External Memory
Interface). To reduce the overall load of the DSP, this transfer
makes use of direct memory access (DMA).
The analog input signal of the ADC originates from an
RF front-end directly attached to the mixed-signal daughter
card. In case of the spectrum sensing prototyping platform, the
RF front-end mainly consists of a commercially available TV
tuner receiving the RF signal by an appropriate antenna and
down-converting it to an intermediate frequency (IF) signal,
which is then sampled by the ADC.
A photography of the spectrum sensing prototyping plat-
form is given in Figure 3. It shows the three aforementioned
modules with the RF front-end at the top and the DSK at
the bottom. In between, the PCB of the daughter card is
located. Additionally, a separate PCB is located on the right-
hand side for debugging purposes and for interfacing with the
synchronization entity.
422
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

III. PROTOTYPING PLATFORM SIGNAL FLOW
This section describes the signal ﬂow for the spectrum
sensing operation. The focus is on the digital baseband signal,
which is buffered in the DSP. An overview of the signal
ﬂow gives Figure 4. Before the sensing operation starts,
its parameters such as sensing interval, target false-alarm
probability and TV standards to be sensed for are deﬁned by an
external spectrum management entity. Within the prototyping
platform itself, a control unit is responsible for evaluating
and distributing the parameters of interest. There are different
operation modes depending on the a-priori knowledge about
the underlying TV usage. In case the frequency band of
interest may only be used by one TV standard, this infor-
mation is communicated to the control unit so that only the
corresponding detection algorithm is carried out. Otherwise, in
case this frequency band may be used by all of the available
TV standards, the control unit passes the captured data ﬁrst
to the DTMB detector followed by the CMMB detector and,
ﬁnally, the PAL-D/K detector. The soft-decision outputs of all
detectors are then processed by a combination metric to give an
overall information about the presence of any of these signals.
A graphical user interface (GUI) exists, which allows a simple
conﬁguration of the sensing parameters and an immediate
demonstration of the sensing results.
IV. CHINESE TV STANDARDS
The intention of this section is to give a brief overview of
the various Chinese TV standards. The focus is on the main
aspects, which are relevant for feature-based signal detection.
For a full description of the TV systems, please refer to [5],
[6] and [7], respectively.
A. DTMB
DTMB, also referred to as DMB-T (Digital Multimedia
Broadcast - Terrestrial), is a mandatory TV standard in China.
DTMB can be used in either single-carrier or in multi-carrier
mode. Three FEC (Forward Error Correction) code rates, ﬁve
modulation orders and two interleaving depths are speciﬁed
for DTMB [5]. A block diagram of a DTMB transmitter is
shown in Figure 5.
DTMB deﬁnes three different header types with different
lengths. The frame body itself has a ﬁxed length of 500 µs.
The frame structure of DTMB including the different header
types is illustrated in Figure 6. The frames are hierarchically
Fig. 3.
Photography of the Prototyping Platform
data buffer
DTMB detector
CMMB detector
PAL-D/K detector
Soft-decision 
metric
from 
FPGA
Control unit
Fig. 4.
DSP Signal Flow
Scrambler 
Scrambler 
FEC Code 
FEC Code 
Interleaver & 
Constellation 
mapping 
Interleaver & 
Constellation 
mapping 
System 
Information 
System 
Information 
Frame body data 
processing 
Frame body data 
processing 
Baseband post-
processing (SRRC filter) 
Baseband post-
processing (SRRC filter) 
Up converter 
Up converter 
MUX 
MUX 
Frame construction 
Frame construction 
Frame header 
Frame header 
Transport Stream 
RF Signal 
Fig. 5.
DTMB Transmitter [5]
structured in a calendar day frame, a minute frame and a super
frame. One superframe consists of either 225 frames with
frame header mode 1 or of 216 frames with frame header
mode 2 or of 200 frames with frame header mode 3.
The three frame headers are generated by different generator
polynomials [5], which are:
G1(x) = 1 + x + x5 + x6 + x8
(1)
for mode 1,
G2(x) = 1 + x3 + x10
(2)
0 0 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
1439 
1439 
0 0 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
479 
479 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
. . . . . . 
Calendar day frame, 24 hours 
Minute frame, 1 minute 
Super frame, 125 ms 
00:00:00 AM 
24:00:00 AM 
First frame 
Frame header:  
420 symbols, 55.56μs 
Frame header:  
420 symbols, 55.56μs 
Frame body: 3780 symbols, 500μs 
Frame body: 3780 symbols, 500μs 
Frame header:  
595 symbols, 78.703μs 
Frame header:  
595 symbols, 78.703μs 
Frame body: 3780 symbols, 500μs 
Frame body: 3780 symbols, 500μs 
Frame header:  
945 symbols, 125μs 
Frame header:  
945 symbols, 125μs 
Frame body: 3780 symbols, 500μs 
Frame body: 3780 symbols, 500μs 
Mode 1 
Mode 2 
Mode 3 
Fig. 6.
DTMB Frame Structure [5]
423
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

T0 +T1  
TGI 
T0 +T1  
Fig. 7.
CMMB Symbol Overlapping
for mode 2 and
G3(x) = 1 + x2 + x7 + x8 + x9
(3)
for mode 3. The generation of the sequence can be realized
by a linear feedback shift register.
B. CMMB
CMMB is a system fully based on the well-known OFDM
(Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing). A combina-
tion of Reed-Solomon (RS) and Low-Density Parity-Check
(LDPC) codes is used for FEC. Unlike many other OFDM
systems such as DVB-T [14], the OFDM symbol of length
T0 in time-domain is not only extended by inserting a cyclic
preﬁx (length T1) but it is also extended by a pre-guard interval
and a post-guard interval of length TGI each. As illustrated in
Figure 7, the post-guard interval of a certain OFDM symbol in
CMMB overlaps with the pre-guard interval of the subsequent
symbol [6].
In CMMB, one frame has a duration of 1 s and consists of 40
time slots. Each time slot contains one beacon and 53 OFDM
symbols. The beacon contains a transmitter identiﬁcation ﬁeld
and two synchronization signals. The OFDM symbols consist
of data-bearing subcarriers as well as of pilot subcarriers.
These pilot subcarriers are subdivided into continual pilots and
scattered pilots [6].
C. PAL-D/K
A variety of different PAL-based standards exist, which
mainly differ in the channel bandwidth or in the underlying
modulation scheme. The PAL standard used in China is
called PAL-D/K with 8 MHz channel bandwidth, 50 Hz ﬁeld
frequency and 625 lines per frame [7]. A PAL signal consists
of separate video and audio parts. Within this manuscript,
only the bandwidth occupied by the video part is subject
to spectrum sensing. The video signal used in PAL is a
CVBS (Color Video, Blanking and Sync) signal, which is
an extension to the monochrome VBS (Video, Blanking and
Sync) signal. A snapshot of a standard VBS signal is depicted
in Figure 8. In addition to the video signal itself, the VBS
signal has some additional components, which are required,
e.g., for synchronization at the receiver. The black-level signal
components after and before the video signal are referred to
as front porch and back porch, respectively. The time values
shown in Figure 8 are compliant to the PAL-D/K standard. The
total duration of one line is 64 µs resulting in a line frequency
of 15625 Hz [7].
V. SPECTRUM SENSING ALGORITHMS
After the brief introduction to the various Chinese TV
standards, this section describes the spectrum sensing algo-
rithms. All algorithms have in common that they are based
on autocorrelation of the digital baseband signal. In general,
the autocorrelation function ϕss(t) of a complex signal s(t)
is deﬁned as
ϕss(τ) =
Z ∞
−∞
s∗(t)s(t + τ)dt
(4)
where (·)∗ denotes the complex conjugation.
A. DTMB
In DTMB, the frame header appears periodically at the
beginning of each frame, which can be exploited for the
sensing operation. The presented autocorrelation-based sens-
ing algorithm for DTMB can be divided into three stages:
• autocorrelation stage
• comb-correlation stage
• decision stage
A ﬂow diagram of the algorithm is shown in Figure 9. For
the autocorrelation the digitized baseband signal is multiplied
with a delayed and complex conjugated version of the signal
where the delay itself depends on the frame header mode.
The running average ﬁlter cumulates a certain number of the
multiplication output samples. Resulting from the periodical
appearance of the frame header, the ﬁrst stage’s output is
applied to a comb correlator, which is a correlation with a
Dirac comb g(t) with a distance ∆t corresponding to the frame
header period, i.e.,
g(t) =
∞
X
k=−∞
δ(t − k · ∆t).
(5)
This stage allows collecting the energy of all frames within
the sensing period. The squared magnitude of the cumulated
comb-correlation output ϕcc is given to the decision stage. In
this stage, the ratio λ of the maximum and the average of the
white 
black 
70% 
30% 
4,7µs 
TH=64µs 
back porch 
video signal (V) 
horizontal blanking (B) 
front porch 
12µs 
synchronization signal (S) 
1,2µs 
Fig. 8.
VBS Signal
424
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Fig. 9.
Flow Diagram of the DTMB Sensing Algorithm
previous stage’s output is calculated:
λ = max (ϕcc(t))
ϕcc(t)
.
(6)
By applying a soft-decision metric to λ, a measure for the
probability of the presence of a DTMB signal is generated.
Furthermore, comparing the ratio with a threshold Γ gives
a hard-decision on the presence of a DTMB signal. This
threshold is generated by using a threshold metric based on
the available sensing interval tsense and the desired false-alarm
probability Pfa.
By using the ratio λ for making the decision about the
presence of a DTMB signal, the presented algorithm is robust
against dynamic range variations as well as varying signal-
to-noise ratios and, thus, independent of the underlying AGC
(Automatic Gain Control) implementation.
B. CMMB
The sensing algorithm for CMMB is very similar to the
sensing algorithm for DTMB. As shown in Section IV, CMMB
uses a cyclic repetition of certain parts of the OFDM symbol,
denoted as cyclic preﬁx. Since this cyclic preﬁx equals the last
part of the corresponding OFDM symbol, it is well suited for
the sensing operation. The general data ﬂow of the algorithm
is identical to the DTMB algorithm depicted in Figure 9.
However, the timings must be adapted according to the CMMB
parameters.
C. PAL-D/K
The sensing algorithm for PAL-D/K relies on the periodicity
of certain parts of the CVBS signal as depicted in Figure 8.
The CVBS signal exhibits a periodic pattern of the synchro-
nization pulses in every transmitted line of the resulting TV
picture. In addition to the synchronization pulses itself with a
length of thsync = 4.7 µs the front as well as the back porch
with lengths of tfp = 1.2 µs and tbp = 6.1 µs, respectively,
can be used for sensing purposes. The time between two
consecutive synchronization pulses is tH = 64 µs. A ﬂow
diagram of the PAL-D/K sensing algorithm is depicted in
Figure 10 and consists of two stages:
• Autocorrelation stage
• Decision stage
While the delay in the autocorrelation corresponds to the
periodicity of the CVBS signal, the length of the running
average ﬁlter is set to tH as well. This improves the sensing
performance by exploiting similarities in the video signal for
consecutive lines. In the decision stage, the average of the
output of the autocorrelation stage is calculated. The residual
parts of the decision stage are identical to the corresponding
parts in the decision stages for DTMB and CMMB signals.
VI. RESULTS
To show the overall performance of the previously intro-
duced algorithms, a comparison between the simulation results
and the results measured with the prototyping platform is
given. The TV signals are generated by a Rohde & Schwarz
signal generator. The signals are sent to the prototyping
platform for detection. Additionally, the actual signal power
is measured using a Rohde & Schwarz power meter. The
parameters used for the simulations as well as for the mea-
surements are as follows: The bandwidth used for all TV
Fig. 10.
Flow Diagram of the PAL-D/K Sensing Algorithm
425
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

standards is 8 MHz and the sensing interval tsense is set
to 20 ms. The target false-alarm probabilities are 10% and
0.1%, while the target detection probability is 90%. For the
simulations, a noise ﬁgure of 8 dB is considered. Figure 11
shows the detection probability Pd versus the received signal
power prx. The considered DTMB signal uses frame header
mode 1. The blue curves show the simulation results for a
false-alarm probability of 10% and 0.1%, respectively. The red
curves show the corresponding measurement results. For the
target detection probability of 90%, the measurement results
are 3 dB to 4 dB worse than the simulation results. Thus, with
the given algorithms, a sensitivity of approximately −110 dBm
and −108.5 dBm can be reached in the presented hardware
setup. There are several reasons that could result in such
degradations. The simulations assume a perfect AGC while
in the real system the maximum gain is limited by the tuner
module leading to an increased quantization noise in case of
very low signal powers at the input of the tuner. The TV tuner
shows highly unstable behavior in terms of amplitude and
phase when the input signal is very weak. Such a property
results from the fact that the tuner is designed for receiving
TV signals at signiﬁcantly higher power levels. The required
sensing sensitivity is much higher than the TV receiver sensi-
tivity. This causes unexpected distortion when the signal level
is below the target receiver sensitivity. This aspect is also the
reason why autocorrelation algorithms are favorable compared
to cross-correlation algorithms. Cross-correlation algorithms
suffer more seriously from such distortions of the tuner,
leading maximally to the same overall performance as the
autocorrelation algorithms although in simulations such cross-
correlation algorithms perform better than their autocorrela-
tion counterparts. However, the computational complexity of
cross-correlation implementations is much higher and, hence,
autocorrelation algorithms are preferred.
Further reasons for the difference between the simulated and
measured sensing results are effects such as frequency offsets
and ampliﬁer non-linearities in the RF stage, which cannot
−118
−116
−114
−112
−110
−108
−106
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
prx / dBm
Pd
 
 
Pfa=0.1 (Sim.)
Pfa=0.1 (Meas.)
Pfa=0.001 (Sim.)
Pfa=0.001 (Meas.)
Fig. 11.
Simulation and Measurement Results for DTMB
−116
−114
−112
−110
−108
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
prx / dBm
Pd
 
 
Pfa=0.1 (Sim.)
Pfa=0.1 (Meas.)
Pfa=0.001 (Sim.)
Pfa=0.001 (Meas.)
Fig. 12.
Simulation and Measurement Results for CMMB
be avoided in hardware implementations and may lead to
signiﬁcant performance degradations. However, these effects
have not been considered in the simulations.
The simulation and measurement results for the TV standard
CMMB are plotted in Figure 12. Again, a degradation of
the measurement performance of almost 3 dB compared to
the simulation performance can be identiﬁed. With the imple-
mented algorithms, a sensitivity of −111 dBm (Pfa = 10%)
and −109.5 dBm (Pfa = 0.1%), respectively, can be reached
for the given target detection probability.
In case of PAL-D/K, the measured performance is much
worse than the simulated performance as shown in Figure 13.
For PAL-D/K, further signal processing steps are necessary
to extract the CVBS signal from the received PAL signal.
These signal processing steps need to be carried out before the
sensing operation. However, they are implemented in a way
to minimize the processing latency rather than for utilizing
the dynamic range most efﬁciently. This leads to a signiﬁcant
−130
−125
−120
−115
−110
−105
−100
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
prx / dBm
Pd
 
 
Pfa=0.1 (Sim.)
Pfa=0.1 (Meas.)
Pfa=0.001 (Sim.)
Pfa=0.001 (Meas.)
Fig. 13.
Simulation and Measurement Results for PAL-D/K
426
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

performance degradation in comparison to the simulation
results, which are based on ﬂoating-point calculations without
any constraints regarding the dynamic range. The sensitivity
for PAL-D/K is approximately −102 dBm.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this manuscript, a prototyping platform for spectrum
sensing was presented and its underlying architecture was
illustrated. Furthermore, an application of cognitive radio for
TV white space in China was addressed. Therefore, spectrum
sensing algorithms for the three predominant TV standards in
China, namely DTMB, CMMB and PAL-D/K, were presented.
Those sensing algorithms have been validated on a prototyping
platform. The prototyping platform itself as well as the under-
lying signal ﬂow were highlighted. It was shown that a signal
detection even at very low input levels is possible with that
platform. For a false-alarm probability of 10% and a detection
probability of 90%, a sensitivity of −110 dBm can be achieved
for DTMB. For CMMB and for PAL-D/K, −111 dBm and
−102 dBm, respectively, can be achieved.
REFERENCES
[1] J. van de Beek, J. Riihijarvi, A. Achtzehn, and P. Mahonen, “UHF White
Space in Europe - A Quantitative Study into the Potential of the 470-
790 MHz Band,” in IEEE Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic
Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN), May 2011, pp. 1–9.
[2] FCC, “Report 10-174: In the Matter of Unlicensed Operation in the TV
Broadcast Bands, Additional Spectrum for Unlicensed Devices Below
900 MHz and in the 3 GHz Band - Second Memorandum Opinion and
Order,” Adopted: 23 September 2010.
[3] IEEE, “IEEE 802.22 Working Group on Wireless Regional Area
Networks.” [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/22
[4] W. Fischer, Digital Video and Audio Broadcasting Technology: A Prac-
tical Engineering Guide, 3rd ed.
Springer Publishing Company, Inc.,
2010.
[5] Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Televi-
sion Terrestrial Broadcasting System, Std. GB 20 600-2006, 18 August
2006.
[6] GY/T 220.1-2006: Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting Part 1 - Frame
Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Broadcasting Channel,
SARFT - The State Administration of Radio, Film and Television Std.
GY/T 220.1-2006, 2006.
[7] Characteristics of PAL-D Television Broadcasting System, Std. GB 3174-
1995, Adopted: 2 December 1995.
[8] Standard for Cognitive Wireless Regional Area Networks (RAN) for
Operation in TV Band, IEEE Std. 802.22, July 2011.
[9] FCC, “Evaluation of the Performance of Prototype TV-Band White
Space Devices Phase II,” 15 October 2008.
[10] V. Gaddam and M. Ghosh, “Robust Sensing of DVB-T Signals,” in IEEE
Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum, Apr. 2010, pp. 1–8.
[11] A. Xu, Q. Shi, Z. Yang, K. Peng, and J. Song, “Spectrum Sensing for
DTMB System Based on PN Cross-Correlation,” in IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), May 2010, pp. 1–5.
[12] L. Wenqi, X. Ning, G. Lijun, Z. Yingxin, and W. Hong, “Spectrum
Sensing Methods for DTMB Based Cognitive Radio Systems,” in
1st International Conference on Information Science and Engineering
(ICISE), Dec. 2009, pp. 2730–2733.
[13] J. Mitola, D. Chester, S. Haruyama, T. Turletti, and W. Tuttlebee,
“Globalization of Software Radio,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 82–83, Feb. 1999.
[14] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): Framing Structure, Channel Coding
and Modulation for Digital Terrestrial Television (DVB-T), ETSI Std.
EN 300 744 V1.6.1, January 2009.
427
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

