A Channel-Aware Uplink Scheduling Algorithm for Mobile WiMAX Networks 
 
Nada M. El-Shennawy 
Computers and Automatic Control Dept. 
Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University 
Tanta, Egypt 
Nada_elshennawy@f-eng.tanta.edu.eg 
 
Mohamed N. El-Derini 
Computer & Systems Engineering Dept. 
Alexandria University 
Alexandria, Egypt 
nazih.elderini@pua.edu.eg 
Mahmoud M. Fahmy  
Computers and Automatic Control Dept.  
Faculty of Engineering, Tanta University 
Tanta, Egypt 
mfn_288@hotmail.com 
 
Mostafa A. Youssef 
Computer Science and Engineering           
E-JUST 
Alexandria, Egypt 
moustafa@cs.umd.edu 
Abstract- There has been a rapid growth of new Internet 
services, such as video conferences, online video games, and 
multimedia applications, offered to end users. These services 
need to satisfy their quality requirements, and thus an efficient 
scheduling algorithm is needed. In the literature, the interest is 
focused on throughput and delay as inputs to the scheduler in 
its bandwidth allocation decision. Jitter, though of great 
significance, did not receive considerable attention, yet. 
Researchers, in the area of WiMAX networks, often 
recommend weighted scheduling algorithms with dynamic 
weight functions. The channel quality is particularly important 
as well in scheduler decision in wireless networks for the 
determination of channel strength. In this paper, we develop 
an uplink channel-aware scheduling algorithm for mobile 
WiMAX networks. Use is made of a weight function with four 
terms: throughput, delay, jitter, and channel quality. A 
comparison is made between the proposed algorithm and two 
famous channel-aware algorithms, namely, proportional fair 
scheme (PFS) and maximum carrier-to-interference ratio (Max 
C/I). Simulation results, obtained by an OPNET simulator, 
reveal that our algorithm outperforms both PFS and Max C/I 
with respect to WiMAX delay and jitter, as functions of the 
number of mobile stations. However, the WiMAX throughput 
takes on a slightly lower value. For real-time applications, the 
algorithm is applied to a video conference and high quality 
video applications, and better values for both delay and jitter 
are attained in both application types. 
  Keywords: WiMAX Networks; IEEE 802.16e; channel-
aware algorithms; scheduling schemes; QoS  
I.INTRODUCTION 
Worldwide 
interoperability 
for 
microwave 
access 
(WiMAX) [1] is one of the emerging broadband wireless 
access networks. It is designed according to IEEE 802.16 
standard [2]. The rapid growth of new services, such as 
online video games, video conferences, and multimedia 
services demands a reliable and efficient Internet access. 
WiMAX is an efficient solution to provide last-mile access 
to the Internet. It is suitable for real-time applications since 
WiMAX has a multitude of advantages features in this 
respect [1][3]; these are (1) use of orthogonal frequency 
division multiple access (OFDMA) in the physical layer, 
which allows WiMAX to operate in Non-Line of sight 
(NLoS) by using multiaccess scheme for broadband wireless 
access; (2) having a high data rate, capable of using 74Mbps 
on 20MHz wide spectrum; (3) supporting adaptive 
modulation and coding rate technology (AMC); (4) being 
suitable for both time division duplexing (TDD) and 
frequency division duplexing (FDD); (5) enjoying strong and 
robust security; and (6) allowing Quality of Service (QoS), 
which is responsible for serving different applications with 
dissimilar requirements.  
QoS is the main feature of WiMAX networks [3][4], 
used to manage the available resources in such a way as to 
enhance the performance of the network. It has three main 
parameters, namely, throughput, delay, and jitter. QoS in 
broadband wireless access is highly important. Yet its 
achievement is sophisticated since the performance of the 
radio link channel is unpredictable. The channel status 
indicating parameter is the carrier-to-interface-plus-noise 
ratio (CINR) [1][2]. 
A scheduling algorithm is part of the QoS architecture. 
Its function is the division of bandwidth among subscriber 
stations (SSs) in order to maximize throughput and minimize 
both delay and jitter. The scheduler should be simple, fair, 
and efficient [3][4]. The wireless channel is influenced by 
many factors such as: signal attenuation, fading, interference, 
and noise ratio. So, it is preferred to use a scheduling 
algorithm which can take the channel status in its bandwidth 
allocation decision [1][3]. 
 A comprehensive survey on scheduling algorithms in 
WiMAX networks is given in [3]. In [5], a detailed 
performance study of uplink scheduling algorithms in point-
to-multipoint WiMAX networks is made, where simulation 
analysis is carried out using average delay, average 
throughput, fairness and frame utilization and the simulation 
results indicate that none of the algorithms considered is 
capable of effectively supporting all WiMAX classes of 
service. Recently, in [6], a comparative descriptive analysis 
for various scheduling algorithms in WiMAX networks is 
presented. 
The work in [7] is focused on the importance of the 
scheduling algorithm in WiMAX networks to ensure the 
usefulness of delay, jitter and throughput. Also, it explains 
deficit round robin (DRR) and weighted deficit round robin 
(WDRR), but no analysis study is given. In [8], a new packet 
scheduling and bandwidth allocation algorithm is developed. 
This scheduling algorithm is divided into two tiers. In tier 1, 
four queues are used by the service classes and each service 
class uses an intra-class scheduling algorithm to decide 
which packet will be served. In tier 2, the chosen packets are 
arranged in a matrix and an inter-class scheduling algorithm 
is used to move packets to the frame. Two inter-class 
scheduling algorithms, dynamically allocating priority queue 
(DAPQ) and dynamically allocating weighted fair queue 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

(DAWFQ) are used. A simulation analysis using OPNET is 
presented. A new strategy about scheduling algorithms based 
on intelligent systems is suggested in [9]. The suggested 
algorithm is based on fuzzy systems and neural networks. 
This algorithm is divided into two stages: Priority stage 
using fuzzy systems and the allocation of bandwidth stage 
using neural networks. A performance comparison between 
the suggested algorithm and some scheduling algorithms are 
presented using OPNET and Matlab. All these algorithms 
belong to the channel-unaware category. 
Weighted scheduling algorithms are preferred for the 
satisfaction of QoS requirements [10]. The reason is that the 
weight corresponds to the number of time slots to be 
allocated to the service class. This number of slots is fixed 
for each WiMAX frame; hence the weight representing the 
number of slots is preferably to be an integer. This means 
that we do not actually need algorithms such as DRR [7] 
[10], in which floating point numbers are used. Further, the 
resulting algorithm will be much less sophisticated. In [11], a 
study of the performance of four scheduling algorithms: 
round robin (RR), MAX CINR, fair throughput (FT), and 
proportional fair scheme (PFS) is presented. The results 
reveal that MC has the highest throughput but with lowest 
fairness, but the converse happens for FT scheduling. PFS 
has the ability of adjusting the throughput and fairness with 
application requirements. In [12], three channel-aware 
scheduling algorithms in mobile WiMAX networks: PFS, 
modified longest weighted delay first (MLEDF), and 
exponential rule are studied and compared with a suggested  
algorithm using a queue length and waiting time of the 
packet in a weight equation. The results indicate that the 
suggested algorithm outperforms the other algorithms in 
throughput and delay. 
It is known that channel-aware schedulers are more 
suitable than channel-unaware schedulers in ensuring QoS 
requirements for wireless networks [1][3]. Also, the 
weighted scheduling algorithms are preferred to use in 
WiMAX networks [10]. The present paper develops a 
channel-aware uplink scheduling algorithm for mobile 
WiMAX networks. Its bandwidth allocation decision is taken 
based on throughput, delay, jitter, and channel quality. The 
proposed algorithm is compared with PFS, and MAX CINR 
with performance metrics: WiMAX throughput, delay, jitter, 
real-time application delay, and real-time application jitter. 
The results reveal that the proposed algorithm outperforms 
the other algorithms, with respect to WiMAX delay, and 
jitter as functions of the number of mobile stations, but the 
proposed algorithm gives a lower throughput than both 
algorithms PFS and Max C/I. Results of the proposed 
algorithm demonstrate that delay and jitter in real-time 
applications evidence that our algorithm transcends the other 
algorithms. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, an overview of WiMAX networks is given. Scheduling 
algorithms are reviewed in Section III. Section IV presents 
the details of the proposed approach. Simulation results are 
introduced in Section V. Finally, conclusions and trends for 
future work are reported in Section VI.  
 
II.WIMAX FRAMEWORK 
WiMAX is the most efficient technique of broadband 
wireless access networks [1][3]. It is used as a last-mile 
network to introduce the Internet for end users in an efficient 
and reliable way. WiMAX networks based on IEEE 802.16 
standard are divided into two main layers: the physical layer 
(PHY) and the medium access control layer (MAC).  
The PHY layer is defined on IEEE 802.16 standard [2] 
using four physical layer types: wireless MAN-OFDM 
(orthogonal frequency division multiplexing), wireless 
MAN-SC (single carrier), wireless MAN-SCa, and wireless 
MAN-OFDMA (orthogonal frequency division multiple 
access).  
WiMAX uses two types of duplexing [1][2][3]: 
frequency division duplexing (FDD) and time division 
duplexing (TDD) in the frame structure. In our work, we use 
TDD. In TDD, the frame structure consists of two 
subframes: downlink subframe and uplink subframe. 
Downlink subframe sends data from the base station (BS) to 
subscriber stations (SSs) together with some control 
information such as: preamble, downlink and uplink maps. 
Uplink subframe implies uplink bursts in addition to control 
information, such as channel quality information, which is 
sent from SSs to BS. Downlink and uplink subframes are 
separated by a transmit-receive transition gap (TTG) and a 
receive-transmit transition gap (RTG).  
The MAC layer [1][3][4] is the intermediate layer 
between the PHY layer and higher layers. It is responsible 
for many important jobs such as header suppression, packet 
scheduling, bandwidth allocation, QoS management, and 
security and authentication issues. 
To facilitate MAC layer work, the MAC layer is divided 
into three sub-layers. Each sub-layer is responsible for doing 
some of MAC functions. The three sub-layers are: 
convergence sub-layer, common-part sub-layer, and security 
sub-layer. First, a convergence sub-layer is designed as a link 
between higher layers and WiMAX MAC layer. This is done 
by mapping data from the upper layers to the appropriate 
MAC layer. Second, a common part sub-layer is responsible 
for bandwidth allocation, connection establishment and 
maintenance for all QoS requirements. Third, a security sub-
layer is developed for authentication, security key exchange, 
and encryption. 
WiMAX supports two types of operation modes [5]: 
Point-to-multipoint (PMP) mode and mesh mode. In PMP 
mode, the communications between all SSs are organized 
and passed through the BS. But in mesh mode, the 
communications can be achieved directly between SSs.  
WiMAX supports QoS by defining five different service 
classes for constant and variable bit rate applications. These 
service classes are [3][5]: unsolicited grant service (UGS), 
used to support constant data rate real-time applications such 
as VoIP without silence suppression; real-time polling 
service (rtPS), defined to support real-time applications with 
variable data rate such as a MPEG compressed video; 
extended real-time polling service (ertPS), used to support 
real-time applications with variable data rate such as VoIP 
with silence suppression; non-real-time polling service 
(nrtPS), defined for variable bit rate non-real-time 
applications; and the best effort (BE) service class, 
responsible for non-real-time applications with no need of 
any special requirements. 
To ensure a good performance of WiMAX networks for 
the different requirements of QoS in real-time applications, a 
suitable bandwidth allocation algorithm is needed [3][4]. In 
the beginning of each WiMAX frame, the scheduling 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

algorithm computes the allocated bandwidth for each SS to 
send this information in UL-MAP to SSs.  
 
III. EARLIER SCHEDULERS 
 
A powerful scheduling algorithm is essential in WiMAX 
networks to satisfy the growth of end user requirements for 
different applications [4]. There is no specific scheduling 
algorithm stated in IEEE 802.16 standard to use. The 
selection of the algorithm is left for service providers to pick 
a suitable one, which satisfies network application 
requirements. 
Scheduling algorithms are classified into two main 
classes: channel-aware and channel-unaware scheduling 
algorithms, outlined in what follows.  
 
A. Channel-unaware algorithms 
 
In channel-unaware algorithms, the bandwidth allocation 
is done without any use of information about the channel 
status. These algorithms include: the round robin (RR) 
algorithm [3] is simple and fair in assigning one allocation 
for each connection in each serving cycle. The weighted 
round robin (WRR) [3][5][6] assigns a weight to each 
connection; then the connections are served according to 
their weights. The main problem of WRR is that it provides 
incorrect percentage of bandwidth allocation when the traffic 
has a variable packet size. The deficit round robin (DRR) 
[7][10] solves this problem of WRR. DRR defines two 
variables for each queue, deficit counter (DC) and quantum 
(Q). Q is set to a constant value equal to the maximum traffic 
packet of the queue, and DC is initialized by a zero value 
when the queue is created. When the queue is visited to 
serve, the value of Q is added to DC and the queue is still 
served until the head packet size is greater than DC. For each 
packet served, the value of DC decreases by the value of 
packet size. When the queue is empty, DC returns to zero.  
The deficit weighted round robin (DWRR) [13] is the same 
as DRR; it adds a weight variable for each queue and the Q 
value depends on the weight value. Another modification on 
DRR, named modified deficit round robin (MDRR) [13], 
works in the same way as DRR but a queue priority 
parameter is added to each queue to contribute to queue 
selection. 
 
B.  Channel-aware algorithms 
 
These algorithms use channel state information from the 
channel quality indicator (CQI) to make the bandwidth 
allocation decision. Channel-aware algorithms include 
modified 
largest 
weighted 
delay 
first 
(MLWDF), 
proportional fairness schema (PFS), and maximum carrier to 
interference ratio (MAX C/I). MLWDF [14] is one of QoS- 
guaranteed algorithms which support minimum throughput 
and minimum delay. In this algorithm, for each queue j the 
scheduler computes a function "ρi*Wj(t)* rj(t)", where ρi is a 
constant which should take a different value for each service 
class, Wj(t) can be either the delay of the head of line packet 
or the queue length, and rj(t) is the channel capacity for 
traffic i. The queue selection occurs on the basis of the 
function value starting from the largest value. There are 
many modifications of MLWDF. PFS [15] belongs to a 
fairness scheduler family which works based on maximizing 
the long-term fairness. PFS uses a ratio of channel capacity 
Wi(t) to the long-term throughput Ri(t) to select the queue 
which will be served. The queue selection occurs based on 
the ratio value starting from the largest value. The main 
disadvantage of PFS is that delay is not taken into account 
when defining the weight function. MAX C/I [11] is used to 
maximize the throughput. In MAX C/I, the queue is selected 
based on the best channel conditions. In WiMAX, the most 
used channel quality indicator is CINR. This algorithm 
checks the value of CINR for each queue and the queue with 
the largest CINR is served first. The movement between the 
queues occurs based on the CINR value in descending order.  
All the above-mentioned scheduling algorithms, channel-
aware and channel-unaware, have the following drawbacks. 
In weighted scheduling algorithms, the bandwidths are 
assigned statically and do not vary with the burst changes; no 
enough attention is given to jitter, causing problems in real-
time applications; priority scheduling algorithms caused 
starvation in low priority classes; and finally, the use of 
channel-aware scheduling algorithms are preferred because 
of the nature of wireless communications . According to [3], 
and to the best of our knowledge, no channel-aware 
scheduling algorithms using jitter delay in its weight function 
are available in the literature.  
 
IV. THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM 
 
In WiMAX networks, the BS is responsible for 
scheduling service classes in both uplink and downlink 
directions. Any scheduling algorithm works on the basis of 
the bandwidth requests of SSs in the uplink direction 
[2][3][4]. 
The proposed approach is a type of channel-aware 
weighted scheduling algorithms with a weight equation 
defined in terms of: throughput, delay, jitter, and channel 
quality. These parameters characterize the QoS and the 
wireless communication of the application at hand. 
For each type of applications, the importance of these 
parameters is varying. In real-time applications which belong 
to rtPS service class in WiMAX, the QoS parameters are all 
important and none of them can be dispensed with. But, in 
non-real-time applications, which belong to nrtPS class in 
WiMAX, throughput is the only important parameter, since 
non-real-time applications are insensitive to delay and jitter. 
The channel quality is important to be considered for both 
real- and non-real- time applications. 
The problem under consideration is concerned with the 
development of a dynamic uplink scheduling algorithm for 
mobile WiMAX networks. The bandwidth is to be allocated 
among n queues; that is, n subscriber stations. The proposed 
method depends on the formulation of a weight function in 
terms of the parameters: throughput, delay, jitter, and 
channel quality. To this end, a weight Wi(t) is assigned to 
queue i as a positive factor of the form: 
 
  ( )  
  ( )
∑
  ( )
 
   
                                                                    (  ) 
In (2),   ( ) is expressed as the sum of four terms 
corresponding to contributions of throughput, delay, jitter, 
and channel quality, respectively. Specifically, we propose 
the following formula for a weight function   ( ): 
 
 
  ( )           ( )       ( )      ( )                                  ( ) 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
The first term      in (3), is the fractional throughput 
contribution to   ( ), defined as: 
 
    
  
∑
  
 
   
                                                                                   ( ) 
 
where Xi is the minimum reserved traffic rate for queue i. 
The second term     ( ) is the fractional delay contribution 
    ( )  
    ( )
  
⁄
∑
    ( )
  
⁄
 
   
                                                                ( ) 
where   ( ) is a time-varying average delay, Li is the given 
maximum latency, and αi is a positive delay weighting 
factor. In (4), the ratio   ( )/Li (less than unity) expresses the 
proportion of the delay of a particular queue relative to the 
maximum acceptable delay of the network. Further, the ratio 
  ( )/Li is weighted by a factor αi, whose value varies 
according to the subscriber station (value of i). This is 
justifiable since each subscriber station is devoted to a 
particular application. The third term     ( ) is the fractional 
jitter contribution,  
    ( )  
    ( )
  
⁄
∑
    ( )
  
⁄
 
   
                                                                   ( ) 
where   ( )is a time-varying average jitter, Ki is the given 
maximum jitter and βi is a positive jitter weighting factor. 
The terms in (5) can be interpreted in the same way as in (4). 
The fourth term    ( )is the fraction channel quality 
indicator 
   ( )      
     ( ) 
∑
     ( ) 
 
   
                                                            ( ) 
 
where    ( )is the carrier-to-interface-plus-noise ratio of the 
channel between BS and the MS, Ωi is the CINR status 
which indicates that CINR increases or decreases. Ωi takes 
on a value of +1 when CINR increases and the value -1 when 
CINR decreases.  Then the bandwidth is divided among the n 
queues using the form given in (7): 
 
   ( )    ( )                                                                 ( ) 
 
 
where BWi(t)  is the bandwidth reserved to queue i and 
ULBW   is the total bandwidth of the uplink subframe. 
Equation 2 is valid for both real- and non-real time 
applications; this implies that the weighting factors αi and βi 
should take on different values of the two types of 
applications. The values of αi and βi for real-time 
applications should be greater than those for non-real-time 
applications. The reason is the fact that real-time applications 
are more sensitive to delay and jitter. The criterion for the 
choice of the values of αi and βi depends on a developed 
algorithm which is introduced in [16] on the basis of the 
importance of delay for real- and non-real-time applications. 
We use the ratio 1:10 for αi to βi . 
The computational scheme of the proposed algorithm is 
itemized in the following consecutive steps: 
1) For each queue, get the values of   ( ) and Zi(t). 
2) Calculate the values of THi (in (3)), DLYi (in (4)), JTRi 
(in (5)), and    ( ) (in (6)). 
3) Calculate the four-term weight function Si(t) according 
to (2). 
4) Calculate the weight Wi(t) by virtue of (1) 
5) Divide the bandwidth of the uplink subframe among the 
n queues based on (7). 
6) The value of the bandwidth of each queue is sent to 
MS. 
7) The service for the queue is continued until the 
assigned division of the bandwidth is used up.  
8) The service is moved between the queues using round 
robin mechanism. 
 
V. EXPERIMENTAL SCENARIOS AND 
SIMULATION ANALYSIS 
The network used consists of four WiMAX service 
classes: ertPS, rtPS, nrtPS and BE with applications: VoIP, 
video conference, FTP and HTTP, respectively. The traffic 
parameters for each service class are taken as those used in 
[5], listed in table I. Simulation in this paper is performed by 
the OPNET simulator [17]. 
 
TABLE I. TRAFFIC PARAMETERS 
 
Service 
class 
Minimum 
reserved 
traffic rate 
in bps 
Maximum 
sustained 
traffic rate 
in bps 
Maximum 
latency in 
msec 
Maximum 
jitter in 
msec 
ertPS 25000 
64000 
20 
150 
rtPS 
64000 
500000 
30 
160 
nrtPS 
45000 
500000 
100 
300 
BE 
1000 
64000 
N/A 
N/A 
 
The simulation results are obtained using several 
experimental scenarios by varying the number of mobile 
stations (MSs). Each scenario consists of one BS serving a 
number of MSs in PMP mode of operation. The frame 
duration is 5 msec, with the uplink and downlink subframes 
having 50% of this duration each. A random topology in 
1000 x 1000 m square space is used. The number of MSs 
varies from 6 to 36 with ratio 1:2:2:1 MSs for service classes 
ERTPS:RTPS:NRTPS:BE, 
respectively. 
The 
proposed 
weighted scheduling algorithm is compared with PFS and 
Max C/I. The WiMAX throughput, delay, jitter, real-time 
application delay, and real-time application jitter are 
considered as performance metrics. Simulation time is 10 
minutes.  
The results of the overall WiMAX throughput, delay, and 
jitter are shown in Figures 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The 
performance of the real time applications delay and jitter are 
shown in Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7, respectively. 
  As shown in Figure 1, the proposed algorithm has a 
lower throughput than PFS and Max C/I, and a higher 
throughput varying between PFS and MAX C/I.  As 
mentioned in [14][15], PFS and Max C/I are designed to 
maximize throughput with no delay guarantee in PFS, but 
Max C/I supports delay minimization.   
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Figure 1: Average WiMAX Throughput in bps vs. number of mobile 
stations 
 
As shown in Figure 2, it is clear that the proposed 
algorithm has a lower delay than PFS and MAX C/I for 
increasing the number of SSs. PFS has a higher delay since it 
does not support any delay guarantee [14]. Max C/I has a 
delay less than PFS since Max C/I supports delay 
minimization [15].  
 
 
Figure 2: Average WiMAX delay in sec. vs. number of mobile stations 
 
From Figure 3, we can conclude that the proposed 
algorithm has a lower jitter than PFS and MAX C/I for 
increasing the number of SSs. 
 
Figure 3: Average WiMAX jitter in sec. vs. number of mobile stations 
 
In Figure 4, the results of the video conference delay are 
presented, and we can see that the proposed algorithm 
presents the best video conference delay value when the 
number of MSs changed. 
 
 
Figure 4: Video Conference delay in sec. vs. number of mobile stations 
 
In Figure 5, the results of the video conference jitter are 
displayed, and we can see that the proposed algorithm has a 
lowest jitter value than PFS and Max C/I when the number 
of MSs changed. 
 
 
Figure 5: Video Conference jitter in sec. vs. number of mobile stations 
 
High quality video performance delay and jitter are 
shown in Figures 6 and 7. From Figures, we conclude that 
the proposed algorithm has better values for both delay and 
jitter than the others algorithms. 
  
 
Figure 6: High Quality Video delay in sec. vs. number of mobile 
stations 
 
0
1000000
2000000
3000000
4000000
5000000
6
12
18
24
30
36
WiMAX throughput in 
bps 
Number of MSs 
PFS
Max C/I
Proposed Algorithm
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
6
12
18
24
30
36
WiMAX delay in sec. 
Number of MSs 
PFS
Max C/I
Proposed Algorithm
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
6
12
18
24
30
36
WiMAX jitter in sec. 
Number of MSs 
PFS
Max C/I
Proposed Algorithm
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
6
12
18
24
30
36
Video Conference  
delay in sec. 
Number of MSs 
PFS
Max C/I
Proposed Algorithm
0
2
4
6
8
6
12
18
24
30
36
Video Conference jitter 
in sec 
Number of MSs 
PFS
Max C/I
Proposed Algorithm
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
6
12
18
24
30
36
High quality video delay in 
sec. 
Number of MSs 
PFS
MAX C/I
Proposed Algorithm
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Figure 7: High Quality Video jitter in sec. vs. number of mobile stations 
 
The best performance of our algorithm is caused by the 
using of delay and jitter contribution terms in the weight 
function with high importance for real-time applications. But 
the other algorithms (PFS and MAX C/I weight functions 
focused on the throughput contribution only. 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS  
 An uplink channel-aware weighted scheduling algorithm 
for mobile WiMAX networks has been proposed. This 
algorithm has advantages: it is weighted scheduling 
algorithm with the use of jitter and channel quality as 
parameters in its weight function. A comparison is made 
with two powerful algorithms: PFS and Max C/I. The 
proposed algorithm is simulated using OPNET. 
The results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm 
outperforms the other algorithms with respect to WiMAX 
delay, and jitter as functions of the number of mobile 
stations; also, the proposed algorithm gives a lower 
throughput and higher load than both algorithms PFS and 
Max C/I. The algorithm is applied to a video conference and 
high quality video applications. The results of the real-time 
applications delay and jitter show that our algorithm 
transcends the others. The performance evaluation of the 
proposed algorithm in Long-Term Evolution (LTE) networks 
[18] will be considered as a future work.  
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] J. G Andrews., A. Ghosh, and R. Muhamed, Fundamentals of 
WiMAX:understanding 
broadband 
wireless 
networking, 
Pearson Education Inc, Feb 2007. 
[2] IEEE 802.16e, IEEE Standard for local and metropolitan area 
networks, Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless Access 
Systems, Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access 
Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in 
Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, Feb 2006. 
[3] C. So-In, R. Jain, and  A.K. Tamimi, “Scheduling in IEEE 
802.16e Mobile WiMAX Networks: Key Issues and Survey” 
IEEE Journal on Special Areas in Communications (JSAC), 
vol. 27, no. 2, 2009, pp.156-171. 
[4] C. Cicconetti, A. Erta, L. Lenzini, and  E. Mingozzi, 
“Performance evaluation of the IEEE 802.16 MAC for QoS 
support”, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput., 6, (1), 2007,  pp. 26–
38. 
[5] N. Abu Ali, P. Dhrona, and H. Hassanein, "A performance 
study of uplink scheduling algorithms in point-to-multipoint 
WiMAX networks", journal of Computer Communications, 
no. 32, 2009, pp. 511-521. 
[6] B. Kumar and P. Gupta, “Scheduling Algorithms in WiMAX 
Network”, Second International Conference on Advanced 
Computing and Communication Technologies, 2012,  pp. 
457-462. 
[7] H. Javier and I. Patricia, "Evaluation of Scheduling 
Algorithms in WiMAX Networks", IEEE ANDESCON, 
2010, pp. 1-4. 
[8] A. Esmailpour and N. Nassar, "A Novel Scheme for Packet 
Scheduling and Bandwidth Allocation in WiMAX Networks", 
IEEE  International Conference on Communications, 2011, 
pp. 1-5. 
[9] D. David and K. Murugessan, "Performance Analysis of 
Neural Networks Based Priority Scheduler for WiMAX under 
Bursty Traffic Conditions", European Journal of Scientific 
Research, vol. 76, no. 3, 2012, pp. 351-365. 
[10] A. Sayenko, O.  Alenan, J. Karhula, and T. Hamalainen " 
Ensuring the QoS requirements in 802.16 scheduling," 
Proceedings of the 9th ACM international symposium on 
Modeling analysis and simulation of wireless and mobile 
systems,  2006, pp. 108 - 117. 
[11] W. Wang and et. al.,"Implementation and performance 
evaluation of QoS scheduling algorithms in mobile WiMAX  
NS-2 simulator", 4th international conference on Signal 
Processing and Communication Systems (ICSPCS), 2010, 
pp.1-6. 
[12] P. Chandur, R. Karthik, and K. Sivalingam, "Performance 
evaluation of scheduling algorithms for mobile WiMAX 
networks", Eighth IEEE PerCom Workshop on Pervasive 
Wireless Networking, 2012,  pp. 764 -769.  
[13] M. Andrews, K. Kumaran, K. Ramanan, A. Stolyar, P. 
Whiting, and R. Vijayakumar, "Providing Quality of Service 
over a Shared Wireless link", IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 39, 
2001, pp. 150-154. 
[14] H. Kim and Y. Han, "A Proportional Fair Scheduling for 
Multicarrier Transmission Systems", IEEE Commun. Lett., 
vol. 9, 2005, pp. 210-212. 
[15] V. Singh and V. Sharma, "Efficient and Fair Scheduling for 
Uplink and Downlink in IEEE 802.16 OFDMA Networks", 
IEEE Wireless Communication and Networking Conference, 
Lasss Vegas, vol. 2, 2006,  pp. 984-990.  
[16] D. Ali and K. Dimyati, “Threshold based Cyclic Polling 
(TbCP): An Uplink Scheduling Agorithm for Mobile 
WiMAX Systems,” International Journal of Information and 
Electronics Engineering, vol. 1, no. 1, 2011, pp. 1-8. 
[17] OPNET Technologies, Opnet modeler Software Package 
available: www.opnet.com.  
[18] S. Sesia, I. Toufik, and M. Baker, LTE - The UMTS Long 
Term Evolution: From Theory to Practice, John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd., 2011. 
 
 
0
0.0005
0.001
0.0015
0.002
6
12
18
24
30
36
High quality video jitter in 
sec. 
Number of MSs 
PFS
MAX C/I
Proposed Algorithm
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

