Fully Functional Passive RFID Tag with Integrated Sensor for Item Level Tagging
Based on Collective Communications and Organic Printed Electronics
Predrag Jakimovski
Pervasive Computing Systems, TecO
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: jakimov@teco.edu
Ali Hadda and Michael Zangl
Faculty of Computer Science
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: {firstname.lastname}
@student.kit.edu
Nina Oertel
SAP AG
Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: nina.oertel@sap.com
Abstract—The development of Organic Electronics (OE) is pro-
moted by the promise of being ultra-low cost technology in the
future. One key application scenario is item level tagging, e.g.,
smart packaging, where items are equipped with organic printed
tags using Radio Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFID) technology.
However, current OE allows the printing of simple tags with
ultra-low hardware complexity, but the printing of RFID chips
with large numbers of transistors that implement RFID anti-
collision protocols are far away from realization. In this paper,
we present one sensor-based and fully functional passive RFID tag
implementing collective communications a proprietary transmis-
sion protocol. Based on OE constraints, we describe the printable
passive smart label down to the logic gate layer. Further on, we
present an external clock synchronization strategy required by
the passive reader system. Additionally, we provide a feasibility
assessment towards printing the smart label, and conclude with
simulating the proposed reader system.
Keywords–smart label; RFID; polymer electronics; organic
printed circuits; wireless communication.
I.
INTRODUCTION
One key point in promoting polymer electronics is the
promise of cost efﬁciency in relation to printing electronic de-
vices in mass production. Another, the incorporated properties
being light, thin and ﬂexible are enabling novel applications
in the area of pervasive systems and ubiquitous computing.
The area of intelligent packaging is one key application for
utilizing Organic Electronics (OE), for instance, the develop-
ment of organic printed smart labels using Radio Frequency
IDentiﬁcation (RFID) technology [1]. OE tags can contain and
provide useful information, such as the item identiﬁcation and
sensor readings. This data is created continuously while items
travel through the supply chain, i.e., from the manufacturing
plant to the ﬁnal consumer, and enable participants and other
stakeholders to improve their business processes: quality con-
trol, certiﬁcation, logistics optimization or fraud detection are
but a few examples. Such dealing results in cost savings for the
producer, suppliers, as well as vendors and, increases product
safety for consumers. The approach we describe in this paper
can be applied in those business processes. It can, for example,
be used to determine product quality in bulk reading scenarios,
such as the goods inbound processing in a supermarket. For
each item the quality is determined by the sensor-based smart
label attached to the item. In operation, the sensor readings are
acquired in a single query and interpreted by our algorithm that
is speciﬁc to product type, e.g., to a quality rating on a scale
from 1 to 7. The quality scale, however, is identical for all
product types, i.e., a rating of 1 corresponds to a perished
item for both milk packages and tomatoes. Otherwise, no
compliance violation is detected, and the goods can be sold.
Based on collective and simultaneous querying a single reader
device can thus determine the quality ratings of multiple items
belonging to different types.
Our paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we provide
an overview about printed RFID technologies, and bring the
state-of-the-art in relation to our smart RFID label approach. In
Section III, we implement the smart label based on our earlier
developed collective transmission protocol [2]. The specially
developed communications for bulk reading of minimalistic
tags is outlined in Subsection III-A and, its implementation
into passive RFID circuitry is given in Subsection III-B.
Thereafter, we describe an external clock synchronization
strategy implemented within the proposed tag circuitry. The
paper concludes with a validation of the proposed approach
by utilizing simulations and a feasibility assessment towards
printing the smart label device with current print technology.
II.
PRINTABLE SMART LABELS
RFID technology is in comparison to barcode in terms of
memory capacity, readability, speed, being re-programmable,
robustness and scalability vastly superior, but the high fabrica-
tion costs for Si-based RFID chips impede their wide deploy-
ment in item-level-based applications. However, the emergence
of organic and printed electronics arises the opportunity to
create affordable all-printed RFID tags, which can compete
with the well established barcode system. Apart from the
advantages of OE being thin, light-weighted, ﬂexible and pre-
sumably ultra-low cost in the near future, the realization of this
technology into printable smart labels is rather challenging,
because the printing process itself is still an issue of current
research. Further on, the created conductive inks indicate low
electro-mobility which result into slow-switched transistors,
i.e., yielding 627 Hz at 10 V electricity supply [3]. In addition,
the printing of circuits on substrates, such as paper and plastic
foils, consumes large areas, so that yet complex integrated
circuits, such as a microchip can not be printed.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

However, an all-printed 1-bit RFID tag based on carbon
nano-tubes and gravure printing process has been reported
from the Sunchon University [4] in 2010. More recently, the
research group presented an improved version of 16-bit RFID
tag at the IDTechEx RFID Europe event [5]. The RFID circuit
is printed entirely on a polyester ﬁlm, whereby nano-silver is
used to print the antenna, because of the better interconnectiv-
ity. The all-printed rectiﬁer of the tag provides a 10 V Direct
Current (DC) from the 13.56 MHz reader signal. The all-
printed ring oscillator can generate a clock signal of 102.8 Hz,
which enables the transmission of a 96-bit transponder IDen-
tiﬁcation number (ID) in a second. In collaboration with the
company Paru their goal is to achieve printing 96-bit RFID
tags conform to the ISO 14443 (International Organization for
Standardization).
The company ThinFilm Electronics and its partner com-
panies PARC developing addressable memory, and Polyera
developing printed displays, presented recently a smart sen-
sor label, which can be printed at high volumes on roll-to-
roll printing process. Their smart label system consists of
a writable memory, sensing capability and a printed display
which indicates visually the information when, for instance, the
temperature of the product has exceeded the maximum thresh-
old. This system is based on line-of-sight reading, and thus
less applicable for mass-reading scenarios, such as monitoring
of pallets in a cool chain, where items are highly dense stacked
and invisible for inspection. However, it offers an additional
support in supply chains, such as picking out of the damaged
and expired products in a super market. In this way, options
for improving supply chain management are extended.
The ﬁrst fully functional printed RFID tag based on silicon
ink has been announced by the company Kovio. The internal
circuit logic of the tag consists of about 1000 printed transis-
tors, and has the capability to radio its stored data from a 128-
bit printed Read-Only-Memory (ROM) to an interrogator. The
transmission is based on High Frequency (HF) (13.56 MHz)
and synchronous tag-talks-ﬁrst protocol. The entire RFID
circuit is printed by inkjet on a thin metal foil substrate. The
application area focuses on Near Field Communication (NFC),
such as the NFC Barcode [6]. An implementation of long
range communication is not available. The printing process
uses inorganic silicon-based technology that can reduce the
cost advantage the polymer electronics is offering.
The research group Holst Center and their partners in the
EU FP7 project ORICLA created a fully functional RFID tag
based on polymer electronics and thin-ﬁlm technology. The
RFID prototype is made on plastic foil with organic thin-ﬁlm
semiconductors and realizes reader-talks-ﬁrst communication.
In contrast, the above presented approaches toward printed
RFID tags are based on tag-talks-ﬁrst principle: as soon as
the RFID tag gets powered from the RF ﬁeld of the RFID
reader, it transmits its data to the reader. Here, the problem
occurs, when many tags try to contact the reader at the same
time, which requires an effective anti-collision mechanism.
However, current generation of printed thin-ﬁlm RFID tags
are in fact enabled with a basic slotted ALOHA protocol, but
the implementation of the anti-collision scheme is limited to
about maximum 4 tags, and come at the cost of a slow reading.
Driven by lowering the costs for fabricating RFID tags,
further techniques are promoted to realize item level tagging,
such as printable and chipless RFID technology. In contrast
to printed RFID tags including an Integrated Circuit (IC)
chip, printed chipless RFID tags are characterized mainly by
encoding the product ID by using Time Domain Reﬂectometry-
based (TDR) and Frequency Domain Signature-based (FDS)
techniques, respectively. While TDR-RFID tags are based on
microwave circulators and capacitors to generate RF wave
transmission-lines in order to transmit the binary ID code, the
FDS-RFID tags consist of resonators with different resonant
frequencies which encode, i.e., the binary data. The coding
capacity of TDR-based tags is currently limited by up to 8 bits,
whereby FDS-based tags can contain theoretically unlimited
capacity depending on frequency band and tag size. For ex-
ample, Islam and Karmakar describe in their work [7] a 16-bit
chipless RFID tag printed on a 1.65×1.65 cm2 substrate area,
which operates in the 6 − 13 GHz frequency band. The ﬁrst
type of fully printed chipless RFID tags suffer from limited
encoding capacity, whereas the second type requires large-
scale size and wide frequency bands, which can be scarcely
deployed for applications operating in the Industrial, Scientiﬁc
and Medical (ISM) radio bands. An overview about recent
advances in printable chipless RFID technology is given in
[8] and [9].
To reﬂect the related work the aim of all described ap-
proaches is focusing on implementing the EPCglobal Tag Data
Standard (TDS) into printable RFID tags, which have the same
capabilities as the conventional Si-based RFID technology is
already providing. For instance, bi-directional communication
between reader and tags, anti-collision protocol for avoiding
interference, and large data storage capacity on tag. The imple-
mentation of these features into a polymer tag, that can be even
printed on roll-to-roll process at high volumes, is currently
rather challenging. The lack of printing integrated circuits with
large numbers of transistors into small area and, the lack of
mass production accuracy and reliability, is suspending the
realization of fully functional organic and all-printed RFID
tags into the far-distant future.
III.
COLLECTIVE COMMUNICATIONS FOR PRINTED
SMART LABELS
In our earlier work, we developed with respect to future
organic and printed smart labels robust and highly scalable
communications based on collective transmission mechanism
called collective communications [2][10]. In the following, we
implement with regards to OE constraints the targeted smart
label device into a fully functional polymer-based circuitry,
and provide a feasibility assessment towards printing the smart
RFID label in mass production.
A. Collective Communications
In general, collective communications is designed how to
obtain information from a set of simultaneously sending nodes,
in our application scenario the tags attached to goods on a
shelf. We request from the set of items which proportion of
tags measured (proportion query), respective, contain which
values (binary query). In principle, this could be done by
querying tags individually using any of the well-established
protocols. However, implementing these protocols is not fea-
sible in our scenario, since the senders need to be simple due to
polymer electronics deﬁciency, and we consider large number
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

of senders. In particular, our transmission algorithm is laid out
to be on the one hand simple, so that the smart label device
can be implemented in polymer electronics, and on the other
hand to acquire maximal performance regarding information
transfer, scalability and robustness. We achieve these objectives
by employing the following fundamental principles:
1)
All queried tags transmit their stored data simultane-
ously and start transmission at the same time
2)
A randomly drawn bit sequence encodes a physical
entity, such as an identiﬁcation, sensor value, temper-
ature range, etc.
By applying the rules, the signals sent from tags superimpose
on the RF channel. However, the transmission mechanism
enables to analyze the superimposed signal statistically at the
receiver side, so that the transfered information, for instance,
which proportion of senders sent which value, can be extracted.
Basically, our communication mechanism is based on bit
sequences c of ﬁxed length, that are shared between a sender S
and a receiver R. A bit sequence v is sent from S as s = c⊕v,
where ⊕ is the bitwise exclusive or. The receiver extracts v
from s by computing v = s ⊕ c. The double application of
⊕c cancels out c and v is regained. Simultaneous connections
between a number of senders Si and corresponding receivers
Ri can then be achieved: simultaneous transmission yields the
superimposed signal as the sum s = s1+s2+. . .+sn of signals
si sent, since the amplitudes of synchronized signals of the
same frequency are approximately added to each other when
the bit sequences si are sent. The resulting signal s is similar
to each of the original signals si, where similarity can be based
on various distance metrics on bit sequences v, w ∈ {0, 1}n,
e.g., on the Hamming distance:
dH(v, w) =
n
X
i=1
|vi − wi|.
(1)
The similarity is then deﬁned by choosing a threshold Tn
suitable for the length of the vectors n. Two bit sequences
v, w ∈ {0, 1}n are called similar if they differ only in a small
number Tn of bits:
v ∼ w
def
⇔ dH(v, w) ≤ Tn.
(2)
A number of pairs of senders and receivers can thus commu-
nicate via codes ci. If the codes ci are chosen so as to be
orthogonal (dH(v, w) = 0), or at least sufﬁciently different
(dH(v, w) ≪ n) from each other, this entails that we can
obtain vi from s by applying v′
i = s ⊕ ci. The result v′
i is
similar to vi, so that vi can then be regenerated from v′
i,
using error correcting codes. Codes ci can be generated so
as to be orthogonal, however, sufﬁciently long random bit
sequences, are also suitable: statistical theory suggests that
the probability to obtain two random bit sequences of low
similarity is higher, the longer the sequences are. In order to
ensure that different values transmitted can be retrieved from
the superimposed signal, we directly encode the numerical
values by using a single random bit vector z0 shared by all
tags and the receiver. We obtain sufﬁciently different codes zi
for numerical values i by circularly shifting z0 by the amount
of i bit, since shifting is a distancing operation. In this way, a
single bit vector z0 ∈ {0, 1}n can be used to encode n values,
and thus save memory capacity on the smart label device.
The received signal s = s1 + s2 + . . . + sn is then simply
a sum of encoded numbers zi, directly encoding the multi-set
of measured values. The algorithm for the reader system is
outlined in Figure 1.
1)
Tags come initialized with a register t set to
default value 0, and transmit code z set to z0.
2)
Each tag measures continually its environment:
3)
if the measured value is m > t, then
a)
it sets t := m.
b)
it shifts the code z accordingly:
z := zt.
4)
Reader sends start signal to tags.
5)
Tags send their respective z.
6)
Reader receives overlaid signal s:
a)
Binary Query:
i)
Set S := ∅.
ii)
For each possible value zi:
if zi ∼ s then S := S ∪ {zi}.
b)
Proportion Query:
For each value z ∈ S: use Least
Squares Estimation to compute
proportion of contribution of z:
i)
Generate linear equation system
for the found values zi ∈ S.
ii)
Estimate parameters ai so that
error is minimal.
iii)
M := {(ai, zi)|s = P
zi∈S
ai ∗ zi}.
c)
Output: return M.
Figure 1.
The Collective Communications algorithm.
B. Circuit design
Based on our communication protocol described above
in Subsection III-A, the implementation of the smart label
device relies merely on features, such as fetching the sensor
value, reading and sending out the corresponding bit sequence.
Hence, the necessary building blocks of the circuit device are
derived as follows: a sensor unit that consists of one Analog-
Digital-Converter (ADC) and the sensor itself, a Read-Only-
Memory (ROM) building block of ﬁxed length that contains a
randomly drawn binary sequence, and a circuit logic block
that is enabled to generate the corresponding bit sequence
to the sensed value, i.e., by employing the hardwired bit
sequence stored in the ROM and carrying out an internal
function operation on it. Further on, the smart label device
contains a clock generator and counter to drive the transponder
circuit. Exemplary, the block diagram in Figure 3 illustrates
the interacting between all participating blocks of an 64-bit
polymer tag, that implement, i.e., the clock generator realized
by one ring oscillator, a 6-bit counter realized by 6 D-ﬂip-
ﬂops, a ROM with 64-bit capacity, and a 3-bit ADC. Since the
target is to create a reader system for passive polymer tags,
the smart label circuitry includes in addition a DC rectiﬁer
concerning power supply, and a modulator transistor to convey
the binary information to the reader device by deploying
inductive coupling. Figure 4 shows in essence the schematic
of the all-printable and passive polymer tag with its analog
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 2.
A passive tag reader system illustrates concurrent transmission of
bit streams sent by several 64-bit smart labels.
Figure 3.
The circuitry implements the principle of collective communica-
tions.
and digital electronic components. The principle for collec-
tive communications is integrated in the protocol mechanism
building block, where a bit sequence is generated according to
the sensed value. The binary sequence is controlling the gate
of the modulation transistor. When the modulator transistor
is switched on, the transponder circuit draws power from the
electromagnetic RF ﬁeld of the reader. In the reverse, when the
modulation transistor is switched off, the transponder circuit
draws still power from the RF ﬁeld, but considerably less
than it is consuming in the on-state. In this way, the binary
information is transfered by means of load modulation to the
reader, i.e., by varying the power consumption.
C. Collective clock synchronization
With respect to bulk reading of smart labels in a dense
area, i.e., when a set of tags are queried simultaneously, the
response of the interrogated tags need to be collectively clock
synchronized, but not phase synchronized as the collective
transmission protocol is providing. On that issue, we developed
for the reader system a collective synchronization method im-
plemented into the transponder circuit. The circuit functionality
is placed in the clock & reset building block (cf.
Figure
4). Since conventional strategies, such as external reader-tag-
synchronization applied in traditional RFID reader systems
can not be employed straightforward in polymer electronics
due to its hardware performance weakness, such as slow-
Figure 4.
The circuit block diagram shows the holistic printable passive tag.
Figure 5.
The schematic shows partially the circuit logic in connection with
the tag rectiﬁer for interpreting signaling coming from reader device.
switched printed transistors, appropriate solutions for reader-
tag-communication needed to be elaborated. With respect
to polymer electronics constraints, we developed collective
synchronization procedures based on switching on/off the elec-
tromagnetic RF ﬁeld of the reader device coil that empowers
the polymer tags. By interrupting the wireless power supply
all responsive tags can be instructed to either start with data
transmission or, to send the next bit of their binary information.
The transmission of data is based on inductive coupling. Figure
2 illustrates concurrent transmission of bit streams transmitted
by several smart labels. In each synchronized time slot at the
current bit index the bit information from all smart labels
superimposes on the RF channel, and generates a speciﬁc
overlaid signal. At the receiver side the superimposed signal in
each time slot is captured and evaluated based on the collective
communication algorithm (cf. mechanism in Figure 1).
In order to initiate every tag to start transmission at the
same time the signaling can be done either by (i) turning off
the reader device coil for a long time period and then start
empowering the tags periodically with short intermissions, or
(ii) begin with transmission by transmitting the start bit in a
long time slot followed by transmitting the subsequently bit
stream in regular sized time slots. Either way, the circuit logic
in the clock & reset building block is tuned to interpret request
orders sent from reader device based on capacitor discharge
behavior and voltage comparator device. The circuit logic is
connected with the tag rectiﬁer shown in Figure 6. Parallel to
the circuit logic that detects the external clock synchronization
request, the internal clock counter in the clock & reset building
block is reseting the bit index, and start increasing the count
when the next intermission is registered. In this way, the smart
label acquires the actual bit position in the bit sequence. In
addition to the clock detection circuit a memory buffer realized
through D-ﬂip-ﬂops preserves the bit index. This cache device
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 6.
Schematic of the clock & reset building block.
Figure 7.
The overall signal analysis indicates the maximal amplitude
difference between different trails with up to 16 simulated passive tags
transmitting simultaneously.
keeps the storage contents even if the polymer tag is not
powered for a short term, i.e., when the reader device causes
an intermission to signalize the next time slot for transmission.
Before increasing the bit index an additional memory buffer
realized by D-latches stores temporarily the current bit index
and induces the bit transmission. After increasing the bit index,
it is delayed rewritten in the bit index buffer. The mono-ﬂops
in the circuit block provide the required delay for stabilized
rewriting. The circuitry of the clock & reset block is depicted
in Figure 5, whereby the external clock detection circuit is
shown in Figure 6.
D. Feasibility assessment
The realization of printing electronic devices in mass
production is one key issue of present-day research. With
regard to organic and printed smart labels the state-of-the-art is
described in Section II. All references indicate the feasibility of
printing circuits with ultra-low hardware complexity, but non
of them has yet enabled the printing of circuits implementing
highly complex functionalities, such as an organic printed
RFID chip with large number of transistors. With respect to
current OE limitations the collective communication protocol
was developed with the purpose to facilitate applications in the
near future, though. The ability of exploiting concurrent and
thus superimposed information transfer, has provided to move
the hardware complexity from tag to the reader side. To the
sake of completeness and, in order to indicate the hardware
complexity of the proposed passive tag, the remaining of the
circuitry is shown in Figure 8. It entails a 6-bit counter that
enables to read out the hardwired 64 bit sequence shown
partially in Figure 3. Due to lack of space the sensor unit
is not shown here. As can be seen from the circuit block
diagram in Figure 4, the depicted circuits in Figure 5, in Figure
6 and in Figure 8, the entire hardware complexity of the tag
is reduced to about few hundreds of transistors. Considering
the tag circuitry in relation to already manufactured printed
electronics by other research facilities, the fabrication in a
clean room of 64-bit ROM devices has been experimentally
veriﬁed [11]–[13]. The printing of holistic 4-bit RFID tags
employing load modulation for communication is described
in [14]. A challenge for realizing the proposed passive tag
into polymer electronics is to achieve hazard-free printed
circuit devices. For example, the analog components in the
clock & reset building block, such as the comparator and
the RC-element for timekeeping (cf. Figure 6), need to be
printed with high accuracy, so that the circuit characteristic
remains constant. Further on, the transmission range regarding
polymer-based printed transponders indicates low modulation
index as reported in [15]. This may constrain the free scala-
bility property of collective communications, i.e., to read-out
many tags at once.
E. Simulation
The communication protocol collective communications
is designed to allocate information instantly from a large
number of nodes transmitting data simultaneously to a receiver.
The communication relies on ON-OFF-Keying (OOK), and
works generally for active reader systems. Here, we analyze
the applicability of the collective transmission mechanism for
passive reader systems. For our analysis, we established in
LTspice a simulated passive reader system, where the antenna
coil generates in HF an electromagnetic RF ﬁeld providing
up to 16 simulated passive transponder circuits with wireless
power. Depending on passively switched on tags the change in
the electromagnetic RF ﬁeld, i.e., the amount of drawn energy
from the RF ﬁeld is recorded and evaluated at the reader side.
With regard to parameterizing the simulation, we chose default
parameters from standard RFID reader systems, such as 10 cm
in diameter for the reader antenna coil, 2 cm in diameter for
the tag antenna, which conforms to the inductive coupling
coefﬁcient of 0.025. The portability of the simulation with
respect to polymer electronics is taken for granted, because the
key parameter for inductance applies for printed antennas and
circuits. In order to simulate different tag positions in relation
to the reader antenna, respective, different sizes of tag antennas
the coupling coefﬁcient is varied. For the resonant circuit of the
reader device generating the 13.56 MHz signal the hardware
parameters are chosen according to Finkenzeller [16, Chapter
4.1]. The inductance is set by 2 µH with resistance of 2.5 Ω.
The capacitor is set by 68.8 pF. Further on, for the tag coil
we chose 100 nH and 0.1 Ω. The results of the signal analysis
are shown in Figure 7, that indicate the minimal measured
amplitude strength for n simulated passive tags transmitting
simultaneously. Therewith, the maximal amplitude difference
is acquired for distinguishing different number of responsive
tags. Further on, the simulations show the more passive tags
being responsive the greater the distinctive features appear
among the captured superimposed signals.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 8.
Schematic of the basic circuit arrangement realizing the part of circuit logic for a 64-bit polymer tag.
IV.
CONCLUSION
With regard to smart packaging, item level tagging and
organic printed smart labels, we described the implementation
of one fully functional passive RFID tag, that is based on
our earlier developed collective communication protocol and
regards current organic electronics constraints. Apart from
describing the state-of-the-art regarding printable smart labels
and, putting this in relation to our smart label circuitry,
we introduced with regard to reader-tag-communication an
external and centralized clock synchronization strategy. Further
on, we provided for the reader system a feasibility assessment,
that indicates the printing of the proposed smart RFID label
is in principle with present-day printing technology possible,
but entails risks, such as low communication range and hazard-
afﬂicted circuits that have been encountered by organic printed
devices with similar hardware complexity. The causes for it
were led back in the used conductive inks and ﬂuctuations
at the printing process. Hence, the speciﬁed hardware param-
eters may vary drastically, so that the printed polymer tags
may exhibit unexpected and consequently unwanted behavior.
However, the development and testing of novel conductive inks
in material science, and improving the design rules for printing
circuits on large area substrates, promises to resolve current
issues of mass production in the near future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the project Polytos, in the
BMBF funded cluster ”Printed Organic Circuits and Chips”.
REFERENCES
[1]
Organic Electronics Association, “OE-A Roadmap for organic and
printed electronics,” White Paper, 2008.
[2]
P. Jakimovski, F. Becker, S. Sigg, H. R. Schmidtke, and M. Beigl,
“Collective communication for dense sensing environments,” Intelligent
Environments, International Conference on, vol. 0, 2011, pp. 157–164.
[3]
K. Myny et al., “An inductively-coupled 64b organic rﬁd tag operating
at 13.56mhz with a data rate of 787b/s,” in Solid-State Circuits
Conference, 2008. ISSCC 2008. Digest of Technical Papers. IEEE
International, 2008, pp. 290–614.
[4]
M. Jung et al., “All-printed and roll-to-roll-printable 13.56-mhz-
operated 1-bit rf tag on plastic foils,” Electron Devices, IEEE Transac-
tions on, vol. 57, no. 3, 2010, pp. 571–580.
[5]
P. Harrop. Sunchon university printed transistors. IDTechEx. [Online].
Available:
http://www.printedelectronicsworld.com/print-articles.asp?
articleids=2664 [retrieved: April, 2014]
[6]
The
kovio
website.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.kovio.com/
[retrieved: April, 2014]
[7]
M. Islam and N. Karmakar, “A novel compact printable dual-polarized
chipless rﬁd system,” Microwave Theory and Techniques, IEEE Trans-
actions on, vol. 60, no. 7, 2012, pp. 2142–2151.
[8]
B. Shao, Q. Chen, Y. Amin, R. Liu, and L. Zheng, “Chipless
rﬁd tags fabricated by fully printing of metallic inks,” annals of
telecommunications - annales des tlcommunications, vol. 68, no.
7-8, 2013, pp. 401–413. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
s12243-013-0378-3
[9]
S. Preradovic and N. Karmakar, “Fully printable chipless rﬁd tag,”
in Advanced Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation Design and Applications,
D. S. Preradovic, Ed., 2011.
[10]
P. Jakimovski, H. R. Schmidtke, S. Sigg, L. W. F. Chaves, and M. Beigl,
“Collective communication for dense sensing environments,” JAISE,
vol. 4, no. 2, 2012, pp. 123–134.
[11]
E. Cantatore et al., “A 13.56-mhz rﬁd system based on organic transpon-
ders,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 42, no. 1, 2007, pp.
84–92.
[12]
A. Ullmann, M. Bhm, J. Krumm, and W. Fix, “Polymer multi-bit rﬁd
transponder,” in ICOE, June 2007, pp. 4–7.
[13]
K. Myny et al., “Plastic circuits and tags for 13.56 mhz radio-frequency
communication,” Solid-State Electronics, vol. 53, 2009, pp. 1220–1226.
[14]
J. Krumm and W. Clemens, “Printed electronicsﬁrst circuits, products,
and roadmap,” in AACD Workshop, 2010, pp. 333–346.
[15]
M. B¨ohm, A System Study for RFID, Transponders Based on Polymer
Semiconductors.
Cuvillier Verlag, 2007.
[16]
K. Finkenzeller and D. M¨uller, RFID Handbook: Fundamentals and Ap-
plications in Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation
and Near-Field Communication.
Wiley, 2010.
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

