Throughput Analysis of Full Duplex Communication
with Asymmetric Trafﬁc in Small Cell Systems
Nurul H. Mahmood1, Gilberto Berardinelli1 and Preben Mogensen1,2
1Wireless Communication Networks Section, Dept. of Electronics Systems
Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
email: {nhm, gb, pm}@es.aau.dk
Frank Frederiksen2
2Nokia Networks
Aalborg, Denmark
email: frank.frederiksen@nokia.com
Abstract—Full duplex communication promises a 100% through-
put gain by enabling simultaneous transmission and reception.
However, such simultaneous communication leads to a correspond-
ing increase in the network interference. In addition, full duplex
communication can only be exploited when trafﬁc is available in
both uplink and downlink directions; while, cellular network trafﬁc
tend to be downlink heavy in practice. The potential throughput
gains of full duplex communication over conventional half duplex
transmission in a small cell network with asymmetric trafﬁc con-
ditions are investigated in this contribution using network analysis
tools from stochastic geometry. The analytical ﬁndings are further
conﬁrmed through computer-based Monte-Carlo simulations. Asym-
metric downlink/uplink trafﬁc pattern and the increased network
interference stemming from full duplex transmissions are found to
limit its potential performance to well below the promised 100%
throughput gain.
Index Terms—Full duplex communication; small cells; stochastic
geometry; 5G.
I. INTRODUCTION
Full duplex communication, i.e. simultaneous transmission
and reception over the same frequency band, promises a 100%
throughput gain over conventional half duplex (HD) transmis-
sions. Historically, full duplex (FD) communication had been
considered impractical due to the overwhelming loopback in-
terference from the transmission-end. Recent advances in self-
interference cancellation (SIC) in both analog and digital domain
allow suppressing this loopback interference to within tolerable
limits, thereby making FD communication appealing with viable
costs [1]. In that respect, FD has the potential of becoming a
signiﬁcant breakthrough in the design of a novel 5th Generation
(5G) radio access technology.
Alongside the self interference, the promise of doubling the
network throughput (TP) through FD communication with respect
to HD transmission may be jeopardized by a number of other
factors. Simultaneous transmissions from both ends of a commu-
nication link inevitably results in extra interference to the network
compared to conventional HD transmission [2]. Furthermore, FD
transmissions can only be exploited with trafﬁc available at both
downlink (DL) and uplink (UL) directions; whereas in practice,
networks have a trafﬁc proﬁle skewed in favor of the DL direction.
The TP performance of wireless networks with FD capable
radios have been investigated in [3]–[5] among others. The
authors in [3] show that FD capabilities can signiﬁcantly increase
the aggregate throughput of current cellular systems with FD
enabled access points (AP) and HD user equipments (UE) under
symmetric trafﬁc conditions and relatively isolated cells. On a
different note, reference [5] considers a large wireless network
and analytically investigates the TP gain of FD communication
using stochastic geometry tools.
Building on our earlier system level simulations based exercise
investigating the performance of local area network with FD-
capable radios [4], the TP performance of FD communication in
a small cell system is analytically derived in this contribution.
We consider a ﬁxed number of small cells, where the APs and
UEs in each cell transmit randomly with independent transmission
probabilities. Statistics of the random interference power at a
generic receiver are thereby obtained analytically, and applied
to evaluate the corresponding ergodic TP for the equivalent
FD/HD system. Analytical ﬁndings are further validated through
simulations.
Similar to [5], stochastic geometry based tools are used in
this study to model the wireless network. However, reference [5]
models the wireless network as a Poisson point process (PPP),
which better reﬂects an ad-hoc network with a large number of
nodes [6]. Here, the network is modelled as a binomial point
process (BPP), which closely reﬂects a local area network with
an arbitrary number of small cells [6]. Furthermore, we derive
the TP gain of FD while in
[5] only upper and lower bounds
are found. Finally, we address asymmetric UL/DL trafﬁc proﬁles
which are typically disregarded in analytical studies.
Organization: Section II introduces the system model, fol-
lowed by statistical representation of the sum interference power
in Section III. Numerical results and concluding remarks are then
presented in Sections IV and V respectively.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider a local area system with a number of small
cells distributed in a circular area R of radius R in the two-
dimensional plane R2. Each small cell consists of an AP and
a single active UE. Our analysis focuses on the performance of
a generic reference cell with the desired receiver located at the
origin. K interfering cells are assumed to be uniformly distributed
around the reference cell, as shown in Figure 1.
The locations of the interfering nodes (i.e. APs and UEs) can
be modelled as realizations of random spatial point processes.
Such an assumption allows us to analyze the problem in hand
using tools from stochastic geometry [6]. Each interfering cell
can be modelled as two independent and identically distributed
(iid) points in R representing the AP and UE respectively. The
resulting wireless network with a ﬁxed number of nodes can
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

be modelled as the BPP, which closely represents a small cell
system [6].
A slotted ALOHA access protocol is considered, where at
any given time, the AP and UE in cell k transmits data with
independent access probabilities ρAP,k and ρUE,k respectively.
The desired transmitter receiver separation distance is ﬁxed at d
meters. Assuming R ≫ d, the UL and the DL transmissions in the
reference cell can be considered to experience similar interference
conditions.
Figure 1. System Model depicting the Reference cell at the center of R with a
random number of interfering cells in FD or HD transmission mode.
Signal Model: The interference power at the desired receiver
from a random interferer k located rk meters away is given by
ζk = ηgβ(rk), where η = η0pν is a constant path loss factor
accounting for the transmit power p, the interference isolation
among neighbouring cells ν (commonly known as wall loss) and
η0 : the path loss at reference distance.
A. Sum Interference Power from Multiple Interferers
Let Ω ∈ {FD(AP), FD(UE), HD} denote the index of set
of interferers with the respective transmission mode. Note that,
the APs and UEs can both transmit simultaneously with FD
transmission, whereas either the AP or the UE of a particular
cell transmits in the conventional HD case. The sum interference
power for the various transmission modes is modelled in this
subsection.
1) Distribution of the Number of Interfering Cells: Due to
the assumed slotted ALOHA random access mode, the number
of active interfering cells is a random variable (r.v.). Assuming
each cell transmits independently with probability ρΩ; let ΛΩ(ρΩ)
represent the number of active interferers for the transmission
mode Ω with λ ∈ {0, 1, . . . , K} being its realization. By virtue
of the assumed BPP network model, the probability mass function
(PMF) of ΛΩ(ρΩ) is given as [8]
fΛΩ(ρΩ)(λ; ρΩ) =
K
λ

ρλ
Ω (1 − ρΩ)K−λ .
(1)
2) Sum Interference Power with HD Transmission: In the
conventional HD case, a particular cell can only transmit in
either the UL or the DL direction. Considering independent UL
and DL trafﬁc, the transmission probability of a particular cell
is given by ρHD = ρAP + ρUE − ρAP ρUE. Note, henceforth
we assume ρAP,k = ρAP and ρUE,k = ρUE ∀k. The sum
interference power with HD transmission is then readily given
by ζHD = P
k∈ΛHD(ρHD) ζk, where ζk is the interference from
a single random interferer.
3) Sum Interference Power with FD Transmission: With FD
transmissions, the AP and the UE can both transmit simul-
taneously as long as there are available packets to transmit.
Therefore, the APs and the UEs can be treated as two different
sets of interferers with the respective transmission probabilities
ρAP and ρUE. Correspondingly, the total interference with FD
transmission is the sum of the interference contributions from
the set of APs and the UEs, i.e. ζF D = ζF D(AP ) + ζF D(UE),
where ζF D(AP )
=
P
k∈ΛF D(AP )(ρAP ) ζk
and ζF D(UE)
=
P
k∈ΛF D(UE)(ρUE) ζk.
B. Ergodic Throughput Calculation
In this contribution, we consider the Shannon rate R(γ) =
log2(1 + γ) as a measure of the instantaneous throughput, where
γ is the instantaneous signal to interference plus noise ratio
(SINR). Let φ denote the desired signal power at the considered
receiver. The instantaneous SINR for the transmission mode
Ω ∈ {FD, HD} can be expressed as γΩ =
φ
ζΩ+N0 , where N0 is
the additive white Gaussian noise power. The ergodic TP can be
obtained by averaging the instantaneous TP over the distribution
of the SINR i.e. RΩ = EγΩ [log2(1 + γΩ)] , where EX [·] is the
expectation operator over the distribution of the r.v. X. This
expectation requires a two-fold integration over the distributions
of φ and ζΩ, and is not easy to evaluate directly. A simpler
expression for the ergodic TP involving a single integration
can instead be obtained using the moment generating functions
(MGF) of the φ and ζΩ as follows [9]
RΩ =
1
ln(2)
Z ∞
0
MζΩ(s/N0) (1 − Mφ(s/N0))
s
exp(−s) ds,
(2)
where MζΩ(s) and Mφ(s) are the MGFs of ζΩ and φ respec-
tively, which are derived in Section III below. Eq. (2) can be easily
evaluated using mathematical software or suitable numerical
integration techniques.
Throughput Gain of Full duplex over Half duplex
The TP gain of FD over HD transmission is given as
ξ = TPF D − TPHD
TPHD
,
(3)
where TPHD = ρHDRHD and TPF D = (ρAP + ρUE)RF D are
the average TP at the reference cell with HD and FD transmission
mode, respectively.
III. STATISTICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE SIGNAL POWERS
Following [10], we deﬁne the MGF of a r.v. x to be a function
of the complex variable s with a negative argument as follows:
Mx(s) = E [exp(−sx)]. The MGFs MζΩ(s) and Mφ(s) of the
r.vs ζΩ and φ are derived in this section.
A. MGF of the Desired Signal Power φ
Assuming the transmit power at the desired transmitter, and
the desired channel fading power gain are given by p0 and
g0 respectively, the power of the received signal of interest is
φ = η0p0g0β(d). Considering g0, which is the only r.v. in φ, to
be Gamma distributed with parameter m, the MGF of φ readily
evaluates to Mφ(s) =

1 + sη0p0β(d)
m
−m
[10].
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

B. MGF of the Single Cell Interference Power ζk
The MGF of the interference power from a random interferer k
located rk meters away is given by Mζk(s) = E
h
exp (−sζk)
i
=
Eg,β(rk)
h
exp (−sηgβ (rk))
i
.
Corollary III.1. The distribution of the distance dependent path
loss β(rk) is given by
fβ(rk)(t) =
2
αR2

t− 2
α −1 − t− 1
α −1
, (1+R)−α ≤ t ≤ 1. (4)
Proof. Under uniform distribution of a user, the distribution
of the random distance rk between a generic receiver located
at the origin and a random transmitter k in R is given by
frk(r) =
2r
R2 for 0 ≤ r ≤ R [8]. The distribution of β(rk) in
Eq. (4) follows directly from frk(r) through a change of variable
involving t ≜ β(rk) = (1 + rk)−α.
Using conditional expectations, the MGF of ζk can be ex-
panded as Mζk(s) = Et
h
Eg

exp (−sηgt) |t
i
. Considering g to
be Gamma distributed with parameter m, the inner expectation
over the r.v. g conditioned on t evaluates to

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
20
40
60
80
100
TP gain (%)
ρUE
 
 
Simulation, ρAP = 1
Simulation, ρAP = 0.5
Simulation, ρAP = ρUE
 Analytical TP gain
Figure 2. TP gain of FD over HD transmission with asymmetric trafﬁc.
B. Impact of Trafﬁc Asymmetry in FD System
The FD TP gain is next investigated in a system level setting
with multiple interferers and with variable transmission proba-
bilities ρAP and ρUE. Figure 3 presents the TP gain of FD over
HD vs ρUE with K = 10 potential interferers for different values
of ρAP . The analytical TP gains are found to closely match the
simulation results, as in Figure 2. The maximum TP gain with FD
is more than halved in a system level scenario with wall loss of
up to 5 dB due to the resulting increase in inter-cell interference
(ICI) with FD transmission. The TP gain is expectedly found
to improve with increasing isolation among the cells (i.e. the
wall loss). This reinforces the fact that the increased network
interference due to FD transmissions has an adverse impact on
the promised TP gains.
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
ρUL
TP gain (%)
Simulation, ρAP = 1
Simulation, ρAP = ρUE
Analytical TP gain
Wall Loss, 
ν = 0.5 dB
ν = 5 dB
ν = 20 dB
Figure 3.
Throughput gain of FD over HD communication in a system level
setting with 10 potential interferers with various transmission probabilities ρAP
and different wall loss values ν.
An interesting paradox is observed for the ρAP
= ρUE
scenario. The ICI is reduced at low transmission probabilities
(i.e. low ρAP ). However, opportunities to exploit FD communi-
cation, which is enabled by overlapping channel access at both
ends is also reduced; thereby resulting in the observed low TP
gain. Although detailed results had to be omitted due to space
constraint, our study further reveals that the TP gain of FD also
reduces with increasing the network size K and decreasing the
parameters R and α.
V. CONCLUSION
The potential TP gain of FD communication over conventional
HD transmissions in a dense small cell scenario, as targeted by
the upcoming 5G radio access technology, is analytically derived
and cross validated through extensive Monte Carlo simulations
in this contribution. An ideal SIC transceiver model is assumed
in order to isolate the impact of the interference coupling and
the trafﬁc asymmetry. TP gains obtained numerically are found
to closely match the simulation results. The derived analytical
results provide with a rather simple model to evaluate the potential
performance of FD communication in a system level setting
without invoking lengthy system level simulations.
The results reveal that the mean TP gain of FD over HD is only
100% for an isolated cell. In a system level setting, the TP gains
depend on two critical factors; namely the interference coupling
among the cells, and the availability of trafﬁc at both ends
in order to exploit the FD potential. The interference coupling
among the cells is in turn a function of the wall loss, the path
loss exponent, fading parameters and the user density. Contrary
to the promised 100% gain, modest gains of around 40% was
observed considering realistic parameter values. As part of the
future work, we plan to extend our study of FD by considering
more practical constraints on the transceiver operations; and
investigate algorithms that can better exploit the potential of FD
communication.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Hong et al., “Applications of self-interference cancellation in 5G and
beyond,” IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 114–121, Feb. 2014.
[2] A. Sabharwal et al., “In-band full-duplex wireless: Challenges and opportu-
nities,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 32, no. 9,
pp. 1637–1652, Sep. 2014.
[3] S. Goyal et al., “Full duplex operation for small cells,” submitted to IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, Apr. 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1412.8708.pdf
[4] N. H. Mahmood, G. Berardinelli, F. Tavares, and P. Mogensen, “On the
potential of full duplex communication in 5G small cell networks,” in
Proc. IEEE 81st Vehicular Technology Conference: VTC-Spring, Glasgow,
Scotland, May 2015, to appear.
[5] Z. Tong and M. Haenggi, “Throughput analysis for wireless networks
with full-duplex radios,” in Proc. Wireless Communications and Networking
Conference (WCNC), New Orleans, USA, Mar. 2015.
[6] J. G. Andrews et al., “A primer on spatial modeling and analysis in wireless
networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 2–9, Nov.
2010.
[7] N. H. Mahmood, F. Yilmaz, M.-S. Alouini, and G. E. Øien, “Heterogeneous
next-generation wireless network interference model-and its applications,”
Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies, vol. 25, no. 5,
pp. 563–575, May 2014.
[8] J. Illian, A. Penttinen, H. Stoyan, and D. Stoyan, Statistical Analysis and
Modelling of Spatial Point Patterns, 1st ed.
West Sussex, England: John
Wiley & Sons, Jan. 2008.
[9] K. A. Hamdi, “A useful lemma for capacity analysis of fading interference
channels,” IEEE Transaction on Communications, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 411–
416, Feb. 2010.
[10] M. K. Simon and M.-S. Alouini, Digital Communication over Fading
Channels, 2nd ed.
New Jersey, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Dec. 2005.
[11] M. Abramowitz and I. Stegun, Eds., Handbook of Mathematical Functions
with Formulas, Graphs, and Mathematical Tables, 2nd ed.
New York,
USA: Dover Publications, 1972.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

