Figure 1. Measurement set-up 
Statistical Analysis and Re-generation of the Radiated Disturbances from Multiple 
Noise Sources  
 
Suna Choi and Jong-wha Kwon 
Radio Technology Research Department 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Deajeon, Republic of Korea 
sunachoi@etri.re.kr 
 
 
 
Abstract—A re-generation method of radiated disturbances 
from multiple noise sources using statistical approach is 
suggested. The radiated disturbances from multiple noise 
sources consisting of an electric board and a Plasma Display 
Panel (PDP) TV are investigated. The frequency spectrum and 
the Amplitude Probability Distribution (APD) of radiated 
noises are measured. The radiated magnetic field from each 
noise source is measured below 30MHz, and then APD 
measurement is progressed at the frequencies where the noise 
sources radiate high disturbances in common. A sequence of 
noise pulses is observed from PDP TV, and the behavior of the 
APD of the electric board noise is similar to the Gaussian noise. 
The parameters of the disturbances are extracted using the 
Middleton’s class A noise model and approximate empirical 
method. From the extracted parameters, random noise data is 
re-generated and radiated using a signal generator and 
antenna. APD Comparison of the measured multiple noises 
and re-generated noises is performed. The results show that 
the re-generation noises are well matched to measured noises. 
The re-generated noise can be applied to the performance 
evaluation of communication systems against non-Gaussian 
multiple noises circumstances. 
Keywords-multiple noise sources; radiated disturbance; 
amplitude probability distributio;, electric boar; plasma display 
panel. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As the number of electric devices used in real situation is 
increased, problems of radiated interferences from multiple 
noise sources are more serious. In general, the multiple 
noises are assumed as Additive White Gaussian Noise 
(AWGN) [1] environments and most communication 
systems are designed to achieve optimal performance in 
AWGN environment. However, there are some applications 
where non-Gaussian noise or impulsive noise is dominant. 
Therefore, the performance evaluations of communications 
systems against the real multiple noise circumstance are 
necessary.  
Since applying the performance evaluation in real 
situation has many difficulties, it is importance to re-generate 
the multiple noises in laboratory circumstance. The statistical 
analysis of multiple noises is required because the noise 
condition is not constant but various according to the time in 
real circumstance. Amplitude Probability Distribution (APD) 
measurement gives probabilistic information about the 
disturbances, which has higher sensitivity and repeatability 
than existing methods, such as peak or quasi-peak 
measurements [2]-[4].  
In this paper, a re-generation method of radiated 
disturbances from multiple noise sources using statistical 
approach is suggested. An electric board and a PDP TV are 
selected as noise sources for realizing an example of a real 
multiple noise circumstance. The spectra and APDs of 
radiated noises are measured according to the measurement 
methods from international standards of the special 
international committee on radio interference (CISPR) [5]. 
The statistical characteristics are analyzed using the 
Middleton’s Class A noise model [6], which has been widely 
adopted due to the excellent agreement with measurement 
data. The parameters of the radiated noises are extracted 
using the approximate empirical method [7]-[8]. Using the 
extracted parameters, random noise data which has the 
statistically identical characteristics with the multiple noises 
is generated via a simulator. Then, the generated random 
noise is radiated in the air using a signal generator and an 
antenna. 
Applying the suggested noise re-generation approach, 
radio noises which are statistically identical to the measured 
multiple noises can be radiated. Therefore, the performance 
evaluation of devices against the multiple noises in real 
circumstance can be performed easily in laboratory 
circumstance. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
(a) 
 
      
          (b)  
 
Figure 3. Noise fluctuations at 5.15MHz (a) Electric Board (b) PDP TV 
 
 
Figure 2. Disturbance spectra from noise sources 
II. 
MEASUREMENT  
A. Measurement set-up 
The special international committee on radio interference 
(CISPR) regulates the measurement methods of radiated 
disturbance. CISPR11[9] and CISPR16-1-4 [10] provide the 
measurement method of the magnetic field below 30MHz 
using an Open Area Test Site (OATS) method, and CISPR15 
[11] provides another measurement method below 30MHz 
using a loop antenna system .  
We performed the measurements of the radiated noises 
from multiple sources in an anechoic chamber according to 
the measurement method of OATS. As shown in Fig. 1, the 
antenna is a loop with 0.6m diameter, and the separation 
distance between the antenna and multiple sources is 3m. 
The electric board and PDP TV composing the multiple 
noise sources are placed side by side. The radiated noises are 
measured in terms of magnetic field strength in dB (uA/m).  
B. Radiatedmagnetic  field from 150k to 30MHz 
Measurements of radiated magnetic fields of a multiple 
noises are performed in the peak mode with 9 kHz resolution 
bandwidth (RBW). The radiated disturbance is entirely 
measured from 150 kHz to 30 MHz, when each of the 
electric board and PDP TV is operated and then both of them 
are activated simultaneously. As presented in fig. 2, high 
radiated disturbance from electric board is shown at the 
fundamental frequency of 1.71MHz and the harmonic 
frequencies. Several high disturbances shown between 
5MHz and 8MHz is supposed to come from inside circuits 
composing the electric board. The PDP TV shows more 
dense disturbances at the fundamental frequency of 240kHz 
and the harmonic frequencies. The disturbances from 
multiple noise sources show the combined shape of the two 
noises.  
To investigate the fluctuation of noises according to the 
time, the radiated noise is measured with zero frequency 
range. Fig. 3 shows an example of each noise fluctuation 
from the electric board and PDP TV measured at 5.15MHz. 
The disturbances from electric board show relatively slight 
variation according to the time, whereas the noise from PDP 
TV shows high fluctuation periodically. 
C. APD measurement at the common frequencies 
APD 
measurement 
method 
gives 
probabilistic 
information about the disturbance. The ordinate axis of the 
APD curve displays the probability that the disturbance 
envelope exceeds the abscissa level. When there is no 
impulsive input, the APD curve is gradually declined from 
the left top to the right side of bottom. When impulses are 
received, the APD shows drastic extension to the right side 
in the middle of the curve and the peak value of impulse 
appears on the abscissa of APD. 
To investigate the effect of radiated disturbance from 
multiple noise sources, APD measurement is made at 
frequencies where both of the electric board and the PDP TV 
generate high disturbances. From the disturbance spectra of 
fig. 2, frequencies of 3.43, 5.15, 6.13 and 7.11MHz are 
selected. At each frequency, APD measurements are 
performed for 120 second using R&S ESU EMI receiver. Fig. 
4 shows the APD measurement results of radiated noises 
from each of the electric board and PDP TV and both noise 
sources.  
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE I.           PARAMETERS OF THE MULTIPLE NOISES 
Frequency  
[MHz] 
Electric 
Board 
PDP TV 
Electric Board 
+ PDP TV 
A 
Γ 
A 
Γ 
A 
Γ 
3.43 
0 
0.007 
0.22 
0.0048 
0.23 
0.0125 
5.15 
0 
0.01 
0.195 
0.0028 
0.2 
0.011 
6.13 
0 
0.038 
0.19 
0.0014 
0.19 
0.006 
7.11 
0 
0.0063 
0.215 
0.0013 
0.21 
0.007 
 
          
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
                          (b)  
 
            
 
 
 
 
     (c) 
 
 
 
 
 
                           (d)  
 
Figure 4. APD measurements of multiple noises (a) At 3.43MHz (b) At 5.15MHz (c) At 6.13MHz (d) At 7.11MHz 
At all the measured frequencies, the APD graphs of 
electric board show gradual decrease. On the other hand, the 
APDs of PDP TV are gradually decreased and extended in 
the middle of curve. The APD shapes of multiple noises are 
similar to those of the PDP TV; however, the levels in the 
left side are higher than those of PDP TV due to the effects 
of noise from electric board. Uniquely, the APD of multiple 
noises at 5.15MHz is less than that of electric board in some 
range. It is considered that the noises from electric board and 
PDP TV are cancelled out by the each other.  
III. 
EXTRACTION OF NOISE PARAMETERS 
The characteristics of multiple noises can be investigated 
by applying Middleton’s Class A noise model. The model is 
appropriate to describe a highly impulsive interference and 
show good agreement with measurement data. It is defined 
by two parameters of A and Г. A is the impulsive index 
which is the product of the mean number of disturbance 
events per second and the mean length of a disturbance.  Г is 
the Gaussian factor, as the ratio of mean power of the 
Gaussian component and that of impulsive non-Gaussian 
component. 
Approximate empirical method is applied to estimate 
noise parameters. A is approximately extracted at the point 
where the sharp rise in disturbance versus probability occurs. 
Γ is extracted at the point where the straight-line starts to 
bend in probability versus disturbance. The smaller is A, the 
properties of the disturbance are dominated by the 
characteristic of typical, individual impulses and the 
disturbance shows the non-Gaussian properties. However, as 
A is close to zero, the noise exhibits a Gaussian property. 
The smaller is Γ, the intensity of non-Gaussian component 
is stronger related to the Gaussian component of the 
disturbance. 
Table I shows the noise parameters extracted from the 
APD measurement, when each of the electric board and PDP 
TV is operated and then both of them are activated 
simultaneously. At all frequencies, the values of A parameter 
of electric board are nearly 0. This means the disturbances 
from the electric board are non-impulsive Gaussian noises. 
When investigating the A parameters extracted from the PDP 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

          
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
                            (b)  
 
             
 
 
 
 
     (c) 
 
 
 
 
 
                           (d)  
 
Figure 5. APD Comparison of measured multiple noises and re-generated noises (a) At 3.43MHz (b) At 5.15MHz (c) At 6.13MHz (d) At 7.11MHz 
TV and multiple noise sources, they show similar values at 
each frequency. It means the impulsive components of 
multiple noise sources mostly come from the PDP TV, 
whereas, Γ parameters of the PDP TV and multiple sources 
have different values at each frequency. The Г values of 
multiple noise sources are higher than those of PDP TV. It is 
because the non-impulsive noises from electric board are 
applied to the multiple noises.  
IV. 
NOISE RE-GENERATION 
Using the extracted noise parameters, multiple noises are 
re-generated. The statistical functions are determined by the 
parameter values of A and Γ, and the random noise data 
following the determined statistical functions are generated 
using a simulator tool. For each measured frequency, one 
million points of random data are generated. The data is 
downloaded to a signal generator and radiated through an 
antenna. The re-generated noise is measured by another 
antenna. Fig. 5 shows the comparisons of APD graphs of 
measured multiple noises and re-generated noises at each 
frequency. Even though there is slight difference between 
two APD graphs at the left side at 7.11MHz, the APD shapes 
of re-generated noises are generally well matched to that of 
measured noises.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The re-generation method of radiated disturbances from 
multiple noise sources using statistical approach was 
suggested. The statistical 
characteristics 
of 
radiated 
disturbance from multiple noise sources are analyzed 
through the APD measurement. The radiated noises from 
electric board and PDP TV are measured from 150 kHz to 30 
MHz, and then frequencies where both noise sources radiate 
disturbances in common are selected. At each frequency, the 
APD is measured and then the characteristic parameters of 
the noises are extracted using the Middleton’s class A noise 
model and approximate empirical method. Random noise 
data is re-generated from the extracted parameters and 
radiated using a signal generator and antenna. APD 
Comparison of the measure multiple noises and re-generated 
noises shows that re-generated noises reproduce the 
measured multiple noises with the similar statistical 
characteristics. The re-generated noise can be applied to the 
performance evaluation of electric devices against the 
multiple noises. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was funded by the MSIP (Ministry of 
Science, ICT & Future Planning), Korea in the ICT R&D 
Program 2013 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. Sklar,  Digital Communications., 1988 :Prentice-Hall 
[2] CISPR 16-1-1, Specification for radio disturbance and immunity 
measuring apparatus and methods Part 1-1: Radio disturbance and 
immunity measuring apparatus – Measuring apparatus,  Edition 3.1., 
Nov. 2010 
[3] CISPR 16-2-3, Specification for radio disturbance and immunity 
measuring apparatus and methods  Part 2-3: Methods of measurement 
of disturbances and immunity – Radiated disturbance measurements, 
Edition 3.1, Aug, 2010, Jun. 2009 
[4] K. Wiklundh, “The relation between the amplitude probability 
distribution of an interfering Signal and its impact on digital radio 
recerivers,” IEEE Transaction on Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 
48, no. 3,  Aug. 2006, pp. 537-544 
[5] S. Choi, Y. Shim, and S. Park, “APD analysis of the radiated 
disturbance from the plasma display panel TVs,” International 
Conference on  ICT convergence, Oct. 2012, pp. 170-174 
[6] D. Middleton, “Statistical physical models of electromagnetic 
interference,” IEEE transaction on Electromagneic Compatibility, vol. 
EM-19, no. 3, Aug. 1977, pp. 106-127 
[7] D. Middleton, “Procedures for determining the parameters of the first 
order canonical models of class A and class B electromagnetic 
interference,” IEEE transaction on Electromagneic Compatibility, vol. 
EM-21, no. 2, Aug. 1979, pp. 190-208 
[8] L. A. Berry, “ Understanding Middelton’s canonical formula for class 
A noise,” IEEE transaction on Electromagneic Compatibility, vol. 
EM-23, no. 3, Nov. 1981, pp. 337-344 
[9] CISPR 11, Industrial, scientific and medical equipment – Radio-
frequency disturbance characteristics – Limits and methods of 
measurement, Edition 5.1, May  2010 
[10] CISPR 16-1-4, Specification for radio disturbance and immunity 
measuring apparatus and methods - Antennas and test sites for 
radiated disturbance measurements, Ed.3.0, Apr.  2010 
[11] CISPR 15, Limits and methods of measurment of radio disturbance 
characteristic of electrical lightning, Ed. 7.0,  Dec. 2005 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

