 
 
 
Spatial Reuse and Interference-Aware Slot Scheduling in a Distributed TDMA MANET System 
 
Isabelle Labbé, Jean-François Roy, Francis St-Onge, Benoit Gagnon 
Communications Research Centre 
Ottawa, ON, Canada 
{isabelle.labbe, jean-francois.roy, francis.st-onge, benoit.gagnon}@crc.gc.ca 
 
 
Abstract— One of the goals pursued by this work is to gain a 
better understanding of the conditions for which spatial reuse 
in distributed TDMA ad-hoc networks is possible. Such 
understanding 
becomes 
particularly 
important 
when 
considering modern ad hoc networking. With the emergence of 
software programmable radios that support multiple modes of 
operations, the effects incurred by operating in low vs high 
spectral-efficiency mode should be well understood and ideally 
addressed by the protocol layers if system efficiency is to be 
preserved.  A distributed TDMA system presented in [1] is re-
visited to make use of an extended interference model. The 
extended interference model combines the graph-based 
interference model with the SINR-based interference model. A 
description of the cross-layering communication developed 
between the MAC and the PHY layers to support the model is 
given. The performance of the TDMA system is evaluated in 
simulation for both, the graph-based model and the extended 
model. The effect of the propagation environment (path loss 
exponent) and of the modulation requirement on spatial slot 
reuse is studied. Results show that network performance of the 
graph-based model rapidly degrades as the spectral-efficiency 
mode increases. The impact is even greater with decreasing 
values of the path loss exponent. In comparison, the extended 
model produces good performance results in all operating 
conditions. 
 
 
Keywords- spatial reuse, interference, slot scheduling, 
distributed TDMA Ad Hoc Network. 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs) have a 
continued growth in bandwidth demand mainly driven by 
the introduction of new user services and applications.  A 
solution to providing increased capacity of wireless systems 
is to operate over wider bands so that more information can 
be sent. But because spectrum resources are limited and its 
usage restricted, this solution is not always possible and 
certainly not sustainable in the long term.  An alternative 
approach in delivering increased capacity has been the 
development of high spectral-efficiency radios.  High 
spectral-efficiency radios make use of advanced modulation 
techniques to transmit a higher capacity of bearer data 
without increasing the assigned channel bandwidth.  The 
approach, however, is not without tradeoffs. The most 
important one being range. Operations at high spectral-
efficiency modes will invariably reduce the achievable 
communication range. A strategy to compensate for the loss 
of range is to employ multi-hop network relaying.  This 
approach of sacrificing range to the benefit of capacity 
(transmitting at high spectral-efficiency modes) while 
relying on relays to extend the coverage seems to be 
establishing in MANETs.  This is the case in military 
tactical networks, for example, where there is an increasing 
need for more bandwidth to support the explosion of IP-
centric operations and where multi-hop relay capability is 
very desirable to connect nodes that are temporarily out of 
range under terrain impediments or node movements. 
 
In the past two decades, many protocols that address 
multi-hop capabilities in MANETs have been proposed. 
Amongst them, TDMA-based protocols have received much 
attention mainly because of their ability to provide QoS 
guarantees. An interesting characteristic of TDMA-based 
media access control (MAC) protocols is their potential for 
achieving higher network capacity through spatial reuse of 
the time slots [2]. Spatial reuse allows geographically 
separated nodes to schedule concurrent transmissions. The 
challenge of spatial reuse lies with the capability of 
generating an efficient scheduling algorithm that takes 
interference into account to prevent unnecessary message 
losses. Hence, an accurate modeling of interference is 
fundamental.  
 
A large majority of the slot schedule designs (and thus of 
the slot reuse schemes) described in the literature have 
assumed a simple disk signal coverage model also known as 
the graph-based interference model [3-7].  In the recent 
years, the poor validity of the graph-based interference 
model and its unrealistic propagation representation has 
received much attention [8-14]. In all of those works, a 
more accurate physical interference model that uses the 
signal-to-interference-and-noise ratio (SINR) to describe the 
aggregate interference in the network is instead proposed. A 
comparison between the two interference models and their 
impact on network performance is presented in [8].  The 
simulation results show that in some cases, graph-based 
scheduling 
performance suffers 
when compared to 
interference-based scheduling.  The study, however, does 
not consider various propagation models.  The performance 
evaluations are presented for a specific path loss exponent 
value and for fixed communication and interference 
thresholds only.  In [11-14], heuristic algorithms that build 
TDMA link schedules by taking into account the more 
accurate physical interference model are proposed.  Most, if 
not all, lack presenting their work within the context of an 
actual protocol (i.e., as an integrated component).  This 
leaves open important aspects of ad hoc networking such as 
294
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
information distribution and conflict resolution.  The 
problem is then formulated under simplified and/or 
unrealistic assumptions that undermine the practical 
relevance of the work. 
 
In this paper, spatial reuse for distributed TDMA-based 
ad hoc networks is investigated.  Several papers that 
consider both interference models present their work 
assuming a particular communication model in which the 
propagation parameters (e.g., radio power, SNR, path loss 
exponent) are set to the specific environment under study. 
Different from those, we take a generic approach to the 
characterization of spatial reuse. Our characterization tries 
to establish the conditions of operation for which a given 
interference model is valid. This is achieved by defining the 
set of parameters that have the greater impact on the 
interference models. Once identified, the conditions under 
which spatial reuse is deemed possible are derived for each 
model.  
 
Based on the results obtained from the spatial reuse 
characterization, we present an extended interference model 
that combines the graph-based model with the SINR-based 
model.  We validate the approach by integrating the 
proposed extended model into an actual prototype 
implementation of a TDMA-based MAC protocol [1]. An 
overview of the MAC-PHY cross layering approach used in 
support of the integration is provided along with the 
enhancements made to the distributed dynamic slot 
scheduling scheme. Using network simulation, we evaluate 
the performance of the TDMA system for various 
conditions of operation.  In particular, we study the effects 
of operating the radios in low vs high spectral-efficiency 
modes.  We also verify the impact of varying the path loss 
model.  Performance results are presented for both the 
original protocol design (which was based on the graph 
interference model only) and the re-visited design (which is 
now based on the combined interference model). 
 
II.  NETWORK CONNECTIVITY MODELS 
A.  The Graph-based Interference Model 
 
 
Most scheduling algorithms proposed for distributed 
TDMA-based multi-hop networks use a simplified binary 
propagation 
model. 
This 
model 
assumes 
a 
radio 
transmission range that stops at a finite border i.e., it 
assumes no or negligible residual energy beyond that 
border. 
Direct 
node-to-node 
connectivity 
(1-hop 
neighborhood) is possible for all nodes located inside a 
transmitter’s disk coverage.   
 
In the graph model (such as shown in Figure 1), the 
interference from direct neighbors of a receiver is 
considered while cumulative interferences from nodes 
beyond 1-hop from the receiver are ignored. 
 
 
Figure 1:  Simple disk-based network connectivity model 
 
The MAC protocols elaborated under this model will 
typically try to maintain collision-free slot allocations by 
respecting the following conditions: 
 
 
When traffic is intended for all neighbors (typically 
referred to as node scheduling), a communication from node 
I to all 1-hop neighbors is successful if no other node within 
node I’s 2-hop neighborhood (in this case, nodes A, B, C, 
D,E, F, H and J) is transmitting in the same time slot as 
transmitter node I. 
 
When traffic is intended for an individual neighbor 
(typically referred to as link scheduling), a communication 
from node J to receiver node I is successful if: 
- Receiver node I and its 1-hop neighbors (in this case, 
nodes C, D and E) are not transmitting in the same time slot 
as transmitter node J; 
- node J’s neighbors (in this case, nodes C, D, E, F, H and I) 
are not receiving in the same time slot as transmitter node J.   
 
Based on the above, a slot reuse schedule can be 
obtained for nodes that are geographically separated.  For 
example, slot reuse for node-scheduled transmissions will 
be possible when transmitter nodes are separated by a 
distance of at least 3 hops. Similarly, slot reuse for link-
scheduled transmissions will be possible between 1-hop 
transmitter nodes if their respective intended receivers are at 
least 3-hops apart. Such spatial slot reuse scheduling has 
been used by many distributed multi-hop TDMA MAC 
protocols to increase the capacity of the network and 
maximize the throughput [3, 5]. The drawback of this 
network 
connectivity 
representation 
is 
the 
over-
simplification of the radio model by assuming that the signal 
of a transmitter node has no or negligible interference effect 
beyond a fixed propagation radius/range.  This assumption 
may be valid under some specific conditions, as will be 
discussed further, but in many cases, this unrealistic 
representation of the propagation model may seriously 
impact the slot reuse scheme (and thus the overall capacity 
of the network).  
 
B.  The Physical Interference Model 
 
 
An alternative and more accurate approach for achieving 
efficient spatial slot reuse is to consider the full interference 
environment i.e., to include in the connectivity model the 
295
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
contributions of all received signals, namely the ones that 
are too weak to provide reliable communication but yet, can 
still cause a non-negligible interference.  This model is 
known as the physical interference model [8, 9].  The 
physical interference model is based on signal propagation 
properties and the distance between the nodes.  The SINR is 
used as a measure of the perceived network interference at a 
receiver node.  A transmission is successfully received if the 
SINR at the receiver is higher than a given threshold.   
 
To establish the conditions under which spatial reuse 
will be possible in the SINR interference model, we derive 
the minimal distance separation that must be respected 
between the main transmitter node and an interfering node 
(simultaneous tx) as a function of SINR values at the 
receiver.  Figure 2 illustrates a possible node-scheduled slot 
reuse scenario valid under the graph-based interference 
model (since the transmitting nodes T and I are separated by 
a 3-hop distance).  
 
 
Figure 2: Interfering node scenario 
 
Let’s assume that a signal transmission is going from a 
transmitting source node T to a receiver node R.  The 
source node T is located at a distance dt of the receiver node 
R.  At the same time, an interfering node I located at a 
distance di from the receiver node R starts another 
transmission (intended for its own neighbors nodes G, H, M 
and N).  Let Pt denote the power of the signal from the 
transmitter node T. In the absence of interference, it is 
generally accepted that the received power of a signal at the 
receiver is obtained as the ratio of the transmit power to the 
path loss. The path loss models the signal attenuation over 
the distance. Path loss is caused by the dissipation of power 
radiated by the transmitter as well as the effects of the 
channel propagation.  The complexity of signal propagation 
makes it difficult to obtain a single model that characterizes 
path 
loss 
accurately 
across 
a range 
of 
different 
environments. We choose to use a simple model that 
captures the essence of signal propagation without resorting 
to complicated path loss models which are, in the end, only 
approximations of the real channel. Possible channel 
impediments such as multipath fading and shadowing 
effects are ignored.  The formulation is derived based on the 
classical model for radio signal propagation in wireless 
networks. According to [15], the received power is modeled 
as: 
α
π
λ






=
d
G
P
P
t
r
4
 
 
 
   
 
 
(1) 
 
where Pr is the received power, Pt  is the transmitted power, 
G is the gain of Tx and Rx antennas, λ is the wave length, d 
is the distance between the transmitter and the receiver and 
α is the path loss exponent.  A path loss value α = 2 
corresponds to the open space environment. The open space 
environment models an ideal environment for signal 
propagation.  To account for attenuation due to ground or 
terrain effects, a path loss exponent value greater than 2 is 
generally used (typically 2 < α < 4).  The higher the path 
loss exponent value, the greater the signal attenuation will 
be relative to the distance.   
 
The SINR at receiver node R is defined as follows:  
N
iP
r
P
SINR
+
=
  
 
 
                  (2) 
where Pr denotes the received power of the signal from the 
transmitter node T, Pi denotes the received power of the 
signal from the interfering node I and N represents the 
ambient noise at the receiver.  Ignoring noise (since noise 
background is expected to be much lower than the 
interference signal) and combining (1) and (2), equation (3) 
is obtained: 
α
π
λ
α
π
λ










=
i
d
G
iP
t
d
G
tP
SIR
4
4
  
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
 
We assume a homogenous ad hoc network where all nodes 
transmit at the same power (thus Pt  = Pi ) and at the same 
frequency.  The successful reception of the signal sent by 
the transmitting node T depends on the SIR at node R.  The 
signal is assumed to be valid (successful reception) if the 
SIR is above a certain threshold.  After reduction, formula 
(3) becomes: 
α






=
t
d
i
d
SIR
 
≥  SIRthreshold  
 
 
(4) 
 
The relation of the interference range to the transmission 
range can thus be expressed as follows: 
(
)
α
threshold
SIR
t
d
i
d
≥
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
 
Equation (5) was derived based on the linear path loss 
model.  A more common way of expressing the measured 
296
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
SIR is using a dB value.  Equation(5) with the SIR value 
expressed in dB becomes: 
 








≥ α
10
10
threshold(dB)
SIR
t
d
di
  
 
(6) 
 
Equation (6) shows that for the reception to be successful, a 
minimum relative distance separation between simultaneous 
transmitting nodes must be met.  This relative distance value 
depends on the desired SIR threshold and the particular path 
loss exponent of the propagation environment. The 
conditions for spatial reuse are thus determined by the 
relationship of the interference range (distance of the 
interfering source to the receiver node) to the transmission 
range (distance of the transmitting source to the receiver 
node). The minimum ratio requirement and thus spatial 
reuse conditions can be plotted for various values of 
SIRthreshold and path loss exponents.  Figure 3 shows the 
result for 4 SIRthreshold values and 5 path loss exponent 
values. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
7.5
13.5
20.5
25.7
SIR threshold (dB)
                                                                                                                                               
path loss exp = 2.0
path loss exp = 2.5
path loss exp = 3.0
path loss exp = 3.5
path loss exp = 4.0
 
Figure 3: Min. relative distance separation vs SIR thresholds 
 
To 
illustrate, 
the 
SIRthreshold 
values 
selected 
for 
representation on the graph correspond to Signal-to-Noise 
(SNR) threshold values of an actual tactical VHF/UHF 
OFDM-based modem [1] operating at various modes over a 
200 kHz bandwidth.  For each mode of operation, the SNR 
threshold value corresponding to a Bit Error Rate (BER) of 
10-6 was selected.  A BER value of 10-6 is generally 
considered acceptable to obtain the full rate at the mode of 
operation. The SNR threshold values represented on the 
graph correspond respectively to coded modem rates of 195 
kbps (QPSK), 390 kbps (16QAM), 653 kbps (64QAM) and 
913 kbps (128QAM).   
 
Figure 3 shows an interference to transmission range 
ratio which increases along with spectral efficiency. This 
relation implies that nodes transmitting with lower spectral 
efficiency are likely to achieve greater spatial slot reuse 
(since 
the minimum 
geographical relative 
distance 
requirement between simultaneous transmitting nodes is 
less). Consequently, the increase in network capacity gained 
from spatial slot reuse is expected to be higher when 
operating at a lower rate as opposed to higher rate modes. 
 
The minimum relative distance requirement increases 
even more with decreasing path loss exponent values. For 
example, in the free space propagation environment (where 
path loss exponent value = 2), a relative distance node 
separation greater than 10 is required when operating at a 
64QAM modulation mode.  This ratio decreases to an 
approximate value of 4 when the path loss exponent rises to 
a value of 3.5.  This impact of the path loss exponent is 
significantly reduced at lower SNR values. At QPSK for 
example, a path loss exponent variation of 2 to 3.5 causes 
only a small variation (1.5 to 2.3) of the corresponding 
distance ratio requirement. Lower spectral-efficiency modes 
are thus less affected by the propagation environment than 
higher spectral-efficiency modes. 
 
It should be noted that the results presented in Figure 3 
were obtained assuming only one source of interference.  In 
a typical ad hoc network, contributions are likely to come 
from multiple sources of interference.  In such cases, the 
resulting aggregation of all signals at the receiver will 
impact the distance required for spatial reuse which will 
inevitably increase.  Results derived from eq (6) thus 
constitute a best case scenario.  
 
C.  Limitations of the Graph-based Interference Model 
 
 
We now consider the minimum relative distance 
requirement in the context of the graph-based interference 
model. As previously stated, the graph-based interference 
model ignores the physical reality of RF propagation. The 
model imposes a static spatial separation between 
simultaneous transmitter nodes which does not always meet 
the minimal distance ratio requirement necessary to produce 
collision-free spatial reuse schedules.  To better understand 
the issue, a simple case scenario is illustrated in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4:  Relative distance separation in graph-based model 
 
297
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
For node scheduled transmissions, the graph-based 
interference model imposes a spatial separation of at least 3-
hops between simultaneous transmitter nodes. In Figure 4, 
this means that nodes A, B or G can simultaneously share 
slots with nodes L or V without causing any collision at C, 
D or S.  In reality, this will be true only if the minimum 
relative di/dt ratio is respected for the required SNR 
threshold value. Let’s consider the case where the di/dt ratio 
is maximal. The di/dt ratio will be at its maximum when the 
interference source is located as far as possible from the 
receiver node while the transmitter node is located as close 
as possible to it.  In Figure 4, this takes place for example, 
when node B is transmitting to node C and interfering node 
V is transmitting to node S. The resulting ratio at node C is 
(2*hopdiameter)/min dt. If the distance of the transmitter is 
small compared to the hop diameter, the resulting ratio 
value will be large enough to ensure that no collision occurs 
at node C (regardless of the SNR threshold value).  To 
validate this spatial slot reuse scenario, the resulting di/dt 
ratio must equally be measured at receiver node S.  Node V 
is now the transmitter node while node B becomes the 
interfering node.  The resulting ratio at node S is (min dt + 
hopdiameter)/ hopdiameter. Keeping the assumption that min dt 
<< hopdiameter, this results in a ratio of ~ 1.  According to 
Figure 3, this low ratio value will inevitably produce a 
collision at receiver node S, regardless of the SNR threshold 
value.  Thus, maximizing the ratio on one side has the effect 
of minimizing it on the other.  This behavior seriously 
reduces the efficiency of the slot reuse scheme.  
 
This simple case scenario illustrates well the limitations 
of the graph-based interference model. To meet the relative 
distance criteria, the model tends to require some sort of 
symmetry in the relative nodes location.  This goes against 
the very nature of ad hoc networking. Obviously, some 
cases exist where the criteria will be satisfied. However, in 
most of those cases, the resulting di/dt ratio at the receiver 
nodes will likely be relatively low.  Based on those 
observations, it is reasonable to expect sub-optimal 
performance results from a slot reuse scheme that would 
strictly be based on the graph-based interference model.   
 
Since the ratios derived in Figure 3 are relative 
separation distances as opposed to absolute distances, brief 
considerations should be made regarding the physical 
limitations imposed by the curvature of the earth.  It is well 
known that the line-of-sight (LOS) communication range 
between two points is limited by the horizon and depends on 
the height of the antennas at each point.  From [16], the 
LOS distance in kilometers can be computed as: 
 
(
h)
distLOS
.8 24
=
                                   (7) 
 
where h is the height of the antennas (assuming identical 
transmit and receive antennas) in meters.  From (7), the 
maximum expected LOS distance between two nodes for 
antenna heights of 3m and 20m is of 14km and 37km 
respectively.  The former corresponds to a fair estimate of 
the maximum LOS distances between ground-to-ground 
mounted vehicles while the latter is representative of ship-
to-ship communications at sea.  Beyond this distance the 
nodes cannot see each other and thus the radios cannot 
interfere with one another.  The effect of the earth’s 
curvature must therefore be taken into consideration when 
deriving the minimum distance required for allowing slot 
reuse.  Clearly, it can put an upper bound on the results 
presented in Figure 3 and in some cases, preserve the 
validity of the graph-based interference model.   
 
  The analysis presented in this section has shown the 
limitations of representing network connectivity based on 
the simplified disk signal coverage model. The analysis has 
revealed that the model can be used in support of spatial slot 
reuse but only under some specific conditions of operation.  
In particular, the model is expected to provide some 
throughput increase when the radios are operated in low 
spectral-efficient modes (because of the lower distance ratio 
requirement).  It is also expected to perform well when the 
transmission range is large (in which case, the physical 
limitation due to the earth curvature comes into play and 
preserves the validity of the interference model).  When 
operating outside of these conditions, the model starts to 
suffer significantly from distant node interference (border 
effects), affecting network performance and the ability to 
perform efficient slot reuse. 
 
III.  THE EXTENDED INTERFERENCE MODEL 
 
 
Previous work carried out by the authors in the area of 
distributed TDMA ad hoc networking, has led to the design 
and development of an experimental prototype system 
called the MATRIQS [1].  MATRIQS is a distributed TDMA-
based multi-hop system developed to provide enhanced 
tactical IP networking capabilities within battle group units. 
Designed to be flexible and adaptive, the MATRIQS system 
supports programmable VHF/UHF waveforms with multiple 
modes of operation.  Various degrees of spectral-efficiency 
modes are offered  with data rates ranging from 9600 bps 
(low efficiency, low bandwidth, high robustness mode) to 
1.0 Mbps (high efficiency, high bandwidth, low robustness 
mode). Currently supported bandwidths are 25, 50, 100, 200 
and 350 kHz. 
 
The MATRIQS MAC developed initially and presented 
in [1] automatically achieved spatial slot reuse based on the 
traditional graph interference model only.  When 
characterizing the system in various operating conditions, 
the limitations of the interference model and its impact on 
the system performance were observed.  A more realistic 
network connectivity model was needed.  The approach 
adopted to address the problem was to extend the graph 
model to include physical interference considerations.  
Essentially, the approach that we propose is a combination 
of the two interference models.  The concept is to keep the 
simplified disk coverage model to establish the first level of 
298
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
interference knowledge.  Then, the more accurate physical 
(SINR) interference model is applied to the slots that are 
identified as potentially available for reuse by the protocol 
(as an outcome of the first level).  The slot scheduling/slot 
reuse scheme resulting from this combined two-step 
approach has the benefit of remaining efficient and accurate 
through a wide range of operating conditions while keeping 
the implementation complexity at an acceptable level.  
 
Conceptually, the approach is similar to the hybrid 
solution presented in [17]. However the two methodologies 
differ greatly.  The algorithm proposed in [17] uses an 
iterative scheme based on a fixed interference range value.  
The interference range is increased adaptively and new 
squared conflicted graphs are re-generated until an 
interference-free schedule is found.  No distribution aspects 
are discussed and the algorithm implies global network 
connectivity knowledge.  Our scheme, instead, relies on the 
distribution of slot information to dynamically guide the slot 
allocation decisions.  While the reported slot information 
makes use of the graph-based interference model to ensure 
distance-2 non-conflicting node scheduling, it also includes 
physical interference information that ensures interference-
free slot reuse scheduling.  This solution not only maintains 
the increased capacity provided by spatial slot reuse but it 
also preserves the flexibility of the protocol in terms of 
dynamic slot allocations.  
 
An overview of the modifications that were performed to 
the MATRIQS MAC protocol to support the extended 
interference model is provided next.  
 
A.  The Cross-Layering Approach 
 
The physical interference model makes use of the SINR 
to evaluate the perceived network interference at a receiver 
node.  Since this specific channel information can only be 
obtained by the physical layer (modem), a cross-layering 
communication approach was developed between the 
MATRIQS MAC layer and its underlying modem.    
 
The cross-layering exchange between the two layers 
occurs via abstract generic interfaces that conform to 
Software 
Defined 
Radio 
(SDR) 
principles. 
The 
communication enables the MATRIQS protocol to derive a 
“per slot” channel quality value which is used in the 
protocol’s slot scheduling and allocation algorithm. 
 
The “per slot” channel quality is expressed as a binary 
value.  The value is either 0 or 1, where 0 indicates a “good” 
slot with low rx interference level and 1 indicates a “bad” 
slot suffering from high rx interference level.  To derive this 
channel quality, the MAC obtains, at the end of each slot, 
two parameters from the modem: the rx signal power (S) 
and the noise + interference power (N), as measured and 
estimated by the modem for the slot period. The rx signal 
power can only be measured by the radio frequency 
receiver. Receivers contain an automatic gain control 
(AGC) device used to normalize the output signal level. The 
control voltage (VG) of the amplifier is derived from the 
input signal level and follows a known transfer function. 
This signal can be supplied in digital form and be used to 
derive the absolute incoming signal power. The RF input 
signal power (S + N) is calculated as follows: 
 
PRF = PD / f(VG)                                      (8) 
 
where PRF is the incoming RF power (S + N), PD is the 
power of the digitized signal after AGC (measured by 
demodulator) and f(VG) is the AGC transfer function and 
represents absolute gain. Since the MAC requires S and N to 
be separate values, the burden falls onto the demodulator to 
measure the noise (N) and therefore provide both S and N 
separately. In the event where the demodulator is unable to 
detect an incoming signal, it declares  N = (S+N) where S = 
0. 
 
Using the rx signal power (S) value obtained from the 
modem, the MAC protocol maintains a run-time table of 
received power for each of the node’s 1-hop neighbors. The 
rx power value is averaged over a time window to smooth 
out the effect of possible transient conditions. The MAC 
then combines this information with its knowledge of slot 
status and ownership to compute an SINR value for each 
slot. The SINR value is calculated as follows: if the slot 
status is rx, the MAC first determines the slot ownership 
(i.e., which neighbor the slot belongs to). The MAC then 
extracts from the table the latest recorded rx signal power 
for that neighbor node and derives the SINR by using the 
ratio formula (S/N).  If the slot is available (i.e., the slot 
does not belong to anyone), then no corresponding rx signal 
power value will be found in the table.  The calculation of 
the SINR value cannot be performed at this point since it 
requires a relative comparison of a neighbor’s rx signal level 
to the measured interference.  In this particular situation, the 
worst-case approach is adopted.  The MAC identifies from 
the table the node for which it has the weakest signal 
(lowest recorded rx signal power).  The MAC then uses this 
value to compute the SINR for the slot.  
 
For each slot, the channel quality is obtained by 
comparing the computed SINR value with the SINR 
threshold (typically set to correspond to a BER of 10-6) for 
the modulation and error correction code in use. This 
channel quality estimate is provided by the physical layer’s 
demodulator.  Here, the implication is that a matching 
good/bad signal threshold value must be pre-established and 
included in the programming. The channel quality for the 
slot is declared good if the computed SINR value is greater 
than the SINR threshold.  It is declared bad otherwise.  
 
The 
cross-layering 
communication 
enables 
the 
MATRIQS protocol to obtain and maintain a run-time per 
slot channel quality value that takes into considerations the 
full 
interference 
environment. The 
MATRIQS 
slot 
scheduling and allocation scheme was modified to take 
advantage of this channel quality information. The 
enhancements done to the scheme are described next. 
 
299
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
B.  The Distributed Dynamic Slot Allocation Scheme  
 
The MATRIQS protocol supports a fully dynamic slot 
scheduling and allocation scheme [1].  The scheme is based 
on slot request and release. As for most distributed-based 
schemes, it combines two approaches: a pro-active approach 
and a re-active approach.   
 
The pro-active approach makes use of the information 
readily available to guide decisions on selecting/requesting 
the slots that have the highest probability of producing 
error-free transmissions. The idea is to pick non-conflicting 
transmission allocations in the first place.  Nodes request 
slots based on the distributed slot information they maintain. 
Each node reports slot ownership information at minimum 
once per cycle.  The reported slot status information ensures 
that 
nodes 
request 
non-conflicting 
node-scheduled 
transmission allocations over a 2-hop neighborhood while 
taking 
advantage 
of 
simultaneous 
link-scheduled 
transmissions whenever possible. Spatial slot reuse based on 
the graph interference model is thus inherently supported by 
the protocol and may take place when transmitters (in the 
case of node-scheduling) or receivers (in the case of link-
scheduling) are separated by a distance of at least 3 hops. As 
neighborhood slot information is collected, a node derives 
and maintains a set of slots it considers available for request.  
Essentially, this set includes all the slots that have been 
reported with the available status by the neighbors.  A node 
selects the slots to request from that set. 
 
The protocol also supports a re-active approach.  The re-
active approach offers a mean to bring corrections when 
problems or conflicts are detected.  Conflicts may rise from 
sudden changes in conditions due, for example, to node 
mobility.  The protocol implements the re-active approach 
by specifying a comprehensive conflict detection and 
resolution scheme. Actions/decisions resulting from this 
scheme typically translate into nodes issuing 
slot 
preemptions or objections to slot requests. 
 
Because these design approaches were originally based 
on the graph interference model, the slots considered 
available by the protocol were often unusable due to the 
interference coming from remote nodes. Consequently, in 
many situations, decisions taken by the protocol to perform 
slot reuse led to an increase in the number of collisions and 
yielded sub-optimal performance. The channel quality 
information obtained from the cross-layering was included 
in both approaches (pro-active and re-active) to improve the 
slot allocation and scheduling scheme.  
 
B.1 Extended Pro-active Approach 
 
 
The pro-active approach is extended by including the 
channel quality value in a node’s periodic slot status report 
for slots that are advertised as available.  To keep the 
overhead low, each slot status is expressed using a 3-bit 
code. Originally, only 2 of the 3 bits were used to indicate 
slots status available.  The third bit is now used to report the 
slot channel quality value where a bit value of 0 indicates a 
“good” slot (slot is considered interference-free) while a bit 
value of 1 indicates a “bad” slot (a strong enough interfering 
signal has been detected in the slot). 
 
This supplementary information is now used to refine 
the available for request slots set maintained by a node.  
The set now only includes the slots reported as available 
good by each neighbor.  As a result, when making a request, 
a node will pro-actively select slots that are truly 
interference-free at that time.  It is important to note that no 
penalty is paid in additional overhead cost.  The cost lies 
with the increased complexity in the structure of the cross-
layering solution. 
 
B.2 Extended Re-active Approach 
 
 
Because operating conditions of ad hoc networks vary 
over 
time 
(e.g., 
topology 
changes, 
propagation 
characteristics 
changes), 
slot 
schedules 
that 
were 
collision/interference free may suddenly not be anymore.  
The reactive approach is extended by considering the 
channel quality in the conflict resolution scheme. The 
parameter is integrated to guide slot preemption decisions.    
Originally, the slot preemption mechanism was strictly used 
as a means to resolve slot scheduling (ownership) conflicts.  
The mechanism is now also used to notify a sending node of 
bad slot receptions.  A node will now also issue a 
preemption message to a neighbor for which signal 
reception on specific slot(s) has fallen below the SNR 
threshold. On reception of a preemption message, those 
“bad” slots are immediately released by the transmitting 
node. 
 
In the same manner, the channel quality value is now 
also considered within the slot approval process.  Nodes 
now verify their latest slot channel quality values before 
approving or objecting to a request. This is because the 
interference conditions may change between the time the 
original slot selection is done and the time a neighbor makes 
its approval or objection decision. An approval is sent if no 
slot ownership conflict is found and the slot channel quality 
is good.  An objection is sent otherwise. 
 
IV.  PERFORMANCE EVALUATION  
To evaluate the performance of the system and to 
measure the impact of the enhanced scheme on slot reuse, 
the MATRIQS experimental system was ported into the 
QualNet (QN) simulation framework [18].  Most of the 
MATRIQS protocol stack (i.e., the MAC and link layers) 
was preserved during the porting process.  Consequently, 
discrepancies between the actual system implementation 
and the simulated version are minimal.  The QN physical 
abstract layer was used in place of the actual modem.  It was 
modified to support the SINR-based interference model as 
well as the cross layering communication scheme. 
 
300
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
A.  Simulation Setup 
 
 
In section 2, it was determined that spatial reuse is 
mainly affected by the propagation path loss and the 
modulation requirement (SINR threshold). Hence, a multi-
hop network topology was constructed to which we applied 
various combinations of path loss exponent values and 
modulation modes (SINR thresholds). 
 
To be consistent with the analysis presented in section 2, 
the QN radio signal propagation model was set to the 
classical log-distance path loss model.  Scenarios were run 
for three path loss exponent values of 2.5, 3.0 and 3.5 
respectively. 
Those 
values 
were 
selected 
to 
be 
representative of various types of propagation environments 
with a degree of attenuation ranging from mild to severe. 
For each path loss exponent value, the impact of the 
modulation was evaluated by varying the SNR threshold 
values.  The SNR thresholds were 7.5 dB, 13.5 dB and 20.5 
dB each corresponding to modulation modes QPSK, 
16QAM and 64QAM respectively.  The channel bandwidth 
was 200 kHz. The operating frequency was set to 300 MHz 
which is representative of low band UHF tactical operations.  
The resulting raw channel rates were 195 kbps (QPSK), 390 
kbps (16QAM) and 653 kbps (64QAM). 
 
  
The network topology was composed of 20 nodes 
deployed using the random uniform distribution.  In order to 
evaluate the effect of both the propagation path loss and the 
modulation mode on spatial reuse, it was required that the 
di/dt ratio values remained the same in all scenarios.  This 
meant keeping the node layout and the relative distance 
between the nodes the same for all scenarios. This was 
achieved by scaling the size of the grid and by adjusting the 
transmission power level accordingly. For each scenario, 
once fixed, the transmission power was kept uniform and 
configured the same for all nodes. The resulting topology 
had a network connectivity diameter of up to 8 hops.  
 
The network was fully connected at all time (there was 
always a path between any pair of nodes).  To ensure worst-
case interference, the network was saturated i.e., each node 
always had traffic to send.  The traffic was UDP/CBR and 
sent by the MAC protocol using the node-scheduled 
transmission mode. 
 
 
 
B.  Results and Discussions 
 
 
For each scenario, the following performance metrics 
were collected:  
 
- reception collision ratio (%): total number of rx collisions 
over the total number of rx signals (locked signals) 
 
- successful slot usage ratio (%): total number of successful 
slot tx (i.e., no neighbor rx collision) over the total number 
of slots 
 
- network throughput (kbps): total number of bits 
successfully received in the entire network over the time 
period. 
 
 
The results are presented in Figures 5, 6 and 7 
respectively.  The results refer to metrics averaged over 10 
runs, each initiated with a different simulation seed.  The 
simulated time was long enough to ensure that steady-state 
conditions had been reached.  For each simulation run, data 
collection began only after the network was “up” to avoid 
transient effects due, for example, to initial empty neighbor 
tables.  For comparison purposes, the performance results 
are presented for both, the original protocol design (which 
was based on the graph interference model only) and the re-
visited design (which is now based on the combined 
interference model). 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Rx collision ratio 
 
 
Figure 6: Successful slot usage ratio 
301
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
Figure 7: Network throughput 
 
As expected, the performance results obtained with the 
combined interference model are better than the results 
obtained with the graph interference model only.  A 
significant difference is seen with the measured reception 
collision ratios (Figure 5).  While the protocol based on the 
combined interference model achieves quasi collision-free 
schedules, the graph-based protocol exhibits rx collision 
ratios between ~15% to ~70%.  Figure 6 shows that the 
successful slot usage ratios obtained with the combined 
model surpass by as much as 70% to 110% the ratios 
measured with the graph-based model.  For example, in the 
case of 64QAM+exp. loss 3.5, the graph-based model 
achieves successful transmissions in only half (50%) of the 
slots. In contrast, the combined model displays a successful 
transmission rate of 140%.  In addition to achieving 
successful transmissions in all (100%) of the slots, an 
additional 40% is gained through the occurrence of 
simultaneous transmissions due to slot reuse (slot reuse 
ratios are represented by the portions in excess of 100% in 
Figure 6).  Slot reuse translates into a direct increase in 
network capacity.  This can be observed in Figure 7.  
Whenever slot reuse is present in Figure 6, Figure 7 shows 
corresponding network throughput values above the 100% 
user data capacity limit (indicated by the dotted line for each 
modulation mode).  Thus any value in excess of the 
displayed thresholds represents a gain in network 
throughput resulting from the slot reuse scheme.  Due to the 
success of the slot reuse scheme, the network throughput 
values (displayed in Figure 7) are consistently higher for the 
combined interference model.  In some cases, a network 
capacity up to 3 times that of the graph-based model is 
obtained.  
 
The performance results obtained for both approaches 
closely match the predicted behaviors of section 2.  As 
expected, a higher ratio of spatial slot reuse and thus a 
greater increase in network capacity is achieved when 
operating at low spectral- efficiency modes (e.g., QPSK) 
than when operating at high spectral-efficiency modes (e.g., 
64QAM). This is because the minimum distance ratio 
requirement is less for lower rate modes.  It is thus more 
easily satisfied in the MANET (ref. Figure 3: min di/dt = ~2 
for QPSK vs min di/dt values between 3 and 11 for 
64QAM).  It should be noted that for the graph model, slot 
reuse occurs in the QPSK modulation mode only. It takes 
place however, in all scenarios for the combined model.  
 
While the results obtained with the combined 
interference model remain quite acceptable in all cases, the 
performance of the graph-based approach quickly degrades 
as the spectral- efficiency mode becomes higher.  The 
impact is even greater with decreasing values of the path 
loss exponent. Clearly, as the minimum distance ratio 
requirement becomes greater, the graph-based model fails at 
meeting the criteria and its performance seriously starts to 
suffer.  The amount of rx collisions increases drastically and 
the network throughput collapses as the successful slot 
usage ratios fall below 100%.  
 
 
V.  CONCLUSION 
In this work, spatial reuse for distributed TDMA-based 
ad hoc networks is investigated.  The simulation results 
confirm that the accuracy of the interference model is 
essential to fully benefit from a maximum network capacity.  
The simple graph-based interference model, for example, 
shows sub-optimal but yet acceptable performances when 
tested with low spectral- efficiency modes (e.g., QPSK).  
However, the validity of the model rapidly degrades as the 
spectral-efficiency mode increases.  The reception collision 
ratio increases drastically and seriously impacts the network 
throughput. 
The extended interference model proposed in this work 
clearly outperforms the simple graph-based approach.  More 
importantly, it produces good performance results in all 
operating conditions.  The approach requires the support of 
cross-layering communication between the MAC and the 
PHY layers but the resulting improvements are sufficient to 
justify the increase in complexity.  
One of the goals pursued by this effort was to gain a 
better understanding of the conditions for which spatial 
reuse in distributed TDMA ad-hoc networks is possible. 
Such understanding becomes particularly important when 
considering modern ad hoc networking. With the emergence 
of software programmable radios that support multiple 
modes of operation, the effects incurred by operating in low 
vs high spectral-efficiency mode need to be well understood 
and ideally addressed by the protocol layers if system 
efficiency is to be maximized. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by Defence R&D Canada 
(DRDC).  
 
302
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Labbe, I. et al., “An Adaptive VHF/UHF System for the Next 
Generation Tactical MANETs”, in Proc. of MILCOM 2009, 
Oct. 2009. 
[2] Nelson, R. and Kleinrock, L., “Spatial TDMA: A collision-
free multihop channel access protocol”, IEEE Trans. 
Commun., vol. COM-33, no. 9, pp. 934–944, Sept. 1985. 
[3] Jorgenson, M. et al., “Operation of the Dynamic TDMA 
Subnet Relay System with HF bearers”, in Proc. of MILCOM 
2005, Vol 1, Oct., 2005. 
[4] Bao, L. and Garcia-Luna-Aceves J. J., "A New Approach to 
Channel Access Scheduling for Ad Hoc Networks", in Proc. 
of ACM MobiCom 2001, July 2001. 
[5] Young, C.D., "USAP Multiple Access: Dynamic Resource 
Allocation for Mobile Multihop Multichannel Wireless 
Networking", in Proc. IEEE MILCOM 1999, Oct. 1999. 
[6] Kanzaki, A. et al., “Dynamic TDMA Slot Assignment in Ad 
Hoc Networks”, in Proc. of AINA 2003, March, 2003. 
[7] Fan Y., Biswas, S., “A Self Reorganizing MAC Protocol for 
Inter-vehicle Data Transfer Applications in Vehicular Ad Hoc 
Networks,” in Proc. of ICIT 2007, Dec., 2007. 
[8] Gronvist, J., Hansson, A., “Comparison Between Graph-
Based and Interference-Based STDMA Scheduling”, in Proc. 
of MobiHoc pp. 255-258, 2001, Oct., 2001. 
[9] Gupta, P., and Kumar, P. R, “The capacity of wireless 
networks”, in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 46, 
2, March 2000. 
[10] Xingang, G., Roy, S., Conner, W. S., “Spatial Reuse in 
Wireless Ad-hoc Networks”, in Proc. IEEE VTC 2003, Fall 
2003. 
[11] Brar, G., Blough, D. and Santi, P., “Computationally Efficient   
Scheduling with the Physical Interference Model for 
Throughput Improvement in Wireless Mesh Networks”, in 
Proc. of MobiCom 2006, Sept., 2006. 
[12] Fan, S., Zhang, L., “Link Scheduling with Physical 
Interference Model for Throughput Improvement in Wireless 
Multi-hop Networks”, in Proc. of CSIE 2009. pp.430-434, 
2009. 
[13] Gronkvist, J., “Distributed Scheduling for Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networks – a Novel Approach”, in Proc. International Symp. 
On Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 
pp.964-968, 2004. 
[14] Brar, G., Blough , D., and Santi , P., “The SCREAM 
Approach for Efficient Distributed Scheduling with Physical 
Interference in Wireless Mesh Networks”, in Proc. Distributed 
Computing Systems, 2008. 
[15] Goldsmith, A., “Wireless Communications”, Cambridge 
University Press, ISBN-10: 0521837162, 2005.  
[16] Ryan, M.J., and Frater, M.R., “Tactical Communications for 
the Digitized Battlefield”, Artech House, ISBN 1-58053-323-
x, 2002. 
[17] Christophides, F. and Friderikos, V. “Iterative hybrid graph 
and   interference aware scheduling algorithm for STDMA 
Networks”, Electronics Letters, Vol 44, Issue 8, April 2008. 
[18] http://www.scalable-networks.com/products/qualnet/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
303
Copyright (c) The Government of Canada, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

