Vehicular Networks Smart Connectivity
Sivakumar Sivaramakrishnan and Adnan Al-Anbuky
Sensor Network and Smart environment Research Centre,
Auckland University of Technology,
Auckland, New Zealand
ssivakum@aut.ac.nz, aalanbuk@aut.ac.nz
Abstract—Good connectivity helps in reducing the number
of packet drop and improve network efﬁciency. Vehicular
networks have a pattern of ﬂow and a deﬁned heading.
Connectivity break occurs due to insufﬁcient radio range.
Dynamic coverage modulation varies the range to maintain
coverage. In areas of high vehicle trafﬁc, data packet loss would
increase due to packet collision. To avoid this the coverage of
node could be reduced and data handoff would be activated
for maintaining connectivity. Shorter coverage in dense areas
allows multiple nodes to communicate with minimal interfer-
ence. Unnecessary transmissions lead to network congestion,
adaptive sampling collects route information to determine its
suitability for establishing communication. This work attempts
at minimizing network congestion and reduce breaks in con-
nectivity through dynamically modulated coverage, direction
dependent data handoff and adaptive sampling. The algorithm
has been simulated using OPNET and results reﬂect reduced
packet drop.
Keywords-Adaptive connectivity; Data Handoff; Dynamic cov-
erage modulation; Adaptive sampling.
I. INTRODUCTION
Vehicular networks or VANETs are networks in which
vehicles communicate with each other to disseminate vital
information regarding the vehicle and trafﬁc. This includes
vehicle malfunctions, closed lanes, speed limits, accidents,
caution measures due to varying driving conditions and
others. These networks aim at making roads safer by
warning the drivers of any potential hazards on the road.
Data dissemination in the network depend on vehicles
heading, and the density of vehicles in a given region. The
heading of the vehicle as shown in Figure 1 is used to
determine the suitability of the vehicle to receive and/or
carry forward data. For example, if lane is closed for north
bound trafﬁc due to road work, the trafﬁc traveling on the
opposite lane (south bound) would carry the information.
This in turn will pass it on to the north ﬂowing trafﬁc.
The other capability available in vehicles these days is a
predeﬁned route to the destination accessed through GPS
(global positioning system). Using this information, the
vehicles heading can be predicted and information can be
shared.
Communication in vehicular networks as discussed in [1],
[2] takes place in the following manner.
• Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V)
• Vehicle to Infrastructure (V2I)
Information broadcast and repetitive data transmission
lead to network congestion and increase collision. Leontiadis
and Mascolo [3] propose time to live to expunge information
from the network after certain duration of time in a speciﬁc
area. The issue with this is determination of the time as it
is scenario speciﬁc. It is dependent on trafﬁc movement, if
the trafﬁc is moving slow the information would also need
to live for a longer duration. On the other hand faster trafﬁc
requires shorter life cycle for the data. We propose route
dependent and priority based time to live. This approach
for determining the life cycle of data classiﬁes different
road hazards by the level of severity and assigning priority
[4]. Zhao and Cao [5] use multihop to transmit data for
sparse networks. The issue with the approach is that if
data is not completely transferred, while the vehicle changes
its heading, and deviates from the predicted path, the data
would get lost.
Figure 1. Deﬁnite Headings of Vehicles
Limiting the life cycle of high priority data in dense
slow moving trafﬁc does not serve the purpose. Hence, we
propose modulating the radio coverage of the transmitter
so that radio pollution is contained reducing communication
304
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

collisions and packet retransmissions. Modulation of radio
coverage would allow for reducing the coverage in dense
trafﬁc and increase coverage in places of light trafﬁc. Radio
signals are also associated with a given maximum range.
Moreover, the dynamics of the roads keep changing. It is
therefore required to have data handoff to transfer large
data packets over multiple nodes (vehicles). Multiple hop
and data handoff both require multiple nodes but in data
handoff communication set-up is only done once with the
ﬁrst receiving vehicle. The ﬁrst receiving vehicle provides
the details of the transmitting vehicle to the next receiving
vehicle. This approach does not require setting up the
communication with other receiving vehicles. This scheme
has importance in scenarios where trafﬁc on a lane is moving
fast and on the other lane the trafﬁc is slow as shown in
Figure 2a.
Figure 2. Trafﬁc Scenario
The vehicles moving fast have a shorter time span to
complete a communication. With large data packets the
possibility of incomplete data transfers is high. To overcome
this issue, if vehicle A (Figure 2a) handsoff data to vehicles
F,E,D and C (in this order), the communication window of
time gets wider, allowing for data packet to be successfully
delivered. Figure 2b shows a scenario where direction of
motion of the vehicle changes. As vehicle 4 in Figure 2b
changes the path, data transmitted by vehicle 1 and 2 is
not of any relevance, where as vehicle 5 is joining the
lane and hence would need the information. Incorporating
dependence of direction on handoff would reduce the re-
transmission, thereby reducing packet collisions.
The paper is organized in the following sections. Section
II discusses the effect of different parameters on vehicular
connectivity. Section III gives the design for improving con-
nectivity through handoff. Results are discussed in Section
IV. Section V concludes the paper.
II. FACTORS AFFECTING VEHICULAR CONNECTIVITY
Connectivity amongst vehicles gets affected by multiple
factors like vehicle velocity, transmission range, vehicle
heading and route to destination.
A. Vehicle velocity
Velocity of a vehicle has a direct impact on the number
of packets transmitted. At high velocities, the transmission
time window reduces, which reduces the number of packets
delivered. Assuming that the communication is speciﬁed by
a packet size of x bytes and a bandwidth of B bps, then the
required transmission time would be Ttrans = x/B. For a
vehicle moving at velocity v km/hr or v/3.6 m/s, the time
required to cover a distance d/1000m is given as Treq =
d/v. As communication takes place between two or more
vehicles, hence their relative velocities are considered. For
vehicle having the same heading (moving in parallel to each
other) v = v1 −v2 and vehicle moving in opposite direction
as shown in Figure 3, its v = v1 + v2. The communication
Figure 3. Effect of Velocity dependent on heading
is successful if Ttrans = Treq, as this would allow complete
packets to be delivered. Figure 4 shows that as the relative
velocity of the vehicles increase, the amount of data packets
received drops.
Figure 4. Available window of time for data communication against vehicle
velocity
B. Transmission range
Invariably, vehicle velocity keeps changing with changing
driving conditions. There are areas where vehicles move
305
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

slowly and trafﬁc builds up creating a dense network of
communicating objects. Somewhere else, the trafﬁc may be
free ﬂowing and the network becomes sparse in communi-
cating objects. Modulating the communication range through
transmission power relative to the speed will help in keeping
the window of required time constant.
C. Vehicle heading and route to destination
The heading of a vehicle plays an important role in
determining the suitability of a vehicle to participate in
communication. If in a heavy trafﬁc zone all vehicle start
broadcasting information there would be enormous data
packet collisions resulting in failed communication. Most
vehicles are equipped with GPS these days. These devices
pre-calculate the route to the destination. Sharing this infor-
mation with neighboring vehicles would help them decide
if they have any vital information that needs to be shared.
Even though GPS is so prevalent, but many drivers do
not always rely on them due to their personal preferences
[6]. Heading of the vehicle which depends on streets and
lanes allows other vehicle to determine its suitability for
data handoff. The uncertainty due to human involvement
can be mitigated by coupling GPS information with the
current heading for handoff. If a vehicle with which handoff
has been performed, changes its heading suddenly, then it
would necessitate retransmission, which is undesirable. The
Figure 5. Probability of retransmission
dynamics on the road is stochastic and Poisson’s distribution
can be used to ﬁnd the probability of retransmission.
P = e−λλk
k!
(k = 0, 1, 2, 3...)
λ = trafﬁc density ⇢ ⇤ a(area)
P = e−⇢a⇢ak
k!
(1)
It can be inferred from the probability analysis, as shown
in Figure 5, that the probability of retransmission is higher
for areas where vehicle density is sparse as compared to
high density areas. This is because the redundancy for
handoff is higher in dense areas and therefore requirement
of retransmission reduces.
D. Time to Live for Data Packets
Time to Live or TTL of a data packet is used to
determine the length of time for which a data packet
should remain in the network (with data packet being
transmitted from one node (vehicle) to another). The issue
is determining how long a data packet should be present
before removing it from the network as setting a random
value might remove the packet either too early or congest
the network with redundant data. This work proposes to
adapt the time to live based on the information priority
Ipriority, vehicle velocity v and route GPScoordinates as
TTL(Ipriority, v, GPScoordinates).
III. DESIGN FOR IMPROVING CONNECTIVITY THROUGH
DIRECTION BASED HANDOFF
The different factors in Section II contribute to maintain-
ing connectivity. Based on these, the transmission coverage,
requirements of handoff and TTL of data depend on in-
dependent factors like velocity, data size, vehicle heading
and route information. The ﬂow diagram in Figure 6 shows
the trigger conditions for Coverage, Handoff, Direction
and Adaptive Sampling (ﬁnding new vehicles to establish
communication).
Figure 6. Flow Diagram for Connectivity of Vehicular Networks
306
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

1) Adaptive Sampling: Adaptive Sampling uses sensing
coverage sense vehicles in the vicinity and exchange route
information. It helps the vehicle wishing to transmit data to
determine whether the other vehicle will move on the route
for which the information is pertaining. If the vehicle is
not following the route, then establishing the communication
will be wasted. As sensing coverage also involves commu-
nication which results in use of radio resources, it should
not be performed very often as it contributes to network
congestion. When a vehicle has information pertaining to a
particular area then it needs to know the possibility of the
current route being used to reach that destination. Adaptive
sampling helps in achieving this through the use of artiﬁcial
neural network. It uses the past sensing information to
predict the use of the current route to reach the area of
interest. Depending on the outcome of the neural network
the vehicle performs sampling using adaptive coverage. This
reduces the sensing operation, minimizing use of radio and
therefore reducing network congestion. Figure 7 shows the
block diagram for adaptive sampling of the network to
search for vehicles for data transmission.
Figure 7. Adaptive Sampling for Vehicle selection
Figure 8 shows the packet format for the sensing opera-
tion. This reﬂects the key factors like destination, heading,
route (start and end coordinates) and Hazard code (code,
priority and trafﬁc condition). The route coordinates give the
start and end coordinates of the current route till the next
intersection. It is not sufﬁcient by itself because a driver
may suddenly take a different route of their preference to
the destination. It is therefore necessary to know the current
heading and destination. As there can be multiple paths
leading to the same destination, the vehicles heading will
allow the determination of future coordinates. This is based
on the use of current coordinates and heading to determine
the route to destination. Route coordinates provide current
information which would be important for the other vehicles.
From Figure 7, it can be noted that artiﬁcial neural network
estimates Tn (duration after which next sampling should
be performed). In applications like VANETS assuming a
constant trafﬁc ﬂow on the road would be unrealistic. For
such circumstances, a single prediction of Tn would not
be accurate. Hence, the output of the neural network is
stored in a look-up table with possible values. When an
estimation error is reported, a different value is taken from
the table. The network re-trains once the values in the table
are exhausted.
Figure 8. Packet Format for Vehicle selection
2) Adaptive Coverage: Constant radius of coverage does
not provide the ﬂexibility to selectively disseminate data
to other vehicles. Adaptive coverage varies according to
the density of vehicles on the road. For sparse density of
vehicles, the coverage increases and reduces where density
of vehicles is high. The advantage of this scheme is that it
reduces packet drop and network congestion.
Rmax = (v · Ttrans)
2
(2)
Here, Rmax is the maximum radius of coverage at relative
velocity v. On equating Equation 2 with the range equation
(Equation 3)
Rmax =
s
PtGtGrλ2
(4⇡)2 Smin
(3)
transmission power Pt is computed and the range is
dynamically varied. Here Gt, Gr are transmitter and receiver
gain respectively, λ is the wavelength and Smin is the
receiver sensitivity. The algorithm for adaptive coverage is
as follows.
Table I gives the algorithm used to determine nodes
coverage.
Table I: Algorithm for Sufﬁciency of Coverage
Algorithm for Sufﬁciency of Coverage
: Sense the density of vehicle in the vicinity
: Compute data size to be transmitted
: Compute duration of connectivity Ttrans
: Sense Vehicle velocity
3) Direction: The direction or heading of the vehicle
helps predict the future route of the vehicle. Figure 9 a,b,c
and d show different routes between the same source and
destination. Upto point A, all the four routes are same; after
point A, the route remains same for Figure 9 a and d, but
for b and c the heading changes.
Similarly, at point B, the route is same for Figure 9 a
307
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 9. Vehicle heading and ﬁnal destination
and c, whereas the heading changes for b and d. Similarly
at point C heading changes between Figure 9 a and c.
As destination is know the GPS device can calculate the
different paths to the destination at each change in heading.
If the vehicle which has some hazard information for a
particular stretch of source, destination pair and the vehicle
senses another vehicle heading along the same direction
information handoff can take place.
4) Handoff:
Handoff is required when the coverage
is not sufﬁcient because of vehicle velocity and limited
coverage in high density regions. In situations like these,
multiple vehicle having same heading (as relative velocity
would be less for vehicles having same heading) are
used to collaboratively collect the data and share amongst
themselves to reconstruct it as shown in Figure 2a.
The handoff requires the vehicle transmitting Vtrans data
to transmit its Id, velocity, direction of motion, data packet
size. Using this information, the vehicle receiving Vrec data
inform their next hop vehicle about the transmitting vehicle
Vtrans, as shown in Figure 10.
As the vehicles are prepared to receive the data from the
transmitting vehicle hence we save on packet exchange to
establish the communication. Figure 11 shows the ﬂow of
the handoff sequence amongst receiving vehicle. The vehicle
Figure 10. Handoff Scenario
Figure 11. Handoff ﬂow diagram
which is ﬁrst to communicate with the transmitting vehicle
Mn forwards its details to the next vehicle, which becomes
ready to receive data from the transmitting vehicle. The
Handoff ﬂow checked by the receiving vehicle Sn checks,
whether the coverage area of the transmitting vehicle is
larger than its own and could data be completely transmitted.
If it cannot be completely transferred, then the ﬁrst receiving
vehicle passes on the identiﬁcation (MnId, its velocity Vel,
Direction and Time to Wait for the next node to receive data)
of the transmitting vehicle to the next vehicle.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Network congestion happens when data trafﬁc is not
controlled. Reduction in redundant data reduces the con-
308
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

gestion. Adaptive sampling associates route with data and
determines the need to perform a transmission. Figure 12
shows the performance with and without Adaptive sampling.
It is evident that the number of packets in the network has
dropped leading to reduction in network congestion.
Figure 12. Number of Packets transmitted : Adaptive vs Regular sampling
Adaptive Coverage varies its coverage area depending on
the trafﬁc and the data size. Figure 13 shows that by adapting
the coverage there is a reduction in the number of packets
lost. The light blue and the green graphs are the number
of packets transmitted and received for ﬁxed coverage. It
can be seen there is a signiﬁcant packet loss. The red and
the dark blue graph are for adaptive coverage. There is a
signiﬁcant reduction in loss of packets. In areas where the
density of vehicles is less or in high density region where
there is reduced coverage and a large packet needs to be
transmitted, data handoff is performed to prevent break in
connectivity. It’s noted from OPNET simulation, Figure 14
that through handoff complete data is being transmitted over
multiple vehicles, overcoming the issue of insufﬁciency of
coverage.
Incorporating direction of motion to select a vehicle
for data handoff, further reduces the unwanted data trans-
mission. Implementing the algorithm within the nodes in
OPNET shows that the vehicle which is on a lane changing
its heading does not participate in communication. The result
shown in Figure 15 graph 3 shows that without implemen-
tation of direction data is being received as the vehicle is
Figure 13. Comparison of Packets transmitted and packets received for
Adaptive Coverage versus Fixed Coverage
Figure 14. Comparison of Handoff with Coverage
in communication range but with the implementation of
direction even though the vehicle is still in communication
range but data is not received. The other vehicle graph 2
moves in a lane parallel to the transmitting vehicle graph 1
and hence receives data.
309
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 15. Direction Independent vs Direction Dependent transmissions
V. CONCLUSION
The work presented here utilizes Adaptive sampling,
Adaptive coverage, Direction of motion of Vehicle and Data
Handoff for intelligently sensing the need for a packet trans-
mission. This approach reduces the number of redundant
packet transmission and hence network congestion. The
results show that through adaptive sampling a signiﬁcant
decrease in unwanted transmissions is achieved. Adaptive
coverage modulates the transmission power to harness the
opportunity and maintain the connectivity. It is evident from
the results that in comparison to the ﬁxed radius coverage,
there is very small packet loss in adaptive coverage. Data
handoff is used to maintain connectivity in scenarios where
coverage is not sufﬁcient for transmitting large data packets.
Improved throughput is evident in the results. Implementa-
tion of direction allows handoff to perform selective dissem-
ination of data. This paper shows that network congestion
and packet loss is reduced through controlling the cover-
age radius, data dissemination and vehicular collaboration
through handoff.
REFERENCES
[1] Y.-T. Chang, J.-W. Ding, C.-H. Ke, and I.-Y. Chen, “A
survey of handoff schemes for vehicular ad-hoc networks,” in
Proceedings of the 6th International Wireless Communications
and Mobile Computing Conference, ser. IWCMC ’10.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 1228–1231. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1815396.1815677
[2] H. Menouar, M. Lenardi, and F. Filali, “Movement prediction-
based routing (mopr) concept for position-based routing in ve-
hicular networks,” in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2007.
VTC-2007 Fall. 2007 IEEE 66th, 30 2007-Oct. 3 2007, pp.
2101 –2105.
[3] I. Leontiadis and C. Mascolo, “Opportunistic spatio-temporal
dissemination system for vehicular networks,” in Proceedings
of
the
1st
international
MobiSys
workshop
on
Mobile
opportunistic networking, ser. MobiOpp ’07.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 39–46. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1247694.1247702
[4] M. Bouassida and M. Shawky, “On the congestion control
within vanet,” in Wireless Days, 2008. WD ’08. 1st IFIP, Nov.
2008, pp. 1 –5.
[5] J. Zhao and G. Cao, “Vadd: Vehicle-assisted data delivery
in vehicular ad hoc networks,” in INFOCOM 2006. 25th
IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications.
Proceedings, April 2006, pp. 1 –12.
[6] B. Brown and E. Laurier, “The normal natural troubles of
driving with gps,” in ACM SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI 2012.
Austin, TX,
USA: ACM, May 2012.
310
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

