Different Criteria of Selection for Quantized
Feedback of Minimum-Distance Based MIMO
Precoder
Ancuta Moldovan∗, Ghadir Madi†, Baptiste Vrigneau†, Tudor Palade∗ and Rodolphe Vauzelle†
∗Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Communications Department
400027 Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@com.utcluj.ro
†University of Poitiers, XLIM-SIC Department
86962 Futuroscope Cedex, France
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@univ-poitiers.fr
Abstract—The achievable performance of a multi-antenna
communication system relies on the amount of information
describing the channel available at the transmitter and at
the receiver. In this paper, we propose different criteria for
selecting the optimal precoding matrix from the codebook, in
a limited feedback spatial multiplexing system. The distortion
function considered to design the codebook aims to maximize the
minimum Euclidean distance between signal points at the receiver
side. The proposed approaches are compared considering the bit
error rate performance, under the constraint of preserving the
same rate on the feedback channel. Since the signal adaptation
must be performed in real-time, the computational complexity
involved in performing the selection is also evaluated for each
method. The simulation results show that the proposed solutions
are promising methods for quantization, as they ensure very small
loss compared to the ideal case.
Index Terms—channel state information; limited feedback;
MIMO precoders; precoder selection.
I. INTRODUCTION
Exploiting propagation diversity, by using multiple anten-
nas at the transmitter and receiver, promises high-capacity
and high-quality wireless communication links. In most of
the multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) applications, the
channel state information (CSI) at the receiver is needed to
perform the equalization and the detection tasks; furthermore,
it is known that some degrees of channel knowledge at the
transmitter can further boost the system performance through
a channel-aware precoding operation of the data streams.
Assuming perfect CSI is available at the transmitter side,
different solutions, that optimize pertinent criteria, were pro-
posed in the literature: minimum mean square error (MMSE)
[1], signal-to-noise (SNR) maximization at the receiver side
(max-SNR) [2], capacity maximization [3] or maximization
of the received minimal symbol vector distance (max −dmin)
[4]. The limitation of these methods is the fact that obtaining
accurate CSI at the transmitter (CSIT) requires to assign a
substantial amount of resources on the feedback channel,
which may reduce the efﬁciency of the communication system.
In order to meet the bandwidth requirements on the feed-
back channel, an efﬁcient quantization of the CSI is mandatory.
In [5], Love et al. present a general overview of feedback
quantization in various transmitter adaptation schemes. Among
these, the quantization of the beamforming vector leads to a
signiﬁcant advancement in feedback techniques. The solution
in [6] assumes that the receiver chooses the precoding matrix
from a ﬁnite cardinality codebook, designed off-line and
known at both sides of the wireless communication link.
The challenges associated with this quantization scheme are
the design of the codebook and the criterion to select the
optimal precoding matrix from the codebook. The framework
used for the limited feedback beamforming is related to the
Grassmann sub-space packing problem, approach that was
shown to ensure the outage minimization, the SNR and the
rate maximization.
Based on these insights, in [7], we have made the ﬁrst
steps for the design of a new quantization scheme for the
max −dmin precoder. The reason why we have opt for the
max −dmin precoder is the fact that, under the assumption of
perfect CSI, it achieves good performance in terms of bit error
rate (BER), providing a signiﬁcant gain of SNR compared to
others precoders [8]. For the quantized feedback, the codebook
design method and the selection of the optimal precoding ma-
trix are based on the maximization of the minimum Euclidean
distance. The proposed method seams to give good results in
MIMO systems with two transmit antennas.
In this paper, based on the codebook designed in [7], we
propose different functions for the selection of the optimal pre-
coding matrix from the codebook, for a maximum likelihood
(ML) detection. We present results obtained by evaluating the
BER in a (2,2) MIMO system, while taking into account
the feedback rate and the computational complexity of the
proposed solutions.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In
Section II, the system model and the max −dmin precoder are
presented. Section III introduces the codebook design method.
In Section IV, different selection criteria are presented and
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

evaluated , considering the same rate on the feedback channel.
Section V resumes the conclusions and states the future work.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND THE max −dmin PRECODER
We consider a MIMO system with nT transmit and nR
receive antennas operating over an i.i.d. Rayleigh ﬂat-fading
channel and b independent data streams are to be transmitted
(b ≤ min(nT , nR)). Assuming perfect knowledge of the
channel state information at both sides of the wireless link,
a precoder and a decoder matrices, F(nT ×b) and G(b×nR),
can be designed, so that the basic system model is:
y = GHFs + Gn
(1)
where H is the nR × nT channel matrix, s is the b × 1
vector of transmitted symbols and n is the nR × 1 additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN) vector.
By using the following decomposition F = FvFd and G =
GvGd, the input-output relation (1) can be rewritten as:
y = GdHvFds + Gdnv
(2)
where Hv = GvHFv = diag(σ1, ..., σb) is the b × b eigen-
mode channel matrix, with σi representing each sub-channel
gain, in a decreasing order; nv = Gvn is the b × 1 additive
noise vector on the channel eigen-mode; the unitary matrices
Fv and Gv are chosen so as to diagonalize the channel and
to reduce the dimension to b.
As only the ML detection is considered at the reception,
the decoder Gd has no impact on the performance and it is
considered to be Gd = Ib, where Ib is the b×b identity matrix.
Regarding the transmit precoder, the optimization under the
max −dmin criterion gives the matrix Fd:
Fd = arg max
Fd
min
sk,sl∈C b,sk̸=sl
||HvFd(sk − sl)||
(3)
where sl and sk are 2 symbols vectors whose entries are
elements of the received constellation C.
The solution of (3) is difﬁcult since it involves the computa-
tion of the minimum distance. A very exploitable solution was
given in [4] for two independent data streams, b = 2 and a 4-
QAM, with a spectral efﬁciency of η = 4bits/s/Hz. If we con-
sider the 2-dimensional virtual channel Hv = diag(σ1, σ2),
it can be totally deﬁned by two parameters: a positive real
parameter ρ =
√
σ2
1 + σ2
2 which is the channel gain and
γ = arctan(σ2/σ1) the channel angle, π/4 ≥ γ > 0.
The precoding solution is SNR-independent and is based on
the value of the channel angle:
• if 0 ≤ γ ≤ γ0
F dmin
d
= Fr1 =
√
ET
[√
3+
√
3
6
√
3−
√
3
6
e
iπ
12
0
0
]
(4)
• if γ0 ≤ γ ≤ π/4
F dmin
d
= Focta =
√
ET
2
[cos ψ
0
0
sin ψ
] [ 1
e
iπ
4
−1
e
iπ
4
]
(5)
where ψ = arctan
√
2−1
cos γ is related to the power allocation
and γ0 = arctan
√
3
√
3−2
√
6+2
√
2−3
3
√
3−2
√
6+1
≃ 17.280 is a constant
threshold, computed by considering that the two forms of the
precoder provide the same dmin.
A power constraint has to be satisﬁed, the average transmit
power being limited to ET , so trace(FdF∗
d) = ET .
III. CODEBOOK DESIGN BASED ON CHANNEL STATISTICS
The approach is related to the Grassmannian line packing
technique, presented in [6], for the design of the beamforming
codebook Fv={eFv1, ..., eFvN }, where N is the cardinality of
the codebook and n = log2N is the number of feedback
bits. The method used for the design of Fv can be applied
only for an uncorrelated Rayleigh fading channel and it is
independent on the channel realization and on the number of
receive antennas. In order to eliminate these limitations, in
[7] we have presented a new limited feedback scheme that
involves the quantization of the max −dmin precoder. The
codebook is empirically design from simulation, as presented
in what follows.
Design criterion: Using a sufﬁciently large number of
channel realizations, for each element eFvi from Fv, i = 1 :N,
we determine Fd that maximizes dmin:
arg max
Fd
min
sk,sl∈C b,sk̸=sl
||GvHeFviFd(sk − sl)||
(6)
The product given by each pair (eFvi, Fd) represents an
entry in the new codebook F={eF1, ..., eFN}. The elements are
dependent on the conﬁguration of the MIMO system thanks
to the design of the max −dmin precoder. For certain channel
realizations, meaning values of the channel angle γ above
the threshold γ0, the new entries are also dependent on the
matrix describing the MIMO channel. Since the parameter
that connects the matrix H and the quantized values of the
precoder is the channel angle, to each element in F we
associate a value of γ related to the Fd precoding matrix. All
the quantized values of γ are contained in a second codebook
A = {eγ1, ..., eγN}.
IV. SELECTION CRITERIA
In this section, we are providing different design approaches
for the selection of the optimal precoding matrix from the
codebook. Numerical results are presented assuming a (2,2)
MIMO system, over which two independent data streams are
transmitted and a 4-QAM modulation.
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
5
10
15
20
BER
SNR(dB)
Theoretical
3 feedback bits
4 feedback bits
5 feedback bits
6 feedback bits
7 feedback bits
Figure 1: Performance of the dmin criterion dependent on the
number of feedback bits
A. dmin selection
The selection criterion maximizes the minimum Euclidean
distance between signal points on the received constellation.
For the given codebook F, the receiver encodes as follows:
arg max
eF
min
sk,sl∈C b,sk̸=sl
||GvHeFi(sk − sl)||
(7)
In Figure 1 are depicted the BER results for the proposed
limited feedback scheme. The results for the perfect feedback
are also plotted for comparison. For a BER of 10−4 and
considering 7 feedback bits, the loss relatively to the ideal
case is 0.7 dB. Reducing the feedback rate at 3 bits leads to
a signiﬁcant degradation of the BER performance, of about 2
dB, which is considered to be unacceptable.
The selection provides good performance with a sufﬁcient
number of feedback bits, but the computation of dmin depends
on both the modulation’s order and on the channel’s statistics.
Moreover, in equation (7) it is necessary to consider all
possible error vectors in searching for the optimal precoding
matrix. In [4] it was shown that for a 4-QAM modulation there
is a number of 14 difference vectors that must be considered,
but it increases signiﬁcantly with the modulation’s order. Since
the selection of the precoder must be performed in real-
time, it is necessary to reduce the computational complexity.
In what follows, we will consider other selection functions
mainly based on the parameters involved in the singular value
decomposition (SVD) of the channel matrix.
B. Angle selection
The channel angle is a parameter that can be used to relate
the current channel realization with the codebook entries. The
new criterion is based on the channel angle and it is intended
to minimize the difference between the actual channel angle
γ, and the quantized values eγi, from the dictionary A. The
function returns the index k of the selected codebook entry,
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
5
10
15
20
BER
SNR(dB)
Theoretical
Selection dmin - 7 bits
Selection dmin - 3 bits
Selection angle - 7 bits
Selection angle - 3 bits
Figure 2: Performance of the dmin and the angle selection
criteria dependent on the number of feedback bits
that will be used to determine the precoding matrix eFk from
the associated codebook F.
k = min
i=1:N|γ − eγi|
(8)
One advantage of the criterion is the fact that it avoids
the computation of the minimum distance, but it requires the
diagonalization of the channel matrix. Since traditional SVD
algorithms involve costly arithmetic operations [9], increased
efﬁciency can be obtained by making use of hardware oriented
arithmetic techniques, based on the CORDIC (COrdinate
Rotation Digital Computer) arithmetic [10].
The simulation results depicted in Figure 2 show a signif-
icant performance degradation, in terms of BER, when the
angle selection is applied. Based on the codebook construction,
we assumed that the BER depreciation is caused by values of
γ ≤ γ0. The next step was to determine to what extent these
values inﬂuence the BER. So, using a set of 105 samples of
the channel matrix, we estimated the cumulative distribution
function (cdf) for a (2,2) MIMO system. From the results in
Figure 3, the probability that the channel angle is bellow the
threshold is P(γ ≤ γ0) ≃ 0.44 This means that, in almost half
of the cases so there is no connection between the codebook
entries and the actual channel realization, so for this region,
the quantization scheme is inefﬁcient.Moreover, in this case,
the higher the number of codebook entries, the lower is the
BER performance since the quantized values of the precoder
are independent on the channel matrix.
In order to highlight the inﬂuence of the max −dmin pre-
coder forms on the system’s performance, we partition the
channel space based on the values of the channel angle. In
Figure 4, the BER plots are computed separately, considering
either channel matrices with γ ≤ γ0, or with γ ≥ γ0 and
a feedback rate of 3 bits. The optimal BER values, for the
same channel statistics, are also plotted for comparison. The
256
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
cdf
γ in degrees
(2,2)
γ0
Fr1
Focta
Figure 3: Cumulative distribution function for γ in a (2,2)
MIMO system
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
5
10
15
20
BER
SNR(dB)
Average theoretical
Average angle selection
Theoretical γ >= γ0
Angle selection γ >= γ0
Theoretical γ <= γ0
Angle selection γ <= γ0
Figure 4: Performance of the angle selection criterion based
on the value of the channel angle - 3 feedback bits
results lend credence to our observation that the angle based
selection is to be used only for channel matrices with γ above
the threshold.
C. Hybrid selection
Based on the results obtained with the previous two selec-
tion criteria, we propose a new function that combines them,
depending on the value of the channel angle. So, for values
of the channel angle bellow the threshold the dmin criterion
is used to select the optimum precoder from the codebook,
while for values of the channel angle above the threshold, the
selection is based on γ.
The results obtained with the hybrid selection are depicted
in Figure 5. It can be observed that, with a 3-bits feedback
rate, the performance is comparable with the one obtained
with the dmin criterion and the same number of bits on
the feedback channel. In what concerns the complexity, the
channel diagonalization is needed, but for more than half of
the scenarios the dmin computation is avoided.
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
5
10
15
20
BER
SNR(dB)
Theoretical
Selection dmin - 7 bits
Selection dmin - 3 bits
Selection hybrid - 7 bits
Figure 5: Performance of the hybrid and the dmin selection
criteria
D. max −σ1 selection
In the hybrid selection, we focus on channel matrices with
the angle above the threshold. In what follows, we propose
a selection criteria that takes into account also the channel
matrices corresponding to the Fr1 form of the max −dmin
precoder. Since the P(γ ≤ γ0) ≃ 0.44 it means that in almost
half of the channel realization the precoder uses only the
ﬁrst virtual sub-channel to transmit the data symbols. Based
on this observation, we propose a quantization scheme that
emphasizes the use of the ﬁrst singular value.
The same approach as in Section III is considered for the
codebook generation, but the criterion is intended to maximize
the ﬁrst singular value max −σ1 from the virtual channel
matrix given by:
σ1(arg max
Fd
(GvHeFviFd))
(9)
Regarding the selection of the optimal precoder from the
codebook, the same criterion that maximizes the ﬁrst singular
value σ1 is applied. Compared to the dmin criterion, the new
function does not require considering the difference vectors
set involved in the computation of the minimum distance. The
BER results are depicted in Figure 6. For a BER of 10−4,
with a 7 bits feedback rate, the loss relative to the dmin based
quantization scheme is around 0.6 dB. The rate reduction at
3 feedback bits adds no extra SNR loss.
In the attempt to reduce the complexity due to the com-
putation of the minimum distance, while keeping a low rate
on the feedback channel, we have introduced different alter-
native methods for selecting the optimal precoder from the
codebook. The new functions are related to the design of the
max −dmin precoder and are dependent on the singular value
decomposition of the channel matrix. For channel realizations
characterized by a value of the channel angle higher than the
threshold we have proposed a solution based on γ. Another
257
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
100
0
5
10
15
20
BER
SNR (dB)
Theoretical
Selection dmin - 7 bits
Selection max −σ1 - 7 bits
Selection max −σ1 - 3 bits
Figure 6: Performance of the dmin and the max(σ1) selection
criteria
solution relies on emphasising the use of the ﬁrst sub-channel
from the virtual channel matrix to transmit the data.
The proposed distortion functions ensure wireless connec-
tions with different performance in terms of reliability, de-
pending also on the number of feedback bits. When choosing
a certain selection method one must take into account the
complexity of the involved computations. It must be stated that
for larger MIMO systems is even more important to consider
the complexity.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a quantization scheme for uncor-
related Rayleigh fading channels, applied to the max −dmin
precoder. The codebook design method and the selection of
the optimal precoder from the codebook are based on the
maximization of the minimum Euclidean distance on the
received constellation. If the two forms of the max −dmin
precoder are considered in the development of the quantization
scheme, the simulation results have shown that, with a reduced
feedback rate, 3 bits, the method ensures a very small loss
compared to the ideal case.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Scaglione, S. Barbarossa, G. Giannakis and H. Sampath, ”Optimal
designs for space-time linear precoders and decoders”,IEEE Transactions
on Signal Processing vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 1051-1064, May 2002.
[2] P. Stoica and G. Ganesan, ”Maximum-SNR spatial-temporal formatting
design for MIMO channels”,IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing vol.
50, no. 12, pp. 3036-3042, 2002.
[3] I.E. Telatar”, ”Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels”,European
Transactions on Telecommunications vol. 10, pp. 585-595, 1999.
[4] L. Collin, O. Berder, P. Rostaing and G. Burel, ”Optimal minimum
distance based precoder for MIMO spatial multiplexing systems”,IEEE
Transactions on Signal Processing vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 617-627, 2004.
[5] D.J. Love, R.W. Hearth, V.K.N. Lau, D. Gesbert, B.D. Rao and M. An-
drews, ”An overview of limited feedback in wireless communications
systems”,IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications vol. 28,
no. 8, pp. 1341 - 1365, October 2008.
[6] D.J. Love and R.W. Hearth, ”Limited feedback unitary precoding for
spatial multiplexing systems”,IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing
vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2967-2976, August 2005.
[7] A. Moldovan, G. Madi, B. Vrigneau, T. Palade and R. Vauzelle, ”SVD
algorithms and quantization applied to MIMO max −dmin based pre-
coder”,Proceedings of EURASIP Workshop on Signal Processing and
Applied Mathematics for Electronics and Communications, SPAMEC
2011, pp. 5-8, 2011.
[8] B. Vrigneau, J. Letessier, P. Rostaing, L. Collin and G. Burrel, ”Statistical
comparison between max −dmin, max-SNR and MMSE precoders”,
40th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, Oct. 2006.
[9] J.R. Cavallaro and F.T. Luk, “CORDIC Arithmetic for an SVD Processor,”
in Proc. 8th Symp Computation Arithmetic, pp. 113-120, May 1987.
[10] J.E. Volder, “The CORDIC trigonometric computing technique,” IRE
Transactions on Electronic Computers vol. 8, no. 3 pp. 330-334, Sep.
1959.
258
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

