Roadside-Assisted V2V Messaging for Connected Autonomous Vehicle
Manabu Tsukada
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1,
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8656 Japan
Email: tsukada@hongo.wide.ad.jp
Abstract—Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) messaging is an indispensable
tool for real-time dynamic information sharing in cooperative In-
telligent Transportation Systems (ITSs). Although V2V standards
are speciﬁed in the European Union, United States, and Japan,
all such standards suffer from a set of common drawbacks. In
this paper, we ﬁrst analyze these issues and derive a problem
statement. We then propose a roadside-assisted V2V messaging
scheme in which roadside units construct a database of dynamic
information obtained from sensors and transmit data to nearby
and remote vehicles. We also design a common solution to the
problem of differing regional standards by making the system in-
dependent of any speciﬁc set of standards. Finally, we analyze the
potential requirements for designing a speciﬁcation of roadside-
assisted V2V messaging. The proposed system is designed to be
technically compatible with 5G mobile edge computing.
Keywords–Cooperative
ITS;
Vehicle-to-Vehicle;
Standard;
VANET; Internet
I.
INTRODUCTION
Road transport is an essential infrastructure for supporting
human activity; at the same time, it introduces many prob-
lems, including trafﬁc accidents and congestion, air pollu-
tion, and increased energy consumption. Solving the problems
of road transport is therefore a key to making road travel
safer, more efﬁcient, and more pleasant. Autonomous vehi-
cles are currently attracting the attention of researchers and
engineers; however, stand-alone autonomous vehicles simply
replace human perception, decision-making, and maneuvering
with computer control. Taking the concept one step further,
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSs) can, for example,
improve perception where there are blind spots in vehicle
sensors by connecting vehicles to roadside units.
Road networks are interconnected among countries and, in
the many cases where there are insigniﬁcant barriers, vehicles
can easily cross country borders. To enable interoperabil-
ity among countries, cooperative ITS need to be developed
based on universal architecture, protocols, and technologies.
To standardize cooperative ITS, the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO) Technical Committee 204 Working
Group 16 (TC204 WG16) (also known as Communications
Architecture for Land Mobile (CALM)), in coordination with
the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI)
TC ITS, is developing a standard architecture for cooperative
ITS called the ITS Station reference architecture [5], [4]. In
the US, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) is standardizing a Wireless Access in Vehicular En-
vironments (WAVE) architecture in the IEEE 1609 family of
standards [2] as well as an IEEE802.11 variant for vehicular
communication, IEEE802.11p [3].
Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) messaging is indispensable for
implementing cooperative ITS involving real-time information
sharing among vehicles of, for example, vehicle position
data. As VRV message standards, the Cooperative Awareness
Message (CAM) [8], Basic Safety Message (BSM) [1], and
Advanced Safety Vehicle (ASV) have been speciﬁed in the
EU, US, and Japan, respectively. Messages are transmitted by
single-hop broadcasting via 5.8 ∼ 5.9Ghz ITS wireless media
(i.e. IEEE802.11p [3]) under the EU and US standards and by
760 Mhz ITS wireless media in Japan.
In theory, connected autonomous vehicles can be made
aware via wireless single-hop V2V messaging of other, out-
of-sight vehicles. However, the three schema described above
have four potential problem areas: 1) mixed environments in
which V2V message receivers cannot receive messages from
vehicle without V2V transmitters; 2) V2V messages may be
lost because of interference and obstacles ﬁltering wireless
communication; 3) communication ranges are limited to within
the wireless range; and 4) V2V message exchange systems are
vulnerable to malfunctions in sender vehicles and to malicious
messaging.
In this paper, we ﬁrst present an analysis of a problem
statement on the above issues. To develop a potential solution
addressing all the problems, we investigate a roadside-assisted
V2V messaging scheme embodying a real-time cyber-physical
system (CPS) comprising sensing technology and a V2V and
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) network. To take advantages
of these technologies, we design a system that employs ITS
dedicated media, cellular media, and IPv6. As V2V messaging
systems under the EU, US, and Japanese share the four
problems above, we investigate a common solution for all
standards and propose adapting a layer of localization to the
standards in each country.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes the problem statement on V2V message exchange.
Section III presents details of our potential solution, called
roadside-assisted V2V messaging. Section IV analyzes the
requirements for the potential solution. Section V introduces
related works. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper by
summarizing the main discussion and addressing future work.
II.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this section, we ﬁrst describe a general scenario using
the V2V messaging. Then, we analyse four potential issues
arisen in the scenario.
A. Scenarios
In the ITS station reference architecture, neighboring ve-
hicle information obtained by V2V messaging is stored in the
Local Dynamic Map (LDM) [6][7] speciﬁed in the facilities
layer, which provides a set of common functionalities shared
by several applications for various tasks. The LDM supports
various ITS applications by maintaining information on objects
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

inﬂuencing or comprising the trafﬁc, including highly dynamic
data such as vehicle, roadside, and trafﬁc conditions and the
presence of accidents.
The LDM data, as updated by the V2V messaging, enables
a connected autonomous vehicle to be aware of other vehicles
out of the line of sight. Figure 1 illustrates a case in which the
LDM provides accurate information to vehicles near an inter-
section. The lower layer of Figure 1 shows the physical space
in which the road, vehicles, and a pedestrian are located, while
the upper layer represents the parallel cyber space in which
networked computers maintaining data that can be modiﬁed,
exchanged, and shared. In the ITS station architecture, digital
data received as CAMs from neighboring vehicles are stored
in the LDM. In the following, we describe the protocol used
the EU; however, the scenario described below applies in the
US and Japan as well.
Building
Physical space
Cyber space (LDM)
Vehicle 1
V
V
V
P
Building
CAM transmitters
Figure 1. LDM and V2V messaging
In the case shown in Figure 1, vehicle 1 is made aware via
a driver assistance alert of other vehicles behind the building. If
the LDM provides accurate information that the other vehicles
are not on a collision course, vehicle 1 does not need to stop
before the intersection.
B. Issues
The above scenario assumes that all cyber-physical systems
are working correctly, that V2V messages from all of the vehi-
cles and the pedestrian are successfully delivered to vehicle 1,
and that the LDM of the vehicle is kept up-to-date with respect
to the surrounding environment.
In real situations, however, physical space information is
often not projected correctly into cyber space. In the section,
we describe the issues of cyber physical projection using V2V
messaging.
1) Mixed Environment: To detect all vehicles using V2V
messaging, all vehicles must be equipped with at least sender-
side V2V device functionality. In this regard, the penetration of
V2V devices is the key factor to enabling cooperative ITS. The
US National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA)
had studied the possibility of implementing regulation to
require V2V devices in new light vehicles [29]. However,
regardless of the level of such deployment old vehicles will
likely lack V2V devices, and thus we should consider mixed
environments in which V2V-enabled vehicles operate among
legacy vehicles.
Beyond legacy vehicles, it is important for cooperative
ITS to accommodate pedestrians and bicycles, which are also
generally not equipped with V2V sender devices. The current
assumption of V2V messaging excludes such non-V2V aware
nodes and therefore their presence is not projected into cyber
space. Again, this strongly suggests that V2V messaging re-
quires adaptation to mixed environments in which V2V-aware
vehicles and non-aware nodes (legacy vehicles, pedestrians,
and cyclists) coexist.
2) Interference and Obstacle: V2V messages are broad-
cast over ITS-dedicated media (ITS-5G or 760Mhz) within
a single-hop distance. Messages may be lost in delivery if
there are obstacles between the nodes that screen wireless
radio propagation. On the road, such obstacles would include
buildings, bridges, tunnels, hills, and heavy vehicles. In the
above case that the V2V message does not reach the receiver,
the physical information is not reﬂected accurately to the cyber
space. The V2V receiver (Vehicle 1 in Figure 1) is not aware
of the other vehicles presence or it is only aware of the
old information. V2V messaging needs the solution to ensure
message delivery.
3) Limited wireless range:
V2V messages cannot be
delivered beyond the range of wireless radio propagation from
the sender vehicle. This range is often described as being from
500 m to 1 km when using ITS-5G in an ideal environment
with a clear line of sight; however, the distance often becomes
shorter in non-line-of-sight scenarios.
4) Malfunctioning and malicious message: In V2V sys-
tems, physical information is projected into cyber space based
on data obtained from received V2V messages. In such cases,
the receiver must be able to trust the sent information. To
ensure trust, NHTSA’s current research is based on the assump-
tion that V2V systems will use Public Key Infrastructure (PKI)
to authenticate messages
[29]. However, such V2V systems
would still be vulnerable to malfunctions of sender vehicles in
which senders broadcast incorrect information (e.g., position,
time, or speed). Such situations can be caused by GPS signal
loss or metering device hardware problems. Alternatively,
senders may broadcast V2V messages with incorrect infor-
mation generated by software bugs or even false information
generated by malicious software.
In the cases above, a receiver will generally not have the
capability of validating the information in the V2V messages
and incorrect physical data will be projected into cyber space.
This underscores the importance of identifying and excluding
incorrect or falsiﬁed physical information in the V2V message
exchange process.
III.
ON THE DESIGN OF ROADSIDE-ASSISTED V2V
MESSAGING
To solve the issues of 1) mixed environments and 2) inter-
ference and obstacles described in Section II, we previously
proposed a roadside assisted V2V messaging scheme called
Proxy CAM. The system is compliant with EU V2V message
standards (CAM) and can be adapted to the other standards
(US and Japan) by adopting their V2V message formats (BSM
and ASV, respectively). With some extension, the scheme
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

represents a potential solution to all of the issues raised in
Section II.
In this section, we brieﬂy describe our previous work
(Proxy CAM [20]) and then propose some extensions to Proxy
CAM for a complete solution to all four issues raised in the
preceding section.
A. Proxy Cooperative Awareness Message
An overview of Proxy CAM [20] is shown in Fig. 2. In
the system, roadside sensors detect vehicles and obtain relevant
information for each vehicle including position, velocity, and
acceleration. The vehicle information obtained from the sen-
sors is then sent to a server located in the system infrastructure
and stored in a database. The database generates CAMs from
its stored data and broadcasts these from roadside transmitters.
CAM-supported vehicles receive the CAMs and store the
information in their LDMs following a reception procedure
identical to that involved in the baseline CAM process (Proxy
CAM), and receiver vehicles ITS applications can access the
data from this Proxy CAM.
In the following sections, we describe the system in detail
by function.
To test the roadside system, it was implemented on Linux-
based systems and evaluated in indoor and ﬁeld tests.
Roadside sensor
2) Sensor data
to the database
3) Proxy CAM 
       transmission
Proxy CAM
Database
Proxy CAM generation
1)detection
Target
Roadside 
Transmitter
Figure 2. Overview of Proxy CAM
B. Roadside Station for Proxy V2V Messaging
Although Proxy CAM solves issues 1) and 2) in section II,
issues 3), limited wireless range, and 4), malicious messaging,
remain unsolved. In this section, we propose an additional
functionality for the Proxy CAM roadside system to solve the
all four issues.
1) Overview of proposed system: An overview of the
proposed system is shown in Figure 3. In the system, roadside
stations are installed at distributed locations, with each station
detecting objects (vehicles, pedestrians, and bicycles) in the
target area using sensors and wireless message receivers. The
detected objects information is stored in real-time in the
database (a). Data processing includes malicious message de-
tection through comparisons between sensor data and received
V2V messages (b). The roadside station then advertises its
proxy V2V messages from its database over ITS-dedicated
media, sharing its dynamic information on the target area (c).
The remote proxy messaging system delivers this dynamic
information on demand using a cellular network such as LTE
(d). Receiver vehicles can obtain this dynamic information
from a combination of genuine and proxy V2V messaging and
remote messaging. In this manner, fresh, dynamic information
is available over a wider area.
Roadside Station
Sensor
Receiver
Transmitter
Target
Receiver
Receiver
Proximity
Remote
Common 
system
Different 
Standards
Roadside
Stations
V2I msg
V2V 
msg
Processing
a) Database of target
b) Malicious msg detection
Discovery &
Remote proxy msg
Internet
Messaging
c) Remote msg
d) Proxy msg
detection
Figure 3. Roadside Station for Proxy V2V Messaging
2) Malicious message detection:
Each roadside station
detects target objects from both sensors and vehicle-sent V2V
messages. The station can therefore check the correctness of
received V2V messages by comparing their content with the
sensor information during database processing (function b in
Figure 3). If the location data (position, speed, direction) of the
received message match the sensor data, the roadside sensor
can trust that the information is correct and add the corre-
sponding entry to the database. Data mismatching occurrences
can follow two cases: 1) there are V2V message data but no
sensor data at the location, or; 2) there are no V2V message
data but there are sensor data at the location.
In the ﬁrst case, if an object is in the target position of the
sensor but no relevant V2V messages have been received, the
system must add the objects information to the database. This
is the normal procedure used in cases in which a vehicle is not
equipped with a V2V transmitter. In the second case, if there
is no object at the position indicated by a V2V message, it
is highly likely that the message sender is disseminating false
information. The system must therefore not include such data
in its database and it must identify the sender as a malicious
node. However, the manner in which malicious node alerts are
sent to other nodes is outside the focus of this paper because,
as mentioned in section IV-H, the dissemination of trusted
information must be considered carefully for security reasons.
Conceptually, the roadside station regularly checks the
consistency of physical space with cyber space and eliminates
incorrect physical information projected to cyber space. To do
so, the system must preferentially trust its sensor data over
received messages data, following the principle generally used
in connected autonomous vehicle systems.
3) Remote Proxy Messaging: A roadside station maintain-
ing a database of dynamic information for its respective area
can generate proxy informational V2V messages on behalf of
target vehicles. Such messages are disseminated over the ITS
media in addition to the ﬂow of genuine V2V messages at,
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

i.e., 760 Mhz in Japan, 5.8 ∼ 5.9Ghz in the EU and United
States. As illustrated in Figure 4, in Japan ASV messages are
transmitted directly over ITS media. In the EU and United
States, V2V messages are transmitted using transport and net-
work layer technologies, namely, CAM, which is transmitted
over the Basic Transport Protocol (BTP), and GeoNetworking
(GN). In addition, BSM is transmitted over the WAVE Short
Message Protocol (WSMP).
To overcome wireless range limitations, we apply remote
proxy V2V messaging via roadside stations, as described
above. To assess this scheme, we performed a preliminary
evaluation using UDP/IPv6 over LTE in [21].
As shown in Figure 4, we propose remote proxy V2V
messaging as a common solution usable by standards in Japan,
EU, and the United States. We designed this system to use IPv6
for remote proxy V2V messaging because it fulﬁls cooperative
ITS requirements as a result of its extended address space,
embedded security, enhanced mobility support, and ease of
conﬁguration. The proposed system also uses UDP because
this enables delivery of messages involving real-time data.
Using UDP/IPv6, packets can be transmitted over general
wireless media such as LTE, 3G, etc., in cases in which the
delay is not too long for real-time data transmission.
Facilities
Access
Safety app
General app
BTP
GN
ITS media
(760Mhz)
ITS Media
(5.8Ghz ~ 5.9Ghz)
ASV
BSM
CAM
UDP
IPv6
General media
(LTE, 3G…)
Application
Japan
US
EU
Common
WSMP
Transport 
& Network
Figure 4. Remote Proxy V2V messaging
Remote proxy V2V messages are sent on-demand from ve-
hicles arriving in a target area, e.g., an intersection, according
to the requirements of the ITS application, e.g., a navigation
system. The application requests dynamic information regard-
ing future vehicle positions in advance. Note that, although IP
address discovery of roadside stations is outside the focus of
this paper, possible solutions for discovery include embedding
IP addresses into the digital map, downloading static lists of
IP addresses, or resolving the IPv6 address from geographical
information using a DNS-like system [15], etc.
The remote proxy V2V messaging capability is considered
to be an additional feature of the roadside station system.
As such, vehicles arriving simultaneously at an intersection
receive both proxy messages over the ITS media and remote
messages over general media. Depending on the freshness of
the data, the receiver side can then decide which data to use.
IV.
REQUIREMENTS FOR THE SOLUTION
In this section, we analyse the design requirements for the
roadside-assisted V2V messaging.
A. Coexistence with the CITS Standards
To enable interoperability among countries, a cooperative
ITS (CITS) must be developed based on universal architecture,
protocols, and technologies. Such a solution must adopt tech-
niques for standardized V2V messages such as CAM in the
EU, BSM in the United States, and ASV in Japan. Facilities
layer functionalities are of particular importance in ITS Station
architecture because applications developed in the architecture
access functions via a standard API; correspondingly, any
solution for interoperability must not require extensions such
as an LDM to the facilities layer.
B. Sensor independence
The solution proposed in this paper uses roadside sensors
to obtain vehicle data within the target area with regard to, e.g.,
position and the velocity. Many types of sensors can be applied
in this manner, including image sensors, LiDAR, induction
loops, infrared sensors, and microwave radar. However, the
implementation should not depend on a particular type of
sensor because sensor requirements will vary by environment
and purpose, e.g., urban environments or highways and budget
or policy drivers. To enable versatility, therefore, roadside
assisted V2V platform should support many types of sensors.
C. Distributed sensors
Sensors may be installed in multiple distributed locations
to obtain wider coverage depending on need. For example,
sensors may be placed to obtain real-time data from many
vehicles in an urban scenario or trafﬁc jam. Any implemented
solution must have the capacity to handle large real-time data
from distributed sensors.
D. Optimized Transmission Coverage
Depending on its conﬁguration, a roadside system must
be able to handle installation of multiple transmitters in
distributed locations to cover a wider transmission range. It
is necessary to consider strategic placement of transmitters,
possibly employing message dissemination strategy algorithms
for determining, for example, frequency use, message ordering,
and area determination, to enable multi-transmitter scenarios.
Moreover, the roadside system must be aware of the V2V
messaging capabilities of target vehicles to eliminate duplicate
message delivery via the genuine and proxy V2V messaging
systems. The system must also estimate the original message
delivery area and transmit proxy messages to the wider area
not reached by the original message transmission.
E. Multi-path Message Delivery
Genuine V2V messaging provides the most accurate real-
time dissemination of information on target vehicles; however,
it is susceptible to the four problems described in Section II.
Proxy V2V messaging is efﬁcient in cases in which the target
vehicle does not have V2V sender functionality. However,
its wireless coverage is limited. Remote V2V messaging can
deliver dynamic messages anywhere, although with deterio-
rating latency. Correspondingly, the receiver should be able
to combine genuine V2V messaging, proxy V2V messaging,
and remote V2V messaging functionality into a combined
functionality.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

F. Real-time delivery of messages
Frequent transmission of V2V messages allows for the
tracking of highly dynamic vehicle status information such
as position, velocity, and acceleration. Genuine CAMs, for
example, are transmitted 110 times per second. A solution
should also send dynamic vehicle information frequently.
Overall, delays in message sensing and transmission must be
minimized.
G. Scalability
In typical urban scenarios or trafﬁc jams, a few hundred
vehicles will occupy the target area of a roadside station. The
generation of proxy V2V messages to and from hundreds of
vehicles ten times per second can cause serious interference,
leading to the potential dropping off of several hundred po-
tential remote V2V message receivers with interest in the
target area dynamic information. To avoid communication
congestion, the solution must transmit dynamic information
efﬁciently to allow for a scalable system.
H. Security Consideration
There are three security considerations relating to the
proposed scheme. The ﬁrst is how to maintain information
on vehicles sending incorrect information as detected by the
malicious message detection system. A trust model for infor-
mation dissemination is necessary. Because roadside stations
will be operated by public agencies, malicious node infor-
mation can be shared with the public by such authorities.
However, more consideration would be necessary in sharing
such information with other administrative domains. Second,
the V2V system was designed to send ”I am here” messages.
However, using proxy messaging changes the scheme to ”he
is there” messaging. Any potential security concerns arising
from this introduction of proxy messaging should therefore be
carefully analyzed. Third, the roadside stations send dynamic
information via the Internet instead of by V2V single-hop
broadcasting. Thus, messages must be encrypted between the
roadside station and the requested vehicle to protect their data
against tapping and falsiﬁcation.
V.
RELATED WORKS
the Japanese Metropolitan Police Department developed
the Driving Safety Support Systems (DSSS) as an infrastruc-
ture assisted CITS for accident reduction [9]. DSSS tested
three experimental systems: a rear-end collision prevention
system for use upon entering trafﬁc jams in which the car
is positioned in front of protective obstacles; a collision
prevention system for use when turning right at intersections;
and a collision prevention system for use at intersections with
poor sight lines. Infrastructure-assisted CITS using beacons
and FM broadcasting have been implemented on highways
across Japan.
It has been shown that the performance of Vehicular Ad-
Hoc Networks (VANETs) depends on the transmission power,
frequency of transmission, and the V2V and V2I message
lifetimes [30]. In turn, it is understood that the performance of
V2V and V2I messages depends strongly on the link quality
and the propagation conditions [13]. [13] demonstrated that
awareness levels for V2I communication are better than those
for V2V communication if roadside units are located in an
advantageous manner. [13] also explained that transmission
power is more important than frequency of transmission in
V2X communication.
[24] demonstrated how multi-sensor data fusion can lever-
age consistency and plausibility checking for perception sensor
data. In particular, the contents of CAMs as delivered by
connected vehicles with on-board perceptions sensors can be
independently validated.
A wide variety of sensing modes can be implemented for
use in road trafﬁc. Vision-based vehicle detection and tracking
techniques are summarized in [28]. Millimeter-wave radar and
cameras are important equipment for sensing vehicles using
vision-based systems. Millimeter-wave radar can also be used
for measuring target range and speed, as is currently done by
police in trafﬁc speed regulation [28]. Furthermore, millimeter-
wave radar can be used under poor viewing conditions in bad
weather. Stereo cameras are another very effective method
for sensing vehicles. Such cameras can sense both a vehicle
position and velocity [11].
One approach to creating messages for sharing object
perceptions relayed from sensors is Cooperative Perception
Messaging (CPM), which is speciﬁed in Ko-PER as a method
for sharing perceived dynamic objects in equipped vehicle or
roadside station environments [26][27]. Environmental Percep-
tion Messaging (EPM) uses proprietary messages that contain
lists of all perceived objects and carry unique IDs for vehicles
registered by local perception sensors [17][16] Sensory Ob-
servation Messaging (SOM) is a proposed method for sharing
infrastructure sensor information with potentially vulnerable
road users [12].
Cloud-based cooperative awareness between vehicles and
pedestrians was proposed in [10]. Under the scheme, pedes-
trians repeatedly send their positions to the cloud from their
smartphones, allowing the cloud to alert vehicles to the ap-
proach of pedestrians. Vehicle-to-Pedestrian (V2P) communi-
cation was also investigated in [23], who proposed a scheme
in which pedestrians receive CAMs on their smartphones from
vehicles hidden behind obstacles.
In the ﬁeld of cooperative autonomous driving, [22] intro-
duced a method of occupancy grid map merging dedicated to
multivehicle cooperative local mapping purposes in outdoor
environments. [18][19] proposed a multimodal cooperative
perception system that provides see-through, lifted-seat, satel-
lite, and all-around views to drivers. The features of the
system were validated in real-world experiments involving four
vehicles sharing a road.
Trafﬁc lights have long been used to coordinate trafﬁc ﬂows
at intersections. To update trafﬁc management to the connected
autonomous vehicle age, [14] proposed autonomous intersec-
tion management in which vehicles coming to an intersection
connect to a dedicated intersection controller that schedules
transfer through the intersection. [25] extended the priority-
based coordination approach at an intersection to support both
autonomous and legacy vehicles.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have found that the V2V messaging standards in the
EU, US, and Japan all suffer from four general shortcomings.
To overcome these, we proposed a roadside-assisted V2V
messaging system. The proposed system is a real-time cyber-
physical system that integrates sensing technology with V2V
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

and V2I networks and combines ITS and cellular media with
IPv6 to disseminate dynamic, fresh information to a wider
area. The proposed system also presents a common solution
for differing national and regional standards, such as those in
the EU, US, and Japan, as it is independent of any speciﬁc
standards. We further analyzed the potential requirements for
designing a speciﬁcation for roadside-assisted V2V messaging.
In future work, we will need to fully implement the
proposed system and validate it in ﬁeld operational tests. We
are also planning to evaluate the large-scale performance of
the system using simulation. In the development of the ﬁfth-
generation mobile network (5G), mobile edge computing will
play an important role in achieving ultra-low latency between
V2V messaging. Because edge stations must be located in
positions with good visibility such as intersections if they are
to cover wider areas, our aim is to ensure that the proposed
roadside system has high technical compatibility needed to co-
locate with 5G edge stations. To this end, further study on the
integration of 5G systems will be necessary.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number JP17H04678 and JP26730045.
REFERENCES
[1]
SAE J2735 Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC) Message
Set Dictionary, November 2009.
[2]
IEEE 1609.0 Draft Standard for Wireless Access in Vehicular Environ-
ments (WAVE) - Architecture, April 2010.
[3]
IEEE Standard for Information technology - Telecommunications and
information exchange between systems - Local and metropolitan area
networks - Speciﬁc requirement, Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium
Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations, July
2010. IEEE Std 802.11p-2010.
[4]
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Communications Architecture,
September 2010. ETSI EN 302 665 V1.1.1 (2010-09).
[5]
ISO 21217:2010 Intelligent transport systems – Communications access
for land mobiles (CALM) – Architecture, April 2010.
[6]
Intelligent transport systems – Cooperative systems – Deﬁnition of a
global concept for Local Dynamic Maps, November 2014. ISO/PRF
TS 18750.
[7]
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic
Set of Applications; Local Dynamic Map (LDM), Sept. 2014. ETSI
EN 302 895 V1.1.1 (2014-09).
[8]
Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS); Vehicular Communications; Basic
Set of Applications; Part 2: Speciﬁcation of Cooperative Awareness
Basic Service, Dec. 2014. ETSI EN 302 637-2 V1.3.2 (2014-11).
[9]
N. Atsushi, N. Tsuyoshi, and O. Yasukazu. Demonstration Experiments
of Driving Safety Support Systems Using Vehicle-to-Infrastructure
Communications Systems (Japanese), 2009.
[10]
M. Bagheri, M. Siekkinen, and J. K. Nurminen. Cellular-based vehicle
to pedestrian (v2p) adaptive communication for collision avoidance. In
Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), 2014 International Conference
on, pages 450–456, Nov. 2014.
[11]
M. Bertozzi, A. Broggi, A. Fascioli, and S. Nichele. Stereo vision-
based vehicle detection. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, 2000. IV
2000. Proceedings of the IEEE, pages 39–44, 2000.
[12]
R. Blokpoel and A. Stuiver.
Sensory observation message and cam
extensions for vru safety.
[13]
M. Boban and P. M. d’Orey.
Exploring the practical limits of
cooperative awareness in vehicular communications. Mar. 2015.
[14]
K. Dresner and P. Stone.
A multiagent approach to autonomous
intersection management.
Journal of artiﬁcial intelligence research,
31:591–656, 2008.
[15]
T. Fioreze and G. Heijenk. Extending the domain name system (dns)
to provide geographical addressing towards vehicular ad-hoc networks
(vanets). In Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC), 2011 IEEE, pages
70–77. IEEE, 2011.
[16]
H.-J. G¨unther, B. Mennenga, O. Trauer, R. Riebl, and L. Wolf. Realizing
collective perception in a vehicle. In Vehicular Networking Conference
(VNC), 2016 IEEE, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2016.
[17]
H.-j. Gunther, O. Trauer, and L. Wolf.
The potential of collective
perception in vehicular ad-hoc networks. In ITS Telecommunications
(ITST), 2015 14th International Conference on, pages 1–5. IEEE, 2015.
[18]
S.-W. Kim, Z. J. Chong, B. Qin, X. Shen, Z. Cheng, W. Liu, and M. H.
Ang. Cooperative perception for autonomous vehicle control on the
road: Motivation and experimental results. In Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages
5059–5066. IEEE, 2013.
[19]
S.-W. Kim, B. Qin, Z. J. Chong, X. Shen, W. Liu, M. H. Ang, E. Fraz-
zoli, and D. Rus. Multivehicle cooperative driving using cooperative
perception: Design and experimental validation. IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 16(2):663–680, 2015.
[20]
T. Kitazato, M. Tsukada, H. Ochiai, and H. Esaki. Proxy cooperative
awareness message: an infrastructure-assisted v2v messaging. In 2016
Ninth International Conference on Mobile Computing and Ubiquitous
Networking (ICMU), pages 1–6, Oct 2016.
[21]
M. Kitazawa, M. Tsukada, K. Morino, H. Ochiai, and H. Esaki. Remote
Proxy V2V Messaging using IPv6 and GeoNetworking. In Vehicular
2017, July 2017.
[22]
H. Li, M. Tsukada, F. Nashashibi, and M. Parent.
Multivehicle
Cooperative Local Mapping: A Methodology Based on Occupancy Grid
Map Merging. Intelligent Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions
on, 15(5):2089–2100, Oct. 2014.
[23]
P. Merdrignac, O. Shagdar, I. B. Jemaa, and F. Nashashibi. Study on
perception and communication systems for safety of vulnerable road
users. In Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2015 IEEE 18th
International Conference on, pages 1876–1881, Sept. 2015.
[24]
M. Obst, L. Hobert, and P. Reisdorf.
Multi-sensor data fusion for
checking plausibility of v2v communications by vision-based multiple-
object tracking.
In Vehicular Networking Conference (VNC), 2014
IEEE, pages 143–150. IEEE, 2014.
[25]
X. Qian, J. Gregoire, F. Moutarde, and A. De La Fortelle. Priority-based
coordination of autonomous and legacy vehicles at intersection. In In-
telligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 2014 IEEE 17th International
Conference on, pages 1166–1171. IEEE, 2014.
[26]
A. Rauch, F. Klanner, and K. Dietmayer.
Analysis of v2x commu-
nication parameters for the development of a fusion architecture for
cooperative perception systems. In Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV),
2011 IEEE, pages 685–690. IEEE, 2011.
[27]
A. Rauch, S. Maier, F. Klanner, and K. Dietmayer. Inter-vehicle object
association for cooperative perception systems.
In Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems-(ITSC), 2013 16th International IEEE Conference
on, pages 893–898. IEEE, 2013.
[28]
S. Sivaraman and M. M. Trivedi.
Looking at vehicles on the road:
A survey of vision-based vehicle detection, tracking, and behavior
analysis. 14(4):1773–1795, Dec. 2013.
[29]
U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Trafﬁc Safety
Administration. Vehicle-to-Vehicle Communications: Readiness of V2V
Technology for Application. pages 1–327, Aug. 2014.
[30]
M. Van Eenennaam, W. K. Wolterink, G. Karagiannis, and G. Heijenk.
Exploring the solution space of beaconing in vanets.
In Vehicular
Networking Conference (VNC), 2009 IEEE, pages 1–8. IEEE, 2009.
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

