Design and Implementation of a Smart Home 
Energy Management System with Hybrid Sensor 
Network in Smart Grid Environments 
 
Jinsung Byun, Insung Hong, and Sehyun Park 
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Chung-Ang University 
Seoul, Korea 
E-mail: jinsung, axlrose11421@wm.cau.ac.kr, shpark@cau.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract— Green IT and smart grid technologies have changed 
electricity infrastructure more efficiently. Recent advances in 
wireless and mobile communications technologies facilitate 
context-aware power management systems which can offer 
situation-based services in digital home. In this paper, we 
propose a novel smart home energy management system 
(SHEMS) with hybrid sensor networks. Hybrid sensor 
networks consist of two types of sensors: the power 
information monitoring sensor (PIMS) and the environment 
information monitoring sensor (EIMS). To maximize the 
hybrid sensor network lifetime, we propose a new routing 
protocol based on cooperation between PIMS and EIMS, 
which we named the CPER. In order to verify the efficiency of 
our system, we implemented our system in real test bed and 
conducted some experiments. The results show that the 
reduction in service response time, the average number of 
packet 
transmissions, 
and 
energy 
consumption 
is 
approximately 29.8%, 42.3 and 17-22%. 
Keywords- home energy management system; smart Grid; 
wireless sensor networks (WSNs); pattern-based control, hybrid 
sensor networks 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Environmental problems, such as climate change or the 
exhaustion of natural resources are the one of the most 
important issues around the world in recent years. These 
problems are mainly because of the excessive use of energy. 
To deal with these problems, recently, smart grid technology 
is emerging and a lot of related works have been done by 
various researchers and scientists around the world.  
Smart grid [1] is defined as a next generation power 
network that delivers electricity from suppliers to consumers 
based on two-way communications. This makes it possible 
for the suppliers and consumers to dynamically respond to 
changes in energy consumption, demand and grid condition, 
which improves grid reliability and energy efficiency.  
As a part of the smart grid, the micro grid is a low 
voltage network that interlinks with small distributed power 
systems. The micro grid provides an independent power grid 
that interconnects the renewable energy plants with the 
power storage systems, such as load systems that govern 
device control in apartments and other dwellings. To 
enhance the function of micro grids, both energy 
management systems (EMS) and distributed automation 
systems (DAS) are needed.  
The smart grid [2] designs a smart place which is defined 
as the energy-efficient place that provides the power-aware 
and user-centric services according to demand-response 
(DR) based on an advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) 
between the users and the power provider. The AMI is the 
infrastructure which monitors the digital meters, delivers the 
power consumption information, and controls the various 
devices.  This infrastructure provides the cost and status of 
the power consumption to the users. The AMI offers an 
accurate demand forecast to the providers for load 
management and the revenue protection. 
As renewable energy generation and storage systems 
increase, the power system should manage the demand-
response and the power consumption load-balancing with the 
power storage device. These power systems merge the power 
provided from the power provider and the power generating 
from the renewable energy source. The different frequency 
and voltage are important issue when integrating renewable 
energy systems into the conventional power networks. 
Research on distribution and transmission considering 
integration of the renewable energy system is needed. 
Recent studies of energy-aware systems focus on energy 
monitoring system [3], [4] and energy-savvy device design 
[5]. Energy monitoring systems [6], [7] allow inhabitants to 
see energy consumption and control electronic devices to 
minimize the power consumption of individual appliances. 
Such systems typically do not consider situation analysis or 
user satisfaction. Most studies of energy-savvy device design 
aim to decrease standby power consumption only for specific 
devices. 
To enhance the scalability and effectiveness of power 
management, existing home network systems and energy-
aware systems [3] should consider additional fundamental 
factors as follows: 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

1) A deployment of wireless and mobile sensor-dependent 
environments: To guarantee QoS and reason adaptive 
services, existing systems deploy a large number of sensors 
and then analyze the associated context. For example, crime 
and disaster prevention services depend on the continuous 
detection of sensor data. These services do not provide 
effective power consumption, and do not consider system 
resources or battery lifetimes, but they do guarantee high-
quality service. 
2) The centralized or device-specific scheme: To analyze 
contexts and provide service, existing systems use 
centralized server schemes or service-specific device 
schemes.  However, centralized schemes require increased 
numbers of sensors to enhance the services that they provide. 
Moreover, to balancing the demands on system resources 
this scheme levels the QoS down according to the statuses of 
devices and sensors. Service-specific devices, which may 
deliver either static and predefined services are difficult to 
scale while maintaining appropriate responses to situational 
changes, such as environmental changes, interruptions, 
events, movements, or conflicts. 
3) The static rule-based inference: Existing systems 
determine the services that they control according to 
predefined thresholds or on/off schedules. These systems 
have static policies and service rules with regard to the 
predefined event analysis and the service determination. 
Furthermore, due to the high dependency of the device 
intelligence, the previous systems are less efficient at device 
control and power consumption in situation management. 
Therefore, an energy-efficient system needs to provide 
effectiveness in power management and user satisfaction for 
implementing the smart grid. Furthermore, such system must 
interconnect with intelligent devices, systems, networks, and 
service provider (SP) by network and information 
convergence. 
Recent work on the smart grid focuses on the load 
management with AMI and wireless communications 
infrastructure. The smart grid only collects and monitors the 
energy status from a home without the consideration of the 
service management and the power consumption efficiency. 
Therefore, a power-aware home network system needs to 
interconnect with the smart grid and manage the energy-
efficient services based on the demand-response for 
implementing the fine grid. Furthermore, the system has to 
cooperate with the AMI and the renewable storage for the 
reusability of the smart grid infrastructure.  
Considering these requirements of the next generation 
power grid, we have designed a smart home energy 
management system (SHEMS). Our system is composed of a 
smart energy management gateway (SEMG), a smart energy 
management server (SEMS), and hybrid sensor networks. 
Our system automatically collects the sensed environmental 
information and efficiently controls the various consumer 
devices based on hybrid sensor networks. 
II. 
SMART GRID’S BACKGROUND 
A. Network Architecture of Smart Grid  
Smart grid basically has the capability to sense power 
grid conditions, measure power consumption, and control 
devices with two-way communications. Smart grid makes it 
possible for the both SP and consumer to dynamically 
respond to changes in energy consumption, demand and grid 
condition. Furthermore, reliable and secure access to 
facilities is crucially important to the success of smart grid. 
Smart grid is typically composed of three network segments: 
home/building area networks (H/BANs), AMI or field area 
networks (FANs), and wide area networks (WANs). Smart 
grid consists of four parts, which are an electricity generation, 
transmission, distribution and consumer part (see fig. 1). 
Smart grid considers improvements in efficiency of all parts 
(i.e. from a generation part to a consumer part). 
The generation part consists of various power plants such 
as a fossil fuelled power plant, nuclear power plant, 
hydroelectricity plant, and renewable power plant. Safety 
and reliability are most important factors in a generation 
part of smart grid. In smart grid, information about the 
 
 
Figure 1. Concept of a smart grid (architecture and keyword) 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

condition of the plant and environment is transmitted to 
administrators via IT infrastructure, thereby making the 
power plants more safe and reliable. Furthermore, smart 
grid is able to synchronize and adjust the voltage output of 
the added generation without damaging the whole system.  
The transmission and distribution part play a role in 
optimizing the electricity transmission and distribution. That 
is, the loss and cost during transmission and distribution 
have to be minimizedm Alternating current (AC) is typically 
preferred since its voltage easily amplifies by a transformer, 
which minimizes resistive loss in the conductors used to 
transmit electricity over long distances. Recently, high-
voltage direct current (HVDC) is used to deliver electricity 
due to the advantage of which is to transmit large amounts 
of electricity over long distances with lower costs and losses. 
In addition, key technologies enabling transmission and 
distribution part deployment are distribution automation 
system (DAS), supervisory control and data acquisition 
(SCADA), robust faulty detection, self-healing, and so on. 
The consumer part is an end user (or consumer) of 
electricity and consists of many types of consumers such as 
home, building, and industry. Main role of this part is to 
gather and transmit various contexts such as power 
consumption or state of power system. Furthermore, this part 
manages electric vehicle (EV) charging and local renewable 
energy sources. In addition, because the smart grid’s goal is 
enhancement of energy efficiency through response to many 
conditions in supply and demand, the smart meters are 
deployed to gather various contexts which are applied to 
calculate the supply and demand. 
B. Communication Standardization for Smart Grid  
There are some short and medium range wireless 
communications technologies emerged in the field of smart 
grid.  
1) IEEE 802.11 (WiFi): The IEEE 802.11 protocol is a 
set of standards for implementing a wireless local area 
network (WLAN), which is suited for high-data-rate 
applications over large areas. The IEEE 802.11 standard, 
commonly referred to as WiFi, is the most accepted 
technology for indoor wireless communications.  The basic 
shortcoming of this standard is the high power requirement 
of devices.  
2) IEEE 802.15.1 (Bluetooth): IEEE 802.15.1 standard, 
commonly referred to as Bluetooth, is an open wireless 
technology standard for transmitting and receiving data over 
small areas. Bluetooth utilizes short wavelength radio 
transmissions in the ISM band from 2400 to 2480 MHz, 
creating personal area networks (PANs) with high levels of 
security. The Bluetooth protocol is well suited for low-
power/low-data-rate applications. The main shortcoming of 
this standard is scalability. That is, Bluetooth networks 
support up to only eight devices. Another shortcoming is its 
periodical waking up and synchronization with the master 
device of Bluetooth networks.  
3) IEEE 802.15.3 (UWB): IEEE 802.15.3 is a MAC and 
PHY standard for high-rate WPANs. There are two major 
types of application that uses UWB communication. The first 
type of application is for high-data-rate (over 1 Mb/s) 
communications such as multimedia content transmission. 
The other type of application is for low-data-rate (below 1 
Mb/s) such as wireless sensor networks. The main 
shortcoming of this technology is similar to that of WiFi. 
That is, the high power requirement.  
4) IEEE 802.15.4 (ZigBee): ZigBee is a standard which 
is employed in many home networking solutions because 
ZigBee has a low-power and low-cost characteristics. The 
ZigBee provides various network topologies such as a cluster 
tree, self-healing mesh network, or star topology, according 
to application’s requirements. In this way, the fixed and 
mobile devices can be configured flexibly. In addition, a 
ZigBee device using carrier sense multiple access with 
collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) does not require scheduling 
special wake-up events in order to communicate and 
maintain synchronization. Thus, ZigBee presents itself as a 
much better candidate (for wireless communication in the 
HAN) than UWB, WiFi, and Bluetooth [8].  
 
 
Figure. 2. Overview of the smart home energy management system  
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
A. Overview of SHEMS 
In this section, we present the overall system architecture 
of SHEMS. Fig. 2 shows an overview of the proposed smart 
building energy management system. The proposed system 
consists of hybrid sensor networks (the power information 
monitoring sensor + the environment information monitoring 
sensor), the smart energy management gateway (SEMG), 
and the smart energy management server (SEMS). We 
present our system in more detail below:  
 
The Hybrid Sensor Networks: To establish the 
proposed hybrid sensor networks, we utilize an 
intelligent sensor that is used for sensing the context 
as well as controlling the device according to rules 
or policies. For example, the environmental 
information monitoring sensor (EIMS) basically 
plays a role of information (e.g. the temperature, the 
humidity, the intensity of illumination, etc.) sensing 
and transmission to SEMG. However, it also directly 
controls a TV, a fan, and a light. In addition, the 
hybrid sensor networks consist of the two types of 
sensors: the power information monitoring sensor 
(PIMS) and EIMS. These sensors operate based on 
the proposed routing algorithm, the CPER.  
 
SEMG: SEMG can efficiently distribute various 
tasks related to the energy management service 
based on the hybrid sensor networks. It also 
interoperates with various mobile devices, such as 
smart phone, PDA, notebook PC using IEEE 
802.15.4 
(ZigBee), 
IEEE 
802.11 
(WLAN) 
technology.  
 
SEMS: SEMS performs complex tasks, such as load 
forecasting, 
user 
and 
device 
authentication 
/authorization, complex events analysis, etc. SEMS 
also manages the whole building energy and 
environmental information, user and device profiles. 
In addition, it performs a task of interconnection 
with other SEMSs. 
B. Hybrid Sensor Network 
In this subsection, we address the hybrid sensor networks 
architecture used for the proposed home energy management 
system. Our hybrid sensor networks consist of many smart 
sensor nodes. They can perform several tasks, such as 
gathering real-time energy consumption and building 
environmental information as well as controlling the various 
consumer devices. The proposed hybrid sensor networks are 
divided into two groups: PIMS group and EIMS group. 
1) PIMS: This is mainly used for gathering the power 
consumption and the power state of the consumer device 
directly connected to PIMS. It is also used to directly control 
the consumer device. It has ZigBee and power line (PL) 
based communication capability in order to automatically 
establish sensor networks. The information about the power 
consumption and the power state collected by PIMS is 
transmitted to the SEMG. The SEMG analyzes this 
information and then generates a power consumption pattern. 
If an energy management operation is needed, the SEMG 
sends the control signal to PIMS in order to control and 
manage the consumer device. PIMS broadcasts its sensor 
identifier (SID) periodically once it enters the local hybrid 
network, so that the SEMG can recognize PIMS.  
2) EIMS: This sensor monitors the environmental 
information, such as the temperature, the humidity, the gas 
(LPG and LNG), carbon monoxide (CO), the intensity of the 
illumination, the user’s movement, etc.  This sensor also 
generates a device control signal and directly transmits it to 
PIMS in order to control the consumer device. Like PIMS, 
EIMS has ZigBee-based communication capability in order 
to establish wireless sensor networks. 
3) CPER - Cooperation between the PIMS and EIMS 
based Routing protocol 
The main goal of the CPER protocol is to increase the 
lifetime of the hybrid sensor networks through the 
cooperation of the two types of sensors (PIMS and EIMS).  
The important difference between the two types of sensors is 
that one operates using the electrical power from the power 
socket directly and the other operates using that from a finite 
battery. We utilize these properties to route a packet from the 
source to the destination.  
A number of existing wireless sensor network routing 
protocols, such as the ones found in [9] and in [10], do not 
consider an adaptive allocation of the system resources and 
the user-centric service aspects; they are not adequate in 
ubiquitous environments where novel services are provided 
for various users. Therefore, we propose a new routing 
protocol that is cooperative method between PIMS and 
EIMS, which is called CPER. We design our routing 
protocol suitable for home energy management services. The 
proposed protocol establishes the wired and the wireless 
sensor networks, based on cooperation between the two 
types of sensors in order to maximize the network lifetime. 
The protocol utilizes difference between the two types of 
sensors as mentioned above. The CPER protocol works as 
follows:  
 * Clustering: The SEMG determines a cluster-head 
depending on the node’s power supply types. That is, the 
SEMG initially elects a node with a direct power source as a 
cluster-head. In the case of a node with battery-powered 
node, the SEMG applies the simplified LEACH [11] -based 
protocol to the cluster-head selection. 
 * Route discovery: (1) (default) If the source should 
discover a route to the destination, it broadcasts a route 
request packet (ROUTE_REQ) to its neighbors. If a node 
receiving a ROUTE_REQ does not know a route to the 
destination, the node inserts its own address into route 
tracking field of the packet and transmits a modified packet 
to its neighbors. In this way, paths are tracked. A typical 
problem for many ad hoc routing protocols is the needless 
packet flooding. To avoid the unnecessary packet flooding 
(e.g., endless packet circulation), each node only forward 
packets it has not yet seen. In addition, a ROUTE_REQ 
carries a form of expiration information, such as maximum 
number of hops in order to avoid unnecessary packet 
transmission. When receiving ROUTE_REQs that have 
different route, it selects a ROUTE_REQ with the minimum-
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

hop path and sends a route reply a packet (ROUTE_RE) to 
the source node. (2) (cooperation with PIMS) If a node 
receiving a ROUTE_REQ has PIMS as its neighbor; does 
not know a route to the destination, it adds its own address to 
the packet and transmits (unicast) the ROUTE_REQ to 
PIMS. Long-distance transmission causes the significant 
energy consumption due to the attenuation characteristics of 
radio-frequency (RF) signals. Therefore, we use the battery-
operated EIMS for short-distance transmission and use PIMS 
for relatively long-distance transmission. In addition, 
because PIMS also have the wired communication (i.e., 
PLC) capability, this makes the service response time faster.  
* Data forwarding: Considering the requirements of 
network architecture for a home energy management service, 
we use the next-hop routing scheme. This approach supports 
some level of fault tolerance and makes our system more 
robust and resilient to node mobility. 
4) Implementation: The hybrid sensor networks consist of 
two types of sensors: PIMS and EIMS (see fig 3). We 
designed each sensor node with sensing, controlling and 
networking abilities. Each sensor node automatically 
establishes the hybrid sensor network using proposed scheme 
and protocol. We designed PIMS using the 8-bit 
microprocessor, and a ZigBee transceiver for communication 
with other sensors and the SEMG. We use the ZigBee 
technology due to its low-cost and low-power characteristics 
[12]. PIMS also has a power line communication (PLC) 
module to communicate with the SEMG and other PIMSs. A 
wireless link has many advantages, such as high scalability 
and easy deployment compared with a wired link. However, 
since a wireless link also has a number of drawbacks, such as 
decreasing signal strength, frequent signal collision, and 
fading, our system balances between the wireless link and 
the wired link. EIMS is equipped with a low power 8-bit 
microprocessor and a ZigBee module for communication 
with other sensors and the SEMG, much like PIMS. EIMS 
analyzes the user’s situation and surroundings and operates 
the rule-based engine through the main processor group 
composed of the low-power 8-bit microprocessor and 
memory. EIMS has various sensor modules, such as 
temperature, humidity, gas detection (LPG, LNG, CO), 
Carbon dioxide, and object detection.  
C. Architecture of SEMG 
1) Middleware Architecture: Fig. 4 shows middleware 
architecture of the SEMG. It consists of various components. 
We will present the core modules in more detail.   
 
Context Manager: It gathers the sensor data and 
categorizes 
the 
situational 
events 
for 
the 
classification and storage to Knowledge Repository. 
This module assorts the meaning events that their 
values have the effects of the service status or the 
conflict situation. It transmits the meaning events to 
Inference 
Engine 
and 
requests 
the 
pattern 
verification to Pattern Correlator. 
 
Inference Engine: In order to reasoning and 
predicting the adaptive service, this module validates 
 
 
Figure. 3. Prototype of the EIMS and the PIMS 
 
Figure 4. Middleware architecture of SEMG 
 
Figure 5. (a) Prototype and (b) hardware blockdiabram of the SEMG  
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

the correlation the events with the service pattern 
and analyzes the contexts receiving form Knowledge 
Repository. It decides whether or not to maintain the 
service and conflict solution to Service Manager 
with the pattern and policy. 
 
Service Manager: This module monitors the service 
status and maintains the personalized service. 
Moreover, this is used to determine the transmission 
of the service status according to the domain 
interconnection and correlation policy. 
 
Configuration Manager: For the convergence and 
the interconnection, this module manages the 
heterogeneous contexts which consist of the status of 
intelligent device, the system, and the network in a 
scalable fashion. When the environmental elements 
change in various situations, this module transmits 
the control signal that reconfigures the address and 
status. 
 
Energy Monitoring Engine: This module monitors 
the total and moment power consumption. Thus, this 
analyzes the pattern of consumption and verifies the 
correlation with service. When the power status 
suddenly changes or made up the novel pattern, this 
module interworking with Inference Engine actively 
organizes the differential service.  
 
Pattern Correlator: For the convergence of the 
network, the device, the service, and the system 
resource, this module generates the patterns and 
analyzes the correlations. In addition, this module 
influences the policy modification and the service 
prediction based on efficiency QoS requirements. 
2) Implementation: Fig. 5 shows the prototype and 
hardware block diagram of SEMG. The main processor is 
based on 32-bit powerful ARM922T SoC (System on Chip) 
microprocessor. It is used for analyzing the complex events, 
operating the middleware, and processing the pattern 
generation. It also controls PIMS and EIMS. The 
communication group consists of a ZigBee transceiver, and 
Ethernet and WLAN modems. We used a 250kbps/2.4GHz 
ZigBee transceiver and 10/100Mbyte Ethernet modem for 
communication. A smart phone or a smart pad using IEEE 
802.11 (WLAN) can receive the energy management service 
via a WLAN modem. The electricity monitoring group plays 
a part in monitoring the power consumption and the power 
state. Furthermore, when electricity leakage or overvoltage 
happens, the SEMG recognizes abnormal events and 
autonomously takes steps to counteract or alleviate these 
problems. The power group is composed of a SMPS and a 
power regulator.  
We also implemented the SEMS to process various 
complex tasks (e.g. electric load forecasting, three-dimension 
(3D) simulation based on the energy management), a user 
and device authentication/authorization). There are various 
electric load forecasting methods and techniques, such as 
neural network based method [13] and time-series based 
model [14]. We adopted an ARIMA model, because in 
theory, it is the most typical model and possible to easy 
implementation. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT AND RESULT 
Fig. 6 (a) shows the service response time by the number 
of information requests per minute. Even though the number 
of service requests increases, our system using CPER 
protocol maintains certain levels of delay of the request and 
response. Our system also gradually decreases the slope of 
the service response time according to a new routing 
 
 
Figure. 6. Comparison of (a) the service response time, and (b) the everage number of packet transmissions at each EIMS 
 
Figure 7. total power consumption of the test bed 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

protocol based on cooperation between PIMS and EIMS, 
whereas not cooperating with PIMS when routing rapidly 
increases the service response time due to the frequent 
packet collision and packet loss. The results show that the 
service response time reduction using our system is 
approximately 29.8% under conditions for generating 100 
service requests per minute. Fig. 6 (b) presents the average 
number of packet transmissions at each EIMS by the number 
of information requests per minute. Similar to the result 
shown in Fig. 6 (a), proposed system using CPER protocol 
gradually decreases the slope of the average number of 
packet transmissions at each EIMS. The results show that the 
reduction of the every number of packet transmissions using 
our system is approximately 42.3% under conditions for 
generating 100 service requests per minute. Because the 
battery power consumption at a sensor node is proportionate 
to the number of packet transmissions, we can increase the 
network lifetime through our hybrid sensor networks. Fig. 7 
illustrates the results of total power consumption for 7 days. 
The results show that the power saving using our system is 
approximately 17-22% by utilizing our energy management 
services, such as light control by using sensing data from 
EIMS, shutting up the standby power, the remote power 
control using a smart phone, etc. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Green IT technology is emerging and many related works 
have been done by various researchers around the world. In 
this paper, we propose a smart home energy management 
system (SHEMS) architecture based on hybrid sensor 
networks to make consumer devices more energy efficient 
and intelligent. We also present a new routing protocol to 
increase the hybrid sensor networks lifetime. We named this 
routing protocol the CPER, whose basic idea is in 
cooperation between the power information monitoring 
sensor (PIMS) and the environment information monitoring 
sensor (EIMS). We implemented our system, and we design 
and develop related hardware and software. We expect that 
our work will contribute to the development of novel home 
energy management system. In order to verify the efficiency 
of our system, we implemented our system in real test bed 
and conducted some experiments. The results show that the 
reduction in service response time, the average number of 
packet 
transmissions, 
and 
energy 
consumption 
is 
approximately 29.8%, 42.3 and 17-22%.  
As a part of our future works, we are doing research into 
novel context awareness technologies and trying to apply 
them into an energy management system. Furthermore, we 
are developing a self-organized energy management system 
for various environments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the MKE(The Ministry 
of Knowledge Economy), Korea, under the HNRC(Home 
Network Research Center) –ITRC(Information Technology 
Research Center) support program supervised by the 
NIPA(National IT  Industry Promotion Agency (NIPA-2010-
C1090-1011–0010) 
and 
by 
the 
Human 
Resources 
Development of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology 
Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the 
Korea government Ministry of Knowledge Economy 
(20104010100570). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Z. Pei, L. Fangxing, and N. Bhatt, "Next-Generation 
Monitoring, Analysis, and Control for the Future Smart 
Control Center," Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 1, 
pp. 186-192, 2010. 
[2] H. Farhangi, "The path of the smart grid," Power and Energy 
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 8, pp. 18-28. 
[3] L. Chia-Hung, B. Ying-Wen, and L. Ming-Bo, "Remote-
Controllable Power Outlet System for Home Power 
Management," Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, 
vol. 53, pp. 1634-1641, 2007. 
[4] S. Darby, "The effectiveness of feedback on energy 
consumption: a review for DEFRA of the literature on 
metering, billing and direct displays," Environmental Change 
Institute, University of Oxford 2006. 
[5] H. Joon, H. Choong Seon, K. Seok Bong, and J. Sang Soo, 
"Design and Implementation of Control Mechanism for 
Standby Power Reduction," Consumer Electronics, IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 54, pp. 179-185, 2008. 
[6] Kurt Roth and J. Brodrick, "Home Energy Displays," 
ASHRAE Journal, vol. 50, pp. 136-138, 2008. 
[7] L. 
F. 
Stein, 
"California 
Information 
Display 
Pilot: 
Technology Assessment," 2004. 
[8] Z. M. Fadlullah, M. M. Fouda, N. Kato, A. Takeuchi, N. 
Iwasaki, and Y. Nozaki, "Toward intelligent machine-to-
machine communications in smart grid," Communications 
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 49, pp. 60-65, 2011. 
[9] S. D. Muruganathan, D. C. F. Ma, R. I. Bhasin, and A. O. 
Fapojuwo, "A centralized energy-efficient routing protocol 
for wireless sensor networks," Communications Magazine, 
IEEE, vol. 43, pp. S8-13, 2005. 
[10] W. Chen, Z. Chen, F. Pingyi, and K. Ben Letaief, "AsOR: an 
energy efficient multi-hop opportunistic routing protocol for 
wireless sensor networks over Rayleigh fading channels," 
Wireless Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 8, pp. 
2452-2463, 2009. 
[11] W. B. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, 
"An application-specific protocol architecture for wireless 
microsensor networks," Wireless Communications, IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 1, pp. 660-670, 2002. 
[12] A. Wheeler, "Commercial Applications of Wireless Sensor 
Networks Using ZigBee," Communications Magazine, IEEE, 
vol. 45, pp. 70-77, 2007. 
[13] C. Ying, P. B. Luh, G. Che, Z. Yige, L. D. Michel, M. A. 
Coolbeth, P. B. Friedland, and S. J. Rourke, "Short-Term 
Load Forecasting: Similar Day-Based Wavelet Neural 
Networks," Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 25, pp. 
322-330, 2010. 
[14] E. Gonzalez-Romera, M. A. Jaramillo-Moran, and D. 
Carmona-Fernandez, "Monthly Electric Energy Demand 
Forecasting Based on Trend Extraction," Power Systems, 
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 21, pp. 1946-1953, 2006. 
 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

