 
 
Abstract—Network coordination techniques are very promising 
for improving spectral efficiency over conventional cellular 
networks limited by inter-cell interference. Thus, Coordinated 
MultiPoint (CoMP) transmission and reception techniques are 
under 
consideration 
for 
LTE-Advanced 
to 
meet 
4G 
requirements. In this work, a coordination technique for inter-
cell interference cancellation is evaluated over a packetized 
multiuser adaptive OFDMA (Orthogonal Frequency-Division 
Multiple Access) system. As a result of our network 
coordination setup, a new question on which pair of users 
should be served at each physical resource comes up. A low 
power user selection algorithm is proposed and evaluated, and 
its performance is compared to that of random user selection.  
 
Keywords-; CoMP; LTE; MIMO; 4G; QoS  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 Data access over mobile networks has caused an 
increasing 
demand 
for 
high 
data 
rate 
wireless 
communications, a trend which is expected to continue. 
Nowadays, a typical user consumes 1 Gigabyte of data per 
month, approximately 200% percent more than one year ago 
[1] [2] [3]. The current mobile networks and wireless 
technologies need to be improved in order to support the 
traffic demand.  
To satisfy the high demand for wireless services, 3rd 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has been developing 
a new mobile standard, referred to as Long Term Evolution 
(LTE). The first release of LTE (Release 8) is              
labeled as 3.9G as it does not meet the International                     
Mobile Telecommunications-Advanced (IMT-Advanced) 
requirements for 4G. However, the evolved version of LTE 
(Release 10), referred to as LTE-Advanced (LTE-A), meets 
or 
exceeds 
the 
requirements 
of 
the 
International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) for the fourth generation 
(4G) radio communication standard, known as IMT-
Advanced. In October 2009, the 3GPP Partners formally 
submitted LTE-A to the ITU Radiocommunication sector 
(ITU-R) as a candidate for 4G IMT-Advanced [4]. 
In a cellular communication system such as 3GPP LTE,  
 
throughput is limited by co-channel interference, either 
within a cell (intra-cell interference) or from nearby cells 
(inter-cell interference). 
Downlink intra-cell interference can be eliminated by 
orthogonal channel allocation. LTE radio transmission is 
based on Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Access 
(OFDMA). Over frequency selective channels, OFDMA 
divides the transmitted bit flow into many different 
substreams 
and 
sends 
these 
over 
many 
different 
subchannels. Data from multiple users are being transmitted 
on parallel narrow-band subcarriers. The advantage is that 
each subcarrier is relatively narrowband, which decreases 
the effect of delay spread.  
Adaptive Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (AQAM) is 
an adaptive digital modulation that provides the system with 
the ability to match the service rate to the channel quality 
while meeting a target Bit Error Rate (BER) [2]. Adaptive 
QAM and OFDMA are combined by performing adaptive 
modulation in each OFDM subcarrier. Although OFDMA 
achieves improved spectral efficiency within one cell, inter-
cell interference is still preventing these technologies from 
coming close to the theoretical rates for multi-cell networks 
[5]. 
Inter-cell interference mainly influences the data rates of 
those users at the cell-edge affecting the average spectral 
efficiency of the cell. Using different transmission 
frequencies between neighboring cells, soft handoff or 
beam-forming multiple antennas, inter-cell interference can 
be reduced. Using more advanced techniques by coherently 
coordinating transmissions of signals across base stations, 
interference could be completely eliminated. Roughly 
speaking, multiple base stations, geographically distributed, 
transmit user’s signal simultaneously. These signals are 
weighted and pre-processed so that inter-cell interference is 
cancelled [6] [7]. 
In the 3GPP standardization activities concerning LTE-
Advanced [8], the coordinated base stations transmissions 
fall into the term of Coordinated Multi-Point (CoMP) 
transmission and reception. CoMP refers to a wide range of 
techniques with the common characteristic of dynamic 
Channel Inversion CoMP Technique in Cellular System: A User-Selection Algorithm 
 
J. Gómez, M.C. Aguayo-Torres, F. Blánquez-Casado, F.J. Martín-Vega 
Departamento de Ingeniería de Comunicaciones 
Universidad de Málaga 
Málaga, Spain 
jesusgomezgalvan@gmail.com, {aguayo, fbc, fjmvega}@ic.uma.es 
 
 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
coordination of transmission and/or reception at multiple 
geographically separated sites with the aim to enhance 
system performance and end-user quality [1]. 3GPP has 
proposed CoMP techniques as a performance enhancement 
for LTE-A Release 12 and beyond, to meet 4G requirements 
[8] [9]. These techniques are the key to achieve the needed 
requirements in terms of spectral efficiency and cell-edge 
throughput.   
In this paper, we present network coordination as a 
means to provide high spectral efficiency in cellular systems. 
This study presents a basic scenario where two base stations, 
connected via high speed backbone, coordinate their 
transmissions and pre-process the signals for cancelling 
inter-cell interference. Each user receives its data from both 
base stations improving the signal strength and with no 
interference, thus reaching a higher spectral efficiency. The 
performance of coordinated networks is compared to that of 
conventional networks without coordination and, as 
expected, it is shown that coordinated base station 
transmissions offers better spectral efficiency values. 
Our coordinated experimental setup is not power 
efficient, so a new challenge comes up for selecting the users 
to be served at each physical resource in order to minimize 
the system transmission power. A user selection algorithm, 
based on simulation results, is proposed. This algorithm 
specifies resources allocation to users in order to minimize 
system transmission power. The proposed algorithm is 
evaluated and their results are compared to that of a random 
user selection algorithm.   
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II briefly describes the fundamentals of coordinated 
networks, presenting the studied CoMP technique for 
cancelling inter-cell interference. In Section III, the system 
model is described. In Section IV, a user selection algorithm 
is proposed for system transmission power reduction. In 
Section V, the coordinated scenario using inter-cell 
interference cancellation and the proposed user selection 
algorithm is then evaluated. Finally, some concluding 
remarks are given in Section VI.    
II. COMP TRANSMISSION 
The basic system model is as shown in Fig. 1. Base 
Stations (BSs) BS1 and BS2 will operate together to transmit 
signals to Mobile Stations (MSs) MS1 and MS2. Both base 
stations will be geographically separated but connected via 
high speed backbone link making coordination possible. 
Both BSs and MSs are equipped with single antennas. 
Knowledge of the Channel State Information (CSI) is 
assumed to be perfectly available at the transmitters, as it is 
measured by the receivers and fed back to the BSs. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. System model 
 
In a classical cell system, for BS1, BS2 is an interfering 
base station, and in the same way, for BS2, BS1 is an 
interfering base station. The received signals at MS1 and 
MS2, y1 and y2, respectively, are given by  
 

=


 	
	 + 


       (1) 
 
where hij is the channel between terminal i and BS j, x1 is 
transmitted signal by BS1 and x2 is that by BS2. ni is 
additive white Gaussian noise [10]. 
A basic system model for a downlink network with M 
single antenna base stations and N single antenna mobiles is 
given by 
 
y = Hx + n          (2) 
 
where H = [hij]NxM denotes the channel matrix,   hij denotes 
the complex channel gain between mobile i and base station 
j,      x = [x1, x2, …, xM]T denotes the complex antenna inputs 
to the channel, n = [n1, n2, …, nN]T denotes additive white 
noise and y = [y1, y2, …, yM]T are the inputs to the receiver.  
In a coordination scenario, where all M base stations act 
together, each mobile may receive useful signals from all 
base stations. If a linear spatial precoding matrix A Є CMxN is 
used to map the data symbols to the antenna outputs, i.e.,  
 
x = As           (3) 
 
where s denotes the vector of data symbols given by             
s = [s1,s2,…, sN]T then the antenna output at the jth base 
station is a linear combination of N data symbols,  
 
xj = ∑



jisi          (4) 
 
Selecting 
a 
proper 
precoding 
matrix 
A 
allows 
interference cancellation. A simple form of coordination, 
called Channel Inversion (CI) or Zero-Forcing (ZF) [1] [2] 
[6] [9], uses a pseudo-inverse precoding matrix given by 
 
A = H† (HH†)–1         (5) 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
According to this, when N = M,  (3) becomes simply             
x = H-1d [6] [9].  
The received signal according to (2), (3) and (5) is given 
by 
 
y = Hx + n = HH† (HH†)–1s + n = s + n   (6) 
 
Thus the ith mobile receives yi = si + ni. All network 
antennas in range can help in the transmission of each 
message, but the message is received only by the intended 
user with no interference [6]. 
Notice that according to (6) the system model 
corresponds to an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) 
channel where inter-cell interference has been cancelled. To 
achieve this is not free: depending on the actual channel the 
precoder should compensate the channel’s effects causing 
fluctuations on the system transmission power. These 
fluctuations will require a large normalization factor in a real 
system, which will dramatically reduce the Signal-to-Noise 
Ratio (SNR) at receivers. 
III.  SYSTEM MODEL 
Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM) is 
a modulation technique widely used to counteract the effects 
of Inter Symbol Interference (ISI) in frequency selective 
channels [2]. OFDM divides the transmission band in a large 
number of sub-bands narrow enough to be considered flat. 
An Inverse Fast Fourier Transform (IFFT) efficiently 
performs the modulation process. Its reciprocal process, the 
forward Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), is used to recover the 
data as a cyclic extension of the OFDM symbol eliminating 
the residual ISI. In this way, OFDM can be considered as a 
time-frequency squared pattern, where each bin can be 
addressed independently.  
Modulation of the OFDM subcarriers is analogous to that 
of the conventional single carrier systems. Supported 
downlink data-modulation schemes are Binary Phase-Shift 
Keying (BPSK), Quadrature Phase-Shift Keying (QPSK), 
16QAM, and 64QAM (as those in LTE). The number of bits 
allocated to each subcarrier can be modified on a symbol 
basis to simultaneously track the time variant frequency 
response of the channel and fulfill the BER service 
requirements.  
When OFDM is also used as multiplexing technique, the 
term OFDM Access (OFDMA) is preferred. In this case, a 
block of bins is assigned to a single user in what can be 
considered a hybrid Time Division Multiple Access–
Frequency Division Multiple Access (TDMA-FDMA) 
technique.  
In this work, the physical resources to be assigned to 
users are formed by one subcarrier in one symbol time, thus 
OFDMA systems allow subsets of the subcarriers to be 
allocated dynamically among the different users on the 
channel.  A Round Robin (RR) scheduling algorithm has 
been used in order to allocate resources to users. Round 
Robin is a fixed no opportunist scheduling algorithm which 
dispenses system resources equally among users following a 
cyclic order. Users are located in an imaginary line between 
BS1 and BS2 and the distance to their respective BSs is 
defined for each user and simulation. 
Perfect channel state information (CSI) is assumed at the 
transmitter. As a consequence, results obtained here are 
upper bounds for those in a practical system. 
The setup is according to system model of Fig. 1. Two 
hexagonal cells with a base station located at the center and 
where each base is loaded with one mobile. The cell radius 
considered is set to Rcell meters. 
As channel model, frequency selective Rayleigh fading 
channel parameters have been employed. We assume path 
loss Hata model [2] in urban areas including lognormal 
shadowing with a standard deviation of σ dB. Propagation 
losses and shadowing have been included to channel matrix 
H = [hij]NxM. Being hij independent normal random variables 
with zero mean and unit variance modeling the normalized 
complex channel gain between mobile i and base station j, 
and gij being the propagation losses including shadowing 
between mobile i and base station j, channel matrix H is 
given by 
 
 = 


       (8) 
 
In our two base stations OFDMA system model, each BS 
will serve to the mobile in its own cell coverage, thus a pair 
of users is served in each resource unit, formed by one 
subcarrier in one symbol time. Furthermore, in our 
coordinated scenario according to (4) the precoder makes 
system transmission power variable. This brings us up a new 
challenge: a user selection algorithm could be defined, 
which allows to choose the best pair of users available for 
resource allocation, in terms of system transmission power 
reduction. 
When N = M and according to (3) and (5) complex 
antenna inputs to the channel from BS1 and BS2 are given 
by 
 
	
	 = 





      (9) 
 
	
	 = 

 ()  
−
−
  
    (10) 
 
where xi denotes the complex antenna inputs to the channel 
and si is the ith mobile’s complex data symbol.  
According to (10), system transmission power for BS1 
and BS2 depends on det (H) given by 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
det (H) = -   (11) 
 
Notice according (10) that, when an inverse precoding 
matrix is applied to the input symbols, the transmission 
power for BS1 and BS2 is modified. Thus, precoding causes 
system transmission power fluctuations. An ill-conditioned 
channel matrix will cause enormous final transmission 
power. This is the price that must be paid in order to achieve 
inter-cell interference be identically to zero maintaining 
SNR level at the receivers.  
IV. USER SELECTION ALGORITHM 
In this section, a user selection algorithm for system 
transmission power reduction is proposed.  
As we mention before, according to (10) and (11) the 
precoder causes fluctuations on system transmission power 
in order to compensate the channel’s effects. 
In a real scenario, a power constraint should be applied 
in order to maintain a fixed transmission power. Then, a 
large normalization factor should be used that would 
dramatically reduce the SNR at the receivers. Our theoretical 
study is based on how channel inverse precoding technique 
affects to system transmission power, so no power constraint 
will be applied. It will conduct us to get an unreasonable 
amount of transmission power but it will be essential to not 
cover up transmission power results. In this way, the results 
will be able to be analyzed in order to define a more efficient 
transmission power user selection algorithm. Once the 
algorithm has been defined it could be applied in a real 
scenario where a power constraint has been used. 
According to (11) it can be deduced that minimum 
system transmission power corresponds to a situation as 
showed in Fig. 2. In this scenario, is very probable that      
det(H), has a maximum value and, as a consequence, system 
transmission power according to (10) will be minimum.  
 
Fig. 2. Minimum sytem transmission power scenario 
 
In the same way, maximum system transmission power 
corresponds to a scenario as showed in Fig. 3. In this 
situation, det(H) has probably a minimum value and 
therefore according to  (10) system transmission power will 
be maximum. 
 
 
Fig. 3. Maximum system transmission power scenario 
 
Given a fixed position for user1 and variable position for 
user2 as shown in Fig. 4  
 
 
Fig. 4. System transmission power dependence scenario  
 
It can be deduced according to (10) and (11) that if user 2 
moves close to cell edge det(H) value is probably reduced 
and therefore transmission power is increased. Otherwise, if 
user 2 moves close to its BS, det(H) value is probably 
increased and therefore transmission power is reduced. 
We can conclude that we need high values for det(H) in 
order to have a lower system transmission power. To 
achieve this, user 1 and user 2 should be the most far away 
between them as possible. So for a fixed position of one user 
its pair, to be served in the same resource block, should be 
selected as far as possible. 
Thus, taking into account the above and based on system 
transmission power results showed in Fig. 7, we propose the 
following criterion for user’s pair selection: 
  
d2 ≤ Rcell – d1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12) 
 
being d1 and d2 distances MS1 to BS1 and MS2 to BS2 
respectively. Rcell denotes cell radius as defined above. 
Selecting user pairs, to be served in the same resource block, 
following (12) ensures a lower system transmission power, 
as we will show in the next section. The lower is d2 respect 
to Rcell - d1, the lower will be system transmission power.    
In the next section, the proposed algorithm is compared 
to a random user pair selection.  
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
V. SIMULATION RESULTS 
In this section, we compare the performance of the 
coordinated networks to that of conventional cellular 
networks with inter-cell interference. After that, we show 
how the proposed algorithm for user pairs to be served at 
each physical resource obtains better results in terms of 
transmission power. First of all, we evaluate the 
performance of network coordination and we show that 
coordination 
is 
successful 
in 
eliminating 
inter-cell 
interference. Second, based on simulations results, we 
compare user selection algorithm with random user 
selection. Then, we analyze the results and we show how the 
proposed algorithm minimizes the system transmission 
power. 
The basic experimental setup is based on Fig. 1, two 
hexagonal cells with a base station located at the center and 
where each base is loaded with one mobile. The SUI-4 
(Modified Stanford University Interim) [12] channel model 
parameters have been used. Two base stations antennas 
allow two simultaneously transmissions over 16 subcarriers 
(Nc = 16). As previously described, path loss Hata model in 
urban areas [2] including lognormal shadowing with a 
standard deviation of 10 dB is assumed. Cell’s radius is 
500m and noise power spectral density is -174dBm/Hz [13].  
Main configuration parameters are summarized in Table 
I. 
              TABLE I 
       SIMULATION CONDITIONS 
Parameter 
Value 
Carrier frequency 
5 GHz 
System bandwidth 
1.75 MHz 
Sampling frequency 
2 MHz 
Noise PSD 
-174 dBm/Hz 
Channel model 
SUI-4 [12] 
MSs Velocity 
5 Km/h 
Cell’s Radius 
500m 
 
Fig. 5 shows system spectral efficiency in bit/s/Hz for 
coordinated 
transmission 
applying 
channel 
inversion 
technique versus conventional not coordinated network. Ptx 
corresponds to base stations transmission powers, Pn is the 
noise power and Lpmax corresponds with the maximum losses 
that an UE located at cell-edge would suffer. Simulation 
results are given for a fixed location for both MS1 and MS2. 
MS1 has been located to d1 = 150m and MS2 to d2 = 250m, 
being, as we mention above, d1 and d2 distances MS1 to BS1 
and MS2 to BS2 respectively. 
For the uncoordinated scenario at low Ptx /Pn – Lpmax 
values the noise is the determining factor, while at high     
Ptx /Pn – Lpmax values is the inter-cell interference. Thus, we 
can observe how at high Ptx /Pn – Lpmax values the efficiency 
is limited by inter-cell interference. 
For the coordinated scenario, the determining factor is 
only the noise; here inter-cell interference has been 
cancelled, so the efficiency depends only on SNR values at 
receivers. Furthermore, it can be observed at low Ptx /Pn – 
Lpmax values the steeped form of the graph corresponding to 
adaptive modulation transmission. In this case, at high Ptx /Pn 
– Lpmax values, the efficiency is limited for the maximum 
constellation used (64QAM). 
The simulation results show that coherent coordination 
transmission improves the spectral efficiency by about a 
factor of 1.875, that is, an enhancement of 87.5% is obtained 
when coordinated transmission is used. 
 
Fig. 5. System spectral efficiency when coordinated Channel Inversion 
transmission technique is used vs. not coordinated transmission 
 
Fig. 6 shows bit error rate (BER) versus SNR for 
coordinated transmission when channel inversion precoding 
is applied.  
 
Fig. 6. BER vs. SNR for coordinated transmission 
 
We can observe how inter-cell interference has been 
cancelled and BER values are the typical of an AWGN 
channel, as expected according to (6). 
Simulation results for system transmission power 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
according to (10) vs d1 and d2 are shown in Fig. 7. The base 
stations transmission powers configured for both BS1 and 
BS2 are fixed to Pt = 40dBm. MS1 and MS2 locations have 
been configured in steps of 50m (distance from MS to BS) in 
order to obtain the grid of possible locations. 
 
Fig. 7. System Transmission Power vs. d1 and d2 
 
Fig. 7 shows that lower system transmission power is 
obtained when MS1 and MS2 are very close to their 
respective base stations. The worst or higher system 
transmission power values are obtained when both MSs are 
in the cell-edge. It is distinguished approximately two zones 
separated by those values d1=d2. In order to have lower 
system transmission power values, pairs of users must be 
selected in the region area d2 ≤ Rcell – d1 
 as 
proposed 
according to (12). Notice that system transmission power 
values are unreasonably high. As we commented in Section 
IV, this is because power normalization factor has not been 
used in order to study how channel inverse precoding 
technique affects to system transmission power.   
Applying the user selection algorithm proposed for 
resource allocation in Section IV, in the worst case, that is, 
when the equality is fulfilled in (12), i.e., d2 = Rcell – d1, 
ensures keeping in the limit of lower transmission power 
values zone. A comparison has been done in this case 
between the proposed user selection algorithm and a random 
algorithm selecting user pairs randomly. The results have 
been obtained for ten users at each cell. Five significant 
different realizations using the same users group and served 
in the same cyclic order have been used. For user selection 
algorithm proposed the same user pairs from the users group 
that fulfill the algorithm in the worst case, i.e., d2 = Rcell – 
d1, have been used for each realization. From the point of 
view of the random algorithm, user pairs have been selected 
randomly for each realization from users group. Results are 
given in Table II. 
 
TABLE II 
TRANSMISSION POWER 
No. 
Proposed Algorithm 
[dBm] 
Random Algorithm [dBm] 
1 
175.2276 
176.9869 
2 
175.2276 
178.2176 
3 
175.2276 
175.2295 
4 
175.2276 
176.1282 
5 
         175.2276 
         177.3151 
 
Table II shows that in all occasions we get better results 
applying the proposed algorithm in the worst case than 
applying a random algorithm for selecting user pairs. 
Approximately, an enhancement of 46.76% on average, 
computed in linear with Watt, is obtained when user pairs 
are selected following the algorithm instead of randomly. 
Obviously, this enhancement is in the worst case; it will be 
higher if pairs of users are selected inside the zone of lower 
system transmission power instead of on the limit.  
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have shown that using coordinated 
transmission in a cellular network improves spectral 
efficiency. In spite of its simplicity, base station 
coordination technique of channel inversion achieves its goal 
of cancelling inter-cell interference. However, it is not free 
as precoder causes system transmission power fluctuations 
due to the stringent requirement that the interference at the 
receivers be identically to zero.  
A user selection algorithm has been proposed for 
resource allocation, where user pairs are selected in the 
region area d2 ≤ Rcell – d1. The user pair criterion proposed 
solely depends on the distance between mobile stations, but 
it is shown that results with the proposed algorithm are 
always better, in terms of system transmission power, than 
applying an algorithm where user pairs are randomly 
selected. 
In future works, the user selection algorithm may be 
improved. An algorithm also dependent on the users’ 
channel gains not only on their mutual distance could be 
proposed.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 This work has been partially supported by the Spanish 
Government and FEDER under project TEC2010-18451. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall, and J. Sköld, 4G LTE/LTE-Advanced for 
Mobile Broadband,  
Elservier 2011. 
[2] A. J. Goldsmith, Wireless Communications, New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005. 
[3] N. Seifi, Base Station Coordination in Multicell MIMO Networks, 
Chalmers University of Technology, 2012. 
[4] 3GPP press release, “3GPP Partners propose IMT-Advanced radio,” 
Geneva, October 8, 2009. 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
[5] R. Irmer et al., “Coordinated Multipoint: Concepts, Performance, and 
Field Trial Results,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Feb. 2011, pp. 
102-111.  
[6] M. Karakayali, G. Foschini, and R. Valenzuela, “Network 
coordination for spectrally efficient communications in cellular 
systems,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 13, no. 4, August 
2006, pp. 56-61.. 
[7] F. Boccardi and H. Huang, “Limited Downlink Network Coordination 
in Cellular Networks,” IEEE International Symposium on Personal, 
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC’07), Sept. 2007, 
pp. 1-5.  
[8] TR 36.814 V1.0.0, “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-
UTRA); Further advancements for E-UTRA Physical layer aspects 
(Release 9),” Mar 2010. 
[9] M. Sawahashi, Y. Kishiyama, A. Morimoto, D. Nishikawa, and M. 
Tanno, “Coordinated Multipoint Transmission/Reception Techniques 
for LTE-Advanced,” IEEE Wireless Communications, June 2010, pp. 
26-34.. 
[10] M. R. Ramesh Kumar, S. Bhashyam, and D. Jalihal “Downlink 
Performance of 2-Cell Cooperation Schemes in a Multi-Cell 
Environment,” 11th International Symposium on Wireless Personal 
Multimedia Communications (WPMC’08). 
[11] C. B. Peel, B. M. Hochwald, and A. L. Swindlehurst, “A Vector-
Perturbation Technique for Near-Capacity Multi-Antenna Multi-User 
Communication-PartI: Channel Inversion and Regularization,” IEEE 
Transactions on Communications, vol.53, Jan. 2005,   pp. 195-202.   
[12]  7-IEEE 802.16.3c-01/29r4, “Channel Models for Fixed Wireless 
Applications,” 2001. 
[13] G. Piro, L. Grieco., G. Boggia., F. Capozzi, and P. Camarda, 
“Simulating LTE Celullar Systems: An Open-Source Framework,” , 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 60, no. 2, Feb. 2011 
, pp.498,513.  
 
 
 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

