Comparison of Techno-Economic Solutions for 5G
Networks and beyond
1st Christos Bouras
Computer Engineering & Informatics Dept.
University of Patras
Patras, Greece
bouras@cti.gr
2nd Fotios Kaisoudis
Computer Engineering & Informatics Dept.
University of Patras
Patras, Greece
kaisoudis@ceid.upatras.gr
3rd Anastasia Kollia
Computer Engineering & Informatics Dept.
University of Patras
Patras, Greece
akollia@ceid.upatras.gr
Abstract—5G envisions a society that is constantly intercon-
nected with a large number of devices, anywhere and anytime.
The developed technologies play an important role, allowing
low latency, a large data trafﬁc, and improved quality of
services. 5G encourages providers and investors to develop
innovative services that meet consumer demands. However,
the viability of a new service is being investigated from an
economic perspective. This paper analyzes 5G technologies and
evaluates them from a techno-economic point of view and
pricing models. In particular, the main factors used to estimate
the cost are CAPEX and OPEX, which compare the viability of
the investment. 5G is proved to be a proﬁtable investment due
to its low cost and the increase in the average data consumption
of each consumer. Finally, reusing existing sites is less costly in
developing a dense macro-cell network.
Index Terms—5G, models, IoT, CAPEX, OPEX.
I. INTRODUCTION
5G will play a vital role in the transmission of mobile data
to provide higher capabilities to individual mobile radio cells.
On the other hand, mobile data are not used appropriately by
users due to reckless usage and increased demand. Due to
this increment in data trafﬁc, mobile providers are ﬁghting
to normalize the massive demand with high-speed and multi-
site data links providing a faster and wide-ranging wireless
network.
The 5G technology is based on Orthogonal Frequency Di-
vision Multiplexing (OFDM) using various technologies such
as Multi-user Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (mu-MIMO),
Distributed Antenna Systems (DAS), Femtocells, Network
Function Virtualization & Software Deﬁned Network (NFV
& SDN), Cognitive Radio (CR), Millimetre Wave (mmWave).
Also, 5G enables support for almost inﬁnite innovations
and uses. It is undoubtedly the network of the future sup-
porting more new services, besides digital communication
and wireless Internet. 5G is a communication standard and
not just a wireless standard. Since the digital relationship
between humans and machines is evolving rapidly, robust in-
frastructure and appropriate networks are required. Increasing
data volume requires faster data transfer. Therefore, the 5G
network needs to face the enormous and complex range of
requirements.
The current mobile standard is known as Long Term
Evolution (LTE). The present technology satisﬁes almost
all the requirements of the subscribers for various applica-
tions.However, the advent of 5G does not mean that LTE
has come to an end, but rather it will be an upgrade that
will expand the existing network resulting in the simultane-
ous operation of both technologies that will lead to higher
capacities and internet speeds. In addition to the billions of
people already using mobile internet, more than 100 billion
connected devices will connect and the 5G network is a
solution to the demands of digitalization.
The development of 5G mobile broadband technology will
have a signiﬁcant impact on the future economy according
to several techno-economic studies. Adapting to the IoT
means that remarkable changes will occur in the current
communication networks. According to [1], crucial factors
that will radically affect the dimensioning of the network
must be considered and are the coverage, range, capacity,
and data rate. Furthermore, it is important to indicate the
cost and energy consumption of the base stations that will
be used for the needs of the network coverage, for example,
an urban or rural area [2]. Also, according to [2], which
refers to an analysis made between macro and femtocell,
it appears that Operator Mobile Network (OMNs) need
to formulate the appropriate strategies to adapt to future
business developments. Finally, it is important to mention the
CAPEX and OPEX costs associated with BS strategy carried
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

out in urban areas where trafﬁc demand is high [3].
The remaining part of this paper is structured as follows:
in Section II, the characteristics of 5G technologies are
presented. Section III refers to compare & contrast the afore-
mentioned technologies. Section IV refers to cost analysis
and needs for upgrading to 5G network. In Section V,
conclusions are summarized and future research is proposed.
II. SYNOPSIS OF 5G TECHNOLOGIES
In this section will analyze the features of technologies
such as mu-MIMO, DAS, Femtocells, NFV & SDN, Cogni-
tive Radio, mmWave.
A. mu-MIMO
MIMO technology utilizes limited resources to meet user
demand, but due to the insufﬁcient number of antennas at
the MIMO system base station, system performance problems
are caused. It constitutes the fundamental technologies of the
future 5G, MIMO technology must meet the requirements
of wireless companies, improve the effectiveness of the
spectrum, the capability of the system communication, the
reliability of the connections, and the data rate. If the number
of antennas is equal to 4, 8, or 16, then the technology
is called MIMO. In case there is a enormous number of
antennas in each transceiver, for example, 128, 256, or more,
then it is called mu-MIMO or Massive MIMO [1]. Figure 1
describes the concept of mu-MIMO architecture.
Fig. 1: mu-MIMO architecture scheme.
B. DAS
The Distributed Antenna System (DAS) contains several
antennas that are considered as nodes and are connected
to a transmission medium, for example, optical ﬁber. As
mentioned in [1], at least two antennas must be per ﬂoor
of a building, so that they adequately cover the ﬂoor of
an apartment complex or a non-densely populated building.
Also, the DAS includes two basic structures. The ﬁrst basic
structure is a base station (BS) and a distributed system (DS
- Distributed System). The second basic structure is several
antennas representing the DS along with many transceivers
that facilitate the transmission.
C. Femtocells
Femtocells are known as Femto Access Point (FAP) or
Home NodeBs (HNBs) and the transmission of base stations
consumption is around 100 mW, which is installed indoors.
Femtocells use the licensed range and provide services like
voice and data to mobile subscribers. Subscribers using
femtocell technology enjoy high-quality voice dialing and
peak data rates because of improved Radio Frequency (RF)
coverage. Furthermore, mobile providers beneﬁt from the
low cost of infrastructure development, considering cover-
age improvements and capacity upgrades. Also, to expand
coverage, femtocells minimize the movement of a macrocell
network and signiﬁcantly increase network capacity by using
the same range many times over smaller pieces. That helps to
achieve higher efﬁciency, as fewer subscribers share valuable
resources macrocell [4]. Figure 2 describes the concept of
Femtocell architecture.
Fig. 2: Femtocell architecture scheme.
D. NFV & SDN
Network and telecommunications applications that use
NFV technology currently operate exclusively from speciﬁc
platforms on NFV cloud infrastructures. The devices that
the user uses increase, because of the requirements of the
users increased. That results in limitations such as expensive
equipment and complex control protocols. At the same time,
it has an impact on the innovation of new services, the
creation of new architectures and technologies in general.
Networking is deﬁned by SDN and NFV, which are critical
tools for the future of the IoT [5].
Utilizing both SDN and NFV technologies for dynamic
Virtual Mobile Network (VMN) development is fundamen-
tal. SDN and NFV technologies are being developed with
the goal of control, reliability, scalability, cost-effectiveness,
and ﬂexibility for VMN [5], [6] development. Also, these
technologies allow VMN to ﬂexibly control the virtual core
of their mobile network by considering trafﬁc load, Radio
Access Network (RAN), and Evolved Packet Core (EPC).
Figure 3 describes the concept of SDN architecture.
E. Cognitive Radio
Cognitive Radio Networks (CRNs) make greater use of
the spectrum because they exploit the points of a spectrum
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Fig. 3: SDN architecture scheme.
that are used less or not at all. Unauthorized users are given
access by the spectrum if their interference is negligible. The
operation of CRN is based on the Cognitive Radio Devices
(CRD), which can automatically adjust some parameters such
as bandwidth, waveform, and transmission power depending
on the environment, avoiding bottlenecks, exploiting parts of
the spectrum. The Cognitive Process (CP) is known to con-
tribute to gathering relevant information, machine learning,
reasoning, and decision making. There are regulated radio
platforms such as Software Deﬁned Radio (SDR) software
to execute the decisions of the CP [7].
It is necessary to clarify the difference between the terms
cognitive communication system based on SDR and CR
software. SDR consists of a group of radio frequencies, in
which most of the intermediate radio frequencies are con-
verted to digital format, to be compared with the classic radio
technology, providing greater ﬂexibility in radio operation.
On the other hand, CR is related to the control that contributes
to the SDR to determine the mode of operation as well as
the necessary parameters that will be applied in the speciﬁc
networking mode [7].
Cognitive communication devices (CRD) are designed to
respond to complex wireless environments which are [7]:
Multi-band, Multi-channel, Multi-mode, Multi-standard and
Multi-service.CRDs and CRNs are characterized as complex
and designed to operate in these situations. The functions
used for management are four and are [7]: spectrum detec-
tion, spectrum management spectrum sharing and spectrum
mobility. Figure 4 describes the concept of CR architecture.
Fig. 4: Cognitive Radio architecture scheme.
F. mmWave
MmWave cellular systems operate in the 30-300 GHz band
and are candidates for 5G cellular systems supporting high
speeds. An innovative technology consisting of millimeter-
wave (mmWave) communications and providing two advan-
tages [8]: 1) proper management of unlicensed additional
Fig. 5: mmWave C-/U- plane architecture scheme.
spectrum bands and 2) huge bandwidth up to 1GHz to
provide high data rates for demanding subscribers.
However, the use of mmWave presents some propagation
barriers, which are [8]: loss of travel due to a high carrier
frequency, reduced dispersion, which helps to reduce the
available diversity, increased blockage, atmospheric absorp-
tion and rain, and noise power due to the use of the high
bandwidth.
To address the prior issues, mmWave can be combined
with other technologies such as Massive MIMO, SDN and
femtocells, which help to achieve an optimal system [8]. Such
as: massive MIMO and Beamforming, Ultra-Dense Networks
(microcell development), a cellular architecture that supports
heterogeneous layers and integrates the SDN standard and
the functional split between the user layer (U-level) and
the control layer (level-C), and a geographical database,
that will include information related to the environment of
each geographical area to increase the efﬁciency of cell
functions, which will support the ability to store and process
information related to previous cell discoveries. Figure 5
describes the concept of mmWave architecture.
III. COMPARE & CONTRAST
In this section, a comparative analysis of the technologies
will be performed based on the characteristics explained
below, (see Table I [9]):
Adoption: Each technology has its degree of adoption.
Low means that its adoption rate is not widespread enough.
High means that its adoption rate is quite widespread. Future
means that it will be presented in the future.
Appeared: The ﬁrst introduction of each technology ac-
cording to research studies.
Bandwidth: Some of the previous technologies need more
bandwidth to increase their efﬁciency, while others directly
reallocate the existing bandwidth. Table I presents the tech-
nologies, which are characterized as reallocate, in need, and
virtual.
Capacity: Each technology offers the appropriate capacity.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE I: Comparison of 5G Technologies.
Factors
5G Technologies
mu-MIMO
DAS
Femtocells
NFV & SDN
CR
mmWave
Adoption
High
High
High
Low
Future
Future
Appeared
2018
1987
2010
2012 / 2011
1999
2017
Bandwidth
Need
Need
Reallocate
Virtual / Reallocate
Reallocate
Reallocate
Capacity
Coverage
Cost
High CAPEX Low CAPEX Low CAPEX
Low CAPEX
Low CAPEX High CAPEX
High OPEX
Low OPEX
Low OPEX
Low OPEX
Low OPEX
High OPEX
Efﬁciency
Heterogeneous
Interference
NFV only
Power Consumption
Scalability
Standardization
IEEE
IEEE
IEEE
Many / OpenFlow
IEEE
IEEE
Coverage: Each technology must meet the needs of the
network, either by redistributing or by purchasing more
resources.
Cost: The development of each technology has a speciﬁc
valuation. The cost-valuation for each technology is charac-
terized by CAPEX and OPEX. CAPEX is the capital expen-
diture relating to the initial purchase or investment in new
equipment, a service, or a product. OPEX is the operating
costs relating to the costs of maintenance, operation, and
energy consumption e.tc.
Efﬁciency: The continuous development of technologies
offers increased efﬁciency and better resource management
in a network.
Heterogeneous: Heterogeneity exists between some tech-
nologies, for example, they can corporate together.
Interference: In some technologies, interferences are re-
sulting in signal distortion.
Power Consumption: Each technology consumes electric-
ity according to its requirements for functionality.
Scalability: Scalability is an vital feature for many tech-
nologies and means whether it is possible to expand a
network by adding the right resources.
Standardization: The standardization of technologies
means a description of the core functions they perform.
According to Table I, some technologies are standardized,
while others are not.
IV. COST ANALYSIS AND NEEDS FOR UPGRADING TO 5G
NETWORK
A. Prediction and assumptions of cost analysis in Shanghai.
It is a fact that OMNs are considering ways in which
migrating to a 5G network will be proﬁtable or not. First,
in [2], a high-level model is examined, which describes the
factors on which it depends whether it is worth investing in
5G networks. The factors that contribute to the completion
of the investment are the forecast of the number of users,
the churn rate, the pricing model, and the cost forecast.
Regarding the prediction of the number of users, a Bass
forecasting model has been chosen, which explains well
the market forecasting system for the types of products or
services. It is achieved according to the formula [10]:
푁(푡) = 푀 ∗
1 − 푒−(푡−푡0) ( 푝+푞)
1 + 푞
푝 ∗ 푒−(푡−푡0) ( 푝+푞)
(1)
where M is the Market Capacity, 푝 > 0 is the innovation
factor and symbolizes the probability of starting a service
and is related to the initial size of the adopters, 푞 ≥ 0
is the imitation coefﬁcient which refers to the size of the
potential future subscribers or adopters’ imitators. N(t) is the
number of subscribers at time t and 푡0 the initial time. From
formula (1) and setting the appropriate coefﬁcients p=0.009,
q=0.42 and M=50000000 [2]. It appears that the number of
adopters or subscribers until 2021 will remain low and then
will increase exponentially until 2025, as shown in Figure 6.
The churn rate or transfer rate from provider to provider
is used to calculate lost and new revenue. Also, the transfer
rate from provider to the provider must be of the order of
[4%, 10%] where the four represents the best case and ten
the worst case [2], so it is concluded that when a user leaves
not only the future revenue is lost, but also the resources
acquired for the needs of the investment are spent.
About the pricing model, a volume-based pricing strategy
is currently being used, which is not efﬁcient for the 5G
mobile network [11]. That is why a hybrid pricing strategy
has been developed that is a combination of volume-based
and value-based and aims at proﬁtability. The volume-based
pricing strategy includes parameters such as location, usage
time, and content. The value-based pricing strategy includes
parameters such as time, speed, and data. In addition, a pre-
requisite for OMNs is to ﬁnd the optimal service price which
has been approached in two perspectives and is transparency
and PED.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

OMNs collect information related to the cost of their
services to properly assess subscriber behavior. Therefore,
to minimize risk and uncertainty, two economic concepts are
proposed, which help to predict the sales of volume-based
data and to determine their prices. The ﬁrst concept is Price
Elasticity of Volume 퐸푉 (푃) and proportional to the price
elasticity of demand and is deﬁned as the percentage change
in actual volume V per percentage change in unit price P. So,
the following formula applies [2]:
퐸푉 (푃) =
lim
푃′−푃→0
푉 ′−푉
1
2 (푉 +푉 ′)
푃′−푃
1
2 (푃+푃′)
= 푃 · Δ푉
푉 · Δ푃 ⇒ Δ푉
푃 = 퐸푉 (푃) · Δ푃
푃
(2)
The second concept is Volume Elasticity of Revenue
퐸푅(푉): deﬁned as the percentage change in revenue R
(charge) per percentage change in actual volume V. So, the
following formula applies [2]:
퐸푅(푉) =
lim
푉 ′−푉 →0
푅′−푅
1
2 (푅+푅′)
푉 ′−푉
1
2 (푉 +푉 ′)
= 푉 · Δ푅
푅 · Δ푉 ⇒ Δ푅
푅 = 퐸푅(푉) · Δ푉
푉
(3)
The two formulas (2) and (3) apply the following [2]: 1)
for the subscriber, if 퐸푉 (푃) < 1 means that the increase
in volume demand contributes to the reduction of service
prices, otherwise there is an increase in service prices. 2)
For the provider, if 퐸푅(푉) > 1 means that that the increase
in volume demand affects the increase in proﬁts. In addition
to the above, the following applies to PED:1) When the
|푃퐸퐷| < 1 means that it is inelastic, speciﬁcally changes
in price have little impact on the volume of service required.
2) When |푃퐸퐷| > 1 the means that it is elastic, speciﬁcally
changes in price have a crucial impact. 3) When PED = 1
subscriber and the provider are beneﬁtted.
Based on the results reported [2], the hybrid pricing model
uses subscriber contents (usage time, content, location) and
according to formulas (2) and (3) it is concluded that if the
price of services decreases then the demand for subscribers
increase and vice versa. Therefore, the ideal solution is when
the PED is equal to one where both the user and the provider
are beneﬁtted. Finally, another conclusion that emerges is the
effect of value and volume on proﬁt at 5G, speciﬁcally 5G
technologies are more beneﬁcial than 4G, due to low cost
and increased average data consumption.
Then, two scenarios have been developed for cost fore-
casting and estimation [2]: The ﬁrst scenario concerns the
creation of new Radio Access Technology (RAT) technology
by replacing the previous BS equipment. The second scenario
concerns the addition of new carriers and equipment to
the existing RAT to reuse the previous BS equipment in
conjunction with the latest equipment and a software upgrade.
Based on the results from [2], which relate to the predicted
CAPEX and OPEX values, the scenario two is more efﬁcient
due to lower CAPEX, but for OPEX the two scenarios do
not show a signiﬁcant difference.
It is known that the demand for network trafﬁc is pro-
portional to the population density since the volume of data
per subscriber does not depend on the growth scenario.
According to [12], the estimamtion of the trafﬁc demand
for 1 푘푚2 in Shanghai shows that the level of demand
corresponding to the average user data rates is 2.59 Mbps,
which was obtained during the eight working hours. However,
the formula (2) shows that it needs an output of 20 Gbps /
푘푚2 [2].
A key issue is the modeling of indoor network investments
using various scenarios to achieve the rate of 20 Gbps per
1 푘푚2. The main features to consider are cost, coverage,
and capacity for each BS category. However, for all of
these scenarios there are penetration losses due to a speciﬁc
wall barrier, so to address this issue two possible solutions
have been proposed: creating a denser 2.6 GHz network or
developing a network using 10 MHz and 0.8 GHz bands
within the zone in order to maximize internal coverage [2]
[13].
Based on the results reported in [2], it appears that de-
veloping many new sites is costly as opposed to reusing
existing sites, which are less expensive even if the sites are
equipped with a new RAT. Also, the 5G mmW Pico Base
Station (PBS) strategy provides the lowest cost but is limited
in terms of network coverage, which results in that if the
network is expanded, it will have a high overall CAPEX [14].
In addition, a more efﬁcient strategy with low base station
density is to use the LTE-A RAT carrier aggregation. Also,
the option to develop new carrier aggregation sites is a more
cost-effective solution than new site development scenarios,
and the development of Femto Base Station (FBS) and Wi-
Fi IEEE 802.11ac becomes more cost-effective when FBS
deployment can support a large number of users. Finally,
the above concludes that the main disadvantage of the 5G
network is that the limited coverage resulting from the use
of small cells such as femtocells, picocells developed with 5G
mmW and Wi-Fi, and the lack of capacity limited by macro-
cell sites and one solution is to combine Macro Base Station
(MaBS), femtocells, 5G mmW PBS or Wi-Fi to achieve the
right balance between cost, capacity, and coverage.
B. Prediction and assumptions of cost analysis in three cities.
The study carried out in Indonesia to upgrade the network
to 5G includes the following cities Jakarta, Surabaya, and
Medan. As mentioned above, using the Bass model which
predicts the number of users of a market and applying the
appropriate rates in formula (1), based on the data taken from
[2], [3] where p=0.0267, q=0.3356 and M is 15000000 for
Jakarta, 3500000 for Surabaya and 2500000 for Medan. The
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE II: Needs in BS and in Bandwidth per 푘푚2 for each city.
Cities
BS Strategy
CAPEX (k$)
OPEX (k$)
MaBS (4G LTE-A)
MetBS (5G mmW)
PBS (5G mmW)
Number
Band (MHz)
Number
Band (MHz)
Number
Band (MHz)
Jakarta
35
40
6
400
6
400
4352.4
1094.4
Surabaya
16
40
3
400
3
400
1996.2
502.2
Medan
14
40
3
400
3
400
1756.2
442.2
accruing forecast results are shown in Figure 6, where the
forecast number of subscribers is being increased by 2025
for all cities.
Fig. 6: Forecast of subscribers for six years for four cities [2], [3].
Besides, the different strategies used for the development
of the 5G network are MaBS, Metro Base Station (MetBS),
and PBS. The design of the network was carried out by
dividing areas into three categories of network requirements
based on the total demand, in high, medium, and low.
According to [3], the results are summarized in Table II
and relate to the needs of each city in BS, bandwidth, and
used for the evaluation of CAPEX and OPEX. Therefore,
Jakarta is the dominant city concerning the rest in terms of
network needs and investments related to the development of
5G networks.
V. CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK
Today there is a relatively large number of 5G IoT
technologies. But to use a communication technology must
be considered whether it is cost-effective and whether it is
a solution to be implemented by providers. In this paper,
the characteristics of 5G technologies are introduced and a
comparison between them in numerous terms was studied.
A forecast model for the development of a 5G mobile
network in Shanghai was also studied, which includes the
estimation of subscriber numbers, the churn rate, a hybrid
pricing model, the estimation of trafﬁc demand, the capacity,
the CAPEX cost for the FBS, WiFi IEEE 802.11ac and
the macro site’s strategy with carrier aggregation and wall
losses compensation. Finally, a high-demand model for the
development of a 5G mobile network in the cities of Jakarta,
Surabaya, and Medan was studied, in which the number of
subscribers, the total CAPEX and OPEX costs for the BS
strategies MaBS, MetBS, and PBS were estimated.
For future study, based on the above, further research
is needed on energy consumption and the impact it will
have on the proﬁt and the further improvement of the 5G
network. Also, there is a need for research for improving the
heterogeneity, scalability, efﬁciency, and cost of 5G cellular
technologies.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Bouras, S. Kokkalis, A. Kollia, and A. Papazois, “Techno-economic
analysis of mimo das in 5g,” in 2018 11th IFIP Wireless and Mobile
Networking Conference (WMNC), pp. 1–8, 2018.
[2] G. Smail and J. Weijia, “Techno-economic analysis and prediction for
the deployment of 5g mobile network,” in 2017 20th Conference on
Innovations in Clouds, Internet and Networks (ICIN), pp. 9–16, March
2017.
[3] A. A. Kusuma and M. Suryanegara, “Upgrading mobile network to 5g:
The technoeconomic analysis of main cities in indonesia,” in 2019 16th
International Conference on Quality in Research (QIR): International
Symposium on Electrical and Computer Engineering, pp. 1–6, 2019.
[4] C. Patel, M. Yavuz, and S. Nanda, “Femtocells [industry perspectives],”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 6–7, 2010.
[5] D. Sinh, L. Le, L. Tung, and B. Lin, “The challenges of applying
sdn/nfv for 5g & iot,” in 14th IEEE-VTS Asia Paciﬁc Wirel. Commun.
Symp.(APWCS), Incheon, Korea, 2017.
[6] C. Bouras, A. Kollia, and A. Papazois, “Sdn & nfv in 5g: Advance-
ments and challenges,” in 2017 20th Conference on innovations in
clouds, internet and networks (ICIN), pp. 107–111, IEEE, 2017.
[7] A. Popescu, Y. Yao, M. Fiedler, and A. Popescu, “Communication
mechanisms for cognitive radio networks,” in 2013 IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops
(PERCOM Workshops), pp. 429–434, IEEE, 2013.
[8] I. Filippini, V. Sciancalepore, F. Devoti, and A. Capone, “Fast cell
discovery in mm-wave 5g networks with context information,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1538–1552,
2017.
[9] C. Bouras, P. Fotakopoulou, and A. Kollia, “5g networks: Advancement
and challenges,” in The Fifteenth International Conference on Wireless
and Mobile Communications (ICWMC 2019), pp. 33–38, 2019.
[10] S. Sundqvist, L. Frank, and K. Puumalainen, “The effects of country
characteristics, cultural similarity and adoption timing on the diffusion
of wireless communications,” Journal of business research, vol. 58,
no. 1, pp. 107–110, 2005.
[11] N. et. al., “Rethinking ﬂat rate pricing for broadband services,” White
Paper, Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group, 2012.
[12] T. et. al., “Is backhaul becoming a bottleneck for green wireless access
networks?,” in 2014 IEEE international conference on communications
(ICC), pp. 4029–4035, IEEE, 2014.
[13] J. Markendahl and ¨O. M¨akitalo, “A comparative study of deployment
options, capacity and cost structure for macrocellular and femtocell
networks,” in 2010 IEEE 21st International Symposium on Personal,
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications Workshops, pp. 145–150,
IEEE, 2010.
[14] F. Khan and Z. Pi, “mmwave mobile broadband (mmb): Unleashing
the 3–300ghz spectrum,” in 34th IEEE Sarnoff Symposium, pp. 1–6,
IEEE, 2011.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

