 
Mobile Technology and Conservation Areas: A Case Study 
 
Erivaldo Martins, Jeferson Schommer Scarton, Juliana Edmundo, Mauro Antonio dos Santos, Wanderson 
Fernandes de Oliveira, Claudio de Castro Monteiro 
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Tocantins 
Palmas, Brazil 
e-mail: erivaldomartins83@gmail.com, jscarton3108@gmail.com, julianaedmundo21@gmail.com, 
santos.mauroantonio@gmail.com, wandersonfernandes@outlook.com, ccm@ifto.edu.br 
 
Abstract—This article addresses the importance of mobile 
technologies as a method to assist in the process of 
denouncing environmental crimes. With the purpose of 
helping the citizens of Tocantins (Northern Brazilian state), 
by giving them means to denounce illegal practices, this 
work helps with environmental preservation. The research 
presented is relevant in helping with environmental 
protection. 
Keywords-mobile 
technologies; 
complaint; 
environment 
crimes; preservation; environment. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This research intends to yield useful information for 
someone and to enable that someone to apply it. In order 
to receive this type of useful information on the way it is 
used, several factors have to be taken into consideration, 
for instance the relevance of the information and what the 
impacts and transformations will involve. Confronting 
with this, it is observed that one of the major concerns at 
present and for future generations is the environment and 
its indiscriminate use. 
According to the law of environmental crimes, the 
normative act materialized in Federal Brazilian Law nº. 
9.605/98, environmental crime is all use of natural and 
mineral resources that violates the limits established by 
law [1]. 
Hence, the protection and conservation of renewable 
and nonrenewable natural resources require actions 
beyond existing legislative instruments, leaving the 
theoretical field and being more effective. Thereupon, 
technology can help in the environmental protection of a 
dynamic and agile way in favor of the environment. 
Historically, in Brazil, the process of denouncing 
crimes against the environment is accomplished in person 
where the citizen goes to the responsible environmental 
organ to complain, or uses the telephone service to 
communicate the illicit practices harmful to the 
environment. Those models of complaint are restricted by 
population, i.e., not always can whoever makes the 
denunciations reach the competent authorities, or they are 
attended by phone calls due to the great number of 
unanswered phone calls. It should also be observed that 
the attendance at public agencies operates at restricted 
hours, and is unavailable on weekends or holidays. 
Therefore, there are no people to receive those 
complaints, and forward them to the surveillance group 
for immediate environmental protection activities [2]. 
In this regard, the project presented in this article is 
the use of mobile technologies, allowing every citizen to 
carry out criminal denunciations against the environment, 
interacting directly from the source of the infraction, at 
any time, through mobile devices connected by Internet. 
To this extent, the project also intends to solve the 
problem of the limitations in the process of carrying out 
criminal denunciations against the environment, allowing 
greater speed and efficiency, in an effort to provide 
assistance to the responsible agencies for environmental 
surveillance. 
For that reason a mobile application was created for 
the Android operating system. Called Preserve.TO, it 
which simplifies and innovates the process of denouncing 
crimes against the environment in the State of Tocantins, 
and can be adapted to anywhere in the world. 
This article is structurally organized in the following 
manner: in section I - introduction, which presents the 
problem, justification, objectives, and organization of the 
text. In section II - related research, which are studies 
already accomplished in this area. In section III - 
proposition, which describes what was done. In section IV 
- methodology, explains what and how it was done. In 
section V - results, which comprehends the data obtained 
in the research in relation to the mobile application. In 
section VI - conclusion and future research. 
II. RELATED RESEARCH 
This section will deal with research related to the goal 
of this article. Besides that, it mentions information 
considered relevant, emphasizing the similarities and 
differences among them. 
A research topic that has great similarity to the work 
developed in this article shows the use of mobile 
technology to help combat sexual violence, collecting 
evidence through the MediCapt application that allows 
investigative professionals to collect evidence relating to 
the crimes of a sexual nature and to send this information 
to a database, and which can be investigated afterwards by 
the lawful authorities or used as criminal evidence in 
court. MediCapt has the same purpose as Preserve.TO, 
because it is a digital means for collecting information 
that can be forwarded to the competent authorities to 
evaluate those digital data, and if it involves a punishable 
criminal offense, to apply the appropriate penalties to 
those who have infringed the laws [3]. 
The course conclusion paper presented at the 
undergraduate course in Computer Science at the 
University of Southern Santa Catarina (Universidade do 
Sul de Santa Catarina, in Portuguese), in 2015, entitled 
“Collaborative System for Identifying and Denouncing 
Environmental Crimes” (“Sistema Colaborativo para 
Identificação e Denúncia de Crimes Ambientais”, in 
Portuguese) presents a project for a system of 
environmental crimes to enable the collaboration and 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
active 
participation 
of 
society 
in 
environmental 
preservation, focusing on crimes against fauna, flora and 
pollution. The application developed was mainly destined 
for mobile devices using the camera features and Global 
Positioning System (GPS) along with a Web version [4]. 
The article presented at the “VIII Brazilian Congress 
of 
Environmental 
Management” 
(“VIII 
Congresso 
Brasileiro de Gestão Ambiental”, in Portuguese) held in 
Campo Grande / Mato Grosso do Sul from November 
27th to 30th, 2017, entitled as “‘Brigade On Line’ 
Application: The Use of Technology to Contribute to the 
Combat of Forest Fires” (“Aplicativo ‘Brigada On Line’: 
O Uso da Tecnologia para Aporte ao Combate de 
Incêndios Florestais”, in Portuguese) reports a very 
similar application to the one presented in this article. 
“Brigada On Line” application, as well as the 
Preserve.TO, are applications that have been developed 
for smartphones and tablets, aimed at helping preserve the 
environment through denunciation to the competent 
agencies. 
Both 
tools 
use 
geographic 
coordinates 
resources, obtained by GPS, image records, and text fields 
to detail the location [5]. 
Those projects, just as the one presented in this article, 
have used tools that furnish mobility information, both 
from a collection and availability point of view. In other 
words, the mobile networks along with the connectivity of 
devices through 3G, 4G and Wireless networks allow 
these solutions to go where the information is generated 
and bring them to the population, reaching as many 
people as possible. In this regard, ubiquitous access to 
information is offered from the moment that it is 
generated until the moment it is provided. 
III. PROPOSITION 
Our proposition with this research is to provide to 
citizens of Tocantins with mechanisms through mobile 
technology that allow them to denounce, in a voluntary 
way, actions of degradation against the environment in the 
State of Tocantins, whether the environmental crime is in 
urban or rural areas. To this extent, the relationship 
between society and public administration becomes 
closer. These denunciations might be directly linked to the 
environmental protection agencies, such as the Brazilian 
Institute of the Environment and Renewable Natural 
Resources (Instituto Brasileiro do Meio Ambiente e dos 
Recursos Naturais Renováveis - Ibama / in Portuguese) 
and the Nature Institute of Tocantins (Instituto Natureza 
do Tocantins - Naturatins / in Portuguese), so those 
agencies can investigate and if penalties apply, the 
lawbreaker 
will 
be 
punished 
for 
attacking 
the 
environment, being held liable according to current 
legislation. 
 
 
Figure 1. Solution flowchart. 
As illustrated in Figure 1, a project is presented to 
enable assistance to society and environmental defense 
agencies. This is accomplished through the development 
of a mobile application in which the user can accomplish 
the denunciations, informing the detailed location, the 
nature of infraction, classified into types of infractions, 
photos of the occurrence, the geographical coordinates 
through GPS and identification of the person making the 
denunciation through user authentication, because the 
access in the application is initially performed by email 
and password, or the denunciation may be provided 
anonymously. After registering the denunciation via 
device, it can be sent to the application server, allowing 
the availability to the competent agencies. These 
accusations can be deleted from the mobile device at any 
time by the authenticated user. 
As well as recording and sending denunciations, the 
project contains a document module, which is can offer 
links to current environmental legislation and several 
related materials. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
This section will present the methodological steps and 
technologies used in the project proposed in this article. 
A centralized Web structure was created containing 
information on the types of environmental infractions, 
receipt of denunciations, authentication and authorization 
of users. A mobile application was also developed for the 
Android operating system, for application of this data, 
generation and sending of denunciations by the project 
users. 
Communication 
between 
Web 
and 
mobile 
applications is done through Web services using 
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON). 
The first stage of the development was the survey of 
the requirements, being made with interviews with Mr. 
Erivaldo Martins, an employee at Naturatins, the public 
agency responsible for environmental monitoring in the 
State. 
Initially, 
the 
following 
requirements 
and 
functionalities of the system were drawn up: list and 
consultation of the nature of the infraction, city of origin 
of the infraction, report of the occurrence, detail, photos 
and geographical coordinates of the place of incident, and 
complainant. The denunciation can be anonymous. 
After 
the 
requirements 
were 
surveyed, 
the 
implementation part of the project was started. To that 
end, Microsoft Visual Studio Community integrated 
development environment was used with the C# (C Sharp) 
programming language and Microsoft SQL Server 
Express database for web application development, and 
the integrated Android Studio development environment 
with the Java programming language, extensible markup 
language (XML), and Realm database for mobile 
application development. 
After the project began to take shape, part of it, the 
Web server, to receive and manage denunciations, which 
was hosted on a virtual server on Google Cloud Platform, 
so that the team could access the application and perform 
testing, synchronizing data, making registrations, testing 
queries, making suggestions, tracking and improving the 
development process. 
With the application working in its beta version, 
mathematical formulas presented in (1) and (2) were 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
applied to obtain statistical data for validation of the 
research. Faced with such a situation, the sample, the 
standard deviation and the estimated error were 
determined. The analyzes were performed using the 
formula presented in (1). 
 
𝑠 = (𝜎 𝑥 
ଵ.ଽ଺
ா )
ଶ                          (1) 
 
Being: 
● 
s: sample. 
● 
σ: standard deviation. 
● 
1.96: 95% confidence. 
● 
E: estimated error. 
 
In a pre-sample of application ratings, with options 
from 1 to 5, 1 being poorly satisfied and 5 being very 
satisfied, the following values were found: 
 
● 
Pre-sample: {4, 2, 5, 3, 5}. 
 
With the standard deviation on this pre-sample of 
1.303840481, the result shown in (2) was obtained. 
 
𝑠 = (
(ଵ.ଷ଴ଷ଼ସ଴଼ସଵ ௫ ଵ.ଽ଺)
(ଵ.ଷ଴ଷ଼ସ଴ସ଼ଵ ௫ ଴.ଵହ))
ଶ                      (2) 
 
The result of s = 170.7377778 was obtained. 
With the application of this mathematical formula 
shown in (2), we have the sample population size for 
validation of the research, from a universe of 170.7377 
people. 
A form was prepared this sample population to answer 
and evaluate the project. This form is digitally found 
through Google Forms, where the user of the application 
could answer seven questions from the researchers, to 
gather pertinent information for the use of the application, 
in order to obtain a valid result, which is in fact to know if 
the application will help to fight environmental crimes in 
the state of Tocantins. 
After a usable version of the Preserve.TO project was 
ready, its use was put into practice by making the mobile 
application available on Google Play Store through the 
Android Package (APK) application. 
One of the researchers is a Naturatins employee. He 
was one of the main persons for presenting the application 
to this institution, where all the coworkers were very 
enthusiastic and used the application in its evaluative test 
phase. 
The project was also displayed to academics from the 
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of 
Tocantins (Instituto Federal de Educação, Ciência e 
Tecnologia do Tocantins – IFTO, in Portuguese), Palmas 
campus, where the researchers explained the proposition 
of Preserve.TO, giving instructions about how to obtain it 
through their smartphones or tablets and also guiding the 
students that after using this application, the research form 
was answered, providing information to the researchers as 
to whether the project would be useful in the combat 
against environmental crimes. 
V. RESULTS 
The public-opinion poll was drawn up with seven 
questions, with each question containing five alternatives, 
on a scale of one to five. Rating one corresponds to poor, 
rating two corresponds to fair, rating three corresponds to 
good, rating four corresponds to very good and rating five 
corresponds to excellent. 
In this public-opinion poll we tried to extract from 
people who used the project what they thought of the 
proposition and whether, in fact, this could help in the 
preservation of the environment. 
The questions used, in the following order, were: Do 
you believe that it is really possible to help to preserve the 
environment through the use of this application?; In the 
environment in which you live, is the use of this 
application relevant for preserving the environment?; 
Evaluate the proposition of the application, in sense of 
helping in the fight against environmental crimes, in 
relation of the utility; Has the application it easy to made 
a denunciation?; Do you believe that the application is 
able to aid in the agility of environmental crime 
surveillance, preventing even greater disaster?; Does the 
use of new technologies, such as the one developed in this 
application, contribute to the preservation of natural 
resources?; Which rating would you assign to recommend 
this application?. 
A total of 172 (one hundred and seventy-two) answers 
to this questionnaire were obtained. For the first question, 
according to Figure 2, 61.6% of the respondents answered 
“Certainly”, 32.6% answered “Yes”, 4.7% answered 
“Maybe”, while 1.2% answered “Not much”, with the 
estimated sampling error of 0.04886% for each response. 
A variance of 0.4106% and a standard deviation of 
0.6408% were found. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Answers to the first question on the form. 
For the second question, we tried to extract from the 
application users the relevance of the technology. The 
percentage acquired is presented in Figure 3. The sample 
fractions obtained were rating 1, which represents “No”, 
one of the research participants attributed this rating, 
meaning that the majority of all who answered the public-
opinion poll believe that the use of the application is 
relevant 
to 
for 
supporting 
preservation 
of 
the 
environment. Therefore, it follows that 99% of people 
believe that the application can promote actions in defense 
of the environment. However, within this universe, 0.6% 
answered “No”, 2.3% answered “Not much”, 7.6% 
answered “Maybe”, 34.3% answered “Yes” and 55.2% 
answered “Certainly”. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Given this second question, which has a variance of 
0.6028 and a standard deviation of 0.7764, it can be 
inferred that the population believes that the use of the 
Preserve.TO 
application 
is 
important 
for 
aiding 
environmental preservation. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Answers to the second question on the form. 
On the third question, rating 1 was not assigned, 
which has the description “Poor”, so it can be seen that 
100% of interviewees do not think that the application 
project is a bad idea. However, within this sample 
scenario, 1.2% answered “Fair”, 13.4% answered “Good”, 
25% answered “Very Good” and 60.5% answered 
“Excellent”. With a variance of 0.5844 and standard 
deviation of 0.7645, most evaluations have been 
concentrated on very good and excellent, assigning the 
application as an important utility tool, Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Answers to the third question on the form. 
The fourth question attempted to verify the time taken 
to accomplish a denunciation, i.e., whether it would be 
faster in this project presented, the Preserve.TO mobile 
application, than in traditional methods, such as carrying 
out the denunciations through phone calls to the call 
centers, denunciation recipients, or even in person at the 
regulatory agencies. Thus, it was found, as shown in 
Figure 5, that 49.4% of the interviewed answered that the 
denunciation process would be fast, and only 7% of the 
interviewed answered that the agility in the denunciation 
process would be Fair, 9.9% answered “Good” and 33.7% 
answered “Very Good”. From these results, a sampling 
error of 0.0684% for each response, a standard deviation 
of 0.98981% and a variance of 0.8066% were obtained. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Answers to the fourth question on the form. 
Consequently, in the fifth question 59.9% of people 
considered the application as a way to speed the 
denunciation process, so that it can quickly reach the 
competent authorities and avoid further damage to the 
environment. 33.1% answered “Yes”, 4.1% answered 
“Maybe”, 2.3% answered “Not much” and 0.6% answered 
“No”, according to Figure 6. Regarding this, 0.0560% as 
sample error for each response, 0.7352% as standard 
deviation and 0.5406% as variance were extracted. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Answers to the fifth question on the form. 
On the sixth question, 61% answered “Certainly” that 
technology can contribute to the preservation of natural 
resources by assisting inspection agencies with faster and 
more current information, promoting a better enforcement 
performance. 34.9% answered “Yes”, 2.3% answered 
“Maybe” and 1.7% answered “Not much”, as shown in 
Figure 7. With a sampling error of 0.0481% for each 
response, standard deviation of 0.6312%, and variance of 
0.3998%. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Answers to the sixth question on the form. 
Finally, in the seventh question, Preserve.TO users 
were asked to recommend this project to be used by 
others, and 65.1% answered “Excellent”, 24.4% answered 
“Very Good”, 9.9% answered “Good” and 0.6% answered 
“Fair”, as shown in Figure 8. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
Figure 8.  Answers to the seventh question on the form. 
For this seventh question we have a sampling error of 
0.0528%, standard deviation of 0.6934% and variance of 
0.4809%. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
This research is focused on how to develop useful data 
for someone and how to make this someone apply it. 
Bearing this in mind, we detect the need to preserve and 
care for something that is a well-diffused right, common 
to all citizens, which is the environment. 
At the end of this research, through the data obtained, 
the researchers observed that the sample population that 
evaluated the application Preserve.TO believes that this 
tool will certainly help in preserving the environment. It 
will also enable a more agile reply from the public 
administration and will reduce bureaucracy in the current 
process of reporting environmental crimes. 
According to the above, in the statistical data obtained 
in the data collection and illustrated in the above figures, 
it is observed that 94.2% of the sample believes that the 
application is capable of assisting in environmental 
preservation. Thus, still within the population, 89.5% of 
respondents believe in the relevance of the application to 
the environment in the current reality in which they live. 
These data reveal the acceptance of the application and 
reflect credibility that the population sample attributed to 
it, when they became familiar with it. 
According to the data obtained in the research, on the 
proposition of the application to help reduce bureaucracy 
in the process of denouncing environmental crimes and 
assisting in the combat against crimes related to the 
environment, 60.5% of the interviewees rated the 
proposition as excellent, while 25% saw the proposition 
as very good. Therefore, it is observed that the proposition 
of the application was very well accepted by the 
population. 
In the context of the easiness in conducting the 
denunciation process, 49.4% rated it as excellent and 
33.7% rated it very good, which shows that the 
respondents believe in a greater efficiency of bringing a 
criminal complaint against the environment, using the 
application. So, within this process, the interviewees also 
believe that the application assists in the celerity of the 
entire 
procedure 
of 
reporting 
and 
monitoring 
environmental crimes, according to data obtained from the 
sample population, which indicates that 59.9% gave the 
maximum rating for the question, that is, they are sure that 
the application helps in dispatch. Still within this 
population, 33.1% answered “Yes”, believing also in the 
speed of the whole process. 
The researched scenario, regarding the use of new 
technologies, shows that 61% of the those interviewed 
indicated the alternative “Certainly”, showing they 
believe in the use of new technologies such as 
Preserve.TO, while 34.9% answered “Yes”. So 95.9% of 
the sample population trust in the new application to help 
protect the environment. 
Finally, it is noted in the statistical data, that 65.1% of 
the sample, that is, from the interviewees, checked the 
option “Excellent”, when asked, “Which rating would you 
assign to recommend this application?”, While 24.4% 
rated as “Very Good”. 
Therefore, in this context, society believes that the 
Preserve.TO application meets the central goal of the 
research, which is how to generate useful information for 
someone and how to make someone else apply them. 
Therefore, 
while 
it 
was 
understood 
that 
the 
Preserve.TO tool alone will not solve the environmental 
issue, it is nonetheless an important tool, which will assist 
environmental agencies in protecting the environment, 
informing environmental control actions, in order to 
investigate 
environmental 
infractions, 
increasing 
effectiveness in the protection of environmental resources 
by the public administration and society, punishing those 
responsible, as well as demanding compensation for 
environmental damage caused. 
As a future study, this technological project can be 
used throughout the State of Tocantins, being extended to 
other states of the Brazilian federation, to assist in 
combating degradation to the environment. To that end, it 
will be available at the Federal Institute of Education, 
Science and Technology of Tocantins, Palmas campus, so 
that it can be continued and improved by interested parties 
or bodies responsible for fighting environmental crimes. 
Currently the application contains a version for 
Android operating system, hosted in the Google Play 
Store. Therefore, to extend its use, other versions, for 
other platforms, can be developed. The popularization of 
this tool may also be carried out by means of 
communication in the media. According to the Federal 
Brazilian Law nº. 12.527/2011, which provides for the 
disclosure and publicity of actions of the independent 
public administration of requests, as improvements in the 
project, the implementation of functionalities is proposed, 
through which it is possible to follow-up the complaints 
made, so that the interested parties can accompany them, 
visualizing 
the 
progress 
made 
by 
the 
public 
administration, including the sanctions applied, whether 
the damage caused by the environmental crime has been 
repaired and other useful information [6]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Brazil, “Federal Law No. 9.605, February 12, 1998” in 
Official Diary of the Federative Republic of Brazil, 
Brasília-DF, 17 February 1998. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/CCivil_03/leis/L9605.htm 
[retrieved: May, 2018] 
[2] Ibama - Brazilian Institute of the Environment and 
Renewable Natural Resources, “How to Denounce Crimes 
and Aggressions to the Environment”. December 2017. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.brasil.gov.br/editoria/meio-
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
ambiente/2014/08/saiba-como-denunciar-crimes-e-
agressoes-ao-meio-ambiente [retrieved: June, 2018] 
[3] R. Mishori et al, “mJustice: Preliminary Development of a 
Mobile App for Medical-Forensic Documentation of Sexual 
Violence in Low-Resource Environments and Conflict 
Zones”. Global Health: Science and Practice, March 2017. 
pp. 
138–150, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ghspjournal.org/content/5/1/138 
[retrieved: 
April, 2018] 
[4] D. G. Silva and L. A. Rech, “Collaborative System for 
Identifying and Denouncing Environmental Crimes”. 
“RIUNI: Institutional Repository”, Unisul University, 2015. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://riuni.unisul.br/handle/12345/3255 [retrieved: April, 
2018] 
[5] L. C. Cruz and G. A. Atahyde, “‘Brigade On Line’ 
Applicative: The Use of Technology to Contribute to the 
Combat of Forest Fires”. “VIII Brazilian Congress of 
Environmental Management”, IBEAS - Brazilian Institute 
of Environmental Studies, November 2017. pp. 1–5, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ibeas.org.br/congresso/Trabalhos2017/VI-
028.pdf [retrieved: April, 2018] 
[6] Brazil, “Federal Law No. 12.527, November 18, 2011” in 
Official Diary of the Federative Republic of Brazil, 
Brasília-DF, 18 November 2011. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2011-
2014/2011/lei/l12527.htm [retrieved: May, 2018] 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

