Towards a Mobile Enhancement of Glocal Heritage? 
Developing user experiences in relation to mobile technologies, geo-localisation and culture 
Laurent Antonczak 
Auckland University of Technology 
AUT 
Auckland, New Zealand 
email: laurent.antonczak@aut.ac.nz 
Catherine Papetti 
Université Côte d’Azur 
IAE, GRM 
Nice, France 
email: catherine.papetti@unice.fr
 
 
Abstract — Considering the recent media coverage and online 
discussions about Niantic’s Pokémon GO, most academics and 
professionals would agree that it is the first app to globally 
popularise mobile locative media (GPS) and augmented reality 
(AR), raising its potential as a technological medium and as an 
interface to offer new possibilities for any user. This paper 
maps technological and user experience changes undertaken 
through collaboration and professional practices  between 
creative technologists and prosumers (clients and/or users), as 
they designed digital environments. Based on the notion of 
augmented space and/or virtual environments, especially in the 
Tourism sector, the authors analyse how tacit knowledge and 
service discovery were utilised to facilitate and integrate 
innovative, engaging and inclusive mobile experiences. Also, 
whilst proposing a networked model of content creation in 
augmented space, this paper reflects on some of the mobile 
characteristics in relation to a glocal (term coined by 
Robertson in the 1990s) approach through two specific 
collaborative research projects: Shangri La and the Mobile 
Innovation Network Australasia (MINA) app.  
Keywords-mobile; locative media; mixed reality; tourism; 
heritage; user-centred; glocal; innovation; mobiquity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Territorial attractiveness and marketing must leave the 
mechanical conventions of the creation of zones and the 
competitive race of companies to integrate with the 
emergence of new area projects. The territory becomes more 
and 
more 
a 
community 
composed 
of 
individuals 
participating in its development rather than bounded by 
managed areas, and the valuation of the region passes 
through the same community of individuals [28][37]. 
Furthermore, digital tools, such as mobile devices and social 
networks allow the co-creation of value and the 
participation of the community to the attraction of the 
territory and its heritage. Hence, the new collective 
environment can be defined as: 
 “the overlapping of virtual information in real space 
(…) mixing virtual objects generated by computers with a 
real environment, generating a mixed environment that can 
be viewed through any technological device in real time.” 
[10] 
Research on Mixed- or Augmented-Reality (MR or AR) 
has been conducted in various fields including cultural 
heritage but the majority of studies focus on technical 
aspects of AR, while others are tailored to specific 
applications [14]. In this paper, the authors investigate how 
AR content is created in this theoretical context, and how 
communities provide one key aspect: a participatory model 
of creating user presence in mobile environments that ties 
into Matsuda’s hypothetical context. Also, with the 
smartphone being the “first medium to introduce AR to the 
mass market which has enormous potential for tourism” 
[1][17], this paper will specifically focus on mobile AR (m-
AR), which allows users to point “the device towards 
physical objects in their surroundings and then are able to 
see additional virtual information overlaid on top of the real-
world camera view through virtual annotations” [39]. 
Furthermore, this paper examines and reflects on two cases 
of AR projects in order to define a purposeful way to 
enhance a tourist experience. 
This paper investigates how media locative content can 
be co-created in mobile environments, and is organised into 
five sections. Section 2 presents the context and some 
definitions of m-AR and glocal heritage, and Section 3 
focusses on the methodology, while Section 4 develops the 
critical analysis of two environmental projects conceived in 
the early- and mid-mobile technology era. In Section 5, the 
results are discussed, and Section 6 convenes the 
conclusion.  
II. 
M-AR, MOBIQUITY AND GLOCAL HERITAGE 
This section is divided into two parts: the first part aims 
to define and contextualise AR and the concept of 
mobiquity, while the second part discusses the connections 
between technology, content, people and the environment. 
A. Context: mobiquity 
Although many definitions of AR exist, all of them 
agree that AR refers to any enhancement of the real 
environment by computer-generated content [14]. AR is a 
combination of real object and computer-generated data 
where virtual objects are blended into the real world. It 
means that user could see virtual and real objects coexisting 
in the same space. Thus, AR technologies supplement 
reality rather than completely replacing it [27].  
With the huge and rapid adoption of smartphones [1] in 
the tourism sector, m-AR is the main device used by 
tourists. Thus m-AR participates in the rapid fostering of 
mobiquity system. Mobiquity is a word proposed at the 
beginning of the Internet relating to the mobile phone in the 
1990s by Xavier Dalloz. Today, it has become a gateway 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

concept between the real world and the virtual world, rich in 
new content and services, bringing the convergence between 
the MOBI-lity of any mobile device and the ubi-QUITY of 
the Internet [29]. This notion originates from the concept of 
Any Time, AnyWhere, Any Device (ATAWAD ), added 
later by Any Content, which consists of several elements: 
the real world tags (tags); the modified reality (increased or 
decreased); the transmedia (contents adapted to the five 
screens); a geolocation tool with indication of the different 
steps to follow; an information tool at every stage that 
enriches the reality; and an interactive tool through which 
the tourist-local-user-politician can post a comment, enrich 
the content, in visual, textual form. This mobile system 
allows any tourist to become an ambassador of the territory 
and users to interact with the actual environment while 
displaying virtual information at the same time [30]. Buxton 
[5][6] even argues:  
"(...)  that ubiquitous technologies are enacting a shift in 
the way that places are encountered and understood. Added 
to this, places across the planet are increasingly facing 
‘wicked’ problems – issues that are difficult to solve by 
traditional methods and approaches."  
 
B. 
m-AR in the context of glocal heritage 
In general, the term of heritage refers to the study of 
everything that is inherited and recovered to remain through 
the medium of archeology, art, tradition, religious and 
culture. Cultural heritage is one of the valuable assets that 
need to be preserved and protected for the future generation. 
A wide body of literature identifies that smartphones or 
AR enabled PC tablets that are applied to cultural heritage 
can help cultural and urban development in two main ways: 
by overlaying a map with drawings, graphics, physical 
models, audio files and digital simulations that helps non-
expert users to understand a culturally complex phenomena; 
and by integrating virtual elements in conjunction with a 
specific site in order to visualise historical details that helps 
to increase the awareness of a place on the basis of its 
uniqueness, as opposed to merely visible. This is a new 
culture of fulfilling the potential of a place and promoting 
its tourism industry [2][12]. 
     Digital AR technologies and possibilities (such as 
bluetooth, wifi and/or geo-location coordinates, gyroscopic 
information) [7] and pervasive media such as mobile phones 
[1] in the field of tourism contributes to the “re-enact of 
historical monuments to reproduce on site historical places 
as in the golden period” [11]. Tourists can gain many 
benefits from those mobile technologies, offering them new 
interactive and highly dynamic experience [31][32]. It opens 
up a glocal territory [35], in terms of an hybridisation 
between one local space and a global appropriation by 
mobile travelers. 
III. 
THE METHODOLOGY 
Due to the complex nature of the technology 
development and during the early stages of the analysed 
project, the authors employed a heuristic form of research 
where “the research process is designed for the exploration 
and interpretation of experience, which uses the self of the 
researcher” [16]. After narrowing down areas, the heuristic 
model evolved into a design-led methodology incorporating 
“research methods that imbues the full spectrum of 
innovation activities with a human-centred design ethos” 
[4]. This was to allow a systematic approach to the practice-
led research that utilises a rinse-and-repeat method. The 
broad framework for all design-led research is analysis and 
synthesis.  
“Analysis relates to the methods of investigation, 
enquiry and understanding central to the research of a 
project brief, concept or a particular context. Synthesis, 
meanwhile, is the means by which a designer is able to draw 
upon his or her initial analytical work and investigation to 
produce meaningful solutions or interventions.” [26] 
However, the collaborative element of the two proposed 
projects needs to be clearly defined. Then, users’ experience 
of being active members within an authentic professional 
glocal 
community 
of 
practice 
can 
provide 
new 
environmental experience for the majority of participants, 
including professionals or amateurs [8].  
Also, ethnography via mainly participant observations, 
qualitative inquiry conducted via written or oral discussions, 
and 
hermeneutic 
(Heidegger) 
interpretation 
methods 
supports the following analysis of the users presence, 
actions and interactions in mobile environment in order to 
draw an adequate but not complete synthesis.  
 
IV. 
Two examples 
Following 
are 
two 
examples 
of 
mobile-based 
collaborative 
research 
projects: 
the 
first 
one 
was 
conceptualised and developed in 2011, during the very early 
stages of mobile environment development and the second 
one was created late 2012.  
 
A. Shangri La - an experience in Virtual Reality [2011]. 
This project was developed by Virtuo Ltd in collaboration 
with Māori-Samoan artist Lonnie Hutchinson on New 
Zealand’s first outdoor virtual binocular experience in 
Wellington. The artwork Shangri La is located in Chew 
Lane, at the heart of Wellington City. The concept is based 
on historical facts: before the settlement of Wellington, the 
area of land that Chews Lane occupies was originally the 
seabed and shoreline. The original bay was surrounded in 
native bush which was also known for its towering Totara 
trees. In order to acknowledge the areas Māori cultural and 
natural history, Shangri La was developed as a series of 
animations that observed and propositioned the physical 
architecture of the Chews Lane by embedding a conceptual 
landscape and stories, which weave their way around the 
lane [21]. In terms of user experience, any flâneur is invited 
to view or gaze the environment through the binocular. The 
binocular can be rotated left or right approximately 360 
degrees and up and down approximately 30 degrees. There 
are black and white motifs in the canvas image. When the 
binocular is held stationary over these motifs a crosshair 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

appears (much like the crosshair on a camera when taking a 
photo), which triggers an animation. 
 
B. Mobile Innovation Network Australasia (MINA) app – 
New Zealand [2012/2013]  
The MINA app is a collaboration between MINA, an 
Australasian-based 
network 
that 
creates 
interactions 
between people, content and the creative industries, and 
Snapr, which brings together photos/videos from a range of 
different apps. The joint-creation of the app came initially 
from a need of the 24 Frames 24 Hours project, which 
engages with local communities around the world through 
mobile-filmmaking workshops. Originally, participants used 
mobile-filmmaking via their smartphone as a means of 
cultural expression. However, the process of filming, 
downloading the footage on a computer and then uploading 
it online became tedious and frustrating for participants. By 
using the metadata (i.e., GPS) of each new mobile short 
video clips created, the app can automatically and 
systematically upload and place the content on Google 
Maps. Hence, participants are empowered to shape 
representations about themselves and their communities, 
while connecting and representing seamlessly a specific 
place or location, “through a kind of no strings attached 
virtual proximity and co-presence” [34]. This mobile project 
focuses on bringing amateur and/or professional filmmakers 
together via a social geo-locative platform and fostering a 
community of practice thanks to creative practices [8][18]. 
V. 
RESULTS 
Both projects are based on most of the key mobile 
benefits defined by Ahonen [1]: mobile is the first personal 
mass media; always connected; always carried; available at 
creative impulse; as most accurate audience info; captures 
social context of consumption; enables AR; and offers 
digital interface (to real world). 
 Shangri La was conceived as an m-AR installation in 
order to invite any user to merge historical and 
contemporary realities and events. Unfortunately, due 
mainly to technical issues in relation to some of the 
limitation of 2011’s technologies and their costs; the project 
Shangri-La needed to scale down some of its ambitions 
while keeping its first intention as authentic as possible: the 
choice of 3D animation and pre-rendered VR was prioritised 
over m-AR and live data [3]. However, collaboration 
between an artist, some creative technologist and an 
engineer [20] resulted into a relevant and pertinent locative 
attraction and community interaction for Wellington City.  
The MINA app reached its use optimisation and 
momentum after hurricane Sandy (late 2012, early 2013): a 
few people contributed to the documentation of the semi-
permanent landscape of devastation and reconstruction 
thanks to their mobile devices and the MINA app. The app 
served as a catalyst for more dialogue between people, local 
bodies 
and 
insurance 
companies. 
The 
MINA 
app 
development is in hibernation at the moment however it is 
easy to imagine that the next step of such a project is to get 
a direct link with Google Street view to provide users a live 
m-AR experience on any site or to outfit participants with 
an immersive experience thanks to Google Cardboard, for 
instance. In this case, mobile functionality, and mobile 
capability provides an interfaces between international 
people and local content by virtue of a global collaborative 
and creative project.  
In both cases, the key attributes and functionality of 
mobile technologies, although used at its early stage, are 
about enhancing user experience in relation to their settings, 
to their spatial coordinates. While there is more and more 
suspicion and awareness of big data and surveillance, the 
authors are cognisant of arising ethical questions and concur 
with Buxton’s perspective: 
 
"My work at each of these places was to collaboratively 
create a mobile based user experience which supported the 
spirit of that place, and the work of those associated with it." 
[5][6] 
Also, based on Stedman [35], Director of the Human 
Dimensions Research Unit –Cornell University, who 
declared that “understanding place in its true complexity is a 
multidisciplinary exercise”, the authors argue that historical, 
political, sociological and economical meanings highly 
influence one's perception about a specific location through 
the lens of a mobile device. The main idea raised from the 
authors’ experiences resides in developing user experiences 
in relation to mobile technologies, geo-localisation and 
culture. As Matsuda wrote: 
 
"Like photography, the design of AR environments has 
been democratized (...) everyone participates in its 
consumption and creation. The augmented space is truly a 
spatial expression of the people who live in it." [23]. 
Furthermore, across various papers or article focusing on 
emerging mobile technologies [4][9][36][39], Buxton [6] 
noted that only a few “cite authors such as Rose (2002) or 
Somerville (2007, 2010)  in their work – however many of 
these themes are the same i.e. embodiment, practice, 
interconnection and permeability. Today’s technologies 
bridge between worlds using the body and screens (portals) 
as points of connection.” 
 
Referring back to Pokemon Go and based on the finding 
of the Shangri-La and MINA app projects, the authors 
concur with Rieser [32] and Haque [15] who highlighted 
that different forms of ‘invisible’ technologies and data are 
shifting people’s relationship to spaces and places and that 
society is evolving from perceiving its surroundings as 
‘static’ and ‘dead’, to an environment which is rather ‘fluid’, 
‘dynamic’ and inherently interactive, and where technology 
has been so integrated into the environment that it is no 
longer visible [9]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the authors contextualised and defined the 
notion of m-AR, mobiquity and glocal heritage in relation to 
user experience; they discussed their methodological 
approach based on phenomenology and qualitative data; 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

they reflected upon two environmental projects conceived 
using early mobile technologies and capabilities and 
highlighted the importance of collaboration [20] to facilitate 
and integrate innovative, engaging and inclusive mobile 
experiences.  
A process-driven creative approach can question the 
existing linearity of creation and user experience in mobile 
environment, as well as multiple perspective contributions. 
Therefore, the authors argue that co-creation and multi-
disciplinary collaborations enrich and enhance interactive 
environments, and enhance the potential of user experience 
in tourism [25]. Following is a pertinent quote from 
Holliday, that summarises this position: 
“Engineers are efficient problem solvers. Business 
people think short term. Designers want things to be elegant 
and beautiful. All three need to create collaboration and 
harmony, and honor the value each other brings. There 
needs to be a new kind of ‘multi-dimensional’ approach to 
design that is yet to be invented.” —Linda Holliday 
(@lmholliday / CITIA) 
Additionally, the concept of a general augmented space 
could soon be a reality with the development of AR-based 
technologies, such as Magic Leap (2010), Google’s AR 
smart lenses (2014), and Microsoft HoloLens (2016). 
Moreover, Cara Kahl [19] argue that: 
"Social groups play an integral part in establishing 
creativity. Their perception and evaluation processes may be 
hard to decipher in an increasingly networked world, but 
ignoring this complexity does not necessarily facilitate 
scientific comprehension of creativity. This notion implies 
adopting a relational approach to investigating it. And 
taking the phenomenon for what we make of it: a dynamical 
construct based on social stimulation and judgment 
processes".  
The critical analysis and the results developed in this 
paper lead the author to state that the notion of prosumers 
needs to be addressed in the wider context of tourism, from 
a political and cultural perspective in order to design a 
coalition for a new social reality. For instance, mobile AR, 
VR or MR should allow for more interactive experience, 
and less passive connection such as traditional in-situ or 
online content delivery. Beyond mobile AR, MR and VR, 
shall we start investigating about the phygital, a 
combination of physical and digital?  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
IAE-Nice (France); Maison des Sciences de l’Homme et 
de la Société Sud Est (MSHS Sud Est), University of Nice 
Sophia Antipolis; Auckland University of Technology (New 
Zealand); Dr Maggie Buxton, Dr Thomas Cochrane, Dr 
Max Schleser, Amanda B. Lees, and Pete Lipponen. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ahonen, T. (2011). Insiders’ guide to mobile. Chicago: 
TomiAhonen Consulting. 
 
[2] Alba, A. (2014). Virtual reality moves past gaming to sell 
travel 
destinations, 
hotels. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.nydailynews.com/news/world/virtual-reality-
moves-gaming-preview-travel-hotels-article-1.2038240 
[3] Bellini, H., Chen, W., et al. (2016). Virtual & Augmented 
Reality: Understanding the race for the next computing 
platform. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://360.gs.com/gs/portal/home/fdk/?st=1&n=%2Fportal%
2Fannouncement%2Fresearch%2 
[4] Brown, T. (2008). Design thinking. Harvard Business Review. 
[5] Buxton, M. (2015). Practicing place with locative mobile 
technology, Whanake: The Pacific Journal of Community 
Development, 1(1), pp. 29-38. 
[6] Buxton, M. (2015). Tricksters, Technology and Spirit: 
Practising Place in Aotearoa-New Zealand. (PhD Thesis / 
AUT University) 
[7] Bystrom, K.-E., Barfield, W., and Hendrix, C. (1999). A 
Conceptual Model of the Sense of Presence in Virtual 
Environments. 
Presence: 
Teleoperators 
and 
Virtual 
Environments, 
8(2), 
pp. 
241–244. 
doi:10.1162/105474699566107 
[8] Cochrane, T., Narayan, V. and Antonczak, L. (2015). 
Designing Collaborative Learning  
Environments 
Using Mobile AR. In S. Carliner, C. Fulford & N. 
Ostashewski (Eds.),  
Proceedings of EdMedia: World 
Conference on Educational Media and Technology  
2015 
(pp. 1394-1402). Association for the Advancement of 
Computing in Education  
(AACE). 
[9] Deuze, M. (2012). Media life. Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
[10] Fonseca, D., Redondo, E., Puig, J., Villagrasa, S., and 
Navarro, I. (2014). Augmented and Geo-located information 
in architectural educational framework. 16th International 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction in Virtual, 
Augmented and Mixed Reality, R. Shumaker (Eds.). Human-
Computer Interaction, Part II, HCII 2014, LNCS, 8526, 15. 
[11] Fritz, F., Susperregui, A. and Linaza, M.T. (2005). Enhancing 
cultural 
tourism 
experiences 
with 
augmented 
reality 
technologies. in the 6th International Symposium on Virtual 
Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage VAST. Retrieved 
from 
http://public-repository.epoch-
net.org/publications/VAST2005/shortpapers/short2005.pdf 
[12] Garau, C. (2014). From Territory to Smartphone: Smart 
Fruition of Cultural Heritage for Dynamic Tourism 
Development, Planning Practice & Research, 29:3, pp. 238-
255. 
[13] Govers, M. and Go, F.M. (2005). Projected destination image 
online : website content analysis of pictures and text, 
Information Technology & Tourism, Vol. 7 pp. 73–89. 
[14] Han, D., Jung, T., and Gibson, A. (2014). Dublin AR: 
Implementing Augmented Reality (AR) in Tourism, In Xiang, 
Z. and Tussyadiah, I. (eds), Information and Communication 
Technologies in Tourism, Springer International Publishing, 
Wien, New York, pp. 511-523 (ISBN: 978-3-319-03972-5) 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-03973-2_37 
[15] Haque, U. (2004). Invisible topographies. In M. Rieser (Ed.), 
The mobile audience: Media art and mobile technologies, pp. 
245-252. New York, NY: Rodopi. 
[16] Hiles, D. (2001). Heuristic inquiry and transpersonal 
research. In proceedings of the CCPE Conference, London - 
October, 
2001. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.psy.dmu.ac.uk/drhiles/HIpaper.htm 
[17] Höllerer, T. H., and Feiner, S. K. (2004). Mobile augmented 
reality. In K. H & H. A (Eds.), Telegeoinformatics: Location-
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Based Computing Services, pp. 1–39. Taylor & Francis 
Books Ltd. 
[18] Jenkins, H., Ford, S., and Green, J. (2013). Spreadable media: 
Creating value and meaning in a networked culture 
postmillennial pop. New York, NY: NYU Press. 
[19] Kahl, C. H., da Fonseca, L. H., and Witte, E. H. (2009). 
Revisiting 
creativity 
research: 
An 
investigation 
of 
contemporary approaches. Creativity Research Journal, 21 
(1), pp. 1-5. 
[20] Maeda, J. (2016). #DesignInTech Report 2016. Kleiner 
Perkins 
Cauﬁeld 
& 
Byers, 
(2016). 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.slideshare.net/kleinerperkins/design-in-tech-
report-2016 
[21] Manovich, L. (2002). The Poetics of Augmented Space. 
Retrieved from http://manovich.net/index.php/projects/the-
poetics-of-augmented-space 
[22] Matsuda, K. (2010). Domesti/city: The dislocated home in 
augmented space. Master’s thesis,  University 
of 
London, 
London, 
United 
Kingdom. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://km.cx/projects/domesticity-the-dislocated-home-in-
augmented-space/ 
[23] Matsuda, K. (2015, September 23). Keiichi Matsuda: Future 
ways of living [Video file].  
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8xq5oMwgaug&t=832s 
[24] Matsuda, K. (2016, May 19). Hyperreality [Video file]. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YJg02ivYzSs 
[25] Metz, R. (2015). Four Important Things to Expect in Virtual 
Reality 
in 
2016. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.technologyreview.com/news/545011/four-
important-things-to-expect-in-virtual-reality-in-2016/ 
[26] Noble, I., Bestley, R. (2011) Visual Research: An 
introduction to research methodologies in graphic design. 
London, UK: AVA Publishing. 
[27] Noh, Z., Sunar, M. and Pan, Z. (2009). A review on 
augmented 
reality 
for 
virtual 
heritage 
system, 
4th 
International Confrence on E-Learning and Games: Learning 
by Playing. Game-based Education System Design and 
Development, pp. 50-61. 
[28] Nonaka, I., and Konno, N. (1998). The concept of" ba": 
Building a foundation for knowledge creation. California 
management review, 40(3), pp. 40-54. 
[29] Papetti, C. and Miranda, S. (2014). Les nouveaux paradigmes 
du tourisme mobiquitaire (The New Paradigms of the 
Mobiquity Tourism), Hors-série de la revue Mondes du 
tourisme, décembre. 
[30] Petkova, V. I., and Ehrsson, H. H. (2008). Being There 
Together: Experiments on Presence in Virtual Environments. 
PloS one, 3(12). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003832 
[31] Rahman, N. H. A., Khalifah, Z., and Ismail, H. N. (2016). The 
role of sensory experiences in appreciating the cultural 
heritage attractions. Tourism, Leisure and Global Change, 3, 
TOC-117. 
[32] Rieser, M. (2004). Overview. In M. Rieser (Ed.), The mobile 
audience: Media art and mobile technologies. New York, NY: 
Rodopi. 
[33] Robertson, R. (1995). Glocalization: Time-Space and 
Homogeneity-Heterogeneity, in Mike Featherstone, Scott 
Lash and Roland Robertson (eds.), Global Modernities, pp. 
25-44. London: Sage. 
[34] Schleser, M. and Turnbridge T. (2013). 24 Frames 24 Hours. 
Ubiquity: The Journal of Pervasive Media 2 (1&2). 
[35] Stedman, R. C. (2003). Sense of place and forest science: 
Toward a program of quantitative research. Forest Science, 
49(6), pp. 822-829. 
[36] Sussmann, S., and Vanhegan, H. (2000). Virtual Reality and 
the Tourism Product Substitution or Complement? In 
Proceedings of the Eighth European Conference on 
Information Systems (ECIS), pp. 1077–1083. Vienna, 
Austria: Wirtschaftsuniversität Wien. 
[37] Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, 
meaning, and identity. Cambridge university press. 
[38] Witte, E. H., and Kahl, C. H. (2008). Small Group 
Performance: reinterpreting proximate evaluations from an 
ultimate perspective. 
[39] Yovcheva, Z., Buhalis, D., Gatzidis, C. (2012). Smartphone 
Augmented Reality Applications for Tourism, e-Review of 
Tourism Research (eRTR), Vol. 10, pp 63-66, No. 2, 2012. 
 
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-572-2
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

