 
 
 
A Modern Quality of Service Evaluation Approach of VOLTE Calls Focused on Packet 
Delays 
İsmail Yıldız 
Business Intelligence Solutions – Digital Analytics 
Turkcell Technology R&D Inc. 
Istanbul, Turkey 
e-mail: ismail.yildiz@turkcell.com.tr
 
Abstract — Long-Term Evolution (LTE) coverage in 
mobile networks is becoming more widespread day by day. 
As a consequence of this situation, Voice over LTE (VOLTE) 
calls in LTE networks have increasingly become more 
important compared to traditional Circuit Switch (CS) voice 
calls. Also, smartphone usage grew rapidly in the last few 
years and VOLTE support is a vital feature of smartphones. 
Additionally, Mobile Network Operators (MNO) tend to 
promote VOLTE service since VOLTE technology has lower 
operational costs than traditional voice service in the long 
run and promises improved sound quality. Although there 
are several straightforward Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) such as call drop rate, jitter, packet delay, packet loss 
rate, etc. in order to measure VOLTE quality of service, 
evaluation of the measured values and revealing real 
perceived quality of service by subscribers is complex. 
Experienced VOLTE quality of service value depends on 
many factors. Determining factors and their significance is 
central to measuring and improving perceived VOLTE 
quality of service. This paper deals with the evaluation 
problem and proposes a new approach to evaluate perceived 
VOLTE quality of service experienced by subscribers. 
Keywords— Expected quality of VOLTE call; evaluation 
approach; packet delay;  user experience; perceived quality. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
It is generally believed that communication between 
people far away started with smoke in the very early ages. 
Centuries later, the telegraph appeared as a crucial 
invention in peoples’ lives. In the following decades, other 
new types of communication devices and technologies 
were invented such as the telephone, the radio, the 
computer, the Internet and the cell phone. Finally, 
smartphones were produced and have become widespread, 
which was the beginning of a new smart era. In this era, 
people increasingly tend to use smartphones as small 
pocket computers and access the Internet with their mobile 
devices mostly using the Global System for Mobile 
Communications (GSM) network. 
In the smartphone era, almost every person owns a 
smartphone in order to increase their life quality. Some 
people use it for its original purpose, which is connectivity, 
but now smartphones have become more than that: they 
can be used for social media, navigation, gaming, business, 
and even health. People can also customize their 
smartphones according to their needs. 
Intensive smartphone and mobile application usage fall 
short in fulfilling people’s download and upload needs. As 
a result, 4G or LTE technologies have been proposed for 
data access. Since LTE is an advanced technology and 
allows higher data consumption and speed, traditional 
voice calls became less important. Instead, VOLTE 
technology was invented which can enable better sound 
quality. VOLTE is a Packet Switch based technology, 
which differs from the traditional Circuit Switch voice 
infrastructure. 
VOLTE is becoming more popular day by day. MNO 
companies also encourage customers to use VOLTE for 
better user experience and lower infrastructural costs in the 
long term. VOLTE holds the promise of providing users 
with clear, high-definition call quality combined with 
much greater spectral efficiency and capacity compared 
with conventional circuit-switched calls over legacy 2G 
and 3G networks [4]. This means that it is easier for a 
caller not only to hear clearly what the person at the other 
end of the line is saying, but also to detect their tone of 
voice, giving a much richer overall experience. Global 
System for Mobile Communications Association (GSMA) 
announced that, by February 2018, 127 Mobile Network 
Operators in 63 different countries launched the VOLTE 
service. Also, there are more than 1218 mobile phone 
models that support and are ready to use VOLTE services 
[5]. 
There are several straightforward KPIs including call 
drop rate, jitter, packet delay, packet loss rate measuring 
VOLTE quality of service. But evaluation of measured 
values and hitting perceived quality of service by 
subscribers is difficult and these KPIs are not sufficient by 
themselves. Additionally, there is no globally accepted 
standard process for this purpose. 
In this paper, the problem of VOLTE quality of service 
evaluation is discussed in detail. Previous market insights 
and measured values are combined in order to propose a 
modern approach to solve this problem. Finally, an 
expected call delay approach is devised and the approach 
is tested, which leads to successful results.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In 
Section II, we present the problem definition, including 
supportive figures. In Section III, exploratory data analysis 
and data preparation are performed. In Section IV, factors 
affecting experienced call delay by GSM subscribers are 
investigated in detail. Finally, our work is concluded in 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
Section V and future directions are discussed in Section 
VI. 
II. PROBLEM DEFINITION 
As VOLTE technology is becoming more widespread 
and gradually replaces traditional voice service, measuring 
VOLTE and improving quality of service has become a 
standard requirement for GSM companies. In fact, the 
traditional approach that is measuring call drop numbers 
and rates is still valid, but it does not provide continuous 
scoring of perceived quality of service. Since a call is 
either dropped or it succeeds, there is nothing to measure 
between these two extreme sides. Therefore, call drop is 
not considered in the scope of this study.  
The Mean Opinion Score (MOS) method is another 
voice quality scoring method, which has been used for 
decades. In MOS method, subjects judge and score the 
quality of voice ranging from 1 (lowest quality) to 5 
(highest quality). An average MOS value is derived from 
individual subject scorings. However, using the MOS 
method in the telecom industry has a limitation, namely, it 
is unclear what threshold values should be applied to 
identify problems or determine acceptability [3]. Which 
MOS value is good, or good enough? It is difficult to find 
the correct threshold value. 
VOLTE technology is a packet switching based 
technology so, generally, KPIs used in data service are also 
valid for VOLTE service. The most commonly used KPIs 
for measuring VOLTE quality of service are jitter, packet 
loss ratio and packet delay during a VOLTE call [1]. 
Packet delay, which is also called latency in some 
resources, is the total time it takes a VOLTE packet to 
travel from a source location to a destination location. 
Jitter is a measure of fluctuations in packet delays during a 
VOLTE call. Lastly, packet loss ratio is the ratio of the 
number of packets that are completely lost and never 
reached the destination versus the total number of packets 
sent [8]. 
Since networking has improved over time and VOLTE 
is an evolved technology, packet losses, and jitter 
problems are handled successfully in modern networks. 
But packet delays still remain a big issue because packets 
must physically travel from a source location to a 
destination location and an acceptable travel time should 
be guaranteed. Among these three basic KPIs, packet delay 
is used in the scope of this study in order to model user 
experience. 
In the remaining part of the article, we use the term call 
delay to denote the average of all packets’ delay belonging 
to a single VOLTE call. Although it is easy to define and 
calculate call delay, it is not so easy to evaluate measured 
call delay values. It is a complicated issue to make 
inferences from measured call delay values. As an 
example, is the measured experience of 300 milliseconds 
call delay acceptable? What about 250 milliseconds call 
delay? Is it a good experience or bad experience?  
The main problem is that evaluation of measured 
values (such as 300 milliseconds) is not straightforward 
and there is no globally accepted reference point. In fact, 
worldwide references may also not give us the real picture, 
because each VOLTE network of each Mobile Network 
Operator 
has 
its 
own 
parameters, 
settings 
and 
establishment. In order to overcome this evaluation 
problem, one common methodology is comparing 
individual subscriber’s call delay figures with the whole 
network’s averages.  
Fig. 1 shows the average call delay values measured in 
Turkcell mobile network in November 2017. Because of 
market competition and commercial limitations, exact call 
delay values cannot be revealed. Instead, values are 
multiplied by a private multiplier and general trend is 
depicted. The unit of multiplied call delay values is defined 
as “D” in the remaining part of this paper. Regarding Fig. 
1, average call delay values vary daily and it is difficult to 
interpret this figure in terms of experience evaluation. 
Comparing individual subscriber’s call delay figures with 
the whole network’s figure will be a misleading approach. 
 
Fig. 1. Daily average call delay trend of the whole network 
Another common methodology is the location-based 
comparison, where individual subscriber’s call delay 
figures are compared to his/her city or district’s call delay 
figure. As we mentioned previously, these simple 
methodologies may result in wrong interpretations. 
VOLTE experience should be evaluated call by call and 
generalizations will lead to incorrect results. 
III. EXPLORATORY DATA ANALYSIS & DATA 
PROCESSING 
 
VOLTE call analysis data set is selected as November 
2017 when VOLTE usage maturated as a major service for 
Turkcell in Turkey. Fig. 2 shows the daily trend of 
VOLTE call numbers. Monthly total number of calls is 
302.673.551 which is pretty huge data. 
 
Fig. 2. Total VOLTE call count trend 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
Since this article is focused on continuous VOLTE call 
scoring and detection of affecting factors, all VOLTE calls 
should not be directly included in the detail analysis set. 
Firstly, VOLTE calls targeted to other Mobile Network 
Operator and originated from other Mobile Network 
Operator should be eliminated because other operator’s 
network settings may be different.  Secondly, dropped 
calls should be eliminated because they present bad 
extreme experience and may mislead the study. Fig. 3 
shows VOLTE call numbers daily trend after this 
reduction and monthly total number of calls became 
178.350.133. 
 
Fig. 3. Reduced VOLTE call count trend 
 
As a rule of basic statistics, outliers are detected and 
eliminated from data set. In order to eliminate outliers, first 
standard deviation (σ) is calculated as 1.571,33 D and 
mean (μ) is calculated as 3.286,77 D. Values greater than 
μ+3σ and less than μ-3σ are accepted as outliers and 
removed from data set. Fig. 4 shows VOLTE call numbers 
daily trend after outlier elimination and monthly total 
number of calls became 174.783.131. It seems that the 
general trend behavior did not change after filtering 
operations. 
 
Fig. 4. Outlier eliminated VOLTE call count trend 
Fig. 5 shows call delay histogram, which can be 
assumed as a normal distribution. 
 
Fig. 5. Call delay histogram 
IV. INVESTIGATION OF FACTORS 
In this section of the article, investigations of various 
factors that are assumed to affect perceived VOLTE 
quality of service of subscriber are performed. 
First, the distance between caller subscriber and called 
subscriber must be the dominant factor affecting 
transmitted packet delay. By nature, data packets 
propagate physically through the network and arrive at the 
end point. The distance is assumed as geographical 
distance as the crow flies between attached base stations of 
caller subscriber and called subscriber. This distance is 
named as call distance in the remaining of this article and 
it is measured in kilometers. 
Fig. 6 shows the average call delay correlation analysis 
with the distance between attached base stations of caller 
subscriber and called subscriber. Not surprisingly, average 
call delay and call distance are strongly correlated with 
Pearson r coefficient equal to 0.71 [6]. So, it is proved that 
distance between attached base stations of caller subscriber 
and called subscriber is a major factor affecting 
experienced call delay.  
Correlation analysis and visualization depicted are 
performed using Python’s Pandas, Seaborn, Matplotlib and 
Numpy packages. 
 
Fig. 6. Correlation and effect of call distance 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
Second, audio codec used may be another important 
factor affecting experienced call delay in November 2017. 
Fig. 7 shows the average call delay trend of AMR and 
AMR Wideband codec types. In Turkcell VOLTE 
infrastructure, these two types of codec are used for 
VOLTE service. Average call delay of AMR Wideband 
codec is absolutely higher than AMR codec. Therefore, 
codec type is another factor affecting experienced call 
delay. 
 
 
Fig. 7. Effect of audio codec used 
Another factor may be the duration of VOLTE call. 
Since call duration is continuous data set, statistical 
analysis is performed and percentile results are given in 
Table I [2]. Call durations divided into three main groups 
as Short, Normal, Long using division points at 33rd 
percentile and 66th percentile. 
TABLE I.  
CALL DURATION PERCENTILES  
Percentile 
Call Duration (Sec) 
Minimum 
0,5 
1th percentile 
4,1 
25th percentile 
21,9 
33rd percentile 
27,4 
50th percentile 
38,5 
66th percentile 
57,2 
75th percentile 
77,8 
99th percentile 
890,4 
Maximum 
7.235,1 
 
 
Fig. 8 shows the call delay trend of clustered call 
durations in November 2017. In this figure, the first 
finding is that short calls significantly has lower average 
call delay than other two clusters. Long calls have higher 
average call delay than normal calls in general. However, 
there are some fluctuations and in a few days normal calls 
have a bit higher or close averages than long calls. 
Although there are few extreme cases, call duration is 
positively correlated with call delay, so call duration 
category is a factor affecting experienced call delay. 
 
Fig. 8. Effect of call duration category 
Mobile devices that are mostly smartphones vary in 
terms of hardware features such as CPU, storage, memory, 
camera. These physical features affect the responsiveness 
of the phone in other words user experienced speed when 
some action is triggered. Similar to traditional computers 
mobile devices have their own operating system. Most 
widespread ones are IOS and Android. Also, some other 
less used operating systems exist such as Windows 8, 
Symbian, etc.  
Since operating system controls every process executed 
in a mobile device, type of operating system may be 
another factor affecting VOLTE quality of service. Fig. 9 
shows the average call delay trend of VOLTE calls 
grouped by mobile device operating system of caller 
subscriber in November 2017. Less used operating systems 
are grouped as other in statistical analysis. As depicted in 
the figure, Android operating systems have minimum 
average call delay almost every day whereas other 
operating systems have the higher call delay. Other 
operating systems have higher average call delay than IOS. 
It should also be noted that other operating systems’ 
average call delay trend is not steady and is very 
fluctuating. Therefore, mobile device operating system of 
caller subscriber is a good factor in experienced call delay. 
 
 
Fig. 9. Effect of mobile device operating system of caller subscriber 
Similar to mobile device operating system of caller 
subscriber, mobile device operating system of called 
subscriber should be another variable to be investigated.  
Fig. 10 shows the average call delay trend of VOLTE calls 
grouped by mobile device operating system of called 
subscriber in November 2017. As depicted in the trend 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
graph, mobile device operating system of called subscriber 
is also determining factor in experienced call delay. 
 
Fig. 10. Effect of mobile device operating system of called subscriber 
During the investigation of factors, it is revealed that 
the more mobile subscribers are the worse quality of 
service they experience. Fig. 11 shows the call delay trend 
of VOLTE calls grouped by caller subscriber mobility in 
November 2017. It is obvious that VOLTE calls of moving 
subscribers have higher average call delay than VOLTE 
calls of not moving subscribers. Therefore, the mobility of 
caller subscriber is an indirect but a significant factor 
affecting experienced call delay. 
 
Fig. 11. Effect of mobility of caller subscriber 
Since a call is two ended concept, if the mobility of 
caller subscriber affects VOLTE experience, it is expected 
that the mobility of called subscriber should also affect it.  
 
Fig. 12. Effect of mobility of called subscriber 
Fig. 12 shows the call delay trend of VOLTE calls 
grouped by called subscriber mobility in November 2017. 
The average call delay of moving subscriber is apparently 
fluctuating. But there is no doubt that VOLTE calls of 
moving called subscribers have higher average call delay 
than VOLTE calls of not moving called subscribers. As a 
consequence, the mobility of called subscriber is an 
indirect but a determining factor affecting experienced call 
delay. 
V. PROPOSAL OF NEW APPROACH 
 
In the previous section, we have proved that 
experienced call delay depends on numerous factors which 
are: 
 Audio codec used (AMR, AMR Wideband) 
 Call duration category (Short, Normal, Long) 
 Mobile device operating system of caller subscriber 
(Android, IOS, Other) 
 Mobile 
device 
operating 
system 
of 
called 
subscriber (Android, IOS, Other) 
 Mobility of caller subscriber (Moving, Not 
Moving) 
 Mobility of called subscriber (Moving, Not 
Moving) 
When VOLTE quality of service experience is 
simplified down to call level, similar to data sessions [7], 
each call has unique characteristics formed by 6 major 
factors mentioned above. In other words, either AMR or 
AMR Wideband is used in VOLTE call. Similarly, caller 
subscriber is either moving from one point to another point 
or is not moving (remain in a fixed location) during a 
VOLTE call.  
TABLE II.  
SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS 
VOLTE 
calls 
 
Audio 
codec 
Call 
duration 
category 
Mobile 
device 
operating 
system of 
caller 
subscriber 
Mobile 
device 
operating 
system of 
called 
subscriber 
Mobility 
of caller 
subscrib
er 
Mobility of 
called 
subscriber 
VOLTE 
call 1 
AMR 
Short 
IOS 
Android 
Moving 
Moving 
VOLTE 
call 2 
AMR 
Short 
Android 
Other 
Not 
moving 
Moving 
VOLTE 
call 3 
AMR 
Short 
Other 
IOS 
Moving 
Moving 
VOLTE 
call 4 
AMR 
Medium 
IOS 
Android 
Not 
moving 
Moving 
VOLTE 
call 5 
AMR 
Medium 
Android 
Other 
Moving 
Moving 
VOLTE 
call 6 
AMR 
WB 
Medium 
Other 
IOS 
Not 
moving 
Not moving 
VOLTE 
call 7 
AMR 
WB 
Long 
IOS 
Android 
Moving 
Not moving 
VOLTE 
call 8 
AMR 
WB 
Long 
Android 
Other 
Not 
moving 
Not moving 
 
Table II shows 9 different VOLTE call characteristics 
as an example. Since the characteristic of a VOLTE call is 
formed by 6 major factors, we reach 324 (3x3x3x3x2x2) 
possible combinations, therefore 324 distinct VOLTE call 
characteristics. 
Each of the 324 distinct session characteristics has its 
own conditions, dependencies and stories. We have come 
up with the concept of Expected Call Delay that is ideal 
delay value of any VOLTE call based on call 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
 
 
characteristics. The formula for Expected Call Delay is 
devised as follows: 
 Expected Call Delay = Ki * Log (CD)                     (1) 
 
where Ki is a constant value for related VOLTE call 
characteristic and CD is call distance. Call distance is the 
measured distance between two parties of VOLTE call, 
where actual coordinates of subscribers’ attached base 
stations are taken into consideration. For each VOLTE call 
characteristic, a detailed statistical analysis is performed 
and constant K values are calculated separately. Basically, 
successful 
VOLTE 
call 
samples 
are 
taken 
into 
consideration. Actual call delay and call distance values 
can be measured from these samples. Then constant Ki 
values are calculated according to the proposed equation 
after 
basic 
statistic 
operations 
including 
outlier 
elimination.  So 324 different K values are prepared for the 
equation. 
 
For any VOLTE Call, Expected Call Delay is 
calculated by measuring the distance between calling and 
called subscribers, taking logarithm and then multiplying 
by related constant K value. 
 
In order to test the success of proposed VOLTE quality 
of service evaluation approach, which is Expected Call 
Delay concept, real subscriber complaints are used as test 
set. Our test method was that whether the proposed 
approach could detect unhappy subscribers or not. Happy 
subscribers generally do not give feedback. In other words, 
happy subscribers do not tend to call GSM call center and 
thank for high level of quality of service. In the test, all 
subscribers who made a complaint about voice call related 
problems are taken into account. In order to make a correct 
correlation analysis, only VOLTE calls of the complaining 
subscribers before actual complaint time are included in 
the test set.  
 
During the analysis, expected call delay values, 
according to the proposed approach, are calculated for 
each VOLTE call in the test set and compared with 
measured actual call delay values. Then, each call is 
classified as good, fair and bad experience based on the 
comparison of its actual call delay value and its expected 
call delay value. Table III shows classification details 
where ECD is calculated expected call delay value and 
ACD is measured actual call delay value of the related call. 
TABLE III.  
CALL CLASSIFICATIONS 
Rule 
Class 
ACD > ECD + (%5 * ECD)  
Bad 
ECD + %5 * ECD ≥ ACD ≥ ECD - %5 * ECD 
Fair 
ECD - %5 * ECD > ACD 
Good 
 
 
 
Results showed that our approach classified %87.77 of 
the calls as Bad experience, % 9.41 of the calls as Fair 
experience and %2.82 of the calls as Good experience. 
Therefore, 
87.77% 
of 
individual 
subscribers 
who 
complained about voice calls have been classified as Bad 
experience within complaint period. As a result, it can be 
said that the proposed Expected Call Delay approach is 
successful in evaluating subscriber perceived quality of 
service and detecting Bad experience. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a detailed analysis on VOLTE 
quality of service measures and evaluation problem. Based 
on analysis results, a new concept of expected call delay 
was proposed and a formula was created. 
The solution was easy to use and very practical in 
detecting individual subscriber’s VOLTE quality of 
service perception. Initial success rate (which is 87.77%) 
of the expected call delay concept and formula to reflect 
the subscriber’s perceived VOLTE service experience was 
very high. 
Currently, the solution is applied to evaluate VOLTE 
service experience of a sample set of subscribers in 
Turkcell and an initial feedback on our solution is very 
positive. 
In the future, there are several factors to be investigated 
whether they affect customer experience on VOLTE or 
not. Firstly, weather condition especially the average 
temperature and temperature changes during a day may be 
an important factor. Secondly, eliminated VOLTE calls 
originated from or terminated by other Mobile Network 
Operators 
should be 
investigated. 
Although 
other 
operator’s network is another network and it has its own 
differential settings, this investigation may give some clues 
about customer VOLTE quality of service perception. 
Thirdly, the business of base station and attached cell of 
caller subscriber may be another factor. The simultaneous 
number of active VOLTE call at the same time may act as 
a factor. Similarly, the business of base station and 
attached cell of called subscriber may be investigated. 
Lastly, this study is conducted on one month’s data. 
Although hundreds of millions of VOLTE calls are 
analyzed and a very strong proposal is formed, analyzing 
one or two year’s data may give us more detailed results 
and idea about seasonality effect on VOLTE quality of 
service. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I am thankful to Turkcell as a visionary company that 
significantly supports R&D studies. Additionally, special 
thanks to my managers for their encouragement for 
performing this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R.Tabany and Chris G. Guy, “An End-to-End QoS performance 
evaluation of VoLTE in 4G,” 10th International Conference on 
Wireless and Mobile Communications, ICWMC 2014. 
[2] M. J. Dixon and F. J. Massey, Introduction to Statistical Analysis, 
McGraw Hill, 1957. 
[3] R. C. Streijl, S. Winkler, and D. S. Hands, “Mean opinion score 
(MOS) revisited: methods and applications, limitations and 
alternatives,” Multimedia Systems, vol. 22, pp. 213-227, 2016. 
[4] VoLTE faces up to the call quality challenge, 2016. Retrieved from 
https://continualexperience.com/volte-faces-up-to-the-call-quality-
challenge/ 
[5] Realising revenue potential with Voice over LTE, 2018. Retrieved 
from https://www.gsma.com/futurenetworks/technology/volte/ 
[6] N. R. Draper and H. Smith, Applied Regression Analysis, Wiley & 
Sons, 1998. 
[7] İ.Yıldız and S. Aydeniz, “Throughput evaluation approach for 
GSM networks,” 14th International Conference on Wireless and 
Mobile Communications, ICWMC 2017, pp. 1-6. 
[8] B. Kiziltan, M. Khan, and F. M. Velotti, “Voice over IP - WLAN, 
3G and LTE issues,” Wireless Network, Chalmers 2011, pp. 1-7. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

