High-Level Energy Saving Strategies  
for Mobile Location-Based Services on Android Devices 
 
Wolfgang Narzt 
Department of Business Informatics – Software Engineering 
Johannes Kepler University Linz 
Linz, Austria 
wolfgang.narzt@jku.at 
 
 
Abstract— The use of mobile location-based services (LBS) on 
modern smartphones, especially continuous utilization of GPS, 
significantly reduces the operating times of batteries. 
Considering the fact that the exhausting exploitation of power 
for determining the current location is unnecessary for various 
situations (e.g., when the device is not being moved), several 
high-level energy saving strategies can be developed in order to 
extend the batteries’ operating times. This paper sketches the 
architecture for high-level energy saving strategies for LBS on 
Android devices encapsulated in a social-web application 
(“Spotnick”) and illustrates their positive results. 
Keywords - Energy Saving Strategies; Location-Based 
Services; Android; Spotnick. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A manifold of location-based services (LBS) utilizing 
GPS, cellular network triangulation, or WLAN SSID 
mapping have evolved as more or less beneficial apps 
available for modern smartphones. Built-in positioning 
technology for location determination in the mobile devices 
is considered state-of-the-art and supports its consumers to 
find a path from A to B, recognize things around one’s own 
position, record your training routes, or exchange current 
whereabouts with your friends. LBS are therefore considered 
an 
indispensable 
paradigm 
in 
mobile 
computing 
environments.  
Nevertheless, continuous use of LBS still faces a 
considerable drawback in terms of batteries’ operating times, 
which are likely to be reduced to less than 10% compared to 
the operating times in standby mode or to a maximum of 12 
hours depending on the type of device (please, refer to the 
exact measurements in the following sections). In addition, 
the devices generate substantial heat, which is not always 
perceived as pleasing. In most cases, the exhausting use of 
GPS is the main reason for draining the battery. There is 
evidence on this statement due to several experiments, which 
we have conducted in order to figure out the energy guzzlers 
in LBS (see Section V). Naturally, the transmission of 
packets via the cellular network or WLAN also impacts 
operating times. The reduction of data transmission is not 
subject of this survey, though. 
So, our main research issue for mobile LBS was to find a 
way to extend the batteries’ operating times of smartphones 
for continuous active operation (i.e., in foreground and in 
background mode). Of course, there cannot be a general 
answer or method to this issue because LBS strongly differ 
in terms of required accuracy and/or latency of reaction 
times. If a service e.g., claims permanent use of GPS due to 
exact location-based examinations, there is hardly any 
chance to develop a strategy for energy saving. Thus, we 
define a family of LBS applications with constraints to be 
fulfilled in order to be suitable to apply the energy saving 
strategies, which we propose in this paper. The constraints 
are defined as follows: 
(i) The service is continuously operational, i.e., the 
position of the device must be determined both in foreground 
and in background mode. (ii) When in foreground mode, the 
best possible position of one’s own device is required. (iii) 
The service dynamically offers location-based points of 
interest (POIs), which have to be triggered, i.e., their content 
displayed, an alarm set off, an external service initiated, etc., 
when the device reaches spatial proximity to them. (iv) An 
observation mechanism is included within a network of 
participating clients, i.e., the service shows the current 
whereabouts of other floating devices. (v) When in 
observation mode (presuming that there is no permanent 
monitoring station), the best possible positions of the 
monitored devices are required. 
This means, that within a distributed LBS environment 
an exact position is only needed when the application is in 
foreground, observed by another client or close to POIs. For 
the remaining time (which represents the major part during 
operation in many cases, e.g., when the device is in 
background mode, not moving, not observed, or generally in 
a static position in the office or at night times, etc.), less 
energy consuming positioning methods (e.g., cellular 
network triangulation) could be used in order to extend the 
batteries’ operating times. Hence, we propose to avoid 
utilization of GPS as often as possible and therefore present 
strategies for Android devices for implementing this 
paradigm (with the drawback of less accurate position 
determination in background mode and latency for the 
reactivation of GPS when required). The strategies are 
encapsulated in a social-web app named “Spotnick”, which 
is available on Google Play and on the App Store, and 
provides the measuring results included in this paper.  
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 deals with 
selected points of state-of-the-art methods and technology. 
Section 3 gives an insight into the proposed energy saving 
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

strategies. Section 4 sketches the test scenarios and 
measuring metrics. Section 5 provides figures and measured 
results and finally, Section 6 concludes the paper and 
prospects future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Investigations concerning energy consumption for 
location-based services on mobile devices have been the 
focal point of research in various scientific and industry labs 
[2][3][8][12]. Bareth and Kupper [5] e.g., have confirmed 
our experiments and derived findings about energy 
consumption of the different positioning technologies 
available on smartphones (see Table I), where they have 
measured the energy consumption for GPS, WiFi-, and cell-
based positioning techniques. 
TABLE I.  
PROPERTIES OF POSITIONING TECHNIQUES [5] 
Technology 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Energy 
A-GPS 
10m 
95% 
6.616Ws 
WiFi 
50m 
90% 
2.852Ws 
Cell-Id  
5km 
65% 
1.013Ws 
 
Generally, there are three ways to face the draining 
problems: (1) directly on a hardware-related level, where 
ameliorations are achieved e.g., by considering Kalman 
filters [4], (2) by several software-based and application-
related high-level strategies utilizing available SDK 
functions, software-architectures and framework [1][6][7][9] 
and (3) with hybrid approaches using additional (less energy 
consuming) sensor technology (e.g., accelerometers) and 
context-based movement detection algorithms as a substitute 
or an extension of functionality [11][13]. 
As the strategy described in this paper can be classified to 
approach (2), let us find out how similar methodologies 
work: Kjaergaard et al. [10] e.g., have developed a context-
based model which tries to estimate and predict system 
conditions and movements in order to calculate a schedule 
for utilization of GPS. In a way, our approach can be 
compared to that, trying to schedule different positioning 
techniques due to system states (e.g., device is not moving). 
Although, the authors have succeeded in significantly saving 
energy using their high-level strategies using a Nokia N95, 
we try to give a more up-to-date approach using a less 
complex algorithm and utilizing enhanced positioning 
techniques on an Android device. 
III. 
ENERGY SAVING STRATEGIES 
The energy saving strategies for our approach are settled 
on a high application-oriented level, cleverly using, not using 
and switching between system functions and operations 
provided by standard SDKs. They are not based on 
hardware-related optimization attempts.  
In principle, the strategy aims at avoiding usage of GPS 
whenever applicable. Instead, it uses cellular- or WiFi-based 
positioning or region monitoring (a technique which utilizes 
the WLAN and Cell-Id handover functions of the phone in 
order to detect a potential movement) and continuously tries 
to switch between those operation modes according to 
particular events. Thus, the architecture results in a Finite 
State Machine (FSM) and has to take decisions for state 
conversions between those states built upon the following 
properties and its values: 
 
1. Application mode: the app is either in foreground 
mode (f) (the user looks at it) or in background 
mode (b) (the app is idle). 
2. Movement: the user/device is either moving (m) or 
stationary (s) (not moving). 
3. Observation mode: the device is either observed (o) 
or unobserved (u). 
4. POIs nearby: points of interest for a device/user are 
either near (n) (i.e., within a distinct radius) or 
distant (d). 
 
Thus, there are four properties having two values each, 
which makes 16 different states, strictly speaking (see Table 
II). Most of them can be combined, though, because it is 
irrelevant for the strategy if the device is moving, observed 
or POIs are near or not when the app is in foreground mode 
(i.e., states 1 to 8 can be combined to one). In this state, the 
most accurate position is required. Also states 9 to 11 can be 
combined to one state, in which GPS is likely to be turned 
on, because the device is either being observed while in 
background mode (states 9 and 10) or a POI is near, the 
approach to it must be exactly determined (state 11). From a 
technical point of view, those two combinations of states 1 to 
8 and 9 to 11 can be merged, once more, for they require the 
best possible position as a common characteristic. State 12 is 
unique: the app is in background mode, the device is 
moving, but not observed or any POIs near. This means that 
nobody takes notice of the app at that moment. Positioning 
must continue, though (by an inaccurate technique), in order 
to reactivate GPS at spatial proximity to a POI (which 
exactly requires to be triggered, transferred, etc.; for a deeper 
insight into location-triggered processes see [14]) within the 
inaccuracy range of the used positioning method. Finally, 
states 13 to 16 can again be combined to one state where 
region monitoring is used in order to recover from an idle 
mode where the app is in the background and not moving 
(observation and POIs are irrelevant at that state). 
TABLE II.  
DIFFERENT STATES OF THE FSM 
 
No. 
App. 
mode 
Move 
ment 
Obs. 
mode 
POIs 
near 
 
No. 
App. 
mode 
Move 
ment 
Obs. 
mode 
POIs 
near 
1. 
f 
m 
o 
n 
9. 
b 
m 
o 
n 
2. 
f 
m 
o 
d 
10. 
b 
m 
o 
d 
3. 
f 
m 
u 
n 
11. 
b 
m 
u 
n 
4. 
f 
m 
u 
d 
12. 
b 
m 
u 
d 
5. 
f 
s 
o 
n 
13. 
b 
s 
o 
n 
6. 
f 
s 
o 
d 
14. 
b 
s 
o 
d 
7. 
f 
s 
u 
n 
15. 
b 
s 
u 
n 
8. 
f 
s 
u 
d 
16. 
b 
s 
u 
d 
 
The consolidation of states reduces the complexity of the 
FSM to three states. Its state transitions are extractable from 
Table II, which is a simplified depiction of the concept, 
though; the actual implementation considers several details, 
which cannot be discussed here due to space limitations 
except the following (see Figure 1): 
239
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

When transiting to a state requiring high accuracy, we do 
not immediately turn on the GPS provider of the Android 
platform. We first check the accuracy value of the network 
provider (which both combines Cell- and WiFi-based 
positioning on Android systems). If this value is good (i.e., 
just a few meters inaccuracy, which refers to a WiFi-based 
determination), then there is no need to activate GPS, e.g., 
when residing within a building where GPS is unavailable, 
anyway. Only a high inaccuracy value triggers the GPS 
provider (see Figure 1). 
To turn GPS off again (and switch back to network 
positioning) several requirements have to comply: While 
moving, no other client must be observing and no POI must 
be near (i.e., within the inaccuracy radius of the network 
provider position). However, deactivation of GPS can also 
lead to a passive state where region monitoring is enabled 
(i.e., the app is completely idle until a system signal wakes it 
up again due to a network handover event among WLAN 
access points or cellular antennas). In order to detect a non-
moving device, we have defined a distance threshold ε, 
which may not be crossed, and a time interval t, which must 
be exceeded until we assume a stationary state where the 
device is not moving (see Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Flow Chart of Energy Saving Strategy (Simplified Excerpt) 
The FSM as described above including several technical 
and strategic tricks as indicated briefly but omitted in detail 
have been implemented as an intent service in the core of a 
social-web application named Spotnick. Spotnick comprises 
a friend finder component for a user’s Facebook friends with 
the opportunity of mutually perceiving their current 
whereabouts with just a few seconds delay. When looking at 
the app, users are able to view their own position and those 
of their observed friends with maximum accuracy 
(depending on the devices’ positioning capabilities). In 
addition, a user can trigger so called spots, i.e., self-set POIs 
that actively announce the arrival of a user on his Facebook 
wall when he reaches spatial proximity to it. Thus, Spotnick 
requires best possible accuracy when the app is in 
foreground mode, when observing friends or at regional 
closeness to spots. For the remaining time of usage (which 
we presume represents the major part of a day for a human 
being, e.g., when he/she is in his/her office or at night times), 
less accurate positioning methods comply in order to keep 
the app functional but not wasting energy. 
IV. 
METRICS AND TEST SCENARIOS 
In order to benchmark the energy saving qualities of our 
proposed methods using our app Spotnick, we have 
repetitively conducted a series of tests, which were organized 
as follows: All tests have been carried out sequentially on the 
same device, an HTC Desire HD with Android 2.3.5 as the 
operating system. All tests have used the same mini-app, 
which has recorded time stamps, WGS84 coordinates (if 
available) and the battery status via the Android SDK in 
regular time intervals.  
Although, we have not been able to provide exact equal 
test conditions for the particular tests due to cellular network 
fluctuations, arbitrary WLAN availability, or the speed or 
duration of our trips while moving through the city traffic, 
we have at least tried to provide similar test conditions: 
Naturally, we have always used the same phone settings (i.e., 
WLAN on, Bluetooth off, UMTS preferred but EDGE 
allowed, no phone calls, no messages, no Internet surfing, no 
other apps running, etc.) and have performed daily recurring 
procedures, i.e., driven the same route from home to the 
office, which is about 20km distance or approximately half 
an hour of driving time (depending on the traffic situation) 
twice a day (bidirectional). At home and in the office, the 
app has been used in foreground for a minute to see where 
the other clients are residing. While driving, our device has 
been observed by another app for a minute and also been 
used in foreground for a minute. Thus, every possible status 
permutation has been created at least once (app in 
foreground, in background, device moving, not moving, 
observed, not observed, while driving, when stationary, etc.). 
With these prerequisites, four test series have been 
conducted (using the mini-app for data recording):  
 
1. Standby Mode Test: This test should examine the 
practical operating time when no app is running. It 
serves as a reference. 
2. Full GPS Test: This test should examine the practical 
operating time when GPS is operational all the time. 
3. Full GPS and Data Transmission Test: Same as test 
number 2, including the transmission of a simple 
HTTP data package every minute (simulating the 
transmission of position data for monitoring mode). 
4. Spotnick Test: This test executed the app Spotnick, 
which contained the energy saving strategies 
described in the previous section. 
240
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

V. 
RESULTS 
According to the four test scenarios the measured results 
are as follows: Table III lists the parameters and typical 
results for one of the conducted Standby Mode Tests. The 
test was started on Jan. 31, 2013 and lasted for nearly 4 days 
until the battery was drained. All location services were 
turned off (i.e., no GPS and no cellular or WLAN-based 
positioning, however WLAN was turned on) and there was 
no data transmission during the test phase. We measured an 
average decline of 1,1% battery power per hour and took 
these values as a reference for the subsequent tests (i.e., the 
operating times are referred to as 100%). 
TABLE III.  
MEASUREMENT RESULTS  STANDBY MODE 
HTC Desire HD, Android 2.3.5 
 
Start Date 
Jan 31, 2013 
Duration 
3d 21h 36min 
Location Services 
off 
Avg. Decline 
1,1 % p.h. 
Data Transmission  none, WLAN on 
Rel. Duration 
100,0 % 
 
Figure 2 additionally illustrates the decline during the test 
phase. Please note, that the tests were not started at midnight 
– it is just the scale that starts at 0:00 for an easier 
comparison to the remaining tests. We do not recognize a 
clear linear decline of battery power, which we guess is due 
to varying environmental conditions, e.g., (wasted) attempts 
of the smartphone to connect to WLAN. However, we have 
not investigated these divergences in detail. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Battery Consumption in Standby Mode 
Test number 2 was the Full GPS Test. Table IV lists the 
parameters and results for a typical test run carried out on 
Feb. 4, 2013. Continuous use of GPS and network-based 
location determination (i.e., cellular triangulation and 
WLAN mappings) reduce the operating time down to 
approx. 9 hours (which is only 9,7% of the Standby Mode 
Test) with an average decline of 11% battery power per hour. 
TABLE IV.  
MEASUREMENT RESULTS  CONTINUOUS GPS 
HTC Desire HD, Android 2.3.5 
 
Start Date 
Feb 4, 2013 
Duration 
9h 07min 
Location Services 
GPS+Network 
Avg. Decline 
11,0 % p.h. 
Data Transmission  none, WLAN on 
Rel. Duration 
9,7 % 
 
Figure 3 illustrates this drastic decline of battery 
operating times. For a better impression of the difference the 
original scale in this graph is the same as in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Battery Consumption with continuous GPS 
However, it still goes worse. If we additionally transmit 
small HTTP packets in regular time intervals (i.e., every 
minute in this example) containing a timestamp, the current 
position and accuracy of the device’s positioning technique 
such that other observing clients may perceive the current 
whereabouts 
of 
this 
device 
(Full GPS and Data 
Transmission Test, see Table V and Figure 4) then we 
measure an operating time of only 7 hours or 7,5% compared 
to the Standby Mode Test. The battery loses power by 14,3% 
per hour!  
TABLE V.  
MEASUREMENT RESULTS GPS+HTTP REQUESTS 
HTC Desire HD, Android 2.3.5 
 
Start Date 
Feb 6, 2013 
Duration 
7h 00min 
Location Services 
GPS+Network 
Avg. Decline 
14,3 % p.h. 
Data Transmission  Every Minute 
Rel. Duration 
7,5 % 
 
The measured results of tests 2 and 3 tell their own tale. 
It is obvious that continuous utilization of GPS (and beyond 
that coupled with regular data transmission) decisively 
decrease batteries’ operating times and therefore the 
attractiveness of location-based services for mobile devices 
continuously using GPS.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Battery Consumption for continuous GPS usage and HTTP 
Requests every Minute 
241
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Hence, the results for our proposed high-level energy 
saving strategies presented in section III are vital (regarding 
the Spotnick Test). They are consolidated in Table VI. The 
test lasted 2 ½ days, which is 65,5% compared to the 
Standby Mode Test with an average decline of 1,6% of 
battery power per hour. 
TABLE VI.  
MEASUREMENT RESULTS SPOTNICK 
HTC Desire HD, Android 2.3.5 
 
Start Date 
Feb 17, 2013 
Duration 
2d 13h 16min 
Location Services 
Spotnick Strategy Avg. Decline 
1,6 % p.h. 
Data Transmission  On Pos. Update 
Rel. Duration 
65,5 % 
 
Figure 5 shows the corresponding graph. Considering the 
descent of the curve it is not clearly recognizable when the 
device was moving, stationary or observed, which applies to 
the fact that GPS was only used on demand (i.e., when the 
application was in foreground mode or the device had been 
observed – both situations occurred seldom during the tests 
and are therefore not evident in the graph). 
 
 
Figure 5.  Battery Consumption using Spotnick 
Considering the accuracy of the calculated positions, we 
refer to the successive two maps in Figures 6 and 7. Figure 6 
Figure 6. shows a clipping of the daily way from our office 
at the University of Linz (starting in the top right corner of 
the map) to a home location (beyond the left edge). The red 
line marks the detailed path measured by GPS (recorded at 
test number 2). It represents the most accurate path we can 
get from the used mobile device (HTC Desire HD). The blue 
line marks the path from the Spotnick app including all 
energy saving mechanisms presented in section III. In the 
urban areas (in the right half of the map) the recorded 
positions are clearly distinguishable from the GPS points, 
however, for this use-case still accurate enough to recognize 
an unambiguous movement along a particular city district. In 
the rural areas (in the left half of the map) the recorded 
positions were less in amount (because farther apart) and less 
accurate (because of rural cellular positioning which is 
imprecise due to distant antennas). Nevertheless, also here an 
unambiguous movement is recognizable for possible 
observers for the short period of time until the moving device 
is informed about being monitored and therefore turns on 
GPS with a slight latency. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Accuracy Comparison GPS (red) vs. Spotnick (blue) 
Figure 7 shows the switching on of GPS for a short 
period of time when a device is being monitored (see the 
blue line, clipped part out of Figure 6). Coming from the top 
right corner in this map, GPS has been turned on after the 
junction where the blue line diagonally crosses a block of 
buildings. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Detailed Accuracy Comparison GPS (red) vs. Spotnick (blue) 
Please note, that the blue line (even when GPS is on) is 
built upon just a few measured points, which is due to a 
minimum distance to be covered and a minimum period of 
time to be elapsed for a position to be recorded and 
transferred. At the very left edge of Figure 7 the observation 
phase has ended and GPS turned off again, which 
immediately results in a clear deviation in the successive 
points. 
VI. 
SUMMARY, CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Continuous utilization of GPS in LBS for modern 
smartphones expedites the process of draining batteries. In 
order to extend operating times we have developed high-
level strategies for saving energy. In particular, we avoid 
usage of GPS whenever possible and use region monitoring 
and network-based positioning when a device is not moved, 
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

e.g., at night times or while residing in the office. As a 
consequence, accuracy is diminished in certain situations 
(e.g., while moving with the app in background) and we have 
to accept latency for the reactivation of GPS whenever 
needed (e.g., when being monitored by other devices). 
Nevertheless, we succeeded in saving energy while 
guaranteeing a full functional service regarding location-
based operations. Figure 8 summarizes the results of our 
conducted tests with a theoretical optimum when the device 
is in standby mode (green line) and a worst result with GPS 
engaged and regular data transmission (red line). In between 
is our energy saving strategy with Spotnick (blue line), 
which indicates a clear improvement compared to the 
exhaustive utilization of GPS. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Battery Consumption HTC Desire HD with Android 2.3.5 
In principle, these strategies also apply to further devices 
and operating systems. We have implemented them for iOS 
devices, as well. The technical details are different, because 
Apple restricts access to hardware-related functions and to 
system-related 
operations 
like 
process 
execution 
in 
background mode. However, the basic concept is similar, 
and also the results seem promising. Although, investigations 
on energy saving strategies for iOS devices are still 
underway, the first version of Spotnick including these 
strategies is available for iPhones in the App Store. 
Presuming comparable success for iOS, our proposed high-
level energy saving strategies could be regarded as code of 
practice for mobile LBS, in general. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Gobriel, C. Maciocco, C. Tai, and A. Min, “A EE-AOC: 
Energy Efficient Always-On-Connectivity Architecture,” 
Proceedings of the 8th International IARIA Conference of 
Wireless and Mobile Communications, ICWMC 2012, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-203-5, Italy 2012, pp. 110-117. 
[2] A. Carroll, “An Analysis of Power Consumption in a 
Smartphone,” Proceedings of the 2010 USENIX Annual 
Technical 
Conference, 
Boston, 
MA, 
USA, 
USENIX 
Association Berkeley, CA, USA, 2010, pp. 21-21. 
[3] S. J. Barbeau, M. A. Labrador, A. Perez, P. Winters, N. 
Georggi, D. Aguilar, and R. Perez, “Dynamic Management of 
Real-Time Location Data on GPS-enabled Mobile Phones,” 
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Mobile 
Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services, and Technologies, 
(UbiComm 2008), Valencia, Spain, 2008, pp. 343 – 348. 
[4] I. M. Taylor and M. A. Labrador, “Improving the Energy 
Consumption in Mobile Phones by Filtering Noisy GPS Fixes 
with Modified Kalman Filters,” Proceedings of IEEE 
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 
March 28-31, 2011, pp. 2006-2011. 
[5] U. Bareth and A. Kupper, “Energy-Efficient Position 
Tracking 
in 
Proactive 
Location-Based 
Services 
for 
Smartphone Environments,” 2011 IEEE 35th Annual 
Computer Software and Applications Conference, July 2011, 
pp. 516–521,. 
[6] T. O. Oshin, S. Poslad, and A. Ma, “Improving the Energy-
Efficiency of GPS Based Location Sensing Smartphone 
Applications,” 2012 IEEE 11th International Conference on 
Trust, 
Security 
and 
Privacy 
in 
Computing 
and 
Communications, June 2012, pp. 1698–1705.  
[7] Z. Zhuang, D. T. R, and L. Altos, “Improving Energy 
Efficiency of Location Sensing on Smartphones,” in 
Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Mobile 
systems, applications, and services, ISBN: 978-1-60558-985-
5, 2010, pp. 315–330.  
[8] N. 
Balasubramanian, 
A. 
Balasubramanian, 
and 
A. 
Venkataramani, “Energy consumption in mobile phones: a 
measurement 
study 
and 
implications 
for 
network 
applications,” Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM 
conference on Internet measurement conference IMC 2009, 
New York, NY, USA, ISBN: 978-1-60558-771-4, 2009, pp. 
280-293. 
[9] T. Farrell, R. Lange, and K. Rothermel, “Energy-efficient 
Tracking of Mobile Objects with Early Distance-based 
Reporting,” Fourth Annual International Conference on 
Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking Services, 
MobiQuitous 2007, pp. 1-8. 
[10] M. Kjaergaard, J. Langdal, T. Godsk, and T. Toftkjaer, 
“EnTracked: energy-efficient robust position tracking for 
mobile devices,” Proceedings of the 7th international 
conference on Mobile systems, applications, and services, 
MobiSys 2009, New York, NY, USA, ISBN: 978-1-60558-
566-6, pp. 221-234. 
[11] A. Rahmati and L. Zhong, “Context-for-wireless: context-
sensitive energy-efficient wireless data transfer,” Proceedings 
of the 5th international conference on Mobile systems, 
applications and services, MobiSys 2007, New York, NY, 
USA, ISBN: 978-1-59593-614-1, pp. 165-178. 
[12] L. Wang and J. Manner, “Energy Consumption Analysis of 
WLAN, 2G and 3G interfaces,” Green Computing and 
Communications 
(GreenCom), 
2010 
IEEE/ACM 
Int'l 
Conference on Int'l Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social 
Computing (CPSCom), 2010, pp. 300-307. 
[13] M. Youssef, M. Yosef, and M. El-Derini, “GAC: Energy-
Efficient 
Hybrid 
GPS-Accelerometer-Compass 
GSM 
Localization,” IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference 
(GLOBECOM 2010), ISSN: 1930-529X, Print ISBN: 978-1-
4244-5636-92010, pp. 1-5. 
[14] W. Narzt and H. Schmitzberger, “Location-triggered code 
execution — dismissing displays and keypads for mobile 
interaction,” in UAHCI ’09: Proceedings of the 5th 
International on ConferenceUniversal Access in Human-
Computer Interaction. Part II. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 2009, pp. 374–383. 
 
 
 
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

