 
 
               Monetizing IoT: Enabled via LTE Broadcast 
                                                                    Rajat Kochhar, Nipun Sharma 
 
 
                                                                    Ericsson Global Services India (Pvt.) Ltd. 
                                                                                       Gurgaon, India 
                                            e-mail: rajat.kumar.kochhar@ericsson.com , nipun.sharma@ericsson.com 
 
 
 
Abstract 
- 
This 
paper 
proposes 
the 
mechanisms 
for 
Communication Service Providers (CSP) to boost the M2M/IoT 
monetization, enabled via upcoming Long Term Evolution 
(LTE) broadcast technology. LTE Broadcast will play a crucial 
role in delivering the multimedia services efficiently to smart 
devices (sensors, connected vehicles, smart phones) for long 
range communication including mission critical services. 
Relevant contents can be positioned strategically across 
different network nodes and accessed in an optimized manner 
to provide economical delivery model for business to business 
(B2B) and business to consumer (B2C) ecosystem. This paper 
further suggests mechanisms by which operators can monetize 
the cached data in the network by providing economical 
charging plans to the end customer. LTE broadcast based 
commercial deployment has already started since 2014 and is 
gaining traction across different verticals enabling reduced 
expenditure and providing enhanced customer experience. 
 
Keywords-LTE Broadcast;Content Caching;Internet of things  
(IoT);Communication Service Provider;Mission critical services, 
etc.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
There has been tremendous growth in data traffic, 
particularly multimedia contents, over mobile broadband 
networks in the last couple of years. This growth has been 
fueled by the increase in the number of users and variety of 
applications delivering multimedia contents e.g., movies, 
songs, sports, video on demand etc. In addition, launch of 
smart 
devices 
with 
higher 
media 
capabilities, 
and 
advancements 
in 
3G/4G 
technologies 
have 
further 
complemented this growth.  
The mobile networks are constantly evolving to cater to 
the needs of new business models across different services. 
For example, LTE Cat-M1 or LTE-M as it is commonly 
known and Narrow-Band IoT (NB-IoT) emphasize on low 
bandwidth communication while LTE Broadcast enables high 
speed multimedia content delivery e.g., live Sport events. 
LTE network architecture is further evolving to support 
Machine to Machine e.g., M2M/IoT communication so that 
billions of new devices can be connected to support IoT 
specific use cases. While LTE-M/NB-IoT primarily focuses 
on low power/cost and low bandwidth communication 
requirements, LTE Broadcast enables delivery of contents to 
millions of devices in an efficient and cost effective manner. 
Multimedia Broadcast Multicast Services (MBMS) is a 
point-to-multipoint unidirectional service in which data is 
transmitted from a single source entity to multiple recipients. 
The MBMS service offers two modes: Broadcast mode and 
Multicast mode. Broadcast mode is supported for LTE and 
3G, and Multicast mode is supported for 3G. The 
specification is referred to as Evolved Multimedia Broadcast 
Multicast Services (eMBMS) when transmissions are 
delivered through an LTE network. eMBMS is also known as 
LTE Broadcast.  This paper will emphasize on LTE broadcast 
as it is upcoming and will act as a baseline technology for 
future deployments.  
The multicast services can only be received by those users 
which have subscribed to that specific service and are part of 
the multicast group associated with the service for 3G 
subscribers only. Both broadcast and multicast services 
across 3G/4G technology are unidirectional, point to 
multipoint transmissions of multimedia content and involve 
transmission of text, audio, video, pictures, emergency alerts 
like Tsunami warning, firmware upgrade of sensors/devices 
associated with smart meters/homes/cities, Live Streaming of 
sports event etc. 
For delivering multimedia content to the multiple users, 
LTE Broadcast (eMBMS) is technically positioned as more 
effective and efficient technology than ubiquitously used 
unicast mode for data communication. This technology 
further optimizes the network resources to reduce the overall 
operational expenditure and exploits the network for mission 
critical activities. Moreover, LTE Broadcast could be 
instrumental in maximizing the network utilization including 
radio interfaces.  LTE broadcast services enable delivering 
content in densely and crowded location efficiently and 
therefore free up the capacity for other services including 
voice services, proximity services, etc. 
LTE broadcast has the potential to lead to commercial 
pay-per-view TV channels from mobile operators. It could 
also enable many more use cases, including the delivery of 
device updates to smartphones and tablets, distributing data 
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-572-2
78

to connected cars or broader IoT applications including 
important emergency alerts. The operators can either create 
their own services or enable the delivery of third party 
services via Application servers (as suggested by 3GPP 
specification in Release 13 or onwards).  
In this paper, we will propose new mechanisms that CSPs 
can use, by leveraging on LTE Broadcast technology along 
with innovative caching techniques. CSPs can adopt 
differential charging for their customer based on the location 
of the content which the customers are accessing. We also 
suggest in the paper, about the benefits of having a content 
registry node in the network which can greatly reduce the 
signaling needed to update all cached data in the network. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section II describes LTE Broadcast Network Architecture 
details along with major network nodes in the system. Section 
III deals with various caching mechanisms used in the 
network. Each caching mechanism has its own pros and cons. 
We will have a detailed look on them and propose ways to 
monetize LTE Broadcast services in the network along with 
some real-life examples in Section IV. We conclude our 
paper in Section V. 
 
II. 
LTE BROADCAST/eMBMS NETWORK 
ARCHITECTURE 
Content via LTE Broadcast is delivered by collaboration 
of three core network elements. eMBMS is realized by 
enhancing capabilities of existing functional entities of the 
3GPP architecture and by addition of new functional entities 
like BM-SC node [6]. 
A. Broadcast Multicast Service Centre (BM-SC) 
The BM-SC provides functionality for MBMS related 
user service provisioning and delivery. Typically, it serves as 
an entry point for content provider, used to authorize and 
initiate MBMS Bearer services including schedule and 
delivery management.  Typically, the multimedia content for 
MBMS is placed outside the core network. The BMSC 
schedules the MBMS session and is also responsible for 
monetizing the services enabled via offline and online 
charging interfaces.  
B. Multimedia Broadcast Multicast service Gateway 
(MBMS GW)  
Another new network element is the MBMS-GW, which 
provides the gateway functionality between the radio and 
service networks. It forward streams from the BM-SC to all 
participating eNodeB in the single frequency network (SFN) 
transmission. MBMS Gateway (MBMS-GW) delivers 
MBMS traffic using IP multicast to multiple cell sites in 
single transmission. SFN technology is used to distribute 
broadcast streams into well-defined areas – where all 
contributing cells send the same data during the same radio 
time slots [4].  
In general, LTE broadcast can deliver multimedia content 
to a broad area, ranging from a shopping street to a part of 
city e.g., in case of sporting events, musical concerts etc. but 
can also be extended to entire network covering many cities 
e.g., emergency alerts etc. The size of broadcast area is often 
decided by the type of content and the intended audience. 
C.  MCE/MME  
Multi-cell/multicast 
coordination 
entity 
(MCE) 
is 
responsible for administration of radio resources for MBMS 
to all radios that are part of the MBMS service area. The 
same is not explicitly highlighted in the diagram below. The 
mobility management entity (MME) performs the MBMS 
session control signaling including session start, update, and 
stop, as well as delivering additional MBMS information to 
the MCE including QoS and MBMS service area.  
With the wide deployment of Content Distribution 
Networks (CDNs), delivery of multimedia content to the 
users has been optimized to some extent. Deployment of 
CDNs 
has reduced 
the 
backhaul 
issues 
faced by 
Communication 
service 
providers. 
Additionally, 
with 
different caching mechanisms, operator can further cache the 
content from CDN or external servers within the operator’s 
network for enhanced content management. This will further 
reduce the dependency and latency introduced by accessing 
content external to the operator’s network.  Fig. 1 below 
provides the network architecture for LTE Broadcast 
network. 
 
Figure 1. Reference architecture for Evolved Packet System with E-
UTRAN and UTRAN (MBMS Broadcast Mode only) 3GPP 23.246  
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-572-2
79

III. 
CACHING MECHANISMS 
Caching is a mechanism to store the content for future or 
simultaneous requests enabling faster access. Content stored 
in the cache might be the result of an earlier access or copy of 
data available in the network.  
Caching, in general is extensively used in IP and telecom 
networks for faster access of relevant content. Typically, the 
contents were stored and accessed from content providers 
network which was external to the operator’s network. Due to 
ever growing demand for multimedia content, operators were 
forced to devise innovative ways to deliver contents which 
reduces network load and provides superior customer 
experience. LTE Broadcast services provide an effective 
method to deliver content to multiple users. LTE Broadcast, 
complemented by caching techniques could further optimize 
the network resource utilization, which could be used by 
other real time services such as Voice over LTE (VoLTE) 
services.  
Deploying caches in mobile networks is regarded as a 
promising way to improve user experiences and reduce the 
signaling within the network nodes as data traffic is expected 
to increase many folds in future. Caching within the network 
can be done on different network nodes e.g., Radio Access 
Network (RAN) nodes or core network nodes. Caching on 
RAN nodes has more advantages in comparison to caching 
on core network nodes in terms of reduction of back-haul 
traffic and improvement of user experience, since contents 
can be retrieved at base stations. Content can also be pushed 
to the cache of user equipment and the user is provided a 
preview of the content. Caching reduces the cost of content 
delivery by optimum usage of radio and network resources, 
which can be utilized for other critical communications. 
There are multiple caching techniques which can be 
implemented to reduce response time and network latency as 
described below: 
A. Core Network Caching 
In LTE networks, core network caching is typically 
deployed at the packet data network gateway or the PGW, 
within the evolved packet core (EPC). For LTE broadcast, 
this content can be cached at eMBMS core network nodes 
e.g., BM-SC and MBMS GW [1]. These cache servers offer 
huge data storage capacity and store content that is popular 
among large number of users. Caching at core network 
nodes reduces the uncertainties of latency and remote server 
response times towards content provider network, outside 
operators trusted domain. When a popular content is found 
in a networks cache, this information is no longer obtained 
from the content provider. This reduces the traffic between 
the EPC and the content providers, thus reducing the 
bandwidth and cost of the Internet connection. 
B.  RAN Caching 
RAN caching position the content towards the edge of the 
network typically at RAN nodes. With caching at core 
network nodes, multimedia content still need to navigate 
through the backhaul links of an LTE network. For LTE 
broadcast RAN caching, the contents are cached at 
participating eNodeB (enabled by SFN). LTE macro, metro 
and pico base stations are ideal platforms to incorporate RAN 
caching because of their all-IP architecture and their 
proximity to the end user.  
By positioning contents at multiple eNodeBs, backend 
signaling is considerably reduced. Since backend signaling 
and transport costs are often the largest parts of the LTE 
network OpEx, the savings can be remarkable [5][9]. 
Technical artifacts are already available suggesting different 
cache techniques at RAN level, cache content management 
(e.g., replicating the cache contents across eNodeBs), etc. and 
further enhancements are ongoing. One of the well identified 
use cases in IoT domain includes small amounts of non-
critical data transfer to multiple IoT devices. Typically, 
Firmware updates for connected vehicles, smart meters, etc. 
are initiated simultaneously which might lead to network and 
RAN congestion. Connected cars require firmware updates 
and typically need to be downloaded while the cars have the 
ignition on typically during morning hours.  LTE network 
can push the firmware updates to participating eNodeB at 
non-peak time (or night) and same can be broadcasted from 
eNodeBs 
to 
all 
the 
participating 
connected 
cars 
simultaneously. RAN caching techniques can support the 
above and other relevant IoT based use cases efficiently, 
releasing the bandwidth for LTE network for critical and real-
time communication like VoLTE. 
C. User Equipment (UE) Caching 
Content can also be cached in user equipment, thereby 
providing fast access to popular videos, news, songs etc. 
When the network is comparatively less utilized, multimedia 
content is typically pushed into the cache memory of the User 
Equipment (e.g., Smartphone). User is provided with a 
preview of the content and the ability to purchase the content, 
if interested. In case the user does not purchase the content, 
then the content is purged from the cache memory and the 
user is not charged for the downloaded multimedia content 
pushed by the operator [3]. Artificial Intelligence (AI), along 
with customer experience management, will play a major role 
in providing the contextual analysis on user’s behavior and 
preferences. Additionally, utilizing the network when it is 
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-572-2
80

less loaded will further support operators to monetize 
existing infrastructure and reduce busy hour spikes in the 
network. Events relevant to the geography, linguistics or 
global events like Olympic games highlights are some of the 
use cases where content can be pushed by operator to 
multiple users based on machine learning algorithms e.g., 
historical behavior.  
Research is also ongoing on collaborative caching [8] e.g., 
caching at EPC and RAN to reduce costs and support more 
requests compared with existing caching schemes when 
fetching dedicated contents.  
Table II gives the main differences between different 
caching 
mechanisms 
as 
explained 
in 
Section 
III. 
 
    TABLE II .         TYPES OF CACHING IN NETWORK 
 
IV. 
MONETIZING LTE BROADCAST SERVICES 
Commercial deployment of LTE broadcast had been 
initiated few years back primarily in 2014. LTE broadcast 
technology was demonstrated during Global events like  XX 
Commonwealth Games in Glasgow, FA Cup final UK, Super 
Bowl XLVIII in US. Tier-1 Operators like Verizon have 
commercially launched their Go90 service including both 
On-Demand and LiveTV offerings. LTE Broadcast alliance 
was formed in Apr 2016 include global operators and 
Vendors like Verizon, KT, Reliance JIO, Ericsson, Netgear, 
etc.  
Operators must leverage upon the caching techniques 
discussed above and develop methods to boost the 
monetization of LTE Broadcast offerings to create mutually 
beneficial business models for operators and end customers. 
CSPs should enable differential charging mechanisms based 
on the content location, providing economical offering for 
(cached) contents to the customers.  End customer should be 
charged based on location of the content and the network 
resource utilization for offered services from CSPs [2].  
Operators can further exploit the content location information 
indicating the content location, as determined by the 
requested multimedia content, and sending the charging-
related information to the charging node in the network. The 
charging-related information enables differentiated charging 
by the charging node.   
In LTE Broadcast architecture, BM-SC node is 
responsible for generating the charging event towards 
Charging Data Function (offline) and Online Charging 
System (Online) node depending upon the Rf/Ro Interface 
[7]. Charging information generated by event produced by 
BM-SC nodes are S-BMSC-CDR and C-BMSC-CDR for 
subscriber and content provider charging respectively.  For 
every MBMS bearer, the BM-SC would be aware of the 
location of multimedia content either through communication 
with MBMS-GW or a Content Manager. If the content is 
available in the internal cache or externally, BM-SC sets up 
the content location to a predefined value for each of the 
cases representing the logical location of the content cache 
e.g., device, eNodeB, local network provider, external 
content provider. Fig. 2 below provides the network 
architecture for LTE Broadcast network along with content 
Registry node which will contain the information regarding 
the cached content in the network. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Introduction of new logical entity named Content Registry in LTE 
Broadcast architecture 
 
Core Caching 
RAN Caching 
UE Caching 
Content 
Placement 
Content 
is 
placed 
within 
EPC    
Content 
is 
placed 
at 
eNODEBs 
Content 
is 
pushed 
to 
UEs cache 
Size 
of 
cache 
It’s 
generally 
tera bytes of 
cache. 
It’s few Giga 
bytes 
of 
Cache 
The 
content 
size 
could 
vary 
from 
few KB to 
few MB 
Benefits 
Bandwidth and 
cost to ISPs are 
reduced for the 
operator 
Backhaul 
signaling and 
transport cost 
is reduced 
Reduction in 
busy 
hour 
traffic 
by 
pushing 
the 
content 
to 
UE at non-
peak period. 
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-572-2
81

We propose that BM-SC node should maintain a content 
registry (logical entity), that should keep the details of all the 
content which are cached at different core and RAN nodes. 
On signaling level, BM-SC would query each eNodeB 
periodically or eNodeB could send the information on the 
control plane to BM-SC regarding the content location so that 
BM-SC has the most updated information available in 
Content Registry.  Information from Content Registry 
module would further be populated with “Content Location 
Information” while charging event would be generated from 
BM-SC towards the charging interface to OCS and CDF 
module.   
Differential charging e.g., charging based on the content 
location provides CSPs a mechanism to minimize the 
dependency on content providers for multimedia content. The 
most watched movies, sports videos, events can be cached 
locally by the operators thereby offering economical rates to 
the subscribers.  
Content location based charging would encourage the 
subscribers to use the locally cached content leading to 
efficient use of the network. This would in-turn result in 
lower Cap-Ex and Op-ex. Additionally, empowering 
subscribers with multiple as well as economical options for 
consuming multimedia content would lower the churn rate.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
IoT’s 
evolution 
has 
been 
closely 
linked 
and 
complemented by the evolution of the mobile communication 
and Internet to enable a connected world. To enable faster 
IoT adoption, LTE Broadcast services will further support to 
monetize service models across B2B and B2C domain. For 
B2B segments, CSPs will support IoT offerings across 
multiple domains e.g., firmware/OS upgrades for IoT enabled 
equipment’s like health monitoring devices, smart home 
devices and sensors. Additionally, LTE broadcast will play a 
major role in broadcasting public safety communication for 
emergency as well as routine updates like traffic snarls at 
highways, extreme weather warnings. 
CSPs can further optimize their offering in existing B2C 
ecosystem by streaming multimedia contents like Live 
events, next generation TV services, internet radio, video on 
demand providing enhanced user experience. LTE Broadcast 
enables the operators to charge premium rates for premium 
content with guaranteed quality, knowing that they can 
deliver always, no matter how popular any certain live event 
or media offering may become. This certainly allows the 
operators and its media partners to offer new services without 
the fear of congestion or failure to deliver to its customers. 
Additionally, the paper suggests innovative delivery model 
for proactively advertising the information cached at various 
nodes and promoting economical charging use cases.  
The capability and the flexibility enabled by LTE 
Broadcast is a very powerful tool for operators wishing to 
embrace and evolve the non-traditional business models 
spanning across IoT offerings and media content delivery. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Abhay Vaish - CTO and 
Head of Network Engineering, Rana Pratap Sircar, Rahul 
Verma and Srinivas Mylavarapu, all of Ericsson Global 
Services India Pvt. Ltd.  for their valuable feedback, support 
and guidance. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Nanjunda Swamy Jamadagni, R.  Rajadurai and S. 
Anegundi Ganapathi , Jan 2014 , Patent Pub No. : WO 
2014017789 A1 
[2] D. Shrader, S. Kumar, T. Lohmar and N. Sharma , June 2016 , 
Telefonaktiebolaget L M Ericsson (Publ),  Patent Pub No.: US 
20160182244 A1 
[3] E. Lyons Soelberg, M. Austin and J. Fraser Whitehead , June 
2013 , At&T Mobility Ii Llc , Patent Pub No. : US 8467773 
B1  
[4] Ericsson Review - 90th Anniversary 2014, 
doi:https://www.ericsson.com/assets/local/publications/ericsso
n-technology-review/docs/2014/ericsson-review-90-years.pdf 
[5] H. Sarkissian , The business case for caching in 4G LTE 
networks, 
doi:http://www.wireless2020.com/docs/LSI_WP_Content_Cac
h_Cv3.pdf 
[6] 3GPP TS 23.246, “Multimedia Broadcast/Multicast Service 
(MBMS); Architecture and functional description” 
[7] 3GPP TS 32.240, “Telecommunication management; 
Charging management; Charging architecture and principles” 
[8] S. Ren , T. Lin and W. An , “Collaborative EPC and RAN 
Caching Algorithms for LTE Mobile Networks” , IEEE 
Explore , Dec 2015 , doi: 10.1109/GLOCOM.2015.7417681 
[9] H. Ahlehagh and S. Dey , ” Video caching in Radio Access 
Network: Impact on delay and capacity” , IEEE Explore , 
April 2012 , doi:10.1109/WCNC.2012.6214173 
DISCLAIMER 
This paper reflects the authors own opinions and not 
necessarily those of their employer. 
ICWMC 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-572-2
82

