A Hybrid Solution For Coverage Enhancement In Directional Sensor Networks
M. Amac Guvensan, A. Gokhan Yavuz
Department of Computer Engineering
Yildiz Technical University
Istanbul,Turkey
amac@ce.yildiz.edu.tr, gokhan@ce.yildiz.edu.tr
Abstract—In directional sensor networks (DSNs), motility
capability of a directional sensor node has a considerable
impact on the coverage enhancement. Motility capability may
overcome overlapped ﬁeld of views and occluded regions occur-
ing during the initial deployment. On the other hand, adjusting
working directions could not always heal coverage holes.
Using mobility is the only solution under these circumstances.
However, the high cost of mobile sensors and the high energy
consumption of their physical movement are the two important
constraints for their use. In this study, a hybrid solution has
been proposed for the coverage improvement in DSNs. This
hybrid solution increases the total coverage by up to 31%
after the initial deployment. Besides, a new hybrid deployment
model for DSNs has been discussed and the performance results
of this model have been presented.
Keywords-Directional Sensor Networks; Coverage; Cost; En-
ergy Efﬁciency; Motility; Mobility; Hybrid Deployment
I. INTRODUCTION
The coverage problem in omni-directional sensor net-
works has been intensively studied in the past decade [1].
There are two main methods for coverage improvement in
omni-directional sensor networks. redeployment/movement
of sensor nodes. On the other hand, coverage problems in
directional sensor networks require more speciﬁc solutions
since directional sensor nodes equipped with ultrasound,
infrared and video sensors may work in several directions.
Exploiting motility capability of those nodes is one of the
basic solutions.
In a randomly deployed DSN, there might be overlapped
areas and occluded regions after the initial deployment. A
directional sensor node with motility capability could adjust
its working direction along x, y, and/or z axes. Thus, the
node provides itself with a new ﬁeld of view (FoV) without
moving to a different location. This new direction possibly
contributes to a better total coverage by (i) minimizing
overlapped areas and (ii) providing occlusion-free FoVs.
Available solutions to the coverage problem exploit motility
rather than mobility due to its nominal cost and low energy
consumption [2]. Since a directional sensor node maintains
its geographical position while adjusting its FoV, the node
does not require an additional driving mechanism and/or
GPS device. This effectively decreases the total production
cost of the sensor node. Nevertheless, mobility may heal
coverage holes where motility is inadequate/insufﬁcient.
However, mobility should be applied in a controlled manner
because of its high energy consumption and the limited
battery capacities of the sensor nodes.
To the best of our knowledge, existing solutions to the
coverage problem in DSNs exploit either motility or mo-
bility. In this paper, our main contribution is a distributed
hybrid solution encouraging the use of both motility and
mobility in a cascaded manner to improve the total coverage
with minimum energy consumption. We discuss the idea
of deploying hybrid directional sensor networks. Simulation
results show that an optimum point for the deployment cost
and the coverage improvement ratio could be achieved using
a certain number of stationary, motile, and mobile nodes.
In Section II, existing solutions to the coverage problem
in DSNs are discussed. Section III presents the directional
sensing model and gives the details of the proposed hybrid
solution. In Section III-B the idea of deploying hybrid sensor
networks is addressed with respect to the coverage improve-
ment and the cost of the network. Section IV presents the
simulation results.
II. RELATED WORK
Existing solutions to the coverage problem in DSNs are
categorized into four groups [3]. We will only discuss the
studies aiming at maximizing the whole coverage, as we
focus on the improvement of area coverage. Enhancing
area coverage is very important for DSNs to fulﬁll the
speciﬁed sensing tasks. A small unmonitored sub-area de-
feats the whole purpose of the network. However, random
deployment may cause several problems, such as overlapped
and occluded regions, uncovered areas, and broken sensor
nodes. Therefore, three solutions have been proposed by the
research community to overcome these difﬁculties. First so-
lution is to redeploy new sensors after the initial deployment.
Second solution is to adjust the working directions of the
directional sensor nodes to improve the ﬁeld coverage [4]
[5] [6] [7] [8] [9]. The last one is to relocate the sensor
nodes with mobility capability [10].
The study [4] is one of the pioneer works on coverage
enhancement. The authors present a new method based on a
rotatable sensing model. To achieve less overlapping area, a
directional node repositions itself on the reverse direction of
the interior angle-bisector occuring between two neighboring
134
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Figure 1.
Directional Sensing Model
directional nodes. On the other hand, Cheng et al. describe
the area-coverage enhancement problem as the Maximum
Directional Area Coverage (MDAC) problem and prove the
MDAC to be NP-complete [8]. The distributed solution for
the MDAC problem, DGreedy algorithm, chooses the least
overlapped direction as the new working direction. The
authors observe that scarce sensors are highly critical to
achieve maximal coverage, thus they utilize the number of
sensing neighbors to differentiate node priorities.
Zhao and Zeng [5] propose an electrostatic ﬁeld-based
coverage-enhancing algorithm based on the Coulomb’s Law
to enhance the area coverage of wireless multimedia sensor
networks by turning sensors to the correct orientation and
decreasing the coverage overlaps of active sensors. They also
aim at maximizing the network lifetime by shutting off as
much redundant sensors as possible.
In [7], the authors name the above mentioned coverage
problem as the optimal coverage problem in directional
sensor networks (OCDSN). They propose a greedy approx-
imation algorithm to the solution of the OCDSN problem,
based on the boundary Voronoi diagram. By constructing the
Voronoi diagram of a directional sensor network one could
ﬁnd the maximal breach path of this network. An assistant
sensor traveling the edges of the Voronoi diagram determines
which sensor to wake up in order to ensure the uncovered
boundaries to be covered.
III. A HYBRID SOLUTION TO THE COVERAGE PROBLEM
IN DSNS
In this section, before presenting our hybrid solution, we
will brieﬂy explain the directional sensing model and the
idea of hybrid deployment.
A. Directional Sensing Model
According to the binary detection model, a directional
sensor node covers each point in its FoV. The common
directional sensing capability for 2D spaces is illustrated
in Figure 1. The sector covered by a directional sensor
node S is denoted by a 4-tuple (P, Rs, −→
Wd, α), where P
is the location, Rs is the sensing radius, −→
Wd is the working
direction, and α is the angle of view of the sensor node S.
Under ideal conditions without occlusion, a sensor node
S covers an area with a size of α
2 Rs
2 units. The special case
of this model, where α = 2π can be described as the omni-
sensing model. For omni-directional sensors, there is only
one possible working direction, whereas directional sensors
have several possible working directions. However, they can
work only at one direction at any given time t.
According to the binary detection model, a target point
is covered when this point is located within a FoV of any
directional sensor node. To ﬁnd out as if this point is covered
or not, the Target In Sector (TIS) test [11] needs to be
applied to the related point. For area coverage problems,
researchers opt for grid-based approach [12] to adapt this test
model for indicating the (un)covered points in the observed
area. Each point around the sensor node S is tested with the
TIS test. The coverage map of the sensor node S is then
created according to the test results.
B. Hybrid Deployment
We state that where the FoVs of two sensor nodes are
overlapped, resolving overlapped region is still possible
even only one of them has motility capability. Following
this idea, we will elaborate on the effects of hybrid de-
ployment in DSNs. There are three types of directional
sensor nodes in DSNs. stationary nodes, motile nodes, and
mobile nodes. Researchers have proved that motility and
mobility signiﬁcantly improve the total coverage in DSNs
[3]. Nevertheless, networks consisting of motile/mobile di-
rectional sensor nodes require high budgets due to their
considerable production cost. As an example, in [2], the
cost of a stationary video camera, a pan-tilt-zoom video
camera, and a mobile node are given as $800, $1300,
and $35000 respectively. The gap between the costs have
deﬁnitely decreased and will continue to decrease in the
future. However, there will always be a reasonable cost ratio
between stationary, motile and mobile nodes. Thus, there
is a necessity of hybrid directional sensor networks, where
coverage improvement ratio and the cost of the network
could be balanced. For example, the cost of a network
built with mobile nodes is extremely high, whereas coverage
improvement is impossible in DSNs consisting of only
stationary nodes. Thus, we can assume that an optimum
point for the cost and coverage improvement ratio could be
achieved using a certain number of stationary, motile, and
mobile nodes.
C. Cascaded Coverage Enhancement in DSNs
In randomly deployed directional sensor networks, the
FoVs of two or more sensors might overlap and/or the FoVs
of some sensors could be obscured by obstacles. In addition
to these two problems, the working directions of some sensor
nodes could be faced towards outside of the observed area.
135
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Figure 2.
A block diagram of the proposed solution to the coverage
problem in DSNs
As a consequence, the total coverage needs to be improved
after the initial deployment. Most researchers exploit motil-
ity capability of directional sensor nodes for this purpose. To
the best of our knowledge, only one study [10] proposes the
use of mobility. However, in this study the authors do not
exploit motility capability. Both approaches have pros and
cons. For example, it is impossible to heal some coverage
holes with motile sensor nodes, where coverage holes are
far enough from any sensor node. The only way (except
redeployment) to resolve these holes is to beneﬁt from the
mobility capability of the nodes. Nevertheless, mobility is
highly expensive because of the associated high production
cost and high energy consumption. Therefore, after the
initial deployment, we ﬁrst exploit motility to minimize the
overlapped areas and occluded regions. Then, we check for
possible coverage holes. If there are redundant sensor nodes
and coverage holes, we redirect these nodes to the holes. A
block diagram of this hybrid solution is given in Figure 2.
The key idea of this hybrid solution is to utilize both the
motility and mobility in a cascaded manner. For exploiting
the motility, we have proposed the AFUP algorithm to
adjust the working directions of the directional sensor nodes
after the initial deployment. AFUP is a heuristic distributed
algorithm which uses the repel forces of uncovered points
around the nodes. Directional sensor nodes exchange their
location (P) and −→
Wd information with neighboring nodes.
Then, each node marks the covered points in its map.
Afterwards, using neighboring nodes’ information, the nodes
determine the overlapped regions in their map. If the number
of overlapped points are more than a predeﬁned threshold,
the node sets its working direction as the center (C) of the
uncovered points in its map. Thus, the vector
⃗
PC gives
the new working direction of the node. The aforementioned
steps are repeated until each node reaches its equilibrium
state. In some regions, where the node density is high, some
nodes could not ﬁnd an appropriate working direction. To
account for such conditions, these nodes update their status
as balanced. For exploiting mobility, we have designed a new
Window-based Neighborhood Exploring (WNE) algorithm
whose details will be discussed in a future work.
Table I
AFUP ALGORITHM VS. RANDOM ALGORITHM
Rs = 30m, α = 60 ◦, Area = 250x250m2
Number of
Random
AFUP(%)
Coverage
Sensor Nodes
Deployment(%)
Gain (%)
N = 25
15.65
18.48
18.08
N = 50
28.28
34.95
23.59
N = 75
39.69
49.28
24.16
N = 100
48.38
60.56
25.18
N = 125
56.28
69.80
24.02
N = 150
63.26
77.23
22.08
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
We have implemented a simulation environment using
MATLAB 7.8. Several test scenarios have been run in this
environment to show (i) the results of the AFUP algorithm,
(ii) to ﬁnd the node density where mobility is inevitable,
and (iii) to analyze the relation between the cost of the
network and the coverage improvement ratio in hybrid
directional sensor networks. We consider the total coverage
and the overlap ratio as the two key metrics. The values for
node density, sensing radius, and angle of view have been
chosen with regard to the studies [13] and [5]. Accordingly,
sensor nodes have been conﬁgured with an α = 60 ◦
and a Rs = 30m. Simulations have been performed for
random deployment in a rectangular two-dimensional terrain
of 250x250m2. 15 different uniform random distributions
have been generated for each individual scenario.
Simulation results show that motility signiﬁcantly im-
proves the total coverage after the initial deployment. Us-
ing only the local information of neighboring nodes, both
overlapped areas are minimized and nodes near border are
faced towards the observed area. Analyzing Table I shows
that coverage gain varies from 18% to 25%. Especially, the
coverage gain in dense networks is greater than in sparse
networks. However, coverage gain starts to drop down when
the network is saturated with sensor nodes.
Figure 3 shows the ratios of overlap minimization and
coverage gain for different number of sensor nodes. Overlap
minimization ratio shows by how much ratio the overlapped
points are decreased after the initial deployment, whereas
coverage gain indicates the rational increase of the total
coverage after applying AFUP. As there are too many uncov-
ered points in DSNs with low node density, directional sen-
sor nodes could easily ﬁnd appropriate working directions.
Therefore, the overlap minimization ratio is considerably
high in those networks. With increasing node density, the
overlap minimization ratio starts to decrease. Facing the
border nodes towards the observed area with increasing
node density prevents the decrease of the overlapped areas.
Thus, the overlapped areas might slightly increase above a
certain threshold. This fact reveals that the use of mobility
is inevitable for directional sensor networks with high node
densities. Another course of action would be to put the
redundant nodes into sleep in the absence of mobile nodes.
136
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

Figure 3.
The relationship between the coverage gain ratio, the overlap
minimization ratio and the number of sensor nodes
Figure 4.
Coverage ratios of random deployment, AFUP, WNE, and
AFUP+WNE
To explore the effect of mobility, we have utilized our
WNE algorithm in the previously given scenarios. The pre-
liminary results show that exploiting mobility after motility
could increase the total coverage up to 6%. In the sce-
narios directional sensor nodes were assumed to exchange
their location information only with nodes within their
communication radius (Rc = 2RS). Thus, this resulted in
exploring coverage holes only within three sensing radii and
therefore, mobility has a limited impact on the coverage
gain. Exchanging information with nodes located within
two-hop communication distance would deﬁnitely improve
the coverage gain.
Solving the coverage problem only with mobility is
expensive, whereas motility is inadequate to cope with
coverage holes. Our experimental results, given in Figure 4,
show that motility+mobility in DSNs provides a substantial
coverage improvement. Furthermore, according to Table II
Table II
NUMBER OF MOVED DIRECTIONAL SENSOR NODES. MOBILE VS.
MOTILE/MOBILE SENSOR NETWORK
Total Number of Nodes
25
50
75
100
125
150
Mobility
9
23
40
44
41
33
Motility+Mobility
1
8
19
17
10
4
Figure 5.
Total travel distance of directional sensor nodes for mobile and
motile/mobile DSNs.
Figure 6.
The correlation between the coverage improvement and the cost
of the network in hybrid sensor networks
and Figure 5 motility+mobility is also highly energy efﬁcient
compared to a mobility only solution. A mobility alone
needs 2 to 9 times more sensors to change their physical
location to achieve same coverage gain as in a motil-
ity+mobility solution. Moreover, the total travel distance in
motile/mobile DSNs is substantially less than the total travel
distance in mobile DSNs, as shown in Fig. 5
Figure 6 demonstrates the importance of hybrid deploy-
ment. Following Figure 6, even if a large number of de-
ployed directional sensor nodes are stationary, the coverage
gain ratio does not change too much if all the nodes were
motile. As an example, in the scenario where the ratio of
motile nodes is 60%, the total coverage ratio increases by
4.17%. Deploying the same scenario with all the sensor
nodes being motile, causes the total coverage to increase
by only 5.93%. Thus, with hybrid deployment, by acknowl-
edging a coverage gain drop of 1%-2%, the deployment cost
could be reduced by 20%.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we have presented the preliminary results
of a Ph.D. thesis, which examines the effect of motility
and mobility capabilities of the directional sensor nodes
on the coverage improvement and the cost of the network.
The proposed hybrid solution aims at maximizing the total
137
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

coverage with minimum energy consumption after the initial
deployment. Simulation results also show that deploying hy-
brid DSNs could balance the ratio between the deployment
cost of network and the total coverage improvement.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research has been supported by Yildiz Technical
University Scientiﬁc Research Projects Coordination Depart-
ment under the grant number 2011-04-01-DOP03.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Mohamed and K. Akkaya, “Strategies and techniques for
node placement in wireless sensor networks: A survey,” Ad
Hoc Networks, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 621–655, 2008.
[2] A.
Kansal,
W.
Kaiser,
G.
Pottie,
M.
Srivastava,
and
G. Sukhatme, “Reconﬁguration methods for mobile sensor
networks,” ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks, vol. 3,
no. 4, 2007.
[3] M. A. Guvensan and A. G. Yavuz, “On coverage issues in
directional sensor networks: A survey,” Elsevier Ad Hoc Net-
works, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2011.02.003, Febru-
ary 2011.
[4] D. Tao, H. Ma, and L. Liu, “Coverage-enhancing algorithm
for directional sensor networks,” in Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science:Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks, vol. 4325,
November 2006, pp. 256–267.
[5] J.
Zhao
and
J.-C.
Zeng,
“An
electrostatic
ﬁeld-based
coverage-enhancing algorithm for wireless multimedia sensor
networks,” in Proc. of IEEE Intl. Conf. on Wireless Commu-
nications, Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCom’09),
Beijing, China, September 2009, pp. 1–5.
[6] H. Ma, X. Zhang, and A. Ming, “A coverage-enhancing
method for 3d directional sensor networks,” in Proc. of IEEE
Intl. Conf. on Computer Communications(INFOCOM’09),
Rio de Janerio, Brazil, April 2009, pp. 2791–2795.
[7] J. Li, R.-C. Wang, H.-P. Huang, and L.-J. Sun, “Voronoi based
area coverage optimization for directional sensor networks,”
in Proc. of Intl. Symposium on Electronic Commerce and
Security (ISECS’09), vol. 1, Nanchang, China, May 2009,
pp. 488 –493.
[8] W. Cheng, S. Li, X. Liao, S. Changxiang, and H. Chen,
“Maximal coverage scheduling in randomly deployed direc-
tional sensor networks,” in Proc. of Intl. Conf. on Parallel
Processing Workshops (ICPPW’07), China, October 2007.
[9] C. Kandoth and S. Chellappan, “Angular mobility assisted
coverage in directional sensor networks,” in Proc. of Intl.
Conf. on Network-Based Information Systems (NBIS ’09),
Aug. 2009, pp. 376–379.
[10] C.-K. Liang, M.-C. He, and C.-H. Tsai, “Movement assisted
sensor deployment in directional sensor networks,” in Proc.
of Intl. Conf. on Mobile Ad-Hoc and Sensor Networks, Dec.
2010.
[11] J. Ai and A. A. Abouzeid, “Coverage by directional sensors
in randomly deployed wireless sensor networks,” Journal
of Combinatorial Optimization, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 21–41,
February 2006.
[12] H. Chen, H. Wu, and N.-F. Tzeng, “Grid-based approach for
working node selection in wireless sensor networks,” in Proc.
Intl. Conf on Communications, vol. 6, Paris,France, 20-24
2004, pp. 3673 – 3678.
[13] N. Tezcan and W. Wang, “Self-orienting wireless multimedia
sensor networks for occlusion-free viewpoints,” Computer
Networks: Int. Journal of Computer and Telecommunications
Networking, vol. 52, no. 13, pp. 2558–2567, September 2008.
138
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

