Multi-agent Topology Approach for Distributed Monitoring in Wireless Sensor 
Networks  
 
 
Bechar Rachid, Haffaf Hafid 
Department of Computer Science, University of Oran 
Oran, Algeria 
E-mail: rachid_bec@yahoo.fr, haffaf.hafid@univ-oran.dz 
Congduc Pham 
University of Pau, LIUPPA Laboratory 
Pau, France 
E-mail: congduc.pham@univ-pau.fr 
 
 
Abstract — In this paper, the multi-agent technology is 
applied in wireless sensor networks domain in order to adapt 
software architecture, and to optimize its performance in 
monitoring. We explore in particular the issues of topology 
control, especially some related work using multi-agent 
systems. In the third part, we will propose an agent-based 
algorithm for fault tolerance and topology control in a wireless 
sensor network. Our proposal consists of embedding an agent 
at each node that is responsible for selecting its parent or the 
next hop to the sink when transferring packets. The main 
contribution is the proposal of a new process of changing 
parent, which is based on the computation of a fault tolerance 
degree, calculated each time by the agent in cooperation with 
its neighboring nodes. Several parameters are exploited to 
calculate this metric, such as the number of hops, the energy 
and the quality of links. Simulation results show that this 
method of changing parent allows an enhanced lifetime, as well 
as network fault tolerance, when compared with the collection 
tree protocol.  
   
Key words: wireless sensor networks; multi-agent systems; 
monitoring; topology control. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Wireless sensor networks (WSN) [1] require large 
amount of data to be transmitted with high reporting rates, 
leading to consume specific resources, such as bandwidth, 
storage, computation, and energy. Research in WSNs aims 
to meet the above constraints by introducing new design 
concepts, creating, improving existing protocols such that 
optimization in this field has been a topical issue of many 
works in the last decade.  
Multi-agent systems (MAS) have a principle that can be 
easily adapted and integrated in complex systems due to their 
fully decentralized and “intelligent” approach [2]. They can 
be used to model phenomena where global behavior emerges 
from the local behavior of system entities and components. 
These components have the ability to percept, process, act 
and react in their environment.  
The wireless sensor networks structure, distributed 
processing ability and complexity considerations especially 
when the number of nodes increases, conducts us to exploit 
recent developments made in multi-agent systems field to 
improve networks performances and simplify the design 
process in order to have reliable and fault tolerant sensors. 
The multi-agent approaches for WSN are introduced in 
many levels and operating aspects. Some works propose 
software architectures for applications and services [3][4]. 
Others are interested in network organization and 
cooperation between nodes [5][6], clustering being the 
dominant approach in this area. Furthermore, many agent-
based works treat routing problems in WSN with different 
applications [7]. Finally, monitoring and mobility are also 
subjects of several studies [7][8], where the use of bio-
inspired principles seems interesting with multi-agent 
systems to solve mobility and scheduling tasks problems.  
These works can be divided into two classes: the first 
class considers the sensor network as a multi-agent system, 
in this case, the application of agent technology consists of 
deploying the same agent to all nodes in order to have 
cooperation between them. This seems to be better adapted 
to wireless sensor nodes, and it will be considered in our 
approach. The second class provides multi-agent systems 
adapted to the logical structure of a WSN where different 
kinds of agent cooperate in the network. 
 Supervision or monitoring, which aims to avoid or detect 
failures, is a set of techniques used to increase the 
performance of a WSN, optimize its lifetime and ensure fault 
tolerance using all network parameters.  
The main approach for load balancing [9] and fault 
tolerance in sensor networks is the maintenance of a 
topology that guarantees good conditions of transfer. Indeed, 
the use of multiple paths helps to balance the energy 
consumption of nodes by distributing the flow of packets on 
better possible paths [10]. This mechanism based on 
topology control contributes to reducing the delay and packet 
loss by reducing the number of hops between nodes and the 
sink. Thus, the quality of service will be improved.  
Topology control consists of the use of network 
characteristics or parameters to generate and/or maintain a 
topology. Despite the fact that MAS technology is the only 
approach that allows nodes to take into account information 
from their environment, only few works on WSNs topology 
control include agent systems.  
Our work targets to increase the lifetime of WSN nodes 
by introducing a new topology control approach and then 
compare it to the collection tree protocol (CTP). In our 
work, the main contribution, which is introducing MAS in 
WSN, is performed when using neighborhood information to 
give a metric called tolerance degree for each node. This 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

metric is calculated by the node itself in cooperation with its 
neighbors. When transferring packets, this degree will be 
used to choose qualified nodes for the transfer. We shall see 
that this approach increases the fault tolerance lifetime of a 
network, without affecting the quality of service. This 
method is implemented as an embedded multi-agent system. 
Section II is devoted to a classification of the state of the 
art that uses multi-agent systems in wireless sensor networks. 
In Section III, a new proposal is introduced on distributed 
agent based topology control in WSN. Performances of this 
proposal will be studied in Section IV, and finally, we will 
give some concluding remarks and future work in the last 
section. 
 
II. USING MAS IN WSN 
 
Using agent technology in a WSN consists in associating 
agents to nodes which cooperate between them in order to 
calculate topology parameters. Each agent has a proper code 
that can be executed by a node, with the ability for the agent 
to move between nodes for processing or searching 
information.  According to Rijubrata [11], the multi-agent 
approach in WSN has many advantages: the easy network 
scalability, extensibility and adaptation tasks, energy 
efficiency, and progressive system. 
In recent years, several research works are interested in 
the WSN distributed processing based on agent technology. 
A classification of these contributions is given below, 
according to their objectives and the level of integration in a 
WSN.  
A. Software architecture of applications and services 
Biswas et al. [12] presents an interoperable multi-agent 
architecture through layers. The authors demonstrate the 
effectiveness of their method by comparing the client/server 
approach and the multi-agent systems in terms of execution 
time and energy consumption. The work is an extension of 
an existing model called interoperable agent model:  the 
new MAS model includes eight agent types: Sensor Agent 
(SA), agent management system (AMS), Directory 
Facilitator (DF), which helps other agents to cooperation, 
agent 
communication 
channel 
(ACC), 
Controller 
synthesizer (CS), Data Manager (DM), Application Agent 
(AA ) and Agent Interface (AI). These agents are distributed 
in a sensor network that may contain both wired and IP 
nodes. The communication between agents is provided by 
XML messages. 
After their work on the MWAC model (Multi-Wireless-
Agent Communication) and DIAMOND method [3], which 
is interested in embedded multi-agent systems, especially in 
wireless infrastructure, the authors present in [2] a 
discussion on embedded systems design specifics that use 
multi-agent systems. 
Smarsly et al. [4] proposes a system design-based on 
migrant agents to define a dynamic operation in a WSN 
according to nodes requirements, this system was really 
tested on a platform for thermal variations treatment in an 
experimental environment. 
Rahal et al. [13] propose a formal model based on real-
time temporal logic for multi-agent system specification and 
evaluation when it is integrated into a WSN environment. 
Reactive decisional agents are used to take advantage of 
their 
ability 
to 
cooperation, 
reaction 
to 
events, 
communication and concurrence. 
B. Organization of the network, clustering and cooperation 
In order to facilitate the design and implementation of 
WSN, Wang et al. [5] propose a model as combination 
between mobile agents and MAS. The proposed architecture 
is hierarchically structured according to the roles played by 
each sensor in the network. These roles are assigned to the 
nodes using some elective algorithms, the MAS is used for 
collaboration and mobile agents for data exchange purpose. 
The objective is localization and classification of acoustic 
targets. 
In [6], the optimization of energy consumption and reply 
time is based on MAS applied to a data collection algorithm 
used for monitoring emergent events where the WSN is 
divided into dynamic clusters. This is defined by the event 
importance which determines the size and the lifetime of a 
cluster. Mobile agents traverse the network through cluster 
heads; itinerary planning is determined by the residual 
energy and the packet loss degree in the path. Simulation 
results show that the multi-agent model has better 
performance in terms of energy consumption and replay 
time. 
Logical clustering model adapted to multi-agent 
operation is presented by Jabeur et al.[7]. It divides the 
nodes into a four levels hierarchy: atomic level which is the 
node itself, micro level that represents a group of nodes 
managed by a cluster head, meso level which is the upper 
level grouping a number of clusters of the same area, and 
finally, a virtual cluster representing the entire network. 
This logical structure can change after an event. At each 
level, is assigned a type of agent cooperating with the higher 
level agent to accomplish the distributed network 
operations. 
C. Routing 
Many works study the routing problem in WSN, the 
classical problem consists in routing data from source node 
to a destination node (sink). According to the application 
goal, multipath routing may be used in order to increase the 
reliability of data transmission i.e., fault tolerance. Liu et al. 
[8] propose a new agent-based routing algorithm with 
quality of service in WSN. By participating in routing and 
maintenance of paths, agents are used to manage the 
topology changes and communication flow. The method is 
based on a Swarm Intelligence principle [33], which is 
inspired from the collective intelligence system of insects. 
In this case, latency, packet loss, and energy conservation 
are considered in general as quality of service factors. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

The MAS has two agent types: Forward agent FA (to 
establish a connection with a neighbor in searching path) 
and Reverse agent RA (in response to build a path). As in 
[8], Dario et al. [14] propose a model called MAM 
(Markovian Agent Model) which is based on Swarm 
intelligence, but using a Markov model. The operation of 
agents is based not only on local transitions from a node 
itself, but the probable transitions of other nodes too (local 
transitions and induced transitions). 
D. Monitoring and Mobility 
A Bayesian model named BNGRAZ (Bayesian network 
algorithm grazing) is proposed by Matthew et al. [15]   for 
managing mobility in WSNs. It is bio-inspired model that 
emulates the behavior of herbivores grazing pastures. The 
WSN in question contains some mobile nodes to adjust 
coverage and connectivity. The choice of itinerary taken by 
a mobile node is based on the probability of disconnection 
or inaccessibility, this probability is calculated using 
information provided by neighbors. 
As in [15], Saamaja et al. [16] propose a similar 
principle but with the aim of optimizing the lifetime and 
satisfy requested quality of service using data collectors that 
form clusters by changing position, the movements are 
made according to objective rather than probability. A self-
adaptation strategy for scheduling tasks in a WSN is 
presented in [17], where a mathematical model is proposed 
for dynamic allocation tasks. The algorithm has a collective 
intelligence functioning called PSO (Particle Swarm 
Optimization algorithm). 
 In [3], Jamont proposes that each node plays a specific 
role in its neighborhood. This role is determined by an 
embedded agent in the node itself. If the node is in the area 
of intersection of multiple clusters, it has the role of liaison 
or gateway; else it has the simple data capture role. Finally a 
representative node or a cluster head is elected in the cluster 
to manage communications. Mobility and node failures are 
well treated by this structure. 
To optimize the task scheduling problem and data 
transmission in video WSN, the work presented by Huang et 
al. [18] is based on a set of intelligent procedures associated 
with agents by using ant colony algorithms, genetic 
algorithms, or mixed algorithms. Security problem is also 
pointed out by this recent trend through bio-inspired 
methods. 
 
Figure 1.  MAS for tasks allocation [18]. 
Each agent (representing a node) decides to participate 
or not in target detection according to the following factors: 
- S: denotes the status set {busy, free} of the current node; 
- E: depicts whether or not the current node has enough 
energy to accomplish the assignment; 
- α: angle of vision of the camera on the x-axis (right to 
left); 
- β: angle of vision on the y-axis (up and down); 
- q: determines the required quality of picture by the 
monitoring process. 
The results show that the algorithms require less energy 
than AODV protocol. 
E. Topology control 
Topology control consists of using different parameters 
of the network in order to provide a well organization 
achieving some important tasks. These parameters could be 
radio range, state or role of the node, etc. The majority of 
works that use multi-agent systems in topology control are 
based on hierarchical structures with clusters, more adapted 
for MAS running on multiple levels [6]. First of all, we 
recall the principles and techniques used in this field and 
related work. According to [19], there exist three main 
techniques: 
E.1.  Power Adjustment Approach 
The power adjustment approach allows nodes to vary 
their transmission power in order to reduce energy incurred 
in transmission. Rather than transmitting at maximum 
transmission power, nodes collaborate to adjust and find the 
appropriate transmission power, yielding to a connected 
network. For example, in Figure 2, the links N1 - N4 and 
N2 - N4 are unused by reducing the radio range of these 
nodes. 
 
Figure 2. Topology control by adjusting the radio range. 
 
Protocols representing this technique are Minimum 
Energy Communication Network (MECN) [34] where each 
node uses the minimum power level to communicate, and 
COMPOW [20] which uses a common minimum power 
level for all nodes in order guarantee the connectivity of the 
network. 
E.2.  Power Mode Approach 
In addition to the techniques used by the MAC layer 
protocols and when the number of deployed nodes is 
sufficient, redundancy of nodes can be exploited to get a 
better topology by changing the state of a node between 
active and sleep. GAF (Geographical Adaptive Fidelity) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[21] is an example of a protocol that uses a principle of 
equivalent nodes, it allows a node to switch between sleep, 
discovery and active states as shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. State Transitions in GAF. 
 
Also, in ASCENT (Adaptive Self-Configuring Sensor 
Network Topologies) [22], a self-reconfigurable algorithm 
that allows nodes to locally measure the operating 
conditions is presented. Based on these conditions, nodes 
then decide whether they need to participate in routing or 
not.  
E.3.  Hierarchical structures 
This technique is to find a structure with hierarchical 
clusters for the network. Choosing cluster heads presents a 
problem for this technique. Several contributions have tried 
to propose approaches to obtain more efficient clustering. 
Most algorithms construct a virtual backbone based on the 
connected dominating set concept (CDS). From these 
algorithms, we can talk about PACDS (Power Aware 
Connected Dominating Set) [23], ECDS (Energy Efficient 
Distributed Connecting Dominating Sets) [35], and TMPO 
(Topology Management by Priority Ordering) [24]. 
E.4.  Hybrid approaches 
The hybrid approach for topology control uses in general 
a combination between a clustering method and other 
techniques, like CLUSTERPOW algorithm [25] (Figure 4).  
 
 
Figure 4. Principle of the CLUSTERPOW algorithm. 
 
This algorithm defines several levels of clusters with 
different radio powers for communication within and 
between clusters. 
 
III.  PROPOSED METHOD 
A. The problem 
Our contribution consists of proposing a hybrid and 
distributed method using MAS for wireless sensor network 
topology control. This method bears on local decisions 
taken by the node itself using a function of several 
parameters: residual energy, number of neighbors, links 
quality, etc. The main objective is to have at any time a 
connected, homogeneous and fault-tolerant network which 
should be capable to predict and avoid as much failures as 
possible. We have been inspired by influence systems [36] 
which require strong cooperation between nodes. 
When transmitting data, the principle consists of 
selecting the most fault tolerant nodes that ensure safe 
transfer. The use of MAS seems to be a suitable approach 
according to the distributed, cooperative and emergent 
principles that characterizes this operation. 
The role of MAS here is to calculate for each node a 
parameter determining its state and its capacity to go further 
without energy depletion or congestion failure before the 
end of data transfer. The calculated parameter is called the 
degree of tolerance of a node. 
Some works in this context have a similar principle 
which is based on computing one or more metrics to control 
the topology such as Rong-rong et al. [26] which calculates 
the probability of node's failure, and Bo-Chao et al. [27] 
based on the evaluation of the link quality between two 
nodes to predict the lifetime of each node. So the main 
difference between these works is the choice of network 
parameters and how to calculate these parameters. In our 
approach, we propose another method, where we will use 
the link quality evaluation of [28] then we add the battery 
status and the number of hops to the. This principle allows 
us to express the lifetime and the fault tolerance ability. A 
thresholding mechanism is implemented to avoid frequent 
changes in the topology due to minor differences. 
B. Related work 
We are interested here in the works which are based on 
local settings of network to predict or estimate other values 
or states in order to optimize the process of topology 
control. 
We start with Yin et al. [26] which proposes an adaptive 
method for fault tolerance topology control by calculating 
the node failure probability FP based on the ratio of the 
consumed energy Ec, the initial energy Einit and another fault 
probability P associated to hardware and software 
components. We have: 
     
   
                                                                    (1) 
In [29], Dario Bruneo et al. show that the introduction of 
Markov techniques allows estimating the lifetime of a node 
by taking the active-sleep cycle as a model of transitions 
with probabilities for each transition. But in reality, lifetime 
also depends on the node activities when it is at active state. 
Failures in a sensor network can be detected by 
application of "fuzzy inference" according to Safdar Abbas 
Khan et al. [30] where the sensor measures are compared 
with expected values by a neural network; the differences in 
behavior allow detecting anomalies. 
The lifetime of a hierarchical network is studied by Bo-
Chao et al. in [27]. It proposes an algorithm for lifetime 
prediction in better and worst cases in a WSN with one hop 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

clusters where the cluster heads should communicate 
directly with the sink. The objective of this work is to find 
the best deployment for this type of topology. A cooperative 
approach for topology control is proposed by Paolo Costa et 
al. in [31]. The construction of the topology consists of 
choosing nodes that guarantee a degree of k-connectivity by 
using a minimum radio range. The stability of topology is 
obtained by cooperation between nodes until obtaining the 
optimal radio level under k-connectivity constraint. 
C. Proposal details 
C.1.  The network model 
Related to an application domain, the nodes of network 
are deployed randomly in a known field to capture specific 
types of information; the captured data are then transmitted 
to a control station or sink. When transferring data, the 
choice of path is based on the choice of the next hop or the 
parent from the current node obeying to some routing 
protocol. Here, the next hop is selected from the neighbors 
using the degree of tolerance at the time of transfer, so the 
node that has the highest degree of tolerance will be 
qualified for this transfer. This task is performed by agents 
implanted on nodes.  
 
 
Figure 5. Network model. 
 
Figure 5 shows this principle where the agent is 
responsible for selecting a parent among candidate 
neighbors for the node that wants to transmit packets. Some 
nodes may become critical, so they cannot be parents to 
other nodes. 
C.2. The topology construction 
After deployment of nodes, the sink diffuses an 
initialization message Init which is based on the HC (Hop 
Count) value. For the sink itself, the value is null. The 
neighborhood discovery is included in this method. 
Each node n which receives the Init message considers 
the sender of the message as the next hop for the next 
transmissions if the HC value of   the latter, is less than the 
HC value of the receiver node n. So, it does: 
if HC (n) > HC (init) then HC (n)  HC (init) 
Then, it rebroadcasts the Init message. At the beginning, 
the HC values are set to infinity for all nodes except the sink 
which is initialized to zero.  
C.3.  Topology control method 
After the stability of the topology obtained by the 
initialization process (there is no node which rebroadcasts 
the Init message), the nodes calculate their degree of 
tolerance as follows. Let us consider: 
- Einit: initial energy of a node. 
- Ev: residual energy of the node v. 
- N: set of neighbors of v, Ni Є N  is a neighbor of v. 
- Pin(Ni): number of received packets by v from Ni 
during a period t. 
- Pout(Ni): number of broadcast packets by Ni during 
a period t. 
- Poutc(Ni): number of correctly received packets by 
the neighbors of Ni (with acknowledgment). 
- HC(v): hop count from v to the sink; 
- NH(v): the next hop from v to the sink also said 
parent of v. 
For the calculation of tolerance degree TD, we propose 
to use the link quality and battery status of each node. The 
calculation of the first parameter is inspired from the link 
quality estimation proposed by Omprakash et al. [28], where 
CTP (Collection Tree Protocol) is defined. It is a routing 
protocol that computes unicast routes to a single route or a 
small number of designated sinks in a wireless sensor 
network basing only on the link quality estimation network 
parameter. It uses periodic messages called beacons to 
maintain topology. A beacon is a packet that contains the 
link quality estimation between tow nodes. 
 In our case, for battery status, we consider the 
relationship between the residual energy and the initial 
energy. 
We define the quality of outgoing links QS between 
node v and its neighbor Ni as follows: 
   (  )        ( )     ( )                         (2) 
Similarly, the quality of incoming links QE between a 
node v and its neighbor Ni: 
   (  )      ( )     (  )                           (3) 
The node v calculates its TD (Tolerance Degree) in 
function of its battery status and quality Q of an outgoing or 
incoming link like it is shown in equation (4), where Q is 
QS for outgoing links and Q is QE for incoming links as 
follows: 
  ( )  (
  
     )  (      (       )      )       (4) 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

where αTD is a weighting constant that can take values 
between 0 and 1, it is 0.9 for our case. 
The parent change procedure is based on the parameter 
values of the previous parent and candidate neighbors.  
We use mainly the energy E, the degree of tolerance TD 
(old value) and the hops count HC. By cooperation, nodes 
use a control message to inform neighbors when there is 
change in values of energy, HC and TD. To avoid parent 
change when small variations in these parameters happen, a 
threshold principle is used for each one. So the node v 
decides to choose a neighbor Ni as its new parent NH if the 
following conditions are satisfied: 
 
HC (Ni) ≤ HC (v) + Threshold_HC 
E (Ni) > E (NH (v)) + Threshold_E 
TD (Ni) > TD (NH (v)) + Threshold_TD 
 
It is necessary to know that the verification order of 
these conditions is very important; it also depends on the 
nature of application using our approach. Here, we chose the 
hops count in first with a threshold that depends on the 
network size (number of nodes in the network) in order to 
avoid long traffic paths. This may be not useful if the 
application has no real time constraint. The algorithm below 
shows the parent selection process according to the previous 
conditions. TE, TTD and THC represent the threshold values 
for the energy, degree of tolerance and the hops count 
respectively. The function Change_Parent represents a 
switching tool between the active parent and the candidate 
one. The TD function implements the estimation of the 
tolerance degree.  
 
 
 
 
This algorithm allows the node to change its parent as 
soon as finding a better one. Also, it is used for selecting a 
new parent among candidate neighbors when detecting a 
fault (e.g., the current parent dies or moves). A fault of 
parent can be declared after failing in packets transfer.     
 
 
IV. IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS 
A. Simulation 
Actually, the MAS platforms are not used in practice to 
implement WSN simulation because there are no network 
properties integrated in these software tools. 
In order to validate the proposed solution and study its 
performances, as well as the adaptation of a multi-agent 
model for this type of distributed algorithm, we have 
implemented our approach using the Castalia simulator 
which is based on the simulator Omnet++ [32]. CASTALIA 
is a commonly used tool in recent years for WSNs 
simulation due to its gratuity and easy integration of new 
protocols in its software layer structure presenting a 
configurable environment as needed. For our study, we used 
version 3.2 of Castalia with OMNET++ 4.2 turning on an 
UBUNTU machine. Our distributed algorithm consists of 
implementing agent on each sensor node. It is the simple 
manner to view a WSN as MAS where cooperation is 
provided by exchanging messages at the moment of data 
transfer to select at each hop, the most fault tolerant node. It 
is clear that the principle of our algorithm implies that 
agents must communicate the necessary information like the 
latest values of TD, energy level and the number of hops. 
The diagram in Figure 6 shows that the agent on node 3, for 
example, has the choice to transfer its packets through nodes 
2, 6 or 7 depending on the status of each one of these nodes. 
 
Figure 6. Principle of our algorithm. 
 
B.  Hypothesis 
To perform simulations, we consider the following 
hypothesis: initially, each node has an initial energy. All 
sensor nodes are battery powered with limited energy, 
except the Sink. Network size is specified at the beginning 
of each simulation, node 0 is chosen as Sink. Other 
simulation parameters are shown in the following table: 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Number of nodes 
Up to 300 
Field Deployment 
250 x 250 meters 
Deployment type 
Random 
Radio model 
CC2420 
Radio power 
0dBm 
Initial energy 
18720 joules 
Simulation time 
100, 200, 300,. 1000 sec .. 
Thresholds: THC , TE  and 
TTD 
20% of difference for each 
Algorithm : Parent Selection 
1: NH = Current Parent (Next Hop) 
2: Ni = Candidate neighbor 
3: If  HC(Ni) < HC (NH) + THC then 
4: if  Energy(NH) = Energy (Ni)   then 
5: if TD (NH) > TD (Ni)  + TTD   then 
6: Change_Parent(Ni) 
7: end if 
8: else if    Energy (NH) < Energy (Ni)   then 
9: if   TD (NH)  ≥ TD(Ni) + TTD   then 
10: Change_Parent (Ni) 
11: end if 
12:  else if Energy (NH) > Energy (Ni)   and   
          Energy (NH) ≤ Energy (Ni) + TE    then 
13: if  TD (NH) ≥  TD (Ni)   then 
14: Change_Parent (Ni) 
15: end if 
16: end if 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

C. Results and analysis 
To demonstrate the performance of our approach, we 
make a comparison with CTP protocol. On figures, our 
approach is noted ATC for agent topology control. Figure 7 
illustrates the execution of our protocol and shows that 
traffic is distributed across all nodes. This is assured by 
changing the parents according to the parameters of each 
node. Applying the algorithm gives the following: 
(A) Construction of the initial tree 
(B) Node 7 becomes a parent of 3 
(C) Node 3 becomes a parent of 2 
(D) Node 2 becomes a parent of 3 and 1 becomes a 
parent of node 2 
(E) Node 9 becomes a parent of node 5 
 
 
 
(A)                                          (B) 
 
(C)                                (D) 
( E) 
 
Figure 7. Illustration. 
 
 
Before giving some results on the performances of our 
approach compared with CTP method, for the lifetime 
definition, we consider the duration between the network 
initialization time until the moment it becomes non convex 
or disconnected.   
 
The initialization begins by broadcasting the ‘init’ 
message, and then nodes start changing their parents basing 
on hop count metric until the stabilization of the topology. 
Time of this operation depends on density of network which 
is defined by its size and the transmission ray of nodes. We 
can express this density by using the average number of 
node’s neighbors in the network like it is shown in Figure 8. 
 
Figure 8. Relationship between WSN density and initialization 
process. 
 
A proportional relationship is remarked between the 
average number of neighbors in the entire network and the 
average number of parent change at initialization. Having a 
lot of neighbors implies frequent recursive parent changing. 
 
Figure 9. Impact on lifetime. 
 
The curves in Figure 9 show a divergence in case of high 
density networks because our approach tries to find other 
paths to conserve energy of those used. However, in CTP, 
congestion or over-use of a path leads to the premature 
death of nodes. In case of low density, there is not a big 
difference because the topology is almost fixed with a small 
number of nodes. 
 
Figure 10. Parent change in the time. 
 
We note from Figure 10 that the difference in the 
number of parents change in both cases CTP and ATC are 
not important at first, but, over time, a divergence becomes 
more significant. This is explained by the diminution of the 
degree of tolerance calculated by our protocol, which 
requires change of parents in order to ensure load balancing. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

  
 
Figure 11. Change of parents with network size. 
 
Figure 11 also shows the curves of parent change, but 
this time based on the network size.  By increasing the size, 
we observe a difference in the number of parent changes for 
both protocols CTP and ATC. It is higher for large-scale 
networks that ensure the existence of other paths where the 
best one will be selected. The use of several parameters by 
our protocol gives more opportunities than CTP which uses 
only the quality of links. 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In this paper, we have presented a state of the art 
concerning the use of MAS in wireless sensor networks. In 
this context, we have proposed an agent-based topology 
control method for WSNs. According to the state of node 
and its neighbors, the main objective is to have a fault-
tolerant network with an extended lifetime by optimizing 
the choice of paths from the nodes to the sink. This choice is 
based on the changing parent method which uses the 
concept of tolerance degree. Also, to respect the multi-agent 
principles, the choice of parent node is achieved in a 
cooperative and distributed manner. The design and 
implementation using Omnet++/Castalia of our proposal 
shows the relevance of multi-agent systems approach 
compared to CTP method.  
Indeed, the simulation results show that our solution 
allows assessing at any time the fault tolerance level of each 
node leading to a better path selection process, and 
therefore, a longer lifetime of nodes. Limitations of the 
proposed approach are related to the reliability of link 
quality estimation mechanism which is best effort delivery. 
So, it is well adapted for relatively low traffic rate 
applications.  
The performance of our approach can be enhanced by 
providing a formula that uses other network parameters to 
calculate the tolerance degree or even use a probabilistic 
approach to predict the activities of a sensor node such as 
packet traffic. In terms of implementation, it is interesting to 
use a real agent based platform for WSN in order to study 
performances of MAS and WSN when coupled. Other 
perspective works could concern to embed security 
parameters and develop more complex formulas.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, 
"Wireless sensor networks: a survey" Computer networks, vol. 38, 
no.  4, 2002, pp.  393–422. 
[2] 
J.P. Jamont and O. Michel, "Design of embedded multi agent 
systems: discussion about some specificities", VII Agent-Oriented 
Software Engineering Technical Forum, Paris, French, December 
15, 2010. 
[3] 
J.P. Jamont, "MWAC: Multi-Wireless-Agent  Communication", 
Revue Technique et science informatiques RSTI série TSI, vol. 25, 
no. 5, 2006, pp.  661-688. 
[4] 
K. Smarsly, K.H. Law, and M. König, "Resource-Efficient Wireless 
Monitoring based on Mobile Agent Migration", In proceedings of 
the SPIE: Health Monitoring of Structural and Biological Systems 
2011. San Diego, CA, USA, 06 Mar. 2011.  
[5] 
W. Xue, B.Dao D. Liang, and W. Sheng, "Collaborative Target 
Classification and Localization in Wireless Sensor Networks 
Agent". Journal of Sensors, vol. 7, no.  8, 2007, pp. 1359-1386. 
[6] 
Y. Lingyun, W. Xingchao, G. Jianhou, and Z. Yanfang, "Data 
Gathering Algorithm Based on Mobile Agent and Emergent Event 
Driven in Cluster-Based WSN", Journal of Networks, vol. 5, no. 10, 
2010, pp. 1160-1168. 
[7] 
N. Jabeur and P. A.Graniero, "Agent-Based Clusters to Virtually 
Manage Spatially Distributed Sensors", Projects TDMDSD08 and 
SII-73 University of Windsor, Department of Earth and 
Environmental Sciences, Windsor, Ontario, Canada, 2008. 
[8] 
L. Min,  X. Shijun, and S.Siyi, "An agent-based routing algorithm 
assistedQoS-forwireless sensor networks", Journal of Network and 
Computer Applications, vol. 35,  no. 1, 2012, pp. 29-36. 
[9] 
D. Wajgi and N.V. Thakur, "Load Balancing Algorithms in 
Wireless Sensor Network : A Survey" International Journal of 
Computer Networks and Wireless Communications (IJCNWC), 
ISSN: 2250-3501, vol. 2, no. 4, Aug. 2012, pp. 456-460. 
[10] Z.  Bidai, M. Maimour, and H. Haffaf, "Multipath Extension of the 
ZigBee Tree Routing in Cluster-Tree Wireless Sensor Networks", 
International Journal of Mobile Computing and Multimedia 
Communications (IJMCMC).vol.  4, no.  2, Apr. 2012, pp. 30-48 
[11] B. Rijubrata, "Mobile Agent based Architecture for Wireless Sensor 
Networks", In proceedings of TKK T-110.5190 Seminar on 
Internetworking, Helsinki University of Technology, Finland, Apr. 
27, 2009. 
[12] K.B. Pratik, Q.Hairong, and Y. Xu, "Collaborative Mobile-agent-
based sensor fusion", Information Fusion, vol. 9,  2008, pp. 399-
411. 
[13] R.H.B. Rahal and B.Bounabat, "Wireless Sensor Network 
Simulation Of The Energy Consumption By A Multi Agent 
System", Journal of Theorical and Applied Information Technology, 
vol.  25, no. 1, 2011, pp. 50-57. 
[14] B. Dario, S. Marco, B. Andrea, C. Davide, and G. Marco,  
"Markovian agent modeling swarm intelligence algorithms in 
wireless sensor networks". Journal of Performance Evaluation, vol. 
69, no. 3-4, 2012, pp. 135-149. 
[15] D.C. Matthew, A. Djamel, P.H. Barry, and H.Alan, "A Bayesian 
network approach to a biologically inspired motion strategy for 
mobile wireless sensor networks", Journal of Ad Hoc Networks, 
vol. 7, no. 6, 2009, pp. 1217-1228. 
[16] V. Saamaja, K.R. Kiran, and R.M.C. Siva, "Using mobile data 
collectors to Improve network lifetime of wireless sensor networks 
with reliability constraints", Journal of Parallel and Distributed 
Computing, vol. 70, no. 7, 2010, pp. 767-778. 
[17] G. Wenzhong, X. Naixue, C. Han-Chieh, H. Sajid, and C.Guolong, 
"Design and Analysis of Self-Adapted Task Scheduling Strategies 
in Wireless Sensor Networks". Journal of Sensors, vol. 11, 2011, pp. 
6533-6554. 
[18] H. Hai-ping, W. Ru-chuan, S. Li-juan, W. Hai-yuan, and X. Fu, 
"Research on tasks schedule and data transmission of video sensor 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

networks based on intelligent agents and intelligent algorithms", 
The 
Journal 
of 
China 
Universities 
of 
Posts 
and 
Telecommunications, vol. 16, no.  6, 2009, pp. 84-91. 
[19] A.A. Azrina, Y.A. Sekercioglu, P. Fitzpatrick, and M.Ivanovich, "A 
survey on distributed topology control techniques for extending the 
lifetime 
of 
battery 
powered 
wireless 
sensor 
networks",  
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 15, no. 1, 2013, 
pp. 121-144.  
[20] S. Narayanaswamy, V. Kawadia, R.S. Sreenivas, and P.R. Kumar, 
"Power control in ad-hoc networks: Theory, architecture, 
algorithm and implementation of the protocol compow", In 
proceedings of European Wireless Conference (2002), pp. 156-162. 
[21] X. Ya, J. Heidemann and D.Estrin, "Geography-informed energy 
conservation for ad hoc routing", In proceedings of 7th Annual 
international conference on mobile computing and networking-
MOBICOM, New York, USA, 2001, pp. 70-84. 
[22] A. Cerpa and D. Estrin, "Ascent: Adaptive Self-Configuring sensor 
networks topologies", IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 
vol. 3, no. 3, 2004, pp.  272-285. 
[23] D.Z. 
Du 
and 
P. 
Pardalos, "Handbook 
of 
Combinatorial 
Optimization", Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004. 
[24] L. Bao and J.J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, "Topology management in ad 
hoc 
networks", In 
proceedings 
of. 4th 
ACM 
International 
Symposium on Mobile AdHoc Networking and Computing, ACM 
New York, NY, USA, 2003, pp. 129-140. 
[25] V. Kawadia and P.R. Kumar, "Power control and clustering in ad 
hoc networks", In INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-second annual joint 
conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications. IEEE 
Societies, 30 March-3 Apr. 2003, pp. 459-469. 
[26] Y. Rong-rong, L. Bin, L. Ya-qian, and H. Xiao-chen, "Adaptively 
fault-tolerant topology control algorithm for wireless sensor 
networks", The Journal of China Universities of Posts and 
Telecommunications, vol. 19, no. Suppl. 2, 2012, pp. 13-18. 
[27] C. Bo-Chao, L. Guo-Tan, T. Ryh-Yuh, and H. Ping Hsu, "Network 
lifetime bounds for hierarchical wireless sensor networks in the 
presence of energy constraints", Journal of Computer Networks, 
vol. 56, no. 2, 2012, pp. 820-831. 
[28] G. Omprakash, F. Rodrigo, J. Kyle, M. David, and L. 
Philip, "Collection Tree Protocol", In proceedings of the 7th ACM 
Conference on embedded networked sensor systems, Berkeley, CA, 
USA, Nov. 2009, pp. 1-14. 
[29] B. Dario, D. Salvatore, L. Francesco, P. Antonio, and S. Marco, 
"Evaluating wireless sensor node longevity through Markovian 
techniques", Journal of Computer Networks, vol. 56, no. 2, 2012, 
pp. 521-532. 
[30] A.K. Safdar, D. Boubaker, and D. Karim, "Application of fuzzy 
inference systems to detection of faults in wireless sensor 
networks", Journal of Neurocomputing, vol. 94, no. 1, 2012, pp. 
111-120. 
[31] C. Paolo, C. Matteo, B. Stefano, and C. Luca, "A Cooperative 
Approach for Topology Control in Wireless Sensor Networks", 
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no. 5, 2009, pp. 526–541. 
[32] OMNeT++ Homepage http://www.omnetpp.org. 
[33] F.  Celik, A. Zengin, and  S.Tuncel, "A survey on swarm intelligence 
based routing protocols in wireless sensor networks",  International 
Journal of the Physical Sciences, vol. 5, no. 14,  2010, pp. 2118-
2126.  
[34] V. Rodoplu and T. H. Meng, "Minimum energy mobile wireless 
networks", IEEE J. Salt. Areas Communications, vol. 17, no. 8, 
1999, pp. 1333-1344. 
[35] Z. Yuanyuan, X. Jia, and H. Yanxiang, "Energy efficient distributed 
connected dominating sets in wireless sensor networks building", In 
proceedings of the 2006 International conference on wireless 
communications and mobile computing, New York, USA, ACM 
2006, pp. 797-802. 
[36] B. Chazelle, 
"Natural 
algorithms 
and influence 
systems", 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 55 no. 12, Dec. 2012, pp. 101-
110. 
 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

