Communications for Massive UAV Scenarios 
Uwe-Carsten Fiebig 
Institute of Communications and Navigation 
German Aerospace Research (DLR) 
Wessling, Germany  
e-mail: uwe.fiebig@dlr.de 
 
 
Abstract— In this article, we look 20 to 30 years ahead and 
provide some thoughts about communication technologies for 
future massive Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) scenarios in the 
Very Low Level (VLL) airspace. We use the term “massive” to 
stress that the number of UAVs will be in the order of the 
number of cars as of today: we treat scenarios where the 
number of UAVs is about 1 UAV per person. We expect UAVs 
to fly autonomously. Onboard sensors, communication and 
software will be key elements to ensure a safe operation. We 
address fundamental questions and provide thoughts on 
communication solutions. 
Keywords-component; UAV communications; drone-to-drone 
communications; massive UAV scenarios. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In a near future, autonomously operating small to mid-
sized Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) enable prompt 
parcel delivery to every household and fast delivery of goods 
to shops, companies, restaurants, hospitals and the like. The 
Very Low Level (VLL) airspace will accommodate millions 
of UAVs. We may see scenarios which have been described 
so far only in science fiction novels. However, we are 
progressively getting closer to such a world: since many years 
already, UAVs support commercial, military and private 
purposes, and their number is dramatically growing. 
In this article, we take a closer look on appropriate 
communication technologies for massive UAV scenarios. 
These scenarios are described in Section II and are very 
different from those of controlled airspaces: the density of 
UAVs will be considerably higher than today’s density of 
aircraft in crowded regions. In Section III, we discuss 
fundamental aspects in terms of communications load and the 
number of simultaneously received messages. We sketch first 
results on the communication performance in Section IV. 
II. 
THE MASS MARKET UAV SCENARIO 
We consider scenarios with 1 UAV per person. This figure 
reflects our vision that the number of UAVs will be similar to 
the number of road motor vehicles as of today. The 
motorization rate in major European countries and in the 
United States is in the order of 60 to 70 % [1], respect. 80% 
[2], including automobiles, trucks, vans, buses, commercial 
vehicles and freight motor road vehicles.  
Eventually, we look on a selected region and consider a 
UAV scenario in a larger city with 1.5 million inhabitants and 
dense traffic situations. Such a city can be Munich, Germany, 
and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States. These cities 
have about 1.5 million inhabitants [3][4] and an area of about 
310 and 350 km2 [3][4], respectively. Thus, both cities have a 
similar number of inhabitants per km2. And both cities have 
about the same number of road motor vehicles [3][5], i.e., 
about 700,000. 
We follow our analogy of today’s car usage pattern and 
the fact that the layout of cities does not dramatically change 
during the next decades. In our analysis, we assume that 
UAVs have a maximum speed of 15 m/s, that the average 
length of their flight paths is 7 km, and that 10 % of all UAVs 
are airborne during a UAV rush hour. Thus, we get an average 
flight duration of 8 minutes. For a UAV rush hour 150,000 
UAVs are airborne over an area of about 300 km2 resulting in 
a density of 500 UAVs per km2; we also obtain about 0.75 
million flights in the UAV rush hour.  
From these numbers, it becomes obvious that traffic 
control of massive UAV scenarios cannot be handled in the 
same way as traffic control for today’s IFR (Instrument Flight 
Rules) flights: due to the tremendous number of airborne 
UAVs a manual and semi-automated way of control is not 
feasible. Therefore, only fully automated traffic control 
systems are an option which in turn require robust and highly 
reliable Communication, Navigation and Surveillance (CNS) 
technologies. We also need very robust collision avoidance 
techniques which rely on the robustness and suitability of 
CNS technologies. In this contribution, we present a de-
centralized communication concept for collision avoidance. 
III. 
COMMUNICATION LOAD  
We estimate the communication load for a city like 
Munich or Philadelphia. Thus, following our vision of 1 UAV 
per person, we get 1.5 million UAVs for such a city. Assuming 
that 10 % of all UAVs are airborne simultaneously during a 
UAV rush hour, we will have 150,000 UAVs in the air.  
In order to get an estimate for the data volumes to be 
handled we refer to car-to-car communications technologies 
where cars broadcast periodically messages at 1 Hz (normal 
operation) to 10 Hz (in emergency situations). We believe that 
these rates can be transferred to UAV communications. A data 
packet shall encompass 500 bit (optionally 5000 bit) and 
contains the current position and orientation of the UAV, its 
future way points, its destination, information about its size, 
volume, freight type, priority mode and flight characteristics. 
Each UAV shall broadcast such a data packet with 1 Hz. Thus, 
the overall bit rate, i.e., the bit rate simultaneously transmitted 
by 150,000 UAVs is obtained as 75 Mbit/s. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

We see that the overall bit rate is relatively small. A single 
LTE-Advanced Pro base station provides a total bit rate of up 
to 1000 Mbit/s and 500 Mbit/s for down- and uplink, 
respectively. Thus, the overall amount of data (and even ten 
times more in case of data packets of 5000 bit) is manageable 
even with today’s technologies. The decisive question is 
whether a de-centralized or a centralized communication 
architecture shall be applied. 
In this article, we promote direct communications between 
drones as in other traffic control systems: TCAS, the Traffic 
Collision Avoidance System for air traffic; AIS, the 
Automatic Identification System for maritime users; RCAS, a 
new Railway Collision Avoidance System acting as additional 
safety system; and ITS G5, a car-to-car communications 
standard. Traffic participants periodically broadcast data to 
surrounding aircraft, ships or vehicles, communicate directly 
with each other and use neither a central communications 
entity nor a centralized communication infrastructure. 
Beaconing, the periodic or quasi-periodic broadcast of 
information, is an established transmission mode. 
An important issue to look at is the question up to which 
range the transmitted data shall be correctly received. We 
derive the communication range from two parameters: (1) 
UAVs will travel with a velocity of up to 15 m/s; (2) a 
potential collision course shall be detectable at least 33 
seconds prior to the time instant at which this collision would 
occur when no action is taken. From a collision avoidance 
perspective, the worst case happens when both UAVs are 
heading directly towards each other resulting in the highest 
relative velocity and, hence, in the shortest amount of time to 
detect and solve this situation; this worst case requires a 
communication range of 
 
𝑅𝑐𝑜𝑚 = 2 ⋅ 15m/s ⋅ 33𝑠 ≈ 1000𝑚  
() 
Assuming all UAVs are equally distributed, the number of 
UAVs within the communication range is obtained as 
 
𝑁𝑈𝐴𝑉 = 𝑅𝑐𝑜𝑚
2
⋅ 𝜋 ⋅ 500km-2 ≈ 1600  
() 
 The result reveals that each UAV must be able to correctly 
receive data from 1600 neighboring UAVs every second. 
Since the transmission rate is 500 bit/s, each UAV has to 
process a total of 0.8 Mbit every second. In view of these 
figures, we do not expect that it will be a problem for future 
UAV communication systems to receive, decode, and read 
1600 data packets per second carrying a total of 0.8 Mbit of 
data. Also, managing the communication load for larger cell 
sizes or larger data packets should not be a problem: e.g., 
doubling the cell radius results in 6300 UAVs per cell and, in 
turn, in 6300 data packets carrying a total of 3.2 Mbit. 
We are also confident that it won’t be a problem to check 
1600, respectively 6300 flight trajectories for potential 
collision courses every second and to suggest alternative 
routes if needed. Note that it is not required to repeat checking 
for potential collisions as long as trajectories remain 
unchanged. Thus, trajectories from only those UAVs have to 
be checked which either enter the communication range or 
have changed their trajectories.  
IV. 
FIRST RESULTS 
At the workshop, the author will provide first results on 
the performance of slotted ALOHA [6] when applied to a 
massive UAV scenario with UAV densities of 100 to 500 
UAV/km2. He will present a relation between communication 
failures (i.e., non-received messages) and the expected 
number of UAV collisions and will apply it to two different 
scenarios: one where all UAVs choose a direct flight path 
between departure and destination locations and one where 
UAVs fly on a grid-like pattern. All UAVs fly above rooftops 
and have line-of-sight conditions. In our first assessment, we 
consider neither multipath propagation although it may 
degrade the communication performance nor take-off and 
landing maneuvers although they are crucial due to shadowing 
situations. The communication system may operate at C-band. 
The analysis will follow a framework which has been 
presented in [7] and is based on the missed detection 
probability that not a single beacon message is received 
correctly at a UAV while approaching another one on a 
collision course. Both UAVs have at least 30 opportunities 
(during 33s) to detect beacon messages of the other UAV 
before the collision happens, and a collision is unavoidable of 
none of the two UAVs correctly receives at least one data 
packet at least 3s prior to the potential collision.  
The first investigations reveal that an ALOHA-type 
beaconing system with 1 MHz bandwidth and 1 Hz beaconing 
rate can support UAV densities up to 150 UAV/km2 when 
UAVs fly direct paths and more than 500 UAV/km2 when 
UAVs fly along a predefined grid while guaranteeing less than 
1 accident per year for a city like Munich. With larger packets 
the bandwidth increases linearly. Note that self-organized 
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) or Location-Based 
TDMA may allow even higher UAV densities.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author thanks Lukas Schalk from DLR for numerous 
fruitful discussions on this subject. 
REFERENCES 
[1] European 
Automobile 
Manufacturers 
Association. 
https://www.acea.auto/files/ACEA_Report_Vehicles_in_use-
Europe_2019-1.pdf 
[2] Bureau of Transportation Statistics of the U.S. Department of 
Transportation (DOT). https://www.bts.gov/content/number-
us-aircraft-vehicles-vessels-and-other-conveyances 
[3] City of Munich. https://www.muenchen.de/ 
[4] U.S. Census Bureau of the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
https://www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/philadelphiacity
pennsylvania,US/PST045219 
[5] Pennsylvania 
Department 
of 
Transportation. 
http://www.dot.state.pa.us/public/dvspubsforms/BMV/Registr
ation%20Reports/Reportofregistration2019.pdf 
[6] N. Abramson, “The ALOHA System - Another Alternative for 
Computer Communications“ in Proc. 1970 Fall Joint Computer 
Conference, 1970, pp. 281–285.  
[7] L. M. Schalk, “Techniques for improving the cooperative 
Traffic Conflict Detection among Drones.” In Proc. of IEEE 
89th Vehicular Technology Conf. (VTC Spring) 2019, Kuala 
Lumpur, Malaysia, doi: 10.1109/VTCSpring.2019.8746350 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

