Novel Pico-cell Range Expansion with Adaptive RACH Resource Allocation
for Random Access of M2M Devices
Woo-Jong Jo, Chang-Yeong Oh,
Samsung Electronics
Suwon, Korea
Email: {wjong.jo, changyong.oo}@samsung.com
Yunmin Kim, and Tae-Jin Lee
School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
Suwon, Korea
Email: {kym0413, tjlee}@skku.edu
Abstract—In the next-generation cellular networks, Machine-to-
Machine (M2M) communications, in which machine-type devices
communicate with each other without user’s control, is considered
to create new services. In M2M communications, a large number
of M2M devices distributed in a cell area may exist. So, the
random access congestion problem caused by massive and simul-
taneous random access trials of user equipments (UEs) is one of
the most important issues to be addressed. For next-generation
cellular networks, an efﬁcient random access control scheme is
required to decentralize random access trials from a macro-
cell to small-cells in a heterogeneous network (HetNet). So, we
consider a new random access control scheme by adjusting pico-
cell’s coverage dynamically to improve the performance of the
random access procedure in HetNets. In this paper, we propose
a new Pico-Cell Range Expansion (PCRE) scheme with dynamic
Random Access CHannel (RACH) resource allocation. We show
that the random access efﬁciency and random access delay of
UEs can be improved.
Keywords–HetNets; M2M communications; random access con-
trol; cell range expansion.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the next-generation cellular networks, Machine-to-
Machine (M2M) communications, which is also known as
Machine-Type Communications (MTC) in the Third Gener-
ation Partnership Project (3GPP) speciﬁcations [1], is con-
sidered as a new key technology to create new services. In
M2M communications, MTC Devices (MTCDs), i.e., different
type of User Equipments (UEs) compared to legacy UEs
for Human-to-Human (H2H) communications, communicate
with each other anytime and anywhere without user’s control.
Because of various applications for M2M communications,
e.g., metering the usage of water, electricity, and gas and
road security for announcing the emergency message, a very
large number of MTCDs can spread in a cell area and work
simultaneously. So, one of the main issues for M2M commu-
nications is a random access congestion problem caused by
the concurrent and massive random access trials of MTCDs.
In order to reduce the congestion problem, some ap-
proaches on random access controls in a Long Term Evolution
(LTE) system have been discussed [2]. In [3], a preamble
separation scheme which splits a set of available preambles
and allocates them to MTCDs separately is introduced. A
part of preambles for MTCDs are shared by M2M and H2H
UEs, but the dedicated preambles are always provided to
H2H UEs. And a dynamic Random Access CHannel (RACH)
resource allocation scheme for dynamic trafﬁc is proposed by
Yilmaz et al. [4]. Amirijoo et al. [5] present an adaptive power
control mechanism for preamble transmission according to the
variation of random access loads.
However, conventional random access control schemes tend
to focus on dealing with random access trials in a single cell.
For the next-generation cellular network, a new random access
control scheme considering the features of Heterogeneous
Networks (HetNets) is required. HetNet is introduced by 3GPP
to handle the growth of mobile data trafﬁc load due to the wide
spread of smart phones and tablet PCs. In a HetNet, various
small-cells formed by low power network entities, such as
pico-eNodeB, femto-eNodeB, and relay-eNodeB, can coexist
and operate along with the conventional macro-eNodeB [6].
So, the random access loads can be spread from a macro-
cell to small-cells. In particular, pico-cells can take over the
random access loads of a macro-cell efﬁciently since they can
be deployed by the operator’s cell planning [7]. For an efﬁcient
random access congestion control in a HetNet, balancing
random access loads between a macro-cell and small-cells is
important.
As an approach for balancing random access loads in Het-
Nets, we consider controlling the coverage area of pico-cells
dynamically by utilizing Cell Rage Expansion (CRE), which
has been introduced initially and discussed by 3GPP [8]. If
the CRE scheme is properly applied to pico-cells, the random
access congestion problem can be relieved by decentralizing
the random access load of a macro-cell to pico-cells. In [9],
they introduce a simple CRE scheme and show simulation
results when the random access loads are ofﬂoaded from
macro-cells to pico-cells depending on different bias values.
Guvenc [10] analyzes the impact of capacity and fairness by
applying the CRE scheme to HetNets. The CRE scheme can
be realized by the power control of eNodeB. Morimoto et al.
[11] proposed a power control mechanism for the CRE. The
simulation results show that the throughput of the edge cell
area is improved although the entire cell throughput slightly
decreases. Liu et al. [12] proposed an adaptive uplink power
control of pico-eNodeB to decrease the inter-cell interference
where power control parameters of each pico-eNodeB can be
conﬁgured according to the interference level from adjacent
eNodeBs. However, their study mainly focuses on improving
the cell area capacity rather than addressing the random access
and the congestion problem.
In this paper, we propose a new Pico-CRE (PCRE) scheme
with dynamic RACH resource allocation to improve the aver-
age random access efﬁciency and the average access delay of
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

M2M and H2H UEs. Each pico-eNodeB measures the number
of accessed UEs, and compares it with the estimated number
of UEs. After the comparison, the pico-eNodeB adjusts its
cell range to reduce the gap between the measured number
of UEs trying to access and the estimated number of UEs
tying to access, and allocates the RACH resource to cover
the expected number of UEs trying to access in the expanded
cell range appropriately. By the proposed scheme, the random
access congestion problem can be addressed in HetNets. We
show the performance improvement by our proposed scheme
through simulations.
This paper is organized as follows. We describe the
proposed PCRE with dynamic RACH resource allocation in
Section II. In Section III, we evaluate the performance of
the proposed scheme via simulations. Finally, conclusion is
presented in Section IV.
II.
PROPOSED PICO-CELL RANGE EXPANSION WITH
DYNAMIC RACH RESOURCE ALLOCATION
The congestion problem may occur when massive UEs
try random access simultaneously in a network. Especially,
in HetNets, the macro-eNodeB and pico-eNodeBs may utilize
the same Physical Random Access CHannel (PRACH) in the
same time since the macro-eNodeB and pico-eNodeBs work
independently for communication services. When macro UEs
are near a pico-cell and they transmit their preambles to the
macro-eNodeB on the same PRACH with pico UEs, the pico-
eNodeB can overhear the preambles. Although the preambles
are not for the pico-eNodeB, the pico-eNodeB misunderstands
that the preambles are transmitted by their pico UEs, and thus
allocates unnecessary RACH resource, i.e., Random Access
Opportunities (RAOs). Therefore, the performance of random
access is degraded in pico-cells. So, we aim to solve the
random access congestion problem by adjusting the pico-cell’s
range and diverting random access trials of macro UEs to pico-
cells.
In a HetNet, UEs generally try to establish a Radio
Resource Control (RRC) connection with the eNodeB sup-
porting the largest Reference Signal Received Power (RSRP).
The number of UEs served by a pico-cell can be limited
by the relatively low transmission power of a pico-eNodeB.
The adoption of an efﬁcient CRE scheme can increase the
number of UEs served by pico-cells. Fig. 1 represents an
example of our proposed scheme. Since pico-eNodeBs PeNB1,
PeNB3, and PeNB4 suffer from interference by macro UEs
near their cells due to the shared preamble set in Fig. 1 (a), the
proposed CRE scheme is applied according to the number of
UEs. In order to accommodate more UEs to a pico-eNodeB,
the pico-eNodeB expands the cell range by controlling the
transmission power. Then pico-eNodeBs also allocate RACH
resource dynamically. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), PeNB1, PeNB3,
and PeNB4 allocate more RACH resource because the number
of UEs, which migrate from the macro-cell to the pico-cell, is
increased. For the macro-cell, less RACH resource is needed
due to the reduced number of macro UEs by the proposed
scheme. The proposed scheme can efﬁciently distribute more
macro UEs near a pico-cell to the pico-cell and allocate RACH
resource appropriately. The dispersion of UEs from a macro-
cell to a pico-cell can solve the congestion problem in a macro-
cell due to the reduction of the number of access UEs.
Now, we describe the proposed PCRE with the dynamic
Pico cell coverage
Macro cell coverage
PeNB2
PeNB3
PeNB1
PeNB4
Pico cell coverage
PRACH subframe for macro- cell
PRACH subframe for pico- cell
Random access to their eNodeB
Random access influence to pico- eNodeB
Macro cell coverage
PeNB2
PeNB3
PeNB1
PeNB4
Expanded pico 
cell coverage
Additional RACH resource
Reduced RACH 
resource
Diverted random access from a macro- eNodeB to a pico- eNodeB
(a) Conventional scheme
(b) Proposed scheme
Figure 1. Random access in macro- and pico-cell networks
(a) conventional scheme (b) proposed scheme.
RACH resource allocation algorithm. In our algorithm, a pico-
eNodeB measures the idle RAOs in the current frame to
estimate the number of UEs trying to access in the pico-
cell area. Then, the pico-eNodeB calculates the estimated
number of successfully accessed UEs and compares it with
the measured number of successfully accessed UEs in the
frame. If its gap is greater than a threshold, i.e., there are
a number of macro UEs around the cell boundary, the pico-
eNodeB expands its cell range to cover the macro UEs and to
allocate an appropriate number of RAOs for the UEs in the
expanded region.
At the ith frame, to estimate the number of UEs trying to
access, the pico-eNodeB measures the number of idle RAOs
(eLidle pico,i). The probability of idle RAOs ( ˆPidle pico,i) in the
ith frame can be estimated as
ˆPidle pico,i =
eLidle pico,i
Lpico,i
,
(1)
where Lpico,i is the number of allocated RAOs in the ith frame.
Since the probability of idle RAOs can be computed as
Pidle pico,i =

1 −
1
Lpico,i
NP UE,i
,
(2)
where NP UE,i is the number of UEs, we can get the estimated
number of UEs ˆNP UE,i by letting (1) to be equal to (2) such
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

that
ˆNP UE,i =
log ˆPidle pico,i
log

1 −
1
Lpico,i
.
(3)
From ˆNP UE,i, the probability of successful RAOs ˆPsucc,i in
the ith frame is estimated as
ˆPsucc,i = ˆNP UE,i
1
Lpico,i

1 −
1
Lpico,i
 ˆ
NP UE,i−1
.
(4)
Then, the pico-eNodeB estimates the number of successfully
accessed UEs ˆNsucc pico,i in the ith frame as
ˆNsucc pico,i = ˆPsucc,i × Lpico,i.
(5)
In fact, the pico-eNodeB can know the actual number of
successfully accessed UEs e
Nsucc pico,i in the ith frame. So,
by comparing ˆNsucc pico,i with e
Nsucc pico,i, the pico-eNodeB
recognizes the existence of macro UEs adjacent to its service
coverage.
If the gap of the estimated number of successfully accessed
UEs and that of the actual UEs is larger than the threshold
Nthr, it conducts its cell range expansion to include the
neighboring macro UEs. To expand its cell coverage, the
pico-eNodeB should decide the amount of transmission power
increment. First, the path-loss in the macro-cell PLmacro,i and
the path-loss in the pico-cell PLpico,i can be deﬁned by the
case model 1 in [13].
PLmacro,i = 128.1 + 37.6 log (dmacro,i[km]) ,
(6)
PLpico,i = 140.7 + 36.7 log (dpico,i[km]) ,
(7)
where dmacro,i and dpico,i are the distance between the macro-
eNodeB and a virtual UE, and the distance between the pico-
eNodeB and a virtual UE, respectively. We deﬁne the RSRP
(from the macro-eNodeB) at a UE as RSRPmacro,i and the
RSRP (from the pico-eNodeB) at a UE as RSRPpico,i.
RSRPmacro,i = 10 log (Ptx macro,i) − PLmacro,i,
(8)
RSRPpico,i = 10 log (Ptx pico,i) − PLpico,i,
(9)
where Ptx macro,i and Ptx pico,i are the transmission powers
of the macro- and of the pico-eNodeB, respectively.
To expand its cell range, the pico-eNodeB needs to ﬁnd
its current cell coverage distance D∗
pico,i. When RSRPmacro,i
and RSRPpico,i are equal, the pico-cell coverage distance can
be obtained.
RSRPmacro,i = RSRPpico,i.
(10)
However, there may be many solutions for the coverage
distance. To ﬁnd the shortest one, the distance Dmtop,i between
the macro-eNodeB and the pico-eNodeB is used.
Dmtop,i =
q
x2
macro,i + y2
macro,i,
(11)
where (xmacro,i, ymacro,i) is the position of the macro-eNodeB
assuming the pico-eNodeB is at (0, 0). When a virtual UE is
in a straight line from the macro-eNodeB to the pico-eNodeB,
Dmtop,i can be
Dmtop,i = dmacro,i + dpico,i.
(12)
From (10) and (12), the solution D∗
pico,i for dpico,i can be
obtained.
Macro-eNodeB
Expanded pico-cell 
coverage
pico
D*
d
∆
Dmtop
Pico-eNodeB
macro
d
pico
d
up
tx pico
p
P
+ ∆
_
macro
D
Macro-cell coverage
Figure 2. An example of pico-cell range expansion.
Once the pico-eNodeB obtains the its current radius
D∗
pico,i, it calculates the amount of the transmission power
increment ∆pup,i to expand the cell range. Let NT OT AL,i be
the maximum number of UEs served in a cell and Dmacro,i
be the radius of the macro-cell. From ˆNP UE,i, NT OT AL,i,
Dmacro,i, D∗
pico,i, and the assumption that UEs are uniformly
distributed in a cell, the additionally required pico-cell range
expansion ∆di can be calculated as
ˆNP UE,i :

many macro UEs contending in the pico-eNodeB. Thus, the
transmission power for the next frame in the pico-cell is not
updated.
In order to get the optimal number of RACH resource for
dynamic RACH resource allocation of pico-cells, we use the
random access efﬁciency of the system. We deﬁne the random
access efﬁciency RAeff,i as
RAeff,i = ˆNP UE,i
1
Lpico,i

1 −
1
Lpico,i
 ˆ
NP UE,i−1
.
(20)
The random access efﬁciency indicates the average success
rate of UEs trials in a frame. The maximum random access
efﬁciency is obtained by differentiation of (20). Then, we can
get
Lpico,i+1 = ˆNP UE,i.
(21)
The dynamic RACH resource allocation phase is performed by
updating the number of RAOs for the pico-cell as the estimated
number of pico UEs ˆNP UE,i. The number of RAOs is limited
to the maximum RAOs Lmax. Then the number of RAOs in
the next frame for the pico-cell is
Lpico,i+1 = min

ˆNP UE,i, Lmax

.
(22)
III.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our pro-
posed PCRE with dynamic RACH resource allocation scheme
in HetNets. The parameters used in the simulations are shown
in Table I. We use the simulation parameters in [13]. We
consider four pico-eNodeBs and UEs are uniformly distributed
in a macro-cell. In the conventional scheme, UEs randomly
access to their eNodeBs with ﬁxed RAOs. For the path-loss
model, all macro- and pico-eNodeBs are outdoor, and 3GPP
TR 36.814 urban macro and pico path-loss model is employed
[13].
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show the average random access efﬁciency
of a macro-cell and a pico-cell. In Fig. 3, as the arrival rate of
UEs trying to access becomes larger, the average random ac-
cess efﬁciency of the conventional scheme with ﬁxed RAOs in
the macro-cell slowly increases and decreases after the certain
arrival rate. When the arrival rate is small, the number of RAOs
is more than the number of access trials since the arrival rate
is small. Then the random access efﬁciency increases as the
arrival rate increases. After that, the random access efﬁciency
decreases since users have insufﬁcient number of RAOs at high
arrival rate. However, the average random access efﬁciency of
the proposed scheme in the macro-cell is almost 36%, i.e., the
TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Radius of a macro cell (Dmacro)
288 m
Max. Macro-eNodeB Tx Power (Ptx macro)
20 W
Max. Pico-eNodeB Tx Power (Ptx pico)
1 W
Max. UE Tx. Power
200 mW
Arrival rate of UEs
1000 to 35000
Max. no. of preamble transmissions
10
Max. no. of HARQ transmissions
5
Max. no. of preambles
54
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Arrival Rate of UEs (X1000)
Random access efficiency in macro cell
Dynamic RAOs with CRE
Dynamic RAOs without CRE
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:1)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:2)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:5)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:10)
Figure 3. Average random access efﬁciency in a macro-cell.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Arrival Rate of UEs (X1000)
Random access efficiency in pico cell
Dynamic RAOs with CRE
Dynamic RAOs without CRE
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:1)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:2)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:5)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:10)
Figure 4. Average random access efﬁciency in a pico-cell.
maximum efﬁciency, since the RACH resource in the cell is
allocated dynamically according to the number of UEs. After a
large arrival rate, collisions may occur and the average random
access efﬁciency decreases. When each pico-eNodeB employs
the CRE scheme with dynamic RAOs, some of macro UEs
near the pico-cell can access to the pico-eNodeB. Thus, when
the arrival rate of UEs trying to access is large, the macro-
eNodeB achieves better performance in terms of the average
random access efﬁciency. The simulation result shows that the
average random access efﬁciency of the proposed scheme with
CRE in the macro cell is improved by 50% over that of the
conventional scheme with ﬁxed RAOs.
Fig. 4 shows the average random access efﬁciency of a
pico-cell. In the conventional scheme without CRE, the number
of UEs serviced by a pico-cell is relatively small. When many
PRACH subframes for the pico-cell are assigned in a frame,
there may be unused RAOs. So, the random access efﬁciency
increases as the arrival rate of UEs increases. In the proposed
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Arrival Rate of UEs (X1000)
Average access delay of macro UEs (ms)
Dynamic RAOs with CRE
Dynamic RAOs without CRE
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:1)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:2)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:5)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:10)
Figure 5. Average random access delay in a macro-cell.
scheme, the pico-eNodeB expands the cell range and allocates
the RACH resource dynamically depending on the number
of pico UEs. The average random access efﬁciency of the
proposed scheme in the pico-cell reaches to 36%, which is
similar to the average random access efﬁciency of a macro-cell.
However, for a large arrival rate, performance may degrade
since the number of macro UEs, which are allocated the same
preambles with pico UEs in the near pico-cell, increases for
massive UEs.
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the average random access delay
of UEs in a macro-cell and a pico-cell, respectively. In Fig.
5, at low arrival rate, the number of available RAOs for users
may be sufﬁcient in ﬁxed RAOs. So, the random access delay
of the conventional scheme is lower than that of the proposed
scheme. As the arrival rate of UEs trying to access becomes
larger, the average random access delay of the conventional
scheme in the macro-cell dramatically increases. However,
when the proposed scheme is applied, the average random
access delay remains small for a wide range of arrival rates and
starts to increase at a large arrival rate of UEs compared to the
average random access delay of the conventional scheme. Col-
lisions may occur frequently due to insufﬁcient RAOs in the
conventional scheme. However, the macro-eNodeB applying
the proposed scheme allocates RAOs appropriately according
to the number of macro UEs, and it results in high random
access efﬁciency. Thus, the proposed scheme achieves better
performance.
Fig. 6 shows the average random access delay of UEs
in a pico-cell. For ﬁxed RAOs, there may be unused RAOs
at the low arrival rate. Then, the random access delay of the
conventional scheme is lower than that of the proposed scheme.
The simulation result shows that the proposed scheme with
CRE can tolerate the congestion problem of UEs compared to
the proposed scheme without CRE. When the arrival rate of
UEs trying to access is extremely high, the average random
access delay for the pico-cell may be degraded compared to
that of the conventional scheme with ﬁxed RAOs. When there
are a number of UEs, PRACH subframes for the macro-cell
are allocated in many of the subframes. Then pico UEs, which
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Arrival Rate of UEs (X1000)
Average access delay of pico UEs (ms)
Dynamic RAOs with CRE
Dynamic RAOs without CRE
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:1)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:2)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:5)
Fixed RAOs (NPRACH:10)
Figure 6. Average random access delay in a pico-cell.
transmit preambles on a PRACH, can be inﬂuenced by adjacent
macro UEs, which transmit the same preambles on the same
PRACH as the pico UEs. Nevertheless, the average random
access delay of the proposed scheme is shown to be improved
in general.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we aimed at studying the performance
improvement of random access in HetNets. Especially, we
consider the feature of M2M communications in which a very
large number of MTCDs can exist in a cell and massive
MTCDs contend simultaneously. Then, the random access
congestion problem can occur due to the concurrent and
massive random access trials of MTCDs. To solve the problem,
we have proposed the PCRE with dynamic RACH resource
allocation. The proposed scheme can attract more MTCDs
from a macro-cell to pico-cells by controlling the pico-cell’s
coverage area. The pico-eNodeBs then allocate appropriate
RACH resource to cover the attracted MTCDs in the expanded
cell range. We have shown that the proposed scheme can
improve the average random access efﬁciency and the average
random access delay of UEs compared to the conventional
scheme with ﬁxed random access resource via simulations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Next-Generation Informa-
tion Computing Development Program through the National
Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Science, ICT & Future Planning (20100020729), and was sup-
ported by Basic Science Research Program through the NRF
funded by the Ministry of Education(NRF-2010-0020210).
REFERENCES
[1]
3GPP TR 23.888 V11.0.0, “System Improvements for Machine-Type
Communications,” Sep. 2012.
[2]
3GPP TR 37.868 V11.0.0, “Study on RAN Improvements for Machine-
Type Communications,” Sep. 2011.
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[3]
K.-D. Lee, S. Kim, and B. Yi, “Throughput Comparison of Random
Access Methods for M2M Service over LTE Networks,,” in Proc. of
IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2011,
pp. 373-377.
[4]
O, Yilmaz, J. Hamalainen, and S. Hamalainen, “Self-optimization of
Random Access Channel in 3GPP LTE,” in Proc. of Wireless Commu-
nications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), Jul. 2011, pp.
1397-1401.
[5]
M. Amirijoo, P. Frenger, F. Gunnarsson, J. Moe, and K. Zetterberg, “On
Self-optimization of the Random Access Procedure in 3G Long Term
Evolution,” in Proc. of International Symposium on Integrated Network
Management-Workshops (IFIP), Jun. 2009, pp. 177-184.
[6]
A. Damnjanovic et al. “A Survey on 3GPP Heterogeneous Networks,”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 10-21, Jun. 2011.
[7]
A. Ghosh et al. “Heterogeneous Cellular Networks: From Theory to
Practice,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 54-64,
Jun. 2012.
[8]
Motorola, “On Range Extension in Open-Access Heterogeneous Net-
works (R1-103181),” 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 Meeting-61, May 2010.
[9]
D. Luo, B. Li, and D. Yang, “Performance Evaluation with Range Ex-
pansion for Heterogeneous Networks,” in Proc. of Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC), Sep. 2011, pp. 1-5.
[10]
I. Guvenc, “Capacity and Fairness Analysis of Heterogeneous Networks
with Range Expansion and Interference Coordination,” IEEE Communi-
cations Letters, vol. 15, no. 10, pp. 1084-1087, Oct. 2011.
[11]
A. Morimoto, N. Miki, H. Ishii, and D. Nishikawa, “Investigation on
Transmission Power Control in Heterogeneous Network Employing Cell
Range Expansion for LTE-Advanced Uplink,” in Proc. of Conference on
European Wireless (EW), Apr. 2012, pp. 1-6.
[12]
J. Liu et al. “Uplink power control and interference coordination
for heterogeneous network,” in Proc. of International Symposium on
Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), Sep.
2012, pp. 519-523.
[13]
3GPP TR 36.814 V9.0.0, “Further Advancements for E-UTRA Physical
Layer Aspects,” Mar. 2010.
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

