Modeling and Performance Evaluation of Small Cell Wireless Networks with Base
Station Channels Breakdowns
Nawel Gharbi
Computer Science Department
University of Sciences and Technology, USTHB
Algiers, Algeria
Email: ngharbi@wissal.dz
Abstract—The ever-increasing number of customers and the
need for higher data rates and multimedia services require
the deployment of Small Cell Networks. This paper considers
modeling, performance evaluation and reliability of Small Cell
Wireless Networks, taking into account the retrial phenomenon,
ﬁnite number of customers served in a cell and channels
breakdowns. The aim of this paper is to give a detailed
performance and reliability analysis of these next-generation
networks considering different breakdowns disciplines using
Generalized Stochastic Petri nets formalism. The novelty of
this investigation consists in the consideration of two break-
downs disciplines: channels breakdowns and base station
(synchronous) breakdowns. For the ﬁrst one, each channel is
an independent working unit, and it can fail independently
of other channels state. For the second one, the breakdowns
are synchronous, hence all the channels of the base station fail
down simultaneously. Hence, we show how this high level model
allows us to cope with the complexity of such ﬁnite-source re-
trial networks, under the different breakdowns disciplines and
how several steady-state performance and reliability indices
can be derived. Through numerical examples, we discuss the
effect of the network parameters on performance.
Keywords-Small Cell Networks; Retrial phenomenon; Chan-
nels breakdowns; Base station breakdowns; Generalized Stochas-
tic Petri nets; Performance and reliability indices.
I. INTRODUCTION
The ever-increasing number of customers and the need for
higher data rates and multimedia services lead to stringent
requirements on the bit rate/km2 that next-generation cellu-
lar wireless networks are expected to deliver. A promising
approach to solving this problem is through the deployment
of Small Cell Networks (SCNs), which represent a novel
networking paradigm based on the idea of deploying short-
range, low-power, and low-cost base stations (BSs) oper-
ating in conjunction with the main macro-cellular network
infrastructure. Small Cells operate in licensed and unlicensed
spectrum that have a range of 10 meter to 200 meters,
compared to a mobile Macrocell which might have a range
of a few kilometers. The use of SCNs is envisioned to enable
next-generation networks to provide high data rates, allow
ofﬂoading trafﬁc from the macro cell and provide dedicated
capacity to homes, enterprises, or urban hotspots. SCNs
encompass a broad variety of cell types, such as micro,
pico, femto cells, as well as advanced wireless relays and
distributed antennas. Regarding compatible technologies,
Small Cells are available for a wide range of air interfaces
including GSM, CDMA2000, TD-SCDMA, W-CDMA, LTE
and WiMax.
This paper considers modeling, performance evaluation
and reliability of small cell wireless networks, taking into
account the repeated calls of customers and channels break-
downs. Models with repeated calls (or retrial phenomenon)
arise in various practical areas as telecommunication, com-
puter networks and cellular mobile networks [1], [2], [3].
These models are based on the fact that, when servers are
all busy or unavailable, customers attempting to get a service
are not put in a queue but will try again to reach the
servers after a random delay. Signiﬁcant references reveal
the non-negligible impact of repeated calls on the network
performances. These repeated calls arise due to a blocking
in a network with limited capacity resources or are due
to impatience of customers. For a recent summary of the
fundamental methods, results and applications on this topic,
the reader is referred to [4], [5], [6].
To this end, we observe a wireless network where a
supported area is divided into small cells, each of them
is served by a base station having a limited number of
channels which could be subject to breakdowns. These
random breakdowns may have a heavy inﬂuence on the
network quality of service. On the other hand, the number
of mobiles (or customers) served in a cell is also small,
such that models with a ﬁnite number of sources should
be considered. These three aspects, customer retrial, ﬁnite
number of sources and breakdowns of the base station
channels, will be dealt with in this paper.
Although the reliability study is of great importance,
there are only few works that take into consideration retrial
phenomenon involving the unreliability of the servers, as it
can be seen in the recent classiﬁed bibliography of Artalejo
[6]. Moreover, most studies deal with single unreliable server
retrial queueing systems [7], [8] or an inﬁnite customers
source [9].
Regarding ﬁnite-source retrial systems with unreliable
multiple servers, we have found some few papers as [10]
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

in which the servers are asymmetric (heterogenous) and the
models are analyzed by queueing theory, and our recent
paper [11] where retrial systems with servers breakdowns
policy were analyzed using Generalized stochastic Petri
nets (GSPNs) formalism. However, the several breakdowns
mechanisms considered in the literature, can be classiﬁed as
servers breakdowns.
In this paper, we propose the applicability of GSPNs
for modeling and performance evaluation of Small Cell
Networks (SCNs) with unreliable base station channels. The
novelty of this investigation consists in the consideration of
two breakdowns policies: servers (channels) breakdowns and
station breakdowns. For the ﬁrst one, each channel is an
independent working unit, and it can fail independently of
other channels state. For the second one, the breakdowns are
synchronous, hence all the channels of the station fail down
simultaneously (base station breakdown). This phenomenon
occurs in practice, for example, when a system consists
of several interconnected machines that are inseparable, or
when all the machines are run by a single operator which
may be fails at any time. In such situations, the whole station
has to be treated as a single entity.
The paper is organized as follows: First, we give an
overview of syntax and semantics of GSPNs formalism. In
Section 3, we present the mathematical model describing
the customers behavior in SCNs. Next, the GSPNs models
for the different breakdowns disciplines are developed. In
Section 5, we show how several steady-state performance
and reliability indices can be derived. Then, based on
numerical examples, we validate the proposed models with
respect to the reliable case and we discuss the effect of
the network parameters on performance. Finally, we give
a conclusion.
II. SYNTAX AND SEMANTICS OF GENERALIZED
STOCHASTIC PETRI NETS
In this section, we developed brieﬂy the basics concepts of
Generalized Stochastic Petri Nets formalism (GSPNs), that
the readers are needed to better understand the proposed
models describing small cell networks.
Generalized stochastic Petri nets [12], [13] are mathemat-
ical and graphical models, that are well suited for represent-
ing and analyzing stochastic and concurrent systems with
synchronization characteristics.
A GSPN is a directed graph that consists of two kinds of
nodes, called places (drawn as circles) and transitions that
are partitioned into two different classes: timed transitions
(represented by means of rectangles) describe the execution
of time consuming activities and can ﬁre only after a random
delay characterized by a negative exponential probability
distribution, and immediate transitions (represented by thin
bars), which model logic activities as synchronization, have
priority over timed transitions and ﬁre in zero time once
they are enabled. Formally, a GSPN can be deﬁned as a
seven-tuple (P, T, I, O, Inh, M0, W) where:
• P is the set of places;
• T is the set of timed and immediate transitions;
• I, Inh : P × T → IN are the input and inhibitor
functions, which provides the multiplicities of the input
and inhibitor arcs from places to transitions (IN is the
set of natural numbers);
• O : T ×P → IN is the output function which provides
the multiplicities of the output arcs from transitions to
places;
• M0 : P → IN is the initial marking, which describes
the initial state of the system;
• W : T → IR+ is a function that associates rates of
negative exponential distribution to timed transitions
and weights to immediate transitions.
An inhibitor arc is represented by a line terminating with
a rounded head. The presence of a token in the inhibitor
place inhibit the ﬁring of the transition.
The system state is described by means of markings.
A marking is a mapping from P to IN, which gives the
number of tokens in each place. A transition is said to
be enabled in a given marking, if and only if each of its
normal input places contains at least as many tokens as the
multiplicity of the connecting arc, and each of its inhibitor
input places contains fewer tokens than the multiplicity of
the corresponding inhibitor arc.
The ﬁring of an enabled transition creates a new marking
(state) of the net. The set of all markings reachable from
initial marking M0 is called the reachability set. The reacha-
bility graph is the associated graph obtained by representing
each marking by a vertex and placing a directed edge from
vertex Mi to vertex Mj, if marking Mj can be obtained by
the ﬁring of some transition enabled in marking Mi. This
graph consists of tangible markings enabling only timed
transitions and vanishing markings in which at least one
immediate transition is enabled. Since the process spends
zero time in the vanishing markings, they are eliminated
from the reachability graph by merging them with their
successor tangible markings [12]. This elimination results
in a tangible reachability graph, which is isomorphic to a
continuous time Markov chain (CTMC). The solution of this
CTMC at steady-state is the stationary probability vector π
which can be expressed as the solution of the linear system
of equilibrium equations π.Q = 0 with the normalization
condition ∑
i πi = 1, where πi denotes the steady-state
probability that the process is in state Mi and Q is the
inﬁnitesimal generator. Having the probabilities vector π,
we can compute several stationary performance indices of
the system.
III. MATHEMATICAL MODEL
The mathematical model describing the customers be-
havior in small cell wireless networks can be viewed as a
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

retrial model consisting of a multiserver service station, an
imaginary waiting space called orbit and a ﬁnite source of
K homogeneous customers. Each customer can be in one
of the following states: free, under service or in orbit at any
time. The probability that any particular customer generates
a primary request for service in any interval (t, t + dt) is
λdt + o(dt) as dt → 0 if the customer is free at time
t. The service station consists of c identical (symmetric)
servers subject to breakdowns and repairs. Each server can
be in operational (up) or non-operational (down) state, and
it can be idle or busy. If one of the servers is up and
idle at the moment of the arrival of a call, then the call
starts to be served immediately, the customer moves into the
under service state and the server moves into busy state. The
service times are independent and identically exponentially
distributed with parameter µ. After service completion, the
server becomes idle. Otherwise, if all the servers are busy or
down at the arrival of a call, the customer joins the orbit and
starts generation of a ﬂow of repeated calls exponentially
distributed with rate ν until it ﬁnds one operational free
server.
A server can fail during the interval (t, t + dt) with
probability δdt + o(dt) as dt → 0 if it is idle, and with
probability γdt + o(dt) if it is busy. In the literature, three
breakdowns disciplines were deﬁned:
• The active breakdowns discipline[10], [9] when δ = 0
and γ > 0. This means that a server can fail only in
busy state.
• The independent breakdowns discipline[10] when
δ > 0, γ > 0 and δ = γ. In this case, a server can
fail in busy or free state with the same probability.
• The
dependent
breakdowns
discipline
which
we have proposed recently in [11]. In this case,
the failure probability depends on the server state.
Hence, the rates δ > 0 and γ > 0 could be equal or not.
If the server fails in busy state, the interrupted customer
returns to the orbit to resume service later. The repair time
of a server is exponentially distributed with a ﬁnite mean
1/τ. We assume that the repairman follows FIFO discipline
to ﬁx up the servers breakdowns, repairs one server at a time
and after repair, the server is as good as new.
The several breakdowns mechanisms studied in the liter-
ature, can be classiﬁed as servers breakdowns. In this paper,
we introduce the station breakdowns policy, which describes
systems with synchronous breakdowns of all servers of the
station.
IV. GSPN MODELS OF SMALL CELL NETWORKS WITH
CHANNELS AND BASE STATION BREAKDOWNS
In the following, we present the GSPN models describing
Small Cell Wireless Networks with different breakdowns
disciplines.
                                             Orbit 
 
 
                                                               Go_Orbit                   Ser_Idle                                
                     Retrial                                                                       
                                                                                         c 
   ν     # 
 
                                                               Begin_Serv         Service 
          Cus_Free             λ                                                               µ        
                         N                     
                                        #                                             Cus_Serv    #  
                                      Arrival        Choice 
      # 
                        Act_Fail           γ            τ            Repair              
 
          
      Ser_Down                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.
GSPN model of small cell wireless networks with retrials and
active channels breakdowns
A. Retrial Networks with Active Channels Breakdowns
Figure 1 shows the GSPN describing a wireless network
small cell with retrials and active breakdowns of channels.
In this model, the place Cus−Free contains the free cus-
tomers, the place Orbit represents the orbit, Cus−Serv
contains customers under service, Ser−Idle represents the
operational free servers (channels) and the place Ser−Down
contains non-operational (failed) servers.
The initial marking of the net is: {K, 0, 0, c, 0, 0} which
represents the fact that all customers are initially free, the c
channels are operational free and the orbit is empty.
The ﬁring of the transition Arrival indicates the arrival
of a primary call. The service semantics of this transition
is ∞-servers (represented by the symbol # placed next to
transition) because all free customers are able to generate
primary calls. At the arrival of a primary or repeated call
to the place Choice, if the place Ser−Idle contains at
least one operational free channel, the immediate transition
Begin−Serv ﬁres. This ﬁring represents the fact that the
customer starts to be served and the server moves into busy
state. However, the immediate transition Go−Orbit ﬁres at
the arrival of a call who ﬁnds no operational free channel i.e.
Ser−Idle is empty. Hence, the customer joins immediately
the place Orbit. Once in orbit, it starts generation of a
ﬂow of repeated calls exponentially distributed with rate ν.
The ﬁring of transition Retrial represents the arrival of a
repeated call from orbit.
When the timed transition Service ﬁres, the customer
under service returns to free state (to the place Cus−Free)
and the channel becomes idle and ready to serve another
customer. The service semantics of transition Service is ∞-
servers because several channels can work simultaneously.
A channel can fail during a service period. This is repre-
sented by the fact that the transition Act−Fail ﬁres before
Service (application of race policy). Thus, the interrupted
customer joins the orbit and the failed channel joins the
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

                                         Orbit 
                        
 
                                                                      Go_Orbit                 Ser_Idle                                                            
                        Retrial                         
                                                                                                             c 
    ν      # 
 
                                                                           Begin_Serv         Service 
           Cus_Free             λ                                                                        µ 
                             N                     
                                             #                                                 Cus_Serv     # 
                                      Arrival         Choice 
        #                              # 
                           Act_Fail           γ   Idle_Fail             δ      τ            Repair   
                                                
          
        Ser_Down                               
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.
GSPN model of small cell wireless networks with retrials and
dependent channels breakdowns
place Ser−Down where it will be immediately repaired.
The ﬁring of transition Repair represents the end of the
repair time. The repairman repairs one server at a time. Thus,
the service semantics of this transition Repair is single.
B. Retrial Networks with Dependent Channels Breakdowns
In the model describing dependent breakdowns of chan-
nels, depicted in Figure 2, during a service period, a channel
can fail, which is represented by the ﬁring of transition
Act−Fail. In this case, the interrupted customer joins the
orbit and the failed channel joins the place Ser−Down to
be repaired. On the other hand, a channel can also fail if it is
idle (in the place Ser−Idle). This is represented by the ﬁring
of transition Idle−Fail which has an ∞-servers semantics
because several idle channels can also fail in the same time.
The transitions Act−Fail and Idle−Fail representing the
breakdown during busy and idle state respectively, may have
the same (δ = γ > 0) or different rates which correspond to
independent and dependent breakdowns disciplines respec-
tively.
C. Retrial Networks with Base Station Breakdowns
In models considering base station breakdowns, all the
channels fail down simultaneously and they also return to
the operational state at the same time, when the base station
is repaired. Hence, the corresponding GSPN models vary
slightly from the previous ones. In fact, the models are the
same as those given in Figure 1 and Figure 2, in which the
multiplicity of the arcs connecting the place Cus−Serv to
transition Act−Fail, Act−Fail to the places Ser−Down
and Orbit, Ser−Down to the transition Repair and the
transition Repair to place Ser−Idle equals c (rather that
1), because the c active channels fail down at the same time.
The ﬁring of transition Act−Fail will move c tokens in the
place Ser−Down, which represents the breakdown of all
base station. At the end of the reparation period (after a mean
delay of 1/γ), c tokens corresponding to the c channels will
be deposited in Ser−Idle. Moreover, in Figure 2, to model
the possibility that all channels of the station fail down
when being in idle state, we should modify the multiplicity
of the arcs connecting the place Ser−Idle to transition
Idle−Fail and Idle−Fail to place Ser−Down (c rather
than 1). The service semantics of the transitions Act−Fail
and Idle−Fail is single-server semantics, because the base
station is a single unit. Hence, the symbols # should be
omitted from these two transitions.
V. PERFORMANCE AND RELIABILITY ANALYSIS
The aim of this study is twofold. Firstly, we have to verify
the correctness of our models and their ergodicity. Next,
we derive the formulas of the most important steady-state
performance indices.
The primordial qualitative property we have to verify is
the boundness of the proposed models. This property ensures
that each place of the net is bounded and so the model state
space is ﬁnite. The second important qualitative property
is the liveness. A transition t is live if from any reachable
marking, there is a reachable marking enabling t. Thus, t is
live implies that the activity modeled by this transition can
always take place from any state. In the proposed models,
all transitions are live. Finally, another interesting qualitative
property we had to check is the presence of home states.
The proposed GSPN models are bounded, live and
the initial marking is a home state. Thus, the underlying
continuous time Markov chains are ergodic. Hence, the
steady-state probability distribution vector π exists and is
unique. Once this probability vector is computed, several
performance and reliability indices of small cell wireless
networks with retrial phenomenon and different breakdowns
disciplines can be derived as follows. In these formulas,
Mi(p) denotes the number of tokens in place p in marking
Mi, A the set of reachable tangible markings, and A(t) is
the set of tangible markings reachable by transition t and
E(t) is the set of markings where the transition t is enabled.
• Mean number of busy channels (ns): This
corresponds to the mean number of tokens in the
place Cus−Serv which is also the mean number of
customers under service.
ns =
∑
i:Mi∈A
Mi(Cus−Serv).πi
• Mean number of customers in orbit
(no): This correspond to the mean number of tokens
in the place Orbit which models the orbit.
no =
∑
i:Mi∈A
Mi(Orbit).πi
• Mean number of operational free
channels (nd):
This
represents
the
average
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

number of tokens in the place Ser−Idle.
nd =
∑
i:Mi∈A
Mi(Ser−Idle).πi
• Mean number of failed channels (nf):
This represents the mean number of tokens in the
place Ser−Down.
nf =
∑
i:Mi∈A
Mi(Ser−Down).πi = s − (ns + nd)
• Mean rate of generation of primary
calls (λ): This represents the throughput of the
transition Arrival.
λ =
∑
i:Mi∈A(Arrival)
λ.Mi(Cus−Free).πi
• Mean rate of generation of repeated
calls (ν): This represents the retrial frequency of
customers in orbit. It corresponds to the throughput of
the transition Retrial.
ν =
∑
i:Mi∈A(Retrial)
ν.Mi(Orbit).πi
• Mean rate of service (µ): This represents
the throughput of the transition Service.
µ =
∑
i:Mi∈A(Service)
µ.Mi(Cus−Serv).πi
• Mean rate of repair (τ): This represents the
throughput of the transition Repair.
τ =
∑
i:Mi∈A(Repair)
τ.Mi(Ser−Down).πi
• Blocking probability of a primary
call (Bp):
Bp =
∑
j:Mj∈A
∑K−s
i=1 i.λ.Prob[Mj(Cus−Free) = i&Mj(Ser−Idle) = 0]
λ
• Blocking probability of a repeated
call (Br):
Br =
∑
j:Mj∈A
∑K−s
i=1 i.ν.Prob[Mj(Orbit) = i&Mj(Ser−Idle) = 0]
ν
• Blocking probability (B):
B = Bp + Br
• Utilization of s channels (Us):
(1 ≤ s ≤ c) This corresponds to the probability that
s servers are busy :
Us =
∑
i:Mi(Cus−Serv)≥s
πi
• Availability of s channels (As): (1
≤
s ≤ c) This corresponds to the probability that s
servers are operational and idle.
As =
∑
i:Mi(Ser−Idle)≥s
πi
• Failure probability of s channels
(Fs): (1
≤
s
≤
c) This corresponds to the
probability that s servers are failed:
Fs =
∑
i:Mi(Ser−Down)≥s
πi
• Utilization of the repairman (Ur): This
corresponds to the probability that at least one server
is failed:
Ur = F1 =
∑
i:Mi(Ser−Down)≥1
πi
• Failure frequency of busy channels
(γ)): This represents the throughput of the transition
Failure (or Fail−Act) for active breakdowns case
and dependent breakdowns case respectively.
γ =







∑
i:Mi∈A(F ailure) γ.Mi(Cus−Serv).πi,
in active breakdowns,
∑
i:Mi∈A(F ail−Act) γ.Mi(Cus−Serv).πi,
in dependent breakdowns.
• Failure frequency of idle channels
(δ)): This represents the throughput of the transition
Fail−Idle.
δ =
∑
i:Mi∈A(F ail−Idle)
δ.Mi(Ser−Idle).πi
• Mean waiting time (W): The mean waiting
time W of the customers in the steady state, can be
easily obtained with the help of Little’s formula:
W = no/λ
• Mean response time (R):
R = (no + ns)/λ
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Table I
VALIDATION OF RESULTS IN RELIABLE CASE
Reliable
Active
Active
Dependent
Dependent
model
breakdowns
breakdowns
breakdowns
breakdowns
of servers
of station
of servers
of station
Population size
20
20
20
20
20
Number of servers
4
4
4
4
4
Primary call generation rate
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
Service rate
1
1
1
1
1
Retrial rate
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
Server’s failure rate
-
1e-25
1e-25
1e-25
1e-25
Server’s repair rate
-
1e+25
1e+25
1e+25
1e+25
Mean number of busy servers
1.800748
1.800764
1.800764
1.800763
1.800763
Mean number of customers in orbit
0.191771
0.191786
0.191786
0.191785
0.191785
Mean rate of customers arrivals
1.800748
1.800745
1.800745
1.800745
1.800745
Mean response time
1.106495
1.1065036
1.1065036
1.1065031
1.1065031
1,5
1,7
1,9
2,1
2,3
2,5
2,7
2,9
3,1
3,3
3,5
0,01 0,02 0,03 0,04 0,05 0,06 0,07 0,08 0,09
0,1
Retrial Rate
Mean Response Time
Reliable
Active servers breakdowns
Active station breakdowns
Dependent servers
breakdowns
Dependent station
breakdowns
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.
Effect of Retrial Rate on the Mean Response Time with K = 50, c = 4, λ = 0.4, µ = 5, γ = 0.02, δ = 0.01, τ = 0.5
VI. VALIDATION OF MODELS
In this section, we consider some numerical results, to val-
idate the proposed models. To this aim, the results obtained
in the reliable case were compared to those obtained by the
Pascal program given in the book of Falin and Templeton
[4], since if the failure rate in non-reliable models is very low
and repair rate is very high, the measures should approach
the corresponding ones in reliable models.
In Table 1, we can see that the corresponding performance
measures for the model with active channels breakdowns,
the model with active station breakdowns, the model with
dependent channels breakdowns and the model with depen-
dent station breakdowns are very close to the reliable case.
In fact, the derived results are the same up to the 4th decimal
digit.
In Figures 3 and 4, the mean response time is splotted
versus the retrial rate ν and channels number c respectively.
We have presented ﬁve curves which correspond to the
reliable case, the active and independent channels and station
breakdowns disciplines. From Figure 3, we can see how
much the increase of retrial rate affects the mean response
time which decreases in reliable case and for the different
breakdowns disciplines. The numerical results agree with
the intuition that the mean response time is better (lower)
in the reliable case for all values of the retrial rate. It is
also shown from this ﬁgure that among the four breakdowns
disciplines, the model with active breakdowns of base station
gives the best mean response times particularly when the
retrial rate is smaller, but when the repeated calls arrive more
frequently, the two station breakdowns disciplines (active
and dependent) are very close.
In Figure 4, it is demonstrated that the channels number
of the base station has a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the mean
response time. We can also see that a small change in
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

0
0,5
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Channels number
Mean Response Time
Reliable
Active servers breakdowns
Active station breakdowns
Dependent servers
breakdowns
Dependent station
breakdowns
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.
Effect of Channels Number on the Mean Response Time with K = 50, λ = 0.4, µ = 5, ν = 1, γ = 0.02, δ = 0.01, τ = 0.5
the number of channels, particularly from 1 to 3, produces
big difference in the mean response time in reliable and
unreliable cases (≈ −55%). However, after a certain value
the decrease is not considerable. On the other hand, we can
observe that the models with base station breakdowns give
the best results, and the worst response time is obtained in
dependent breakdowns of channels discipline.
VII. CONCLUSION
The exponentially increasing demand for wireless data
services requires a massive network densiﬁcation. A promis-
ing solution to this problem is the concept of Small Cell
Networks, which is founded on the idea of a very dense
deployment of short-range, low-cost and low-power base
stations.
This paper aims at modeling, performance evaluation and
reliability of Small Cell Wireless Networks, taking into
account the repeated calls of blocked customers, the ﬁnite
number of customers served in a cell and the breakdowns of
base station channels. Hence, we showed how the behavior
of customers in Small Cell Wireless Networks with different
breakdowns disciplines can be intuitively described using
Generalized Stochastic Petri nets formalism and how several
performance and reliability indices can be derived.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Roszik, J. Sztrik and C. Kim, Retrial queues in the
performance modeling of cellular mobile networks using
MOSEL, Inter. Journal of Simulation: Systems, Science and
Technology, vol. 1-2, pp. 38-47, 2005.
[2] J. R. Artalejo and M. J. Lopez-Herrero, Cellular mobile
networks with repeated calls operating in random environ-
ment,Computers & operations research, vol. 37, no7, pp.
1158-1166, 2010.
[3] V. D. Tien, A new computational algorithm for retrial queues
to cellular mobile systems with guard channels, Computers
& Industrial Engineering, vol. 59, pp. 865-872, 2010.
[4] G. I. Falin and J. G. C. Templeton, Retrial Queues, Chapman
and Hall, London, 1997.
[5] J. R. Artalejo and A. G´omez-Corral, Retrial Queueing Sys-
tems: A Computational Approach, Springer, Berlin, 2008.
[6] J. R. Artalejo, Accessible bibliography on retrial queues:
Progress in 2000-2009, Mathematical and Computer Mod-
elling, vol. 51, pp. 1071-1081, 2010.
[7] J. Sztrik and D. Efrosinin, Tool supported reliability analy-
sis of ﬁnite-source retrial queues, Automation and Remote
Control, vol. 71, pp. 1388-1393, 2010.
[8] J. Sztrik and C. S. Kim, Tool supported performability investi-
gations of heterogeneous ﬁnite-source retrial queues, Annales
Univ. Sci. Budapest., Sect. Comp., vol. 32, pp. 201-220, 2010.
[9] J. Wang, J. Cao and Q. Li, Reliability analysis of the retrial
queue with server breakdowns and repairs, Queueing Sys-
tems, vol. 38, pp. 363-380, 2001.
[10] J. Roszik and J. Sztrik, Performance analysis of ﬁnite-source
retrial queues with nonreliable heterogenous servers, Journal
of Mathematical Sciences, vol. 146, pp. 6033-6038, 2007.
[11] N. Gharbi and C. Dutheillet, An algorithmic approach
for analysis of ﬁnite-source retrial systems with unreliable
servers, Computers and Mathematics with Applications, vol.
62, pp. 2535-2546, 2011.
[12] M. Ajmone Marsan, G. Balbo, G. Conte, S. Donatelli, and
G. Franceschinis, Modelling with Generalized Stochastic Petri
Nets, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1995.
[13] M. Diaz, Les r´eseaux de Petri - Mod`eles Fondamentaux, Paris,
Herm`es Science Publications, 2001.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

