Affordable Quality of Service Assessment for Cellular-Connected UAV
Communications
Hong Zhu∗, Jos´e Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro∗, Tom´as Dom´ınguez-Bola˜no†, Xuesong Cai‡§, Xuefeng Yin∗
∗College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China,
{zhuhong0120,j.rpineiro,yinxuefeng}@tongji.edu.cn
†CITIC Research Center & Department of Computer Engineering, University of A Coru˜na, Spain, tomas.bolano@udc.es
‡Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University, Aalborg, 9220, Denmark, xuc@es.aau.dk
§Department of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, 22100 Lund, Sweeden, xuesong.cai@eit.lth.se
Abstract—In recent years, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
have been used extensively in military and civilian ﬁelds, making
the research on cellular-connected UAVs a popular topic for
Fifth Generation (5G) and beyond communications. In order
to support the increasing amount of applications, it is essential
to evaluate the performance of UAV communications. In this
work, the end-to-end delay, packet success rate, and throughput
of Air-to-Ground (A2G) communications are evaluated based
on a realistic channel model obtained from measurements. The
measurement campaign, conducted in a suburban environment,
includes both Line-of-Sight (LoS) and Obstructed Line-of-Sight
(OLoS) scenarios. From the results, it can be seen that architec-
tural elements close to the ﬂight route can severely decrease the
communications performance even when the visibility between
the Base Station (BS) and the UAV is permanently ensured.
Moreover, we have shown that the Quality of Service (QoS)
requirements for critical communications proposed by 3rd Gener-
ation Partnership Project (3GPP) can be fulﬁlled by establishing
a threshold on the received Signal to Interference and Noise
Ratio (SINR). This way, the SINR can be used as a condensed
performance metric for the design of safe ﬂight routes for critical
communications for UAVs.
Keywords- A2G communications; critical communications;
end-to-end delay; QoS requirements; UAV.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, there has been a explosion of Unmanned
Aerial Vehicle (UAV) military and civilian applications, such
as assistance in surveillance and rescue missions, logistics
service, and aerial photography. All these applications get
beneﬁted by the high mobility, ﬂexibility, affordable price,
and extended service life of UAVs [1]. For most of the UAV
applications, a connection between the UAV and a terrestrial
Base Station (BS) is usually required. Different services can
rely on this Air-to-Ground (A2G) communication link, such as
data or video transmission from the UAV to the ground or the
onboard reception of control signals from a terrestrial com-
mander [2]. Due to this, the application of Fifth Generation
(5G) communications for UAVs has attracted a considerable
amount of interest. Therefore, it is essential to judge whether
the terrestrial commercial stations can satisfy the requirements
of UAV communications.
According
to
the
3rd
Generation
Partnership
Project
(3GPP), the Quality of Service (QoS) requirements (including
availability, end-to-end delay, and throughput requirements)
for the UAV communications can be classiﬁed into two types
depending on the communication nature: payload-oriented,
and critical [3]. Comparing these two kinds of communi-
cations, the reliability and latency requirements are more
stringent for critical communications since they transmit safety
and control-related messages. As a consequence, it becomes
of utmost importance to evaluate the performance of A2G
communications in terms of the end-to-end delay and the
network availability (i.e., the probability that the QoS of users
can be satisﬁed [4]).
Several approaches [4]–[6] have been proposed in the lit-
erature to evaluate the performance of UAV communications.
She et al. [4] characterized the latency, reliability, and network
availability of UAV communications by deriving the decoding
error probability and studying two optimization problems
to minimize the total bandwidth and maximize the network
availability for Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communications
(URLLC). An iterative algorithm was proposed in [5] to
optimize the UAV deployments by obtaining the minimum av-
erage transmission power under given constraints of maximum
latency and block error probability. Horani et al. [6] provided
models on both air-to-ground and ground-to-ground scenarios
to characterize the end-to-end latency taking into account the
queuing delay, which depends on the amount of users who are
multiplexed on the same radio resources.
It can be seen that the above-mentioned approaches are
solely focused on theoretical analysis considering the propaga-
tion delay, bandwidth, transmission power, or processing time,
and do not provide empirical validation. Our previous work
[7] evaluated the throughput of A2G communications based
on a realistic (measurement-based) channel model, and in [8]
we considered the joint evaluation of the end-to-end delay,
availability and throughput with measurement-based results
for the ﬁrst time. However, only purely Line-of-Sight (LoS)
scenarios were considered in these works.
In this work, we extend our previous studies [7] [8] to
Obstructed Line-of-Sight (OLoS) scenarios and show the
inﬂuence of the propagation environment elements in the com-
munications performance. We evaluate the end-to-end delay,
packet success rate, and throughput performance of the A2G
communications for low height UAVs. It is noteworthy that
we employ a realistic channel model based on measurements
in a suburban environment, not only for the LoS propagation
conditions but also in the OLoS ones. The effect of the
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Hybrid Automatic Repeat reQuest (HARQ) techniques and
retransmission mechanisms were considered, implying the
implementation of both the forward link and feedback link
for the simulations. The obtained results demonstrate that the
architectural elements of the environment may have a sig-
niﬁcant inﬂuence on the UAV communications performance,
which is also severely affected by the distance between the BS
and the UAV. The provided results of latency, reliability, and
throughput constitute a basis for the planning of the network
deployments and ﬂight routes for different UAV-based ser-
vices, especially for those requiring critical communications.
However, note that the results consider only the physical layer
of the communication system [9], since upper layers will be
dependent on the speciﬁc application or deployment under
consideration.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Firstly,
Section II describes the details of the measurement campaign
and the construction of the channel model. Then, Section III
contrastively analyzes the results of performance, in terms of
availability, latency and throughput, for both a LoS scenario
and an OLoS scenario. Finally, Section IV summarizes the
main achievements of this work.
II. MEASUREMENT CAMPAIGN AND CHANNEL MODEL
In this section, we detail the process of analyzing the perfor-
mance of the UAV communications by means of simulations
with a measurement-based channel model. The measurement
campaign used to obtain the channel model is described in
Section II-A. The channel model deﬁnition and the signals
processing are detailed in Section II-B. Finally, the required
concepts on HARQ techniques are described in Section II-C.
A. Measurement Environment and Equipment
The measurement campaign was performed in a suburban
environment at the Jiading Campus of the Tongji University
(Shanghai, China). The environment includes rivers, trees,
roads and buildings between 15 m and 70 m high. The two
scenarios considered, namely the LoS and the OLoS, are de-
scribed in detail in [10] and respectively imaged in Figures 1a
and 1b. The LoS scenario consists of a straight ﬂight in the
absence of large obstacles, whereas in the OLoS scenario
the UAV ﬂies over a low building and close to high ones.
The ﬁgures include the representation of the ﬂight routes
and the position of the BS, located about 20 m far away
from the starting point of the ﬂight routes, being its (latitude,
longitude) coordinates (31.2873872◦, 121.2040907◦). The co-
ordinates of the starting point for both ﬂight routes expressed
as (latitude, longitude) are (31.287433◦, 121.204179◦); the
coordinates of the end point of the ﬂight routes for the
LoS and OLoS scenarios are (31.284102◦, 121.208412◦)
and (31.288310◦, 121.208793◦), respectively. Representative
buildings are also marked in the ﬁgures. The ﬂight height
is 15 m and the speed of the UAV is about 5 m/s in both
scenarios.
As depicted in Figure 1c, the measurement equipment
consists of two parts, the ground part and the air part. The
Base station
Starting point
End point
Media School
UAV ﬂight route
(a) Measurement environment (LoS scenario).
Base station
Starting point
End point
UAV ﬂight route
Media School
Library
(b) Measurement environment (OLoS scenario).
Air part
Ground
part
Router
USRP and
computer
Omnidir.
antenna
GPS-
disciplined
oscillator
Omnidir.
antenna
Power
ampliﬁer
Power
source
USRP
GPS-
disciplined
oscillator
(c) Measurement sounder (air and ground parts).
Figure 1. Measurement scenarios and sounder.
ground part is ﬁxed on a lift at the height of 15 meters and
works as a transmitter. The air part, acting as a receiver,
consists of an UAV equipped with a quasi-omnidirectional
antenna, another Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP)
N-210 used to received signals, a GPS-disciplined oscillator,
a small computer to collect the data from the USRP and a
router to control the small computer. More speciﬁcally, the
central carrier frequency of the measurement is 2.5 GHz with
a bandwidth of 15.36 MHz, which is similar to the commercial
Long Term Evolution (LTE) deployments of the measurement
area. Note that the wireless local area network (WLAN)
connection used to control the small computer on the UAV
from the ground causes no interference to the measurements
since it works in the frequency band of 2.4 GHz.
B. Signal Processing and Channel Model
For the generation and processing of signals, the “GTEC
5G Simulator” [11], an open development whose source code
(together with that of the “GTEC Testbed”) is publicly avail-
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

able under the GPLv3 license at [12], was used. The GTEC
5G Simulator includes the necessary modules to conﬁgure the
transmit signals and process the acquired samples. What is
more, the functionalities of the “GTEC 5G Simulator” include,
but are not limited to, channel estimation, interpolation and
equalization, as well as signal synchronization in time and fre-
quency domain. In addition, the sounding signal is an Orthog-
onal Frequency-Division Multiplexing (OFDM) signal with
a frame structure similar to that of downlink LTE structure.
After acquiring the OFDM frames, the Space-Alternating Gen-
eralized Expectation-maximization (SAGE) algorithm [13],
integrated in the “GTEC 5G Simulator”, was used to extract
the channel Multipath Components (MPCs). Each snapshot,
regarded as a set of consecutive samples from the received
signal used to estimate the MPCs, is approximately 10 ms long.
For the m-th snapshot, the channel impulse response can be
expressed as [10]
hm(t, τ) =
L
X
l=1
αm,lδ(τ − τm,l)ej2πνm,lt
(1)
where t is the time variable, τ is the delay variable, and αm,l,
τm,l, and νm,l are the complex amplitude, delay, and Doppler
frequency for the l-th MPC of m-th snapshot, respectively.
δ (·) denotes the channel impulse function (Dirac delta) and
L is the amount of MPCs per snapshot. According to our
observations [10] [14], L = 15 paths are sufﬁcient to capture
all the MPCs of the received signal in our measurements. Note
that, as shown in [15], αm,l, τm,l, and νm,l are approximately
constant for each snapshot since the UAV ﬂies at low speed
(around 5 m/s).
The estimated channel snapshots are used to simulate the
transmission of LTE signals according to the 10 MHz band-
width downlink LTE proﬁle [16] and further obtain the results
of the communication performance, including the end-to-end
delay, the packet success rate and the throughput. In time
domain, the i-th received LTE subframe can be expressed as
[8]
yi(t) = xi(t) ∗ hm(t, τ) + n(t)
(2)
where xi(t) represents the i-th transmitted LTE subframe,
∗ is time-varying convolution operator, m is the number of
snapshot corresponding to the time of simulation for the i-
th subframe, and n(t) is Additive White Gaussian Noise
(AWGN).
In order to match the measured channel in our simulation,
the AWGN power is adjusted to ﬁt the measured Signal to
Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR), calculated as in [17].
The comparison between the simulated and measured SINR
is shown in Figures 2a and 2b for LoS and OLoS scenarios,
respectively. In these two ﬁgures, the X-axis is the horizontal
distance deﬁned as the distance between the UAV and the BS
projected on the ground, and the Y-axis is the SINR in dB. The
simulated SINR is displayed as a solid blue curve whereas the
measured SINR is displayed as dotted orange curve. As shown
in the ﬁgures, the trend and absolute values of the simulated
SINR are consistent in general. A slight deviation between the
simulated and measured SINR values can be appreciated for
the lowest SINR values due to the limited sensibility of the
receiver.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Horizontal Distance [m]
0
5
10
15
20
25
SINR [dB]
Simulated SINR
Measured SINR
(a) Simulated and measured SINR in LoS scenario.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Horizontal Distance [m]
-10
0
10
20
SINR [dB]
Simulated SINR 
Measured SINR
(b) Simulated and measured SINR in OLoS scenario.
Figure 2. Simulated and measured SINR for both scenarios.
C. Retransmission Mechanisms in LTE
After generating the transmit signals and obtaining the
channel model, we simulate the transmission of LTE signals.
In order to calculate the end-to-end delay, the LTE packet re-
transmission mechanisms need to be considered. According to
the LTE standard, each received packet is checked for errors by
means of a Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) [18]. If a CRC
error is detected at reception, then probably a retransmission
of a packet will be requested. For each retransmission of a
packet, a different Redundancy Version (RV) value will be
used, hence the RV sequence can be used to represent the
number of transmissions of each packet. More speciﬁcally,
when the receiver gets a new packet with errors, it ﬁrst tries
to correct the errors using a HARQ technique, which combines
both Forward Error Correction (FEC) and Automatic Repeat
reQuest (ARQ) [19]. If there are no remaining errors in the
packet after the correction, the receiver will send a positive
acknowledgement (ACK) to the transmitter. In contrast, if the
errors can not be corrected completely, a negative acknowl-
edgement (NACK) will be sent to the transmitter and the
packet will be retransmitted [16, Section 9.3.4].
As deﬁned in LTE, at most 8 HARQ processes operate
simultaneously [16, Section 10.3.2.5]. In other words, the
ACKs/NACKs corresponding to 8 packets are processed in
parallel despite the fact that the transmitter sends one single
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

packet at a time. Note that the reception of the ACK/NACK
reply at the transmitter is not instantaneous, but implies both a
propagation delay as well some processing time at the receiver,
hence several data packets are handled by the transmitter
simultaneously. Furthermore, the sequence of operation of
the HARQ processes is random and hence, the order of
transmissions of packets cannot be predicted [16, Section
10.3.2.5]. This way, in order to calculate the end-to-end delay
per packet, we track the RV value for each of the 8 HARQ
process, which is consistent with the LTE standard deﬁnition
[16, Section 10.3.2.5].
When errors remain after the operation of a HARQ process,
a retransmission is requested and the number of transmissions
will increase in one unit until a maximum of 4. When the
RV is 4 and there are still uncorrected errors, the packet will
be dropped as speciﬁed by the LTE standard [16, Section
10.3.2.5]. However, when there are no remaining errors for
a HARQ process within the ﬁrst 4 transmission attempts, the
packet is assumed to be received correctly and an ACK is sent
back to the transmitter. This way, for each packet, the end-to-
end delay is deﬁned as the time instant when it was received
correctly minus the time instant when it was transmitted for the
ﬁrst time. Note that only the LTE physical layer is considered
in this work and hence, we did not consider additional delays
introduced by higher levels of the communication system [9],
which may be different for different applications.
III. RESULTS
This section shows the obtained results, including the
simulated SINR, number of transmissions per packet, packet
success rate, end-to-end delay and throughput. By comparing
the obtained values with the constraints speciﬁed by the 3GPP
in [3], we can judge whether terrestrial deployments enables
critical communications for UAVs.
A. Simulated SINR
The simulated SINR, obtained as in [17], varies with the
horizontal distance between the UAV and the BS for both LoS
and OLoS scenarios, as shown in Figure 3. It can be seen that
the SINR for the LoS scenario is higher than 0 dB for all
the ﬂight distances and it decays with the horizontal distance
with an approximately steady trend. For the OLoS scenario,
the SINR decay is also steady from 50 m to 200 m. At around
200–250 m, a sharp decrease in the SINR occurs, caused by the
building labeled as “Media School” in Figures 1a and 1b. Note
that the height of the building is around 5 m lower than the
ﬂight altitude, and hence, even if the UAV is always visually
reachable from the BS, the building has a great impact in
the transmission of the signals, leading to OLoS propagation
conditions. For ﬂight distances larger than 300 m, the SINR
becomes lower than 0 dB for the OLoS scenario.
B. Number of Transmissions Attempts per Packet
Figure 4 shows the number of transmissions per packet
versus the horizontal distance. For convenience, a 1 s moving
average was applied. From the results, it can be seen that a
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Horizontal Distance [m]
-5
0
5
10
15
20
25
Simulated SINR [dB]
LoS SINR
OLoS SINR
Figure 3. Simulated SINR for the LoS and OLoS scenarios.
single attempt can lead to the successful transmission during
the early part of the ﬂights for both LoS and OLoS scenarios.
As the horizontal distance gets larger, an increasing number
of transmissions is needed, since the number of transmission
attempts per packet is limited to 4, according to the LTE
standard [16, Section 10.3.2.5]. The increase of the number
of transmission attempts for the OLoS scenario is abrupt
when the horizontal distance is around 200–250 m, due to the
decrease of SINR caused by the building labeled as “Media
School” in Figures 1a and 1b. It can also be seen that for
horizontal distances larger than 250 m, the packets require 4
transmission attempts with high probability.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Horizontal Distance [m]
1
2
3
4
Number of Transmissions
LoS RV
OLoS RV
Figure 4. Average number of transmissions attempts per packet for the LoS
and OLoS scenarios.
C. Packet Success Rate
Figure 5 shows the comparison of the packet success rate,
obtained by using an average window of length 1 s, w.r.t the
horizonal distance for the LoS and OLoS scenarios. For the
LoS scenario the packet success rate is 100 % during the whole
ﬂight. However, for the OLoS scenario, the packet success rate
is 100 % at the beginning of the ﬂight, and it starts to decrease
after reaching a horizontal distance of about 230 m. Finally,
it drops rapidly to 0 % at about 300 m. It can be seen, by
recalling the results on Figure 3, that the decrease in packet
success rate is well correlated with that on the SINR. We can
also observe that, combining the results of Figures 4 and 5,
the number of packet transmission attempts for horizontal
distances larger than 300 m (for the OLoS scenario) is always
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

4. This means that, for the OLoS scenario, when the horizontal
distance is larger than 300 m, all the packets are transmitted
incorrectly even after 4 attempts.
It can be seen that an architectural element of the environ-
ment (the building labeled as ”Media School“ in Figures 1a
and 1b in our case), even still allowing visual contact between
the BS and the UAV, can cause a sudden decrease of the
packet success rate. According to the constraints speciﬁed
by the 3GPP in [3], the reliability requirements for UAV
communications state that the packet error rate shall be lower
than 0.1 % for critical communications. Therefore, for satis-
fying this criterion, the horizontal distance should be limited
to approximately 230 m for the OLoS scenario, whereas the
constraints are always fulﬁlled for the LoS scenario. More
importantly, it can be seen that a SINR larger than 0 dB
can be a good indicator for the fulﬁllment of the reliability
requirements for critical UAV communications stated by the
3GPP [3].
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Horizontal Distance [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Packet Success Rate [%]
LoS rate
OLoS rate
Figure 5. Packet success rate for the LoS and OLoS scenarios.
D. End-to-end Delay
As shown before, when the SINR decreases to around
0 dB, no packets will be received successfully. Figures 6a
and 6b show for the LoS and OLoS scenarios, respectively,
the instantaneous end-to-end delay per transmitted packet w.r.t.
the horizontal distance, including the processing time at the
receiver [16, Section 10.3.2.5]. In the ﬁgures, each blue dot
corresponds to the delay for a speciﬁc packet. The minimum
delay values correspond to the cases in which the packets are
transmitted successfully at the ﬁrst attempt. When the SINR
decreases, the delay per packet starts to increase due to the
need of performing several transmission attempts. Note that
since the packets are processed on a 1 ms time basis at the
BS, the values of end-to-end delay are almost discrete, being
the propagation delay negligible. The speciﬁc discrete values
are affected not only by the number of transmission attempts
per packet, but also by the random ordering of the the HARQ
processes. Finally, as indicated in Section II-C, the packets
with remaining errors after 4 transmission attempts will be
dropped, hence the maximum value of the end-to-end delay is
limited. The speciﬁc upper limit of the delay value can change
based on the HARQ ordering strategy followed by the BS. For
our simulations, it is 36 ms.
Figure 6c represents the comparison of the end-to-end
delay for the LoS and OLoS scenarios. For convenience,
a 1 s moving average was applied. The growth rate of the
delay for the OLoS scenario when the horizontal distance is
200–250 m is greatly larger than that of LoS scenario due
to the presence of the building labeled as “Media School”
in Figures 1a and 1b, which is consistent with the results of
packet success rate shown in Figure 5. The end-to-end delay
is crucial for critical communications, which require to deliver
the packets on time. In particular, an end-to-end delay within
50 ms is required for critical communications, according to
the constraints speciﬁed by the 3GPP in [3]. It can be seen
that this constraint is fulﬁlled for all the packets successfully
delivered.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Horizontal Distance [m]
10
20
30
40
Delay [ms]
(a) Instantaneous end-to-end delay for the LoS scenario.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Horizontal Distance [m]
10
20
30
40
Delay [ms]
(b) Instantaneous end-to-end delay for the OLoS scenario.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Horizontal Distance [m]
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Delay [ms]
LoS delay
OLoS delay
(c) Average end-to-end delay for the LoS and OLoS scenarios.
Figure 6. End-to-end delay for the LoS and OLoS scenarios.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

E. Throughput
Figure 7 shows the throughput w.r.t. the horizontal distance
between the BS and the UAV for the LoS and OLoS sce-
narios, respectively. For convenience, a 1 s moving average
was applied. The maximum throughput value is 12.8 Mbps
for both scenarios, corresponding to the case in which all
the packets are successfully received at the ﬁrst transmission
attempt. The minimum throughput value for the LoS scenario
is about 4 Mbps, whereas for the OLoS scenario the throughput
decays to 0 Mbps after approximately 300 m, since no success-
ful packets are transmitted (see Section III-C). As expected,
the decrease of the throughput is well correlated with the
increase of the number of transmission attempts per packet, the
decrease of packet success rate, and the increase of end-to-end
delay (Figures 4, 5 and 6c, respectively). However, according
to the constraints speciﬁed by the 3GPP in [3, Table 5.1-1], the
required data rate for critical communications is relatively low,
just 60–100 Kbps, which is always reached for the distances
in which most of the packets are transmitted successfully.
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
Horizontal Distance [m]
0
5
10
Throughput [Mbps]
LoS throughput
OLoS throughput
Figure 7. Throughput comparison for both scenarios
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, the performance of A2G communications
for low-height small-sized UAVs was evaluated by using a
measurement-based channel model. The measurement cam-
paign was conducted in a suburban environment, considering
both LoS and OLoS scenarios. The performance metrics
considered included the end-to-end delay, the packet success
rate, and the throughput, which were used to further deter-
mine whether terrestrial commercial BS can support critical
communications for UAV applications.
From the results, it can be seen that the measurement sce-
nario can greatly inﬂuence the communication performance.
Architectural elements close to the ﬂight route can severely
decrease the communications performance even when the
visibility between the BS and the UAV is permanently ensured.
These kinds of obstructions can lead to sudden changes on
the end-to-end delay, success rate of the transmitted packets,
and throughput, whereas the changes in these performance
metrics are smooth and dominated by the BS-UAV distance
for scenarios without obstructions.
As a general result, it can be seen that all the performance
metrics are highly correlated with the SINR at the receiver,
being the SINR determined by both the BS-UAV distance and
the effect of the objects in the propagation environment. When
the SINR decreases, the number of retransmissions required
per packet starts to increase, and the end-to-end delay increases
accordingly. More required transmission attempts per packet
also lead to lower values of packet success rate and hence, to
a lower throughput. In particular, when the SINR decays to
values close to 0 dB, most of the packets are dropped, and the
throughput becomes 0 Mbps.
Based on the obtained results, we have shown that the QoS
requirements for critical communications proposed by 3GPP
(in terms of end-to-end latency, reliability, and throughput) are
fulﬁlled for all the cases in which the packet success rate is not
severely decreased, which in practice happens when the SINR
is higher than 0 dB. This proves that the SINR can be used
as a condensed performance metric for evaluating the viability
of critical communications for UAV applications, and for the
design of safe ﬂight routes for critical applications, which
should consider the inﬂuence of both the BS-UAV distance
and the architectural elements in the propagation environment.
Moreover, the goal should not only be ensuring the fulﬁllment
of the minimum performance requirements, but to increase the
performance to the highest level achievable. In order to do
this, schemes on dynamic optimization of the modulation and
coding scheme (MCS) based on different performance ﬁgures
of merit (e.g., throughput, delay or reliability) constitute one
of our current research topics.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 61971313; as well
as by the Xunta de Galicia (by grant ED431C 2020/15, and
grant ED431G 2019/01 to support the Centro de Investi-
gacin de Galicia “CITIC”), the Agencia Estatal de Investi-
gacin of Spain (by grants RED2018-102668-T and PID2019-
104958RB-C42), and ERDF funds of the EU (FEDER Galicia
2014-2020 & AEI/FEDER Programs, UE). The efforts from
our colleagues at the Sino-German Center of Intelligent Sys-
tems, Tongji University, are also gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and T. J. Lim, “Wireless communications with
unmanned aerial vehicles: opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Com-
munications Magazine, vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 36–42, 2016.
[2] D. W. Matolak and R. Sun, “Air-ground channel characterization for
unmanned aircraft systems-part I: Methods, measurements, and models
for over-water settings,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, no. 1, pp.
26–44, 2017.
[3] 3GPP, “Technical speciﬁcation group radio access network: Study on
enhanced LTE support for aerial vehicles,” 3GPP, Tech. Rep. 3GPP TR
36.777 V15.0.0, December 2017.
[4] C. She, C. Liu, T. Q. S. Quek, C. Yang, and Y. Li, “Uav-assisted uplink
transmission for ultra-reliable and low-latency communications,” in 2018
IEEE International Conference on Communications Workshops (ICC
Workshops), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[5] K. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Fei, and X. Wang, “Power limited ultra-reliable
and low-latency communication in uav-enabled iot networks,” in 2020
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC),
2020, pp. 1–6.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[6] M. Horani and M. O. Hasna, “Latency analysis of uav based communi-
cation networks,” in 2018 International Conference on Information and
Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC), 2018, pp. 385–390.
[7] Z. Huang, J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, T. Dom´ınguez-Bola˜no, X. Yin, D. Ma-
tolak, and J. Lee, “Performance of 5G terrestrial network deployments
for serving UAV communications,” in 14th European Conference on An-
tennas and Propagation (EuCAP 2020), Copenhagen, Denmark, March
2020, pp. 1–5.
[8] H. Zhu, J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, Z. Huang, T. Dom´ınguez-Bola˜no, X. Cai,
X. Yin, J. Lee, and D. Matolak, “On the end-to-end latency of cellular-
connected UAV communications,” in 15th European Conference on
Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP 2021), D¨usseldorf, Germany, March
2021, pp. 1–5.
[9] H. Zimmermann, “OSI reference model - the ISO model of architecture
for open systems interconnection,” IEEE Transactions on Communica-
tions, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 425–432, 1980.
[10] J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, T. Dom´ınguez-Bola˜no, X. Cai, Z. Huang, and
X. Yin, “Air-to-ground channel characterization for low-height UAVs
in realistic network deployments,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas and
Propagation, vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 992–1006, February 2021.
[11] T. Dom´ınguez-Bola˜no, J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, J. A. Garc´ıa-Naya, and
L. Castedo, “The GTEC 5G link-level simulator,” in 1st International
Workshop on Link- and System Level Simulations (IWSLS2 2016),
Vienna, Austria, July 2016, pp. 1–6.
[12] “GTEC
Testbed
Project,”
https://bitbucket.org/tomas bolano/gtec
testbed public.git [retrieved: July, 2021].
[13] B. H. Fleury, M. Tschudin, R. Heddergott, D. Dahlhaus, and K. I.
Pedersen, “Channel parameter estimation in mobile radio environments
using the SAGE algorithm,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 17, no. 3,
pp. 434–450, 1999.
[14] J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, Z. Huang, X. Cai, T. Dom´ınguez-Bola˜no, and
X. Yin, “Geometry-based MPC tracking and modeling algorithm for
time-varying UAV channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Commu-
nications, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 2700–2715, April 2021.
[15] Z. Huang, J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, T. Dom´ınguez-Bola˜no, X. Cai, and
X. Yin, “Empirical dynamic modeling for low-altitude UAV propagation
channels,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. Early
Access, March 2021.
[16] S. Sesia, I. Touﬁk, and M. Baker, LTE-the UMTS long term evolution:
from theory to practice.
John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
[17] J. Rodr´ıguez-Pi˜neiro, M. Lerch, J. A. Garc´ıa-Naya, S. Caban, M. Rupp,
and L. Castedo, “Emulating extreme velocities of mobile LTE receivers
in the downlink,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and
Networking, vol. 2015, no. 106, April 2015.
[18] 3GPP, “Multiplexing and channel coding,” 3GPP, Tech. Rep. 3GPP TS
36.212 V8.0.0, 2007.
[19] L. Yang and Z. Liao, “A hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ)
with turbo codes in OFDM system,” in 2010 Intl. Conference on
Computational Intelligence and Software Engineering, 2010, pp. 1–4.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-878-5
ICWMC 2021 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

