A Novel Concept of UWB Pulse Switching in Sensor Networks 
 
Qiong Huo and Subir Biswas 
Michigan State University, USA 
qionghmsu@gmail.com, sbiswas@egr.msu.edu  
 
Abstract -This paper presents the initial results of applying a novel 
concept of energy-efficient pulse switching protocol for ultra-
light-weight wireless network applications. The key idea is to ab-
stract a single pulse, as opposed to multi-bit packets, as the in-
formation exchange mechanism. Pulse switching is shown to be 
sufficient for event sensing applications with binary sensing. 
Event sensing with conventional packet transport can be prohibi-
tively energy-inefficient due to the communication, processing, 
and buffering overheads of the large number of bits within a 
packet’s data, header, and preambles. The paper presents the key 
architectural ideas of a joint MAC-Routing protocol for pulse 
switching with a novel hop-angular event localization.    
Keywords-Impulse Radio; Pulse Switching; UWB; Sensor 
Network; Event Monitoring; Pulse Routing 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
   The key idea in this paper is to introduce a new abstraction of 
pulse switching for replacing the traditional packet switching 
for event monitoring. An example application is Structural 
Health Monitoring (SHM) [1] in which while monitoring a 
bridge for structural failures, it may be sufficient for a sensor 
to generate an event to indicate a structural crack in its vicinity. 
Sending an event, indicating the presence of the crack, to a 
sink would require single bit information transport. For this 
scenario, packets can be energy inefficient due to the commu-
nication, processing, and buffering overheads of a large num-
ber of bits within the payload, header, and the synchronization 
preambles [2] in each packet. 
   In the proposed pulse switching paradigm, such an event can 
be coded as a single pulse, which is then transported multi-hop 
while preserving the event’s localization information. The re-
sulting operational lightness, leveraged via zero collision, zero 
buffering, no addressing, no packet processing, and ultra-low 
communication and energy budgets makes the protocol appli-
cable for severely resource-constrained sensor devices such as 
Radio Frequency Identifiers (RFIDs) operating with tight ener-
gy budgets, often from harvested energy [3].    
      The primary challenges are: 1) how to transport localiza-
tion information using a single pulse, and 2) how to route a 
pulse without being able to explicitly code any information 
within the pulse. A key architectural novelty in this work is to 
integrate a pulses’ (i.e. event’s) location of origin within the 
MAC-routing protocol syntaxes. More specifically, by observ-
ing the time of arrival of a pulse with respect to the MAC-
routing frame, a sink can resolve the corresponding event loca-
tion with a pre-set resolution. Multi-hop pulse routing is ad-
dressed by introducing the concept of a novel synchronized 
phase waves across different hop-distances from the sink.  
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II pre-
sents the related work. Section III describes the network, appli-
cation, and localization model. Section IV presents the MAC-
Routing pulse switching architecture, and Section V presents 
simulated performance results of the proposed architecture. 
Finally, Section VI summarizes the paper. 
II. RELATED WORK 
   Jain et al. [4] reduce preamble and header overheads by ag-
gregating payloads from multiple short packets into a single 
large packet that is routed to a sink node. While reducing the 
energy cost, aggregation still requires the inherent packet over-
heads. The objective of our work is to fully eliminate packets 
via replacing them by pulse switching. 
   Fragouli et al. [5] develop models for energy and delay 
bounds for bit (i.e., packet based) and pulse communications in 
single hop networks. The main results are to demonstrate that 
the worst case energy performance of pulse communication 
can be substantially better than that of packet based communi-
cation, although with a possibly worse delay performance. A 
notable limitation of this work is that the paper does not pro-
vide mechanisms for scaling these results for multi-hop net-
works. Also, no Medium Access Control (MAC) and routing 
protocol details are provided for pulse switching. The objective 
of this paper is to design a MAC-routing framework that can 
be used for practical implementations of multi-hop pulse 
switching.  
III. NETWORK AND APPLICATION MODEL  
Network Model: As shown in Fig. 1, a network contains arbi-
trarily distributed sensors that send pulses to a sink. Depending 
on the node locations and the transmission range (assumed to 
be non-uniform), each node resides at a certain hop-distance 
from the sink. In Fig. 1, the hop-distance for each node is 
marked under the node. The sink is assumed to be capable of 
making high-power transmissions with full network coverage 
for frame-synchronizing the sensors.  
 
Figure 1.  Network model with hop-angular localization 
Application Model: Pulse switching can be used for event 
sensing applications. An event results in multiple pulses, which 
are transported multi-hop to a sink. A pulse is able to repre-
sent: a) the very occurrence of the event, and b) its location of 
origin. With this information, several high level conclusions 
can be derived at the sink by correlating multiple event pulses.  
  Hop-angular Event Localization: A concept of hop-angular 
event area is introduced for event localization. The network is 
logically divided into a fixed number of angular sectors. In Fig. 
1, for example, there are 16 22.5o-wide sectors. With a pre-
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

defined sector-width (αo), the location of a sensor can be repre-
sented by the tuple {sector-id, hop-distance}. For example, the 
location of the encircled sensor in Event Area B in Fig. 1 can 
be represented as {15, 3}, meaning the node is located in the 
15th sector, with a hop-distance 3 from the sink. 
Sink
(h-1).Rmin
h.Rmax
Event 
Area
α
Access Point
Access Point
0
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
hop-distance
Event-Area (sq. m)
Sector Size: 10 degrees
R_min:  1 m
R_max: 1.5 m
Conservative
Average
Fig. 2: Hop-distance event localization
 
Figure 2.  Hop-distance event localization 
   The concept of event area does not assume any specific 
shape (i.e. circular or otherwise) of a node’s transmission cov-
erage area. It could be of any arbitrary shape as shown in Fig. 
1. While the angle for a node is pre-programmed at the de-
ployment time, its hop-distance can be dynamically discovered 
using the process outlined in Section IV.C. The {sector-id, 
hop-distance} tuple indicates an event-area, whose size deter-
mines the event localization resolution. This tuple for an 
event’s origin is carried to the sink by the corresponding pulse.   
   Consider the example event-area identified by the tuple {α, 
h} in the top portion of Fig. 2. With a sector-width of α, and 
Rmin, Rmax representing the known minimum and maximum 
wireless transmission range, the most conservative (coarse) 
localization resolution can be expressed as the largest possible 
event area: 


/360
)1
(
2
min
2
2
max
2

R
h
h R
A
conservative



. The average 
resolution 
is


/360
)1
(
2
2
2
2
arg
R 
h
h R
A
ave e



, 
where 
.2
/)
(
max
min
R
R
R


 For example, with transmission range span-
ning between 1m to 1.5m, in a network with sector-width (i.e. 
α) of 10o, the size of an event-area that is 5 hop-distances away 
is approximately 3.5 square meters. For the Structural Health 
Monitoring application on a bridge, this means that a structural 
crack can be localized within approximately 3.5 square meter 
area. For a given α and transmission range, since this resolu-
tion reduces with higher hop-distances, the maximum network 
size will be determined based on the desired resolution.  
 
IV. PULSE SWITCHING ARCHITECTURE  
A. Joint MAC-Routing Frame Structure 
   Nodes are frame-by-frame time synchronized by the sink, 
and they maintain joint MAC-Routing frames (see Fig. 3) in 
which each slot is used for sending a single pulse. The slot 
includes a guard-time to accommodate the cumulative clock-
drift during a frame, which can be very small for RF technolo-
gy such as Ultra Wide Band (UWB) Impulse Radio, as the 
frame size itself can be ultra-short (µs) for UWB. As shown in 
Fig. 3, the frame contains an uplink part and a downlink part. 
The uplink part contains a control sub-frame and an event sub-
frame. The downlink part of the frame contains a synchroniza-
tion slot in which the sink transmits a full power pulse to make 
all nodes frame-synchronized. The two following downlink 
slots and the reconfiguration part of the uplink control sub-
frame are used for hop-distance discovery. The reconfiguration 
area in control sub-frame has (H+1) slots, where H is the max-
imum hop-distance. The forwarding flag area is designed for 
routing pulses towards the sink. The H-slot wide routing area 
of the control sub-frame is used for energy management. These 
functions will be explained in detail in the next few sections.  
 
Figure 3.  MAC-Routing frame for multi-hop pulse switching 
   The event sub-frame contains H slot clusters, each cluster 
containing 360/α slots, where α corresponds to the sector-
width. Each slot within a cluster corresponds to a specific {sec-
tor-id, hop-distance} tuple. Meaning, for each event-area, rep-
resented by {sector-id, hop-distance}, there is a dedicated slot 
in the event sub-frame. An event originating node transmits a 
pulse during the dedicated event sub-frame slot that corre-
sponds to the {sector-id, hop-distance} of the node’s event 
area. While routing the pulse towards the sink, at all intermedi-
ate nodes it is transmitted at the same event sub-frame slot that 
corresponds to the {sector-id, hop-distance} of its event-area 
of origin. In other words, while being forwarded, the transmis-
sion slot for the pulse at all intermediate nodes does not change 
with respect to the frame. This is how information about the 
location of origin of an event is preserved during routing. Upon 
reception, the sink can infer the event-area of origin from the 
{sector-id, hop-distance} value corresponding to the slot at 
which the pulse is received. The role of the control sub-frame 
in Fig. 3 will be described in Sections IV.C, IV.D and V. 
 
Slot: Tf
Pulse: Gaussian Monocycle
(Pulse Repetition 
Period)
Received: Single Pulse
Multi-path: Delay Spread
Received: Merged 
(overlapped) Pulses
Empty Slot
Empty Slot
Pulse 
Width
 
Figure 4.  Pulse switching with un-modulated UWB pulses  
B. Pulse Realization using UWB Impulse Radio 
   The ability to transmit and receive a single pulse without per-
pulse synchronization overhead is a key requirement for pulse 
switching. Ultra Wide Band (UWB) [6][7] Impulse Radio (IR) 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

technology can be practically  [8] used because of its support 
of single pulse transmission and reception. The top graph in 
Fig. 4 depicts a UWB implementation of the slot structure used 
in this protocol. A typical UWB pulse width is 1 ns, and the 
pulse repetition period Tb is 1000 ns [6], which determines the 
slot size in this case.   
C. Pulse Forwarding  
   A hop-distance discovery process needs to be periodically 
executed by the network for each node to discover its own hop-
distance from the sink node.  When a pulse is transmitted by a 
node at hop-distance h, only its neighboring nodes at hop-area 
(h-1) forward it towards the sink. Meaning, the nodes at hop-
area h and h+1 should ignore the pulse. This logic ensures that 
a pulse is eventually delivered to the sink. While transmitting a 
pulse in the event sub-frame (see Section IV.A), its transmitter 
also sends a pulse in the corresponding slot of the forwarding 
flag area of the control sub-frame. That is, while forwarding a 
pulse by a hop area h node, it sends a pulse in the hth time slot 
of the forwarding flag area. By looking at the received pulse in 
the forwarding area, all the receivers of the pulse can decide if 
it should be discarded or forwarded towards the sink. This can 
ensure that a pulse from hop-area h should be forwarded only 
by nodes in hop-area h-1.  
 
 
D. Sector-constrained Routing 
   The extent of sector-constraints during pulse forwarding can 
be parameterized using , which represents the ratio of the 
angular resolution and an angle . The angle is the sector-
width beyond which a pulse may not be flooded while for-
warding. For a given , the minimum and the maximum values 
of   are  and
o
180 respectively.  
3
1
2
Access Point
Access Point
Sink
A
B
D
2
C
a: Fault tolerance due to route diversity  
b: Intra-event pulse merging at node A
Wake-up Regions
Routing
Area
Hop 
distance: 1
Hop 
distance: 2
Hop 
distance: 3
Hop 
distance: 4
1
2 3 4
1
2 3 4
1
2 3 4
1
2 3 4
Sector Ids.
1
2 3 4
Hop-distances.
Sector 
Id = 3
Fwd Flag
Area
1
2 3 4
 
Figure 5.  Route diversity and pulse merging/aggregation 
   The corresponding   values are 1 and
180o /
. When   is 
1, routing is maximally constrained, indicating the minimum 
communication energy consumption, and the maximum sus-
ceptibility to errors due to the minimum pulse redundancy, as 
shown in Fig. 6.  
 
E. Aggregation via Pulse Merging   
   Collisions between pulses may not necessarily lead to infor-
mation loss. For example, in Fig. 5, since the pulse originating 
from D is transmitted by B and C on the same slot in the event 
sub-frame, the receiver A detects RF signals for a merged pulse 
in that slot. As long as the RF hardware can detect the presence 
of this overlapped pulse, the routing continues. In fact, this 
pulse merging and route diversity provides inherent in-network 
aggregation for events from the same event-area.  
source
source
source
δ= 0.2 
(α = 30 , γ =150 )
δ= 0.33 
(α = 30 , γ = 90 )
δ= 1 
(α = 30 , γ = 30 )
sink
sink
sink
 
Figure 6.  Routing envelope and pulse fan-out during forwarding 
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
   We developed an event-driven C++ simulator which imple-
ments MAC framing and pulse routing using the UWB Im-
pulse Radio model as presented in Section IV.  
A. Pulse Transmission Count 
   For the proposed Pulse Switching Protocol (PSP), Fig. 7:a 
reports the number of forwarding transmissions across differ-
ent hop areas when an event is created in hop area 5 in the 441 
node network. Numbers are reported for two different sector 
constraints ( =0.2 and 1). For both   observe how the num-
ber of pulse transmissions maximizes at an intermediate hop-
distance, confirming the lateral fan-out and convergence seen 
as the routing envelopes in Fig. 6. 
 
Figure 7.  Transmission count and route diversity 
    
B. Route Diversity 
   The route diversity factor
)1
(
  
represents the number of 
forwarding transmissions for a pulse from hop-distance h, 
normalized by h, which is the minimum number of required 
transmissions. Fig. 7b demonstrates β with increasing sector-
constraint   for two different angular resolutions of α = 15◦ 
and 30◦. A larger α means more nodes are involved in forward-
ing (see Fig. 6), leading to higher route diversity.  
 
C. Error Analysis 
Impacts of Pulse Loss Error: Pulse losses can manifest in the 
form of un-reported events. We define Pulse Loss Rate (PLR) 
as the probability that a pulse is lost in a given time-slot due to 
multi-path, channel noise, or interferences. Event Loss Rate 
(ELR) is the probability that a pulse is not reported to the sink. 
Fig. 8:a depicts simulation results of PLR versus ELR for a 
single event generated in hop area 5 of the 441-node network. 
Observe that for practical range of PLR [10], the ELR for PSP 
remains vanishingly small and it is generally insensitive to the 
value of PLR. This is mainly because of the redundancy in 
pulse transmissions (i.e. route diversity) for PSP as demon-
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

strated in Fig. 7.  
 
Impacts of False Positive Errors: If pulses are erroneously 
detected [9] by a node in state LO or TL such that a false posi-
tive pulse in the control sub-frame corresponds to another false 
positive pulse in the event sub-frame with corresponding for-
warding flag (see Fig. 3), then an event is falsely detected at 
that node. Once such a false positive event is generated, it is 
forwarded all the way to the sink, leading to a false positive 
event reporting. Let FPPR (False Positive Pulse Rate) be the 
probability that a false positive pulse is generated due to faulty 
UWB detection in a given time-slot. We intend to determine 
the quantity FPEGR (False Positive Event Generation Rate) 
which corresponds to the probability of at least one false posi-
tive event generation per frame per node at a given hop-area. 
 
Figure 8.  Impacts of pulse loss and false positive 
 
  The impacts of FPPR on FPEGR in hop area 3 in PSP are 
shown in Fig. 8:b. Hop area 3 is chosen because it represents 
the middle of the experimental network. Observe that in PSP, 
FPEGR is extremely small with practical range of FPPR [10] 
which is lower than 10-4. This indicates that the proposed PSP 
is fairly immune to false positive errors.  
D. Energy Consumption 
   A distributed TDMA with sink-rooted minimum spanning 
tree for packet routing has been used as the representative pro-
tocol to compare its energy consumption with that of the pro-
posed pulse switching. TDMA is chosen because of its high 
energy efficiency compared to random access mechanisms. An 
event detected by a sensor is reported to sink using min-hop 
routing along the minimum spanning tree. A packet contains 
the minimum amount of information to represent a {sector-id, 
hop-distance} event-area and also a per-packet preamble [2].  
 ‘   Based on the UWB specification [8], the transmission and 
reception consumptions are set to 4 nJ and 8 nJ per pulse. 
Since a pulse transmission using the baseband UWB has the 
same energy expenditure for Pulse Position Modulated bits in a 
packet, the same 4 nJ and 8 nJ values are used for both pulse 
and bit  (in packets) transmission and reception.  
   Fig. 9 reports the communication power consumption for 
both pulse and packet transport with varying event rates. Ob-
serve that the consumption is linearly dependent on the event 
rate λ for both pulse and packet scenarios. The slope of the 
TDMA graph in Fig. 9 is noticeably higher than that for PSP 
for both angular resolutions of α = 15◦ and 30◦, and it is mainly 
due to the overhead of per-packet preamble and payload over-
heads. Overall, Fig. 9 validates the primary premise of pulse 
switching that it can transport multi-point-to-point binary 
events at a lower energy budget compared to traditional packet 
switching. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Event Rate (event/node/sec)
Communication Consumption (mWatt)
 
 
TDMA,  = 30
TDMA,  = 15
PSP,  = 30
PSP,  = 15
 
Figure 9.  Communication power consumption per node 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
   A novel pulse switching protocol for ultra-light-weight net-
working applications has been developed in this paper. A joint 
MAC-routing architecture for pulse switching with a hop-
angular event localization strategy was presented. Through 
simulation results, it is shown that the proposed pulse switch-
ing architecture can be an effective means for energy efficient-
ly transporting information that is binary in nature.  
   Future work on this topic includes: 1) an implementation of 
the proposed pulse routing architecture on a UWB embedded 
hardware, 2) extending the architecture for cellular event local-
ization, and 3) experimenting with pulse switching for non-
radio media such as ultrasound on metal substrates.   
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
   This work was supported by an NSF grant NeTS 0915851. 
VIII. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C.R. Farrar, G. Park, D.W. Allen, and M.D. Todd, “Sensor net-
work paradigms for structural health monitoring”, J. of Structural 
Control and Health Monitoring, vol. 13, no. 1, 2006, pp. 210-225.   
[2] Z. Yuanjin, C. Rui, L. Yong, “A new synchronization algorithm 
for UWB impulse radio communication systems”, Int. Conf. on 
Communication Systems (ICCS), Singapore, 2004, pp. 25-29. 
[3] E. Minazara, D. Vasic, and G. Poulin, “Piezoelectric diaphragm 
for vibration energy harvesting”, Ultrasonics, vol. 44, no. 1, 2006, 
pp. 699-703. 
[4] A. Jain, M. Gruteser, and D. Grunwald, “Benefits of Packet Ag-
gregation in Ad-Hoc Networks”, Technical Report CU-CS-960-
03, Dept. of Computer Science, Boulder, Colorado, August, 2003. 
[5] C. Fragouli and A. Orlitsky, “Silence is golden and time is money: 
power-aware communication for sensor networks”, in Allerton 
Conference on Comm., Control and Computing, 2005. 
[6] S. Haykin and M. Moher, “Modern wireless communications”,  
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 2004, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA. 
[7] M. Win and R. Scholtz, “Impulse radio: how it works”, IEEE 
Communication Letters, vol. 2, no. 2, 1998, pp. 36-38. 
[8] B. Poucke and B. Gyselinckx, “Ultra-wideband communication 
for low-power wireless body area networks”, Industrial Embed-
ded Systems Resources Guide, 2005. 
 [9] Van Trees and Harry L., “Detection, Estimation, and Modulation 
Theory - Part l.” John Wiley & Sons. 
[10] Yu. Andreyev, A. Dmitriev, E. Efremova, A. Khilinsky and L. 
Kuzmin, “Qualitative Theory of Dynamical Systems, Chaos and 
Contemporary Wireless Communications”, International Journal 
of Bifurcation and Chaos, Vol.15, No.11, 2005, pp. 3639-3651. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

