Basic Internet: Mobile Content Delivery to Everyone
George Suciu
Research Department
Beia Consult International
Bucharest, Romania
email: george@beia.ro
Geaba Alin Nicusor
Telecomm. Department
Politehnica of Bucharest
Bucharest, Romania
email: alin_geaba@yahoo.com
I˜naki Garitano
Enginering Faculty
Mondragon Unibertsitatea
Mondragon, Spain
email: igaritano@garitano.org
Josef Noll
Basic Internet Foundation
University of Oslo/UNIK
Kjeller, Norway
email: josef@unik.no
Abstract—The Basic Internet Foundation aims at optimized con-
tent delivery for capacity-limited networks, and thus provides free
access to basic information to everyone. In this paper we describe
the main technological challenges of the content delivery, being
the concept of information, the remote administration of access
points and the inclusion of Internet of Things (IoT) information.
Basic Internet aims at offering free access to information on low
capacity Internet lines to people lacking Internet coverage or
the ability to pay for mobile data. The main contributions of this
paper are solutions that the foundation as well as other programs
or companies have addressed encouraging digital development
and inclusion.
Keywords–Internet; foundation; broadband; devices; network;
information; developing economies.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There is a constant need for evolution and the only way
humanity has surpassed many obstacles and gotten to the point
it is today is by using the collective knowledge of different
individuals. In that desire to form a connection with others in
order to access information you require, the Internet has been
developed as the solution for sharing and receiving data and
information.
The origins of the Internet date back to the 1960s, when
the United States government developed a research program
that aimed to build robust, fault-tolerant communication via
computer networks [1]. The Internet now links several billion
devices worldwide together, and consists of a multitude of
networks local to global scope, private or public connected
to a broad array of networking technologies [2].
In the 1990s, the Internet had developed into a usable
and efﬁcient service that led to a modern human life. As of
June 2014, nearly 42.3% of the world’s human population has
already used the services of the Internet [3]. The necessity
of the Internet grew rapidly and it is now used in a large
variety of data transfers and downloads for different purposes
such as entertainment, business, document and many others.
However, the Internet is not accessible for the majority of
people in developing economies, mainly due to availability
and affordability. As an example, countries like Guinea and
Niger have less than 2% Internet usage [3].
The problem that the Basic Internet foundation is trying
to solve is that of the economical solution present in many
countries. The fact that not all of us are born into the same
living conditions is a giving fact, but that does not mean that
some of us should be restricted from receiving a proper means
of education, including digital competency.
The Internet can be used for multiple purposes, one of
them is to promote teacher training. In the case of rural areas,
the Internet can have an important role in giving teachers
some pointers to a better educational experience, make them
a moderator of digital science, and offer them materials for
their work [4][5]. By using a network-based training system,
teachers can keep in touch with each other or receive support
from educators from the best universities.
The Basic Internet Foundation is complementary to Mobile
Network Operators, and offers their services to people who
can’t access or can’t afford mobile Internet services. Based
on factors such as social conditions, markets or economy the
Foundation determines if their interventions are required, and
once those factors have evolved satisfactorily, the Founda-
tion will transform its involvement to commercial providers.
However, such a transfer of assets will include obligations to
continue providing free basis information services. The paper
is organized as follows: Section II presents similar solutions
from other companies with similar goals, while Section III de-
scribes the political involvement in various countries. Section
IV presents the current technology challenges, and Section V
addresses ﬁrst results from pilot implementations. Section VI
concludes the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we provide an overview of existing solutions
for Internet distribution in areas with economic issues and
present the main challenges. The United Nations’ Human
Rights Council has unanimously backed the notion of equal
rights for every person to be allowed to connect to and express
themselves freely on the Internet. All of the 47 members of
the Human Rights Council have approved that notion in a
resolution on the ﬁfth of July 2012 [6].
A. Nextelco
Nextelco Foundation is a company founded in 2012 by
Guy Kamanda and aims at providing Internet to Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC) [7]. The main goal is to provide
free information access, which the company considers to be a
human right.
The company is using the new concept of user involved
service and that of the infrastructure provision. What the real
challenge that Nextelco recognized is that mobile coverage
is very limited, and costly satellite connection is often the
only way of establishing Internet access. In practice, the
Internet is only accessible for the well-established people.
Nextelcos main purpose is to establish information access
as a consumer product in Africa for people of all ages and
economical standards. The company has joined forces with
Basic Internet to provide hot-spot solutions with free access
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

to basic information like Wikipedia, and voucher-based access
to Internet content.
B. WaveTek
WaveTek Nigeria Limited is an innovative company that
provides Information and Communications Technology (ICT)
solutions that offers customers cutting-edge infrastructure and
devices independent of their social area [8]. The Managing
Director, Ken Spann advised the operators specialized in ICT
to invest more time into developing virtual ﬁber solutions
to deepen Internet penetration thus improving the quality of
service. The solution the company has come up with for
reducing the cost as an alternative for the ﬁber circuits is a
high-capacity wireless.
The idea is to provide ﬁber-equivalent connections between
different locations. The way to do that is by transmitting
data over microwave or millimeter wave frequencies at gigabit
speeds, approximately 2 Gigabits per second (Gbps), with the
possibility to upgrade it in the future up to 10 Gbps. The
reason for its efﬁciency it that has multiple advantages such as:
add/drop data ports and optional wire-speed with an Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES) encryption built-in thus making
existing ﬁber network redundant.
C. Internet of Internets
The Next Generation Internet (NGI) consists of a multitude
of projects that have the objective of improving Internet
performance as well as content quality in different regions [9].
NGI focusses on the research regarding the design, pro-
tocols, engineering, and operation regarding the new signal
processing techniques in 3G/4G/LTE/B4G [10][11]. Other
important researches are that of the Ad Hoc Network and
Wireless Mesh Network [12][13], channel allocation [14],
Internet of Things (IoT) [15], cloud computing [16], and
extensions of the Internet Protocol (IP) [17].
The Multi-Tier Architecture for the Internet of Internets
(MTAII) can be separated into two components, Speciﬁc In-
ternet Protocol (SIP) and Multi-Tier Internet Protocol (MTIP).
SIP isolates IPv4 on hosts from WAN infrastructures while
delivering IPv4 trafﬁc through WANs between hosts. MTIP
provides a tree-like topology and is used for delivering SIP
trafﬁc.
The exhaustion of the IPv4 address space was foreseen
more than a decade ago, so many solutions had been suggested
[18]-[21]. The problem was that none of them were accepted
as a solution so they were all combined into another Internet
protocol IPv6 [22][23], leading to a modiﬁed protocol stack
(Figure 1).
Applications
ATM
TCP, UDP
IPv4
Link
Applications
TCP, UDP
IPv4
IPv4 WAN
MTIP
IPv6
…
Figure 1. The change in the protocol stack
Internet research assumes sufﬁcient capacity on the link
layer, which is not the reality in congested mobile networks
or over satellite links. Thus, novel concepts are required with
distributed applications supporting these low-capacity links.
III.
POLITICAL INVOLVEMENT
Two examples of political involvement are provided, being
Germany and Romania. In Germany, the Ministry of Com-
munications has annnounced that every public building should
have a free Wiﬁ access in order to foster innovations.
The Romanian Government launched the National Broad-
band Strategy in order to increase the penetration rate in house-
holds of the broadband connection. The broadband coverage
remains limited, especially in rural areas among households
and companies.
In 2009, the “Government strategy of developing broad-
band electronic communications in Romania for the period
2009-2015” was adopted. Starting from the provisions of this
Strategy, correlated with those of the European Structural
Funds Regulations and with the speciﬁc state aid, the Ministry
of Communications and Information Society has developed
a Model for Implementation of projects aimed at developing
broadband infrastructure in disadvantaged areas.
The use of Structural Funds available for infrastructure
development was decided after analyzing patterns of imple-
mentation of broadband infrastructure, achieved through in-
stitutional cooperation, consultation and joint communications
market proﬁle as well as consultations with representatives of
the European Commission. The infrastructure is state property,
which is made available to communications operators on a
commercial basis, and without restricting access.
The Ministry of Communications and Information Soci-
ety (MCSI) has distributed in 2010 hotspots in public areas
throughout the country. The E-NET initiative consists of
building a national broadband infrastructure in deprived areas,
by using structural funds. The measure was intended to further
the transition process to a modern society, information, based
on the increasing number of areas with free Internet access.
These network activities are supported by open-source
developments, providing a cost-effective Internet service in-
frastructure.
IV.
TECHNOLOGY CHALLENGES
The Basic Internet Foundation aims to deliver optimized
content over low-capacity links. The delivery involves several
technological challenges, which need further research and
development. Currently, the technological department of the
Basic Internet Foundation is focused on solving three main
challenges: (1) the notiﬁcation of information, (2) the central-
ized management of the whole infrastructure, which involves
Customer-premises Equipment (CPE), and (3) the dynamic
establishment of secure and privacy-aware communication
channel for Internet of Things (IoT) devices.
The ﬁrst challenge is related to information provisioning.
Information has social, economic, political and cultural roles,
depending on the background of the reader. The challenge,
we are addressing, is related to the way information is best
presented in bandwidth limited systems. Thus, we try to char-
acterize information content related to the amount of bits being
used in the communication. Instead of restricting content, we
suggest to restrict content types, e.g., to allow text and pictures,
but dismiss videos. However, both deﬁnition and technological
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

implementations are not straight forward. Taking the example
of the resolution and the size of a picture. Depending on the
content of a picture, a certain resolution and size is required
to provide meaningful information.
The second challenge, the centralized management of the
whole infrastructure, requires further research and develop-
ment of protocols such as the Customer Premise Equipment
(CPE) Wireless Access Network (WAN) Management Protocol
(CWMP), proposed by the Broadcom Forum under the TR-069
report [24]. The CWMP protocol deﬁnes the communication
between the CPE and Auto-Conﬁguration Server (ACS), to-
gether with a framework with several functionalities:
•
Auto-conﬁguration and dynamic service provisioning,
•
Software/ﬁrmware image management,
•
Software module management,
•
Status and performance monitoring, and
•
Diagnostics.
Such functionalities would allow CPE provisioning at the
time of initial connection, allowing the distribution of CPE
devices with default factory settings. The savings in terms of
efforts necessary to conﬁgure each device would increase the
affordability of the project and push forward the research and
development of other technologies.
The third challenge, the dynamic establishment of secure
and privacy-aware communication channels for IoT devices,
involves the design and development of a middleware for both
CPE and IoT devices. Being the Basic Internet network open
and unencrypted, the middleware would allow the interaction
between devices with the platform in order to perform func-
tions such as:
•
Establish an encryption algorithm together with a key,
and
•
Add, update or revoke security certiﬁcates,
Furthermore, the middleware would allow the development of
CPE applications. Those applications would perform different
functions such as conversion of user information into anony-
mous requests.
Current IoT device vendors suffer the lack of a standard
communication channels. Most IoT devices are connected to
private or service provider networks preventing them from
controlling the communication channel. Moreover, when using
mobile operator services, each device needs to be equipped
with a SIM card, which depending on the country it will re-
quire to be different unless the vendor established an agreement
with a multi-country service provider. The costs and challenges
associated to communication channels prevent many vendors
from developing new IoT devices.
As self-monitoring health care devices evolve, secure-
and privacy-aware communication channels become necessary.
Home located health-care services, such as Dignio prevent
[25], take advantage of new health related IoT devices provid-
ing a qualitative service built on top of traditional home health-
care services. Gathered health related measures like blood
pressure are sent from the end user devices to a central patient
monitoring service, and the service will provide a personalise
medical advise to the user. Thus, the communication needs to
be bidirectional and the channel has to ensure security and
privacy.
The development of the middleware would allow the cre-
ation of Basic Internet enabled devices. In this way, interested
IoT device vendors would be able to associate with the Basic
Internet Foundation, being able to use the communication
infrastructure and develop their own applications on top of
CPE devices.
V.
RESULTS AND IMPACT
Though three main challenges are mentioned in the pre-
vious chapter, the focus will be on experiences related to
challenge one, the information provision.
The Basic Internet Foundation started its activities back in
2010 for developing Internet access in Africa. A series of pilots
were established in 2011, amongst others the Internet access
for the region and the University of Lisala (DRC). Experiences
from these pilots showed that the bandwidth limited and costly
satellite link was the biggest hurdle for affordable Internet
access.
The main problem that developing countries are facing
is related to the high costs for providing Internet services
in areas with low availability. The main focus is on getting
as much information as possible through a bandwidth-limited
link. Some examples of such low-availability links are satellite
links and congested mobile networks.
Basic Internet provides solutions for optimizing the stream
of information in such a way that a high amount of information
can be provided despite the unfavourable conditions mentioned
earlier. The Basic Internet network contains in its complete
form: a network termination, a distribution network, and a
Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) Access Point. In areas where no
Internet connection is available, the network termination can
be achieved through either a radio link or a satellite connection.
The http archive provides various measures of content of
web pages [30]. An average Web page has doubled in size
from 2012 to 2015, being 1.09 MB in 2012, and 2.1 MB in
2015. The space used by scripts on web pages is between 15
and 19%, while images account to slightly more than 60%. The
raise of video is documented ﬁrst time in 2015, accounting for
10% of the web size.
TABLE I. WEB SITE GROWTH AND CONTENT
1Jul2012
1Jul2013
1Jul2014
1Jul2015
av. web site [kB]
1090
1485
1829
2135
Images [kB]
684
909
1159
1348
Scripts [kB]
210
225
293
344
Video [kB]
204
Though the total size has doubled, there are remarkable dif-
ferences in size. Google.com uses only 90 kB, while Wikipedia
uses around 300 kB, both substantially lower than the 3.3 MB
used by the NYTimes.com. On thin lines, e.g., a satellite link
of 1 Mbps, a web page of 2.1 MB would load in 20 s, and
block the satellite capacity for other users.
Thus affordability requires reduction of information, which
can be achieved through removing content, content elements,
resizing images and compression of the whole web page.
Opera Mini is one of the best examples of a browser designed
primarily for mobile phones, smartphones and personal digital
assistants that can provide a maximum of information, even
though it has limited capacity in the network [?][31]. Statistics
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

from Opera point to an average of 340 pages/user, resulting in
an average of 4 MByte per month for users in Nairobi [32].
TABLE II. INFORMATION PROVISIONING COSTS
Usage [MB]
Users/1 Mbps
costs/user [US$/month]
4
3996
0.5
20
799
3
50
320
6
Results of a simpliﬁed model for providing information
over a satellite link are provided in Table II. For simpliﬁcation,
the costs per user are based only on the operational costs
of the satellite link. The numbers are based on a 1 Mbit/s
(Mbps) satellite link to Africa, with costs of 2000 US$/month,
12 h duty time, and a simpliﬁed linear distribution of the
trafﬁc. Table I clearly shows the effect of basic information
and compression, allowing to provide information at a satellite
cost of half a dollar per month, given the average use of
compressed 4 MByte per user and month. In comparison, a
video transmission of 8 min, accounting to 50 MByte, would
cost roughly 6 US$. Using a radio link or a mobile network
termination will signiﬁcantly reduce the cost, and can drop the
Basic Internet provision to lower than 0.1 US$/month.
Nowadays, the foundation joined the United Nation’s Vi-
sion 2030 to ensure optimized content delivery for capacity-
limited networks in low-developed countries [29]. The Basic
Internet Core Network (Figure 2) is the one responsible for the
information optimization and supports trafﬁc shaping, trafﬁc
balancing, free access to basic information and voucher-based
access to full Internet including video and gaming.
Figure 2. The Basic Internet central AAA and the Customer Equipment
The enhanced infrastructure, as piloted in 4 Universities in
Kinshasa (DRC), provides free access to Wikipedia and other
educational sides. The customer infrastructure includes a local
server, adding free-of-charge educational videos and content.
The results of the pilot implementations verify that
•
A cost-effective Internet distribution is possible,
•
The deployment addresses people not being able to
access information,
•
Typical target groups are schools, universities, health
and community centres, and
•
The service offer is complementary to conventional
telecom services.
Based on the results of the pilot, we believe that a cost-
effective basic Internet distribution worldwide is possible, and
will foster digital inclusion.
A high-bandwidth local distribution network represented
by a server fully loaded with information freely available for
everyone could extend the service offer for education and
health information. Such a development includes device and
software development speciﬁc for the evolving markets such
as BRCK [33], as well as low-cost solutions, e.g. USB modem
and USB capable MikroTik router [34][35].
Following the principle of the Basic Internet of a low-
bandwidth information provision, the focus is mainly on the
applications speciﬁcally developed for distributing a large
amount of collective information without high requirements.
Examples that ﬁt these expectations are Wikipedia and a long
list of apps on phones and tablets that can work with a
minimum bandwidth.
One of the most important development projects refers
to health applications that provide information based on the
feedback given by a health-sensor. The main idea is to transmit
the data about a persons health over the low-bandwidth link
together with user-speciﬁc information, and to get reliable
personalized treatment information back to the user.
Though education and health care are the two dominant
areas, digital inclusion will foster local innovation. Business
innovation in developing economies will take place by receiv-
ing up-to-date information about customers, partners, markets
and innovations that can be implemented.
Other actors like Google have dedicated resources for
building and helping the development of running wireless
networks in emerging markets for connecting more people
to the Internet [36]. The main concepts being provided by
the Basic Internet Foundation and others are services reach-
ing those who can’t access or can’t afford wireless Internet
services. In that way, the access provision is complimentary
to conventional Telecom services. Current activities include
the marketing trial in Kinshasa to address potential scalability
issues. Upcoming steps are pilots in selected African countries
in order to address the ecosystem for digital education. Further
steps include global alliances to reach out to countries seeing
the need for digital inclusion.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented the development as well as
the principles, which the Basic Internet Foundation is based
on. The core of the initiative is providing free access to basic
information to developing economies using a cost efﬁcient way
of network access.
Three main challenges are identiﬁed, related to the no-
tiﬁcation of information, the centralized management of the
whole infrastructure, and the dynamic establishment of secure
and privacy-aware communication channel for Internet of
Things (IoT) devices. The paper addresses the mainly the ﬁrst
challenge, and demonstrates that roughly 4000 users can be
supported with free basic access over a thin 1 Mbps satellite
link, dropping the connectivity price to as little as 0.5 US$ per
person and month. Examples of pilot installations in Africa
are presented, pointing out the target groups being schools,
universities, health- and community-centres.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Other initiatives, programs and companies that support the
same ideas, as well as their results are presented. A range
of solutions for future work envisioned for the purpose of
life improvement are introduced. The development of such
programs will leave strong results in many areas regarding
e.g., data transfer, health, economy, knowledge, business, and
entertainment.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Steward (ed.), (2000, Jan) “IPTO – Information Processing Tech-
niques Ofﬁce”, The Living Internet, http://www.livinginternet.com/i/ii
ipto.htm [Retrieved: Mar.2015].
[2]
RFC 1122, Requirements for Internet Hosts – Communication Layers,
1.1.2 Architectural Assumptions, 1989.
[3]
— (2014, Dec.), ”World Stats”. Internet World Stats. Miniwatts Mar-
keting Group. http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats1.htm#africa [Re-
trieved: Jul 2015]
[4]
A. Feenberg, “Building a Global Network: The WBSI Experience”,
in L. Harasim (ed.) “Global Networks: Computers and International
Communication”, The MIT Press, 1993, pp. 186–197.
[5]
M. Riel, “Global Education through Learning Cycles”, in L. Harasim
(ed.) ”Global Networks: Computers and International Communication”,
The MIT Press, 1993, pp. 222–236.
[6]
J. Noll, “Providing Internet Access to Emerging Economies
The
Business of Free Access, The Third International Conference on Mobile
Services, Resources, and Users. MOBILITY 2013. Nov. 2013
[7]
Nextelco
Sprl,
(2012,
June),
First
installations
of
Network,
https://www.facebook.com/nextelco.sprl. [Retrieved: Jul 2015]
[8]
N. A. Nurudeen, (2015, June). “Virtual ﬁbre solutions will enhance con-
nectivity, says WaveTek, The Nation Publication, [Retrieved: Jul. 2015]]
[9]
Y. Liu, J. Wu, Q. Wu, and K. Xu, “Recent progress in the study of the
next generation Internet in China”, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A, vol. 371, nr.
1987, Feb. 2013.
[10]
A. Jayanthiladevi, H. M. Premlatha, and G. M. K. Nawaz, “Analysis
study of seamless integration and intelligent solution in any situation
by the future advanced mobile universal systems 4G(FAMOUS 4G),”
in Proc. of the Intern. Conf. on Electronics and Telecommunication
System (ICEVENT ’13), 2013, pp. 1-5.
[11]
L. Duan, J. Huang, and J. Walrand, “Economic analysis of 4G network
upgrade, in Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM, 2013, pp. 1070-1078.
[12]
S. Fujiwara, T. Ohta, and Y. Kakuda, “An inter-domain routing for
heterogeneous mobile ad hoc networks using packet conversion and
address sharing, in Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference
on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCSW ’12), 2012,
pp. 349-355.
[13]
L. Song, C. Zhao, and C. Zheng, “Analysis and optimization model of
cognitive wireless mesh networks, in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Industrial Control and Electronics Engineering (ICICEE
’12), Aug. 2012, pp. 1426-1429.
[14]
S. N. Ohatkar and D. S. Bormane, “Channel allocation technique with
genetic algorithm for interference reduction in cellular network, in
Proceedings of the 2013 Annual IEEE on India Conference (INDICON
’13), Dec. 2013, pp. 1-6.
[15]
S. Nastic, S. Sehic, M. Vogler, H. L. Truong, and S. Dustdar, “Pa-
tRICIAa novel programming model for IoT applications on cloud plat-
forms, in Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE 6th International Conference on
Service-Oriented Computing and Applications (SOCA ’13), Dec. 2013,
pp. 53-60.
[16]
M. Bourguiba, K. Haddadou, I. E. Korbi, and G. Pujolle, “Improving
network I/O virtualization for cloud computing, IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 25, no. 3, 2014, pp. 673-681.
[17]
G. Huston,“Network Service Models and the Internet, The Internet
Protocal Journal, Vol. 16, nr. 2, Jun. 2013, [Retrieved: Aug. 2015]
[18]
R. Hinden, (1994, Oct), “Simple Internet Ptorocol Plus White Paper,
Internet RFC 1710, [Retrieved: Jul. 2015].
[19]
B. Carpenter, (1994, Apr.), “AEIOU: Address Extension by IP Op-
tion Usage, http://ftp.ripe.net/ietf/94mar/aeiou-minutes-94mar.txt, [Re-
trieved: May 2015].
[20]
Z. Wang, (1992, Nov.) “EIP: The Extended Internet Protocol
A
Framework for Maintaining Backward Compatibility, Internet RFC
1385, [Retrieved: May 2015]
[21]
Y. Li and W. T. Teo, (1998, Nov.), “IP Private Address Identiﬁ-
cation (PAID), https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-yliteo-mobileip-paid-00,
[Retrieved: May 2015]
[22]
S. Deering and R. Hinden, (1998, Dec.), “Internet Protocol, Version 6
(IPv6) Speciﬁcation, Internet RFC 2460, [Retrieved: Nov. 2014].
[23]
R. Gilligan and E. Normark, (1996, Oct.), “Transition Mechanisms for
IPv6 Hosts and Routers, Internet RFC 1933, [Retrieved: Nov. 2014].
[24]
Broadcom Forum, “TR-069 CPE WAN Management Protocol, 1,
Amendment 5, November 2013, https://www.broadband-forum.org/
technical/download/TR-069 Amendment-5.pdf. [Retrieved Mar. 2015]
[25]
Dignio prevent service, http://www.dignio.com/services/, [Retrieved:
Jun.2015]
[26]
J. Stowers, D. Westby-Gibson, and I. Marsic, “Interoperability over low
data rate channels using CORBA mediated, bit-packed, variable-format
message transmissions,” MILCOM 97 Proceedings , vol.1, ov. 1997,
pp. 455–459.
[27]
D. Defreyne, “Bit Packing With Packed Array”, Programming Data-
structures Optimization C C++, Aug.2013.
[28]
J. Blow, “Packing Integers”, The Inner Product, May 2002.
[29]
M. I. Maalim, J. McVeigh, and H. Mannanm, (2014, May), “Kenya’s
vision for an equitable, rights-based health system fails to address
speciﬁc health needs and barriers to accessing health care of vulnerable
populations”, Africa policy journal, [Retrieved: Jul. 2015].
[30]
http Archive, (2015, Jun), http://httparchive.org/interesting.php?a=All&
l=Jul\%201\%202015 [Retrieved: Jun. 2015].
[31]
G. Duncan, (2006, Jun.), “Opera Mini Ofﬁcially Brings Web to Mo-
biles”. Digital Trends News, [Retrieved: May 2015].
[32]
Opera
Software,
(2011,
Jun.)
State
of
the
Mobile
Web
Report,
http://techloy.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/
opera-state-of-the-mobile-web-report-june-2011.pdf
[Retrieved:
May 2015].
[33]
H. Vogt, (2014, Jul.) “Africa’s Challenges Are Tech Startups’ Opportu-
nities”, Wall Street Journal, [Retrieved: Jan 2015]
[34]
F. Langobardi, (2007), “BoulSat Project: Radio network implementation
by low cost technology”, Master’s Thesis, Politecnico di Torino. p. 78.
[35]
R. Bartalesi, S. Catusian, and F. Langobardi, (2007, Aug), “Radio Net-
work Implementation by Low Cost Technology: a Case of Study”, Pisa:
Ingegneria Senza Frontiere, University of Pisa. pp. 3–4. [Retrieved:
Nov.2014].
[36]
A. Efrati, (2013, May),“Google to Fund, Develop Wireless Networks
in Emerging Markets”, The Wall Street Journal, [Retrieved: Jun. 2015].
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-433-6
ICWMC 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

