Cyclostationary Detection in Spectrum Pooling 
System of Undefined Secondary Users 
 
Nazar Radhi 1, Kahtan Aziz 2, Rafed Sabbar Abbas3, Hamed AL-Raweshidy 4 
1,3,4 Wireless Network & Communication Centre, School of Engineering & Design 
Brunel University, London, UK 
2 College of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Al-Ghurair University, Dubai, UAE 
 
Nazar.Radhi@brunel.ac.uk 1   ,   Kahtan@agu.ac.ae 2 
RafedSabbar.Abbas@brunel.ac.uk 3  ,   Hamed.Al-raweshidy@brunel.ac.uk 4
  
 
Abstract— Spectrum sensing continuing to emerge as an 
essential topic for the cognitive networks where two kinds of 
users primary and secondary will share the band. This paper 
proposes a method for real-time detection of secondary users 
at the base stations. Cognitive Radios may hide themselves in 
between the primary users and Rental secondary users based 
on spectrum pooling system to avoid being charged for using 
spectrum. To deal with such scenario, a cyclostationary Fast 
Fourier Transform FFT Accumulation Method (FAM) has 
been used to develop a new scheme for channels users 
recognition. Channels users are tracked according to the 
changes in their signal parameters for instance modulation 
techniques. The Matlab simulation runs three signals 
transmitted on spectrum pooling system channels. Obtained 
spectral correlation density functions show successful 
Differentiation between signals. 
 
Keywords— Cognitive Radio; Sensing; Cyclostationary 
Detection; Undefined. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
   Nowadays, wireless systems are based on fixed 
spectrum allocations, allocated fixed spectral bandwidth to 
licensed user at any time. Which lead to a useless of scarce 
and expensivespectral resources and result in inefficiency 
utilizing spectrum. Dynamic spectrum access techniques 
secure greater spectral-usage efficiency and enhanced 
access to frequency spectrum based on spectrum pooling 
[1]. of Spectrum pooling is a resource sharing strategy 
which allows the licensed owner to share portion of his 
licensed spectrum with a rental secondary users [2], 
cognitive radio users absent until he needs it himself. The 
goal of the spectrum pooling is to improve spectral 
efficiency by overlaying new wireless radio systems on a 
licensed one (the primary users) without interfering to the 
primary users, and without changing its operations. In 
order to keep existing and without harmful interference 
with rental users, cognitive radios technology must have 
the ability to detect unused spectrum, it is a very important 
process in spectrum pooling system.  
   One of the most significant issues in the cognitive 
radio technology is spectrum sensing, because in cognitive 
radio 
system, 
the 
systems 
distinguish 
the 
radio 
environment by the spectrum sensing. If the spectrum 
sensing does not work accurately, the cognitive radio 
system will have incorrect information about the radio 
environment, and the system will try to use the spectrum 
which a primary user uses and does not use the spectrum 
which the primary user does not use. It results in the 
several performance degradation of: the cognitive radio 
system and the primary user [3]. 
   Traditionally, there are three schemes which are used 
for spectrum sensing, such as: Matched filter detection, 
Energy detection and Feature detection [4].  
   Matched filter detection: When the parameter of the 
primary user signal is known to the CR user, the optimal 
detector in stationary Gaussian noise is the matched filter, 
it maximizes received signal-to-noise ratio. While the 
matched filter requires a priori characteristics knowledge 
of the primary user signal, e.g. modulation type and order, 
pulse shaping, packet format.  
   Energy detection: If the receiver cannot gather 
sufficient in formation about the primary user signal, the 
optimal detector is an energy detector. However, the 
energy detector measures energy in each narrowband 
channel and determines the presence of a primary user if 
the energy detected in a narrowband channel is higher than 
a certain threshold. However, to achieve high receiver 
sensitivity, a low threshold has to be used. In some cases, 
the threshold has to be lower than the noise floor, in which 
case the detection fails. The problem is even more 
complex due to the fact that the noise is most likely non- 
Gaussian because of the presence of CR user’s 
interference.  
    Feature detection: Most of the signals encountered in 
wireless communications are cyclostationary inherent, 
whereas the noise is stationary [5]. The wireless 
communication signals loaded with sinusoidal carriers, 
pulse trains, repeating codes, hopping sequences, cyclic 
prefixes, and signals are cyclostationary because their 
mean 
value 
and 
autocorrelation 
function 
exhibit 
periodicity. This periodicity trend is used to perform 
various signal processing tasks that includes detection, 
recognition and estimation of the received signals [6]. As a 
result, the cyclostationarity of the primary signals can be 
used to detect their presence. The cyclostationarity of a 
266
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

signal is not reflected in the power spectral density (PSD); 
however, it is reflected in the spectral correlation density 
(SCD) function which is obtained by taking the Fourier 
transform 
of 
the 
cyclic 
autocorrelation 
function. 
Therefore, spectral correlation analysis of the received 
data can be used to identify the signal. Higher order 
spectral statistics have also been used to identify weak 
users [5]. 
The paper has been organized as follow: the proposed 
model to be used in this investigation is discussed in 
Section II. Section III introduces detection method. In 
Section IV, reports on simulated implementations and 
analyses of the proposed model. Section V presents 
concluding remarks. 
 
II. PROPOSED MODEL  
   The cognitive radios (CRs) are designed to work in a 
crowded wireless environment. Thus, scarce spectrum 
may lead selfish cognitive networks to use illegally the 
spectrum. High reconfigrability specifications of the 
cognitive radios make them capable to adapt their signal 
parameters according to their needs and the channels they 
are working in. Although, CRs designing have passed a 
long way of development to allow these transceivers to be 
obtainable in the near future, it is scarcely visible how 
these services will be monitored.  To verify the cognitive 
network, a supporting sensing network is designed to 
examination the spectrum. Observed holes suitable to 
transmit are reported whenever a request to transmit and 
the occasion are available. We think that: duties for this 
sensing network should be extended to include the CRs 
recognition. A wider network may be created by adding 
awareness abilities to the sensing network to produce a 
novel robust monitoring system.  
The new designed scheme will be capable of noticing 
the white holes in the spectrum, and also identify each 
channel 
user. 
Such 
a 
development 
requires 
the 
amalgamation of the optional monitoring system and 
information resources for occurrence the Spectrum Broker. 
The observed data are then being sent instantaneously to 
the decision makers in the main wireless providers for 
additional processing.  
 
 
Fig .1   spectrum pooling system 
   The opportunity that a certain CR may transmit 
illegally falls outside the current definitions of cognitive 
networks. These bluffer cognitive radios can use their 
technical advances to adapt their carrier frequencies to 
transmit on a certain channel when the primary user is off. 
However, they still need to transmit using different signal 
parameters to maintain broadcast dedicated to their end 
users. This exploit may occur at any time and can be 
happen rarely or even constantly. The recommended 
observation scheme will use the FFT Accumulation 
Method FAM to detect deceptive CRs behaviour 
instantaneously. FAM is presented as the algorithm for 
cyclic spectrum analysing. This method is derivative from 
the cyclostationary technique which is widely acceptable 
as the most effective sensing procedure for the cognitive 
radios. This work is a natural expansion of our work in [7] 
by incorporating the recently suggested spectrum pooling 
system and different CR users. 
 
III.  DETECTION METHOD 
 
The cyclostationary processing theory is proposed here 
as the algorithm for the developed identification scheme. 
Most of the communication signals can be modelled as 
cyclostationary random process. Let say, a zeros-mean 
discrete time signal x(n) is cyclostationary with periodic T 
if its autocorrelation function   ,  is also periodic 
in T, as shown in Equation 1 [7]. 
 
 ,  
    ,                             1 
 
To gain an intuition into how cyclostationary based 
detection works, it is beneficial to define the Cyclic 
Autocorrelation Function (CAF) [7]. 
 
 .  
 lim

1
2  1   


 
      !"                        2 
 
 where 
  is the CAF of discrete time signal x (n) 
and   is the cyclic frequency. The CAF can also be 
interpreted as the measured amount of correlation between 
different frequency-shifted versions of a given signal. For 
different signal, the CAF exhibits different features, which 
are generally used for detecting the presence of the signal. 
However, this feature is not easily seen by only observing 
its CAF, in time domain. For this reason, it is important to 
determine in the frequency domain the amount of 
correlation between frequency-shift versions of the signal. 
By applying the Fourier transform to the CAF, 
Giving the cyclic spectral correlation function as shown 
in equation 3 [7]. 
 
#    
  

"
   $"                                  3 
267
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

where  #
&  is called cyclic spectral correlation 
function or cyclic spectrum of discrete time signal x(n). 
Notably, if =0, the CAF and the Cyclic Spectrum (CS) 
reduce to the conventional autocorrelation function and 
power spectral density function, respectively. FAM 
method is based on modifications of time smoothed cyclic 
cross period gram which is defined as [7]: 
#'(
  . & 
 lim

1
2  1  1



 )(  *, & 
 
2+ ,(   
 *, &  -
2+                           4 
 
 
 where  )( *, & 

+  and ,( *, & 

+  are the 
complex the complex envelopes of narrow band, band pass 
components of the signals X(n) and Y(n), respectively. 
These complex envelopes are computed in the following 
way [7]: 
)(  , & 

 
/0 
⁄
"0 
⁄
    $"23          5 
 
,(  , & 

 
/0 
⁄
"0 
⁄
 5    $"23      6 
 
where    is a data narrowed window of length T = 
N'Ts seconds and the sampling period Ts. The FAM 
method is validated by estimating the cyclic spectrum.  
Fig. 2 illustrates the implementation model of FFT 
Accumulation Method. 
 
  
 
Fig. 2 FFT Accumulation Method 
 
The FAM method works as follow: 
• 
The complex envelops are estimated efficiently 
by means of a sliding N’ point FFT, followed by a 
downshift in frequency to baseband. 
• 
In order to allow for an even more efficiency 
estimation, the N’ point FFT is hoped over the data in 
blocks of L samples which means that L data point are 
skipped between computations of the N’ point FFT. 
• 
After the complex envelopes are computed and 
the product sequences between each one of them and the 
complex conjugate of the other s are formed, the time 
smoothing is accomplished by means of a P point FFT. 
 
   The value of L was chosen to be equal to N'/4. The 
value of N' is determined according to the desired 
resolution in frequency  ∆& used in the algorithm, and 
is given by [7]: 
 
8 
 &9
∆&                                                                   7 
 
The value of P is determined according to the desired 
resolution in cyclic frequency∆-, and is given by [7]: 
; 
&9
<∆                                                                      8 
IV. SIMULATION 
 
    A Matlab simulation code was created to generate 
FAM as the sensing mode for our model.  We demonstrate 
a spectrum pooling example which has a GSM network as 
primary users and cognitive radio network as rental 
secondary users and cognitive node as hiding secondary 
user, respectively based on modulation of GMSK, OFDM 
and AM-DSB, as illustrated in Fig. 1 three signals were 
fed into the code and simulation was run at frequency of 
805 MHz. 
    Fig. 3 shows the spectral correlation function for the 
GMSK signal. The modulation used here to generate this 
signal is quadrate phase shift keyed modulation. It is easy 
to decide the modulation sort from the signals profile. 
 
 
Fig. 3 Cyclic spectrum of the GMSK signal 
 
Fig. 3 shows an overview for the received primary signal 
268
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

 
 
Fig. 4 Contour figure of the GMSK signal 
 
    Subsequently, we examine the rental secondary user 
signal using the same technique. Assuming that the rental 
CR network transmitted signal in OFDM, the detected 
waveform is shown in Fig. 4. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 Cyclic Spectrum of the OFDM signal 
 
    It is significant to look at the received signals from 
diverse sides. This will avoid any ambiguity in the signals 
modulation source category. Hence, the other outlook for 
the rental secondary User spectral function is show in   
Fig. 5. 
 
 
Fig. 6 Contour figure of the OFDM signal 
 
 
    Meanwhile, we examine the hiding secondary user 
signal using the same FAM technique. Assuming that the 
hiding CR node transmitted signal in AM signal. The 
modulation used here is Double side- band Large Carrier 
DSB-LC, the detect waveform is shown in Fig. 6. 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 Cyclic spectrum of the AM-DSB signal 
 
    The AM-DSB signal can be reobtainable also in an 
additional elevation sight to assure the modulation type. 
Fig. 7 shows overview for the received hiding secondary 
user signal. 
269
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

 
  
Fig. 8 Contour figure of the AM-DSB signal 
 
 
    It is substantially noticeable the differences between 
the primary, rental secondary and hiding secondary 
simulated signals using the FFT accumulative method. 
These results make this method a preferable choice for this 
category of signal discovery. Additionally, cyclic 
spectrum enables accurate examination for the signal 
periodic changes. Thus, minor functions resulted from 
wireless environmental changes and interference can be 
estimated, compared, and identified. The obtained results 
show the FAM correlation function. Detected signals in 
time domain are transferred to the frequency domain. 
Subsequently, other estimations are implemented to define 
each signal type. Although, this will ensure the accuracy 
of obtained result, it is not known the effects of the time 
spend in this process on the detection speed. Reasonable, 
 changes speed affects on CAF and CS will be critical 
factor on the results reliability advisability. The simulation 
was performed assuming perfect transmission conditions 
without any consideration for the environmental and 
systematic noise. 
     Up to our knowledge, no efforts tried to use the 
FAM characters to make a distinction between different 
channels signals as this papers presents. We argue that a 
designed monitoring system can be developed using FAM 
and enhanced by self learning to recognize any CR 
prohibited transmission and deal with it at once. The 
learning features will let the anticipated system more 
efficient in introducing to various signals. Future work 
will be undertaken to detect hiding signals with noise by 
Cognitive Radio users using FAM method. 
 
                            V. CONCLUSION 
    A new strategy was presented for detecting the 
simulation transmission from cognitive radio. Cognitive 
radios hiding themselves by using primary channels in 
spectrum pooling system or by using same primary and 
rental secondary  frequencies were detect in this paper. 
Our matlab simulation process three signals: primary, 
rental secondary and hiding secondary transmitting on the 
pooling system channels. The simulated signals were 
analysed corresponding to the changes in their modulation 
techniques. FAM used as the analysing algorithm for the 
scenario studied. Detected signals were recognized in 
accordance with their frequency domain representations 
performed by the used method. Primary and two 
secondary generated signals were examined and detected 
clearly. The presented modification wills aware managing 
entities for the future networks on any uncharted 
transmission whenever it occurs. The suggested model 
will be required to guarantee the reliability of the charging 
system. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Oner and F. Jondral, “Extracting   the Channel Allocation 
Information in a Spectrum Pooling Systems exploiting system 
cyclostationary”,      15th IEEE international Symposium on 
personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2004. 
PIMRC 2004, vol. 1, pp. 551-555, 5-8 Sep. 2004. 
[2] 
P. Si, H. Ji, F. Richard and C. M. Leung, “Optimal Cooperative 
Internetwork Spectrum Sharing for Cognitive Radio Systems With 
Spectrum Pooling,” IEEE Transaction on Vehicular Technology, 
vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 1760-1768, May 2010.  
[3] 
OFCOM, “Digital dividend: cognitive access”, Consultation on 
license-exempting cognitive device using interleaved spectrum, 
Publication date: 16 February 2009. 
[4] 
T. Yucek, H. Arslan “ A Survey of Spectrum Sensing Algorithms 
for Cognitive Radio Applications” ,  IEEE Communication 
Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 11, no. 1, First Quarter 2009. pp: 113-
130. 
[5] 
G. Bansal, Md. Hossain, P. Kaligineedi, H. Merceir, C. Nicola, U. 
Phuyal, Md. Rashid, K.C. Wavegedara, Z. Hasan, M. Khabbazian, 
and V.K. Bhargava, “Some Research Issues in Cognitive Radio 
Networks”, pp. 1-7 AFRICON conference proceedings 2007. 
[6] 
J. Chen, A. Gibson, and J. Zafara, “Cyclostationary Spectrum 
Detection in Cognitive Radios” IET seminar on Cognitive Radio 
and Software Difined Radio, pp. 1-5, September 2008. (2002) The 
IEEE website. [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee.org/ 
[7] 
 A. 
Al-Dulaimi, 
N. 
Radhi 
and 
H. 
S. 
Al-Raweshidy, 
“Cyclostationary Detection of Undefined Secondary Users,” 3rd 
International Conference on Next Generation Mobile Applications, 
Services and Technologies (NGMAST 09), pp. 1-4, September 
2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
270
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

