Analysis of Interfered Noise for Sound Systems over LTE Mobile Phones  
 
Suna Choi, Sungwoong Choi, Sangbong Jeon, Yongsup Shim, Seungkeun Park 
Spectrum Engineering Research Team 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI) 
Deajeon, Korea 
sunachoi@etri.re.kr, swchoi@etri.re.kr, sbjeon@etri.re.kr, sys@etri.re.kr, seungkp@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— As the LTE is deployed commercially, the effect of 
interference of LTE mobile phone is issued. The paper presents 
an interference analysis of LTE mobile phone in the sound 
systems. 
Three 
LTE 
mobile 
phones 
from 
different 
manufacturer’s brands are used for measuring interference 
and three GSM phones are tested for the relative comparison 
with the LTE phones. A speaker and a wire telephone are 
applied as sound systems which are affected by LTE phone. 
The output spectra exposed to the LTE phones are presented 
and the interfered noise levels in sound systems are 
experimented at various distances from the LTE phones, and 
also at various powers of the LTE phones. The experimental 
results show that LTE mobile phones generate an interfered 
noise in sound systems up to the distance of 30~40cm. Also, the 
interfered noise is generated at over the power of 0dBm.  
Keywords- LTE; interference; sound system. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 Evolution of wireless technology has been achieved in 
phase during a remarkably short time. The first generation 
(1G) has fulfilled the basic mobile voice, while the second 
generation (2G) has introduced capacity and coverage. This 
is followed by the third generation (3G), which has opened 
the gates for higher speed mobile broadband. The significant 
expansion seen in mobile and cellular technologies is a 
result of the increasing demand for high-data-rate 
transmissions [1], [2]. As the fourth generation (4G) cellular 
networks, which offers high performance and capacity, the 
long term evolution (LTE) has been proposed by 3rd 
generation partnership project (3GPP) [3].  
Tens of countries already provide LTE mobile phone 
service and many others are preparing to start the service. 
Accordingly, the number of LTE user is expected to grow 
steeply. As the usage of LTE mobile phones is increased, 
the study on interference issue of LTE cellular phone with 
the sound systems is necessary.  
LTE has adopted orthogonal frequency division multiple 
access (OFDMA) for downlink and single carrier frequency 
division multiple access (SC-FDMA) for uplink as the 
communication method [4]. In these methods, both of time 
and frequency division multiple access are employed to 
support multiple users. Therefore, the interference problem 
which causes the noise to sound systems can be emerged in 
LTE system as similar to a global system for mobile 
communication (GSM). Cellular telephone such as GSM is 
already known to cause electromagnetic interference with 
sound systems because of the pulsed nature of the signal of 
the time division multiple access (TDMA). 
The interfered effect of GSM is investigated in many 
researches and applied to standards. In [5] and [6], the 
frequency spectra from several mobile phones including 
GSM and code division multiple access (CDMA) services 
are measured and compared. In [7], GSM modulation signal 
is suggested for the immunity test of sound and television 
broadcast receivers and associated equipment. 
On the other hand, the interfered effect of LTE has not 
been investigated even though the need of interference 
analysis of LTE is growing. This paper focuses on 
interference analysis of LTE mobile phone in sound systems 
such as a speaker or a wire telephone, based on the 
measurement. LTE mobile phones from three different 
companies are used to investigate for the purpose. 
Additionally, three GSM mobile phones from identical 
companies are tested for the relative comparison with the 
results of LTE mobile phones.  
The paper is organized as follows: Time domain structure 
of LTE system is described in Section II. Measurement 
methods are shown in Section III. Then, experimental 
results are presented in Section IV. Discussion is given 
consecutively in Section V. Finally, conclusions are 
followed in Section VI. 
II. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF LTE SIGNAL 
LTE supports two radio frame structures for frequency 
division duplex (FDD) and time division duplex (TDD) 
modes [8]. In the FDD mode, uplink and downlink 
transmission are separated in the frequency domain. In the 
TDD mode, uplink-downlink configurations with both 5ms 
and 10ms downlink-to-uplink switch-point periodicity are 
supported. 
In this paper, we test LTE mobile phones which operate 
in the FDD mode, which has been deployed commercially. 
As shown in Fig. 1, the generic radio frame of LTE in FDD 
mode has time duration of 10ms in the time domain. A 
frame is divided into 20 slots of each 0.5ms. Each slot 
consists of a number of symbols. Although one slot 
composes the smallest resource block, the basic time-
domain unit for scheduling in LTE is one sub-frame. Two 
consecutive slots form a sub-frame of 1ms duration. The 
290
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Figure 1. Frame structure of LTE 
 
 
Figure 2. Measurement set-up 
Sound systems 
Reference sound levels 
Speaker 
42.2 dB 
Wire telephone 
47.2 dB 
 
Table 1. Reference sound levels of sound systems 
fundamental frequency associated with the LTE frame rate 
of 100 Hz and several of the harmonics fall in the audible 
frequency region. Therefore, they can cause interfered 
noises to sound systems. 
III. 
MEASUREMENT METHOD 
For the analysing the effect of interference of LTE, the 
interfered noise levels in sound system are experimented 
according to various distances from the LTE phones and 
various powers of the LTE phones. Three LTE mobile 
phones from different manufacturer’s brands are used for 
measuring audible interference. Additionally, three GSM 
phones from identical brands tested for the relative 
comparison with LTE phones. In order to ensure the 
confidence, the experiment is progressed in the anechoic 
chamber.  
As shown in Fig. 2, a base station emulator and an 
antenna are used to control the LTE and GSM phones. The 
powers of the LTE and GSM phones are adjusted from 0 to 
22dBm as the commands of base station emulator. A 
speaker and a wire telephone are investigated as sound 
systems at various distances from the LTE and GSM phones. 
The interference-induced sound pressure levels (SPL) are 
recorded by a sound pressure meter.  
The spectra of interferences from the LTE mobile phones 
can be visualized by an oscilloscope. The interferences are 
measured in the time domain and then transferred to the 
frequency domain signal using the FFT function of the 
oscilloscope. However, the measurement of sound pressure 
levels is performed without the oscilloscope to prevent the 
driving sound of the oscilloscope from affecting the sound 
pressure meter.  
IV. 
EXPERIMETAL RESSULTS 
A. Reference noise levels 
As listed in Table 1, initial sound levels of the sound 
systems are measured and the results are used as the 
reference 
interference 
levels 
for 
the 
following 
measurements. The reference levels are performed when the 
LTE and GSM phone are off and the each power of a 
speaker and a wire telephone are on. Because the wire 
phone is measured with the receiver picked up, the 
measured reference sound level of the wire phone is about 
5dB louder than that of the speaker. 
B.  Spectra of interfered noise 
The spectra of a speaker near to the LTE and GSM 
mobile phones are measured by wire connection from the 
output of speaker and the input of the oscilloscope. 
Figs. 3 and 4 present the spectra of the interfered noise 
when the power of LTE and GSM mobile phones are 
20dBm and the distance between each of LTE and GSM 
mobile phone and the speaker is 5cm. The interfered noise 
from LTE phone repeats at 10ms intervals and that from 
GSM phone repeats at 4.16ms intervals in the time domain. 
They match to the frame length of LTE and GSM. The peak 
voltage of the LTE phone is 1.19Vpp while that of GSM 
phone is 1.53Vpp.  
Frequency spectra of Figs. 3 and 4 are presented from 0 
to 20 kHz which is known as acoustic frequency range. The 
interference from LTE and GSM mobile phones reveals 
discrete peaks in the frequency domain. These peaks 
correspond to the frame rate and its harmonics. The type of 
interference produced by these technologies may be 
described as a buzzing sound in sound systems. 
C. Interferences at the maximum power 
The interfered noise levels of sound systems are 
examined when the power of the LTE phones is set to 
maximum value (22dBm) by the base station emulator to 
demonstrate the worst case of the interference scenario.  
Plots of sound pressure levels of a speaker versus 
separated distance between the speaker and each LTE and 
GSM mobile phone at the maximum power are given in Fig. 
5. The interfered effects of GSM mobile phones are tested 
for the purpose of relative comparison with LTE phones. 
The initial distance between the speaker and each LTE 
and GSM mobile phone is set to 5cm, and then adjusted at 
intervals of 10 cm. Signs of A, B and C of Figs. 5 and 6 
indicate the three brands of LTE and GSM phones. There 
are differences of measured sound levels among the LTE. 
291
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

 
Figure 4. Spectra of interfered noise from GSM mobile phone 
 
 
Figure 3. Spectra of interfered noise from LTE mobile phone 
 
However, all of the interfered noises of the speaker from the 
LTE phones show the similar tendency. Even though the 
interfered noise levels from the LTE phones are lower than 
that from GSM phones, the interfered noises are detected up 
to a distance of about 25 cm. The interfered sound levels are 
approached to the reference value of Table 1 beyond 25cm. 
The interferences of LTE mobile phones to a wire 
telephone at the maximum power (22dBm) are shown in Fig. 
6. The initial distance between the speaker and each LTE 
and GSM mobile phone is set to 3cm, and also adjusted at 
intervals of 10 cm. 
The interfered noise levels from the LTE phones are 
lower than that from GSM phones. While the interfered 
noises of GSM phones are detected up to a distance of over 
63cm, the interferences of LTE phone diminishes and 
reaches to the reference value at a separation distance of 
almost 33 cm.  
D. Interferences at various powers 
The interfered noise levels of sound systems are 
investigated when the output powers of LTE mobile phones 
are varied from 22dBm to 0dBm for examining the effect of 
power.  
Fig. 7 presents the plots of sound pressure levels of a 
speaker versus output powers of LTE mobile phones when 
the separation distance between a speaker and each LTE 
hone is fixed to 5cm. The interfered noise levels of the 
speaker decrease as the power of LTE phones declines. 
When the power reaches to 0dBm, the interfered sound 
levels are almost reaches to the reference values listed in 
Table 1. 
Plots of sound pressure levels of a wire telephone versus 
output power of each LTE mobile phone are presented at 
Fig. 8 when the separation distance between wire telephone 
and LTE phones is fixed to 3cm. Although there are 
differences in the measured values among the LTE mobile 
phones, the interfered sound levels almost reach to the 
reference value at the power of 0dBm. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The audible frequency of human ear is generally known 
from the minimum 20Hz to the maximum 20 kHz. The 
experimental results show that LTE mobile phones 
apparently generate an interfered noise in the audible 
frequency region to sound systems such as a speaker and 
wire telephone, even though the interfered noise levels from 
the LTE phones are lower than that from GSM phones.  
The interfered noise levels decrease as the distance 
between sound system and the LTE phone is increase. The 
interfered noise is almost vanished when the LTE mobile 
phone is about 30~40cm apart from the sound system. 
Therefore, a simple way to avoid the interfered sound noise 
is to place the LTE phone away from the sound system. But 
it cannot be a fundamental method for reducing the 
interfered noise. 
The interfered noise levels also decrease as the power of 
LTE mobile phone declines. The output power of a LTE 
mobile phone in practical circumstance is determined by the 
distance from the base station and radio propagation 
environment. As the communication coverage of a base 
station is smaller, the output power of LTE mobile phone 
can be reduced. If the number of base stations is increased 
and the power of LTE mobile phone is reduced to less than 
292
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 8. Interferences for wire telephones at various LTE powers 
 
Figure 5. Interferences from LTE and GSM mobile phones 
for a speaker 
 
Figure 7. Interferences for speaker at various LTE powers 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Interferences from LTE and GSM mobile phones 
for a wire telephone 
0dBm, the distance which the sound system is affected by a 
LTE mobile phone is expected to decrease to less than 
several centimetres. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents an interference analysis of LTE mobile 
phone in the sound systems, based on the experiment. Three 
brands of LTE mobile phones investigated and a speaker 
and a wire telephone are applied as sound systems. The 
output spectra of interfered noise are presented in the time 
and frequency domain. Furthermore, the interfered noise 
levels in sound systems are measured at various distances 
from the LTE phones, and also at various powers of the 
LTE phones. The experimental results show that LTE 
mobile phones apparently generate an interfered noise to 
sound systems. Therefore, various efforts to reduce the 
interfered noises of LTE mobile phones such as separating 
from the sound systems or reducing the transmission power 
are necessary.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the KCC (Korea 
Communications Commission), Korea, under the R&D 
program supervised by the KCA (Korea Communications 
Agency) (KCA-2011-08921-01303) 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Ergen, Mobile broadband - Including Wimax and LTE, 
Springer, NY, 2009 
[2] E. Dahlman, S. Parkvall and J. Skold, 4G LTE/LTE-
Advanced for Mobile Broadband, Academic Press: Elsevier, 
2011 
[3] D. Astely, E. Dahlman, A. Furuskar, Y. Jading, M. Lindstrom, 
and S. Parkvall, “LTE: the evolution of mobile broadband," 
IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 47, pp. 44-51, Apr. 2008 
[4] H.Holma and A.Toskala, LTE for UMTS-OFDMA and SC-
FDMA based Radio Access, Wiley and Sons, 2009 
[5] M. Skopec, “Hearing aid electromagnetic interference from 
Digital wireless telephones”, IEEE Trans. Rehab. Eng., vol. 6, 
pp. 235-239, June 1998 
[6] R. 
E. 
Schlegel 
and 
F. 
H. 
Grant, 
“Modeling 
the 
Electromagnetic Response of Hearing Aids to Digital 
Wireless Phones,” IEEE Trans. on EMC, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 
347-357, Nov. 2000 
[7] CISPR 20: Sound and Television Broadcast Receiver and 
Associated Equipment - Immunity Characteristics-Limits and 
Methods of Measurement, IEC, 6th Edition, 2006 
[8] 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical Specification 
Group Radio Access Network; Evolved Universal Terrestrial 
Radio Access (E-UTRA); Physical Channels and Modulation, 
3GPP Std. TS 36.211 V.10.3.0, 2011 
293
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

