Using Meta-Heuristic Algorithms for Minimizing the Costs of Access-Point Location 
 
Pawel Aksiutin, Dymitr Paremski, Iwona Pozniak-Koszalka, Leszek Koszalka, Andrzej Kasprzak 
Department of Systems and Computer Networks, Wroclaw University of Technology, 
Wroclaw, Poland 
e-mail: iwona.pozniak-koszalka@ pwr.wroc.pl 
 
Abstract — Cost and quality are important issues in the network 
design. This paper presents an approach to wireless network cost 
optimization. The suggested model aims at determining optimal 
locations of access points which could provide service for receivers. 
The target service area would be determined by distribution of 
receivers and the access points would provide service coverage to 
serve prospective user-traffic demand in the selected area. Two 
created algorithms for location of access points are described and 
investigated with the designed experimentation system. It may be 
observed that using these algorithms in designing wireless network 
may result in reduced costs for telecommunication companies. 
 
Keywords -- cost optimization; wireless network; access point, 
heuristic algorithm; experimentation system. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays the wireless network technology has a great 
impact on our life. It could carry broadband internet access to 
humans in the remote area network. We deal with wireless 
communication networks in the level of single user (PAN), local 
area (LAN), metropolitan area (MAN) and wide area network 
(WAN). In this paper, we focus on metropolitan area networks 
and consider the issue of optimal access point (AP) usage. The 
equivalent term for AP is transmitter. One of the most important 
parameters of the access point is its range of service. The range 
of an AP is related to its cost. Here, we assume that access 
points provide service with IEEE standards: 802.11a, 802.11b, 
and 802.11g. In this paper, the objective is to select and allocate 
the APs in a way to minimize the total cost of their distribution. 
 
 
    Fig. 1 shows an example of the access point distribution that 
could provide network coverage inside the circles.  
 There are many related works in which the improvement of 
network design by taking into account costs of APs is discussed. 
Prommak and Wechtaison [1] proposed the WiMAX network 
design for the cost minimization and access data rate using 
mulit-hop relay stations. Regula and others [2] proposed  
algorithms for AP location, including the algorithm that uses 
term ‘center of mass’ and greedy approach. Kraimeche and 
Chang [3] suggested an approach for the optimization of a 
wireless access network based on a simple exhaustive search 
algorithm. Calegari and others [4] described optimisation 
algorithms for radio network planning, including a greedy 
algorithm and genetic approach. In this work, two meta-heuristic 
algorithms based on simulated annealing and genetic ideas are 
presented. The properties of these algorithms are tested with the 
designed and implemented experimentation system. 
 This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we provide 
the formulation of the considered problem. The created meta-
heuristic algorithms are presented in Section III. The 
experimentation system for testing these algorithms is described 
in Section IV. In Section V, the results of investigations made 
with this system are discussed. Section VI sums up the work and 
Section VII concerns further research in the area. 
II. STATEMENT OF COST MINIMIZATION  PROBLEM 
The goal is to minimize the total cost of distribution access 
points over a given area. We express our objective function as: 
     Minimize  f  = min ∑a zagabcb  
              (1) 
where: 
• a = 1, 2,…, A denotes a set of candidate APs locations, 
• b = 1, 2,…, B denotes a set of APs types, 
• c = 1, 2,…, Cb denotes a set of APs types’ costs (for each b an 
access point installation cost is defined), 
• gab is binary variable; it is equal to 1, if AP is installed in 
location a and is of b type; it is 0, otherwise,  
• za is also binary variable; it is equal to 1, if AP is installed in 
location a, it is 0, otherwise. 
• t = 1, 2,…, T denotes a set of TP (receiver, test point), i.e., 
potential users of network facilities, 
Figure 1.  Example of access-points (APs) distribution. 
278
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

• xat is a binary variable, it is equal to 1 if TP is assigned to AP 
installed in location a; it is 0, otherwise 
• s = 1, 2,…, Sb denotes a set of ranges for every b type of AP, 
• i = 1, 2,…, Ia denotes a set of access point types assigned for 
each a, 
• m = 1, 2,…, Mb denotes a set of maximum numbers of TPs 
possible to serve by b type AP.  
Moreover, 
the 
following 
assumptions 
are 
taken 
into 
consideration: (i) the coverage of the AP is a circle (other 
propagation models are not considered here); (ii) the following 
constraints (2) – (7) have to be satisfied: 
• The TP can be assigned only to an installed AP (i.e., za = 1) : 
   xat ≤ za,   a = 1, 2,…, A   t = 1, 2,…,T   
 
(2) 
• It is a limit ma for each a on maximum number of serving TP  
∑t xat ≤ ma,     a = 1, 2,…, A   t = 1, 2,…, T  
 
(3) 
• Each TP can be assigned to maximum one AP: 
∑a xat ≤ 1,  a = 1, 2,…, A     t = 1, 2,…, T 
 
(4) 
xat ≤ za,      a = 1, 2,…, A     t = 1,2,…, T 
 
(5) 
∑a xat ≤ 1, a = 1, 2,…, A     t = 1, 2,…, T 
 
(6) 
∑t xat ≤ ma, a = 1, 2,…, A.     
 
 
(7) 
III.   META-HEURISTIC ALGORITHMS  
Meta-heuristic approach is very often used in optimization. 
Formulation of the problem shows that we have to find the 
solution in huge discrete search-space. In this section, we 
present meta-heuristic algorithms to solve the problem. Firstly, 
we present basic procedures; next, we describe the way of 
adaptation of intelligent methods to creation of the algorithms. 
A. Basic procedures 
In the considered problem, the cost optimization is possible 
due to minimizing redundancy for transmitters’ coverage. To 
achieve this goal we base on MIS (Maximum Independent Set) 
model used in [4]. The classical scheme for MIS extraction can 
be found in [5]. The concept of solving problem considered in 
this paper is lying in creating possible independent sets of 
receivers and then matching to them the cheapest possible 
transmitters. Firstly, for all receivers has to be created 
neighbourhood table (NT). NT consists of neighbourhood lists 
(NL). Each receiver has its own NL. Such list stores all 
neighbours of particular receiver. Neighbourhood is defined on 
the basis of largest range from set s. It means that for a given 
receiver all TP in distance less than Smax are its neighbours. 
The procedure of creating complete neighbourhood table 
(CNT) for all receivers in t can be described as follows: 
 
The procedure of creating releasing neighbourhood table 
(RNT) can be described as follows:  
 
As the result of this approach, an independent sets of receivers 
can be acquired. Next, AP is placed in the candidate AP location 
nearest the centre of set of receivers given in NL. Note that the 
chosen transmitters (APs) differ in dependence of order of 
processing the NL. The cost is a sum of installation costs c for 
types of AP selected in RNT.  
The sequence of mentioned here procedures ends with 
calculated final cost and it is taken as a criterion function. In 
contrast to other AP distribution optimization methods, we do 
not take as a search space set of candidate AP locations but 
processing order for NL. And this sequence is a discrete search-
space searched for the optimal solution in two implemented 
meta-heuristic algorithms.  
B. Algorithm based on Simulated Annealing (SA) 
The idea of simulated annealing method was used because of 
simplicity and efficiency [5]. In this method, as the criterion cost 
function the system energy is interpreted. The system state can 
be understood as the processing order of NL internal parameters 
of SA. In our implementation, internal parameters of SA were 
discovered experimentally. Entering perturbation (EP) is done in 
the following way: 
 
The presented form of EP allows eliminating weakness of 
classic simple replacement of two chosen NL. Such classic 
replacement does not cause big change in search space.  
C. Algorithm based on Genetic Algorithms 
We applied the population-based model [6] that uses 
selection and recombination operators to generate new feasible 
solution. The roulette wheel selection is used to evaluate the 
fitness value associated with each individual (chromosome): the 
1. Find a largest range Smax in set s. 
2. For each receiver from set t check whether distance 
between a given receiver Tt  and the rest of TPs in set t 
is less than Smax . 
3. If yes, add indices of these receivers to list of 
neighbours for a given receiver T t. 
1. Choose two random NL in NT  
2. Reverse order between chosen NLs  
1. Choose NL from NT for processing.  
2. Match the cheapest transmitter that can support all 
receivers on the list. 
3. Delete receivers from processed NL (do it for whole 
NT) 
4. If  NT is not empty go to step 1   
279
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

higher the fitness value of an individual, more likely it is to be 
selected. In our approach, chromosomes can be defined as 
processing order for neighbours’ lists. Crossover is a 
combination of two chosen individuals and mutation is a 
random disturbance in this individual. The program execution 
stops when the predefined number of iteration steps has been 
run through [4]. Outline of the algorithm is presented as below. 
 
IV.    EXPERIMENTATION SYSTEM 
The model of the experimentation system is shown in Fig. 2. 
The idea of the system proposed in [7] was applied in order to 
allow testing properties of the created algorithms. 
 
Figure 2.  Experimentation system. 
Input parameters of the system (simulator) are: 
• 
AP types features 
• 
Receivers features 
Output parameters of the system (simulator) are: 
• 
AP distribution 
• 
Cost of distribution 
The simulator was implemented in .NET C# in Visual Studio 
2008 IDE. Simulator has graphical user interface (see Fig. 3), 
which allows choosing configuration options (design of 
experiment). Algorithms were tested under Microsoft Windows 
64-bit OS, CPU of 1 GHz and 2 GB of RAM. Recently, the 
implemented simulator gives possibilities for observing effects 
of using four algorithms to finding location of APs (denoted as 
base stations in Fig. 2), including two created algorithms: 
•    Algorithm based on Simulated Annealing (SA), 
•    Algorithm based on Genetic Ideas (GA), 
and two algorithms described in [2] [7] : 
• 
Algorithm 1 (Alg. 1) - It is based on the physic's term – 
center of mass. The set of possible receivers is divided into 
the subsets. The subset’s center of mass is considered as the 
location of the AP.  Details are given in [7]. 
• 
Algorithm 2 (Alg. 2) - It is a greedy algorithm, which uses a 
particular graph model in order to implement adjacency 
matrix. This matrix is being checked in order to find the 
cheapest AP that supports receivers in nearby area [7]. 
 
Figure 3.  Simulator interface - working environment. 
V. INVESTIGATIONS 
     The aim of the investigations was comparing efficiency of 
different methods for solving problem of location APs (access 
point’s distribution) concerning minimization of the cost defined 
by (1) with assumptions expressed by (2) – (7). 
     Due to the fact that in real life receivers are distributed in 
many different ways, we provided differentiated benchmarks. 
To realize this task we created and implemented a module of 
experimentation system for generating different types of 
distribution. It allows testing algorithms in various conditions. 
Benchmark generator ensures 4 types of distribution. The user 
of experimentation system can set parameters such as the total 
number of receivers and the introduced distribution type: 
• 
Regular – receivers are distributed regularly on the map, 
distances between points on the map are equal and in each 
point the total number of receivers is equal too;  
• 
Regular with randomness – philosophy of this distribution 
is almost the same like in the regular distribution, but 
numbers of receivers differ – they are chosen at random; 
• 
Irregular – locations of receivers are chosen randomly, but 
constraints arising from set parameters are held; 
• 
Grouped – locations of receivers are grouped; groups are 
confined by surface of random circle shape. 
1. Choosing random population of n chromosomes 
(feasible solutions for the problem). 
2. Evaluate fitness (cost function computed) of each 
individual chromosome x in the population. 
3. Repeat the steps below until the new population is 
created. 
3.1. Select pairs of chromosomes from a population 
according to their fitness ranking. 
3.2. According to crossover probability cross over 
pairs of chromosomes to form a new offspring. 
3.3. Apply mutation operation within a new 
offspring. 
3.4. Put new offspring in a new population.  
4. Replace an old population by the new generated one. 
5. Check whether the stop condition is satisfied. If yes, 
then stop. Return the best solution. 
6. Go to step 2. 
 
280
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

A. Costs 
For each series of experiments the total number of receivers 
was different – in range from 100 to 1000 with step 100.  The 
obtained results are shown in Fig 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6, and Fig. 7. 
Experiment 1 – Regular distribution 
 
Figure  4.  Regular distribution - cost in relation to the number of receivers. 
Experiment 2 – Regular distribution with randomness 
 
Figure 5.  Regular distribution with randomness - cost in relation 
 to the number of receivers. 
Experiment 3 – Irregular distribution 
 
Figure 6.  Irregular distribution - cost in relation to the number of receivers.  
Experiment 4 - Grouped distribution 
 
Figure 7.  Grouped distribution - cost in relation to the number of receivers. 
It may be observed that almost for every tested distribution 
type, the newly implemented algorithms decreased distribution 
cost. It is worth to be noticed that SA performed a little bit better 
than GA, especially in the case of irregular distribution – the 
most common distribution in the real world. Observing the 
shapes of graphs for SA and GA, one may conclude that they 
are quite similar to those ‘produced’ by Algorithm 2.  
B. Execution time 
The execution time for the both developed heuristic 
algorithms significantly increased in comparison with heuristic 
Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2. The scale of this increase is 
visible in Fig. 8 and in Table I. Using meta-heuristic algorithms 
requires about 100 times longer execution time (in average). 
Notwithstanding to this fact, the execution time is still short – 
the longest was of about 1 sec. However, the obtained cost 
profits are worth this increment. One should remember that this 
paper deals with optimization of base station distribution cost – 
making decision about location of APs (distribution of base 
stations) is long-term designing process and it is worth to devote 
more computation time to obtain better solution to the 
considered problem.  
 
Figure 8.  Comparison of the averaged execution times for different distributions. 
281
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE   I .  AVERAGE EXECUTION TIME 
The averaged execution time [ms] 
 
Alg 1 Alg 2 
SA 
GA 
Distribution type 
Regular 
5.75 
3.22 594.9 578.5 
Regular with  
 randomness 
6.85 
5.61 369.0 580.2 
Irregular 
10.37 10.60 460.3 490.6 
Grouped 
12.17 13.58 617.2 473.3 
C. Improvement 
To show the obtained improvement while using the proposed 
approach (meta-heuristic algorithms), we present the results of 
comparison between algorithms.  
Comparison to Algorithm 1. In comparison with Algorithm 1, 
the remarkable dependency between improvement and the 
number of receivers can be observed (see Fig. 9 and Fig. 10). 
This relationship can be expressed as follows: the larger number 
of receivers, the bigger improvement is obtained. It goes up to 
60%. Such improvement can bring huge financial benefit.    
 
Figure  9. Improvement for SA and Alg. 1. 
 
Figure  10.  Improvement for GA and Alg.1. 
Comparison to Algorithm 2. In comparison to Algorithm 2, 
such clearly relation like in comparison to Algorithm 1 is not 
visible (see Fig. 11 and Fig. 12). The improvement is unstable 
and does not depend on the number of receivers but in most of 
cases is positive and up to 40%. 
 
Figure 11.  Improvement for SA and Alg. 2. 
 
Figure 12. Improvement for GA and Alg. 2. 
In Table II, the comparison of general (over all distribution 
types) improvements is presented. In columns, the created meta-
heuristic algorithms applied to the problem and in rows,  
previously used Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, are specified. In 
the intersections, are improvement percentages between them, 
e.g., in the intersection between SA and Algorithm 1 is result 
25%, it means that SA improved average distribution cost in 
comparison to Algorithm 1 by 25%. 
TABLE   II.  COMPARISON BETWEEN THE IMPLEMENTED ALGORITHMS  
 
General average improvement of algorithms 
SA 
GA 
Algorithm 1 
25% 
19% 
Algorithm 2 
21% 
15% 
Observing results shown in Table II, we may conclude that the 
average improvement may be estimated as around 20%.  
282
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

VI.     CONCLUSION 
The aims of conducted investigations - presented in this 
paper - were achieved. We shown the advantage of the proposed 
approach – using of the created meta-heuristic algorithms 
ensured that the average improvement was of   around 20%. It 
may be interpreted as a big advancement. The obtained results 
show that use of meta-heuristic algorithms in presented problem 
is profitable. Rising the execution time is the fact, but it can not 
be not acceptable when does not exceed 1 sec.  
The weak points of investigation presented in this paper are 
lying in: taking into consideration a simple model and focusing 
only on cost optimization; algorithms were tested only on 
artificial 
generated 
benchmarks 
(basing 
on 
simulation 
experiments) – it would be more reliable to use real data. 
VII. 
FUTURE WORK 
The experimentation system can be developed in many ways 
as an incremental approach to aiding optimization of AP 
location problem. The system can be improved by including 
modules giving possibilities of aiding process of solving more 
complicated problem with propagation model applied [8] and 
quality indicators taken into consideration. 
We believe also that results obtained by heuristics 
algorithms could be improved in some cases by two stage 
approach [9], including adjustment of internal parameters [10] 
of the meta-heuristic algorithms at the first stage. The efficiency 
of the Algorithm based on Simulated Annealing, largely 
depends on three internal parameters: cooling factor, start 
temperature and end temperature. The similar situation concerns 
the Algorithm based on Genetic Algorithm. Thus, we plan 
making more experiments with changing the number of 
iterations in which this algorithm creates new population and 
also more experiments which results could give hints how to 
match the size of chromosome’s population. Finding optimal 
internal (input) parameters for both algorithms could be time-
consuming; however, it may result in further minimization of 
the cost of the designed location of the base stations.  
Moreover, some improvements in application are planned, 
e.g., the input map of simulator could be downloaded through 
Google Maps Api. It would improve the usability of graphical 
interface; maps would be created dynamically, either. It is also 
desirable to have such possibilities as saving all experimentation 
results in data base and generating charts in ‘automatic way’.  
The experimentation system with the simulator as a core is 
an aiding tool in teaching process at the Faculty of Electronics, 
Wroclaw University of  Technology. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors of this paper would like to thank Agnieszka 
Beza, Michal Michalski and Krzysztof Pajak - students of the 
Faculty of Electronics, Wroclaw University of Technology,  
and authors of simulator [7], for availability to use their 
application for further development.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Ch. Prommak and Ch. Wechtaison, “WiMAX Network Design for Cost 
Minimization and Access Data Rate Guarantee Using Multi-hop Relay 
Stations”, International Journal of Communications, vol. 4, 2010. 
[2] 
P. Regula, I. Pozniak-Koszalka, L. Koszalka, and A. Kasprzak, 
„Evolutionary Algorithms for Base Stations Placement in Mobile 
Networks”, Intelligent Information and Data Base Systems, Springer, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 6592, pp. 1-10, 2011. 
[3] 
K. Kraimeche, B. Kraimeche, and K. Chiang, “Optimization of a Wireless 
Access Network”, Proceedings of IEEE Systems and Engineering Design 
Symposium, James Madison University, Virginia, USA, April, 2006. 
[4] 
P. Calégari, F. Guidec, P. Kuonen, B. Chamaret, S. Josselin,  
D. Wagner, and M. Pizarosso, “Radio Network Planning with 
Combinatorial Optimization Algorithms”, Proceedings of the 1st ACTS 
Mobile Telecommunications Summit, Chr. Christensen, Ed., vol. 2, pp. 
707-713, November, 1996. 
[5] 
T. Spencer and M. Goldberg,, “A  New  Parallel  Algorithm  for  the  
Maximal Independent  Set  Problem”, SIAM Journal, vol. 54, pp. 11-121, 
1989. 
[6] 
H. Cormen, C.E. Leiserson, and R.L. Rivest, “Introduction to algorithms”, 
MIT Press, 1990. 
[7] 
A. Beza, M. Michalski, and K. Pajak, “Application to Simulate Wireless 
Network in Regard to Cost optimization for Base Stations Distribution.”, 
Report of Dept. of Systems and Computer Network, Wroclaw University 
of Technology, Wroclaw, 2009. 
[8] 
E. Osekowska, I. Pozniak-Koszalka, and A. Kasprzak, „Impact of 
Propagation Factor on Routing Efficiency in Wireless Mesh Networks”,  
Proceedings of IARIA. 11th International Conference on Networking 
(ICN’12), 2012. 
[9] 
L. Koszalka, D. Lisowski, and I. Pozniak-Koszalka, „Comparison of 
Allocation Algorithms for Mesh Networks with Multistage Experiments”, 
Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3984, pp. 58-67, 2006. 
[10] L. Koszalka, M. Kubiak, and I. Pozniak-Koszalka, “Allocation Algorithm 
for Mesh-Structured Networks”, Proceedings of IARIA 5th International 
Conference on Networking, IEEE Comp. Society Press,  pp. 24-29, 2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
283
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

