Efﬁcient Mobility Management in 6LoWPAN
Wireless Sensor Networks
Abdelwahed Berguiga, Habib Youssef
PRINCE Research Unit, ISITCom, Hammam Sousse
University of Sousse, Tunisia
abdelwahed.berguiga@infcom.rnu.tn, habib.youssef@fsm.rnu.tn
Abstract—Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) represent one
of the most exciting today’s research areas. Their utility ranges
from causal sensing and data collection to mission critical
applications such as battle ﬁeld control, medical assistance, and
natural disaster forecasting. With all the constraints related to
WSNs, and with the urgent need to provide connectivity between
sensor networks and the Internet, a new IETF Working Group,
namely 6LoWPAN, was created. This group opens up a wealth
of application opportunities as well as a number of difﬁcult
challenges. One of these challenges is the efﬁcient support of
sensor mobility. This paper proposes a mobility management
scheme for IPv6 over Low power Wireless Personal Area Net-
work (6LoWPAN) sensor nodes. We propose FPMIPv6-S (Fast
handover Proxy Mobile IPv6 for Sensor networks), an improved
version of the protocol PMIPv6, a protocol recently adopted
as an RFC to support mobility in IPv6 based networks. We
present a performance comparison of FPMIPv6-S with PFMIPv6,
a recently proposed modiﬁcation to PMIPv6 using an analytical
approach. Performance results show that FPMIPv6-S exhibits a
signiﬁcantly lower number of messages exchanged and handoff
latency, thus extending the network lifetime.
Keywords—Wireless Sensor Networks; 6LoWPAN; FPMIPv6-S;
PFMIPv6; Binding update cost; Packet delivery cost.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The emergence of low cost technologies in wireless com-
munication has enabled the development of small wireless
sensors. Characterized by their low cost, low power consump-
tion and their implementation in different applications, wireless
sensors have attracted attention in the academic ﬁeld as well
as in industry. Indeed, wireless sensors can be used in various
applications such as remote control, health, and military ap-
plications. The distinguishing characteristic of sensors is their
limited resources (memory and processing) and autonomous,
but usually limited power supply.
Although it is a part of the domain of ad hoc networks,
sensor networks and ad hoc networks differ in many ways.
A WSN is composed of simple nodes. Applications require a
few bytes sent periodically or on demand, generally triggered
by an external event. Each node can be either a source or
a destination of information. A sensor network may consist
of hundreds of mobile nodes which can move from one
place to another. These mobile nodes can communicate with
each other or with external networks such as the Internet.
So far, sensor networks use non-IP protocols such as the
ZigBee 802.15.4 protocol stack [1]. Besides the fact that the
ZigBee protocol is incompatible with the Internet Protocol, it
introduces several constraints such as resource usage, energy
consumptions, limited bandwidth, etc.
With all the constraints related to WSNs, and with the
urgent need to provide connectivity between sensor networks
and the Internet, a new IETF Working Group, namely 6LoW-
PAN [2], was created. The 6LoWPAN working group proposed
two RFCs: RFC 4919 [2], which provides an overview, as-
sumptions, problems, and goals for improving IPv6 over low
power wireless PAN; and RFC 4944 [3], which speciﬁes the
transmission of IPv6 packets over IEEE 802.15.4 protocols.
The integration of IPv6 in LoWPAN is expected to facilitate
the introduction of new applications such as information shar-
ing with other networks as well as the ability to provide cell-
based mobility so that a session can be maintained while the
device moves.
Indeed, providing IP connectivity to mobile 6LoWPAN
devices may suggest that the devices can use traditional
mobility related IP protocols such as Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6) [4],
Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) [5], and Proxy Mobile
IPv6 (PMIPv6) [6]. However, mobility using traditional mo-
bility related IP protocols poses several challenges. First, the
signaling overhead triggered by a sensor move can deplete
sensor battery. Second, mobility always results in energy
consumption due to the messages exchanged to synchronize
with the new channel and also degrades the performance of
the network due to packet loss. In addition, the connection
discontinuity during handover can increase the delay and
packet loss. Further, 6LoWPAN nodes are not equipped with
a mobility protocol. Special proxy agents such as 6LoWPAN
gateways are responsible for maintaining connectivity between
6LoWPAN mobile node and the Internet. The 6LoWPAN
gateway is responsible for managing mobility-related functions
on behalf of the 6LoWPAN sensor devices.
The objective of this work is to introduce a new IP-based
related mobility protocol named Fast handover PMIPv6 for
Sensor networks (FPMIPv6-S). We analyze and compare the
binding update cost and packet delivery cost of our proposed
scheme with PFMIPv6. This performance evaluation shows the
most suited protocol to manage mobility in a wireless sensor
network.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II reviews background data related to IEEE 802.15.4 and
mobility in WSNs. Section III presents an overview of Fast
handover for PMIPv6. In Section IV, the proposed mobility
scheme is described and discussed. Section V evaluates the
location update cost and packet delivery cost using analytical
model. Experimental results are given in Section VI. Finally,
conclusions and future work are given in Section VII.
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

II.
RELATED WORKS
Many proposals have been reported for wireless sensor
networks to increase the lifetime of mobile sensors and thus
improve their performance. The idea presented by David
Kiyoshi Goldenberg et al. [7] is to have the nodes move to
predetermined positions that minimize energy consumption to
transmit the sensed data toward a static sink. Howard et al. [8]
proposed an algorithm to be implemented on sensor guided
by mobile robots. The main objective of this algorithm is to
maximize the coverage area in order to increase the line-of-
sight between robots. Rajesh Rao et al. [9] proposed distributed
algorithms for mobile sensors. In this work, the proposed
algorithms enable the sensor to move to new areas to optimize
the transmitting power needed to send collected data toward
the static sink. The new position of sensors is determined by
distributed simulated annealing algorithms.
Chatzigiannakis and Nikoletseas [10] explore the possibil-
ity of using a small number of mobile coordinators for efﬁcient
communication between any pair of nodes in the network.
These nodes act as mobile relays and they carry packets from
source to destination. Indeed, the packets are exchanged when
the source node and the relay are in the radio vicinity of each
other. Then, the mobile relay forwards packets to the sink.
With this approach, the energy required to transmit a packet
from a node to the sink is reduced signiﬁcantly. However, the
problem of energy has been replaced by the delay because the
sensor has to wait for the mobile relay to pass nearby. Also,
this solution is feasible only in the so-called delay tolerant
networks.
Most of the above proposed approaches do not take into ac-
count the connectivity between IEEE 802.15.4 based-network
and existing IP-based infrastructure. Further, the majority
of the proposed solutions provide mobility within the same
IEEE 802.15.4 network. However, with the introduction of
the Internet of Things (IoT), a wireless sensor network can
be composed of several sub-networks (or clusters) that are
interconnected via an existing transport network, e.g., the
Internet. Communication across subnets is likely to be multi-
hops.
Interconnecting
a
Wireless
Personal
Area
Network
(WPAN) such as a WSN to the Internet presents several
challenging tasks. To overcome this problem, a 6LoWPAN
protocol has been proposed to insure internetworking between
ZigBee/802.15.4 and TCP/IP. Given the limited packet size
of 802.15.4, the 6LoWPAN protocol describes methods and
assumptions for improving IPv6 over low power wireless
PAN. Providing IP connectivity to mobile 6LoWPAN devices
may suggest that the devices can use traditional mobility
related IP protocols such as Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6), Hierarchical
Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6), and Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6).
Unfortunately, deploying HMIPv6 and MIPv6 in the sensor
networks requires the modiﬁcation of the protocol stack of
the mobile nodes. However, with sensors characterized by
limited resources in terms of processing capacity and mem-
ory, it is difﬁcult to modify the structure of their protocol
stack. The PMIPv6 protocol provides network-based mobility
management. With PMIPv6, a Mobile Node (MN) is exempt
from participating in any mobility-related signaling. In fact,
all messages signalling are supported by the proxy mobility
agents namely Local Mobility Anchor (LMA) and Mobility
MN
p-MAG
n-MAG
LMA
HACK
HI
L2 attach
PBU
PBA
RA
NS
Deliver packets
TPFMIPv6-rea
AAA
AAA Request
AAA Reply
Fig. 1. PFMIPv6 handover procedure
Access Gateway (MAG). The main idea of PMIPv6 is that the
MN is not involved in any IP layer mobility-related signaling.
The problem with PMIPv6 in that all data trafﬁc between
the mobile and correspondent nodes is forwarded through the
LMA. This presents two main drawbacks:
1)
Besides its mobility management role, the LMA will
get overburden with data forwarding task between the
communicating nodes.
2)
Packets delivery delay will get increased because of
the imposed transfer through the LMA.
Some efforts have recently been reported to adapt this pro-
tocol for WSNs. Islam et al. [11] have proposed a new scheme
called Sensor Proxy Mobile IPv6 (SPMIPv6). SPMIPv6 is
an adaptation of the PMIPv6 standard. However, SPMIPv6
inherits the centralized approach of PMIPv6 which has some
limitations such as non-optimized routing path, single point
of failure, packet loss, and long handoff latency which re-
sult degradation of mobility performance. In order to reduce
packet losses during the handover latency, MIPSHOP working
group [12] has standardized the Fast Handover for Proxy
Mobile IPv6 (PFMIPv6). However, PFMIPv6 reduces only
packet loss by creating, during the handover, a bi-directional
tunnel between the previous MAG that is currently serving
the MN and the new MAG to which the MN is most likely
to move. However, handover latency is longer than PMIPv6,
because of increased signalling during PFMIPv6 handover.
Also, PFMIPv6 requires that a mobile node is capable of
reporting lower-layer information, as stated in [12], which may
also require a modiﬁcation of the mobile node.
III.
OVERVIEW OF FAST HANDOVERS FOR PMIPV6
The overall PFMIPv6 signaling ﬂow includes two modes
of handover: the ﬁrst mode is reactive and the second is
predictive. For simplicity, the terms MAG, LMA, and MN will
be used here-in-after to unify the terms among PFMIPv6. Each
step of the ﬁrst mode, as shown in Figure 1, is described as
follows [12]:
1)
When a MN detects that a handover is imminent, it
reports its identiﬁer (MN ID) and the previous Access
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Point Identiﬁer (AP ID) to the new MAG (n-MAG)
to which the MN is about to move.
2)
Based on its neighbor local table, n-MAG can deter-
mine the previous MAG (p-MAG) address according
to the tuples (AP-ID, MAG) of the context informa-
tion. Then, the new MAG initiates the exchange of the
handoff information by sending the Handover Initiate
(HI) message to the previous MAG.
3)
The p-MAG sends a Handover Acknowledge (HAck)
message back to the n-MAG. The HAck message
contains MN related context such as MN-HNP, and
the LMA address that is currently serving the MN.
4)
Once the n-MAG receives the HAck message, it
establishes a bi-directional tunnel with the p-MAG
and packets destined for the MN are forwarded from
p-MAG to the n-MAG over this tunnel. This kind of
routing may increase the end-to-end delay.
5)
After that, n-MAG sends a Proxy Binding Update
(PBU) message to the MN’s LMA, whose address is
provided in HAck message, to update the MN’s new
location.
6)
The LMA sends a request message to the Authen-
tication Authorization Accounting (AAA) server for
the MN’s access authentication.
7)
After successful authentication, the LMA will reply
by sending back a Proxy Binding Acknowledgment
(PBA) message. In addition, the LMA establishes a
bidirectional tunnel with the n-MAG. From this time,
the packets to/from the MN go through the n-MAG
instead of the p-MAG. In addition, n-MAG sends a
RtrAdv message to the MN to advertise MN-HNP as
the hosted on-link preﬁx.
8)
Finally, after completing the address conﬁguration
procedure the MN is able to use the new address to
continue sending/receiving data to/from correspond-
ing node (CN).
However, although in PFMIPv6 the MN is exempt from
any participation in any mobility related signaling, additional
HI/HAck messages are required to be exchanged between p-
MAG and n-MAG requesting buffered packets. Nevertheless,
it is not deﬁned based on which criteria and when n-MAG has
to request the buffered packets from p-MAG. Also, another
problem that may arise is a neighbor queue overﬂow at new
MAG, as well as the long handoff latency, and non-optimized
communication path.
IV.
PROPOSED SCHEME (FPMIPV6-S)
A. FPMIPv6-S protocol architecture
In this section, we present our proposed scheme: Fast
handover Proxy Mobile IPv6 for Sensor networks (FPMIPv6-
S). FPMIPv6-S is an enhanced architecture of PFMIPv6 and
its main objective is to reduce the handover latency of MN
while moving and changing the attachment point to the new
network. The FPMIPv6-S architecture consists of the following
entities:
•
Sensor Mobile Access Gateway (SMAG): Sits on
the network border and it acts like an access gateway
router between MN and external network. Its main
role is to detect the MN’s movement and perform the
Mobility Options
A H L
K M R P S
Reserved
Lifetime
Sequence #
Fig. 2. FPMIPv6-S SBU Message Format
Mobility Options
Status
K R P S
Reserved
Lifetime
Sequence #
Fig. 3. FPMIPv6-S SBA Message Format
mobility-related signaling with SLMA on behalf of the
MN. Packets sent/received to/from the MN are routed
through a tunnel created between the SMAG that is
currently serving the 6LoWPAN MN and the SMAG
whose the corresponding node is attached.
•
Sensor Local Mobility Anchor (SLMA): Acts like a
Home Agent in MIP. SLMA is responsible of main-
taining reachability with MN while it moves within a
PMIPv6 domain.
•
6LoWPAN Mobile
Node
(MN): A device that
changes its point of attachment from one network
to another. The MN may change its location without
changing its home address.
B. Message format for FPMIPv6-S
This section gives the message formats exchanged to per-
form the binding, and communication processes in the sensor
PMIP domain. These messages include Sensor Binding Update
(SBU), Sensor Binding Acknowledgement (SBA), Localized
Routing Initiation (LRI), and Localized Routing Acknowledg-
ment (LRA).
For binding query operation in FPMIPv6-S, we deﬁne the
two new messages, SBU and SBA, by adding the ’S’ ﬂag
bit into the existing PBU and PBA messages of PMIPv6,
respectively, as shown in Figures 2 and 3. The SBU and
SBA messages are exchanged between SMAGs and SLMA
to update the current location of the 6LoWPAN MN. The
deﬁnition and description of the other ﬂags are beyond the
scope of this study and are described in [6].
To perform the communication process, SLMA and
SMAGs exchange localized routing (LR) messages to request
local forwarding for a pair 6LoWPAN MN-CN which locates
the MAG who’s the CN is attached for delivery data packets.
The key idea of the LRI and LRA messages is to introduce the
route optimization process and reduce end-to-end delay [13].
Hence, all data packets can travel between 6LoWPAN MN and
CN through a tunnel that is created between SMAGs without
being intercepted by the SLMA. Therefore, this allows better
routing of data packets between the 6LoWPAN MN and CN
which results in the reduction of network load and end-to-end
delivery delay.
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

3.SBU(include n-SMAG @)
1.Report
4.SBA
2.HI(include SLMA @ & CN @)
5.HAck
6.RA
7.NS
Deliver packets
TFPMIPv6-S
6LoWPAN
L2 Attchment
p-SMAG
n-SMAG
SLMA
Fig. 4. FPMIPv6-S handover procedure
The procedure of sending data packets from 6LoWPAN
MN to CN can be described as follows. First, given that
the communicating MN and CN are anchored to the same
SLMA, this latter initiates LR by sending two separate LRI
messages to the two SMAGs. Each LRI message contains
the IP address of the counterpart SMAG. When the SMAGs
receive the LRI, each SMAG creates a local forwarding entry
and a bi-directional tunnel is established between the two
SMAGs such that all data packets, for which the destination is
CN, are sent from the 6LoWPAN MN over this tunnel without
being intercepted by the SLMA.
C. Message Flow in FPMIPv6-S
The steps of the sequence diagram of the message ﬂow are
shown in Figure 4. There are seven steps:
•
Step 1 and 2: When a MN detects that it is entering
a new sensor network, it sends a Report message
to the previous SMAG (p-SMAG) that is currently
serving the MN. The Report message contains the MN
Identiﬁer (MN ID) and the New Access Point Iden-
tiﬁer (New AP ID). The p-SMAG sends a Handover
Initiate (HI) message to the new SMAG (n-SMAG).
The HI message MUST include both SLMA and CN
addresses.
•
Step 3: The p-SMAG sends the SBU message to the
SLMA on behalf of the n-SMAG. The SBU message
contains the default information like the PBU message
on PFMIPv6 plus the n-SMAG address. From this
moment, n-SMAG will wait for a SBA message from
SLMA.
•
Step 4: In response to the SBU, SLMA which includes
both the authentication (AAA) and network informa-
tion sends back a Sensor Binding Acknowledge (SBA)
message.
•
Step 5: Once n-SMAG receives SBA, it replies by
sending HAck to p-SMAG, conﬁgures the required
routing information needed to reach 6LoWPAN MN,
TABLE I. Performance evaluation related parameters
Parameter
Description
Tx−y
Transmission cost of a packet between nodes x and y
PC
Processing cost of node C for binding update or lookup
NMAG
Number of MAGs in the PMIP domain
NMN/MAG
Number of active MNs per MAG
Cx−y
Hop count between nodes x and y
Sctrl
Size of control packet (byte)
Sdata
Size of data packet (byte)
a
Unit cost of binding update with LMA
b
Unit cost of lookup for MN at LMA
t
Unit transmission cost of a packet per hop (wired link)
k
Unit transmission cost of a packet per hop (wireless link)
and registers the requesting 6LoWPAN MN in its BUL
table.
•
Step 6: n-SMAG sends a RtrAdv message to 6LoW-
PAN MN. When the 6LoWPAN MN receives this
RtrAdv message, it will conﬁgure its IP address using
either a stateful or stateless address conﬁguration.
•
Step 7: Once the MN performs address conﬁguration,
it sends a Neighbor Solicitation (NS) message to n-
SMAG, and accordingly the MN is connected to the
n-SMAG. From this moment, the sensor node is able
to communicate with the CN through SMAGs.
V.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
In this section, we analyze the performance of PFMIPv6
and FPMIPv6-S in terms of binding update cost (BUC) and
packet delivery cost (PDC). We deﬁne the total cost (Ctotal)
as the sum of binding update cost and packet delivery cost,
i.e.,
Ctotal = BUC + PDC
(1)
Table I gives notations used in this work [14] [15] [16].
For simplicity, we consider that all costs are symmetric, i.e.,
Tx−y=Ty−x.
A. PFMIPv6 cost analysis
The binding update process of PFMIPv6 is performed as
follows: When MN enters a new MAG (n-MAG) region, it per-
forms the channel scanning which corresponds to the handover
latency at L2 (TMAG−MN). Then, there is an exchange of HI
and HAck messages between the new MAG and the previous
MAG (p-MAG). This operation takes 2TMAG−MAG.
After that, n-MAG performs the binding update operations
by exchanging the PBU and PBA control messages with LMA
which takes 2TMAG−LMA+PLMA. The n-MAG, on receiving
the PBA message, sends back a Router Advertisement (RA)
message to the MN which takes TMN−MAG. After receiving
RA and conﬁguring its IP address using either a stateful
or stateless address conﬁguration, the MN sends a neighbor
solicitation message to n-SMAG and performs the Layer 2
attachment which corresponds to 2TMN−MAG.
We noted that the authentication process to be done by
LMA via Authentication, Authorized and Accounting server
(TAAA) will be simply expressed as the delay to exchange
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

TABLE II. Parameter values
Parameter
Default value
NMAG
20
NMN/MAG
200
CMAG−LMA
5
CMAG−MAG
√NMAG
Sctrl
50 bytes
Sdata
1024 bytes
a
3
b
2
t
2
k
4
messages between LMA and AAA server [17]. Hence, the
binding update cost can be expressed as follows:
BUCP F MIP v6 = Sctrl(4TMN−MAG + 2TMAG−LMA
+ 2TMAG−MAG + TAAA) + PLMA
= Sctrl(4kCMN−MAG + 2tCMAG−LMA
+ 2tCMAG−MAG + TAAA)
+ alog(NMAG × NMN/MAG)
(2)
It is assumed that the processing cost for binding update
with LMA (PLMA) is proportional to the total number of active
MNs in the LMA domain (NMAGxNMN/MAG) in the log scale
by using a tree-based data structure to implement the database.
Therefore, the processing cost at the LMA can be expressed
as follows:
PLMA = alog(NMAG × NMN/MAG)
(3)
In PFMIPv6, the packet delivery process consists of send-
ing data packet from MN to CN. First, a packet is sent from the
MN to the LMA via its MAG, which is equal to TMN−MAG
+ TMAG−LMA. Then, the LMA will look for CN address in
its binding cache which requires PLMA. Finally, LMA sends
the packet to MAG of CN (TMAG−LMA), and further to
CN (TMAG−CN). Therefore, the PDC for PFMIPv6 can be
expressed as follows:
PDCP F MIP v6 = Sdata(TMN−MAG + 2TMAG−LMA
+ TMAG−CN) + PLMA
= Sdata(kCMN−MAG + 2tCMAG−LMA
+ kCMAG−CN)
+ blog(NMAG × NMN/MAG)
(4)
B. FPMIPv6-S cost analysis
As we have already mentioned in Section IV-C, in
FPMIPv6-S the p-SMAG sends SBU message to the SLMA on
behalf of the n-SMAG, which corresponds to TSMAG−SLMA.
On receiving the SBU, SLMA will perform the needed au-
thentication and registration processes which take 2PSLMA.
After that, SLMA replies by sending back the SBA that
contains the MN’s home network preﬁx (TSLMA−SMAG).
Once the n-SMAG gets SBU message, it will directly reply
by sending HAck to the p-SMAG and RA to the MN, which
takes TSMAG−SMAG+TSMAG−MN. After receiving RA and
conﬁguring its IP address using either a stateful or stateless
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
x 10
4
k
Total Cost
 
 
PFMIPv6
FPMIPv6−S
Fig. 5. Total cost versus k
address conﬁguration, the MN sends a neighbor solicitation
message to n-SMAG and performs the Layer 2 attachment
which corresponds to 2TMN−SMAG.
BUCF P MIP v6−S = Sctrl(3TMN−SMAG + 2TSMAG−SLMA
+ 2TSMAG−SMAG) + 2PSLMA
= Sctrl(3kCMN−SMAG
+ 2tCSMAG−SLMA + 2tCSMAG−SMAG)
+ 2alog(NSMAG × NMN/SMAG)
(5)
We note that, from Figure 4, the handover delay is equal
to the period from the moment that 6LoWPAN MN starts L2
attachment to the moment that 6LoWPAN MN receives the
ﬁrst packet from n-SMAG.
In the case of data packet delivery, we analyze the com-
munication between two MNs that belong to different MAGs
in the same domain. As we mentioned earlier, when the
MN is attached to the n-SMAG, SLMA exchanges localized
routing messages with n-SMAG and p-SMAG to request local
forwarding for a pair 6LoWPAN MN-CN. When the SMAGs
receive the LRI, each MAG creates a local forwarding entry
and a bi-directional tunnel is established between two SMAGs
such that all data packets, in which the destination is CN, are
sent from the MN over this tunnel. Accordingly, the packet
delivery cost for FPMIPv6-S can be expressed as follows:
PDCF P MIP v6−S = Sdata(TMN−SMAG + TSMAG−SMAG
+ TSMAG−CN) + Sctrl4TSMAG−SLMA
= Sdata(kCMN−SMAG
+ tCSMAG−SMAG + kCSMAG−CN)
+ Sctrl4tCSMAG−SLMA
(6)
VI.
NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we show numerical results based on the
analysis derived in the previous section. To simplify our
analysis, we only focus on analyzing the handover latency
within a same domain. The other possible scenarios [18]
for interdomain movement are not considered in the present
document, and they are set as future work. The parameter
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
x 10
4
t
Total Cost
 
 
PFMIPv6
FPMIPv6−S
Fig. 6. Total cost versus t
values are taken from [14] [15] [16]. They are shown in
Table II.
Figure 5 shows the total cost with respect to the wireless
link delay. In this analysis, we have changed the parameter (k)
and setting all other parameters to their default values. We see
that the total cost for the two protocols increases linearly with
the increment in the wireless link delay. The proposed scheme
FPMIPv6-S gives better performance than PFMIPv6 scheme.
This is due to the protocol properties. Indeed, as shown in
Section IV-C, the handover latency is reduced since the L2
attachment is not taken into account during the exchange of
Sensor Binding Update/Acknowledge messages.
Figure 6 shows the impact of wired link delay on total
cost. For all of the mobility protocols, it can be observed that
the total cost considerably increases as the wired link delay
increases. FPMIPv6-S results in a lower total cost latency than
PFMIPv6. As mentioned earlier with PFMIPv6, when a MN
wants to send a data packet to a CN, all data packets get
routed to the LMA through a tunnel between the MAG and
the LMA. Then, LMA forwards the packet to the destination
MAG. Thus, when the data packet size is increased, the cost
to send it is also increased. Also, this can create the triangle
routing problem. However, with FPMIPv6-S, we don’t need
to send a data packet to SLMA. Indeed, control messages
must be exchanged between SMAGs and SLMA. As a result,
a tunnel between SMAGs is established, and all packets ex-
changed between 6LoWPAN mobile and correspondent nodes
are tunneled through this optimized routing path.
Figure 7 illustrates the variation in the total cost as the
distance between the SMAGs and SLMA (MAGs and LMA) is
changed. From the Figure, it is clear that the total cost increases
for all the mobility protocols schemes. However, when the hop
count is larger than 3 hops, PFMIPv6 has higher total cost
than FPMIPv6-S. This is because sending a data packet from
MN to CN must include intermediate nodes such as SLMA
(LMA). However, with FPMIPv6-S, only control packets must
be exchanged between SMAGs and SLMA to ﬁnd the CN’s
location.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we studied the problem of mobility man-
agement for 6LoWPAN mobile sensor nodes. We presented
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
x 10
4
Total Cost
 
 
Hop count SMAG−SLMA
PFMIPv6
FPMIPv6−S
Fig. 7. Total cost versus hop count SMAG-SLMA
PFMIPv6-S , a new fast proxy-based mobility management
protocol, which is an improved version of PFMIPv6. We
have conducted a comparative analytical study for two mo-
bile protocols, PFMIPv6 and FPMIPv6-S. We compared the
total cost which is expressed as the sum of binding update
cost and packet delivery cost. The performance analysis and
the numerical results presented in this work shows that our
proposal signiﬁcantly outperforms PFMIPv6. We are in the
process of building NS3 simulation models of PFMIPv6 and
FPMIPv6-S protocols in order to validate our analytical results
and to perform a more thorough evaluation.
REFERENCES
[1]
Z. Alliance, “Zigbee speciﬁcation,” tech. rep., http://www.zigbee.org,
2007.
[2]
N. Kushalnagar, G. Montenegro, and C. Schumacher, “IPv6 over
Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs): Overview,
Assumptions, Problem Statement, and Goals.” RFC 4919, Aug. 2007.
[3]
G. Montenegro, N. Kushalnagar, J. Hui, and D. Culler, “Transmission
of IPv6 Packets over IEEE 802.15.4 Networks.” RFC 4944, Sept. 2007.
[4]
D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and J. Arkko, “Mobility Support in IPv6.” RFC
3775, June 2004.
[5]
H. Soliman, C. Castelluccia, K. ElMalki, and L. Bellier, “Hierarchical
Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) Mobility Management.” RFC 5380, Oct. 2008.
[6]
S. Gundavelli, K. Leung, V. Devarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and B. Patil,
“Proxy Mobile IPv6.” RFC 5213, Aug. 2008.
[7]
D. K. Goldenberg, J. Lin, A. S. Morse, B. E. Rosen, and Y. R. Yang,
“Towards mobility as a network control primitive,” MobiHoc, 2004,
pp. 163–174.
[8]
A. Howard, M. J. Matari´c, and G. S. Sukhatme, “An incremental self-
deployment algorithm for mobile sensor networks,” Auton. Robots, vol.
13, Sept. 2002, pp. 113–126.
[9]
R. Rao and G. Kesidis, “Purposeful mobility for relaying and surveil-
lance in mobile ad hoc sensor networks,” IEEE Educational Activities
Department, vol. 3, July 2004, pp. 225–232.
[10]
I. Chatzigiannakis and S. E. Nikoletseas, “An adaptive compulsory
protocol for basic communication in highly changing ad hoc mobile
networks,” IEEE Computer Society, 2002, pp. 193–202.
[11]
M. M. Islam and E.-N. Huh, “Sensor proxy mobile ipv6 (spmipv6) a
novel scheme for mobility supported ip-wsns,” Sensors, vol. 11, no. 2,
2011, pp. 1865–1887.
[12]
H. Yokota, K. Chowdhury, R. Koodli, B. Patil, and F. Xia, “Fast
Handovers for Proxy Mobile IPv6.” RFC 5949, Sept. 2010.
[13]
S. Krishnan, R. Koodli, P. Loureiro, Q. Wu, and A. Dutta, “Localized
Routing for Proxy Mobile IPv6.” RFC 6705, Sept. 2012.
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[14]
H. Jung, M. Gohar, J. I. Kim, and S. J. Koh, “Distributed mobility
control in proxy mobile ipv6 networks,” IEICE Transactions, vol. 94,
no. 8, 2011, pp. 2216–2224.
[15]
Y.-H. Choi and T.-M. Chung, “Using correspondent information for
route optimization scheme on proxy mobile ipv6,” Journal of Networks,
Vol. 5, no. 8, 2010, pp. 984–989.
[16]
A. Jabir, S. Subramaniam, Z. Ahmad, and N. A. W. Hamid, “A cluster
based proxy mobile ipv6 for ip-wsns,” EURASIP J. Wireless Comm.
and Networking, vol. 2012, no. 1, 2012, p. 173.
[17]
K.-S. Kong, W. Lee, Y.-H. Han, M.-K. Shin, and H. You, “Mobility
management for all-IP mobile networks: mobile IPv6 vs. proxy mobile
IPv6,” IEEE Wireless Communications, Apr. 2008, pp. 36–45.
[18]
G. Giaretta, “Interactions between Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6) and
Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6): Scenarios and Related Issues.” RFC 6612, May
2012.
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

