Trafﬁc Steering Framework for Mobile-Assisted
Resource Management in Heterogeneous Networks
Anton Dogadaev∗, Aleksandra Checko∗†, Andrijana Popovska Avramova∗, Anna Zakrzewska∗, Ying Yan∗,
Sarah Ruepp∗, Michael S. Berger∗, Lars Dittmann∗ and Henrik Christiansen∗
∗Department of Photonics Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
†MTI Radiocomp, Hillerød, Denmark
Email: {akdo, amch, apop, azak, yiya, srru, msbe, ladit, hlch}@fotonik.dtu.dk
Abstract—With the expected growth of mobile data trafﬁc
it is essential to manage the network resources efﬁciently. In
order to undertake this challenge, we propose a framework
for network-centric, mobile-assisted resource management, which
facilitates trafﬁc ofﬂoading from mobile network to Wi-Fi or open
access small cells. A provision of desired quality of experience to
the end-user is carried out by an operator-conﬁgurable monitor-
ing application that is running on a mobile device. A potential
to enhance network-centric resource management is provided by
delegating trafﬁc steering authorities to the network backbone.
What is more, we give an overview of existing standardization
activities on ofﬂoading the mobile trafﬁc through Wi-Fi.
Keywords—Heterogenous Networks; Network Centric; Resource
Management; Ofﬂoading
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cisco forecasts that mobile data trafﬁc will grow 13-fold
from 2012 to 2017. As the 4G networks are generating
19 times more trafﬁc than their predecessors [1], it is essential
to maintain the network in a way that ensures certain Quality
of Experience (QoE) level. In Long Term Evolution (LTE)
networks, the load on the network has a crucial impact on
achievable user data rates. Improving the network capacity
by introducing additional cells challenges interference mana-
gement. The exponential growth in mobile data trafﬁc also
puts additional load on the backhaul network, which becomes
congested and requires considerable investments. Therefore,
mobile operators would like to use, e.g., the Wi-Fi networks,
or open small cells whenever possible to ofﬂoad the trafﬁc
through them.
In this work, we describe a network-centric resource ma-
nagement framework where a mobile facilitates the networks’
decisions by gathering feedback and requesting its demands.
However, it is the network that makes the ﬁnal decisions in
order to ensure the optimum network operation, in terms of
network ofﬂoading and power saving in the ﬁrst place. For
the mobile operators, who are interested in reducing their
investments on the licensed spectrum and backhaul upgrading,
our solution will enable that by facilitating the trafﬁc ofﬂoad.
Users beneﬁt from this approach, as the mechanisms for the
network selection are enhanced, therefore connecting over
a less loaded cellular network will improve their QoE and
reduce the price of connection. Reduction of the trafﬁc cost is
especially important, because while data connections in a home
country are relatively cheap, in roaming the price becomes
considerable.
Mobile network 
coverage
Wi-Fi
coverage
Open access 
small cell 
available
Network 
selection
Smart phone
”Smarter” phone
Small cell 
coverage
Wi-Fi
coverage
Site
Wi-Fi available
Network 
selection
Fig. 1.
Mobile network ofﬂoading.
In the sections below, the phone, working according to our
framework, will be called as a mobile device with ”smarter”
application on it. Such a ”smarter” phone will seamlessly use,
e.g., Wi-Fi or open access small cells for ofﬂoad as shown in
Figure 1.
What is more, our platform will enhance possibility of
ubiquitous Internet access, complementing services offering
global connectivity from one account, like the iPass [2].
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section II, we state the challenges of resource management
and load balancing in heterogeneous networks. Section III in-
troduces related standardization and research work towards en-
hancement of handover across the standards, trafﬁc ofﬂoading,
interworking and network selection. In Section IV, we provide
a deﬁnition of our framework from the network-centric point
of view. Section V gives detailed overview of the proposed
framework architecture and covers its extension possibilities
by employing IEEE 802.11u and IEEE 802.21. Section VI
concludes the paper.
II.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT AND TRAFFIC STEERING
ISSUES IN HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS
LTE has been deployed around the world since the end
of 2009. For example in the big European cities, where cove-
rage is assured, a lot of people are subscribing to the mobile
access through LTE. It is enabled by a growing popularity of
the user devices supporting the standard. In the same time the
QoE is decreasing as more users share the capacity of the
network.
A Wi-Fi connection is a cost efﬁcient way to gain access
to the Internet, thanks to its widely spread coverage and
availability of the devices that support it. Mobile operators
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

could use the ubiquitous Wi-Fi coverage to ensure the mobile
service accessibility, especially indoors. The opposite solution
is also present in the market, where the Wi-Fi routers are
connected to the Internet through LTE. It is a clear evidence of
the convergence of those two standards, however taking into
account the additional load on the mobile infrastructure that it
imposes, it should be used carefully and only when needed.
Users are also getting used to the always-on connectivity
over ﬂat rate subscription and relying on their smartphones.
When they are traveling abroad, the roaming data rates are
still considerable. Seamless ofﬂoading the trafﬁc to local Wi-Fi
hotspots is a convenient solution to this problem. That is the
reason for the popularity of the services like iPass, which cover
a wide range of Wi-Fi hotspots. However, their coverage could
be improved; they also require user to get and conﬁgure the
client.
Nowadays widely-employed 3G/4G cellular networks are
lacking the possibility of trafﬁc ofﬂoading and interconnecting
with other access networks that may exist in the area. In par-
ticular, Wi-Fi networks might be employed for interworking
with standards for high-speed mobile communications like
LTE/LTE-Advanced (LTE-A). Deployment of this functional-
ity will sufﬁciently improve trafﬁc load balancing. However,
currently existing Wi-Fi networks lack the possibility of global
access and authentication. In order to settle this problems ideas
of Global Wi-Fi networks and their interworking with the
cellular networks received increasing interest in scientiﬁc and
standardization community.
In today’s mobile devices, a lot of control is still left for
the user - he/she needs to know how to conﬁgure a smartphone
or any other network device in order to use Wi-Fi instead of
cellular connection whenever possible. What is more, users
very often do not have the possibility to conﬁgure certain
operations to be scheduled when they are connected through
Wi-Fi, e.g., to update the installed applications, to backup data
from the phone, etc. The mobile devices should require as
little as possible interaction from the users, while on the other
hand be able to provide (assist) the network with sufﬁcient
information which will ensure that the user’s expectations of
service quality are met.
Mobile network coverage is deployed using macro cells.
In densely populated areas, where high peak data rates are
expected, small cells can boost the overall network capacity
by introducing the additional resources. Small cells can be
of micro-, pico- or femtocell size. Some of them can be for
enterprise use, but also an open access small cells can be
introduced. In both cases ofﬂoading the trafﬁc from macro-
to small cell will equalize the average cell load, improving the
peak achievable data rates.
III.
OVERVIEW OF STANDARDIZATION EFFORTS AND
RELATED WORK
A lot of standardization efforts have been put in preparing
the standards that ensure a seamless vertical handover between
wireless technologies. In the tight coupling architecture among
heterogeneous networks, a seamless handover can be achieved.
The enhanced Generic Access Network (eGAN) [3], [4],
a Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) standard, is an
example of a tight coupling approach. In eGAN, the mecha-
nisms for exchanging inter-Radio Access Technology (RAT)
measurements are deﬁned which enable well timed inter-RAT
handover. Due to the fact that tight coupling approach is
expensive, complex and requires modiﬁcation in the terminals
and access networks, a loose coupling approach is preferred.
The Interworking WLAN (I-WLAN) [5] is a 3GPP standard
for loose coupling interworking between WLAN and 3GPP
networks. The Mobile IP is used as the mobility protocol, but
there are no mechanisms deﬁned for timely triggering of the
vertical handover.
The
Media
Independent
Handover
(MIH)
[6],
an
IEEE
802.21
standard,
facilitates
vertical
handover
using a loose coupling approach. It provides mechanisms for
the make-before-break handover by deﬁning initialization and
preparation phases prior to the execution of a handover. In
the initialization phase the current link is observed and new
access networks are detected. In the preparation phase, a
decision for handover is made, query regarding the available
resources is performed and information, required for mobile
IP execution, is retrieved. The IEEE 802.21a amendment to
the MIH covers mechanisms for latency reduction during the
authentication, as well as authorization and data protection for
the MIH services. The main issue that is yet not deﬁned in
the standard is how to perform a reservation of the resource in
order to ensure the required QoE and methods for translation
of the Quality of Service (QoS) context deﬁnitions between
different technologies and operators [7].
From a user’s point of view, maintaining seamless connec-
tion to Wi-Fi networks is not as straightforward as connecting
to cellular networks. Often users do not recognize the avail-
able Wi-Fi networks, and, even more, they get discouraged to
use Wi-Fi when credentials are necessary to connect to open or
public networks. In order to provide a cellular-like experience
and the Global Wi-Fi implementation, the Wi-Fi Alliance
Hotspot 2.0 Speciﬁcation, which references the IEEE 802.11u
amendment, has been presented [8]. The IEEE 802.11u [9]
aims to provide an overall end-to-end solution for interworking
with external networks. It deﬁnes Layer 2 transport for a query-
response protocol which can be the IEEE 802.21 protocol
or the Access Network Query Protocol (ANQP). This allows
users to effectively query the network for the information
relevant to the network selection prior to performing the
authentication procedures.
Nowadays mobile devices are capable of multihoming,
allowing simultaneous connection to different networks, re-
ceiving and sending data on multiple interfaces at the same
time. Seamless mobility thus becomes not just mobility per
user, but more per service (ﬂow). The IP Flow Mobility
(IFOM) [10] provides the means to select and ofﬂoad a
single ﬂow to a complementary access network. A shortcoming
of IFOM is that it is limited to one active 3GPP and one
active non-3GPP connections, while all IP ﬂows are intended
to one Packet Data Network (PDN) connection [11]. In [12],
the missing interface towards the Policy and Charging Control
(PCC) system is identiﬁed as a limitation for dynamic IFOM.
This interface is needed in order to inform the gateways (PDN,
signalling gateway) of the routing policies.
In the IEEE 802.21, a MIH Information Server (IS) is
deﬁned to maintain information of available networks. On
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

the other hand, 3GPP has deﬁned the Access Network De-
tection and Selection Function (ANDSF) to maintain a map
of coverage in a form of a static database containing the
available access networks in a certain location (e.g., a cell).
The mobile nodes can provide ANDSF with its capabilities
(IFOM, Multiaccess PDN Connectivity or Seamless Wi-Fi)
and location, so that ANDSF can limit the information that
is valid for the particular mobile node. However, the standard
does not include generation procedures for the policies and the
dependence of the requested service, the QoS required for the
service, the available signal strength levels, load balancing etc.
The issue of a database design and maintenance has not been
covered as well. As indicated in [13] and [14] the ANDSF
does not provide sufﬁcient tools to the operators for control of
network access.
The Fixed/Mobile Convergence initiated the alignment of
ﬁxed and mobile management requirements between the 3GPP
and the Broadband Forum (BBF). The Technical Report
(TR) [15] deﬁnes architectural framework for interworking
between Service Provider (SP) that offer 3GPP and/or ﬁxed
access. The TR considers several functionalities among which
is Wi-Fi ofﬂoading and IFOM. The Broadband Policy Control
Framework (BPCF), described in [16], deﬁnes a policy based
activation of broadband services as well as policy management
and control. The main logical entities are policy decision,
policy enforcement points and admission control function.
The policies are applied at an IP session, IP ﬂow or at
an aggregate level. The motivation and the architectures for
interworking between 3GPP system and a ﬁxed broadband
access network using WLAN or femto access is elaborated
in [17]. The authors indicate the different methods for policy
control as a main problem for 3GPP-BBF interworking and
discuss the procedures for initial attachment and policy and
charging control session establishment.
The research community has also been focusing on
suggesting and evaluating different frameworks for trafﬁc
steering. Important research directions such as: minimization
of delay for the vertical handover, load balancing among
networks, trafﬁc ofﬂoading etc., have been covered to high
extent. Different schemes with respect to user’s QoE and
optimization of network resources have been proposed in
the research literature. For example, a possible procedure for
vertical handoff between cellular and Wi-Fi networks were
suggested in [18]. However, this paper considers architecture
for handover decision management taking into account only
users and applications requirements. In [19] the decision
algorithm relies on application proﬁle handling, and manages a
ﬂeet of mobile nodes. The target of the framework is to either
reduce the cost of communication from user point of view
or to achieve the required QoS, while considering the energy
consumption. Again the operator point of view is not taken
into account, nor resource availability at the cellular or Wi-Fi
networks. In [20], IEEE 802.21 is evaluated for handover of
data services, where the decision is made within a time interval
during which the data rates over two networks are compared.
In [21], a context aware mobility framework is presented,
where decisions are made in a cross-layer and interactive
approach. The mobile node is responsible for determining the
optimal point of attachment, while the network is responsible
for optimizing the network resources.
Wi-Fi
Coverage
Small cell
coverage
Wi-Fi
coverage
BS1
BS3
BS2
info
instructions
info
info
instructions
info
instr.
instr.
info
- Wi-Fi Hotspot 2.0 
availability
- ANQP request
- How is Wi-Fi 
backhauled
- Battery level
- Requested throughput
- Price preference
+ mobile network offload
+ lower power consumption
+ Better QoE
+ reduced backhaul investments
+ reduced roaming cost
instructions
- Decisions
- Network parameters
Decision 
Center
Decision
Enity
Offload
Load 
balancing
RAT-
selection
Mobile Core 
Network
Information 
Server
Fig. 2.
A framework for mobile-assisted, network-centric resource manage-
ment and it’s beneﬁts
In our previous work [22], we have introduced an ap-
proach to the network resource management, where the system
functionalities are classiﬁed according to the time needed to
perform particular control action. The framework is universal
and applicable to a wide variety of network deployments
characterized by multiple RATs, Heterogeneous Networks and
different architectures of Base Stations (BSs) such as Dis-
tributed BS and Cloud Radio Access Network. In this work,
we focus on trafﬁc steering as one functional part of resource
management. Here, we propose a framework where both users’
proﬁles per application/preferred operator and network mode
are considered in the decision algorithm. More over, we argue
that the network centric approach is more appropriate in
achieving improved network operation and utilization, while
the user is ensured with good connection and service anytime,
anywhere.
IV.
NETWORK-CENTRIC FRAMEWORK DEFINITION
The proposed resource management framework in this
paper adopts the network-centric approach, where assistance
from mobile nodes is required. As the ﬁnal decision is made
at the network side, this framework allows the operator to
be in control of the network load and resources in general.
The mobile nodes are responsible to provide the network
with various information such that the decision will improve
users’ QoE.
As represented by Figure 2, the resource management
framework consists of two parts: a network part or decision
center and a mobile part or ”smarter” application residing
on the side of a Mobile Node (MN). The proposed decision
center contains two (logical) elements: the Decision Entity
and the IS. The Decision Entity is responsible for analyzing
data and steering the trafﬁc demands. It has several main
operations that can indicate to the MN to perform: selection of
a suitable access network from a list of hotspots/small cells,
handover to a small cell or a Wi-Fi hotspot, trafﬁc ofﬂoading
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

to a small cell/Wi-Fi, etc. The goals of these operations are
to always ensure best connectivity and service, optimize the
network operation, balance the load among networks that
belong to the operator. The IS represents a database of the
up-to-date information gathered from the mobile devices, avail-
able eNodeBs and access points. The ”smarter” application
is responsible to send sufﬁcient information that will aid the
network to reach a decision. The users are encouraged to install
this application as it will enhance the ubiquitous access to the
Internet and improve the experienced QoS. In the following
subsections, two approaches are presented: the basic and the
enhanced framework.
A. Basic Framework
In the basic framework, the Decision Entity considers the
data received from the MN, the network load and operation.
Given that the mobile node is the only one able to sense alter-
native access networks, it is therefore responsible to detect and
report a list of available networks. The ”smarter” application
is responsible to communicate with the decision center and
send information on certain time intervals. The time intervals
can be set by the decision center. The information gathered
about Wi-Fi hotspot may not be just limited to the Service
Set Identiﬁcation (SSID). In case of support of IEEE 802.11u
and ANQP, the MN can retrieve more information about the
capabilities of the networks such as presented in [8]: Network
Authentication Type information, Roaming consortium list, IP
Address Type Availability, Hotspot Operator Friendly Name,
Operating Class etc. Additionally in case of the support
of IEEE 802.21, the MN can retrieve QoS parameters such
as throughput, packet error rate and/or different classes of
service [6].
All this information can be collected by the IS and made
available to the Decision Entity for analysis. In this case the
task of the Decision Center is to provide a decision on the
MNs that are best suited to be ofﬂoaded to alternative access
networks and possibly forward the required security credentials
for the new access network. The decision is made so that the
operator’s network is relieved from load, and the users that
remain are ensured with the required level of quality.
B. Enhanced Framework
In
the
enhanced
framework,
the
IS
maintains
a
database (a Proﬁle DB) of available mobile Network Proﬁles
(NPs) and User Proﬁles (UPs) that indicate their operation and
possibility to provide certain QoE. An example of the network
proﬁle can be presented as follows:
•
Guaranteed QoS parameters: The available network
is able to ensure a certain level of QoS parameters.
•
Non Guaranteed QoS: The available network might
be unknown to the operator, but can offer free access
to the Internet without information on any QoS pa-
rameters.
•
Limited Resources: The available network is capable
to ensure a connectivity under certain limitations.
For example the throughput per user is limited to a
certain threshold, the number of users connected to
the network is limited and/or only certain users are
allowed to connect.
In order to assure its delegated functionality, a Proﬁle DB is
allocated in the backbone. The Proﬁle DB can be constructed
dynamically based on the information from the MNs and/or
agreements among network operators. In the second case,
the networks need to update their proﬁle in case there is a
change. For example, if the network becomes overloaded and
the available resources are limited. Additionally, in case of
Wi-Fi hotspots, the credentials for access could be available at
the Decision Center and therefore simplify the access of MNs
to the available Wi-Fi.
The ”smarter” application is enhanced as well. It is re-
sponsible for a proﬁle activation depending on the type of
the service that is requested by the user. The proﬁles can be
based on internal parameters of the MN, that may include, as
an example, desired throughput requirements, residual battery
lifetime and activated subscription. The information on the
active proﬁles per user is collected at the side of IS as well.
The proﬁles can be deﬁned according to the parameters that
have higher priority, for example:
•
Required QoE parameters proﬁle determines the key
quality parameters for the requested service. Here
different classes of service can be deﬁned depending
of the type of application. For example it can be a
high demand on bandwidth for streaming service, low
latency for voice services, low packet error rate for
ﬁle synchronization etc.
•
Minimum price proﬁle controls trafﬁc consumption of
the MN and its applications, minimizing the overall
cost of data transmission. The application will look
for Wi-Fi networks, checking their quality. Known
Wi-Fi networks and security credentials could be
stored and marked as the preferred ones. Application
will also create UPs in open access Wi-Fi networks
on behalf of the user, if needed for connecting, to
facilitate the connection.
•
Maximum battery lifetime proﬁle controls different
parameters of the MN, maximizing total time that MN
can work on its battery power.
In the enhanced framework, the Decision Entity reaches
decisions based on the data received from the MN, the user
proﬁles and network conditions that are reﬂected through
NPs. The proposed architecture and the communication among
different entities in the enhanced framework is elaborated in
the next section.
V.
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE FOR DATA OFFLOADING
We build our approach on the assumption that MN with
”smarter” application ofﬂoads trafﬁc to the Wi-Fi network,
which is superior in terms of provided QoS parameters and
most closely ﬁts to the UP that is currently active on the MN.
In the basic approach, the Decision Entity may require MN to
ofﬂoad all trafﬁc each time when Wi-Fi is available for connec-
tion. However, in this paper, we propose an advanced technique
that potentially can provide an optimal load balancing solution
for network operators, still keeping the user of MN satisﬁed
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

MN
Serving 
eNodeB
Candidate 
Wi-Fi1,…,N
IS
Beacon #1,…,#N
Profile DB
Request for 
network evaluation
QoS retrieval
Network 
authentication 
parameters and SSID
Wi-Fi 
association
Request for 
NPs and UP
Traffic offloading from LTE/LTE-A to WLAN
Offload complete
...
UP update request
Response with 
NPs and UP
Network-centric Decision Center
Decision
Entity
Fig. 3.
Proposed sequence diagram for the proﬁle-based trafﬁc ofﬂoading
from LTE/LTE-A cellular networks towards Wi-Fi.
by the acquired network resources. As represented by Figure 3
a trafﬁc ofﬂoading scenario begins on the side of MN by
performing network discovery procedure in a passive low
power consumption scanning mode by retrieving information
about new Wi-Fi hotspots from broadcasted beacon frames.
Since the MN may not recognize all received SSIDs and
cannot retrieve their QoS parameters as well as an active NP,
it transfers the acquired data to the network-centric Decision
Center together with the request to evaluate recently discovered
Wi-Fi.
Upon the retrieval of network QoSs and NPs together
with UP of MN that is analyzed for ofﬂoading options, the
IS executes the algorithm of decision making as depicted
by Figure 4. After performing mapping procedures of received
SSIDs to NPs from the Proﬁle DB, the Decision Center
analyses if the discovered networks meet the requirements and
are reasonable for data ofﬂoading for a given UP, by executing
the following compliance test:
•
Requirement 1: NP should support connection of MN
that has an active UP.
•
Requirement 2: Provided QoS parameters of the net-
work should be equal or greater than those requested
by UP.
If both requirements are met, the IS puts SSIDs corre-
sponding to current NP into the set C that deﬁnes available
candidates for ofﬂoading. If after searching procedures it
reveals that C = ∅, the IS sends an information message to
a ”smarter” application that MN should stay in the serving
cellular network. In this case, IS also sends notiﬁcation that
”smarter” application declares too high requirements for the
networks that are currently available for ofﬂoading. As soon
as the ﬁnal list of the SSIDs that meet requirements of UP
is created, the ﬁnal decision may be derived. We deﬁne the
task of optimal NP selection that is performed by the IS as an
optimization problem that can be formulated as follows:
NP ∗ = max
NPi∈C f (NPi, UP),
i = 1, . . . , |C| ,
(1)
where the objective function f takes the set C and the UP as
initial parameters in order to calculate NP ∗ that corresponds
to the optimal load balancing solution and maximizes the
satisfaction of the end-user by provided network resources.
However, the overall solution for the introduced optimization
problem highly depends on the ﬁnal implementation of this
trafﬁc steering framework and lies beyond the scope of the
current paper.
After transmission of security credentials and the SSID
that corresponds to the proﬁle NP ∗, ofﬂoading procedures
are initiated between the MN and selected network. In this
case, the MN may simply switch connection to the designated
network or employ advanced protocol for trafﬁc ofﬂoading and
vertical handover, such as the MIH. If necessary, the IS also
provides security parameters for authorization and indication
of roaming partners, so the MN correctly identiﬁes recently
selected access network and is able to proceed with association.
Interworking
solutions
based
on
the
MIH,
like
the
IEEE 802.21, may also facilitate the task of the vertical
handover realization between LTE/LTE-A and Wi-Fi networks
as well as provide feasible opportunity for a possible function-
ality extension of the proposed framework. The MIH IS may
provide information about discovered networks and indicate
roaming partners for a MN. However, some procedures that
are usually performed on higher layers, like pre-association
and user authorization, may still require additional interac-
tion with 3GPP and IEEE 802.11 technologies. Information
exchange can be carried out by employing the ANQP from
the IEEE 802.11u amendment. It can potentially simplify
procedures of network identiﬁcation, providing comprehensive
access to information about network operators, type of the ser-
vice (public, private, paid-for, etc) and connection parameters
like cost of the trafﬁc, for example. In order to have a common
and up-to-date information about Wi-Fi hotspots and eNodeBs
that are available in the area, their operators are supposed
to negotiate a joint agreement to share this information with
each other. However, we foresee that this requirement may
be neglected in the nearest future after overall deployment of
Wi-Fi access points with support of the Hotspot 2.0 Technical
Speciﬁcation that includes the IEEE 802.11u amendment.
The IEEE 802.11u gives an opportunity to retrieve the in-
formation about network speciﬁcations through user generated
probe requests and responses. The access network information
retrieval is conducted by the ANQP, which is transported
by the Generic Advertisements Service public action frames,
User ID and
network 
parameters
Retrieve UP 
for user ID
Retrieve NP 
for SSIDs
Get next NP 
out of the 
queue
NP complies 
with UP
Put SSID to 
the set C
Yes
Is NP list 
empty?
No
No
C=Ø 
Stay in serving 
network
Yes
Solve 
optimization 
problem
No
Send NP* and 
selected SSID
Yes
Enqueue NPs 
for a check
Request to 
update UP
Fig. 4.
The state diagram of decision making procedures in the IS.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

carrying out transportation frames of higher layer advertise-
ments between Wi-Fi hotspots (or IS) and the MN. The
information repository for this type of a protocol, in terms of
this framework deﬁnition, is provided by the Decision Center.
According to the fact that location of this server lies outside the
scope of the IEEE 802.11u speciﬁcation we bind the physical
location of the IS and the Proﬁle DB to a backbone network.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In a scope of broad deployment of the 3G/4G access
technologies, this paper introduces a novel network-centric
framework for ofﬂoading decision making supported by the
mobile-assisted discovery of candidate-networks.
The fast and reliable approach is provided by allocating
the decision center in the backbone, which facilitates opti-
mization of overall network resources and implementation of
an efﬁcient load balancing scheme. At the same time the
quality of end-user experience is controlled at an appropriate
level without noticeable increase in the power consumption
on its side due to the passive network discovery. In order to
facilitate and accelerate adjustments according to the changes
in available network resources and the Quality of Experience
demands of the user, a proﬁle-based control is presented for
the user and network entities.
As another advantage, the proposed framework also ﬁts
currently available IEEE standards for the Media Independent
Handover, which facilitates its implementation and retrieval of
network parameters. Together with the proﬁle approach, this
resource management framework allows a network operator
to determine and control the Quality of Experience of the
end-user from the network-centric perspective. All the beneﬁts
listed above give potential for the presented framework to
be successfully implemented and deployed in future mobile
communication networks.
Performance evaluation of the proposed solution is the
subject of our future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially sponsored by the Danish Advanced
Technology Foundation through the research project SAIRS
and by the Seventh Framework Programme for Research
of the European Commission HARP project under grant
number 318489.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Trafﬁc Forecast
Update, 20122017,” White Paper, Cisco, Feb. 2013.
[2]
Enterprise Mobility Services and Global Wi-Fi Network — iPass.
[Online]. Available: http://www.ipass.com/
[3]
3GPP, “Generic Access Network (GAN); Stage 2,” 3rd Generation
Partnership Project (3GPP), TS 43.318 version 10.1.0 Release 10, Apr.
2011.
[4]
3GPP, “Enhanced Generic Access Networks (EGAN) study,” 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), TR 43.902 version 11.0.0
Release 11, Oct. 2012.
[5]
3GPP, “3GPP system to Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) in-
terworking; System description,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project
(3GPP), TS 23.234 version 11.0.0 Release 11, Sep. 2012.
[6]
IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks - Part 21:
Media Independent Handover Services, IEEE Std. 802.21-2008, Jan.
2009.
[7]
G. Lampropoulos, A. Salkintzis, and N. Passas, “Media-independent
handover for seamless service provision in heterogeneous networks,” in
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 46, no. 1, 2008, pp. 64–71.
[8]
“Wi-Fi Certiﬁed Passpoint Architecture for Public Access,” White
Paper, Aruba Networks, 2011.
[9]
IEEE Standard for Information technology–Telecommunications and
information exchange between systems Local and metropolitan area
networks–Speciﬁc requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations Amendment
9: Interworking with External Networks, IEEE Std. 802.11u-2011, Feb.
2011.
[10]
3GPP, “IP ﬂow mobility and seamless Wireless Local Area Network
(WLAN) ofﬂoad; Stage 2,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP),
TS 23.261 version 11.0.0 Release 11, Sep. 2012.
[11]
T. Ahmed, S. Antoine, S. Dong, and D. Barankanira, “Multi Access
Data Network Connectivity and IP Flow Mobility in Evolved Packet
System (EPS),” in Wireless Communications and Networking Confer-
ence (WCNC), 2010 IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–6.
[12]
P. Loureiro, M. Liebsch, and S. Schmid, “Policy routing architecture
for IP ﬂow mobility in 3GPP’s Evolved Packet Core,” in GLOBECOM
Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2010 IEEE, 2010, pp. 2000–2005.
[13]
M. Corici, A. Diez, D. Vingarzan, T. Magedanz, C. Pampu, and Z. Qing,
“Enhanced access network discovery and selection in 3GPP Evolved
Packet Core,” in Local Computer Networks, 2009. LCN 2009. IEEE
34th Conference on, 2009, pp. 677–682.
[14]
M. Corici, J. Fiedler, T. Magedanz, and D. Vingarzan, “Access Network
Discovery and Selection in the Future Wireless Communication,” in
Mob. Netw. Appl., vol. 16, no. 3.
Hingham, MA, USA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Jun. 2011, pp. 337–349. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11036-011-0309-3
[15]
Broadband Forum, “Interworking between Next Generation Fixed and
3GPP Wireless Networks,” Broadband Forum, TR 203, Aug. 2012.
[16]
Broadband Forum, “Broadband Policy Control Framework (BPCF),”
Broadband Forum, TR 134, Jul. 2012.
[17]
H. Kim, L. Kim, and A. Kunz, “Enhanced 3gpp system for interworking
with ﬁxed broadband access network,” Communications Magazine,
IEEE, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 88–95, 2013.
[18]
F. Hadiji, F. Zarai, and A. Kamoun, “Architecture of mobile node in
heterogeneous networks,” in Communications and Information Technol-
ogy (ICCIT), 2012 International Conference on, 2012, pp. 260–264.
[19]
J.-M.
Bonnin,
I.
Lassoued,
and
Z.
B.
Hamouda,
“Automatic
multi-interface
management
through
proﬁle
handling,”
in
Mob.
Netw.
Appl.,
vol.
14,
no.
1.
Hingham,
MA,
USA:
Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Feb. 2009, pp. 4–17. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11036-008-0117-6
[20]
S. J. Bae, M. Y. Chung, and J. So, “Handover triggering mecha-
nism based on IEEE 802.21 in heterogeneous networks with LTE
and WLAN,” in Information Networking (ICOIN), 2011 International
Conference on, 2011, pp. 399–403.
[21]
S. Fernandes and A. Karmouch, “Design and analysis of an IEEE
802.21-based
mobility
management
architecture:
a
context-aware
approach,” in Wirel. Netw., vol. 19, no. 2.
Secaucus, NJ, USA:
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., Feb. 2013, pp. 187–205. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11276-012-0459-7
[22]
A. Zakrzewska et al., “A Framework for Joint Optical-Wireless Re-
source Management in Multi-RAT, Heterogeneous Mobile Networks,”
in IEEE International Conference on Communications 2013: IEEE
ICC’13 - Workshop on Optical-Wireless Integrated Technology for
Systems and Networks 2013, June 2013, unpublished.
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-284-4
ICWMC 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

