Vertical Fast Handoff in Integrated WLAN and UMTS Networks 
 
Vahid Solouk1, Borhanuddin Mohd Ali2, and K. Daniel Wong3 
1. Department of Electrical Engineering, UUT, Urmia, IRAN 
e-mail: vsolouk@comsoc.org 
2. Department of Computer System and Communication Engineering, UPM, Serdang, MALAYSIA 
e-mail: borhan@ieee.org 
3. 3G Wireless & Technology Sdn Bhd, Petaling jaya, MALAYSIA 
e-mail: daniel_wong@ieee.org 
 
Abstract— Mobility management and on top of that, vertical 
handoffs remains as one of the most challenging obstacles in 
4G evolution.  In this paper, we present Vertical Fast Handoff 
protocol as a solution to the mobility issues in integrated 
WLAN-UMTS networks which utilizes Early Binding Update 
technique to achieve reasonable performance. It contains 
several key factors including new network modules and 
procedures. In order to evaluate the performance, an 
analytical model is presented that includes metrics describing 
handoff and packet delivery delays, and signaling overhead. 
Based on the assessments, it is shown that the proposed method 
exhibits tolerable performance in terms of delays as well as 
signaling overhead. 
Keywords-vertical handoff; early binding update; packet 
delivery; latency; signaling cost 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The coexistence of various communication systems as 
recommended for the next generation of mobile systems 
requires mobility solutions for users with seamless inter-
technology roaming capabilities; this means that a seamless 
inter-system handoff is required. Currently, the noticeable 
ambition toward the convergence of access technologies 
foreseen by many research bodies has resulted in several 
approaches for achieving seamless vertical handoffs. The 
most noticeable discussions in the literature are currently on 
whether the integration of two standards namely, Media 
Independent Handover (MIH) proposed by IEEE802.21 and 
IETF mobility working group (mipshop) will lead to 
mobility solutions for future mobile networks. Despite the 
initial wrap-ups of the mentioned standardization bodies 
independently, 
only 
a 
promise 
of 
minimized 
data 
interruption during vertical handoffs is made certain by 
either the integration of the standards or other solutions or 
other proposals in the area. 
Naturally, every inter-system roaming which leads to 
vertical handoff requires that both link and IP layer handoffs 
take place, since both network points of attachment as well 
as the device interface are subject to change. Several 
initiatives have been made to finally design and implement 
each of these communications layers. For vertical handoff in 
a heterogeneous wireless network, the integration and 
interworking of these two layers with a properly designed 
timing can directly impact on the performance parameters 
and subsequently lead to seamless handoffs. In this paper, we 
propose Vertical Fast Handoff (VFHO) as a new method 
which is applied at both IP and link layers. VFHO utilizes 
some features of Fast Handoff for Mobile IPv6 (FMIPv6) in 
a different manner and manipulate the timing in IP layer 
including 
Early 
Biding 
Update 
(EBU) 
with 
the 
Correspondent Node (CN). We then present an analytical 
model to evaluate the performance of our method. The rest 
of this paper is organized as follows: 
The next section reviews some of the efforts made in the 
field, followed by a full description of the protocol design in 
Section 3, while Section 4 describes the protocol in further 
detail. In Section 5, we present an analytical model for the 
performance metrics including handoff and packet delivery 
delay, as well as signaling overhead in form of cost 
functions. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section 6. 
II. 
HANDOFF IN HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 
Many handoff protocols promise seamless mobility, 
focusing mainly on the handoff operation latency, packet 
loss during the handoff, or similar metrics. However, the 
issue of seamless mobility becomes more fragile when inter-
system or vertical handoff is the case. 
IEEE802.21 MIH [1, 2] supports various types of layer-3 
mobility management protocols, specifically Mobile IP 
(MIP), MIPv6 and Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) [3-5]. As 
this standard focuses mainly on solving media independency 
problem, it operates closer to link layer than on the mobility 
management protocols of layer-3. Hence, integration with 
layer-3 protocols to optimize vertical handoff has been the 
interest of several proposals [2, 3, 6-11]. For instance, the 
primitives in MIH to support handoff is far from adequate, 
hence several works addressing this issue have been 
proposed (i.e. , in [6]) where a new primitive, namely MIH-
PrefixInfo including the prospective Access Router (AR) 
info was linked to L2 events, and based on modified event 
triggers, a similar mechanism to FMIPv6 for handoff has 
been proposed. Although this work originally addressed the 
issue of anticipation and ping-pong effect in FMIPv6, the 
method for AR discovery was not indicated and neither was 
information gathering from the neighborhood. Besides, the 
proposed handoff mechanism results in more deployment 
complexities in AR. 
Access Router Information Protocol (ARIP) [12] is 
another proposal based on IETF SEAMOBY working group 
project [13] defined as Candidate Access Router Discovery 
59
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

(CARD). The information on neighboring ARs (ARIP) 
needed for MN is provided at MN’s local or home AR and 
then sent to the MN. However, the protocol suggests no 
method on how to collect ARIP information from the 
neighboring ARs and how the procedure should be 
initialized. Additionally, maintaining such processes for AR 
requires 
more 
network 
resources 
and 
more 
AR 
functionalities while the rest of handoff operations still need 
to be performed by Mobile Node (MN). Moreover, the 
protocol still requires AR deployment which is a technology 
obstacle. 
Few other proposals focus on improving the IEEE802.21 
proposed Media Independent Information Services (MIIS) 
[3]. MIIS information primitives are utilized in [9, 11]; this is 
done by selecting a higher layer mechanism of mobility 
management, which is a SIP-based mechanism, to obtain 
information of neighboring networks from different access 
technologies. The method was tested with an MN with two 
neighboring subnets. These approaches suggest that the MIH 
information is obtained through several query/response 
messages to estimate the network. 
III. 
VFHO DESIGN 
VFHO conceptually differs from other handoff methods 
in the way of service disruption and packet transmission 
period; this is due to proper interaction of link and IP layers 
and hence less disruptive mobility and handoff. It includes a 
procedure to collect and process user and network traffic 
information from higher layers; this is necessary to select an 
appropriate network for the next point of attachment. 
Furthermore, VFHO resolves the issue of packet delivery 
delay which arises from reroute and retransmissions between 
the old and new points of attachments. Table 1 lists the new 
messages and service primitives introduced through the 
proposal. The message flow diagram of the proposed 
approach is depicted in Fig. 1. The network registration is 
performed once an AR is switched on and the active ARs 
send an LUR message to Home Information Register in 
Master mode (HIR-M) in intervals to preserve their status at 
HIR-M. If no LUR is received, HIR-M inquires the 
respective AR using LUQ message and unless it receives a 
reply from the AR, the status changes to inactive. If the AR 
does not reply to two consecutive LUQs, the record is 
deleted from the database. In the following, the process is 
described through some operational phases which are 
identified in Figure 1.We assume a mobile user maintaining 
an ongoing connection with UMTS network approaches an 
indoor destination with WLAN coverage and switches on the 
WLAN interface. The base station ID received through 
beacon is reported to the Handover Decision Engine (HDE) 
and to HIR-S for information of the discovered AR. After the 
target network selection, the HIR-S informs HDE using 
LAR. As the new network is detected, a Link-Going-Up 
(LGU) event is sent to HDE to start Fast Binding Update 
(FBU). 
A. Early Binding Update with CN 
Majority of handoff studies, specifically of fast handoff 
suggest that the Binding Update (BU) procedure be started 
after the packet delivery from new AR (nAR) to MN. To 
reduce packet delay, BU should be initiated at the start of 
packet forwarding. The BU message is formed in nAR using 
the nCoA and forwarded to the CN’s IP. The proposed early 
BU can be performed in two cases, both prior to link switch. 
For the first case, the BU message is appended to FBU and 
sent to previous AR (pAR) which in turn, processes and 
extracts the BU and sends it to CN. Since the BU in this 
case is sent through the old network, it is recognized in CN 
as the Remote BU (RBU). In the second case, it is assumed 
that the pAR has no signaling message ready to perform BU 
hence, as soon as a bi-directional tunnel between the two 
ARs is established, the BU message is forwarded to nAR 
and thereby, to CN as a Local BU (LBU). 
B. Link Activation and IP Layer Handoff 
Now, HDE can initiate the nCoA activation on WLAN 
interface and the MIP layer sends a message to nAR to 
inform that the MN is ready to receive packets. As the main 
part of IP layer handoff, nCoA has already been configured 
and validated therefore, the immediate action after the link 
state changes is to inform the nAR. The event indicated in 
this process is LU which also triggers HDE to assist issuing 
the message to nAR. HDE informs the MIP layer using an 
information message on link switch status which is called 
Link Change Report (LCR). The packet delivery phase 
starts immediately after IP layer handoff completion. 
However, packet forwarding through the old network 
continues until the CN confirms the BU by sending Binding 
Acknowledgement (BA). At this time, the HDE commands 
the release of old link to UMTS interface using Link 
Release Command (LRC) and the process is completed. 
While most of handoff methods consider the start of packet 
Figure 1. Message Flow Diagram of VFHO 
60
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

delivery from the buffer as completion point of handoff 
process, this proposed model strives to satisfy QoS 
requirements for various traffic classes by decreasing the 
packet delay due to handoff. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
The analytical model to assess the proposed handoff 
protocol is illustrated in Fig. 2. This model was inspired from 
[14] and leads to obtain a general cost function to describe 
the metrics. 
A. Handoff Latency 
Handoff delay is comprised of several elements including 
Link and IP layers handoff latencies, and packet delivery 
delay. It can be concluded that the period of packet buffering 
and binding update is equal to the time taken to perform link 
and IP handoffs, and the packet forwarding period. However, 
unlike the other handoff protocols, the time taking processes 
are incorporated in VFHO. It can be inferred that the 
expected handoff latency of VFHO depends highly on 
transmission periods between MN and nAR as well as 
process delays in the MN as these processes are scheduled to 
start early and by special events as described in protocol 
description. Hence, TLH is only a portion of the actual link 
layer handoff time, TIH excludes nCoA configuration as 
another long process, and TBU is a short time as it has started 
prior to link layer handoff. The total handoff latency 
therefore, is: 
 
                          
      (1) 
 
where,                    . For identical 
distances, wireless components, TMN-nAR and TMN-pAR 
can be expressed as TMN-AR. The handoff delay can be 
written as: 
 
                      
 
      (2) 
 
One of the major delay contributors in IP-based handoffs 
is the procedure of Duplicate Address Detection (DAD) or 
TDAD which is performed within binding update procedure. 
The duration of this procedure is topology dependent and is 
reported in many IP-based network infrastructures to take 
between 0.5 and 1 s. As the BU procedure starts some time 
prior to link switch, DAD is given some time to complete 
before the IP layer handoff. Hence, the overall handoff 
latency is independent of TDAD. For the sake of 
calculations, we assume TDAD = 600ms in Equation 2. 
The handoff delay for various wireless link delays and 
MN speeds are shown in Fig. 3-a. The wireless link delay 
was varied from 10 to 500ms with different steps. Although 
10m/s is a high speed for an MN to move, the handoff 
latency could be maintained as low as 600ms when the 
wireless link delay reaches 75ms.  However, for lower 
speeds (i.e. up to fast walking speed of 5m/s), the handoff 
delay is around 300ms and reaches 400ms when wireless 
link shows a delay of around 130ms. 
B. Packet Delivery 
We analyze packet delivery from two main aspects, the 
cost of delivering data packets and the cost of signaling. We 
propose an analytical model similar to what was introduced 
in [15] to determine the packet delivery cost from data 
transmission aspect which is used to obtain the end-to-end 
latency during the total handoff process. The packet delivery 
cost consists of two main elements namely, transmission 
and process costs. We assume α and β as normalized 
weighting factors that influence the two cost elements of 
packet transmission and processing. Hence, the packet 
Table 1. New Message and Primitive Structure for VFHO 
Message/Primitive 
Name 
Service Type 
Parameters 
Link Available (LA) 
Event 
MN WLAN MAC, Link 
Type, nAR MAC, Activity 
Flag 
Local 
Area 
Query 
(LAQ) 
Command 
pAR ID, nAR ID, Usability 
Code 
Local 
Area 
Report 
(LAR) 
Information 
MN MAC, nAR MAC, BSS 
ID, Status, Priority Code 
Remote 
AR 
Query 
(RAQ) 
Command 
pAR ID, nAR ID, nAR 
Prefix 
Remote 
AR 
Report 
(RAR) 
Information 
nAR 
Prefix, 
AR 
Type, 
Priority Code, Neighbors 
(Prefix, AR Type, Priority 
Code) 
Local 
Registration 
Request (LRR) 
Information 
BSS ID, AR Prefix, Link 
Type, Available BW, Cost 
of Service, Offering Service 
Codes, Reg. Flag 
Local Update Request 
(LUR) 
Information 
BSS ID, AR Prefix, Link 
Type, Available BW, Cost 
of Service, Offering Service 
Codes, Upd. Flag 
Local 
Update 
Query 
(LUQ) 
Command 
Link 
ID, 
AR 
(SGSN) 
Prefix, AR (WLAN) Prefix, 
Lifetime 
Link Release Command 
(LRC) 
Command 
Old Link ID, MN UMTS 
MAC, pAR MAC, Reason 
Code 
Link Activate Command 
(LAC) 
Command 
New Link ID, MN MAC, 
nAR MAC, Priority Code 
Link 
Change 
Report 
(LCR) 
Information 
nAR MAC, MN WLAN 
MAC, Result Code 
Figure 2. Timing Diagram for Transmissions and Processes of VFHO 
TBU 
TIH 
TLH 
TRB
U 
Bea
con 
Rec
AR 
Report 
nCoA 
Configurati
on 
RBU 
Extraction 
Handoff Decision 
Time (THD) 
FBAck 
Packet 
Forwarding 
BU 
Complete 
Packets 
Direct from 
CN 
TPD 
Link 
Activation 
TFBU 
Packet Buffering 
Time (TBF) 
PD 
Request 
TNS 
TPF 
61
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

delivery cost and the ratio of average size for data and 
signaling packets can be obtained as: 
 
   
          
 
      (3) 
  
  
      
 
 
      (4) 
 
where           denote the data and signaling packet 
sizes, respectively. The transmission cost of data packets is 
a portion of total transmission cost by the coefficient   and 
can be written as: 
 
  
      
 
                    (5) 
      (       ) 
 
                    (6) 
  
      (       ) 
 
                    (7) 
 
where,    is packet arrival rate (number of packets per 
time unit) and   is the ratio of data packets to the overall 
data. 
Fig. 3-b illustrates packet delivery delay versus data 
packet size when packet arrival rate changes. When the data 
packets form the maximum of 50% of the total packets, it 
can be seen that the packet delivery cost shows small 
variations with a maximum of 38 at the rate of 25 packets 
per second. As data packets increase to above 70%, the cost 
becomes more sensitive to the arrival rate showing 
variations of about 35 to 50. Although this shows that the 
packet delivery is highly dependent on the size and arrival 
rate of the data packets, even the highest delivery cost 
hardly causes packet disruption as it is still comparable to 
the overall signaling cost of around 300 (discussed in next 
section). 
C. Signaling Cost 
Signaling cost is defined as the total cost of signaling 
traffic overhead which in turn, is the total number of control 
messages exchanged between MN and network components 
(AR or CN). To determine total signaling cost, the main cost 
equation is extended to signaling costs for the four stages of 
Handoff Decision, Link Layer Handoff, IP Layer Handoff, 
and Packet Delivery, and can be expressed as: 
 
     ∑   
 
                 
      (8) 
 
 
Table 2. Parameters for Analytical Model 
α 
Β 
Dr 
Dl 
λS 
w 
0.1 
0.2 
6 
4 
1 
2 
 
We use random-walk mobility model which is generally 
confined to a limited geographical area and speeds [16]. For 
random movements over a certain period, the probabilities 
of the user leaving and staying in a local area are p and q = 
1-p, respectively. The user position is defined as state k 
Markov chain. The two transition probabilities αk,k+1 and 
βk,k-1 are defined as probabilities that the user approaches or 
retreats with one random step unit in a hexagonal macro-cell 
with k surrounding hexagonal micro-cells [17]. 
 
       {
(   )    
(   ) (
 
  
 
  )        
 
      (9) 
       (   ) (
 
  
 
  )                    
    (10) 
 
Using Equations 8 and 9, the steady-state probability of 
state k within the local area with K local areas, pk,K, can be 
obtained in terms of the steady-state probability, p0,K with 
the conditions ∑
    
 
   
   canbe written as: 
 
     
 
  ∑
∏
      
      
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
    (11) 
 
The impact of wireless link on overall signaling cost is 
described based Session-to-Mobility Ratio (SMR) [17], 
which is defined as the ratio of session arrival rate (λS) to 
session crossing rate (RS) in a random-walk mobility model 
[18]. 
The probability that the user moves through a random-
walk mobility model from a local area (l) to a routing area 
(r), PT(r,l) can be expressed by: 
  (   )  ∑
  ( )   ( | )       
 
   
 
 
    (12) 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3. a) VFHO Latency vs. Wireless Delay, b) Packet Delivery vs. 
Arrival Rate 
62
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

where   ( ) is the probability of an incoming session 
during the time that the user stays in state k for a given 
number of states K and  ( | ) is the probability that a 
session initiated in state k, continues in state K. These 
probabilities can be obtained from: 
  ( )  
 ̅( )     
∑
 ̅( )     
 
   
 
 
 
 
    (13) 
where,  ̅( ) is the mean time the user stays in state, k. 
finally, the cost of each operation can be expressed as 
follows. 
 
      [  (   ) (     )    (    (   ))] 
    (14) 
      [  (   ) (     )] 
 
 
    (15) 
      [     (   )] 
 
 
 
    (16) 
      [     (   )] 
 
 
 
    (17) 
 
Where,         denote two units of signaling cost 
through wireless link in routing and local areas, 
respectively, and    is session arrival rate in packets per 
time unit. We assume typical parameter values that were 
reported in various studies with similar analytical models 
[17, 19] as listed in Table 3. The signaling cost in wireless 
link is defined as the product of the distance between the 
two nodes and transmission cost in wireless link (w).  
Fig. 4 illustrates the resulting total signaling cost under 
various circumstances. The total signaling cost is shown 
based on the number of local areas within a routing area as 
in Fig. 4-a, and based on the number of MNs in the routing 
area in Fig. 4-b. As shown through the figures, the 
probability of MN leaving the local area is an important 
factor in the total cost, and greater values cause increase in 
the handoff decision element of the total cost. Additionally, 
increasing both number of WLAN ARs and MNs also 
causes higher signaling costs. 
Fig. 4-c shows the variation of total signaling cost versus 
SMR through a random-walk mobility model within a 
routing area. The total cost was determined for SMR values 
of 0.1, 1, 10, and 100. For the minimum value of SMR, 0.1, 
the total signaling cost shows very high value. However, as 
the SMR increases to larger than 1 which implies session 
arrival rate is higher than mobility rate, the signaling cost 
decreases but the impact of k factor in the total signaling 
becomes more chromatic. This is because the packet delivery 
cost is the dominant factor when the session arrival rate is 
higher than the mobility ratio. 
When the value of cell crossing rate is fixed, the increase 
of SMR should result in the increase of session arrival rate 
and thereby, the total cost. This is because the link switch 
cost is more dominant than packet delivery cost over the total 
cost. However, the size of routing area as depicted in Fig. 4-d 
is almost as significant as cell crossing rate in the resulting 
Figure 4. Total Signaling Cost Variations vs. a) Number of LAs, b) MN Density, c) SMR, and d) RA Size 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
63
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

total cost. For instance, the radius of 25km can cause a total 
signaling cost of as low as radius of 1km when SMR is 
decreased by 50 times. As a result, higher SMR values incur 
higher packet delivery cost, while we can still control link 
layer switching by adjusting the size of routing area.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposes a seamless vertical handoff protocol 
in heterogeneous wireless network of WLAN and UMTS 
technologies. The proposed handoff protocol, VFHO, is a 
combination of link and IP layers operations, which handles 
media heterogeneity in between these two layers as well as 
information of application layer. The introduced approach 
utilizes some techniques such as EBU to guarantee the 
continuation of packets in heterogeneous networks which has 
been barely the concern of the existing literature. Hence, 
through the distinct definition of handoff latency proposed 
here, as well as costs of signaling, the proposed method 
performs more affordable than the existing methods upon 
being built up under identical circumstances. VFHO was 
analyzed mathematically to examine packet delivery delay 
and signaling overhead in terms of cost functions. The 
proposed framework and vertical handoff method show 
robust performance in terms of tolerable signaling overhead 
as well as handoff and packet delays. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
"IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks- Part 
21: Media Independent Handover," IEEE Std 802.21-2008, pp. 
c1-301, 2009. 
[2] 
G. Lampropoulos, et al., "Media-Independent Handover for 
Seamless Service Provision in Heterogeneous Networks," IEEE 
Communication Magazine, vol. 46, pp. 64-71, 2008. 
[3] 
V. Gupta, "IEEE802.21 Standard and Metropolitan Area 
Network: Media Independent Handover Services," IEEE, vol. 
Draft, March 2006. 
[4] 
R. S. Koodli and C. E. Perkins, Mobile Inter-Networking with 
IPv6: Concepts, Principals, and Practices. New Jersey: John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2007. 
[5] 
K. D. Wong, Wireless Internet Telecommunications. Norwood: 
Artech House Mobile Communications Series, 2005. 
[6] 
Y. Y. An, et al., "Reduction of Handover Latency Using MIH 
Services in MIPv6," in 20th International Conference on 
Advanced Information Networking and Applications, 2006, pp. 
229 - 234. 
[7] 
L. Dimopoulou, et al., "Analysis and evaluation of layer 2 
assisted fast mobile IPv6 handovers in a WLAN environment," 
in Computers and Communications, 2005. ISCC 2005. 
Proceedings. 10th IEEE Symposium on, 2005, pp. 327-332. 
[8] 
W. Tong, et al., "Cost-Aware Handover Decision Algorithm for 
Cooperative Cellular Relaying Networks," in 
Vehicular 
Technology Conference, 2008. VTC Spring 2008. IEEE, 2008, 
pp. 2446-2450. 
[9] 
A. Dutta, et al., "Seamless Handover across Heterogeneous 
Networks - An IEEE802.21 Centric Approach," Patent 
(WO/2006/ 
125085), 
Available: 
http://www.wipo.int/pctdb/en/wo.jsp?WO=2006125085, 
Last 
visited: Sept. 2010. 
[10] 
M. Kassar, et al., "An overview of vertical handover decision 
strategies in heterogeneous wireless networks," Computer 
Communications, vol. 31, pp. 2607-2620, 2008. 
[11] 
Q. B. Mussabbir, et al., "Optimized FMIPv6 Using IEEE 802.21 
MIH Services in Vehicular Networks," Vehicular Technology, 
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 56, pp. 3397-3407, 2007. 
[12] 
D.-H. Kwon, et al., "Access router information protocol with 
FMIPv6 for efficient handovers and their implementations," in 
IEEE 
Global 
Telecommunications 
Conference, 
2005. 
GLOBECOM '05, 2005, p. 6 pp. 3819-3825. 
[13] 
M. Liebsch, et al. (2005). Candidate Access Router Discovery 
(CARD). 
Available: 
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4066.txt?number=4066, Last visited: 
Dec. 2010. 
[14] 
E. Stevens-Navarro and V. W. S. Wong, "Comparison between 
Vertical Handoff Decision Algorithms for Heterogeneous 
Wireless Networks," in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2006. 
VTC 2006-Spring. IEEE 63rd, 2006, pp. 947-951. 
[15] 
G. Chuanxiong, et al., "A seamless and proactive end-to-end 
mobility solution for roaming across heterogeneous wireless 
networks," Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, 
vol. 22, pp. 834-848, 2004. 
[16] 
G. Bolch, et al., Queueing Networks and Markov Chains, 
Modeling and Performance Evaluation with Computer Science 
Applications, 2 ed. New Jersey: Wiely & Sons, Inc., 2006. 
[17] 
D. H. Kim, et al., "Dynamic location management scheme for 
location registers in wireless ATM networks," Electronics 
Letters, vol. 36, pp. 1650-1651, 2000. 
[18] 
J. S. M. Ho and I. F. Akyildiz, "Mobile user location update and 
paging under delay constraints," Wirel. Netw., vol. 1, pp. 413-
425, 1995. 
[19] 
X. Zhang, et al., "P-MIP: Paging Extensions for Mobile IP," 
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 7, pp. 127-141, 2002. 
 
 
64
ICWMC 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-140-3

