A Greedy-based Network Planning Algorithm for Heterogeneous
Smart Grid Infrastructures
Christian M¨uller
TU Dortmund University
Communication Networks Institute (CNI)
44221 Dortmund, Germany
Email: christian5.mueller@tu-dortmund.de
Christian Wietfeld
TU Dortmund University
Communication Networks Institute (CNI)
44221 Dortmund, Germany
Email: christian.wietfeld@tu-dortmund.de
Abstract—Focus of this paper is the evaluation and opti-
mization of automatic network planning algorithms considering
different communication technologies supporting Smart Grid
communication infrastructures. Therefore, a performance eval-
uation and sensitivity analysis of parameters of greedy-based
algorithms solving the covering-location problem are imple-
mented and analyzed in a discrete-event simulation environ-
ment. Based upon the presented results, an optimization based
on the greedy algorithm is introduced considering Smart Grid
technology and topology speciﬁc parameters. An evaluation
for several real-world reference scenarios shows the inﬂuence
of multi-layered and heterogeneous network topologies, which
are typically used in Smart Gird ICT networks, including
wired, wireless and Powerline Communication technologies.
Depending on the technology, an optimization of the deploy-
ment level and number of network entities can be achieved and
is presented by a reduction up to 30% for single-technology
topologies and up to 10% for heterogeneous topologies.
Keywords-network planning algorithm; covering location prob-
lem; heterogeneous infrastructures; smart grid.
I. INTRODUCTION
Current Smart Grid approaches comprise an actively in-
tegration of distributed energy sources and loads into the
energy grid in order to enable a more balanced usage
of volatile energy sources and movable load systems. In
this context, several smart energy management approaches
are present like locally managed and self-sustaining Micro
Grids [1] and centralized load coordination like Demand
Side Management (DSM), Distributed Energy Resources
(DER) for example based on dynamic energy prices. At
this point, seamless integration of DER and DSM at the
customers households are some of the key capabilities of
future Smart Grid infrastructures. For this purpose, the
underlying communication infrastructure requires a reliable,
sufﬁcient dimensioned and demand-oriented network design
in order to transport metering data, control information and
to provide added-value services with the required Quality-
of-Service (QoS). But the challenging task in designing
a network infrastructure for these application is caused
by the heterogeneity of access technologies (e.g., GPRS,
PLC, DSL), combining shared and dedicated infrastructures,
integrating existing networks, deploying new networks and
providing Home Area Networks (HAN), Neighborhood Area
Networks (NAN) and Wide Area Networks (WAN) for
different application scenarios [2]. The variety in applicable
technologies leads to a heterogeneous infrastructure, which
requires detailed and adjustable network planning algorithms
considering the different architectural structures for different
technologies.
The work in this paper concentrates on the design and
evaluation of heterogeneous network infrastructure planning
algorithms. Therefore several network planning methologies
are discussed in terms of cell size, cell capacity, multi-
layered and heterogeneous topologies. A Greedy-based al-
gorithm is evaluated by simulation and enhanced for typical
Smart Grid infrastructures.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II introduces
related work in terms of ongoing Smart Grid projects and
network planning algorithms. The implemented algorithms
and the simulation environment are presented in Section III.
The performance evaluation of a typical Smart Grid scenario
is addressed in Section IV. Finally, the paper is ﬁnished with
conclusion and an outlook on future work.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND RELATED WORK
An overview on heterogeneous network topologies sup-
porting the Smart Gird by using different technologies for
multiple application scenarios is given in the following Sec-
tion II-A. An approach describing the optimization problem
is given in Section II-B, whereas a state-of-the-art review of
network planning algorithms is provided in Section II-C.
A. Smart Grid Topologies
Network infrastructures for Smart Grids applications com-
prise different aggregation levels in HAN, NAN and WAN
infrastructures in order to support different ICT and Energy
components [3]. Figure 1 shows a multi-layered network
topology for integrating large-scale components, like wind
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 1.
Multi-Layered Network Topologies for Smart Grid Application Scenarios
and solar farms, as well as particular smart energy house-
holds and micro grids. In order to provide connectivity
to the customers premises equipment, several options has
been introduced [4], which mainly base on two scenarios:
a dedicated network infrastructure and a shared network
infrastructure. By using a shared network infrastructure, re-
strictions in terms of Quality-of-Service have to be accepted
due to non-exclusive usage of the medium. On the other
hand, this solution offers an economic alternative by using
existing infrastructures.
Wired preexisting technologies (e.g., DSL, FTTx, GPON)
[5] in the Smart Grid context are used for integrating the
prosumers (producer and cosumer) households and sub-,
resp. transformer stations into the infrastructure. Since in-
stallation costs are higher compared to wireless technologies,
the integration of existing infrastructures is widely preferred.
Using the powerline as transmission medium for data
has been discussed decades-long and has been established
successfully for the transport grid. Concerning the present
efforts on integrating new actors like the prosumers, into the
Smart Grid, especially Broadband PLC technologies (IEEE
P1901, HomePlug 1.0/1.0 Turbo/AV/AV+, DS2, Panasonic
HD) become more relevant. Due to new capabilities like
larger bandwidth, higher modulation schemes and notching
ﬁlter, the BPLC technologies offers an economic solution
for the communication infrastructure on several levels of the
Smart Grid. Furthermore, narrowband PLC technologies are
discussed as a last-mile solution due to moderate installation
costs and exclusive usage.
Wireless Technologies, like GSM, UMTS as well as LTE
and Mobile WiMAX offer a cost-efﬁcient solution for new
communication infrastructures due to the saved installation
costs for cables. On the other side, wireless technologies are
based on a substantiated network design covering resource
and frequency allocation. Several Smart Metering projects
are based upon wireless low data rate approaches, but for a
comprehensive installation of Smart Meters and for offering
enhanced services like DSM enhancements, the usage of
next generation cellular networks for machine-to-machine
(M2M) services is currently evaluated. Especially the usage
of lower frequency ranges (e.g., digital dividend after digital
television transition) for dedicated services (Smart Metering,
DSM, Substation Automation) offers a promising solution
for covering rural areas, whereas the development of future
network deployments needs to be taken into account.
B. Covering-Location-Problem
Deploying
and
optimizing
the
previously
described
networking technologies is related to the Set-Covering-
Location-Problem (SCLP), which is one of the most studied
NP-hard problems [6]. The goal is to cover a given set of
demand nodes J = {0, ..., m}, e.g., Smart Energy Houses,
with the minimum number of required infrastructure nodes,
e.g., base stations, which are taken from a set of possible
infrastructure node positions I = {0, ..., n}. A mathematical
description of the optimization problem is given by
min
X
i∈I
yi
(1)
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

under the condition that
X
i∈I
rijyi ≥ 1
for
j ∈ J
(2)
with
yi, rij ∈ {0, 1}
for
i ∈ I, j ∈ J
(3)
whereas yi is representing the deployed infrastructure node
positions and rij is indicating the according covered demand
nodes in range.
The Maximum-Covering-Location-Problem (MCLP) is a
modiﬁcation of the SCLP, where the goal is to cover a
maximum number of demand nodes with a limited number
of infrastructure nodes. In order to priorize the demand
nodes an additional parameter bj for j ∈ J is introduced
and the relation for the optimization problem is given by
max
X
j∈J
bj · xj
(4)
under the condition that
X
i∈I
rij · yi ≥ xj
for
j ∈ J
(5)
and
X
i∈I
yi = p
(6)
and
xj, yi ∈ {0, 1}
for
i ∈ I, j ∈ J
(7)
Several approaches for solving the optimization problem are
discussed in literature and summarized in the next section.
C. Network Planning Algorithms
In general, the following networking algorithms are dis-
cussed in the literature [7]: Exact Algorithms, Genetic Algo-
rithms and Heuristic Algorithms.
In order to obtain an optimal solution for the problem, ex-
act algorithms search all potential solutions in the parameter
space, which is a time-consuming procedure, in the context
of Smart Grid infrastructures, where thousands of nodes
are taken into account [8]. Another approach are genetic
algorithms based on Darwin theory of natural selection and
its class of evolutionary algorithm. The idea behind this
algorithm is to start with an initial population and then
individuals from the initial population are selected in order
to generate new individual solutions [9][10]. Heuristics al-
gorithms are approximated algorithms and provide relatively
optimal solutions in a reasonable computation time. This
is a compromise between solution quality and execution
time, which offers a sufﬁcient solution for network planning.
There are several approximated algorithms used to solve
network planning problems, like Tabu Search [11], Simu-
lated Annealing [12] and Greedy Algorithm [7], which are
iterative algorithms calculating stepwise the local optimum.
III. SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT
In order to compare the different optimization approaches
and network planning methods, a geo-based simulation envi-
ronment [13] is used for the conducted performance analysis.
Due to the geo-based positions of the communication nodes,
close to real world scenarios were investigated in order
to analyze the impact of the algorithms on the real-world
scenarios.
Figure 2.
Simulation Scenario with Multi-Layered Infrastructure and
Adaptive Cell Size
A. Geo based Scenario Generator
The presented simulation model is based on the discrete
event simulator OMNeT++ [14]. The developed geo-position
scenario generator acquires the coordinates from different
ofﬂine sources. This includes own acquired data and govern-
mental/commercial data products, as well as online sources,
like the Google Maps API (Premier) or OpenStreetMap. Due
to the limitations in requesting data from the online sources,
the online procedure is reasonable for smaller scenarios,
but in case of a large-scale scenario, the acquisition of the
geo-positions can be performed by ofﬂine sources. In order
Broadband NAN Technology
Wired
Wireless
PLC
max. Demand Nodes per Cell
96
200
48
min. Demand Nodes per Cell
18
6
6
max. Distance/Range
500 m
200 m
100 m
Infrastructure Node Positions
Streets
Houses
Streets
Coverage Area Calculation
Distance
Channel Model
Distance
Table I
PARAMETERS FOR DIFFERENT APPLICATION SCENARIOS
to generate a large-scale network with thousands of nodes,
a dynamic network creation is necessary. This avoids a
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 3.
Network Planning based upon Greedy Algorithms and Enhanced Greedy Algorithms
manual, time-consuming static generation and conﬁguration
of each node. In our approach, we use geographic positions
of real locations, e.g., houses, as input parameters for the
automatic network generation. This ensures a close to real-
ity network topology. An exemplary geo-based simulation
scenario is presented in Figure 2.
Initialization, generation and conﬁguration of the net-
work are executed by a core simulation [13]. A set of
preconﬁgured geographic positions (north-west and south-
east corner coordinates) mark the simulation playground.
The core simulation can receive the positions of nodes,
which are located within the playground, from an ofﬂine
source and online from an external SQL database, e.g.,
the geo-position database GeoDatabase. Via a connection
between the core simulation and the GeoDatabase [13], all
information about existing nodes within the playground and
neighbors of particular nodes can be retrieved, including the
information listed in Table III-A. The dynamic node creation
is based on the received geographic positions. Nodes are
placed on the Cartesian positions (x,y), which are calculated
using Mercator projection of GPS position data of real
locations.
B. Network Planning Algorithms
The network planning algorithm is based upon a Greedy-
Adding Algorithm [15] with several adjustments in terms
of cell size, link budget and multi-layered infrastructures in
order to meet the requirements on a communication infras-
tructure for a Smart Grid. The parameters of implemented
different broadband NAN technologies are summarized in
Table III-A.
1) Greedy Adding Algorithmic: The Greedy Adding Al-
gorithm offers a powerful approach for solving the CLP, but
in some cases a non optimal result is calculated. Especially
in areas of high density with a linear placement of communi-
cation nodes, which is usually the case for streets or smaller
villages, an optimization of the Greedy-Adding algorithm
can reduce the overall number of communication cells.
Figure 3 shows the comparison of the common and enhanced
Greedy Algorithm. The common Greedy Algorithm selects
the next best candidate position for an infrastructure node by
selecting the position, which covers the maximum number
of uncovered demand nodes. This procedure comes along
with two disadvantages: On the one hand, two or more
equal positions can not be distinguished due to the next
best position is chosen from the list. On the other hand,
one position with less uncovered demand nodes could have
a better coverage due to already covered demand nodes
within the area, which are not taken into consideration.
The enhanced algorithm adds in a ﬁrst step an additional
condition to the next best candidate selection by choosing
the best position with additionally covering already covered
demand nodes. In a second step all candidate positions are
checked for multiple covered demand nodes and removed if
more than one candidate position is available. Finally, the
increased overlapping areas of neighbored cells caused by
the additional condition are reduced by optimizing the cell
radius and threshold adjustment (see Section III-B2).
2) Adaptive Cell Radius: Usually, the initial connectivity
range of a candidate point is adjusted by a simple distance
calculation. In reality, more parameters are inﬂuencing the
connectivity range, e.g., transmission power, outdoor-to-
indoor transition, fast fading, incident angle, as well as
maximum capacity. In order to meet the requirements for a
sufﬁcient simulation of the transmission range per cell, the
cell radius is adjusted dynamically by increasing the trans-
mission power from a minimum threshold to a maximum
threshold until the maximum transmission power or number
of trafﬁc nodes is reached.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

3) Link Budget: The calculation of the link budget is
accomplished by using appropriate analytic channel mod-
els, which take into account the distance, incident angle,
house type and orientation. In the presented simulations,
analytic radio propagation models are used for different
topologies described in Section II-A, which enables a large-
scale analysis of the topologies and offers extensibility in
terms of technologies. For urban areas, the transmission
range is calculated by the Okumura-Hata channel model
[16][17][18] covering a high density of stationary commu-
nication nodes, prevailing Non-Line-Of-Sight connections
and smaller communication ranges. In suburban and rural
areas, a predominant number of communication nodes are
placed in a (Near)Line-of-Sight conditions and usually the
communication ranges are increased.
4) Multi-layered Network Topologies:
By introducing
multi-layered network topologies, e.g., aggregation of Smart
Metering data by NAN technologies, an overlapping WAN-
technology is required for collecting data from the aggre-
gation points. Additionally, nodes, which are not covered
due to their secluded position, can also be covered by the
overlapping WAN technology and additionally, an economic
threshold of minimum numbers of demand nodes per cell
can be deﬁned for the network planning process (e.g. min.
6 nodes). The network planning process for the next higher
layer uses the same metric as described in Section III-B2
with according parameters for the WAN technology.
IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
The results from the simulation are presented in this
section. In Figure 4, the coverage of demand nodes is shown
Figure 4.
Coverage of Demand Nodes Depending on the Number of
Infrastructure Nodes
depending on the number of infrastructure nodes for a single
layered topology. Due to the lower capacity of the PLC cells,
up to 150 infrastructure nodes are required in order to cover
the whole area, whereas the wireless NAN network requires
72 infrastructure nodes and the wired NAN network requires
40 infrastructure nodes. The inﬂuence of the transmission
range and capacity is shown by the comparison of the
wireless and wired NAN technology. Hence, the wireless
NAN technology covers more demand nodes during the ﬁrst
planning steps due to the higher capacity, whereas the wired
technology shows overall lower number of infrastructure
nodes due to the higher transmission range.
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Wireless NAN
Technology
Wireless NAN
Technology
(min. 6 Nodes)
Wired NAN
Technology
Wired NAN
Technology
(min. 6 Nodes)
PLC NAN
Technology
PLC NAN
Technology
(min. 6 Nodes)
Mixed NAN
Technologies
Mixed NAN
Technologies
(min. 6 Nodes)
Number of covered Demand Nodes 
Covered Demand Nodes - WAN Technology (L2)
Covered Demand Nodes - NAN Technology (L1)
Figure 5.
Comparison of NAN Technologies for Multi-Layered Topology
Planning
In order to analyze the inﬂuence of multiple technologies
in one scenario, an additionally heterogeneous network
scenario has been analyzed. The results show, that the
heterogeneous NAN network shows the same behavior up
to a level of deployment of 50% of the wired network, up
to a level of deployment of 90% of the wireless network and
above 90% of the PLC network. Due to the heterogeneous
approach, the number of infrastructure nodes is reduced to
120 together with enhancing the coverage throughout the
planning process.
The problem by providing full coverage are secluded
nodes (e.g., rural areas). Therefore, a multi-layered infras-
tructure is introduced by dividing the network into two
layers, whereas L1 represents the NAN connectivity and L2
presents the WAN connectivity. The results for a comparison
between a single-layered and multi-layered scenarios are
shown in Figure 5.
In the multi-layered scenarios, a threshold is deﬁned,
which sets the minimum number of demand nodes per NAN
cell. All uncovered demand nodes from the L1 are covered
in a second planning step (L2) with all L1 infrastructure
nodes. The multi-layered planning algorithm shows a better
result by reducing the number of infrastructure nodes of up
to 30% in the PLC scenario and up to 10% in the mixed
scenario.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The results presented in this paper show the inﬂuence of
different parameters and enhancements on greedy based net-
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

work planning algorithms in order to evaluate the usability
for Smart Grid ICT topologies. Based upon a real-world
scenario, which has been evaluated by a geo-based simula-
tion environment, the inﬂuence of multi-layered topologies
where analyzed. Hence, a reduction of infrastructure nodes
in the presented heterogeneous scenario of up to 10% could
be achieved. The inﬂuence of a more detailled model of the
actual transmission medium by analytic channel models, link
budget calculation and adaptive cell size were analyzed as
well.
Future work will focus on the integration of more detailed
trafﬁc analysis of the particular network entities in order
to optimize the maximum cell size an capacity. Further-
more the performance evaluation of the designed networks
within a protocol simulation environment and comparison
to established telecommunication networks will give some
indications of further optimization approaches in terms of
adjusting the multi-layer thresholds and scalability issues.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work in this paper was partly funded by the
German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology
(BMWi) through the projects E-DeMa (reference number
01ME08019A) [19]. The authors would like to thank the
project partners RWE, Miele, Siemens, ProSyst, SWK and
ef.Ruhr. The authors wish to acknowledge the efforts of Mr.
Henning B¨ottcher during the project.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Mashhour and S. M. Moghaddas-Tafreshi, “A Review on
Operation of Micro Grids and Virtual Power Plants in the
Power Markets,” in 2nd International Conference on Adaptive
Science & Technology (ICAST).
IEEE, 2009, pp. 273–277.
[2] IEEE P2030/D2.1 Draft, Draft Guide for Smart Grid Interop-
erability of Energy Technology and Information Technology
Operation with the Electric Power System (EPS), and End-
Use Applications and Loads.
New York, USA: IEEE, May
2010.
[3] C. Wietfeld, H. Georg, S. Gr¨oning, C. Lewandowski,
C. M¨uller, and J. Schmutzler, “Wireless M2M Communi-
cation Networks for Smart Grid Applications,” in European
Wireless 2011 (EW), Vienna, Austria, April 2011.
[4] C. Wietfeld, C. M¨uller, J. Schmutzler, S. Fries, A. Heiden-
reich, and H.-J. Hof, “ICT Reference Architecture Design
based on Requirements for Future Energy Marketplaces,” in
1st IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communi-
cations (SmartGridComm).
Gaithersburg, Maryland, USA:
IEEE, October 2010, pp. 315–320.
[5] C. H. Hauser, D. Bakken, and A. Bose, “A Failure to Com-
municate: Next Generation Communication Requirements,
Technologies, and Architecture for the Electric Power Grid,”
IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, vol. 3, pp. 47–55, March
2005.
[6] K. Tutschku, Models and Algorithms for Demand-oriented
Planning of Telecommunication Systems.
University of
W¨urzburg, July 1999.
[7] R. M. Whitaker and S. Hurley, “Evolution of Planning for
Wireless Communication Systems,” in 36th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS).
Big
Island, Hawaii, USA: IEEE, January 2003, pp. 10–19.
[8] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein,
Introduction to Algorithms, 4th ed.
The MIT Press, 2001,
vol. 1.
[9] Y. Wu and S. Pierre, “Base Station Positioning in Third
Generation Mobile Networks,” in Canadian Conference on
Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE).
IEEE,
2003.
[10] Y. Choi, K. Kim, and N. Kim, “The Positioning of Base
Station in Wireless Communication with Genetic Approach,”
in Personal Wireless Communications.
Springer, 2007.
[11] M. St-Hilaire, S. Chamberland, and S. Pierre, “A tabu search
algorithm for the global planning problem of third genera-
tion mobile networks,” Computers & Electrical Engineering,
vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 470–487, 2008.
[12] J. Dr´eo, A. P´etrowski, and E. Taillard, Metaheuristics for
Hard Optimization: Methods and Case Studies, P. Siarry, Ed.
Springer Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, vol. 1.
[13] C. M¨uller, H. Georg, and C. Wietfeld, “A Modularized and
Distributed Simulation Environment for Scalability Analysis
of Smart Grid ICT Infrastructures,” in 5th International
Workshop on OMNeT++ co-located with International ICST
Conference on Simulation Tools and Techniques (SIMUTools).
Desenzano, Italy: ICST, March 2012.
[14] A. Varga and R. Hornig, “An Overview of the OMNeT++
Simulation Environment,” in First International Conference
on Simulation Tools and Techniques for Communications,
Networks and Systems (SIMUTools).
Marseille, France:
ICST, March 2008, pp. 60:1–60:10.
[15] R. Church and C. ReVelle, “The Maximal Covering Location
Problem,” Papers in Regional Science, vol. 32, no. 1, pp.
101–118, January 1974.
[16] H. Okamoto, K. Kitao, and S. Ichitsubo, “Outdoor-to-Indoor
Propagation Loss Prediction in 800-MHz to 8-GHz Band for
an Urban Area,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology,
2009.
[17] E. Damosso and L. Correia, “Digital Mobile Radio Towards
Future Generation Systems, COST 231 Final Report,” Euro-
pean Commission, 1999.
[18] J. Meinil¨a, P. Ky¨osti, T. J¨ams¨a, and L. Hentil¨a, “WINNER II
Channel Models,” Wiley Online Library, 2009.
[19] BMWi Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology,
“Project E-DeMa - Development and Demonstration of
Decentralized
Integrated
Energy
Systems
on
the
Way
Towards the E-Energy Marketplace of the Future,” [retrieved:
April, 2012]. [Online]. Available: http://www.e-dema.de/en/
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-203-5
ICWMC 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

