Jammer Localization Method using Degradation of GPS C/No Measurements 
Inone Joo 
Satellite Technology Research Group 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute  
Daejeon, Korea 
e-mail: inone@etri.re.kr 
Cheonsig Sin 
Satellite Technology Research Group 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute  
Daejeon, Korea 
e-mail: cssin@etri.re.kr
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we present the Global Positioning 
System (GPS) jammer localization method using the carrier-
to-noise density (C/No) measurements of the commercial GPS 
receivers, which are already installed nationwide in Korea. The 
jamming power directly affects the C/No measurements of 
GPS signals. Accordingly, we precisely make the C/No profiles 
of the GPS receivers correspond to the jamming power under 
jamming test environment. Then, the Received Signal Strength 
(RSS) of the jamming can be estimated by comparing the 
degraded C/No measurements and the corresponding C/No 
profile of the respective station. Finally, we determine the 
jammer location by using the RSS of the respective station and 
the propagation prediction model of the jamming signal. 
Keywords- GPS; Jammer; Localization; C/No. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Even though GPS signals are normally robust to jamming 
due to spreading gain using the code division access scheme, 
it can be disturbed and can malfunction if the jamming 
exceeds the spreading gain [1][2]. In particular, the jamming 
is very critical threat to the unmanned autonomous 
applications using GPS navigation [3]. The direction finding 
system is generally used to locate the jammer source, but it is 
highly costly and should be deployed in the specific station 
[4]. Therefore, in this paper, we present a GPS jammer 
localization method using the C/No measurements of the 
commercial GPS receivers, which are already installed 
nationwide in Korea. The simulation demonstrates that the 
proposed method estimate GPS jammer location by using the 
C/No measurements. The paper is organized so that Section 
II describes the block diagram and localization algorithm. In 
Section III, we present the simulation results of the proposed 
method. Finally, the conclusion is drawn in Section IV. 
II. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
A. Block diagram  
Figure 1 shows the block diagram of the proposed scheme. 
The jamming power can be estimated by the C/No 
measurements of GPS signals because they are directly 
affected by the degree of jamming. Accordingly, we 
previously make the C/No profiles of the GPS receivers 
correspond to the jamming power through the precise 
jamming test. If we detect the degradation of the C/No 
measurements of the GPS receivers installed and operated in 
various stations, we estimate the RSS of the jamming by 
utilizing the corresponding C/No profile of the respective 
station. Then, we configure the candidate area including the 
jammed stations and divide it into the small cells. The cell 
size is defined as the resolution of the jammer location. We 
calculate the average value and variance of the transmitted 
power at all cells within the candidate areas by using the 
RSS of the respective station and the propagation prediction 
model of the jamming signal. Finally, we determine the 
location of the GPS jammer as the cell position within the 
candidate areas having the minimum variance of the 
transmitted (TX) power.   
 
Figure 1.  Block diagram of the proposed method. 
B. Localization Algorithm  
Figure 2 illustrates the algorithm to determine the jammer 
location.  There are many propagation path loss values 
between the number of jammed positions and the cell 
position. Then, we can estimate the number of TX powers 
 
Figure 2.  Localization algorithm of the proposed method 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

corresponding to the number of jammed positions at each 
cell. Therefore, the cell having the minimum variance of the 
estimated TX powers means the estimated optimum location 
of the jammer within the candidate area including the 
jammed stations. In this paper, the propagation prediction by 
the Longley-Rice model is used to estimate the propagation 
path loss [5].   
III. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
Firstly, we make the C/No profiles of the GPS receivers 
corresponding to the RSS of the jamming, as shown in 
Figure 3. Although the C/No values measured from the GPS 
receiver are various, we use the average value (green color) 
of C/No values having about 50 dB-Hz (light-green color) 
for comparing the degraded C/No from the jammed receiver.  
RSS
C/No 
AVR
 
Figure 3.  C/No profiles of the GPS receivers corresponding to the RSS 
It is assumed that 11 receivers are jammed by the 
jamming of 1KW effective isotropically radiated power 
(EIRP) via 1575.42MHz at the position (LLH : 36.8499o / 
127.2257o / 560m) near Chonan city in Korea. The RSS 
values at the stations installed in the commercial GPS 
receivers are displayed in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Simulated RSS by simulated jammer power 
 
Figure 5.  Estimated jammer location and power 
Figure 5 shows that the proposed method estimates 1.9 
KW power with about 3 dB error at the jammer location 
using the RSS of the respective station and the propagation 
prediction of the Longley-Rice model, on the assumption 
that the RSS are accurately estimated. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented the GPS jammer localization 
method by using the degradation of C/No measurements of 
the GPS receivers already installed nationwide in Korea. The 
simulation showed that the proposed method estimates the 
GPS jammer location under the condition that the RSS 
values are accurately estimated by the degraded C/No. This 
result showed that this method could be used effectively to 
locate the jammer. Furthermore, future studies will be aimed 
at improving the reliability of the proposed method by 
performing experiments under a realistic environment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by the Korea government (MSIT) [4011-2017-02934, 
Development of Korea Radio Interference Signal Detection, 
Alert and Mitigation Technologies]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Kaplan and C. Hegarty, Understanding GPS: principles and 
applications. Artech house, 2005. 
[2] B.-y. T. James, Fundamental of global positioning system 
receivers, John Wiley & Sons, 2005. 
[3] A. Ruegamer and D. Kowalewski, "Jamming and spoofing of 
GNSS signals–An underestimated risk?!." Proc. Wisdom 
Ages Challenges Modern World. 2015.  
[4] T. E. Tuncer and B. Friedlander, Classical and modern 
direction-of-arrival estimation. Academic Press, 2009. 
[5] A. G. Longley and P. L. Rice, "Prediction of tropospheric 
radio transmission loss over irregular terrain. A computer 
method-1968", ESSA Tech. Rep. ERL 79-ITS 67, U.S. 
Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, July 1968. 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-642-2
ICWMC 2018 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

