Problematic of QoS-based On-demand Routing
Protocols to Improve Communication in Mobility
Context
Tiguiane Y´el´emou
Polytechnic University of Bobo Dioulasso,
Bobo Dioulasso, Burkina Faso
Email: tyelemou@gmail.com
Tound´e Mesmin Dandjinou
Polytechnic University of Bobo Dioulasso,
Bobo Dioulasso, Burkina Faso
Email: dandjimes@yahoo.fr
Abstract—In mobile ad hoc networks, achieving good QoS is a
critical issue and is very difﬁcult to guarantee due to rapidly
changing of network topology and the lossy nature of wireless
links. In this context, routing protocols must be smart enough to
select better paths for data transmissions. In this paper, we focus
on the well-known Ad-hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV)
protocol. Standard route discovery approach used in AODV is
expected to obtain the best path in term of delay. However, in
lossy-links context, multimedia data packet transmission success,
on path established thanks to control packets, may require several
attempts. These retransmissions increase delay and overhead.
Many QoS-based methods failed to make a meaningful im-
provement due to added complexity and additional delay and
overhead. In this paper, we use a metric based on number of
Packet Retransmissions to show that improving performance of
on-demand routing protocols, in the mobility context, lies on
effective control of node neighborhood.
Keywords-mobility; reliability; wireless networks; quality
of service; on-demand routing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Mobile Ad hoc NETworks (MANET) are characterized by
instability of their topology. This is mainly due to node mo-
bility and the lossy nature of wireless links. Selecting reliable
paths for data transmission in this context is a challenge. In
order to guarantee Quality of Service (QoS), routing protocols
should be smart enough to choose a reliable route in order to
avoid packet loss. To deal with the problem, Qos-based routing
protocols are proposed. Route selection process should take
into account link quality. However, most methods proposed
for link quality estimation and best path selection are not
appropriate for this rapid topology change. They require a long
period to ﬁnd QoS path and the obtained path is, very often,
longer than the shortest path (in terms of number of hops).
Long paths are more vulnerable to breakage than shortest
paths.
The main contributions of this paper include:
•
Use of a convenient and pratical way to evaluate
quality of links in mobile context,
•
Design of QoS-based Ad-hoc On-demand Distance
Vector (AODV) protocol [1]. The QoS metric used
(called PR-metric) is based on the number of retrans-
missions. It takes into account accurately the propor-
tion of retransmission time with respect to time of
ﬁrst issue. We use this metric to compare effectiveness
of different QoS-based methods used to improve on-
demand routing protocols performance,
•
A detailed analysis of differend QoS-based AODV
protocol performance. For our tests, we used realistic
wave propagation model and realistic mobility model.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In
Section II, we present and analyze related work. In Section III,
we present our QoS-based routing protocols. Performance eval-
uation and discussions are made in Section IV. We conclude
in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
In recent years, much effort has been made to improve the
standard AODV protocol [1]. In this section, after presenting
the critical behaviors of the protocol, we review various
proposed improvements.
A. AODV protocol
On-demand routing approaches are source-initiated reactive
mechanisms. When a node desires to sent a packet to an other
node and does not have a valid route, it intiates a path discovery
process in order to locate the destination node [1]. Then, a
route request (RREQ) packet is issued and ﬂooded in the
network. Once the ﬁrst RREQ packet reaches the destination
node or an intermediate node with a fresh route toward the
destination, a route reply (RREP) packet is sent back to the
source node. The source node rebroadcasts the RREQ if it
does not receive a RREP during a Route Reply Wait Time
(RREP WAIT TIME). It tries discovery of path up to a given
maximum number of attempts and aborts the session if it fails.
As the RREP packet is routed back along the reverse path,
the intermediate nodes along the path record a tuple for the
destination in their routing tables which point to the node from
which the RREP is received. This tuple indicates the active
forward route.
AODV uses a timer-based technique to remove stale routes
promptly. Each routing entry is associated with a route expira-
tion timeout. This timer is refreshed whenever a route is used.
Periodically, newly expired routes are invalidated.
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Route maintenance is done using route error (RERR) pack-
ets. When a link breakage is detected, routes to destinations
that become unreachable are invalidated. RERR propagation
mechanism ensures that all sources using the failed link receive
the RERR packet. RERR packet is also generated when a node
is unable to forward a data packet for route unavailability.
The ﬁrst RREQ consideration approach means the selected
path is the one with the better Round Trip Time (RTT) and the
sorthest path in term of hops count if all links are considered
as similar. Contrary to proactive routing approaches, in on-
demand routing methods, nodes maintain information only for
active routes. But, route request and route error broadcasted
may be important if established routes are much bits error-
prone. This can be demonstrated by simulation with the use
of a realistic physical layer and a realistic wave propagation
model.
B. Enhanced AODV
One of the well-known problem of AODV protocol is
the long end-to-end delay due to overtime induced by route
discovery process. Also, when the frequency of link failures
is high, routing load and jitter become important. Since the
publication of standardized version of AODV, many efforts
have been made to improve it. The major challenge is to
limit the frequency of route discovery process. Thus, several
optimizations have been proposed in the literature. Among
them, we note taking into account link quality in the route
selection process and adapting timers to the network dynamics.
1) Tacking into account link quality: To take into account
link quality in the route selection process, several methods
are proposed with different QoS metrics including bandwidth,
delay, packet delivery ratio, Bit Error Rate (BER).
Khaled et al. [2] propose a path robusteness-based quality
of service routing for MANET. They proposed that before
processing RREQ packet, an intermediate node must assure
that its lifetime and the delay toward the neighbor from which
it receives the RREQ packet are above given delay-threshold
and lifetime-threshold. At each hop, at least ﬁve checks are
made and RREQ packet size increased with a node address.
Destination node and source node must wait for copies (that
have followed different paths) of RREQ and RREP packets
until a timeout. The overhead (additionnal delay and routing
load) and the complexity of this approach hypothecate protocol
effectiveness.
Some works, such as [3], use optimal link metric value in
the path choice. Path selection choice based on optimal link
metric value may not allow to get the best path. For example,
for number of hops or retransmissions count-based metric, a
path with minimum link metric value m (the minimal metric
value amoung other feasible paths), is prefered than anyone
with just one link with metric value upper than m even if the
other links are better.
Some authors use additive and multiplicative metric to
enhance AODV route discovery process. To ﬁnd the optimal
path in wireless mesh networks, Kim et al. [4] modify the
standard AODV RREQ process. They propose that duplicate
RREQs with better cumulative link metric value be forwarded,
so that all the possible routes are considered. As link quality
metric, they use an improved Expected Transmission Time
(ETT) [5]. Their RREQ packet carries the cumulative link
ETT value. They estimate the archievable throughput of their
approach more than twice compared to standard AODV. We
presume it is not necessary to re-broadcast duplicate RREQ
packets. The intermediate node may note all possible reverse
paths and retain as active reverse path to the source the better
one according to the considered QoS metric. Their approach
needs to be tested in MANET context with realistic simulation
assumptions.
2) Taking into account network dynamics: Mobility of
nodes is one of the essential issue of MANET. Taking into
account the mobility of nodes is countered, ﬁrst, by difﬁculties
to adequately measure the mobility degree of a node. Many
papers [6][7] propose to privilege nodes with low speed but
network topology change is not local problem. A node may be
ﬁxed but if its neighborhood moves a lot, integrating this node
into transmission path will not allow efﬁcient communication.
Some authors propose to use link breakage prediction
for packet loss avoidance. In fact, when intermediate node
detects degradation of neighbor link quality on active route,
it may anticipate route maintenance process. Then, source
node is advertized to the probable path failure and anticipates
route recovery process. This avoids transmission interruption.
QoS metrics used in this method include received signal
strength [8], packet delivery ratio of control packets [9]. Very
often, the power of modeled signal depends only on the
distance to the concerned neighbor node. It is known that
obstacles in wave progation environment has an impact on
signal strength [10][11]. Even if these metrics are accurately
measured, the approach only anticipate the break of the link.
The source must initiate a new route recovery process. The
impact on delay improvement is not signiﬁcant.
Amruta et al. [8] and Naif et al. [12] focused on accessi-
bility prediction to restric route discovery for future commu-
nications. Indeed, during the usual routing operations, a node
can collect signiﬁcant information enabling it to predict the
accessibility and the relative mobility of the other nodes in the
network. However, due to rapid change of network topology
and since they are not actively maintained, these routes become
obsolete.
III.
QOS-BASED ON-DEMAND ROUTING PROTOCOLS
In this section, we present the PR-metric and three variants
of AODV based on this metric. However, comprehensive
presentation of this metric is beyond the scope of this paper.
A. QoS metric
To quantify link quality, we focus on metrics based on link
reliability. Very often, criteria like as BER, Packet Delivery
Ratio (PDR, e.g., Expected Number of Transmissions, ETX)
are used. For this study, we use a new metric based on the
expected number of retransmissions required to communicate
successful data packet on this link. Let us call it PR-metric.
With PR-metric, distance between a node and its neighbor will
not be 1 but 1 + a ∗ (n − 1), where n represents the average
number of transmissions required to make a data transmission
successful and a is a parameter to weigh retransmission cost.
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

For retransmission, we want to design a transmission made
after the ﬁrst issue (after the ﬁrst transmission attempt). The
coefﬁcient a is the ratio between the average time required
for a retransmission over the time necessary for an initial
successful transmission. Statistical analysis and results permit
us to estimate a to 0.65 with 0.03 as standard deviation.
The number of retransmissions can be obtained from net-
work interface statistics (MAC level). This metric has a direct
impact on delay and throughput. Contrary to the well-known
metrics like BER or Expected Transmission Count (ETX) [13],
it takes into account real time network load. Its estimation
is local. It does not induce a signiﬁcant routing load or a
large computation time. It is a good compromise between the
number of hops criterion and the BER or ETX criterion which
induces selection of long route [14].
B. AODV-BL-PR
AODV-BL-PR picks out AODV where we apply black-
listing approach to route recovery process. With AODV-BL-
PR, when an intermediate node receives a RREQ packet, it
compares the PR-metric value of link on which this packet
is received to a predetermined threshold. If this PR-metric
value is higher than this treshold, the packet is discarded,
otherwise it is managed as in standard AODV. We set this
threshold to 2. We estimate that, in mobility context, after 2
attempts to transmit data, the path used is no longer valid. Note
that maximum number of retransmissions at MAC layer is 4
for our test. We note that a control message (usually lighter)
can be successfully transmitted on a poor quality link when a
normal payload message can not be transmitted. With this route
selection approach, paths containing bad links are disregarded.
This will also limit the dissemination of RREQ messages and
then reduces routing overhead.
C. AODV-sum-PR
To design AODV-sum-PR, two main modiﬁcations are
made to standard AODV, namely QoS-information dissemi-
nation and duplicate RREQ packets process by intermediate
node.
•
QoS-information dissemination: for AODV-sum-PR,
RREQ and RREP packets are extended with the cu-
mulative PR-metric (C-PR-metric) ﬁeld. Source node
initializes this metric to 0.0. An intermediate node
increases the value of C-PR-metric by the PR-metric
of the link on which it received the packet. The
intermediate node also integrates reverse path into its
routing tables. Each entry is improved with the C-PR-
metric as QoS-metric. The RREP packet also carries
the C-PR-metric. The ﬁeld is, this time, initialized to
0.0 by the destination node or to the current value of
entry related to this destination by intermediate node
which initiates the RREP packet.
•
Duplicate RREQ packet process: contrary to stan-
dard AODV, an intermediate node manages duplicate
RREQ packet. Indeed, if the C-PR-metric of a dupli-
cated RREQ packet is lower than the recorded one,
the entry for source node (reverse path) is updated:
the previous hop to the source node will be the new
transmitter. Finally, the source node obtains a path to
the destination with the lowest C-PR-metric value.
Note that intermediate node does not need to re-broadcast
the duplicate RREQ packet and does not need to integrate the
PR-metric value of all its neighbors as control packets header
information, as widely done.
In Table I, we summarized the duplicate packet processing.
TABLE I.
SAMPLE OF DUPLICATED PACKET PROCESSING ALGORITHM
f o r
the
concerned
r e v e r s e
path
i f
new C−PR−me tric < c u r r e n t C−PR−me tric
update
next−hop
update C−PR−me tric
e l s e
drop
the
packet
D. AODV-Timer
In AODV-Timer, we reduce the timers associated to the
various recorded routes, established links with neighbors and
waiting for a response (hello timer, route validity timer, waiting
RREP packet timer, etc.). These timers are used to manage
routes and links validation or recovery processes. The new pa-
rameters are presented in Table II. This coordinated reduction
globally means that a node more frequently inventories its links
and routes.
With this approach, we want to know the determining
factor between taking into account link quality or a convenient
control of neighborhood information for better performance in
mobility context.
TABLE II.
DEFAULT (AT LEFT) AND MODIFIED (AT RIGHT) AODV
PARAMETERS FOR OUR TESTS
Timer Parameter
AODV-st
AODV-Timer
MY ROUTE TIMEOUT
10s
5s
ACTIVE ROUTE TIMEOUT
10s
5s
REV ROUTE LIFE
6s
3s
BCAST ID SAVE
6s
3s
MAX RREQ TIMEOUT
10s
5s
NETWORK DIAMETER
30 hops
10hops
RREP WAIT TIME
1.0s
0.7s
HELLO INTERVAL
1s
0.5s
BAD LINK LIFETIME
3s
1.5s
In summary, the reduction of route timeout value to 5s
means that a path that is not used 5s ago is considered obsolete.
The default value in standard AODV is 10s. The source waits
less time (0.7 instead of 1.0) to restart a new request if it
receives no response to a previous query. The network diameter
is reduced to 10 instead of 30. We estimate that over 10 hops
it is impossible to communicate in node mobility context. A
HELLO INTERVAL timer set to 0.5s instead of 1.0s, means
that nodes should test their neighborhood more frequently.
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we ﬁrst present our simulation environment,
we then present the results of simulation tests and analyze the
performance of different protocols.
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

A. Experimental setup
To compute more real simulations, we use a realistic wave
propagation model taking into account environment charac-
teristics. Therefore, we enhanced NS2 [15] with a ray-tracer
simulator, Communication Ray Tracer (CRT) [16], that has
been developed at the XLIM-SIC laboratory. CRT simulator
provides a 3D ray-tracer wave propagation model. It takes
into account the geographical data, electrical properties of
materials, the polarization of the antennas, the position of the
transmitters and receivers, the carrier frequency and the max-
imum number of interactions with the surrounding obstacles.
To realistically model the movement of the node, we use
the VANET-Mobisim [17] software. Node speed is computed
by this software. The mobility model implemented is more
realistic than widely used ones [18][19][20]. Paths are deﬁned
in correlation and consistency with our environment model.
VANET-Mobisim is also easily interfaced with NS2. Speciﬁ-
cally, VANET-Mobisim uses a mobility ﬁle in XML format,
which contains all the detailed informations of the microscopic
and macroscopic models that govern mobility of nodes. The
mobility model used in this software takes into account the
environmental parameters of the mobile nodes (trafﬁc lights,
speed limits, etc.) and possible interactions between mobile
nodes. A node may thereby accelerate, decelerate according
to environment constraints.
The global parameters for the simulations are given in
Table III.
TABLE III.
SIMULATION PARAMETERS.
Parameters
Values
Network simulator
ns-2
Simulation time
180s
Simulation area
1000m*1000m
Maximum number of transmissions
4
Transmission power
0.1w
Data types
CBR
Data packet size
512 bytes
MAC layer
IEEE 802.11a
We also use a realistic model of the Munich town (urban
outdoor environment, see Figure 1), obstacles (building, etc.)
are printed red. Dots represent nodes. Other real environments
could be used in a more comprehensive study.
As routing protocols, we compare AODV-st, the standard
AODV protocol [1], to the three PR-metric based ones pre-
sented in Section III.
B. Simulation results
In this section, we study the impact of mobility on
performance of the four protocols. 60 mobile nodes move
in the Munich town environment (Figure 1). Their average
speeds range from 4m/s to 20m/s. 10 simultaneous end-to-
end transmissions are initiated during 165s. As performance
parameters we rely primarily on average end-to-end delay of
data packets, PDR and Routing Overhead (RO). End-to-End
Delay concerns only successfully delivered packets. PDR is
the ratio of the number of successfully delivered data packets
over the number of sent data packets. Routing overhead is
the number of routing protocol control packets. It permits
Figure 1.
Simulation environment when number of nodes=60. Obstacles are
printed red.
to evaluate the effective use of the wireless medium by data
trafﬁc.
Figure 2 and Figure 3 show that AODV-new-timer is better
in delay and PDR. It reduces unnecessary waiting time and
the knowledge of neighborhood, in real time, avoids node to
process obsolete paths. The node implementing AODV-new-
Timer detects links breakage quickly. For QoS-based AODV
(AODV-BL-PR and AODV-sum-PR), determining QoS routes
requires substantial time and with node mobility, established
routes become obsolete quickly. These show that better neigh-
borhood information control is more important than taking into
account link quality for AODV efﬁciency.
A thorough analysis of the simulation shows that the
majority of communications where source and destination
are far apart from each other have failed. Established routes
become obsolete even before the ﬁrst data packets arrive at the
destination.
Figure 2.
Delay evolution when speed increases.
Protocol’s performance in RO parameter is presented in
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

Figure 3.
PDR evolution when speed increases.
Figure 4. The high cost of AODV-new-Timer is expected
since Hello and RREQ messages emiting frequency increased.
The better performance of QoS-based AODV compared to
standard one can be explained by better paths selection. In
addition, blacklisting approach of AODV-BL-PR limits the
dissemination of RREQ messages.
Figure 4.
RO evolution when speed increases.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We tested the effectiveness of different QoS-based methods
under realistic wave propagation model and realistic mobility
model. For QoS metric, we use number of retransmissions
count-based metric. Although we used a simple and effective
method for link quality estimation, the results show that taking
into account the quality of links is not effective for the MANET
performances improvement. The additional complexity, in-
duced by QoS management, increases delay and precipitated
the obsolescence of the links.
To achieve better performance in high speed MANET
context, the real challenge is the effective control of node
neighborhood and accurate established routes lifetime and
waiting RREP packet timeout.
A solution where the inventory frequency of the neigh-
borhood depends on the network dynamics might improve
the performance of on-demand routing approach in mobility
contexts.
A more comprehensive study of the problematic of on-
demand routing protocol performance could concern other real
environments (than Munich town one) and a reﬁnement of the
penalty coefﬁcient due to retransmissions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to thank my colleagues of XLIM-SIC labora-
tory of University of Poitiers for simulation tools developped
including Communication Ray Tracer (CRT) simulator. I es-
pecially thank Professor Philippe Meseure for everything he
taught me as knowledge, especially for the writing of scientiﬁc
articles and metrics design.
I also thank the Polytechnic University of Bobo Dioulasso
for facilitating the ﬁnancing of my participation in the confer-
ence where I presented this paper.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, “Ad hoc on-demand distance
vector (AODV) routing protocol,” Tech. Rep. RFC3561, IETF Network
Working Group, July 2003.
[2]
K. A. Al-Soufy and A. M. Abbas, “A path robustness-based quality
of service routing for mobile ad hoc networks,” in 2010 IEEE 4th
International Conference on Internet Multimedia Services Architecture
and Application(IMSAA), pp. 1–6, IEEE, Dec. 2010.
[3]
Y. Chen, Z. Xiang, W. Jian, and W. Jiang, “A Cross-Layer AOMDV
routing protocol for V2V communication in urban VANET,” in 5th
International Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks, 2009.
MSN ’09, pp. 353–359, IEEE, Dec. 2009.
[4]
S. Kim, O. Lee, S. Choi, and S. Lee, “Comparative analysis of link
quality metrics and routing protocols for optimal route construction in
wireless mesh networks,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 9, pp. 1343–1358,
Sept. 2011.
[5]
P. Esposito et al., “Implementing the expected transmission time metric
for OLSR wireless mesh networks,” in Wireless Days 2008 (WD08),
pp. 1–5, Nov. 2008.
[6]
N. Enneya, K. Oudidi, and M. Elkoutbi, “Enhancing delay in manet
using olsr protocol,” International Journal of Computer Science and
Network Security IJCSNS, vol. 9, no. 1, 2009.
[7]
M. Benzaid, P. Minet, and K. Al Agha, “Integrating fast mobility in the
OLSR routing protocol,” in 4th International Workshop on Mobile and
Wireless Communications Network, 2002, pp. 217 – 221, 2002.
[8]
A. Chintawar, M. Chatterjee, and A. Vidhate, “Performance analysis
of ad-hoc on demand multipath distance vector routing protocol with
accessibility and link breakage prediction,” in IJCA Proceedings on
International Conference and workshop on Emerging Trends in Tech-
nology (ICWET), pp. 1–6, 2011.
[9]
A. Khosrozadeh, A. Akbari, M. Bagheri, and N. Beikmahdavi, “New
AODV routing protocol with break avoidance,” in 2011 International
Symposium on Computer Science and Society (ISCCS), pp. 303–306,
IEEE, July 2011.
[10]
W. Hamidouche, R. Vauzelle, C. Olivier, Y. Pousset, and C. Perrine,
“Impact of realistic mimo physical layer on video transmission over
mobile ad hoc network,” in 20th Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio
Communications Symposium, 2009.
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

[11]
M. Guenes, M. Wenig, and A. Zimmermann, “Realistic mobility and
propagation framework for manet simulations,” in NETWORKING
2007: Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks, Wireless Networks, Next Gen-
eration Internet, Proceedings, vol. 4479 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pp. 97–107, Springer Verlag, 2007.
[12]
N. Alsharabi, L. Ping, and W. Rajeh, “Avoid link breakage in on-demand
ad-hoc network using packet’s received time prediction,” in Proceedings
19th European Conference on Modelling and Simulation, 2005.
[13]
D. S. J. D. Couto, D. Aguayo, J. Bicket, and R. Morris, “a high-
throughput path metric for multi-hop wireless routing,” Wireless Net-
works, vol. 11, pp. 419–434, July 2005.
[14]
T. Y´el´emou, P. Meseure, and A.-M. Poussard, “Improving zrp perfor-
mance by taking into account quality of links,” in WCNC 2012 Paris,
France, April 2012.
[15]
L. Breslau et al., “Advances in network simulation,” COMPUTER,
vol. 33, May 2000.
[16]
R. Delahaye, Efﬁcient and Realistic Simulation of the Physical Layer
to Aid Routing in Ad hoc Networks. PhD thesis, University of Poitiers,
2007.
[17]
J. Haerri, F. Filali, and C. Bonnet, “Mobility models for vehicular ad hoc
networks : a survey and taxonomy,” in IEEE communications surveys
and tutorials, vol. 11, pp. 19–41, IEEE-INST Electrical Electronics
Engineers INC, 2009.
[18]
Q. Zheng, X. Hong, and S. Ray, “Recent advances in mobility modeling
for mobile ad hoc network research,” in Proceedings of the 42nd annual
Southeast regional conference, pp. 70–75, ACM, 2004.
[19]
X. Hong, M. Gerla, G. Pei, and C.-C. Chiang, “A group mobility
model for ad hoc wireless networks,” in Proceedings of the 2nd
ACM international workshop on Modeling, analysis and simulation of
wireless and mobile systems, MSWiM ’99, (New York, NY, USA),
p. 5360, ACM, 1999.
[20]
F. Bai, N. Sadagopan, and A. Helmy, “Important: a framework to
systematically analyze the impact of mobility on performance of routing
protocols for adhoc networks,” in 22th Annual Joint Conference of the
IEEE Computer and Communications, vol. 2, pp. 825–835, 2003.
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-347-6
ICWMC 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications

