Mining Cross-document Relationships from Text
Petr Knoth
Knowledge Media Institute
The Open University
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
p.knoth@open.ac.uk
Zdenek Zdrahal
Knowledge Media Institute
The Open University
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
z.zdrahal@open.ac.uk
Abstract—The paper argues that automatic link generation
and typing methods are needed to ﬁnd and maintain cross-
document links in large and growing textual collections. Such
links are important to organise information and to support
search and navigation. We present an experimental study
on mining cross-document links from a collection of 5000
documents. We identify a set of link types and show that the
value of semantic similarity can be used as a distinguishing
indicator.
Keywords-text mining; automatic link generation and typing;
semantic similarity; digital libraries.
I. INTRODUCTION
There has been a signiﬁcant research effort in the area
of modelling cross-document relationships. These include
various semantic relations at the discourse level ranging from
mere similarity of topics presented in two documents to the
assertion that one document elaborates/contradicts the ideas
described in another one. Enriching document collections by
inter-document relationships provides the means for better
organising fragmented information. In practice, this would
improve the browsing, the navigation and the discovery
of important information resources. However, the current
cross-document relationship modelling approaches rely on
human annotators and therefore they do not scale-up. So far,
little work has seriously addressed the limitations of manual
identiﬁcation of cross-document relationships in large and
constantly growing repositories. In this paper, we argue
that automatic link discovery and typing methods can be
used to bridge this gap. In this paper, the concept of link
refers to a semantic connection between two segments of
text, such as two documents or paragraphs, at the discourse
level and should not be confused with the Semantic Web
representation known as Open Linked Data, which is an
approach for publishing data and their relations using RDF
triples.
This work is based on the following hypotheses:
(a) Cross-document links can be generated automatically
using semantic similarity as one of the criteria.
(b) The value of semantic similarity is related to the link
type.
The paper brings the following contributions:
• We provide evidence and argue why automatic link
generation is necessary for the creation and mainte-
nance of typed relationships, especially in scholarly
databases and encyclopedias, and why it cannot be
easily substituted by social tagging or crowdsourcing
approaches.
• We elaborate the abovementioned hypotheses, espe-
cially (b), for a selection of link types.
• We present a simple experiment for mining link types
motivated by the results previously reported in [1].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, the role automatic link generation methods can play
in automatically analyzing large text collections is intro-
duced. Related work in the areas of semantic web tools
for discourse modeling, automatic link generation and link
typing is discussed in Section III. In Section IV, we argue
why automatic link generation is needed and cannot be
substituted by crowdsourcing approaches. An experimental
link typing study is presented in Section V. Finally, the paper
is concluded in Section VI.
II. AUTOMATIC MINING OF CROSS-DOCUMENT LINKS
The automatic link generation task can be deﬁned as
follows: Let S and T be collections of documents, denoting
sources and targets respectively. Let s ∈ S and t ∈ T be
lexical units of possibly different granularity. For example,
s and t can be the whole documents, paragraphs, sentences
or even noun phrases. The goal is to ﬁnd a binary relation
ρ ⊆ S × T deﬁned in terms of pairs < si, tj > such that
all pairs are interpreted by a human evaluator as carrying
the same semantic relationship. For example, ρ can be
interpreted as is similar, is the same, expands, contradicts,
etc. The relation must satisfy the usual properties, e.g.,
is the same is symmetric, transitive and reﬂexive, is similar
is not transitive, expands is antisymmetric etc.
Automatic link generation methods have many potential
applications. For example, the methods can be used for the
interlinking of resources not originally created as hypertext
documents, for the maintenance or the discovery of new
links in collections growing in size, or to improve navigation
in collections with long texts, such as books or newspaper
articles. All this makes the automatic mining of cross-
document links a very useful technology which could be
applied across a number of disciplines including information
retrieval, semantic web, user navigation, text summarization
and others.
55
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

III. RELATED WORK
A. Semantic web technology for cross-document relation-
ship modeling
One of the most important areas where cross-document
relations play a key role are digital libraries. Nowadays, the
activities of researchers and students rely more and more
on access to large online repositories using technologies
and tools, such as Google Scholar, CiteSeer or PubMed.
These systems currently do not provide support for organ-
ising, modeling and sharing cross-document relationships.
Consequently, their navigation capabilities are limited.
To ﬁll the gap, scientiﬁc community invested signiﬁcant
effort into relationship and argument modeling tools. For
example, the Mendeley tool [2] allows to discover related
research literature, highlight and organise it, annotate rela-
tionships to other articles and share them with others. Similar
work has been done previously by Uren et al., the ClaiMaker
tool described in [3] allows to model and share research
debates/discourses across scientiﬁc literature. Other work
has also focused on relationship and argument visualization
[4]. A number of tools have also been developed for speciﬁc
domains, such as the life sciences [5], [6].
Though the abovementioned studies recognise the po-
tential offered by collaborative tagging, crowdsourcing and
sharing, the resulting approaches rely in the end always
on human annotators. We claim that there are at least two
reasons why such an approach cannot scale-up: (1) The
rate of information growth is faster than the resources of
the crowds. This issue is further discussed in Section IV.
(2) Researchers are usually reluctant to share this type of
knowledge, because the skill of analyzing and interpreting
papers is the researcher’s know-how. This has also been
recognised in the tool presented in [3], where sharing is
restricted to a selected research community.
B. Link generation
In the 1990s, the main application area for link gen-
eration methods were hypertext construction systems [7].
Nowadays, link generation methods for ﬁnding related doc-
uments have become the de-facto standard. They have been
applied in large digital repositories, such as PubMed or
the ACM Digital Library, or in search engines including
Google Scholar. Generating links pointing to units of a
lower granularity than a document has been investigated
more recently. The task of such systems is to locate relevant
information inside the document instead of only providing a
link to the whole document. The Initiative for the Evaluation
of XML retrieval (INEX) played an important role in the link
generation research by providing evaluation tracks (Link-
the-Wiki track) for link generation systems at the granularity
of documents as well as at a more ﬁne-grained granularity
[8].
Current approaches can be divided into three groups:
(1) link-based approaches discover new links by exploiting
an existing link graph [9], [10], [11]. (2) semi-structured
approaches try to discover new links using semi-structured
information, such as the anchor texts or document titles
[12], [13], [14]. (3) purely content-based approaches use
as an input plain text only. They typically discover related
resources by calculating semantic similarity based on docu-
ment vectors [15], [16], [17], [18]. Some of the mentioned
approaches, such as [11], combine multiple methods.
C. Link taxonomies/ontologies and link typing
A pioneering study in link typing has been presented
already in 1980s by Randall Trigg [19] who developed a
taxonomy of link types. Trigg divided links into two groups
- normal (inter-document) links and commentary (cross-
document) links. His rich taxonomy of link types enables the
speciﬁcation of judgements on hypertext nodes. With link
types, such as unimportant, solved, insufﬁcient or incoherent
the taxonomy is content focused rather than relation focused
[20]. Another approach is represented by the ScholOnto
taxonomy [21] which has been developed with a reference
to cognitive coherence relations [22].
An inﬂuential study on automatic generation and typing
of links has been published in [23]. Allan recognizes that
certain cross-document link types (automatic links) can be
automatically extracted more easily than others. He focuses
then on the development of methods for the identiﬁcation of
the automatic link types, involving relations such as tangent,
equivalence or contrast.
An unsupervised approach for the recognition of discourse
relations has been presented in [24]. The authors show
that from a set of adjacent sentences a subset of discourse
relations, namely contrast, explanation-evidence, condition
and elaboration can be recognized with high accuracy. This
task is signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult, but also more interesting,
in the cross-document settings. Similar problem has been
recently addressed in Radev et. al. [25] who introduced
a taxonomy of 18 cross-document rhetorical relationships
denoted as Cross-document Structure Theory (CST). In ad-
dition, they present the development of an annotated dataset
of CST relationships and experiment with the recognition of
their subset using machine learning with a varying level of
success for different relationships.
IV. MANUAL ANNOTATION AND CROWDSOURCING
Cross-document discourse modeling, i.e., connecting a
claim found in one document with a claim found in another
one by a semantic relation, such as contradicts, is technically
identical to the problem of providing metadata that allow to
organize resources and information in a logical way. Various
social annotation tools for metadata generation available on
the Web have become very popular, such as image tagging
or rating systems. Most applications that use them are based
on the idea that a large number of users can provide in most
cases good quality metadata. However, there is a number
56
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

of problems where the knowledge of the crowds is not
sufﬁcient due to lack of human expertise or theoretical time
constraints.
It has been shown [26] that metadata can be divided into
three distinct groups with respect to the nature of informa-
tion they are describing. (1) Metadata describing the content
of a resource (2) Metadata classifying a resource using a
taxonomy (3) Metadata connecting two resources usually by
a semantic relation. While provision of type (1) metadata can
be done by humans for large text collections in a reasonable
time, the provision of type (2) metadata is problematic and
type (3) metadata cannot be manually acquired even in
moderately large collections. The reason is that the number
of possible connections explodes quadratically with respect
to the number of resources and as a result people are unable
to keep track of all the relevant available information. The
problem appears to be particularly signiﬁcant in quickly
growing collections with many contributing authors.
A tempting approach to resolve this problem is by
increasing the number of people who contribute to the
collection maintenance, for example, by creating discourse
links and then sharing the results with others. Shum and
Fergusson expect that this will result in a user-generated
web of meaningfully connected annotations which can be
visualized, ﬁltered and searched for patterns in ways that
are impossible at present [27]. In reality, this approach can
be successful only in very limited domains, it certainly does
not scale-up unless automatic link generation and typing
tools assist in the annotation and the maintenance process.
In addition to that, human annotators have been previously
found inconsistent in carrying out this task [28].
To provide an example, let us consider Wikipedia, which
is today perhaps the largest collection of documents contain-
ing user created links and at the same time maintained by a
very large community of users (about 250,000 contributing
users). Even though Wikipedia contains currently 3,433,587
articles, it is still very small in comparison to all information
available on the Web. While in Wikipedia content is typi-
cally linked from an anchor (concept) to the whole article
(description of the concept), the situation is more complex in
other domains, such as in scholarly databases. In Wikipedia,
there can be only one page describing a concept whereas
in scholarly databases there can be a large and growing
number of papers discussing the same topic. The growth
of Wikipedia in terms of new articles has already started
to decrease and it is predicted that this trend is going to
continue in the future. An opposite trend can be expected
with scholarly literature.
Even though the problem of linking information less
complex in Wikipedia than in scholarly databases and even
though the community is very large, the maintenance of
Wikipedia is problematic and automatic tools are desperately
needed. For example, it has been noted in [29] that the
effort necessary for the maintenance of the information on
Wikipedia is not directly proportional to the amount of
information stored, but rises faster than linearly with the
amount of information being added.
V. USING SEMANTIC SIMILARITY FOR LINK TYPING
We have previously studied the relation between links
authored by people and links predicted by automatic link
generation methods [1], namely using semantic similarity
measures on document vectors directly extracted from text.
The results indicate that semantic similarity is strongly
correlated to the way people link content. In this paper,
we are extending this work by investigating the qualitative
properties of links. As a test-bed we are using articles
selected from Wikipedia. For our experiments, this dataset
has the following advantages:
• A large number of good quality articles forming a
network of cross-references created and agreed by a
sufﬁciently large community of Wikipedia contributors.
• Articles connected by a single unspeciﬁed link type.
However, the link may represent different semantic
relationships.
• A suitable initial test-bed. Only a limited set of dis-
course relations are present in Wikipedia at the article
level. As a consequence, we do not investigate relations,
such as disagreement or contradiction that typically do
not appear at this level.
The correlation has been measured on a collection of
5,000 Wikipedia articles in categories containing the phrase
“United Kingdom”. This required the calculation of semantic
similarity (in this case cosine similarity calculated on tﬁdf
document vectors) for 5,0002
2
−5, 000 = 12, 495, 000 pairs of
documents and the extraction of all 120,602 links between
these articles created by Wikipedia authors.
A. Linked-pair likelihood
A central concept of our study is the quantity called
linked-pair likelihood introduced in [1] which is the proba-
bility that a pair of documents is connected by a manually
created link, calculated as lpr =
|links|
|document pairs|. Figure
1 shows lpr calculated for groups of document pairs at
different intervals of semantic similarity. It can be observed
that linked-pair likelihood strongly correlates with the value
of sematic similarity (this provides an answer to hypothesis
(a) in the introduction), however the direction of the cor-
relation is in the right part of the graph quite unexpected.
The correlation has been tested for statistical signiﬁcance
with a positive result for p-value well beyond p < 0.001 for
both Spearman’s rank and Pearson correlation coefﬁcients.
This indicates that high similarity value is not necessarily a
good predictor for the existence of a link. The detail of this
experiement can be found in [1].
57
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Figure 1.
The linked-pair likelihood (y-axis) with respect to the cosine
similarity (x-axis) [1].
B. Using semantic similarity for relation typing
The results presented in the previous section provoke a
number of questions. Perhaps the two most interesting are:
(1) Why is the curve in Figure 1 not monotonically in-
creasing which would mean the more semantic similar
the more likely to be linked?
(2) As content can be linked for various reasons, are there
any qualitative differences between linked documents
with different value of semantic similarity?
A possible explanation for question (1) is that people
create links between related documents that provide new in-
formation and therefore do not link nearly identical content.
Regarding question (2), we hypothesize that the value of
semantic similarity might be used in link type identiﬁcation,
i.e., the reasons for linking articles with different values of
semantic similarity are also different. Investigation of these
two questions provides answers to hypothesis (b) presented
in the introduction.
C. Relations of interest and their representation
In our experiment, we have decided to use four discourse
link types building on the classiﬁcation provided by [23]
as we hypothesize that the value of semantic similarity
might be a useful distinctive factor. The sampled document
pairs were classiﬁed to the following types: tangent, simi-
larity/equivalence, expansion, aggregate. Examples of these
link types are depicted in Table I. The description of these
link types is as follows:
Tangent links represent according to [23] links which
relate topics in an unusual manner, for example, a link from
a document about “Clouds” to one about Georgia O’Keeffe
(who painted a mural entitled Clouds). In our work tangent
links are associated to document pairs that are related in
a useful, but relatively marginal way, typically there is a
single piece of information that justiﬁes the relationship of
the documents.
Expansion link type is attached to a link which starts at
a discussion of a topic and has as its destination a more
detailed discussion of the same topic.
Title 1
Title 2
Link
type
Description
Jack
McConnell
Scottish
Qualiﬁ-
cations
Authority
tangent
The ﬁrst article mentions that
the
Scottish
Labour
politician
Jack McConnell appointed a new
board for the Scottish Qualiﬁca-
tions Authority (SQA) and intro-
duced signiﬁcant changes to the
way the agency worked.
Social
Demo-
cratic Party
(UK)
David
Owen
expansion
David Owen was was one of
the founders of the British Social
Democratic Party (SDP) and led
the SDP from 1983 to 1987 and
the re-formed SDP from 1988 to
1990. The ﬁrst article mentions
David Owen a number of times.
Senior
Railcard
Family and
Friends
Railcard
similarity/
equiva-
lence
Both articles describe the his-
tory of railcards introduced by
British Rail. Articles clearly de-
scribe two semantically related
concepts.
Statutory
Instru-
ments
of
the
UK,
1996
Statutory
Instru-
ments
of
the
UK,
1996
(3001-
4000)
aggregate
The ﬁrst article contains the other
as its part.
Table I
EXAMPLE LINK TYPES
Similarity/equivalence
links
represent
related
and
strongly-related discussions of the same topic.
Aggregate links are those which group together several
related documents. According to Allan [23], aggregate links
may in fact have several destinations, allowing the destina-
tion documents to be treated as a whole when desirable. In
our work, only pairs of documents are considered and thus
aggregate links are assigned to document pairs when the ﬁrst
article contains signiﬁcant parts of the second article.
The only discourse link types from Allan’s taxonomy that
we did not use for classiﬁcation are comparison and contrast
links. Contrast and comparison is in a Wiki typically handled
either explicitly in the text, e.g., “The invasion of Iraq was
particularly controversial, as it attracted widespread public
opposition and 139 of Blair’s MPs opposed it.” or it is
part of the elaboration, revision and reﬁnement process of
the article. This obviously reduces the number of discourse
relationships we can identify to those mentioned above.
We also assume that two contrasting text segments would
often be represented by similar term-document vectors and
therefore the value of semantic similarity would not provide
sufﬁcient information.
D. Results
To answer the questions deﬁned in Section V-B, we have
carried out a study that investigates the characteristics of
link pairs at different similarity levels. The interval [0.1, 1]
of semantic similarity depicted in Figure 1 has been divided
58
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Figure 2.
The frequency of different link types with respect to semantic
similarity of document pairs
into 9 intervals of even width. As a case study, 10 article
pairs from each interval1 between which a link was created
by Wikipedia users were randomly sampled and they were
assessed by a human investigator and classiﬁed. An evalu-
ation environment was created to allow the investigator to
see the articles next to each other and to easily compare
them. The investigator was asked to inspect both articles, to
assign exactly one of the four relationships of interest and to
provide a brief justiﬁcation for the decision. The document
pairs were presented to the investigator in a random order
and the investigator was during the evaluation not aware of
the calculated value of semantic similarity associated with
the article pairs. The evaluation and classiﬁcation of one pair
took from 5 to 20 minutes. The whole manual evaluation
took about 19 hours.
Overall, 37% of article pairs were classiﬁed as tangent,
36% as expansion, 20% as similar and 7% as aggregate.
The results of the evaluation are presented in Figure 2. The
ﬁgure shows the frequency of different link types in all the
9 selected intervals.
We have found that in the lower levels of semantic
similarity [0.1, 0.3] most of the links were classiﬁed under
the tangent link type. At higher levels of similarity the
proportion of the tangent link types decreases. Only very
few links were classiﬁed as tangent when the similarity of
the document pair was high.
Expansion links start to appear at similarity higher than
0.3. At the similarity level of 0.3 − 0.4 the proportion of
the expansion links is roughly the same as the proportion
of tangent links. The highest proportion of expansion links
is present in the semantic similarity interval of 0.4 − 0.6
where the value of similarity seems to be quite a distinctive
factor from the similarity link types. At higher similarity
1Only 5 article pairs were sampled from the interval [0.9,1.0] due to lack
of data in this region.
values, the proportion of expansion links drops and similar
link types appear.
Most of the similar/equivalence links types are present
in the interval 0.6, 0.9. The proportion of this link type
is in this region approximately 40%. It seems that it is
hard to distinguish them in this interval from the expansion
links solely based on the similarity value. When semantic
similarity reaches the value of 0.9, it is possible to see
aggregate link types that are characteristic by a large value
of similarity.
Overall, this conﬁrms that the value of semantic similarity
is a useful factor characterizing up to certain extent the
type of the semantic relationship which provides answer
to the second question reported in Section V-B. We have
also observed from this experiment and Figure 1 that people
link most often document pairs of the expansion and tangent
types, even though the tangent type is in absolute numbers
the most frequent link type. People link less likely document
pairs providing similar, equivalent or even duplicate content.
The value of semantic similarity is just one criterion which
is useful for the detection of certain link types, but has not
been used in link typing previously. We expect that robust
link typing systems should be developed by combining a
number of strategies. We are aware that the value of semantic
similarity as presented in this example is unable to make
distinctions about certain link types, such as the prerequisite
link type, nor it can be used to determine the direction of
the link. Other text characteristics perhaps combined with
external knowledge should be used for this purpose.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have shown that automatic link generation and typing
systems are needed in order to provide scalable solutions to
document interlinking in large text collections. We argued
that cross-document relations cannot be simply produced by
the “Social Web” using crowdsourcing methods. However,
the automatically identiﬁed relations can be conﬁrmed or
rejected using social tagging and both approaches can work
in synergy.
We have presented an experimental study that shows
that the value of semantic similarity is a useful indicator
that can help to identify link types. We assume that more
similar indicators exist and their combination would improve
the accuracy of link typing. In our study, we have used
Wikipedia as a source of textual document. This choice
alowed us to simplify the problem by considering only a
limited set of cross-document relations. In the future, we
plan to perform similar experiments on data from scholarly
databases that provide more complex and challenging envi-
ronment for link generation and typing. In addition, we plan
to work with lexical units of a lower granularity, such as
paragraphs, sentences and noun phrases. This will help us
to better understand the characteristics of cross-document
relationships with the aim to ﬁnd distinctive features for
59
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

various relationship types. This should enable the building
of automated and scalable tools for automatic link generation
and typing capable of supporting various reasoning and
navigation tasks outlined in the beginning of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] Knoth, P., Novotny, J., Zdrahal, Z.:
Automatic generation
of inter-passage links based on semantic similarity.
In:
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Com-
putational Linguistics (Coling 2010), Beijing, China, Coling
2010 Organizing Committee (2010) pp. 590–598
[2] Henning, V., Reichelt, J.:
Mendeley - A Last.fm For Re-
search? In: 2008 IEEE Fourth International Conference on
eScience, IEEE (2008) pp. 327–328
[3] Uren, V., Shum, S.B., Li, G., Domingue, J., Motta, E.:
Scholarly publishing and argument in hyperspace. In: WWW
’03: Proceedings of the 12th international conference on
World Wide Web, New York, NY, USA, ACM (2003) pp.
244–250
[4] Shum, S.B.: Cohere: Towards web 2. 0 argumentation (2008)
[5] Burns, G.A.P.C., Cheng, W.C.: Tools for knowledge acqui-
sition within the neuroscholar system and their application
to anatomical tract-tracing data.
Journal of Biomedical
Discovery and Collaboration 1 (2006) pp. 10+
[6] Ciccarese, P., Wu, E., Wong, G., Ocana, M., Kinoshita, J.,
Ruttenberg, A., Clark, T.:
The swan biomedical discourse
ontology. J. of Biomedical Informatics 41 (2008) pp. 739–
751
[7] Wilkinson, R., Smeaton, A.F.:
Automatic link generation.
ACM Computing Surveys 31 (1999)
[8] Huang, W.C., Geva, S., Trotman, A.: Overview of the inex
2009 link the wiki track. (2009)
[9] Itakura, K.Y., Clarke, C.L.A.: University of waterloo at inex
2008: Adhoc, book, and link-the-wiki tracks. [30] 132–139
[10] Jenkinson, D., Leung, K.C., Trotman, A.: Wikisearching and
wikilinking. [30] 374–388
[11] Lu, W., Liu, D., Fu, Z.: Csir at inex 2008 link-the-wiki track.
[30] pp. 389–394
[12] Geva, S.: Gpx: Ad-hoc queries and automated link discovery
in the wikipedia.
In Fuhr, N., Kamps, J., Lalmas, M.,
Trotman, A., eds.: INEX. Volume 4862 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science., Springer (2007) pp. 404–416
[13] Dopichaj, P., Skusa, A., Heß, A.: Stealing anchors to link the
wiki. [30] pp. 343–353
[14] Granitzer, M., Seifert, C., Zechner, M.:
Context based
wikipedia linking. [30] pp. 354–365
[15] Allan, J.: Building hypertext using information retrieval. Inf.
Process. Manage. 33 (1997) pp. 145–159
[16] Zeng, J., Bloniarz, P.A.: From keywords to links: an automatic
approach. Information Technology: Coding and Computing,
International Conference on 1 (2004) pp. 283
[17] Zhang, J., Kamps, J.: A content-based link detection approach
using the vector space model. [30] pp. 395–400
[18] He, J.: Link detection with wikipedia. [30] pp. 366–373
[19] Trigg, R.: A Network-Based Approach to Text Handling for
the Online Scientiﬁc Community. PhD thesis (1983)
[20] Mancini, C.:
Cinematic Hypertext: Investigating a New
Paradigm. (2005)
[21] Shum, S.B., Motta, E., Domingue, J.: Scholonto: an ontology-
based digital library server for research documents and dis-
course. International Journal on Digital Libraries 3 (2000)
pp. 237–248
[22] Sanders, T., Spooren, W.P.M., Noordman, L.G.M.: Coherence
relations in a cognitive theory of discourse representation.
Cognitive Linguistics (1993)
[23] Allan, J.: Automatic hypertext link typing. In: HYPERTEXT
’96: Proceedings of the the seventh ACM conference on
Hypertext, New York, NY, USA, ACM (1996) pp. 42–52
[24] Marcu, D., Echihabi, A.:
An unsupervised approach to
recognizing discourse relations. In: ACL ’02: Proceedings of
the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics, Morristown, NJ, USA, Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (2002) pp. 368–375
[25] Radev, D.R., Zhang, Z., Otterbacher, J.: Cross-document re-
lationship classiﬁcation for text summarization. Unpublished
paper (2008)
[26] Knoth, P.:
Semantic annotation of multilingual learning
objects based on a domain ontology (2009)
[27] Shum, S.B., Ferguson, R.: Towards a social learning space
for open educational resources. In: OpenED2010: Seventh
Annual Open Education Conference. (2010)
[28] Ellis, D., Furner-Hines, J., Willett, P.: On the measurement
of inter-linker consistency and retrieval effectiveness in hy-
pertext databases. In: SIGIR ’94: Proceedings of the 17th
annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, New York, NY, USA,
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. (1994) pp. 51–60
[29] Kittur, A., Suh, B., Pendleton, B.A., Chi, E.H.: He says, she
says: conﬂict and coordination in wikipedia. In: CHI ’07:
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in
computing systems, New York, NY, USA, ACM (2007) pp.
453–462
[30] Geva, S., Kamps, J., Trotman, A., eds.: Advances in Focused
Retrieval, 7th International Workshop of the Initiative for
the Evaluation of XML Retrieval, INEX 2008, Dagstuhl
Castle, Germany, December 15-18, 2008. Revised and Se-
lected Papers.
In Geva, S., Kamps, J., Trotman, A., eds.:
INEX. Volume 5631 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science.,
Springer (2009)
60
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

