Comparative Visual Analysis of Large Customer
Feedback Based on Self-Organizing Sentiment Maps
Halld´or Janetzko, Dominik J¨ackle and Tobias Schreck
University of Konstanz
Konstanz, Germany
Email: Halldor.Janetzko@uni.kn, Dominik.Jaeckle@uni.kn, Tobias.Schreck@uni.kn
Abstract—Textual customer feedback data, e.g., received by
surveys or incoming customer email notiﬁcations, can be a rich
source of information with many applications in Customer Rela-
tionship Management (CRM). Nevertheless, to date this valuable
source of information is often neglected in practice, as service
managers would have to read manually through potentially
large amounts of feedback text documents to extract actionable
information. As in many cases, a purely manual approach is
not feasible, we propose an automatic visualization technique to
enable the geospatial-aware visual comparison of customer feed-
back. Our approach is based on integrating geospatial signiﬁcance
calculations, textual sentiment analysis, and visual clustering and
aggregation based on Self-Organzing Maps in an interactive
analysis application. Showing signiﬁcant location dependencies of
key concepts and sentiments expressed by the customer feedback,
our approach helps to deal with large unstructured customer
feedback data. We apply our technique to real-world customer
feedback data in a case-study, showing the capabilities of our
method by highlighting interesting ﬁndings.
Keywords—customer relationship management, review analysis,
self-organizing maps, sentiment analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Many companies with business in the world wide web
collect reviews and customer feedback of their products and
services. One common way of assessing customer satisfaction
are grading schemes (e.g., one to ﬁve stars) and free text
forms allowing more detailed customer comments. But aside
from showing the average rating or the distribution of ratings,
more sophisticated and consequently also more expressive
analyses are performed very rarely. This is surprising, as the
free text provided by customers is a valuable source of hints
with respect to customer needs and satisfaction levels, but a
manual inspection is often not feasible. Modern approaches
of text processing and visualization can help at this end,
by summarizing important themes and sentiments in large
amounts of text.
An effective analysis of textual customer feedback should
involve and examine different aspects of the text content. The
most obvious one is the frequency of statements or terms.
Simple statistics and visualization methods like word clouds
may help to get a ﬁrst impression of most important keywords.
But simple statistics do not help to analyze, whether the
customers liked or disliked these points. The next important
aspect is the sentiment extracted from the context of the
addressed keywords occurring in the text. E.g., customers may
complain or praise products or services, and by using sentiment
analysis, we aim at capturing this notion. From a company’s
point of view, negative statements are in many cases more
important to analyze than the positive ones, to improve cus-
tomer satisfaction. But the computation of one single sentiment
score is not very expressive as customers might review more
than one aspect, and different customers may have different
opinions. Therefore, the challenge is to arrive at a ﬁne-
grained analysis in this complex data. The sentiment analysis
should assign sentiment scores with respect to the attributes
of the product or service, instead of computing one value.
Customers, for instance, could like a certain bought product,
at the same time complain about a too complicated ordering
process. Yet another key aspect holding valuable information
in customer feedback data is the geospatial location. Customer
feedback can be geolocated by several ways, including having
the customer address in a corporate database, or by geo-
resolving the IP address an anonymous web feedback was
provided. From that we can derive the geospatial distribution
of customer feedback, which is important for two reasons.
First, for global companies, cultural differences may inﬂuence
the customers’ conception and country speciﬁc products or
services should be offered. Second, besides cultural differences
there is another aspect which may change customer’s needs.
The geographic location determines for instance the climate
and may also impose delivery obstacles resulting from the
geographic topology. In very dry areas, for example, it may
be reasonable to leave a parcel outside the customer’s housing,
but in rainy areas the customer may complain about a soaked
product. Concerning the topology, hard to reach customers
(e.g., islands or exclaves) may complain about long delivery
times, but there may be nothing the company could do about
it.
Our main motivation for this work was the following start-
ing hypothesis, to be explored on a real-world CRM data set:
“The geographic position of reviewing customers correlates to
their satisfaction levels and needs.” We wanted to see, whether
there are differences in customer preferences caused by the
geospatial location. The result of this analysis could help to
improve the customer satisfaction by detecting differences in
customer needs. Companies can therefore differentiate better
among their customers and can easily focus and channel their
efforts.
In this paper, we perform customer feedback analysis based
on sentiment maps. Sentiment maps are the result of preceding
opinion mining steps, where the occurrence of a term is drawn
on a geographic map. The color used hereby depicts the
sentiment and the sentiment map consequently shows not only
the geospatial distribution of the term but simultaneously also
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Fig. 1.
Visualization of customer feedback data using sentiment analysis and self organizing maps. Term groups with different sentiment scores are visible and
additionally the geospatial distribution of the terms is displayed. The brightness of the background represents the coherence of the geographic distribution for
each SOM node.
the sentiment distribution. Following this approach leads to one
sentiment map for each term. Further details of this approach
can be found in the beginning of the analysis results section
of this paper. A result of our technique is depicted in Figure 1.
We present in this paper our methodology analyzing
customer feedback with respect to sentiment and geospatial
customer location. Our contributions are the combined text
and geospatial analysis of customer feedback data and the
visual representation allowing a comparative analysis. Fur-
thermore, we show that there are indeed frequent feedback
terms (concepts) with a high geospatial dependency. The paper
is structured as follows. First, we will give an overview to
existing and related work in section II, and then detail our
approach in section III. Findings from an application to a
real-world data set will be discussed in section IV. We will
conclude with an outlook to future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Our work relates to a number of areas, which we brieﬂy
review in the next paragraphs.
Self-Organizing Maps for Visual Data Analysis. Many
problems in visual data analysis require the reduction of data
to perform meaningful analysis on a reduced version of data.
Clustering reduces the data to a smaller number of groups to
more easily analyze and compare; and dimensionality reduc-
tion reduces the number of dimensions of data items to con-
sider, and to project data to 2D displays. The Self-Organizing
Map (SOM) algorithm [1] is a well-known method, which
provides both data reduction and projection in an integrated
framework. As a neural-network type method it learns a set
of prototype vectors arranged on a regular grid, typically em-
bedded in 2D. The method typically provides robust results in
both data clustering and 2D layouting. Using regular 2D grids
as neural structures for the SOM training, visualization in form
of heatmaps, component planes, and distance distributions
comprise basic methods for visual exploration of data using
SOM processing [2]. SOM-based Visual Analysis to date has
considered different application domains, including ﬁnancial
data analysis based on multivariate data models [3], analysis
of web clickstream data using Markov Chain models [4],
trajectory-oriented data [5], or time-oriented data [6]. Image
Sorter [7] proposed to visually analyze collections of images
by training a SOM over color features extracted from the
images. We here follow that idea, in that we analyze geospatial
heatmaps of sentiment scores using SOM of respective color
features as well.
SOM-Based Visual Analysis of Geospatial Data. Many
application problems involve georeferenced data items, and
visual analysis approaches have been identiﬁed as very helpful
also for geospatial data analysis processes [8]. Choropleth (or
thematic) maps are a basic, popular technique to show the
distribution of a scalar value over a land-covering map [9].
Also, SOM-based approaches have been studied in context
of geospatial data analysis, and proven useful to this end.
When considering georeferenced data with SOM, basically two
approaches exist. First, in the joint data model, one single
data representation is formed by combining spatial and other
multivariate data into a single vector representation which is
input to the SOM method. Examples include [10], where a joint
vector representation for both geolocation and demographic
data was formed for census data analysis. More methods can
be found in [11]. As a second approach, linked views integrate
visual data analysis of each data aspect (geolocation, time,
multivariate measures, etc.) in separate views combined by
linking and brushing. One example system is [12], where
a linked view system proposed the joint visual analysis of
geospatial and multivariate data. Also, in [13], we proposed to
jointly analyze geospatial and temporal phenomena by a linked
view. There, SOM clusters can be computed for either data
perspective, and the correspondence of clusters to the other
perspective is shown by an auxiliary view. In our approach
we do not consider geolocation data explicit for the SOM
generation, but implicitly by the spatial-sensitive color features
extracted from sentiment heatmaps generated from text data
(cf. also Section III for details).
Feature-based Text Visualization. Finally, we relate to a
body of work in visual document analysis. In general, feature-
based document analysis abstracts a document (or collection,
or stream) by a set of features which are more easy to visualize,
as compared to the content of the documents. Numerous
document features for different applications have been studied
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
fast delivery
to set up
to show
4
1
2
3
4
Fig. 2.
Process pipeline to create self-organizing sentiment maps. The self-organizing sentiment map is determined by (1) extracting corresponding feature
vectors, (2) calculating the best matching unit, (3) aggregating similar images according to the SOM, and ﬁnally (4) mapping the coherence and the additional
information like the used terms to the images.
to date. For example, features scoring the readability of docu-
ments have been proposed in [14], and features applicable to
classify authorship of documents have been surveyed in [15].
Sentiment features rate the polarity (in terms of positiveness of
negativeness of statements) in a given text. In combination with
time-series analysis, sentiment features can be used, e.g., to
detect critical customer opinions in near real time, as possibly
arising from some feedback channel [16]. In [17], we applied
sentiment analysis to customer feedback data and analyzed it
by means of geospatial heatmaps generated for the sentiments.
While in [17], we considered only small sets of such heatmaps
which we sequentially inspected, the focus of our work here is
the comparative analysis of large numbers of sentiment maps,
based on the SOM method.
III.
TECHNIQUE
Our approach enables the geospatial visual comparison
of customer feedback sentiments by using a Self-Organizing
overview display. Figure 2 shows the overall process that is
divided into four steps: (1) First, we extract a color feature
vector for each sentiment map. (2) Second, we train the SOM
and assign every sentiment map exactly one node. In step (3)
we aggregate all sentiment maps that are located on the same
map node. (4) Finally, we calculate the coherence and enhance
the aggregated sentiment map with the content terms from the
represented customer review texts. We next detail these steps.
Feature Vector Extraction. The feature vector we use as
input to the SOM computation consists of localized RGB color
values. We create a grid overlay for each sentiment map and
calculate the color mean value for each cell. The mean value is
determined by the color value of each single pixel contained in
the corresponding grid cell. The representative feature vector
for any sentiment map is created using the RGB color model.
All RGB mean values are forming the feature vector:
Picture1 = (R1,1 G1,1 B1,1 R1,2 G1,2 B1,2 R1,3 G1,3 B1,3 . . .)
Ri,j represents the value of R for picture i and cell j. This
format is used as feature vector representing one sentiment
map; each picture is assigned exactly one vector. Then, the
extracted feature vectors are used to train the SOM using the
SOMPAK implementation [18] (see also Figure 2 (1)).
Sentiment Map Classiﬁcation. We apply a standard SOM
training process following best practices suggested in [18].
Based on the deﬁned SOM grid resolution, the prototype
vectors are linearly initialized. Then, two learning phases are
applied. First, a coarse learning is performed with a larger
training radius, so that every considered node has a wide
impact factor. Then, a ﬁne-tuning training step is performed
with a smaller training radius. Once the SOM-training has
ﬁnished, the best matching prototype vector on the SOM grid
(best matching unit, or bmu) is determined for each sentiment
map by ﬁnding the node with the minimal distance (1).
bmu(SM) =
M
min
k=1


v
u
u
t
N
X
i=1
(v(SM).i − v(nodek).i)2

 (1)
We iterate all sentiment maps and calculate the best matching
unit for each sentiment map SM. Then, we iterate all M
trained SOM nodes and calculate the minimal Euclidean
distance between the sentiment map and the trained SOM
node. Therefore, the feature vector of the sentiment map and
the vector of the SOM node are used. The corresponding vector
is determined via the function v() with size N. The control
variable i addresses every single vector entry. Finally, the
sentiment map is assigned to the SOM node with the minimal
distance (see also Figure 2 (2)). The grid size can be chosen
individually for each application.
Similarity-based Sentiment Map Aggregation. As the
outcome of the SOM and bmu mapping, multiple sentiment
images may share the same SOM node. Therefore, we need
to provide aggregation of such sets of maps. To ﬁnd a repre-
sentative image for those sentiment maps different approaches
are possible. We here chose to apply visual aggregation and
merge all similar images into one. Therefore, every sentiment
map is assigned a transparency value, so that we are able
to create one image by lying one sentiment map upon each
other. The resulting image visualizes all aggregated sentiment
areas. By adding multiple pictures on top of each other, the last
added picture on top has the highest impact according to the
process of alpha composition in terms of occlusion [19]. For
that reason, we calculate the intersection of sentiment maps
on our own based on the color, shown in Figure 2 (3).
Coherence Mapping and Map Enhancement. The last
step of the pipeline is twofold: First, we map the background
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

of the aggregated sentiment map to its coherence. Second,
we enhance the aggregated sentiment map with additional
information.
Aggregating multiple sentiment maps may result in an
image showing a constant distribution. But the single pictures
might be very diverse regarding the positions where the
identiﬁed sentiment was mapped to. In order to understand
the composition of those aggregated sentiment clusters it
is important to deﬁne a quality criterion: the coherence of
the sentiment maps. Thus, we make use of the background
and deﬁne a coherence measure. The coherence measure (2)
expresses how similar two sentiment maps are according to
its feature vector. The coherence is mapped to the color range
from black (high coherence) to white (very low coherence).
coherence(SMS) =
N
P
i=1
N
P
j=i
dist(SMSi, SMSj)
N · (N + 1)
2
(2)
The coherence is calculated for N sentiment maps (SMS)
addressing the same SOM node. Summarizing, we build the
average of all pictures including a distance function. We
then sum the distance value of each sentiment map to all
other sentiment maps. The distance function dist between two
sentiment maps is deﬁned in equation (3).
dist(p, q) =
s
M
P
k=1
(v(p).k − v(q).k)2
|{i ∈ 1..M : ¬(v(p).i = v(q).i = 0)}|
(3)
The distance function requires two sentiment maps as parame-
ters with dimension M. The Euclidean distance is normalized
by the number of vector dimensions M excluding all dimen-
sions with zero values in both dimensions. The problem of a
possible low coherence raises with the algorithm of the SOM:
To calculate the similarity in the second step the Euclidean
distance combines sentiment maps that are very sparse, as the
exact locations do not matter.
Sentiment Keyword Visualization. Every sentiment map
corresponds to one term. As a consequence, if multiple senti-
ment maps are aggregated, the resulting image corresponds to
multiple terms. Hence, we combine the aggregated sentiment
maps with a simple but effective text representation: All terms
are drawn semi-transparent with a gray border on top of the
aggregated image. Also, the amount of sentiment maps that
have been aggregated is indicated by a red number on the
top left corner. Using an intelligent text layout algorithm,
the analyst can easily identify the terms corresponding to the
image; the text uses the full width and height to be easy to
read. Figure 2 (4) illustrates the automatic labeling result.
Depending on the chosen grid size in the ﬁrst step (feature
vector extraction), the ﬁnal result may differ. To allow data
abstraction and overview large data sets, we typically chose
a relatively small grid size, where the amounts of nodes is
signiﬁcantly smaller than the amount of considered sentiment
maps.
IV.
ANALYSIS RESULTS
We applied our methods described above to sentiment maps
of a real-world data set of collected customer reviews. The
reviews were collected after online purchases via an online
survey. The data set consists out of 86.812 customer reviews
with an average of 18.4 words per review (the median is 12
words per review). In this section, we will ﬁrst describe the
input images resulting from a technique called sentiment maps
more in detail. Afterwards, we will discuss interesting ﬁnd-
ings with respect to the geographic distribution of frequently
reported review terms.
Sentiment Maps. Sentiment maps allow the user to inspect
the geospatial sentiment distribution of individual terms and
are introduced in [17]. After collecting all terms of all reviews
excluding stop words one visualization for each of these
terms is created. More speciﬁcally, ﬁrst all occurrences of
the respective term are determined and the sentiment value
for these occurrences are retrieved. The data is then used to
generate the sentiment map as illustrated in Figure 3. The
data is ﬁrst partitioned into two subsets: the occurrences with
positive sentiment in Figure 3(a) and occurrences with negative
sentiment in Figure 3(c). The two partitions are processed
separately. A Gaussian blurring function is applied in order
to spatially extend the occurrences and increase the visual
salience of the geospatial distribution patterns. The result
is a blurred representation for both sentiments showing the
respective geospatial occurrences as depicted in Figures 3(b)
and 3(d). Finally, a combined image is created by using the
RGB channels of the RGB color model. The blurred image of
the negative occurrences is put in the red channel and the green
channel is used for the positive occurrences. Consequently,
locations with both positive and negative sentiments will result
in yellow colors, while pure positive sentiments will result
in green colors. We did not differentiate between within
negative sentiments or positive sentiments respectively as this
differentiation is highly user and application dependent. But
sentiment maps could be extended by this possibility. The ﬁnal
result of this technique can be seen in Figure 3(e).
a) Positive term occurrences
c) Negative term occurrences
b) Blurred positive occurrences
d) Blurred negative occurrences
e) Combined term occurrences
red 
channel
green
channel
Fig. 3.
The location maps of positive (a) and negative (c) review terms are
blurred to increase the visual saliency and to give a visual aggregation (b,d).
Both blurred location maps are then combined (e) by using the RGB channels
and show the distribution of positive (green), neutral (yellow) and negative
(red) term occurrences.
Discussion of Findings. We applied the technique de-
scribed in section III to a dataset consisting of 327 sentiment
maps. These terms were found in preceding document mining
steps and contains the words being nouns, verbs, and adjec-
tives. Note that some of these terms are even compound nouns
like ”phone call“ or negated verbs like ”not to send“. The
resulting overview visualization can be seen in Figure 4.
On an abstract level there is a clear grouping and ordering
of the sentiment maps visible. Terms with only negative
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Fig. 4.
Resulting overview visualization of the SOM analysis process. There are SOM nodes like the one in the lower left being highlighted with a bright
background showing a high internal diversity.
occurrences (reddish images) are located in the upper left while
positive terms (greenish sentiment maps) are located in the
lower right. The ﬁrst diagonal consists of terms being either
mentioned negatively and positively equally often (upper right)
and terms with a geospatial, diverse distribution (lower left).
The SOM analysis enables the analyst to get a fast overview
over terms being mentioned always positive or negative.
The strongly highlighted, white node of Figure 4 in the
lower left contains eleven terms showing a very diverse
geospatial distribution. As this is the node being highlighted
most we will investigate this node in the following paragraphs.
Detailed analysis via drill-down techniques are possible in
our system and reveal the geospatial distribution for each
single term. The visualization of all eleven contained terms
is depicted in Figure 5.
Inspecting the sentiment maps more in detail reveals that
this node mainly contains sentiment maps with sparse and
diverse geospatial distributions.
The most obvious sentiment map contained in this SOM
node is the term ”hawaii“. It is occurring mostly positively
and collocated with the geospatial position of the Hawaiian
islands. Inspecting the customer comments in detail, we found
that customers liked the free shipping possibilities to Hawaii,
Fig. 5.
Visual representation of all sentiment maps contained in the lower
left node of Figure 4.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

which seems not to be taken for granted. Service managers
can learn from this information that (Hawaiian) customers do
care about the shipping procedure and that free shipping might
be an advantage over competitors.
Also, the term ”case manager“ (third row, second column in
Figure 5) shows an interesting pattern. Although mostly men-
tioned negatively because of language issues – the customer
support was hard to understand because of foreign accents
– there are many positive occurrences in Houston, Texas
where customers liked the support regarding their printers.
Service managers should now investigate further what the
characteristics about the problems in Houston were.
Two further interesting sentiment maps are the ones of
”nightmare“ and ”porch“. Investigating the underlying reviews
shows that the preceding sentiment analysis did not work
correctly as all the reviews were purely negative. This is not a
drawback of the method per se, but exempliﬁes the uncertainty
of any sentiment analysis and the sensitivity of our method to
the input data. The comments regarding the term ”porch“ were
mentioning that the parcel was left unattended on the porch.
The term ”nightmare“ was used in cases where the process of
ordering and returning products did not go smoothly.
V.
CONCLUSION
We presented our approach to visually compare and in-
spect large sets of textual customer feedback with respect to
sentiment expressed regarding key concepts, and geographic
distribution. For each concept, a sentiment map was rendered,
and set of all maps was visually clustered and aggregated
by the SOM approach. Interaction methods allow to navigate
the overview visualizations and drill down for detailed in-
spection and relation of feedback topics in geospatial context.
Application ﬁndings presented indicate that key concepts and
their sentiment scores being highly dependent on geographic
position. Such ﬁndings can be very helpful in analyzing service
levels across locations, products, and customers, and similar
applications in CRM.
We have several ideas to extend our work in future for
improved analysis. One possibility improving the visual rep-
resentation is the integration of semantic zoom approaches.
Semantic zoom can allow to merge neighboring SOM nodes
to reduce the level of detail. Additionally, semantic zoom
can be applied to the shown terms by using an ontology
grouping terms, showing only the common parent of a set of
related concepts. The ontology also leads to another extension
possibility we are going to integrate in future. We plan to show
the hierarchic relationships between terms directly on the SOM
representation. Last but not least, we want to consider more
detailed map visualizations concerning production facilities
and income distributions among different cities correlating
geospatial dependent properties with the text features.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Consensus project
and has been partly funded by the European Commission’s 7th
Framework Programme through theme ICT-2013.5.4 ICT for
Governance and Policy Modelling under contract no.611688.
We are thankful to Ming Hao of Hewlett-Packard Labs
for fruitful collaboration on the analysis of geo-referenced
customer review report data. We also thank the Helsinki
University of Technology for providing the SOMPAK imple-
mentation which we used in this study.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Kohonen, Self-Organizing Maps.
Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[2]
J. Vesanto, “SOM-based data visualization methods,” Intelligent Data
Analysis, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 111–126, 1999.
[3]
G. J. Deboeck and T. K. Kohonen, Eds., Visual Explorations in Finance:
with Self-Organizing Maps.
Springer, 1998.
[4]
J. Wei, Z. Shen, N. Sundaresan, and K.-L. Ma, “Visual cluster explo-
ration of web clickstream data,” in IEEE VAST, 2012, pp. 3–12.
[5]
T. Schreck, J. Bernard, T. von Landesberger, and J. Kohlhammer,
“Visual cluster analysis of trajectory data with interactive kohonen
maps,” Information Visualization, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 14–29, 2009.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/ivs.2008.29
[6]
J. Bernard, J. Brase, D. Fellner, O. Koepler, J. Kohlhammer, T. Ruppert,
T. Schreck, and I. Sens, “A visual digital library approach for time-
oriented scientiﬁc primary data,” Springer International Journal of
Digital Libraries, ECDL 2010 Special Issue, pp. 111–123, 2011.
[7]
K. U. Barthel, “Improved image retrieval using automatic image sorting
and semi-automatic generation of image semantics,” Image Analysis for
Multimedia Interactive Services, International Workshop on, vol. 0, pp.
227–230, 2008.
[8]
N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and
Temporal Data: A Systematic Approach.
Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[9]
A. M. MacEachren, How Maps Work - Representation, Visualization,
and Design.
Guilford Press, 2004.
[10]
F. Bao, V. Lobo, and M. Painho, “The self-organizing map, the geo-
som, and relevant variants for geosciences,” Computers & Geosciences,
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 155 – 163, 2005, geospatial Research in Europe: AG-
ILE 2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/B6V7D-4F0851H-2/2/ac6bd99e54c5ff81db9a173604b0d3aa
[11]
P. Agarwal and A. Skupin, Eds., Self-Organising Maps: Applications
in Geographic Information Science.
Wiley, 2008.
[12]
D. Guo, J. Chen, A. M. MacEachren, and K. Liao, “A visualization
system for space-time and multivariate patterns (VIS-STAMP),” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 12, no. 6,
pp. 1461–1474, 2006.
[13]
G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, S. Bremm, T. Schreck, T. von Landes-
berger, P. Bak, and D. A. Keim, “Space-in-time and time-in-space
self-organizing maps for exploring spatiotemporal patterns,” Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 913–92, 2010.
[14]
D. Oelke, D. Spretke, A. Stoffel, and D. A. Keim, “Visual Readability
Analysis: How to Make Your Writings Easier to Read,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 18, no. 5, pp.
662–674, May 2012.
[15]
P. Juola, “Authorship attribution,” Found. Trends Inf. Retr., vol. 1,
no. 3, pp. 233–334, Dec. 2006. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/
10.1561/1500000005
[16]
C. Rohrdantz, M. C. Hao, U. Dayal, L.-E. Haug, and D. A. Keim,
“Feature-based Visual Sentiment Analysis of Text Document Streams,”
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Special Issue
on Intelligent Visual Interfaces for Text Analysis, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 26:1–
26:25, 2012.
[17]
M. C. Hao, C. Rohrdantz, H. Janetzko, D. A. Keim, U. Dayal, L.-E.
Haug, M. Hsu, and F. Stoffel, “Visual sentiment analysis of customer
feedback streams using geo-temporal term associations,” Information
Visualization, Jun. 2013.
[18]
T. Kohonen, J. Hynninen, J. Kangas, and J. Laaksonen, “SOM PAK:
The self-organizing map program package,” Helsinki University of
Technology, Tech. Rep. A31, 1996.
[19]
T. Porter and T. Duff, “Compositing digital images,” in Proceedings
of the 11th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques, ser. SIGGRAPH ’84.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1984,
pp. 253–259. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/800031.
808606
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

