Particular Requirements on Opinion Mining for the Insurance Business
Sven Rill, Johannes Drescher, Dirk Reinel, Jörg Scheidt, Florian Wogenstein
Institute of Information Systems (iisys)
University of Applied Sciences Hof
95028 Hof, Germany
{srill,jdrescher,dreinel,jscheidt,fwogenstein}@iisys.de
Abstract—In this paper, we discuss the work in progress of
our current project focusing on opinion mining in the ﬁeld
of insurance business. The main purpose of this project is to
improve Opinion Mining methods for the German language
and optimize them with special regard to the insurance
business. These improved methods make it possible to extract
opinions from user-generated texts (in the insurance domain) in
a better quality than today. We fetch the required text data for
this study from a huge online community website for customers.
There, we ﬁnd a sufﬁcient number of user reviews about
insurance companies, which is necessary for our research.
Besides the main purpose of this study, another aim is the
development of a prototype. This could then be used to monitor
the current “crowd’s opinion” about insurance products and
services. For this reason and in order to understand key aspects
of the domain, we collaborate with the nobisCum Deutschland
GmbH, a German company offering consulting and software
development services for the insurance industry. Using one data
source and limited evaluation sets, we obtained ﬁrst results
which look promising.
Keywords-opinion mining; insurance; aspect-based opinion
mining; domain-speciﬁc orientation.
I. INTRODUCTION
The steep rise of user-generated content over the last
few years, especially user reviews, on the Web, together
with its reliability and the wide public acceptance, makes
it therefore important for many companies to observe these
relevant sources. Since the amount of reviews, comments,
posts, etc. (user contributions in short) from only one web
platform is, sometimes, too large to be checked manually,
methods are required to automate that. There are already
some applications done by different groups or companies
that claim to be able to reliably extract opinions from
German texts. However, that does not always work very well
yet. In many cases, the results are restricted to basic opinions
(positive, neutral or negative) of certain texts, calculated by
counting all opinion bearing words in this text (a kind of
document-level sentiment classiﬁcation, e.g., a bag of words
approach).
Using textual data together with its meta information
from different review portals, forums, blogs and/or social
networks (e.g., Facebook, Twitter) together with advanced
Opinion Mining methods such as Aspect-based Opinion
Mining can help to solve this problem. Thereby, it is
also very important to handle domain- and context-speciﬁc
orientations on generated opinion words and phrases and, in
the course of this, also to improve Opinion Mining methods
for the German language. In our case, we have to improve
them particularly for the insurance domain.
Beside this main purpose, another goal is to include
the improved or developed methods and algorithms into a
prototype. By using this prototype application, insurance
companies will be able to monitor the opinion of their
customers or of their whole peer group on certain aspects
of their own products “in real time”.
In Section II, some related work is introduced. Section
III contains a brief description of the OMVers (Opinion
Mining für die Versicherungsbranche - Opinion Mining for
the insurance business) project, our identiﬁed issues and a
short description about the input data. Section IV mainly
depicts the different domain-speciﬁc opinion mining steps.
In Section V, we want to explain our evaluation process. A
short conclusion completes the paper in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Especially in the last few years, a lot of research work
has been done in the area of Opinion Mining and Sentiment
Analysis. A detailed overview of the whole topic has been
given from Pang and Lee [1] and just recently in a survey
from Liu and Zhang [2].
A good overview of the Aspect-based Opinion Mining
approach is also given in the work from Liu and Zhang [2].
In addition to this, Liu deﬁned a model to describe aspects
in a document, called quintuple [3]. A method to extract the
required aspects is presented in research [4].
Furthermore, there are several lists of opinion words for
multiple languages. For the English language such lists are
SentiWordNet [5], the Subjectivity Lexicon [6], Semantic
Orientations of Words [7] and two lists of positive and
negative opinion words offered by [8].
O’Hare et al. [9] analyzed blogs in the ﬁnancial domain
to automatically determine the sentiment of the bloggers.
Zhuang et al. [10] focused their research on the movie
domain and proposed an approach for review mining and
summarization.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

There is a lot of preliminary work on several aspects in
the ﬁeld of Opinion Mining. As a summary of this work,
one can say that a general approach to Opinion Mining,
applicable in many domains, does not yet give satisfactory
results. On the other hand, domain speciﬁc applications are
already promising.
The focus of this project is to apply Opinion Mining
techniques exclusively in the insurance business.
III. THE OMVERS PROJECT
OMVers [11] is a collaborative project of the nobisCum
Deutschland
GmbH
(nobisCum)
and
the
Institute
of
Information Systems (iisys). This synergetic cooperation is
very important for the project’s success. While nobisCum
mainly works on developer tasks such as building a front-
and a back-end, creating a suitable database, providing an
interface for the opinion mining analyze module, etc., iisys
can completely dedicate itself to research. During the entire
time, the project can beneﬁt from the knowledge as well as
the experience of nobisCum about the insurance sector.
A. Major Issues
Before we will be able to analyze user written texts in the
insurance domain in such a way that suitable results can be
achieved, several subtasks have to be deﬁned and ﬁnished.
In preparation for this project we identify the following
major issues as such tasks (partly based on survey [2]). The
ﬁnal aim is to create opinion quintuples (see [3]) for every
analyzed user written text in this domain.
1) Generate Opinion List:
Existing lists containing
opinion bearing adjectives, nouns or verbs (and phrases)
for the German language are not sufﬁcient for our project.
Therefore, we need to produce an own list. Our research
group considered this issue separately and published a
generic approach to generate such lists [12].
2) Improve Opinion Mining for German:
Currently,
there are some weaknesses in Opinion Mining methods for
the German language, e.g., identifying compound nouns.
An example for such a noun is “Versicherungsbetrug” -
“insurance fraud”.
3) Identify, extract and group aspects: The automatic
extraction of aspects (also known as features) from a text
is one of the most important parts of this project. Hu and
Liu [4] present an interesting two-step-method to perform
that. The accuracy of the ﬁrst step was already improved by
Popescu and Etzioni [13]. After extracting, the aspects have
to be combined to groups. For that, the OpenThesaurus (see
http://www.openthesaurus.de/) will be useful for looking up
synonyms.
4) Handle domain-speciﬁc opinion words:
Since we
have
our
self-generated
general
opinion
list,
another
important issue is how to handle domain-speciﬁc opinion
words. For example, in the sentence “I will change my
insurance company” the verb change in the insurance
domain expresses a really strong opinion (negative in
this case). Whereas in the sentence “I will change my
clothes” the same verb expresses no opinion (objective
sentence). Furthermore, we assume that about 80 % of the
entries of our opinion list are universal, in other words
domain-independent. However, this assumption has not
been veriﬁed yet.
5) Handle context-dependent opinion words: Similar to
the domain-speciﬁc issues mentioned above, the problem
of context-dependent opinion words is really relevant for
our project, too. Let us have a look at the following two
sentences: “I will change to this insurance company” and
“I will change to my previous insurance company”. The
verb “change” expresses opposite opinions, positive in the
ﬁrst sentence, negative in the second one. There is another
special case we can see in the sentence “In any case,
I will change”. In such a case it would be impossible
to determine the opinion expressed by “change” without
looking at previously written sentences.
Ding et al. [14] proposed an approach to handle opinion
words that are context-dependent.
6) Map opinion words to aspects: As soon as we have
identiﬁed the aspects we can use our list of opinion bearing
words to bring them together. This is a huge and important
step towards our aim to create opinion quintuples. However,
there are already methods for this ofﬁcially called aspect
sentiment classiﬁcation, which we can test and adapt to our
speciﬁc requirements [4] [14].
B. Additional Issues
In addition to the major issues there are some addi-
tional issues, such as extracting and grouping the entity
(the insurance company), extracting the opinion holder and
time, mining comparative opinions, handling coreference
resolutions and extending the approach for multilingualism.
Although the extraction of the entity, opinion holder and
time are not minor issues, we want to simplify this aspect
for now. Therefore, we deﬁne that
• There is only one well-known entity per text,
• The opinion holder is always the author of the text and
• The time is always the publication time of the text.
For that reason, our opinion quintuple at the beginning will
look as follows: (e, aj, ooj, h, t). Entity e, opinion holder h
and time t are unique per text, while aspect a and the opinion
value oo are not. In a later phase of the project, this current
restriction has to be improved. Please note furthermore that,
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

instead of a basic opinion orientation [3], we work with
continuous opinion values between -1 and +1 [12].
After having ﬁnished all subtasks described in Section
III-A, we expect very satisfactory results. This is the reason
why the additional issues are not mandatory at the moment.
C. Input Data
For ﬁrst investigations, we use user-generated reviews
about automobile insurances from an online community
for customers called Ciao [15]. So far, no method has
been developed that would enable us to crawl such reviews
automatically, so we have to fetch them manually. Besides
the text, the main information of a typical Ciao review is
a title, the author’s alias plus additional user information, a
rating value, the publication date, pros and cons deﬁned by
the author, an “advisable ﬂag” as well as an average review
rating retrieved from other Ciao members. We also use some
of this additional information for this project.
IV. DOMAIN-SPECIFIC OPINION MINING
The aim of our data analysis is to go down to the aspect
level of a speciﬁc text and create the appropriate opinion
quintuples. Thus, it will be possible to see a quantitative
as well as qualitative summary of the opinions of different
texts.
However, to see how good or bad other methods for this
application case work, we have decided to use an iterative
approach. This implies that we start our research with a
basic document-level sentiment classiﬁcation [1], meaning
that the smallest unit is the whole review text. This method
is only suitable for documents that contain just one entity
(as they do in our case). Nevertheless, the granularity of this
technique is probably not ﬁne enough for our application.
After that, we test a method called sentence-level sen-
timent classiﬁcation, which is an intermediate step before
ﬁnally reaching the “supreme discipline” of aspect-based
sentiment analysis or aspect-based opinion mining, respec-
tively.
After each step, we perform an evaluation of the results
produced by the respective algorithm with a self-deﬁned set
of sentences (see Section V). This allows us to measure the
quality of every method used as well as to compare them.
Furthermore it will help us to improve the methods in an
iterative way.
Since the implementation of the ﬁrst two main steps
(document-level sentiment classiﬁcation and sentence-level
sentiment classiﬁcation) has almost been completed, we
want to describe the ongoing and future work on the aspect-
based sentiment analysis below, which is partly based on the
ﬁve tasks (except IV-A) to be performed to build opinion
quintuples [2].
A. Domain-speciﬁc Opinion List Generation
As already mentioned in Section III-A1, we have pub-
lished a generic approach to generate opinion lists of phrases
[12]. By using this approach, we have already created such
a list.
As described in Section III-A4, we now have to deal
with domain-dependent opinion words. These words are
currently not contained in the list or have the wrong opinion
value for the insurance domain (remember the example of
the verb change). Therefore, in the next step we add such
words to our existing list manually or change their opinion
value if they already exist.
B. Entity Extraction and Grouping
Currently, this task is treated as an additional issue (see
Section III-B). Therefore, we start by using the Ciao hier-
archy (Ciao > insurances > automobile insurances > [list of
all insurances]) to determine the (unique) entity of review
texts. Later on, we plan to extract entities automatically.
This is still required in order to analyze blogs and forums
(unstructured sources) and could be handled by using Named
Entity Recognition (NER) techniques [16].
C. Aspect Extraction and Grouping
As mentioned in Section III-A3, aspect extraction is a
crucial task of our project. Currently, we highly simplify
this issue. That means we are currently using a manually
produced list of grouped aspects as well as their synonyms
prepared by nobisCum. Although this approach works quite
well, our aim is to extract and group aspects automatically
as soon as possible. In addition to that, a method to split
compound nouns (a common occurrence in the German
language) is needed as well (see Section III-A2).
D. Opinion Holder and Time Extraction
Similar to the entity extraction part, this task is also treated
as an additional issue. As described in Section III-C, every
user review from Ciao contains the author’s alias and the
publication date, among others. This meta information is
presently used to determine the opinion holder as well as the
time of the whole review. After ﬁnishing the major issues
(see Section III-A), this task will be automated, too.
E. Aspect Sentiment Classiﬁcation
As we now have our list with opinion bearing words (not
yet domain-speciﬁc) and the required, at the moment static,
list of aspects, we can start a simple analysis of reviews to
determine the opinion on different aspects. Since our opinion
list also contains opinion values for phrases like “nicht gut”
- “not good”, we do not have to handle valence shifters.
We are still at the beginning of this task, i.e., by now we
have neither managed context-dependent opinion words (see
Section III-A5) nor “but phrases”, comparative opinions, etc.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Currently, we use a basic approach to aggregate opinions on
various aspects (see Section III-A6).
Later on, we plan to signiﬁcantly improve this approach.
After generating and using a domain-speciﬁc opinion list,
the next intermediate aim of this task is to handle context-
dependent opinion words, which are indispensable to get
satisfactory results.
F. Opinion Quintuple Generation
After ﬁnishing all previous tasks, we will be able to
produce simpliﬁed opinion quintuples (e, aj, ooj, h, t) (see
Section III-B). As already mentioned, the quality as well
as the complexity of these quintuples are to be improved
iteratively by improving the other tasks.
V. EVALUATION
To evaluate the quality of the applied and adjusted opinion
mining methods, we create a set of sentences related to the
insurance domain.
We have considered using a three-class model. The ﬁrst
class, which is the basic one, contains simple sentences
such as “The claim settlement of that insurance company
is very good”. Sentences of this category should be easy to
analyze. The second class includes more difﬁcult sentences
(that means one subordinate clause, “but phrases”, etc.), e.g.,
“The employee of the customer service was friendly but not
really helpful”. The third and most intricate class contains
sentences with many subordinate clauses as well as irony,
e.g., “They raised the yearly subscription again, I really love
this company”.
Every whole sentence as well as the aspects inside, if
any, must be tagged in a machine-readable schema. In order
to determine the opinion value of a sentence or aspect we
decided to use the following six categories: strong positive
(sp), weak positive (wp), neutral (n), weak negative (wn),
strong negative (sn) and objective (o).
This set of tagged sentences enables us to measure the
quality of our methods. Thus, we can see improvements as
well as possible deterioration.
VI. CONCLUSION
Although user-generated content provides an enormous
potential in the area of Opinion Mining, which makes
it attractive for companies to pursue real time customer
monitoring without relying on the usual polling techniques,
it has been used little so far. The main reason for this is that
Opinion Mining methods, which are available to companies
(especially German ones) still do not work satisfactorily.
We aim to improve Opinion Mining methods for the Ger-
man language in the course of this project. Early experiments
have already shown that a domain- and, of course, a context-
dependent approach is indispensable for this. As a next step,
we have to check whether the assumption that about 80%
of our self-generated opinion list is domain-independent is
correct.
At ﬁrst glance, the extraction of opinions with our adapted
methods and our opinion list works quite well, but until now
we have only worked with user reviews from a single source
as well as within limited evaluation sets. In the near future,
we would include blogs and forums and we should then
see how different writing styles, text structure and a mix of
topics affect our methods.
The ﬁrst audited results of the project are expected in the
fourth quarter of 2012.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The OMVers project is publicly sponsored by the Bavarian
Ministry of Economic Affairs, Infrastructure, Transport and
Technology (BStMWIVT).
The Institute of Information Systems is supported by the
Foundation of Upper Franconia and by the State of Bavaria.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Pang and L. Lee, “Opinion mining and sentiment analysis,”
vol. 2, p. 1, 2008.
[2] B. Liu and L. Zhang, Mining Text Data, 2012, ch. A Survey
of Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis, pp. 415–463.
[3] B. Liu, Handbook of Natural Language Processing, 2010,
vol. 2, ch. Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity.
[4] M. Hu and B. Liu, “Mining and summarizing customer
reviews,” in Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD-2004), 2004, pp. 168–177.
[5] S. Baccianella, A. Esuli, and F. Sebastiani, “Sentiwordnet
3.0: An enhanced lexical resource for sentiment analysis
and opinion mining,” in Proceedings of the Seventh Inter-
national Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC’10), vol. 25, May 2010, pp. 2200–2204.
[6] T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann, Human Language
Technology Conference - Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, 2005, ch. Recognizing Con-
textual Polarity in Phrase-Level Sentiment Analysis.
[7] H. Takamura, T. Inui, and M. Okumura, “Extracting semantic
orientations of words using spin model,” in Proceedings of the
43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, 2005, pp. 133–140.
[8] B. Liu, M. Hu, and J. Cheng, “Opinion observer: Analyzing
and comparing opinions on the web,” in Proceedings of the
14th International World Wide Web conference (WWW-2005),
2005, pp. 342–351.
[9] N. O’Hare, M. Davy, A. Bermingham, P. Ferguson, P. Sheri-
dan, C. Gurrin, and A. F. Smeaton, “Topic-dependent senti-
ment analysis of ﬁnancial blogs,” in Proceedings of the 1st
International CIKM Workshop on Topic-Sentiment Analysis
for Mass Opinion Measurement (TSA-09), 2009, p. 9.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

[10] L. Zhuang, F. Jing, and X.-Y. Zhu, “Movie review mining
and summarization,” in Proceedings of the 15th ACM Inter-
national Conference on Information and Knowledge Manage-
ment (CIKM-2006), 2006, pp. 43–50.
[11] Institute
of
Information
Systems
(iisys),
“Analytical
Information
Systems:
Projects,”
http://www.iisys.de/en/
research/research-groups/analytical-information-systems/
projects.html, (accessed September 21, 2012).
[12] S. Rill, J. Drescher, D. Reinel, J. Scheidt, O. Schütz,
F. Wogenstein, and D. Simon, “A Generic Approach to
Generate Opinion Lists of Phrases for Opinion Mining Ap-
plications,” in Proceedings of the First International Work-
shop on Issues of Sentiment Discovery and Opinion Mining
(WISDOM-2012), 2012.
[13] A.-M. Popescu and O. Etzioni, “Extracting product features
and opinions from reviews,” in HLT ’05: Proceedings of the
conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, Oct 2005, pp. 339–
346.
[14] X. Ding, B. Liu, and P. S. Yu, “A holistic lexicon-based
approach to opinion mining,” WSDM08, pp. 231–240, 2008.
[15] Ciao GmbH, “Preisvergleich und Testberichte bei Ciao,” http:
//www.ciao.de/, (accessed June 4, 2012).
[16] D. Nadeau and S. Sekine, “A survey of named entity recog-
nition and classiﬁcation,” vol. 30, pp. 3–26, 2007.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

