Understanding the Food Supply Chain using Social Media Data Analysis
Nagesh Shukla
SMART Infrastructure Facility, Faculty of EIS
University of Wollongong
Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia
e-mail: nshukla@uow.edu.au
Nishikant Mishra, Akshit Singh
Hull University Business School
Hull University
Hull HU6 7RX, UK
e-mail: n.mishra@hull.ac.uk
e-mail: akshit.singh@manchester.ac.uk
Abstract— This paper proposes a big data analytics based
approach, which considers social media (Twitter) data for
identifying supply chain management issues in food in-
dustries. In particular, the proposed approach includes: (i)
capturing of relevant tweets based on keywords; (ii) pre-
processing of the raw tweets; and, (iii) text analysis using
support vector machine (SVM) and hierarchical clustering
with multiscale bootstrap resampling. The result of this
approach included cluster of words, which can inform supply
chain (SC) decision makers about the customer feedback and
issues in the flow/quality of the food products. A case study of
the beef supply chain was analysed using the proposed
approach where three weeks of data from Twitter was used.
The results indicated that the proposed text analytic approach
can be helpful to efficiently identify and summarise crucial
customer feedback for supply chain management.
Keywords-
Twitter
data;
social
media;
data
mining;
clustering.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the advent of online social media, there is lot of
consumer information available on Twitter, which reflects
the true opinion of customers [9]. Effective analysis of this
information can give interesting insight into consumer
sentiments and behaviors with respect to one or more
specific issues. Using social media data, a retailer can
capture a real-time overview of consumer reactions about an
episodic event. Social media data is relatively cheap and can
be very effective in gathering opinion of large and diverse
audiences. Using different information techniques, business
organisations can collect social media data in real time and
can use it for developing future strategies. However, social
media data is qualitative and unstructured in nature and often
large in volume, variety and velocity [6]. At times, it is
difficult
to
handle
it
using
traditional
operation
and
management tools and techniques for business purposes. In
the past, social media analytics have been implemented in
various
supply
chain
problems
predominantly
in
manufacturing supply chains. The research on application of
social media analytics in domain of food supply chain is in
its primitive stage. In this article, an attempt has been made
to use social media data in domain of food supply chain to
make it consumer centric. The results from the analysis have
been linked with all the segments of supply chain to improve
customer satisfaction.
Firstly, data was extracted from Twitter (via Twitter
streaming
API)
using
relevant
keywords
related
to
consumer’s
opinion
about
different
food
products.
Thereafter, pre-processing and text mining was performed to
investigate the positive and negative sentiments of tweets
using
Support
Vector
Machine
(SVM).
Hierarchical
clustering of tweets from different geographical locations
(World, UK, Australia and USA) using multiscale bootstrap
resampling was performed. Further, root causes of issues
affecting consumer satisfaction were identified and linked
with various segments of supply chain to make it more
efficient. Finally, the recommendations for consumer centric
supply chain were described.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II, presents
the literature review related to food products supply chain
and state-of-the-art methods used in the area. In Section III,
the proposed methodology is discussed in detail. Section IV
presents the results obtained by applying proposed twitter
based analytics for beef supply chain. Section V details the
managerial implications of the proposed analysis method in
food products supply chain. Finally, Section VI concludes
this research with some guidelines for future research.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Food products supply chain, such as for beef products
consists of various stakeholders, which are farmer, abattoir
and processor, retailer and consumer. Literature consists of
research publications on diverse characteristics of beef
supply
chain
such
as
waste
minimisation,
vertical
coordination in supply chain, traceability, greenhouse gas
emission, meat quality, meat safety. For instance, Francis et
al. [4] have applied value chain analysis for examination of
beef sector in UK. The opportunities for waste minimisation
at producer and processor level have been identified in the
UK by comparing them to practices followed in Argentina.
Consequently,
good
management
practices
have
been
suggested to mitigate the waste generated in UK beef
industry. Wang et al. [16] have utilised the standardized
performance analysis data to examine the beef farms in
Texas Rolling plants.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

In literature, several types of framework have been
proposed to investigate problems and issues associated with
supply chain through big data analysis. Chae [1] has
developed a Twitter analytics framework for evaluation of
Twitter information in the field of supply chain management.
An attempt has been made by them to fathom the potential
engagement of Twitter in the application of supply chain
management and further research and development. Tan et
al. [14] have suggested an analytic mechanism for capturing
and processing of big data generated in the corporate world.
It employed deduction graph technique. Hazen et al. [7] have
determined the problems associated with quality of data in
the field of supply chain management and a novel procedure
for monitoring and managing of data quality was suggested.
Vera-Baquero et al. [15] have recommended a cloud-based
mechanism utilising big data procedures to efficiently
improve the performance analysis of corporations. Frizzo et
al. [5] have done a thorough analysis of literature on big data
available in reputed business journals. A very limited work is
being done to explore the characteristics of food supply
chain by utilising social media data.
Twitter,
Facebook
and
Youtube
denote
the
swift
expansion of Web2.0 and applications on social media lately.
Twitter is the most rapidly growing social media platform
since its outset in 2006. More than 75% of corporate firms
enlisted in Fortune Global 100 have one or more Twitter
account for the entire firm and for their distinct brands [10].
This research study will use Twitter data for the identifying
issues
in
supply
chain
management
(SCM)
in
food
industries. The next section describes the research study
conducted in this paper.
III.
ANALYTICS APPROACH
In case of social media data analysis, three major issues
are to be considered, namely, data harvesting/capturing, data
storage, and data analysis. Data capturing in case of twitter
starts with finding the topic of interest by using appropriate
keywords list (including texts and hashtags). This keywords
list is used together with the twitter streaming APIs to gather
publicly available datasets from the twitter postings. Twitter
streaming APIs allows data analysts to collect 1% of
available Twitter datasets. There are other third party
commercial data providers like Firehose with full historical
twitter datasets.
The Twitter streaming API allowed us to store/append
twitter data in a text file. The analysis of the gathered Twitter
data is generally complex due to the presence of unstructured
textual
information,
which
typically
requires
Natural
Language Processing (NLP) algorithms. We proposed two
main types of content analysis techniques – sentiment
mining and clustering analysis for investigating the extracted
Twitter data; see Figure 1. More information about the
proposed
sentiment
mining
method
and
hierarchical
clustering method is detailed in the following subsections.
A.
Data Analysis
The
information
available
on
social
media
is
predominantly in the unstructured textual format. Therefore,
it is essential to employ Content Analysis (CA) approaches,
which includes a wide array of text mining and NLP
methods to accumulate knowledge from Web 2.0 [2]. An
appropriate cleaning of text and further processing is
required for effective knowledge gathering. There is no best
way to perform data cleaning and several applications have
used their own heuristics to clean the data. A text cleaning
exercise,
which
included
removal
of
extra
spaces,
punctuation, numbers, symbols, and html links were used.
Then, a list of major food retailers in the world (including
their names and Twitter handles) was used to filter and select
a subset of tweets, which are used for analysis.
1)
Sentiment analysis based on SVM
Tweets contain sentiments as well as information about
the topic. Thus, sophisticated text mining procedures like
sentiment analysis are vital for extracting true customer
opinion. The objective here is to categorise each tweet with
positive and negative sentiment. Sentiment analysis, which is
also widely known as opinion mining is defined as the
domain of research that evaluates public’s sentiments,
appraisals, attitudes, emotions, evaluations, opinions towards
various commodities like services, corporations, products,
problems, situations, subjects and their characteristics.
The identification of polarity mentioned in opinion is a
crucial for transforming the format of opinion from text to
numeric value. The performance of data mining methods
such as SVM is excellent for sentiment classification. SVM
model is employed in this approach for the division of
polarity of opinions. Initially, a set of features from the data
must be chosen. In this case, we have used Unigrams and
Bigrams, which are the tokens of one-word and two-word,
respectively, identified from the tweets. In this study, we
used binary value {0,1} to represent the presence of these
features in the microblog.
SVM is a technique for supervised machine learning,
which requires a training data set to identify best Maximum
Margin Hyperplane (MMH). In the past, researchers have
used approach where they have manually analysed and
marked data prior to their use as training data set. In this
case, we have examined the use of emoticons to identify
sentiment of opinions. In this paper, Twitter data was pre-
processed based on emoticons to create training dataset for
SVM.
Microblogs
with
“:)”
were
marked
as
“+1”
representing positive polarity, whereas messages with “:(”
were marked as “-1” representing negative polarity. It was
observed that more than 89% messages were marked
precisely by following this procedure. Thus, the training data
set was captured using this approach for SVM analysis.
Then, a grid search (Hsu et al., 2003) was employed to train
SVM. The polarity (Polm={+1,-1}) representing positive and
negative sentiment respectively of microblog m can be
predicted using trained SVM. In real life, when consumers
buy beef products, they leave their true opinion (feedback)
on Twitter. In this article, the SVM classifier has been
utilised to classify these sentiments into positive and
negative and consequently gather intelligence from these
tweets.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Sentiment Analysis
(usingSupportVectorMachine)
HierarchicalClustering
(withmultiscale bootstrapresampling)
Pre-processed microblog
Tweets
Figure 1.
Overall approach for social media data analysis
2)
Hierarchical
clustering
with
p-values
using
multiscale bootstrap resampling
In this research, we also employed a hierarchical
clustering with p-values via multiscale bootstrap resampling
method to analyse the content of tweets with positive and
negative sentiments [13]. The clustering method creates
hierarchical clusters of words and also computes their
significance
using
p-values
(obtained
after
multiscale
bootstrap resampling). This helps in easily identifying
significant clusters in the datasets and their hierarchy. The
agglomerative method used is ward.D2 [11]
In a typical data clustering approach, data support for the
identified clusters is not present. The support of data for
these clusters can be obtained by adopting multiscale
bootstrap resampling. In this approach, the dataset is
replicated by resampling for large number of times and the
hierarchical
clustering
is
applied.
During
resampling,
replicating sample sizes was changed to multiple values
including smaller, larger and equal to the original sample
size.
Then,
bootstrap
probabilities
are
determined
by
counting the number of dendrograms, which contained a
particular cluster and dividing it by the number of bootstrap
samples. This is done for all the clusters and sample sizes.
Then, these bootstrap probabilities are used to estimate p-
value, which is also known as Approximately Unbiased
(AU) value.
The result of hierarchical clustering with multiscale
bootstrap resampling is a cluster dendrogram. At every stage,
the two clusters, which have the highest resemblance are
combined to form one new cluster. The distance or
dissimilarity between the clusters is denoted by the vertical
axis of dendrogram. The various items and clusters are
represented on horizontal axis. It also illustrates several
values at branches, such as AU p-values (left), Bootstrap
Probability (BP) values (right), and cluster labels (bottom).
Clusters with AU >= 95% are usually shown by the red
rectangles, which represents significant clusters.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The proposed Twitter data analysis approach is used to
understand issues related to the beef/steak supply chain
based on consumer feedback on Twitter. This analysis can
help to analyse reasons for positive and negative sentiments,
identify
communication
patterns,
prevalent
topics
and
content, and characteristics of Twitter users discussing about
beef and steak. Based on the result of the proposed analysis,
a
set
of
recommendations
have
been
prescribed
for
developing customer centric supply chain. The total number
of tweets extracted for this research was 1,338,638 (as per
the procedure discussed in Section 3). They were captured
from 23/03/2016 to 13/04/2016 using the keywords beef and
steak. Only tweets in English language were considered with
no geographic constraint. Figure 2 shows the geo-located
tweets in the collected dataset. Then, keywords were selected
to capture the tweets relevant to this study. The overall
tweets were then filtered using this list of keywords so that
only the relevant tweets (26,269) are retrieved. Then, country
wise classification of tweets was performed by using the
name of supermarket corresponding to each country. It was
observed that tweets from USA, UK and Australia and
World were 1605, 822, 338 and 15214 respectively. There
were many hashtags observed in the collected tweets. The
most frequently used hashtags (more than 1000) were
highlighted in Table 1.
As described in the previous subsection, the collection of
training data for SVM was done automatically based on
emoticons. The training data was developed by collecting
10,664 messages from the Twitter data captured with
emoticons “:)” and “:(”. The automatic marking process
concluded by generating 8560 positive, 2104 negative and
143 discarded messages. Positive and negative messages
were then randomly classified into five categories. The 8531
messages in first four categories were utilised as training
data set and the rest of the 2133 messages were utilised as
the test data set.
Numerous
pre-processing
steps
were
employed
to
minimise the number of features prior to implementing SVM
training. Initially, the target query and terms related to topic
(beef/steak related words) were deleted to prevent the
classifier from categorising sentiment based on certain
queries or topics. Various feature sets were collected and
their accuracy level was examined. In terms of performance
of the classifier, we have used two types of indicators: (i) 5-
fold cross validation (CV) accuracy, and (ii) the accuracy
level obtained when trained SVM is used to predict
sentiment of test data set.
Table 2 reports the performance of SVM based classifiers
on the collected microblogs. The best performance is
provided when using unigram feature set in both SVM and
Naïve Bayes classifiers. The unigram feature set gives better
result than the other feature sets. This is due to the fact that
additional casual and new terms are utilised to express the
emotions. It negatively affects the precision of subjective
word set characteristic as it is based on a dictionary. Also,
the binary representation scheme produced comparable
results, except for unigrams, with those produced by term
frequency (TF) based representation schemes. As the length
of micro blogging posts are quite short, binary representation
scheme and TF representation scheme are similar and have
almost matching performance levels. Therefore, the SVM
based classifier with unigrams as feature set represented in
binary scheme is used for estimating the sentiment score of
the microblog.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 2.
Visualisation of tweets with geolocation data
TABLE 1. TOP HASHTAGS USED
Hashtag
Freq
(>1000)
Freq
(%)
Hashtag
Freq
(>1000)
Freq
(%)
#beef
17708
16.24%
#aodafail
1908
1.75%
#steak
14496
13.29%
#earls
1859
1.70%
#food
7418
6.80%
#votemainefpp
1795
1.65%
#foodporn
5028
4.61%
#win
1761
1.62%
#whcd
5001
4.59%
#ad
1754
1.61%
#foodie
4219
3.87%
#cooking
1688
1.55%
#recipe
4106
3.77%
#mplusplaces
1686
1.55%
#boycottearls
3356
3.08%
#meat
1607
1.47%
#gbbw
3354
3.08%
#lunch
1577
1.45%
#kca
2898
2.66%
#bbq
1557
1.43%
#dinner
2724
2.50%
#yum
1424
1.31%
#recipes
2159
1.98%
#yummy
1257
1.15%
#accessibility
1999
1.83%
#bdg
1255
1.15%
TABLE 2. PERFORMANCE OF SVM BASED CLASSIFIER ON SELECTED FEATURE SETS
Representati
on scheme
Feature Type
Number of
Features
SVM
CV (%)
Test data (%)
Binary
Unigram
12,257
91.75
90.80
Bigram
44,485
76.80
74.46
Unigram + bigram
56,438
87.12
83.28
Term
Frequency
Unigram
12,257
88.78
86.27
Bigram
44,485
77.49
71.68
Unigram + bigram
56,438
84.81
80.97
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

To identify meaningful content in the collected tweets,
initially, we performed sentiment analysis to identify
sentiments of each of the tweets followed by HCA.
Following section provides the results of the analysis
performed on the tweets (by sentiment) collected worldwide
and UK.
a) Analysis of negative tweets from the world
The collected tweets were divided into positive and
negative sentiment tweets. In negative sentiment tweets, the
most frequently used words associated with ‘beef’ and
‘steak’, were ‘smell’, ‘recipe’, ‘deal’, ‘colour’, ‘spicy’,
‘taste’ and ‘bone.’ Cluster analysis is performed on the
negative tweets from the world to divide them into clusters in
terms of resemblance among
their tweets. The three
predominant clusters identified (with significance >0.95
level) are represented in Figure 3 as red coloured rectangles.
The first cluster consists of bone and broth, which highlights
the excess of bone fragments in broth. The second cluster is
composed of jerky and smell. The customers have expressed
their annoyance with the bad smell associated with jerky.
The third cluster consists of tweets comprising of taste and
deal. Customers have often complained to the supermarket
about the bad flavour of the beef products bought within the
promotion (deal). The rest of the words highlighted in Figure
3 does not lead to any conclusive remarks.
This cluster analysis will help global supermarkets to
identify the major issues faced by customers. It will provide
them the opportunity to mitigate these problems and raise
customer satisfaction and their consequent revenue.
TABLE 3. RAW TWEETS WITH SENTIMENT POLARITY
Sentiment
Raw Tweets
Negative
@Morrisons so you have no comment about the
lack of meat in your Family Steak Pie?
#morrisons
Negative
@AsdaServiceTeam why does my rump steak
from asda Kingswood taste distinctly of bleach
please?
Positive
Wonderful @marksandspencer are now selling
#glutenfree steak pies and they are delicious
and perfect! Superb stuff.
Positive
Ive got one of your tesco finest* beef Chianti's
in the microwave oven right now and im pretty
pleased about it if im honest
b) Analysis of negative tweets from UK
The most widely used words after ‘beef’ and ‘steak’ were
‘tesco’, ‘coffee’, ‘asda’, ‘aldi’. The association rule mining
indicated that the word ‘beef’ was most closely associated
with terms like ‘brisket’, ‘rosemary’, and ‘cooker’, etc. It
was least used with terms like ‘tesco’, ‘stock’, ‘bit’. The
word ‘steak’ was highly associated with ‘absolute’, ‘back’,
‘flat’. and rarely associated with words like ‘stealing’,
‘locked’, ‘drug’.
The four predominant clusters are identified (with
significance >0.95 level). The first cluster contains the words
– man, coffee, dunfermline, stealing, locked, addict, drug.
When this cluster was analysed together with raw tweets, it
was found that this cluster represents an event where a man
was caught stealing coffee and steak from a major food store
in ‘Dunfermline’. The finding from this cluster is not linked
to our study. However, it could assist retailers for various
purposes such as developing strategy for an efficient security
system in stores to address shoplifting. Cluster 2 is related to
the tweets discussing high prices of steak meal deals. Cluster
3 represents the concerns of users on the use of horsemeat in
many beef products offered by major superstores. It reveals
that consumer are concerned about the traceability of beef
products. Cluster 4 groups tweets, which discuss the lack of
locally produced British sliced beef in the major stores (with
#BackBritishFarming). It reflects that consumers prefer the
beef derived from British cattle instead of imported beef.
Rest of the clusters, when analysed together with raw tweets,
did not highlight any conclusive remarks and users were
discussing mainly one-off problems with cooking and cutting
slices of beef.
The proposed HCA can help to identify (in an automated
manner) root causes of the issues with the currently sold beef
and steak products. This can help major superstores to
monitor and respond quickly to the customer issues raised in
the social media platforms.
V.
MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS
The finding of this study can assist the beef retailers to
develop a consumer centric supply chain. During the
analysis, it was found that sometimes, consumers were
unhappy because of high price of steak products, lack of
local meat, bad smell, presence of bone fragments, lack of
tenderness, cooking time and overall quality. In a study,
Wrap (2008) estimated that 161,000 tones of meat waste
occurred because of customer dissatisfaction. The majority
of food waste is because of discoloration, bad flavor, smell,
packaging
issues,
and
presence
of
foreign
body.
Discoloration can be solved by using new packaging
technologies and by utilising natural antioxidants in the diet
of
cattle.
If
the
cattle
consumes
fresh
grass
before
slaughtering, it can help to increase the Vitamin E in the
meat and have a huge impact on delaying the oxidation of
color and lipid. The issues related to bad smell and flavor can
be caused due to temperature abuse of beef products. The
efficient cold chain management throughout the supply
chain, raising awareness and proper coordination among
different stakeholders can assist retailers to overcome this
issue. The packaging of beef products can be affected by
mishandling during the product flow in the supply chain or
by following inefficient packaging techniques by abattoir
and processor, which can also lead to presence of foreign
body within beef products. Inefficient packaging affects the
quality, color, taste and smell. Periodic maintenance of
packaging machines and using more advanced packaging
techniques like modified atmosphere packaging and vacuum
skin packaging will assist retailers in addressing above
mentioned issues.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 3.
Hierarchical cluster analysis of the negative tweets originating in the World
The high price of beef products can be mitigated by
improving the vertical coordination within the beef supply
chain. The lack of coordination in the supply chain leads to
waste, which results in high price of beef products.
Therefore, a strategic planning and its implementation can
assist the food retailers to reduce price of their beef products
more efficiently than their rivals.
During the analysis, it was found that products made
from forequarter and hindquarter of cattle have different
patterns of demand in the market, which leads to carcass
imbalance [3][12]. It leads to huge loss to retailers and
contribute to food waste. Sometimes, consumers think that
meat derived from different cuts such as forequarter and
hindquarter have different attributes like flavor, tenderness,
and cooking time as well as price. The hindquarter products
like steak and joint are tenderer, takes less time for cooking
and are more expensive whereas forequarter products like
mince and burger have less tenderness, takes more time for
cooking and are relatively cheaper. Consumers think that
beef products derived from the forequarter and hindquarter
have different taste and it affects their buying behavior. In
this study, it was found that slow cooking methods like
casseroling, stewing, pot- roasting and braising can improve
the flavor and tenderness of forequarter products. With the
help of proper marketing, advertisement, retailers can raise
awareness between the consumers and can increase the
demand of less favorable beef products, which will further
assist in waste minimization and making the supply chain
more customer centric.
The analysis of consumer tweets reveal that consumers
especially from the UK, were interested in consuming local
beef products. Their main concern was quality and food
safety. Specially, after horsemeat scandal, customers are
prone towards traceability information, i.e., information
related to animal breed, slaughtering method, animal welfare,
use of pesticides, hormones and other veterinary drugs in
beef farms. Retailers can gain the consumer confidence by
following the strict traceability regime within the supply
chain.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Consumers have started to express their views on social
media. Using social media data, a company can know the
perception of their existing or potential consumers about
them and their business rivals. In this study, Twitter data has
been used to investigate the consumer sentiments. More than
one million tweets related to beef products has been
collected using different keywords. Text mining has been
performed to investigate positive and negative sentiments of
the consumers. During the analysis, it was found that the
main concern related to beef products among consumers
were color, food safety, smell, flavor and presence of foreign
body
in
beef
products.
These
issues
generate
huge
disappointment among consumers. There were a lot of tweets
related
to
positive
sentiments
where
consumers
had
discovered and share their experience about promotion, deal
and a particular combination of food and drinks with beef
products. Based on the findings, some recommendations has
been prescribed to develop consumer centric supply chain. In
future, extensive list of keywords can be used for further
analysis. Future work may include standardizing the data
preprocessing steps for better model training and prediction.
For instance, positive and negative words can be included in
the analysis for better sentiment prediction. Network analysis
tools can be also employed to understand the social network
communities and identifying marketing opportunities.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. K. Chae, “Insights from hashtag# supplychain and Twitter
analytics: Considering Twitter and Twitter data for supply chain
practice
and
research,” International
Journal
of
Production
Economics, vol. 165, pp. 247-259, 2015.
[2]
M. Chau and J. Xu, “Business intelligence in blogs: Understanding
consumer interactions and communities,” MIS quarterly, vol. 36, no.
4, pp. 1189-1216, 2012.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

[3]
A. Cox and D. Chicksand, “The Limits of Lean Management
Thinking:
Multiple
Retailers
and
Food
and
Farming
Supply
Chains,” European Management Journal, vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 648-662,
2005.
[4]
M. Francis, D. Simons and M. Bourlakis, “Value chain analysis in the
UK
beef
foodservice
sector,” Supply
chain
management:
an
international journal, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 83-91, 2008.
[5]
J. Frizzo- Barker, P. A. Chow-White, M. Mozafari, D. Ha, “An
empirical study of the rise of big data in business scholarship,”
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 36, pp. 403-
413, 2016.
[6]
I. A. T. Hashem, I. Yaqoob, N. B. Anuar, S. Mokhtar, A. Gani, S. U.
Khan, “The rise of “big data” on cloud computing: Review and open
research issues,” Information Systems, vol. 47, pp. 98-115, 2015.
[7]
B. T. Hazen, C. A. Boone, J. D. Ezell, L. A. Jones-Farmer, “Data
quality for data science, predictive analytics, and big data in supply
chain management: An introduction to the problem and suggestions
for
research
and
applications,” International
Journal
of
Prod.
Economics, vol. 154, pp. 72-80, 2016.
[8]
C. W. Hsu, C. C. Chang and C. J. Lin, “A Practical Guide to Support
Vector Classification,” Technical report, Department of Computer
Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, 2003.
[9]
P. W. Liang and B. R. Dai, “Opinion mining on social media data”
In 2013
IEEE
14th
International Conference on
Mobile Data
Management, vol. 2, pp. 91-96, 2013.
[10] A. C. Malhotra, C. K. Malhotra and A. See, “How to get your
messages retweeted” MIT Sloan Management Review, vol. 53, no. 2,
pp. 61-76, 2012.
[11] F. Murtagh and P. Legendre, “Ward’s hierarchical agglomerative
clustering method: which algorithms implement Ward’s criterion?”,
Journal of Classification, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 274-295, 2014.
[12] D. Simons, M. Francis, M. Bourlakis, A. Fearne, “Identifying the
determinants of value in the UK red meat industry: A value chain
analysis approach,” Journal on Chain and Network Science, vol. 3,
no. 2, pp. 109-121, 2003.
[13] R. Suzuki and H. Shimodaira,
“Pvclust:
an
R
package
for
assessing the uncertainty in hierarchical clustering”, Bioinformatics,
vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1540-1542, 2006.
[14] K. H. Tan, Y. Zhan, G. Ji, F. Ye, C. Chang, “Harvesting big data to
enhance
supply
chain
innovation
capabilities:
An
analytic
infrastructure based on deduction graph,” International Journal of
Production Economics, vol. 165, pp. 223-233, 2015.
[15] A. Vera-Baquero, R. Colomo-Palacios and O. Molloy, “Real-time
business activity monitoring and analysis of process performance on
big-data domains,” Telematics and Informatics, vol. 33, no. 3, pp.
793-807, 2016.
[16] T. Wang, S. C. Park, S. Bevers, R. Teague, J. Cho, “Factors affecting
cow-calf herd performance and greenhouse gas emissions,” Journal of
Agricultural and Resource Economics, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 435-456,
2013.
[17] Warp Report. The food we waste, http://www.ifr.ac.uk/waste/
Reports/ WRAP%20The%20Food%20We%20Waste.pdf, Accessed:
28/04/2017, ISBN:1844053830, 2008.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

