Mining Ice Hockey: Continuous Data Flow Analysis 
Adam Hipp 
Applied Computational Intelligence Laboratory 
University of Cincinnati 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45220 
hipp.adam@uc.edu 
Lawrence J. Mazlack 
Applied Computational Intelligence Laboratory 
University of Cincinnati 
Cincinnati, Ohio 45220 
mazlack@uc.edu 
Abstract—Ice hockey is relatively under computationally 
analyzed. Possibly this is because ice hockey is a continuous 
flow game with relatively few major events (goal scoring) while 
most of the other games that have been data mined can be 
described as being a series of clearly bounded events. This 
work describes needs of data mining ice hockey statistics to 
quantify the contribution of individual hockey players to team 
success. Large databases of ice hockey statistics for the colle-
giate and professional levels can be accessed to perform this 
work. The goal is to use ice hockey statistics and computational 
methods to help make personnel decisions at both the coaching 
and franchise management levels. This type of work has the 
potential to encourage new avenues of sports statistics 
research, as well as statistical research and data mining, in 
general. 
Keywords-data mining; continuous flow analysis; ice hockey 
I. OBJECTIVES AND OVERVIEW 
Data mining techniques have been developed to take 
large bodies of statistics and reduce them to interesting 
patterns and relationships using computers much faster than 
a human could on his own. Data mining techniques have 
been successfully applied to many types of large databases, 
and an emerging application of data mining is sports statis-
tics. Sports generally lend themselves well to data mining 
since most sports contain large amounts of statistics that 
have been kept over a long period of time. 
The purpose of this work is to data mine ice hockey 
statistics to quantify the contribution of individual hockey 
players to team success (i.e., winning). Large databases of 
ice hockey statistics for the collegiate and professional 
levels can be accessed to perform this work. The long term 
goal is to use ice hockey statistics and computational 
methods to help make personnel decisions at both the 
coaching and franchise management levels. For example, 
applications of this work could be used to help a coach 
decide which players on his team should receive more 
playing time, or to help a team executive decide who on his 
team should be traded and for whom from another team. 
The central hypothesis is that currently available ice 
hockey statistical databases, which contain statistics 
compiled for individual players, can be computationally 
used to aid in making effective decisions about ice hockey 
players. The rationale behind this hypothesis is that 
computational approaches to player statistics in other sports 
in a similar fashion have been successful in the past, and as 
stated, there is a large amount of hockey statistics available 
for analysis. There are two specific aims: 
• Create a computer model that takes ice hockey 
statistics as an input and scores each player’s 
contribution to their team. The working hypothesis is 
that currently available ice hockey statistics can be used 
to effectively compare players to one another on a single, 
useful, and unbiased scale.  
• Create a more robust computer model that takes 
multiple players’ statistics into account to quantify 
how effective multiple players are together. The 
working hypothesis is that currently available ice hockey 
statistics can be used to score a “squad” contribution level 
on a single, useful, and unbiased scale. 
While data mining methods have been applied to some 
sports with success, very little research has been done 
specifically on ice hockey. The results add to the emerging 
field of sports data mining. 
II. SIGNIFICANCE 
Data mining and statistical analysis has been applied to 
other major sports with some success, but very little 
research has been done with ice hockey statistics. The 
argument could be made that this is because ice hockey does 
not lend itself to this type of analysis as easily as sports such 
as basketball, baseball, football, and soccer. The difference 
between ice hockey and these other games can be identified 
by the internal game flow. In baseball and football, action is 
broken into a sequence of separate plays; the result of what 
each player does in a particular play is easily quantified, for 
example: bases accumulated on a hit in baseball or yards 
gained on a single carry by a running back in football. In 
basketball, plays are not as broken up, but scoring is fre-
quent, causing more statistics to be accumulated for each 
player throughout the course of the game. Hockey is a low 
scoring, relatively constant flow game. 
There are a significant amount of hockey statistical 
categories, even if the number of categories is less than the 
other games. The primary statistics a player accumulates are 
goals, assists, points (goals + assists), and +/- (difference 
between team goals scored and team goals allowed while 
the player is on the ice). Other lesser known statistics have 
been compiled as well. The website of the National Hockey 
League (NHL), NHL.com, keeps detailed player statistics 
dating back to 1997, and appends these basic statistical 
categories with penalty minutes, power play goals, 
shorthanded goals, game winning goals, game tying goals, 
overtime goals, shots, shooting percentage, time on ice, 
shifts per game, and face-off win percentage. There is 
31
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

potential in the accumulated available data to quantify 
player contributions using more complexity than just goals 
and assists. In depth statistical analysis of a given set of 
sports statistics can lead to the creation of new statistical 
categories, causing useful analysis to build upon itself. 
Based on the successful application of statistical 
techniques and data mining to other sports and the untapped 
potential of ice hockey statistics, the significance of the gap 
in knowledge of applying these techniques to ice hockey is 
made clearer.  
This work is expected to improve the decision making 
abilities of coaches, team executives, and other people 
involved in management of an ice hockey team. There are 
many types of benefits that can come out of the new 
knowledge generated by this work. 
One group of people who will benefit from the work is 
ice hockey coaches. The largest beneficiaries would be 
hockey coaches at the highest level, professional or 
international team coaches. This is because the most 
statistics and interest are available at the professional level. 
The results of this work can be used to help a coach decide 
which players should receive more playing time, or when 
different players can be ideally used in different situations. 
The results will also help a coach identify players who are 
undervalued on his roster or what players would benefit 
most from what type of development. Over time, a coach 
may learn to identify traits in a player that may have been 
suggested by the statistical analysis, which can improve a 
coach’s talent and instincts.  
A second group of people who will benefit from this 
work are team executives If this analysis identifies a player 
on another team who is undervalued by his team, a team 
executive may use this information to propose a trade for 
the undervalued player without having to give up too much 
for a potentially good player. This work can also help team 
executives decide what players to draft from colleges and 
other lower leagues without having to rely purely on scouts 
who can only investigate a limited number of players. This 
work can help teams discover players who might otherwise 
not have been given a chance. 
Another benefit of this work is the benefit to the 
followers of ice hockey. By having better players and better 
teams taking the ice every day, the quality of the game will 
be improved, which will make the game more enjoyable for 
the fans. Beyond this, many fans of sports enjoy hearing 
statistical analyses of the games they follow, and this work 
will open the doors to new types of hockey analysis. More 
interesting statistics will help make ice hockey even more 
interesting and generate more avid followers of the game.  
III. BACKGROUND 
There has been some research into applications of 
statistics and data mining to sports. This research has 
approached the problem of modeling sports situations and 
performance in a variety of ways. One vein of sports 
research that can be found in the literature is research which 
attempts to statistically model in-game situations. This can 
be most commonly seen with soccer, since, like hockey, 
soccer is a constantly moving, low scoring game, leading to 
less statistics to be generated.  
For example, Wang and Wang [1] used the Apriori 
algorithm [2] to determine association rules between 
different types of technical movements in soccer. The idea 
behind this research was to determine what the most 
common chains of ball movements that occur during a 
particular game are. This type of research can be applied to 
the ball movement patterns of a particular team to determine 
what kind of defense to play against the team, or to help 
players predict what the opposing team’s next move may be 
after something occurs based on common occurrence chains 
determined from application of this research. The only thing 
required would be for someone to watch the opposing team 
play and keep a record of when each technical ball 
movement occurred throughout the game, generating a long 
chain that represented the entire game for the team. By 
watching many games, a database of ball movement can be 
created and then mined using the research as presented. 
A similar approach was taken by Chai [3] to mine 
patterns from data of soccer using serial data, pass time, and 
ball possession time. Serial data refers to the pattern of 
which player possesses the ball in a given chain of 
possession for a team. Chai applied data mining techniques 
to the serial data to determine what chains of possession 
between players happened often, incorporating both teams 
with specific players into each pattern. This work can be 
used to show what trends of ball possession happen when a 
specific team is in control. Also, it can help to identify 
weaknesses within that team’s strategy by incorporating the 
players on the opposing team. If a particular chain of 
possession for a team was often broken up by a particular 
player on the opposing team, a future opponent can use that 
information to adjust its strategy. 
 Beyond just the actual patterns of player possession 
determined, the pass time and ball possession time was used 
to create a time series model of a particular game, which led 
to other association rules about each interesting chain of 
player possession which gave some insight into why events 
occurred. For example, a chain of four specific players may 
end in a steal by the opposing team often, but the reason 
why would be up to speculation from that information 
alone. However, by knowing that the specific chain of 
players led to longer pass times, it can be inferred that these 
players tend to make long, dangerous passes to one another, 
which can be used to help strategize against that team in the 
future. [3]  
Nunes and Sousa [4] applied different data mining and 
data visualization techniques to available data relating to the 
European championship soccer matches over the history of 
the tournaments. Using in game data such as cards given, 
goals scored, and substitutions, these techniques were able 
to confirm the types of trends and patterns one may expect 
for a soccer match. For example, the research showed that 
substitutions begin occurring towards the end of the first 
half, with very few substitutions early in the match. Since 
when a player is substituted out in a soccer match, he is 
done for the rest of the game, it makes sense that 
substituting early in the match would be uncommon. 
32
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Halftime is often a good time to make a substitution since it 
gives coaches and players time to refocus their strategy with 
the break. 
Nunes and Sousa [4] applied the Apriori algorithm to 
match specific information from the tournament’s history in 
the hopes of finding interesting and unexpected association 
rules, but the results of this portion of the research did not 
yield interesting results. Instead, trivial association rules 
were found. The research went on to apply classification 
data mining techniques to matches in different countries but 
it was again unable to find many useful classifications in 
terms of predicting the outcome of soccer matches. Data 
visualization proved to be the most useful of the statistical 
techniques applied to the data in this research. 
There have been various levels of success applying 
game-model statistical research to soccer matches. Soccer 
and ice hockey share many traits in terms of how the game 
can be modeled, and one avenue of ice hockey statistical 
research that may be worth pursuing is the one taken for 
soccer research shown here. However, that is not the type of 
data mining for ice hockey that is described here. Data 
mining that makes use of a greater number player and team 
statistics in a more generalized fashion, which is more 
similar to the work described here, can be found in the 
literature. 
Maheswari and Rajaram [5] decided to apply data 
mining techniques to cricket data, noting that cricket lends 
itself to large accumulations of data which cannot be 
completely analyzed by a human in a reasonable amount of 
time. The approach in this work straddles the line between 
game flow modeling, similar to the soccer research just 
presented, and purely accumulated statistical modeling. In 
cricket, one team bowls the ball towards the batter, who is a 
member from the other team. The batter is on offense and 
the bowler is on defense. Play can be broken up by each 
bowl, where the bowler bowls the ball and the hitter hits it. 
A sequence of events will occur which may or may not 
result in runs being scored, and then the process repeats with 
a new bowl. Since cricket is a game where many short plays 
occur, similar to baseball, association between statistical 
events is much clearer to infer. This work uses data mining 
algorithms to find association rules between different 
statistical categories in cricket for different players. This 
type of information can be used to find a player’s strengths 
and weaknesses to different approaches from the opposition. 
For example, the type of bowl to which a hitter is weak 
could be discovered through an application of this work 
helping the defensive team strategize as to how to bowl to 
that particular player.  
Recently, Wang, Jie, and Zeng published a paper related 
to their work on development of an interactive baseball and 
softball statistical gathering and analysis computer program 
[6]. Fast and Jensen [7] applied data mining techniques to 
broad NFL team statistics, such as wins, losses, points 
scored and points allowed, as well as the history of NFL 
coaching performances and associations between coaches. 
Coaching associations comes in the form of who was an 
assistant under whom, to give an idea of who learned from 
successful coaches and went on to become successful 
himself. Based on statistical team success and coaching 
associations, the research was able to show that the history 
of the coaching staff for a given team had a strong 
association to whether that team made the NFL playoffs in 
the given year. This type of research could be used to help 
identify up and coming or undervalued coaches quickly, so 
a franchise or school would move in to acquire this coach 
before other teams or schools start to take notice. 
Conversely, this research could also be used to show what 
coaches may be given more credit than they deserve. 
Romer [8] applied statistical analysis and dynamic 
programming to model NFL football game situations with 
the goal of determining optimal strategy on fourth-down 
plays. The generally accepted strategy in football is for the 
team with the ball to punt in many given situations when the 
team has the ball on fourth down. Romer’s analysis shows 
that conventional knowledge may be approaching the game 
too conservatively, meaning that teams should be more 
willing to “go for it” on fourth down to try to keep 
possession of the ball if they are able to gain enough yards. 
There has even been sports research from a more media-
driven point of view, such as the research by Dao and 
Babaguchi [9]. This research uses a temporal representation 
of small events during the course of a sporting event to 
predict what type of event will occur next. The results of the 
research could be useful for media coverage of sporting 
events, to help a system automatically identify when a 
replay was likely to be displayed to viewers, or for the 
system to understand what kind of event is happening on the 
field based on the positioning of cameras at the current time 
and moments leading up to the current time. This type of 
automatic detection could be used to improve the speed and 
quality of media coverage of sporting events. Since this type 
of detection would be nearly impossible to have perfect 
results, the best application would likely to let the system 
automatically suggest to an interactive user what the next 
step in coverage to take should be, which could speed up the 
decision making process within the media and thus enhance 
the viewer experience. 
An application of data mining takes a similar approach 
to ours was done by Smith, Lipscomb, and Simkins [10]. In 
their work, the goal was to use data mining of individual 
baseball pitcher statistics to predict the winner of the annual 
Cy Young award. The Cy Young award is given to the 
pitched voted to be the best pitcher in each of the two 
leagues that make up Major League Baseball. The 
application in this research chose the top 10 starting pitchers 
in terms of wins and top 10 relief pitchers in terms of saves 
as candidates for the Cy Young in the given season. The 
individual statistics available for each candidate are then run 
through a data mining algorithm that is a Bayesian 
classifier. Applying the classifier to data from 1967 through 
2006, the correct pick of Cy Young winner from each 
league happened frequently. 
In the 1990’s, IBM developed a program called 
Advanced Scout [11] that was created to “seek out and 
discover interesting patterns in game data.” Advanced Scout 
was a specific data mining application for NBA basketball, 
and was distributed to many NBA teams during the 1990’s. 
33
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Using input data from a given game of basketball between 
two teams, which includes very specific input data such as 
“who took a shot, the type of shot, the outcome, any 
rebounds, etc.” The data is also temporal, showing when 
each data point occurred during the game. The IBM 
software is then able to apply data mining algorithms to this 
data and find interesting and useful patterns and 
associations. Since the data is temporal, video can 
accompany a game analysis, so when a particular pattern is 
shown to occur at a time point, a coach can then pull up the 
video to actually see what the statistics are saying. This type 
of interaction can be very valuable to a coach, helping him 
to learn to spot important patterns and behaviors on his own, 
as well as to better understand those identified by the data.  
Some of the general data mining queries involve “either 
field goal shooting percentage to detect patterns related to 
shooting performance, or possession analysis to determine 
optimal lineup combinations.” Advanced Scout takes an 
approach similar to the cricket application by Maheswari 
and Rajaram [5], but with more detailed input data and more 
rigorous analysis. 
Another broader-focus type of sports data analysis is 
known as “sabermetrics.” The beginnings of sabermetrics 
are well explained by Schumaker [12]: “In 1977, Bill James 
began publishing his annual Bill James Baseball Abstracts. 
These abstracts were used as his personal forum to question 
many of the traditional baseball performance metrics… 
James continued to publish his annual compendium of 
insights, unorthodox ranking formulae and new statistical 
performance measures which he called sabermetrics.” 
Baseball is a statistics rich game, and it is now accepted that 
rigorous statistical analysis is necessary to remain 
competitive at the professional franchise level of baseball. 
However, James’ sabermetrics were not even strongly 
considered by decision makers in Major League Baseball 
until 2002, when the Oakland Athletics began to incorporate 
some of James’ ideas. The A’s used some of James’ 
performance measurements to help decide whom to draft, 
and the strategy marked a turnaround for the A’s franchise. 
The A’s general manager, Billy Beane, “discovered that by 
carefully selecting players in the draft, the A’s could lock-in 
players that were oftentimes overlooked by other clubs into 
long contracts that paid little money and thus develop this 
into a strategy to compete with larger payroll teams. It was 
simply a matter of picking the right players, which 
sabermetrics could make easier.” 
The traditional baseball statistics are categories like runs 
batted in (RBI), hits, singles, doubles, triples, home runs, 
and stolen bases for field players, and categories like earned 
run average for pitchers, which takes the number of earned 
runs a pitcher gives up and normalizes it by 9 innings to 
give a measure of the average number of runs that pitch 
would give up in a normal nine inning game. James came up 
with different categories that helped to better quantify 
player performance, such as On-Base Percentage, which 
determines what percentage of plate appearances for a batter 
results in the batter reaching base, and strikeout to walk 
ratio for pitchers. 
Schumaker [12] explained how Dean Oliver took a 
similar approach to basketball statistics as James did to 
baseball beginning in the 1980’s. Oliver took more of a 
team-based statistical approach, but still was able to make 
contributions to analysis of basketball by helping to identify 
player contribution and even measure how well players 
worked with one another on the court.  
As the success of analysis such as that of James and 
Oliver began to be noticed, a sudden revolution in sports 
data analysis began and is continuing today. A sabermetrics 
type of analysis is beginning to be applied to football as 
well, which has the benefit of many types of statistics easily 
able to be accrued due to the stop-and-go nature of the 
game, but the drawback in that there are only 16 games in 
an NFL season, while there are 162 games in a baseball sea-
son and 82 games in an NBA season. As a comparison, 
there are 82 games in an NHL ice hockey season as well. 
[12] 
There have been plenty of statistical computer tools that 
have been created to access and analyze the large amount of 
sports statistics available. Schumaker [12] provides a short 
summary of different programs, some of which are for a 
specific sport, while others can be used for many different 
games. One example is Digital Scout, which is an adaptable 
piece of software that can be used for record keeping and 
creating custom reports, “such as baseball hit charts, 
basketball shots, and football formation strengths.” Another 
is SportsVis, which creates graphical representations of 
sports data quickly to help people uncover trends or 
problems.  
Schumaker [12] delved into research tools and methods 
created for a large variety of sports, but ice hockey 
information is noticeably sparse. Comprehensive statistical 
data about players and teams in hockey can be found in two 
major online resources are supplied by the NHL [13] as well 
as an outside, independent resource [14]. Interactive 
graphics that can be used to identify where events occur on 
the ice and when can be found are also supplied by the NFL 
[13]. Similar to basketball, a shot-taking map can be drawn 
on a graphical representation of the ice/court, and the visual 
data can infer trends or patterns about players or a team 
[15].  
IV. DATA 
There are two specific objectives of the work. The first 
objective is to create a computer model that takes ice 
hockey statistics as an input and scores each player’s 
contribution to his team. The second objective is to create a 
robust computer model which takes multiple players’ 
statistics into account to quantify how effective multiple 
players are together. 
To accomplish both of these objectives, a large amount 
of data needs to be accessed. NHL.com has comprehensive 
statistics reaching back to the 1997-1998 season for every 
player, including Games Played, Goals, Assists, Points, +/-, 
Penalty Minutes, Power Play Goals, Short Handed Goals, 
Game Winning Goals, Overtime Goals, Shots, Shooting 
Percentage, Time on Ice per Game, Shifts per Game, and 
34
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Face-off winning percentage. The website also has game-
by-game statistics and team statistics. 
Since the first goal is to score a player’s contribution to 
team success, both the individual player statistics and team 
statistics will be important to consider. For example, if one 
player has scored many more goals then another, but the 
high-scoring player is on a team with many more losses than 
the lower-scoring player, that doesn’t necessarily mean that 
the higher-scoring player is a better contributor to team 
winning. There could be something else the player does that 
makes it more difficult for his team to win, which may even 
be related to his higher scoring. If the higher-scoring player 
has a tendency to play too aggressively, he will score more 
goals, but he’ll also put his teammates in more shorthanded 
situations, either through penalties or by trying to take the 
puck too far on his own, causing him to turn the puck over 
more often and lead to breakaways for the opposing team. 
The basic idea is to use player statistics and the team 
statistics accumulated at the same time. With a large 
database to work with, the hope is to mine interesting 
association rules. However, the approach for mining these 
rules will not be straightforward. In fact, players may need 
to be grouped differently depending on their position. For 
example, penalty minutes accrued by a center may have an 
association with accumulating losses for a team, but penalty 
minutes accrued by a defender may have an association with 
accumulating wins for a team. This is a possibility due to 
the different nature of the positions. A center’s job is to win 
face-offs and score goals; a defender’s job is to stop the 
opposing team from scoring. Generally, a rougher, more 
physical player is a desirable attribute in a defender, and 
those types of players will tend to accumulate more penalty 
minutes. Again, this is speculation, and quite the opposite 
may result from the analysis. 
Once a variety of data segmentation and approaches to 
mining association rules between player statistics and team 
wins have been run, the intention would be for a 
comprehensive 
formula 
that 
scores 
each 
player’s 
contribution to team success based on their statistics. The 
formula will be regardless of who the player is or what team 
the player is on. This way, the value of two players from 
very different backgrounds, including position differences 
and team history, can be compared directly in an unbiased 
way. If an effective formula can be derived, it could be used 
to identify a player who makes strong contributions to his 
team but has been stuck on unsuccessful teams due to the 
players around him, which could be used to the advantage of 
both the team who has the player and a different team who 
would want to acquire him.  
To accomplish the second objective, a similar approach 
is taken as with the first, using pairs of defenders and lines 
of forwards, where a line consists of two wings and a center. 
The groups of players to be used for creating the association 
rules will be chosen by researching commonly used lines on 
teams throughout the time period covered by available data. 
This is because randomly choosing players to create a “line” 
for each team would work statistically, but could cause 
misleading results since the players may not necessarily 
work together. The goal is to derive association rules that 
may have a form like “If defender 1 and defender 2 both 
have an average of more than 2 penalty minutes per game 
with an average time on ice of at least 20 minutes per game, 
then wins occur.”  
Similar to the first process, if a useful set of interesting 
association rules can be derived, the next step would be to 
develop a mathematical formula using the statistics of a pair 
or set of three players and “score” the group of players. If 
actual scoring cannot be accomplished, at least a set of 
player types that create an idea pair of defenders or line of 
forward could be suggested with statistical support. With 
the complex level of analysis required for combining 
players, even suggesting what “groups of statistics” for each 
of two or three players on a line could be very valuable in 
constructing lineups for a game or figuring out who to draft 
or acquire for a team, based on the current roster. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
There is sufficient precedent to show the success and 
benefits of sports statistics and data mining analysis. Ice 
hockey is relatively under computationally analyzed. 
Possibly this is because ice hockey is a continuous flow 
game with relatively few major events (goal scoring) while 
most of the other games that have been data mined can be 
described as being a series of clearly bounded events. This 
work described the needs of data mining ice hockey 
statistics to quantify the contribution of individual hockey 
players to team success. Large databases of ice hockey 
statistics for the collegiate and professional levels can be 
accessed to perform this work. The goal is to use ice hockey 
statistics and computational methods to help make 
personnel decisions at both the coaching and franchise 
management levels. Many people from the walks of 
academia and business, as well as hockey enthusiasts, will 
benefit from the results of this research. This type of work 
also has the potential to encourage new avenues of sports 
statistics research, as well as statistical research and data 
mining, in general. It is an important societal goal to find an 
effective way to draw more people into studying fields 
involving math and science. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Wang and L. Wang, "Research of Association Rules in 
Analyzing Technique of Football Match," presented at 
Second International Conference on Power Electronics and 
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 178-180, 2009. 
[2] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant, "Fast Algorithms For Mining 
Association Rules," presented at 20th VLDB Conference, 
487-499, 1995. 
[3] B. Chai, "Time Series Data Mining Implemented on Football 
Match," Applied Mechanics and Materials, vol. 26-28, pp. 98-
103, 2010. 
[4] S. Nunes and M. Sousa, "Applying Data Mining Techniques 
to Football Data from European Championships," presented at 
Conferência de Metodologias de Investigação Científica 
(CoMIC'06), 4-16, 2006. 
[5] P. Maheswari and M. Rajaram, "A Novel Approach for 
Mining Association Rules on Sports Data using Component 
35
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Analysis: For Cricket match perspective," presented at 2009 
IEEE International Advance Computing Conference, 2009. 
[6] G. Wang, S. Jie, and F. Zeng, "Design and Realization of 
Baseball and Softball Match Data Analysis Information 
System," Advanced Materials Research, vol. 187, pp. 353-
357, 2011. 
[7] A. Fast and D. Jensen, "The NFL Coaching Network: 
Analysis of the Social Network Among Professional Football 
Coaches," presented at AAAI Fall Symposia on Capturing 
and Using Patterns for Evidence Detection, 2006. 
[8] D. Romer, "It’s Fourth Down and What Does the Bellman 
Equation Say? A Dynamic-Programming Analysis of Football 
Strategy,"  9024, 2003. 
[9] M. Dao and N. Babaguchi, "Sports Event Detection using 
Temporal Patterns and Web-casting Text.," presented at First 
ACM 
Workshop 
On 
Analysis 
And 
Retrieval 
Of 
Events/Actions And Work Flows In Video Streams (AREA 
'08), 2008. 
[10] L. Smith, B. Lipscomb, and A. Simkins, "Data Mining in 
Sports: Predicting Cy Young Winners," Journal of Computing 
Sciences in Colleges, vol. 22, pp. 115-121, 2007. 
[11] I. Bhandari, E. Colet, J. Parker, Z. Pines, R. Pretap, and K. 
Ramanujam, "Advanced Scout: Data Mining And Knowledge 
Discovery In NBA Data," Data Mining and Knowledge 
Discovery, vol. 1, pp. 121-125, 1997. 
[12] R. Schumaker, O. Solieman, and H. Chen, "Research in 
Sports Statistics," Sports Data Mining, pp. 33-50, 2011. 
[13] http://www.nhl.com/ 
[14] http://www.hockey-reference.com/ 
[15] H. Chen, R. Schumaker, and O. Solieman, "Data Sources for 
Sports," Sports Data Mining, pp. 25-31, 2011. 
 
 
36
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

