Negation Identification and Calculation in Sentiment Analysis  
Amna Asmi 
University of Hull, UK 
e-mail: A.Asmi@2008.hull.ac.uk 
Tanko Ishaya 
University of Jos, Nigeria 
e-mail: ishayat@unijos.edu.ng 
 
Abstract—The extensive growth of user-generated content has 
introduced new aspects of analysis on World Wide Web data. 
Sentiment analysis of written text on the web is one of the text 
mining aspects used to find out sentiments in a given text. The 
process of sentiment analysis is a task of detecting, extracting 
and classifying opinions and sentiments expressed in texts. It 
includes the identification of the meaning of words within the 
text through natural language processing rules. While existing 
research presents a number of approaches for sentiment 
analysis, these approaches have not quite provided an 
appropriate and efficient way of calculating and representing 
the role of negation in sentiment analysis. Therefore, this paper 
presents a framework for automatic identification of the 
presence of opinion in textual data. The proposed framework 
includes a description of rules for negation identification and 
calculation. These negation rules are designed in order to 
improve sentiment text analysis.  Main achievement of the 
paper is a demonstration on an approach for automatic 
identification and calculations of negation in opinion and 
sentiment analysis.  
Keywords-Negation Identification; Negation Calculation; 
Subjectivity Analysis; Sentiment Analysis; Opinion Mining; 
Social Media Mining; Text Mining.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The aim of sentiment analysis is to find out the positive 
and negative feelings, emotions and opinions written in a 
text. These sentiments are based on the meaning of words 
used in text according to different scenarios and situations. 
There are a variety of ways used to express the same feeling 
in a written text by using different grammatical rules. These 
grammatical rules contain negations that are very frequently 
used in text that completely change the meanings of words. 
In other words, negation identification and detecting its 
scope with in a sentence (text) are necessary in finding out 
the sentiments from a piece of text. Although negation 
identification is an important aspect of sentiment analysis, it 
is yet to be properly addressed. In general, the efforts put 
into sentiment analysis of sentences having negation terms in 
them are less efficient with respect to general sentiment 
analysis. Negation identification is not a simple task and its 
complexity increases, since negation words such as not, nor 
etc., (syntactic negation) are not the only criterion for 
negation calculation. The linguistic patterns - prefixes  (e.g., 
un-, dis-, etc.) or suffixes (e.g., -less) also introduce the 
context of negation in textual data [24]. Similarly, word 
intensifiers and diminishers (contextual valence shifter) also 
flip the polarity of sentiments [7, 21]. It will take a lot of 
efforts to enlist all such words in one list.  These valence 
shifters do not only flip the polarity but also increase or 
decrease the degree to which a sentimental term is positive or 
negative [5]. On the other hand, negation does not restrict 
itself to ‘not’. There are terms like; no, not, n’t, never, no 
longer, no more, no way, nowhere, by no means, at no time, 
etc. [5, 21] that also change the meaning of a sentence. 
However, the precision involving the negative word “not” is 
very low, at 63% [5].  Another reason is the fact that the 
number of negation sentences encountered is considered 
insignificant during the evaluation of any sentiment analysis 
system as compared to the level of effort required to resolve 
the issues related to negation. This paper is an effort towards 
finding an approach to handle the syntactic negation for 
sentiment analysis by not only using the polarity and its 
intensity for words but also using the dependencies, relation 
within the sentences and sentence structure. The negation is 
handled with the diminishers, intensifiers and negation terms 
during the process of sentiment analysis. This research 
mainly focuses on the identification of negation, and 
identification of scope of syntactic negation. It presents a 
proposed framework for automatic identification of opinion 
in textual data. The framework has been implemented and 
evaluated by verifying the polarity identified by prototype 
system with a group of participants. 
The rest of the paper has been structured as follows: 
Section 2 presents an analysis of related work in the area of 
sentient analysis. This is followed by a description of the 
proposed framework for sentiment analysis, and the existing 
resources used to generate dependencies in Section 3. 
Section 4 presents an application of this proposed framework 
for negation handling in sentiment analysis. It also explains 
the basic rules used in this framework for handling negation. 
Section 5 involves an analysis of the technique used through 
some example illustrations together with an analysis of the 
results of the prototype evaluation. Section 6 provides a 
conclusion and the prospective extensions to this work. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Text based information is broadly classified into two 
basic types, facts and opinions. In other words, textual 
analysis can be understood as classification of text either 
positive/negative (document or sentence level sentiment 
classification) 
or 
subjective/objective 
(sentence 
level 
subjectivity classification). Sentiment analysis is a process, 
which deals with the detection of sentiments, opinions, 
emotions, appraisals and feelings towards entities, events and 
properties [22]. The concept of emotion, opinion or 
sentiment is very broad. Different researchers have identified 
different spectrums of emotions in different dimensions [15, 
10]. However, it is believed that all these different 
dimensions can be mapped to either positive or negative 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

emotions [25]. On the basis of this believe, research in 
sentiment analysis and opinion mining has considered 
positive and negative feelings. Most researchers in the field 
of opinion mining have used the lexicons and lists of words, 
with word as basic unit of expression of emotions in any 
language. Lexicon based negation i.e., negation introduced 
by suffix and/or prefix is easily handled with the help of a 
good lexical resource, i.e., dictionary, ontology, database etc. 
However, more emphasis on opinion analysis should be on 
how these words are joined and correlated with other words 
to give specific meanings in any language. This inter-
relationship of words makes up sentences, which is why it is 
important to emphasis on finding the scope of negation, 
diminshers or intensifiers. Due to syntactic and semantic 
differences, it is difficult to interpret the intensity of polarity. 
While calculating a value of intensity of any sentence, there 
are always modifiers, which not only change the polarity of 
other words in the sentence but also affect the intensity. 
Negation is a complex thing as it changes the meaning 
(polarity and its intensity) if used within a clause. It is also 
difficult to identify which part of a clause a negation is 
changing in a sentence. The following sections II A – II D 
highlight different methods used for negation identification 
and how they affect sentiment analysis of text. Section II E 
discusses the State of Art for analysis of Negation. 
A. Bag of Words 
Bag of words (BOW) is a technique where each word in 
a document is represented by a separate variable numeric 
value (weight) [26]. It is the most widely used technique for 
sentiment analysis [3, 11]. Das and Chen [3] incorporated 
negation in their research for extraction of sentiments from 
stock market message boards. They believed that negation in 
a sentence reverses the meanings of the sentence. They 
discussed how words like “not”, “never”, “no”, etc., serve to 
reverse sentence meaning. They detected negation words in 
sentences and tag from the sentences with negation markers 
[3]. In  2002, researchers in [11] adopted the same technique 
and added the negation word with every word until the first 
punctuation mark following the negation word. An example 
that better explains this technique is “I do not NOT like NOT 
this NOT new NOT Nokia NOT model” [17]. From the 
example above, it can be seen that this technique is not an 
effective way to find out the negation from a written text as 
negation may be based on a meaning of words, whereas 
understanding a scope is very necessary to determine such 
meanings. Another limitation of this technique is that it is 
based on the list of words, and lists in any language can 
never be complete.  
B. Contextual Valence Shifter 
Contextual Valence Shifters or modifiers are the words, 
which change (boost, enhance, diminish etc.) meanings [8].  
Many researchers have transferred their research on 
sentiment analysis from BOW to Parts of Speech (POS) 
especially Verbs, Adjectives and Adverbs. The pioneers in 
giving an understanding that there is a basic polarity 
associated with every word were in [12]. However, lots of 
contextual shifters are still needed to change or modify the 
valance associated with words. Negatives, intensifiers or 
diminishers are examples of contextual shifter [12]. For 
example; Negatives: John is clever versus John is not clever. 
Intensifier: Sam is suspicious about Anna versus Sam is 
deeply suspicious about Anna.  Diminishers: I know what to 
say versus I hardly know what to say.  Wiegand et al.  [17] 
believed that the effectiveness of the model believed that the 
effectiveness of the model could be better judged if was 
evaluated. Kennedy and Inkpen [6] used the same model for 
Contextual Valence Shifters. They enhanced their model but 
still kept the scope of any negation term as immediately 
preceding a term. There is a need for relationship finder to 
define the scope of negation terms [7]. Other researchers 
have tried to define the scope by defining lists of verbs, 
adjectives and adverbs and defining their relationships for 
sentiment analysis [16]. Lists of positive and negative terms 
and a set of lists for modifiers was proposed in [8] to define 
the scope of these modifiers as n- terms before and after 
positive or negative terms, although this n remained a 
constant. This technique is better for negation identification 
in comparison to the BOW technique. However, it also 
considered the propagation of lists as a limitation. The lists 
used for this technique may grow with time and can never be 
complete, as in any language there might be infinite number 
of words and ways they can be used. Therefore, there is 
always a need to devise some way for the system to handle 
words, which are not present in the lists. 
C. Semantic Relations 
Semantic relations refer to the relationship between 
concepts or meanings for example antonym, synonym, 
homonym etc. It is evident from existing research that 
semantic relationship is also used for negation identification. 
It is clear that atomic words, which can provide a misleading 
polarity for sentences as words can be modified (weakened, 
strengthened, or reversed) based on lexicon, discourse, or 
paralinguistic contextual operators [12]. The use of linguistic 
structure of sentence for sentiment analysis was proposed in 
[9], where the polarity of a sentence is dependent upon the 
polarities of its parts:  noun phrases (NP), verb phrases (VP) 
and individual parts of speech. Negation is handled by 
defining different intensities of negation words. In other 
words, the negation of words can change the polarity of an 
entire sentence or only parts of it [17]. Shaikh et al. [14] has 
used a similar approach to calculate the sentence level 
sentiment analysis. They performed semantic dependency 
analysis on the semantic verb frames of each sentence, and 
apply a set of rules to each dependency relation to calculate 
the contextual valence of the whole sentence [14]. A two-
phase process was proposed in [2] as another way of 
compositional semantics. They identify the polarity of words 
in the first phrase where all the words are classified on the 
basis of the level of their strength in terms of the scope in the 
sentence. The second phase is based on the inference rules, 
which identify the polarity modification feature. For 
example, in the sentence “They could not eliminate my 
doubt”, the word not is a negater whereas eliminate also 
reverses the polarity of doubt, and not is reversing polarity of 
eliminate. These rules are much different as compared to the 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

ones presented in [18] and [9, 17]. This approach is working 
well for simple sentences in the written text but has failed for 
compound sentences where a sentence may have word-based 
or sentence-based dependencies. 
D. Relations and Dependency Based 
The grammatical relationships between the words within 
a sentence and syntactic dependencies help in extraction of 
textual relations. Reschke and Anand [13] have given a 
context aware approach for sentiment analysis where the 
sentiment is evaluated towards a target entity, event, or 
proposition. The scope of words is defined by the clauses or 
phrases (noun phrase, verb phrase) in the sentence and 
sentiment in the sentences are understood by the heuristic 
rules defined to join the clauses [13]. Jai and others also tried 
to identify the scope of different terms by using Stanford 
Parser tree [27]. They used simple tree based rules by 
identifying the dependent terms and later used some parts of 
speech based tools to understand the sentimental behavior of 
negation [5]. 
There is quite an extensive research undertaken for 
sentiment analysis and scope of different words and their 
relation within a sentence and on broader sense domain. 
However, negation is still an over looked domain probably 
because of the low proportion of the number of negative 
sentences encountered during the evaluation of sentiment 
analysis. Irony is a process of using words and phrases 
(generally positive) that are generally different if used 
otherwise [1]. Therefore identification, extraction and 
analysis of irony are difficult. 
E. Analysis of Negation  
For the sentence level sentiment analysis in English 
language, the basic structure of English sentence and its 
parts: clauses and phrases are necessary to be understood. 
These parts further divide sentences into different types of 
sentences (simple, complex and compound). The sentence is 
made more complex by adding declarative, interrogative, 
exclamatory and imperative sentences. In order to further 
complicate the problem as the comparison, contradiction, 
negation and irony might also be introduced in the 
sentences. Negation needs to identify its scope, negation can 
be local (e.g., not good), or it can involve longer-distance 
dependencies (e.g., does not look very good) or the negation 
of the subject (e.g., no one thinks that it’s good). It even 
changes its roles i.e., instead of negating and can even 
intensify (e.g., not only good but amazing) [18]. In order to 
find out the scope of the negation, the sequence of words in 
the sentence should be identified. On the whole, it is not 
simply the negation of a word but negation of the sentence 
[19, 21].  
The expression of negation within a sentence varies a lot. 
It can be a verb, adverb, suffix or prefix. It might also occur 
more than once in a sentence and rather than cancelling each 
other it can give negative meaning, for example; I cannot get 
no satisfaction [4]. Therefore, the negation analysis has been 
done using many different ways: Parts of Speech, Bag of 
Words, and Dependency Tree. However, the best results can 
be found by combining these approaches. A way to 
understand the negation by using bag of words approach and 
latter resolving the scope with the help of dependency tree 
was proposed in [20]. The following section explains the 
proposed framework for sentiment analysis and the approach 
for negation identification and calculation that helps to solve 
the negation problem in sentiment analysis. 
III. 
FRAMEWORK FOR SENTIMENT ANALYSIS 
This section introduces a framework for sentiment 
analysis and explains how it is handling negation 
identification, scope of negation and calculation of sentiment 
on sentence level. The framework presented in Figure 1, 
consists of a number of detection, extraction and 
classification components interacting at various levels.  
 
Pre-processor
Syntactic Parser
Sentiment Analyser
Polarity Calculator
Repository
SentiWord
Net
WordNet
Polarity Calculation Rules
Analysed Data
Domain 
Specific 
Resource
Input
 
Figure 1.  Framework for Sentiment Analysis 
The framework shows a mixed and combined approach 
to lexical and syntactic analysis for sentiments. The 
framework uses a number of existing lexical and syntactic 
analysis resources for sentiment analysis. Its main 
components are briefly described in Sections A through C.  
A. Pre-processor 
The pre-processing phase of the system takes text as 
input and arranges all the data in required format. It splits 
data into sentences and forwards all the sentences to 
syntactic parser. 
B. Syntactic Parser 
The syntactic parser is an iterative parser, which uses 
Penn Tree Bank [30] parser to assign Parts of Speech (POS) 
tags to each word in the sentence. The name entities and 
idioms involved in a sentence are also identified in syntactic 
parsing. It also uses Stanford Parser [27] to identify how 
different words are interacting within a sentence and 
identifies the syntactic dependencies/relationship within a 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

sentence. The syntactic parser parses each sentence 
iteratively with all the identified information to the sentiment 
analyser after classifying the sentence as a question, an 
assertion, a comparison, a confirmation seeking or a 
confirmation providing by using the rule of sentence type 
identification. 
C. Sentiment Analyzer 
The sentiment analyzer is basically the main part of 
proposed framework. It uses general resources like 
SentiWordNet [28], WordNet [29] and any domain specific 
resource to extracts the sentiment-oriented words from each 
sentence 
by 
using 
the 
relationship 
information 
of 
(dependencies within) the sentence. The Sentiment Analyzer 
has two sub modules, which help in calculating the polarity 
of sentences and documents. The Polarity Calculator (PC) 
calculates the polarity of a sentence and assigns a score. In 
order to calculate polarity, PC uses SentiWordNet [28] to 
identify the positive and negative words and their values 
assigned by the SentiWordNet [28]. In this process, PC 
collects the synonyms of a word if its not found in 
SentiWordNet [28]. The PC first uses WordNet [29] to get 
the synonyms. The sentiment analyzer generates frames for 
each sentence. A frame contains the type of sentence, 
subject, object/feature, sentiment oriented word(s), sentiment 
type (absolute or relative), sentiment strength (very weak, 
weak, average, strong or very strong) and polarity of 
sentence. 
IV. 
USAGE OF FRAMEWORK FOR NEGATION  
All the sentences having negation are forwarded from the 
pre-processor to the syntactic parser with other sentences. 
There is no specific requirement for handling the negation 
sentences for pre-processing. However, syntactic parser 
identifies the negation and POS that are involved in negation 
with the help of Stanford Dependency Parser [27] during the 
syntactic parsing phase. In the negation identification 
process, the kind of negation i.e., no one likes his behavior 
where ‘no’ is used to determine the behavior of one, is also 
identified. This process also takes care of the negation in 
conjunction sentences. The negation identification is very 
import part of syntactic parser that is used for polarity 
calculation by the sentiment analyzer. The following section 
explains how sentiment analyzer uses the negation for 
polarity calculation. 
A. Polarity Calculation 
Sentiment analysis identifies the semantics involved in a 
sentence. The words in a sentence, their meanings, 
alternative words, polarity of each word and intensity 
associated with each word are basic elements used by 
sentiment analyzer for sentiment identification. The polarity 
of sentence is usually based on the meaning of words. 
However, the negation (only for negation sentences) changes 
the meaning of the words and polarity of the sentence. In 
order to calculate the polarity of a sentence, some rules are 
defined in Table 1. These rules are defined on the basis of 
POS. Most negation words are classified as adverbs, suffix, 
prefix or verbs. However, the nouns are generally there to 
determine the meaning of another noun. The scope of 
negation will be identified by the dependency tree, which 
indicates how negation is interacting with other words in the 
sentence. This dependency will identify the scope of the 
negation - whether it is a single word or a phrase / clause 
within a sentence. In the case of a clause or phrase, the noun 
phrase/ clause is first calculated for the sentiment polarity 
before the verb phrase or clause sentiment polarity is 
calculated. The negation is handled in each phrase 
accordingly. The intensity of polarity will not exceed  (+/-) 1, 
where + is for positive and – is for negative polarity. The 
intensity of a sentence is calculated as: 
Resulting Intensity = First Word/Phrase/Clause + [( 1 - Second 
Word/Phrase/Clause) * Second Word/Phrase/Clause]  
 
(1) 
TABLE 1. RULES SPECIFYING NEGATION 
First  
Word 
/Phrase 
/Clause 
Second 
Word      
/Phrase 
/Caluse 
Negation 
Result 
Positive 
Positive 
True 
Negative 
Positive 
Positive 
False 
Positive 
Positive 
Negative 
True 
Positive 
Positive 
Negative 
False 
Negative 
Negative 
Positive 
True 
Positive 
Negative 
Positive 
False 
Negative 
Negative 
Negative 
True 
Negative 
Negative 
Negative 
False 
Positive 
 
The positive/negative value of words in the Equation 1 is 
extracted from the SentiWordNet [28] in order to calculate 
the polarity of a sentence. The extracted value from the 
SentiWordNet [28] is reversed during this process if 
negation is ‘True’ as presented in Table 1. 
B. Algorithm for Polarity Calculation 
Function CalculatePolarity Returns Polarity { 
  Double polarity = 0 
  For Each nounPhraseOfSentence { 
     get SentiWordNet value of all Adjectives and Nouns of 
noun-phrase 
      If (Sentence is Marked NEGATION by Syntax Parser) { 
         Reverse the SentiWordNet values of related 
Nouns/Adjectives } 
       For Each Noun and Adjective { 
polarity += [( 1 – Noun/Adjective) * Noun/Adjective] 
} }  For Each verbPhraseOfSentence { 
get SentiWordNet value of all Adverbs and Verbs of 
verb-phrase; 
      If (Sentence is Marked NEGATION by Syntax Parser) { 
Reverse the SentiWordNet values of related 
Verbs/Adverbs  } 
      For Each Verb and Adverb { 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

polarity += [( 1 – Verb/Adverb) * Verb/Adverb] 
        }  } Return polarity } 
 
The syntax parser forwards each sentence to the 
sentiment parser as mentioned in Figure 1. The syntax parser 
identifies the ‘negation’ for negation sentences and also 
identifies the words identifying the negation before handing 
over the sentences to the sentiment parser. For the sentiment 
analysis, the sentiment parser calculates the polarity of each 
sentence through the above algorithm. In order to calculate 
the polarity of a sentence, all the noun and verb phrases are 
calculated. Polarity calculator gets the values of all nouns 
and adjectives involved in a noun phrase from the 
SentiWordNet [28]. These values are reversed by the polarity 
calculation in case of negation sentence depending on the 
negation scope. Similarly, polarity calculator obtains the 
values of all verbs and adverbs involved in the verb phrase 
from the SentiWordNet [28] and reversed these values in 
case of negation sentence. The whole process uses Equation 
1 iteratively for polarity calculation while solving each noun 
and verb phrase. 
V. 
ANALYSIS 
The sentence polarity is calculated on the basis of the 
parts of a sentence. A sentence may contain either simple 
POS (Verb, Adverb, Adjectives, etc.) or complex parts of 
speech (Noun Phrase [Pronoun, Noun] or Verb Phrase [Verb, 
Noun Phrase], relations of possession, determiner, etc.). The 
following hierarchy is an example of POS in a complete 
sentence. 
(Sentence  
    (Noun Phrase (Pronoun, Noun)) 
    (Adverbial Phrase (Adverb)) 
    (Verb Phrase (Verb) 
      (Sentence 
        (Verb Phrase (Verb) 
          (Noun Phrase (Noun)) 
        )  )  )  ) 
Sentiment polarity calculation is a nested process. This 
process calculates the sentiment of the most inner level first 
and then it calculates along with the next higher level, which 
is also called Sentiment Propagation [23]. This process 
calculates the polarity and intensity of the words and phrases. 
If there is a negation term the polarity will be calculated 
accordingly. The following three examples illustrate the 
whole process of polarity calculation. 
A. Example 1 
They have not succeeded, and will never succeed, in 
breaking the will of this valiant people. 
 (Sentence 
    (Pronoun They) 
    (Verb Phrase 
      (Verb Phrase (have not) 
        (Verb Phrase (Verb succeeded))) 
      (and) 
      (Verb Phrase (will) 
        (Adverbial Phrase (Adverb never)) 
        (Verb Phrase (succeed))) 
      (Prepositional Phrase (in) 
        (Sentence 
          (Verb Phrase (breaking) 
            (Noun Phrase 
              (Noun Phrase (the will)) 
              (Prepositional Phrase (of) 
                (Noun Phrase (this valiant people))))))))) 
     
The negation word ‘not’ is affecting the succeeded (+) 
whereas never is effecting succeed (+) where succeeded and 
succeed are joined by and (joins same polarity). Both 
successes are in breaking (-) the will of people who are 
valiant (+) people. As they have not succeeded in doing 
something Negative and the polarity of sentence is Positive 
as shown in Figure 2. 
 
S (+)
They
Have (-)
Not (Neg)
Succeeded (+)
Will (-)
Never (Neg)
Succeed (+)
And (-)
in
Breaking 
(-)
The 
Will 
Of (+)
the
Valiant 
(+) 
people
 
Figure 2.  Dependency Tree Structure  for Example 1 
B. Example 2 
Jhon is never successful at tennis. 
  (Sentence 
    (Noun Phrase (Jhon)) 
    (Verb Phrase (is) 
      (Adverbial Phrase (never)) 
      (Adjectival Phrase (successful) 
        (Prepositional Phrase (at) 
          (Noun Phrase (tennis)))))) 
 
Negation never is for successful (+) and this success is at 
tennis. This negation of positive term is a simple negation, 
which is presented in Figure 3. 
 
S (-)
Jhon
Is (-)
Never (Neg)
Successful (+)
At
Tennis  
Figure 3.  Dependency Tree Structure for Example 2 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

C. Example 3 
The audio system on this television is not very good, but 
the picture is amazing. 
(Sentence 
(Sentence 
      (Noun Phrase 
        (Noun Phrase (the audio system) ) 
        (Prepositional Phrase (on) 
          (Noun Phrase (this television)))) 
      (Verb Phrase (is not) 
        (Adjectival Phrase (very good)))) 
    (, ,) 
    (Conjunction but) 
    (Sentence 
      (Noun Phrase (the picture)) 
      (Verb Phrase (is) 
        (Adjectival (amazing)))) ) 
Negation not is effecting the Adjectival Phrase (very 
good (+)) whereas the sentence also has a conjunction of 
‘but’ which is followed by a positive clause ‘the picture is 
amazing (+). The conjunction ‘but’ diminishes the meaning 
of first negative and gives emphasis to following positive 
clause as presented in Figure 4. 
S (-)
S (+)
But 
NP
VP (+)
NP
VP 
(-)
The
Audio
System
is
Not (-)
Very 
Good 
(+)
The 
picture
is
Amazing 
(+)
 
Figure 4 Dependency Tree Structure for Example 3 
 
Figure 5.  Graph showing Responses from Five Respondents and the 
Prototype System (Participant S) generated opinion scores 
 
From the Figure 5 above, there is a clear agreement of 
the annotations made by all the five participants with the 
system with all the 55 sentences.  Only two sentences (30 
and 55) have more than two annotators that have given 
opinion polarities that are different from that of the system 
generated. Close analysis of these two sentences have shown 
why the difference.  
Furthermore, the relationship between opinion polarity 
and intensity (as generated by the system) and all the five 
user generated opinion score for a sample 55 sentences was 
investigated using the Pearson product-moment correlation 
coefficient (r). Table 2 presents the result of the calculated 
multiple regression.  
 
Table 2 Pearson Product-Moment Correlations between System and User 
Generated Opinion Polarity  
Correlations 
 
Participant 1 
Polarity Score 
Participant 2 
Polarity Score 
Participant 3 
Polarity Score 
Participant 4 
Polarity Score 
Participant 5 
Polarity Score 
System  
 Polarity Score 
Participant 1 Polarity 
Score 
Pearson Correlation 
1 
.754
** 
.413
** 
.544
** 
.260 
.693
** 
Sig. (2-tailed) 
 
.000 
.002 
.000 
.055 
.000 
N 
55 
55 
55 
51 
55 
55 
Participant 2 Polarity 
Score 
Pearson Correlation 
.754
** 
1 
.412
** 
.342
* 
.329
* 
.872
** 
Sig. (2-tailed) 
.000 
 
.002 
.014 
.014 
.000 
N 
55 
55 
55 
51 
55 
55 
Participant 3 Polarity 
Score 
Pearson Correlation 
.413
** 
.412
** 
1 
.270 
.215 
.300
* 
Sig. (2-tailed) 
.002 
.002 
 
.056 
.116 
.026 
N 
55 
55 
55 
51 
55 
55 
Participant 4 Polarity 
Score 
Pearson Correlation 
.544
** 
.342
* 
.270 
1 
.326
* 
.359
** 
Sig. (2-tailed) 
.000 
.014 
.056 
 
.019 
.010 
N 
51 
51 
51 
51 
51 
51 
Participant 5 Polarity 
Score 
Pearson Correlation 
.260 
.329
* 
.215 
.326
* 
1 
.327
* 
Sig. (2-tailed) 
.055 
.014 
.116 
.019 
 
.015 
N 
55 
55 
55 
51 
55 
55 
System 
Polarity Score 
Pearson Correlation 
.693
** 
.872
** 
.300
* 
.359
** 
.327
* 
1 
Sig. (2-tailed) 
.000 
.000 
.026 
.010 
.015 
 
N 
55 
55 
55 
51 
55 
55 
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
!*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). 
 
 
From the table above, we can see that the data showed no 
violation of normality between all the five sets. For example, 
r=.693, indicates a positive correlation between system 
generated polarity and opinion oriented 1, which shows a 
strong, positive correlation between the two variables, 
r=.693, n=52, p<.0005 with high levels of system generated 
polarity scores associated with user generated polarity scores 
for the sample sentences. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Current research on sentiment analysis shows that there 
is a growing need to develop approaches to cope with the 
variety of evolving social media generated text. One aspect 
of research that has been identified as important, but has still 
received little attention is the identification of negation and 
its implication on the semantic understanding of sentences. 
This paper presents an evaluation of existing approaches to 
sentiment analysis and presents an approach for negation 
identification and calculation using a developed framework 
for sentiment analysis. These negation rules are designed in 
order to improve the sentiment text analysis. 
While, there are still a number of challenges to be 
addressed in the field of sentiment analysis, the developed 
rules for negation calculation is being integrated within the 
general framework developed in Figure 1 within polarity 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

calculation. 
Further 
work 
will 
also 
include 
the 
implementation of prepositional negation calculation. 
The framework is not designed by keeping any specific 
lexical resource in mind; therefore, by improving the 
precision of resources the results can easily be improved. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Carvalho, P., Sarmento, L., Silva, M. and Oliveira, E . (2009) Clues 
for detecting irony in user-generated contents: oh...!! it's "so easy" 
;-). In: The 1st international CIKM workshop on Topic-sentiment 
analysis for mass opinion. Hong Kong, China. ACM, 53-56. 
[2] 
Choi, Y. and Cardie, C. (2008) Learning with compositional 
semantics as structural inference for subsentential sentiment 
analysis. In: The Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural 
Language 
Processing. 
Honolulu, 
Hawaii. 
Association 
for 
Computational Linguistics, pp. 793-801. 
[3] 
Das, S. and Chen, M. (2001) Yahoo! for Amazon: Extracting 
market sentiment from stock message boards. Asia Pacific Finance 
Association Annual Conf. APFA (2001),  
[4] 
Horn, L. R. and Kato, Y. (2000) Introduction: Negation and 
Polarity. at the Millennium.  
[5] 
Jia, L., Yu, C. and Meng, W. (2009) The effect of negation on 
sentiment analysis and retrieval effectiveness. In: The 18th ACM 
conference on Information and knowledge management. Hong 
Kong, China. ACM, 1827-1830  
[6] 
Kennedy, A. and Inkpen, D. (2005) Sentiment Classification of 
Movie Reviews Using Contextual Valence Shifters. In: FINEXIN 
2005. Ottawa.  
[7] 
Kennedy, A. and Inkpen, D. (2006) Sentiment Classification of 
Movie 
Reviews 
Using 
Contextual 
Valence 
Shifters. 
. 
Computational Intelligence. , Vol. 22 2, pp. 110-125. 
[8] 
Li, N. and Wu, D. D. (2010) Using text mining and sentiment 
analysis for online forums hotspot detection and forecast. Decis. 
Support Syst., Vol. 48, 2, pp. 354-368. 
[9] 
Moilanen, K. and Pulman, S. (2007) Sentiment Construction. In: 
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing RANLP. 
Borovets, Bulgaria.  
[10] Neviarouskaya, A., Prendinger, H. and Ishizuka, M. (2007) Textual 
Affect 
Sensing 
for 
Sociable 
and 
Expressive 
Online 
Communication. In: The 2nd international conference on Affective 
Computing and Intelligent Interaction. Lisbon, Portugal. Springer-
Verlag, 218-229. 
[11] Pang, B., Lee, L. and Vaithyanathan, S. (2002) Thumbs up?: 
sentiment classification using machine learning techniques. In: The 
ACL-02 conference on Empirical methods in natural language 
processing Association for Computational Linguistics, 79-86. 
[12] Polanyi, L. and Zaenen, A. (2004) Contextual Valence Shifters. In: 
The AAAI Spring Symposium on Exploring Attitude and Affect in 
Text. California, USA.  
[13] Reschke, K. and Anand, P. (2011) Extracting contextual 
evaluativity. 
In: 
The 
Ninth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computational Semantics. Oxford, United Kingdom. Association 
for Computational Linguistics, 370-374. 
[14] Shaikh, M. A., Prendinger, H. and Mitsuru, I. (2007) Assessing 
Sentiment of Text by Semantic Dependency and Contextual 
Valence Analysis. In: The 2nd international conference on 
Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction. Lisbon, Portugal. 
Springer-Verlag, 191 - 202  
[15] Smith, D. B. (2010) Plutchik’s Eight Primary Emotions. 
wordpress.com. 
[16] Subrahmanian, V. S. and Reforgiato, D. (2008) AVA: Adjective-
Verb-Adverb Combinations for Sentiment Analysis. IEEE 
Intelligent Systems, Vol. 23, 4, pp. 43-50. 
[17] Wiegand, M., et al. (2010) A survey on the role of negation in 
sentiment analysis. In: The Workshop on Negation and Speculation 
in Natural Language Processing. Uppsala, Sweden. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 60-68  
[18] Wilson, T., Wiebe, J. and Hoffmann, P. (2005) Recognizing 
contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis. In: The 
conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical 
Methods in Natural Language Processing. Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics, 
347-354. 
[19] Morante, R. and Daelemans, W. (2009) A metalearning approach to 
processing the scope of negation. In: The Thirteenth Conference on 
Computational Natural Language Learning. Boulder, Colorado. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 21-29. 
[20] Nakagawa, T., Inui, K. and Kurohashi, S. (2010) Dependency tree-
based sentiment classification using CRFs with hidden variables. 
In: Human Language Technologies: The 2010 Annual Conference 
of the North American Chapter of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics. Los Angeles, California. Association 
for Computational Linguistics, 786-794. 
[21] Kirkegaard, O. W. (n.d.) Negating sentences in english [WWW]. 
Available 
from: 
http://emilkirkegaard.dk/en/wp-
content/uploads/Negating-sentences-in-english.pdf [Accessed June 
9, 2012]. 
[22] Abbasi, A., Chen, H. and Salem, A. (2008) Sentiment analysis in 
multiple languages: Feature selection for opinion classification in 
Web forums. ACM Trans. Inf. Syst., Vol. 26, 3, pp. 1-34. 
[23] Heerschop, B., Hogenboom, A. and Frasincar, F. (2011) Sentiment 
Lexicon Creation from Lexical Resources. In: 14th International 
Conference on Business Information Systems (BIS 2011). Springer, 
185-196. 
[24] Councill, I. G., Mcdonald, R. and Velikovich, L. (2010) What's 
great and what's not: learning to classify the scope of negation for 
improved sentiment analysis. In: The Workshop on Negation and 
Speculation in Natural Language Processing. Uppsala, Sweden. 
Association for Computational Linguistics, 51-59. 
[25] Neviarouskaya, A., Prendinger, H. and Ishizuka, M. (2007) Textual 
Affect 
Sensing 
for 
Sociable 
and 
Expressive 
Online 
Communication. In: The 2nd international conference on Affective 
Computing and Intelligent Interaction. Lisbon, Portugal. Springer-
Verlag, 218 – 229 
[26] Grobelnik, M. and Mladenic, D. (2004) Text-Mining Tutorial. In: 
Learning Methods for Text Understanding and Mining. Grenoble, 
France. 
[27] Esuli, A. (2008) Automatic Generation of Lexical Resources for 
Opinion Mining: Models, Algorithms and Applications. Ph.D., 
UNIVERSITÀ DI PISA. 
[28] Miller, G. A. (1995) WordNet: a lexical database for English. 
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 38, 11, pp. 39-41. 
[29] Penn_Treebank (1992) The Penn Treebank Project [WWW]. 
Available from: http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~treebank/ [Accessed 
Aprail 21, 2012] 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

