Exploiting Student Intervention System Using Data Mining
Samia Oussena, Hyensook Kim 
University of West London 
London, UK 
samia.oussena@uwl.ac.uk, Hyensook.kim@uwl.ac.uk 
Tony Clark  
Middlesex University 
London, UK 
Tony.clark@mdx.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—With the proliferation of systems that are put for the 
student use, data related to activities undertaken by the 
student are on the increasing. However, these vast amounts of 
data on student and courses are not integrated and could 
therefore not easily queried or mined. Therefore, relatively 
little data is turned into knowledge that can be used by the 
institution learning.  In the work presented here, different data 
sources such as student record system, virtual learning system 
are integrated and analysed with the intention of linking 
behaviour pattern to academic histories and other recorded 
information.  These patterns built into data mining models can 
then be used to predict individual performance with high 
accuracy.   The question addressed in the paper is: how can 
indicators of problems related to student retention produced 
by data mining be presented in a way that will be effective. A 
prototype system that integrates data mining with an 
intervention system based on game metaphor has been build 
and piloted in the computing school. Early evaluations of the 
system have shown that it has been well received at all levels of 
the institution and by the students.  
Keywords-data mining; intervention system; student drop-
out; game metaphore 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Whilst student engagement is complex and multi-
dimensional, one key aspect for high education institutions is 
to engage students at a personalised level. There is a 
proliferation of data related to student activities.  Activities 
might relate to some actions the student has performed such 
as submitting an assignment or viewing lecture notes. 
However, these vast amounts of data on student and courses 
are not integrated and could therefore not easily be exploited. 
Consequently, little data is turned into knowledge that can be 
used by the institution learning. Data mining is the field of 
discovering of implicit and interesting patterns for large data 
collections [8]. Data mining has been applied to a number of 
fields including bioinformatics and fraud detection. In recent 
years, there has been an increased interest in the use of data 
mining to the educational setting. Data mining has been 
shown to help predict student educational outcomes [13]. 
When using Data Mining, the goal is to develop a model, 
which can infer an aspect of the student academic outcomes, 
such as passing a module, from a combination of other data 
that represents student’s characteristics. For example, 
Garbrilson [6] uses data mining prediction techniques to 
identify the most effective factors in determining student test 
scores. In [10], authors use a data mining classification 
technique to predict student’s final grades based on their web 
use.  In most of these applications, the results are usually 
presented to strategic decision makers in graphical form (for 
example a dashboard), which is interpreted and some 
intervention programme is then put in place.   However the 
integration of the predictions provided by Data Mining, the 
presentation of the results produced by applying predictive 
patterns to live student data and the intervention processes 
are typically weak. In most cases intervention is provided by 
humans resulting in an overall process can be very resource 
intensive. There is therefore a lack of integration between the 
identification of the problem and the implementation of the 
intervention actions. 
In this paper, we discuss the design of an intervention 
system based on data mining. We have developed an 
application that allows the data mining models to be refined 
as a consequence of intervention actions, as well as involving 
students in the process. There is evidence that personalising 
and signposting educational ‘moments’ contributes to a 
better learning environment [7].  Although the literature on 
retention points to the complexity of factors influencing 
retention, there is evidence that linking social and academic 
experience, and tailoring the learning environment to 
individual needs increases an institution’s chances of 
retaining its students [1].  
The challenge in designing the application for the student 
retention has been how to maximise student engagement.  
Arguably the weakest link in the process arises in ensuring 
that students at risk are identified as early as possible. Of 
course, this can be achieved with unlimited resources in the 
form of tutors who continually monitor raw data sources and 
who contact students as soon as they detect a problem 
indicator. However, this is not realistic. Our proposal is to 
automate the process and to present information to students 
in a way that will maximise their engagement and therefore 
reduce the resource burden. Hence our research question is: 
how can indicators of problems related to student retention 
produced by data mining be presented to students in a way 
that will be effective without an unrealistic resource 
overhead? 
The strong widespread appeal of computer and console 
gaming has motivated a number of researchers to harness the 
educational potential of gaming [3].   Here, we have looked 
at using the motivation power of games to encourage 
students to be involved with the intervention system. Our 
hypothesis is that: features used by gaming systems can be 
incorporated into student intervention systems in order to 
maximise their effectiveness. 
131
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

To test out hypothesis we have designed a prototype 
system that has the following features: we have designed a 
uniform data model describing a student profile within a 
teaching and learning environment; data mining techniques 
are then used to process the information and to produce rules 
that represent indicators of failure within the educational 
process; the rules are then processed against live student data 
in order to raise potential indicators of failure in real-time; 
gaming systems have been analysed in order to produce a 
model whereby information can be presented to students as 
though their learning experience is a game; this model has 
been implemented in the form of a web application and the 
events produced by the rules are fed into the gaming model. 
The rest of the paper is as follows: Section 2 discusses 
some of the student retention work; Section 3 discusses the 
students and the learning models that we have used; Section 
4 discusses our gaming environments; Section 5 discusses 
the design of the application. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Several modelling methods have been applied in 
educational research to predict student’s retention. The more 
widely used models are the Students attrition model (Bean 
1980) and the Tinto student integration model [17]. Tinto’s 
model examines factors contributing to a student’s decision 
about whether to continue their higher education. It claims 
that the decision to persist or drop out is quite strongly 
predicted by their degree of academic integration, and social 
integration. Tinto argues that from an academic perspective, 
performance, personal development, academic self-esteem, 
enjoyment of subjects, identification with academic norms, 
and one’s role as a student all contribute to a student’s 
overall sense of integration into the university.  
Students who are highly integrated academically are 
more likely to persist and complete their degrees. The same 
is true from a social perspective. Students, who have more 
friends at their university, have more personal contact with 
academics, enjoy being at the university, and are more likely 
to make the decision to persist.  Bean’s model appears to use 
many of the constructs in Tinto’s model but the most 
significant addition is the inclusion of external factors. These 
include attitude constructs which might have a direct effect 
such as finance or indirect such as influence of parents and 
friends’ encouragements [2].    
There are also other models of student retention. Thomas 
developed her model "institutional habitus" [18]), based on 
Tinto’s theory, which can be divided into the academic and 
the social experiences. The academic experience covers 
attitudes of staff, teaching, learning and assessment. 
Different learning styles are supported and diverse 
backgrounds are appreciated. Tutors are friendly, helpful and 
accessible. Assessment gives students the opportunity to 
succeed and staffs are available to help. The social 
experience combines friendship, mutual support and social 
networks. Thomas noted that one factor in her students’ 
persistence was the fact they felt more at home with their 
friends. 
Recently, data mining models have also been developed 
for addressing student retention. For example, in [10], the 
authors use data mining classification techniques to predict 
students final grades based on their web-use feature. It can 
identify students at risk early and allow the tutor to provide 
appropriate advice in a timely manner. Cerrito applied data 
mining in mathematics courses, her study demonstrates that 
retention needs to be of concern at all levels of a student’s 
career at the university, not just for the first year students [4]. 
Students with high entrance scores and low risk factors may 
also leave the university before graduation. However, most 
of these projects are lacking the following up intervention.  
Seidman’s has shown that early identification of students at 
risk as well as maintaining intensive and continuous 
intervention is the key to increasing student retention [14]. 
He also explains how universities can prepare their programs 
and courses so students will have the greatest probability of 
success both personally and academically.  
In this paper, we argue that the intervention process 
needs to be integrated with the identification process in order 
to be effective.  The data mining process will help with the 
early identification, followed by early and continuous 
intervention, as proposed by Seidman. By combining the two 
processes, we are able to provide an audit trail of the 
intervention actions that can be then evaluated for their 
effectiveness.  
III. 
AN INTERVENTION SYSTEM BASED ON GAMING 
ENVIRONMENT 
Gaming, and particularly on-line gaming has become 
very popular with young people in recent years. In such 
systems, players can develop a profile based on playing a 
number of (possibly collaborative) games. The profile can be 
tailored to the individual in terms of the look and feel and 
represents achievements in terms of goals attained, points 
achieved, extra features unlocked etc. When a game is 
played, there are a number of features that can be attained 
such as completing a level or defeating a foe. In general, 
each game attaches points to the different challenges it 
presents and, although the games are different, the points are 
in a universal currency (or at least universal to a specific 
gaming platform). Points awarded to a specific gamer 
represents their level of achievement in terms of skills 
attained and challenges overcome.  Gamers can compare 
their aggregate performance against other gamers to produce 
a league table; relative positions in a league table can be a 
powerful motivating factor and gamers can spend a great 
deal of time trying to move their position up the table. In 
addition, games can compare their performance at a more 
fine grain level in terms of specific skills and achievements. 
A gamer may have a specific interest in achieving a given 
skill because it is transferrable to another game. 
Our proposal is that students can be viewed as gamers 
and learning outcomes can be viewed as being similar to 
points awarded when playing games. That being the case, we 
propose that the same powerful motivating factors that lead 
gamers to strive to increase their performance (whether 
relative or absolute) can be applied to students. A number of 
attributes common to computer games are recognized in 
fostering active engagement; motivation and a high level of 
persistence in game play [6]. These include the use of 
132
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

environment that simulates realistic experiences for the 
player, providing opportunities for identity exploration and 
play through role play [15]. In a number of games, a player 
may learn to take on attributes of their avatar [19].  Using 
avatars may lead to a sense of responsibility towards the 
character that can lead to educationally relevant outcomes. 
The other main attribute is the creation of a sense of pride 
and accomplishment by structuring the game to challenge the 
player and allow progress.   
The above principals have been implemented in the 
intervention system in order to harness the motivation 
potential of gaming; including associating academic 
performance with scores, use of avatar, structure the levels 
based on learning outcomes and modules and providing a 
league board.  
IV. 
THE INTERVENTION SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
We have built an intervention system that put students as 
the main actors. Students play a critical role in being 
successful and subsequently remaining at the university.  
Studies have indicated that motivation is a prerequisite for 
student learning [16]. The student can foster this motivation 
by setting clear and explicit learning goals and understanding 
the expectation of success. The greater the belief that a task 
can be accomplished the greater the motivation.  In our 
system, at any point of time the student will be presented 
with what has been accomplished so far in terms of learning 
outcomes gained within each module, the modules that have 
been passed and the marks gained so far. The student is also 
aware of what is expected in order to acquire his 
qualification, for example, in terms of modules to be taken, 
learning outcomes to be gained within a module, and number 
of assignments.  However, this will only make an impact if 
students are engaged i.e. access and make use of the 
information.  Hence, while modeling the student we looked 
at both the information predicting their performance as well 
as information related to their engagement with the system. 
The design of the predictive model part is based on two 
main information channels, as suggested by Tinto, one 
related to the student and one related to the university. The 
information related to university is based mainly on 
information related to courses and their related modules.  
The design of this part of the model has been constrained by 
the institution’s information that we had access to. The 
constraints were mainly due to the interpretation of the data 
protection act.  One of the techniques that supported our 
design was feature importance technique.  Here, we have put 
all the data that we had access to and carried a data mining 
analysis to help us determine which indicators provide the 
best assessment of potential student academic performance.  
As illustrated in Figure 1, the model includes the following 
types of information: 
• 
Information related to their entry profile such as 
their qualification and the scores of the tests that 
they took at their entrance. 
• 
Information on the course that they enrolled on. 
This will contain a general information related to 
the course itself such as the modules that are part 
of the course, the faculty that manages the course, 
the type of award, and a more specific information 
related to the student enrolment to the course 
offering; for example, the year the student has 
enrolled and how many modules he had to repeat in 
that course. 
• 
Information related to individual module that the 
student is enrolled on.  Here also it includes a 
general information related to the module such as 
the number of assignment for the module, number 
of credits for the module and the team delivering 
the module, and information related to the student 
enrolment to the specific module offering such as 
the date enrolled and the results for that module. 
• 
The other type of information relates to the 
interactions the student has with the module 
resources; such as interaction with the virtual 
learning site, interaction with library, interaction 
related to the module assessment such as 
submission of assignment, results acquired for the 
assignment. 
	  
Figure	  1.	  Student	  model:	  predictive	  part	  
 
The design of the engagement model part is based on the 
mapping of student performance to the game attributes. For 
example, based on their profile, students are associated to 
one of the groups (Zone) that have been identified by the 
data mining process. For each of the zone, the data mining 
process would have identified a threshold for when 
intervention actions are required.  In this model, we have 
included not only individual performance information but 
also performance information related to the group, the 
module and the course.   
133
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

 
Figure	  2.	  Student	  model:	  engagement	  part	  
As illustrated in Figure 2, the types of information 
included in the model are the following: 
• 
Personal information such as their Avatar, their 
preferred mode of communication. 
• 
Information related to points that they have 
acquired and need to acquire.  
• 
Information related to module; these include all the 
learning outcomes that are associated to it, the 
activity that allows the achievement of the learning 
outcome and the number of points associated to it. 
They will get predefined points for doing activities 
such as accessing blackboard, borrowing a book 
from library, or submitting an assignment. The 
blackboard visits in a day for one particular module 
will be counted as 1 visit. If the student visits 
blackboard to access resources for another module 
on the same day, another visit will be added related 
to that module. Similarly they will obtain points 
when they obtain marks for each of the assessment. 
They will also unlock learning outcomes for the 
modules when they do the activities related to the 
learning outcome. They will unlock all the learning 
outcomes for a module when they pass the module. 
The architecture of the system is illustrated in Figure 3. 
The system has been built using Oracle technology [11] and 
includes three main components; the data warehouse 
component, the data-mining component and the intervention 
application. We have used oracle workflow system to 
execute data warehouse update and run data mining engine. 
Currently the workflow runs every Friday. The intervention 
reporting system runs on its own scheduler after data mining 
process. 
 
 
 
Figure	  3.	  MCMS	  System	  Architecture	  
A. The data warehouse component 
The data warehouse component takes the data provided 
by the institution data sources and builds the data warehouse; 
i.e. the different dimensions of the cubes.  The data sources 
used for the system are discussed in the next section. We 
have defined four cubes in this study; one for students, one 
for student activities, one for modules and the other one for 
courses.  
B. Data sources 
When analyzing the data sources, we have identified 
information that will give us a good understanding of the 
students’ profile; i.e. data related to information before their 
entry to the university (student background), data related to 
their interaction in the university; including their goals 
(student interaction), and data related to their results. The 
key sources used are as follows: 
• 
The student record system relates to the profile of 
the student prior to joining the institution.  Student 
profile will include information such as their 
entrance level, their ethnicity, literacy and 
numeracy test entrance score. In addition the 
student’s assessment profile including marks and 
the number of re-sits taken is maintained by the 
record system. 
• 
The library system and the reading list system 
captures information about a student’s book loan 
activities and links this to the reading lists set for 
the modules that the student is registered for. 
134
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

• 
The online learning system and e-library records 
how often the student logs into the system and the 
use of the various pages in the virtual learning 
environment (VLE). In our case the VLE can 
capture the number of hits on individual pages and 
document downloads. 
• 
The module study guides provide information 
such as reading lists and the schedule of 
assessments 
for 
each 
module. 
The 
course 
specification 
provides 
information 
such 
as 
regulations about options and assessment hurdles. 
The study guides and course specifications also 
provide lists of learning outcomes that can be 
gained by the students when they pass individual 
modules 
or 
module 
elements. 
Individual 
assessments are broken down into different types. 
Institution 
departments 
that 
own 
course 
components are recorded in addition to the tutor 
responsible for delivering the module. 
• 
The marketing system and entrance test system 
provides information about entry requirements and 
whether students have had any additional tutoring 
on entry. For example overseas students may be 
offered extra tuition in English and the test system 
will record whether they took up this offer and, if 
so, the results. 
 
C. The data mining component 
Educational data mining is a newly emerging discipline 
and there have been reports of a number of demonstration 
applications in Spanish [13] and American [9] universities, 
and particularly in distance-learning institutions [11]. Data 
Mining has already proved to be successful in e-commerce 
and bio-informatics, where results are achieved through the 
use of associators, classifiers, clusterers, pattern analysers, 
and statistical tools. In the educational context, data mining 
provides analysis of the students’ behaviour, navigation, 
frequency, and length of interaction with the e-Learning 
system that can identify patterns of behaviour and 
associations. It can classify students into groups depending 
on their learning behaviour rather than just ability. At the 
same time it also identifies students exhibiting atypical 
behaviour that needs early intervention and feedback.   The 
overall process that we have used in this system is illustrated 
below. At each iteration, data is fed to the data mining 
process, in order to identify potential drop-out students and 
their performance.  The intervention process will then 
identify specific intervention actions for these students.  
  
The data mining process that we have adopted includes 
three main stages: finding the features’ relations, data 
grouping, and making the prediction [20] The first stage 
involves applying features’ importance and associate rules to 
find the correlation among data features.  This stage helps 
eliminate any data that is unlikely to make any impact on 
subsequent tasks. For example, we found that age and gender 
is not related to students’ performance (results or drop-out), 
whereas the VLE interaction is related to students’ 
performance.  
The next stage involves classification of data and 
extraction rules and patterns.  Here we identify groups of 
students that have shown related features and will require 
similar intervention.  Examples of such groups include first 
year full time students, students transferring from other 
institutions, non-UK students, students with low library 
usage or post-graduate students. The third and final stage 
includes applying regression to the identified groups in order 
to predict future behaviours i.e. allowing us to predict the 
potential students that are at risk of dropping out, or their 
academic performance requires attention.  Here we identify 
students that are underperforming or the ones that have 
shown an improvement in their performance. 
The data mining models have been built based on three 
years of historical data before being integrated into live feed 
data.  The data were divided in two sets, one for building the 
models and one for validating the model. Once the models 
have been validated, the data warehouse is updated every 
week. The prediction stage of the process is conducted on the 
updated data leading to new alerts and update of the data. 
D. Intervention Application Component 
This component presents the results of the data mining 
models and implements the intervention system.  We have 
used different views for different stakeholders. One view is 
targeted towards improving students’ performance and 
providing them with a holistic and a detailed view of their 
performance. Students at risk of dropping out receive an 
intervention message via email or SMS. The other view is to 
support the academics in implementing their intervention 
policies. The data here is presented at different levels of 
abstractions depending on their role (tutor, programme 
leader, and head of school). Any of the intervention content 
is generated according to a predefined and personalised 
intervention rule.  
 
Figure	  4.	  Student	  Intervention	  Application	  
Students are encouraged to use avatars that have 
characters that they would like to relate to.  Being associated 
with a strong avatar might motivate them to acquire high 
scores.  Student activities are mapped to module learning 
outcomes activities in order to convert student performance 
as counted points. For example, if a student borrowing a 
book from the reading list, he or she would get points for his 
135
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

or her module and if he or she submits an assignment, he or 
she gets points as well. If the students reach the target points 
for each learning outcome of a module, they would see their 
mission achievement records in the web application and 
would encounter the next challenge for further improvement 
such as a usual role-playing game.   We have also 
implemented a league table where scores can be compared 
within the same group (Zone). A screenshot of the 
implemented student web application is shown in Figure 4:  
Students are alerted by email or text if they are in at-risk 
zone. In the message, they are presented with their 
achievements so far in terms of the points. The message also 
advises them with a number of actions that they need to 
undertake in order to get out of the zone. A student that has 
taken the right action and has managed to get out of the zone 
is also alerted. The message that they receive is a 
congratulatory message that invites them to review their 
achievements and show them how they can unlock the next 
level. 
The design of the messages and the actions that the 
students are invited to undertake are associated with each of 
the groups that were identified in the second stage of the data 
mining process. For each group, based on the pattern that 
describes the group, a template for the message is designed, 
with specific actions that will lead to correcting the low 
scores in the particular interaction, such as accessing the 
module VLE content.   The templates are then personalised 
with live data specific to each student. The intervention 
messages are common to all modules, however each module 
leader is encouraged to refine the rules that will lead to alerts 
and customise the intervention messages and actions.  
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Through this paper, we have explored the benefitting 
factors of using a gaming environment in order to engage 
and motivate students in terms of retention. The prototype 
system has been used to integrate the data mining process 
with the intervention system. The data mining process is 
used as two main functions; primarily to predict those 
students who are most likely to drop-out early, and secondly 
to group students into specific categories that can be targeted 
with personalised interventions if it is predicted that a drop-
out is imminent. Certain activities and accomplishments 
merit a specific number of points to be added on the 
appropriate student’s game profile. The student unlocks each 
level in the gaming process through achieving a set score for 
each learning outcome. This idea of levels is a great source 
of motivation to students, as well as the idea of a ‘leader 
board’ in which students’ are encouraged to become 
competitive. This also enforces the gaming environment, 
making ‘winning’ appear more appealing than in a classic 
university environment.   
The system has been piloted for a semester in the 
computing school and the institution is planning to pilot it in 
more schools in the next academic year.  The early 
evaluation of the system has mainly been done through 
presentation and focus groups.  The questions that we tried to 
address in these focus groups are for example; how do 
student perceive the intervention application impact on 
learning and their academic performance? Are the 
predictions of the data-mining models accurate? Is the 
gaming metaphor a good motivation tool? How do tutors and 
university staff perceive the impact of the intervention 
application 
on 
the 
student 
learning 
and 
academic 
performance? What improvements were made to some of the 
learning and teaching processes? The early results have 
shown that the system has been well received and the 
prediction have been very similar to what the tutor expected. 
We are planning to do a more in depth quantitative data 
analysis in order to track student engagement and survey 
their perceptions of the environment. 
In terms of further improving the system there are a few 
problems that must be targeted. For example, in each 
iteration, the data mining models must be manually 
retrained. This is a hindrance and can be rectified by 
implementing an algorithm that creates self-adapting models. 
Another area to expand upon is the range of data sources 
available. We hope to add new data sources, such as 
financial data, timetabling and data relating to their social 
involvement in universities. This has not initially been 
possible due to data constraints. Currently, another part of 
the system that has not been discussed in this paper, involves 
the monitoring of courses and modules. This has given us 
some insight into the performance of the education processes 
and one of our planned works is to investigate the 
relationship between the performance of the education 
processes and the student performance. The other area for 
improvement will involve creating an additional gaming 
feature (i.e. settings), providing a user-friendly interface 
enabling students to access key information, such as course 
information, university regulations, and their personal 
timetable. This idea of integrating learning and games could 
be further developed through literacy and numeracy features 
to support their main subject. This is once again could be 
incorporated into the gaming environment, similar to many 
educational games and consoles available in the current 
market.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Anagnostopoulou, and D. Parmar, Practical guide: 
bringing together e-learning & student retention,  London: 
Cats Ltd. ISBN: 978-1-85924-301-5. 
[2] J. Bean,  Dropouts and turnover: The synthesis of a causal 
model of student attrition. Research in Higher Education, 12, 
pp. 155-187. 
[3] S. DeCastell and  J. Jenson, Serious play, Journal of curriculm 
Studies 35(6), pp. 649-665  
[4] P. Cerrito,  Data Mining Student Performance in Mathematics 
Courses, CinSUG Third AnnualOne Day Conference.  
Committee of Public Accounts, (2002) Fifty-eighth Report of 
Session Improving Student Achievement and Widening 
Participation in Higher Education in England, HC 588,2001-
02. 
[5] S. Gabrilson, Data Mining with CRCT Scores. Office of 
information technology, Geargia Department of education. 
[6] R. Garris, R. Ahlers, and  J. Driskell, Games, motivation, and 
learning: A research and practice model. Simulation and 
Gaming: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 33(4), pp. 441–467.  
136
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

[7] 
L. Harvey, S. Drew,  and M. Smith, The First-year Experience: A 
Review of Literature for the Higher Education Academy, 
http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/research/Harvey_Drew_Smith.pdf 
[8] W. Kloesgen and Zytkow, Handbook of Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining,  Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 2002. 
[9] J. Luan, Data mining and knowledge management in higher 
education –potential applications. In Proceedings of AIR 
Forum, Toronto, Canada.  
[10] B. Minaei-Bidgoli, G. Kortemeyer and W. Punch, Enhancing 
Online Learning Performance: An Application of Data 
Mining Methods, From Proceeding of Computers and 
Advanced Technology in Education . 
[11] E. Mor and J. Minguillón, E-learning personalization based 
on 
itineraries 
and 
long-term 
navigational 
behavior, 
Proceedings of the 13th international World Wide Web 
conference on Alternate track papers & posters,pp. 264-265 
May 19-21,  New York, NY, USA . 
[12] Oracle  
http://www.oracle.com/technology/products/bi/odm/index.ht
ml [accessed on 25/05/2011] 
[13] C. Romero and S. Ventura, Data mining in e-learning, 
Southampton, UK: Wit Press.  
[14] A. Seidman, Retention Revisited: RET = E Id + (E + I + C)Iv. 
College and University, 71(4), pp-18-20. 
[15] K. Squire,  H. Jenkins, W. Holland, H. Miller, A. O’Driscoll 
and K. Tan, Design principles of next-generation digital 
gaming for education. Educational Technology, 700 33, 
pp.17–23.  
[16] M. Svinicki, A. Hagen and  D. Meyer, How to Reaserch on 
Learning Strengthens instruction, Teaching on Solid Ground: 
Using 
Scholarship 
to 
Improve 
Practice, 
Jossey-Bass 
publishers, San Francisco, CA. 
[17] V. Tinto, Dropout from Higher Education: A Theoretical 
Synthesis of Recent Research, Review of Educational 
Research vol.45, pp. 89-125,1975. 
[18] L. Thomas, Student retention in higher education: the role of 
institutional habitus", Journal of Education Policy, Vol. 17 
No. 4, August, pp. 423-442, 2002. 
[19] N. Yee, and J. Bailenson, The Proteus effect: The effect of 
transformed self-representation on behavior.  Human 
Communication Research 33, pp. 271-290. 
[20] Y Zhang, S. Oussena, T. Clark. and H. Kim,  Use Data 
Mining To Improve Student Retention in Higher Education – 
A Case Study, to be presented in 12th International 
Conference on Enterprise Information Systems(ICEIS) pp. 
190-197. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
137
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

