Is the Polarity of Content Producers Strongly
Inﬂuenced by the Results of the Event?
Liliana Ibeth Barbosa Santill´an
University of Guadalajara
Information Technology
Guadalajara, M´exico
Email: ibarbosa@cucea.udg.mx
Inmaculada ´Alvarez de Mon y Rego
Universida Polit´ecnica de Madrid
Ling¨uistica aplicada a la ciencia y la tecnolog´ıa
Madrid, Spain
Email: ialvarez@euitt.upm.es
Abstract—This paper presents an approach to compare two
types of data, subjective data (Polarity of Pan American Games
2011 event by country) and objective data (the number of medals
won by each participating country), based on the Pearson corre-
lation. When dealing with events described by people, knowledge
acquisition is difﬁcult because their structure is heterogeneous
and subjective. A ﬁrst step towards knowing the polarity of
the information provided by people consists in automatically
classifying the posts into clusters according to their polarity.
The authors carried out a set of experiments using a corpus
that consists of 5600 posts extracted from 168 Internet resources
related to a speciﬁc event: the 2011 Pan American games. The
approach is based on four components: a crawler, a ﬁlter, a
synthesizer and a polarity analyzer. The PanAmerican approach
automatically classiﬁes the polarity of the event into clusters with
the following results: 588 positive, 336 neutral, and 76 negative.
Our work found out that the polarity of the content produced was
strongly inﬂuenced by the results of the event with a correlation of
.74. Thus, it is possible to conclude that the polarity of content is
strongly affected by the results of the event. Finally, the accuracy
of the PanAmerican approach is: .87, .90, and .80 according to
the precision of the three classes of polarity evaluated.
Keywords—Polarity; Subjective; Objective Corpus Analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Content producers are currently emerging from the social
web where the majority of the population is young people
with very speciﬁc needs in terms of communication. The
Web has facilitated social networking phenomena through both
structured and unstructured data. The analysis of this content
may have considerable inﬂuence on important decisions that
affect society.
The amount of Internet resources that exist in the Web
dealing with a speciﬁc event, such as newspapers, chat rooms,
social networking, Internet commerce, product reviews and
blogs, have heterogeneous content that proliferates in an un-
controlled fashion.
However, there are difﬁculties in measuring the polarity
of the content generated by a person. Some of them are: a)
identifying noise polarity and fake reviews and b) dealing with
slang and inaccurate use of language.
In addition, one of the most important and complex tasks
for the entrepreneurs, ofﬁcials and the organizers of an event
is to know as precisely as possible how citizens perceive it. In
this sense, the diversity of opinions and assessments related to
events that involve different countries vary greatly. A possible
solution is to obtain metrics for measuring the polarity of the
content expressed by producers in their writings.
The motivation of this research is to develop a ﬁrst ap-
proach on how to assess the appreciation of an event through
the opinions of citizens grouped by their origin country for an
event of Pan-American scale.
This study focuses on answering the following research
question: Is the polarity of content producers strongly inﬂu-
enced by the results of the event?
The hypothesis that the authors propose is:
H1
The polarity of content producers is strongly in-
ﬂuenced by the results of the event.
This study aims to provide beneﬁt in the form of classify
the social point of view of polarity of the 2011 Pan American
Games.
This project could be of beneﬁt for both governments and
citizens.
Compared with previous work, the major contributions of
this paper are the following:
•
Focusing on unstructured opinions in order to contrast
subjective polarity and objective data related to the
same event.
This work draws on at least 5,600 opinions of citizens of
the Pan American countries, helping to understand the impact
of the event among the citizens of the 42 nations participating
in 36 sports. Some of the advantages of our analysis are that
it facilitates knowing the polarity of the citizens through fresh
opinions articulated in Internet resources.
This paper is structured as follows. Section II brieﬂy
discusses the related work. Section III gives an overview of
the design, describing the proposed PanAmerican approach.
Sections IV and V discuss the analysis and experiments.
Finally, Section VI contains the conclusions of our research
work.
II.
RELATED WORK
The related work takes into account two topics: 2.1)
polarity, and 2.2) systems related to olympics.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

A. Polarity
According to Cambria [1], Opinion Mining ”mainly con-
cerns polarity detection”, whereas sentiment analysis, as de-
ﬁned by Pang [2], is ”the speciﬁc application of classifying
reviews as to their polarity (either positive or negative)”. Opin-
ion mining and sentiment analysis are used in this research as
synonyms in order to deal with the literature related to both
topics.
In recent years, opinion mining has been studied by
many researchers. The authors have focused on three aspects:
a) question answering, b) recommendation systems, and c)
sentiment-relevant lexicons.
•
Question answering: Earlier work showed that dis-
ambiguating instances of subjectivity clues is useful
for sentence-level attitude-type classiﬁcation. Soma-
sundaran et al. [3] developed automatic classiﬁers to
recognize when a sentence is expressing one of the
two main types of attitude. Stoyanov [4] developed
a corpus of opinion questions and answers; his re-
search compared and contrasted the properties of facts
and opinions in question answering. Vlad et al. [5]
deﬁned qualitative dimensions for evaluating answers
and showed how ignored terms in the process of
entity deﬁnition can help users to discover underlying
information.
•
Recommendation systems: Efforts in this area were
carried out by Nitin et al. [6] who proposed a col-
laborative exploration system helping users to explore
movie reviews from various viewpoints. Reputation is
a topic of collective interest; Morinaga [7] demon-
strated that it is possible to help users to discover im-
portant knowledge regarding the reputations of prod-
ucts of interest through the following tasks: charac-
teristic word extraction, co-occurring word extraction,
sentence extraction, and correspondence analysis. Un-
gar et al. [8] used clustering methods for collaborative
ﬁltering.
•
Sentiment-relevant lexicons: Previous research has
focused on the creation of lexicons in English such as
that of: Higashinaka [9] who used a set of dialogues
to build her own lexicon. Lexicons are also available
as linguistic resources on the Internet, some examples
being: SentiWordnet [10], NTU Sentiment Dictionary
[11]. Pak [12] build automatically sentiment relevant
lexicon from Internet Resources, and the Opinion-
Finder system for subjectivity analysis [13], among
others.
B. Systems
The research of Gruzd et al. [14] measures if happiness
is contagious online in 2010 winter olympics and they de-
termined that were more positive messages than negative in
twitters. It also inﬂuenced the level of retweet from posi-
tive versus negative messages. SentiStrength [15] splits the
tweets into positive and negative conversations and ﬁlters them
through a programme, which systematically converts them into
a lightshow. It was used for measure the Olympic London Eye.
As opposed to these works, we aim to model multiple
users’ location posts and learn polarity from numerous opin-
ions by different individuals on the Pan American Games 2011.
III.
THE PANAMERICAN APPROACH PROPOSED
The PanAmerican approach aims at performing the classi-
ﬁcation of polarity in a set of Internet resources focused on an
event. The approach is based on four components: a crawler
(A), a ﬁlter (B), a synthesizer (C), and a polarity analyzer (D).
The main function of the crawler component is to search and
ﬁnd data from internet resources related to the event of interest.
After locating the data, the ﬁlter component processes the data
in order to remove noise. The ﬁlter component only debugs
internet resources that are associated with the event. At this
point, the corpus consists of numerous posts containing large
amounts of data from many countries and in many languages.
The synthesizer component represents the amount of data into
clusters with similar expressions using unsupervised learning.
Finally, the Polarity analyzer component classiﬁes each cluster
into positive, neutral or negative. Each of the components in
the PanAmerican approach is described in greater detail below:
A. Crawler
The crawler is a component that obtains internet resources
related to one event and stores them in a repository for later
use.
The main challenges faced by this component are the size
of the internet resources that continue to grow in a highly
dynamic way and the fact that some of them appear and
disappear in a very brief period of time. The depth is the link
levels that a seed can have; if a seed has another link embedded
in the body of the web this will conduct a search on this link,
and so on up to the number of levels conﬁgured on the system.
It is important to note that an unlimited number of levels can
take months of processing in multiple threads. The solution is
to seek and obtain Internet resources based on a depth of four
links [16].
In addition, the crawler component stores items in a knowl-
edge base as follows: the URL, the contents of the internet
resource in natural language, a bag of words and the position
in the sentence of each one of these.
An important challenge is the quality of the internet
resources because over 40 percent of the data collected is
not semantically related to the event under study. One of
the reasons is that many people manipulate their content
speciﬁcally with keywords, titles, and descriptions in order for
their Internet resource to rank high in search results during the
event and for that reason the ﬁlter component is essential.
1) Data: The quality of the corpus is measured by the
degree of compliance of the posts that meet the purpose for
which the corpus is compiled. Thus it was necessary to take
special care in the selection of posts attempting to maintain
homogeneity. Therefore, it was necessary to establish the
following criteria that govern the selection and inclusion of
posts.
Quantity: It was decided to include 5600 posts of different
dimensions.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Quality of text: Given that the selection was automatic,
special care was taken in that the texts were written in
the correct language, without spelling mistakes, in clear
writing.
Published in Pan American Games 2011: Due to the
nature of the project, we only included published posts.
Type of opinion: the opinion must have been carried out
with the results of the event.
Text form: The texts must be written in the form of
general impressions.
Style: The texts must be comprehensive, describing the
opinion from beginning to end, discarding free or incom-
plete texts introduced in unﬁnished or abandoned posts.
Additional information: Each sample must be marked
with a series of additional data, which gives extra in-
formation and allows for identiﬁcation. These marks are
the: web page from which it has been extracted, country
or area where the opinion has been realized, language,
and date of the opinion.
B. Filter
The ﬁlter is a component that processes Internet resources
to remove unwanted data related to an event. The ﬁlter uses an
anti-noise function to minimize 37.5 percent of the noise in the
corpus content. The ﬁlter works by analyzing the most frequent
words in the post titles and descriptions that are related to the
name of the event and then classiﬁes each post as noise or not
noise. Finally, the ﬁlter builds a knowledge base populated
with titles, descriptions and posts related to the event. The
output from the ﬁlter component is still a large volume of data
because there are one hundred sixty-eight Internet resources
that are producing dozens of posts daily in several languages.
As a result, the knowledge base grows tremendously and is
full of instances that were saved sequentially; thus, the next
step is a preprocessing of all the resulting data, grouping
and classifying them according to common themes using the
synthesizer component.
C. Synthesizer
The main function of the synthesizer component is to take
all the posts that the ﬁlter has classiﬁed as not noise and
without previous knowledge about them identify groups of
similar expressions using a Bayes classiﬁer [17].
Therefore, the next step is to group all the posts that express
similar content to represent the data in a lower dimension
space. One reason to use unsupervised learning [18] is that
people observe the same event in several ways; however, their
perceptions of one event have clear differences based on their
nationality. We used a Bayes classiﬁer, which has shown good
results in previous work. The results are stored in two plain
text ﬁles: one with a set of clusters, and the other one with
the six most representative patterns for each cluster of posts.
The synthesizer component creates a new population of posts
represented in a lower dimension space by clustering.
D. Polarity Analyzer
The polarity analyzer component is in charge of the polarity
analysis of clusters based on a Multilingual Lexical Ontology
(MLO) (see section 1) and classiﬁes each cluster into positive,
negative or neutral. It uses K-means cluster.
For each cluster, we obtained the six most representative
patterns: the component performs a semantic analysis of pat-
terns based on the MLO ontology.
Therefore, subjectivity is calculated with an additional
operation as follows: positive (more than zero), negative (less
than zero), and neutral (equal to zero).
Finally, each cluster is classiﬁed into positive, negative or
neutral.
1) Multilingual Lexical Ontology (MLO): The two main
characteristics of the MLO ontology are that it is language-
independent and provides multilingual population in any lan-
guage. However, their instances are in the four languages,
these being Spanish, English, Portuguese and French because
they are the languages most used by people in the 2011 Pan
American Games.
Deﬁnition: the MLO Ontology is a conceptual description
based on a lexicon of the subjective words in Natural Language
as shown in (1). The MLO Ontology consists of four disjoint
sets C, R, A, and τ where C means concept identiﬁers (2),
R means relation identiﬁers (3 and 4), A means attribute
identiﬁers (5), and τ means data types (6).
MLO := (C, ≤ c, R, γR, ≤R, A, γA, τ)
(1)
The set C of concepts is:
C : .=





















Adjectives, NegativeAdjectives,
P ositiveAdjectives, Adverbs, NegativeAdverbs
, P ositiveAdverbs, Articles, Authors,
DomainResources, Nouns, NegativeNouns,
P ositiveNouns, P aragraphs, P osts,
P redicates, P repositions, Sentences,
Subjects, T itles, InternetResources,
V erbs, NegativeV erbs, P ositiveV erbs
(2)
The set R of relations is:
R : .=



author of, post of, paragraph of, sentence of,
adverb in, articles inprepositions in, nouns in,
adjectives in, verbs in, subject of, predicate of
(3)
where the relation hierarchy deﬁnes that DomainResources
has the relation author of that belongs to Authors. InternetRe-
sources has the relation post of that belongs to Posts, following
the same logic the rest of the relations are deﬁned, as shown
in equation (4).
γR(author of) = (Authors, DomainResources)
γR(post of) = (P osts, InternetResources)
γR(paragraph of) = (P aragraphs, P osts)
γR(sentence of) = (Sentences, P aragraphs)
γR(adverbs in) = (Adverbs, Sentences)
γR(articles in) = (Articles, Sentences)
γR(prepositions in) = (P repositions, Sentences)
γR(nouns in) = (Nouns, Sentences)
γR(adjectives in) = (Adjectives, Sentences)
γR(verbs in) = (V erbs, Sentences)
γR(subject in) = (Subjects, Sentences)
γR(predicate in) = (P redicates, Sentences)
(4)
The set A of attribute identiﬁers is:
A : .=









blog, author, title, post, paragraph, sentence,
subject, predicate, article, noun, nounP, nounN,
verb, verbN, verbP, adjective, adjectiveP,
adjectiveN, preposition, adverb, adverbP,
adverbN
(5)
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

The set τ of datatypes contains only one element a string, as
shown in (6).
τ := (string)
(6)
The ﬁrst axiom deﬁnes the concept NegativeAdverbs as
equivalent to saying that there is a negativeAdverb, which
stands in a adverb in relation with the corresponding sentence,
following the same logic the rest of the axioms are deﬁned as
shown in (7).
∀x(NegativeAdverbs(x) ←→ ∃y ∧ adverb in(x, y) ∧ Sentences(y))
∀x(P ositiveAdverbs(x) ←→ ∃y ∧ adverb in(x, y) ∧ Sentences(y))
∀x(NegativeV erbs(x) ←→ ∃y ∧ verbs in(x, y) ∧ Sentences(y))
∀x(P ositiveV erbs(x) ←→ ∃y ∧ verbs in(x, y) ∧ Sentences(y))
∀x(NegativeNouns(x) ←→ ∃y ∧ nouns in(x, y) ∧ Sentences(y))
∀x(P ositiveNouns(x) ←→ ∃y ∧ nouns in(x, y) ∧ Sentences(y))
∀x(NegativeAdjectives(x) ←→ ∃y ∧ adjectives in(x, y) ∧ Sentences(y))
∀x(P ositiveAdjectives(x) ←→ ∃y ∧ adjectives in(x, y) ∧ Sentences(y))
(7)
To summarize, the PanAmerican approach proposed is
shown in Fig. 1, where the input is the Ofﬁcial Web of Pan
American Games 2011 and the output is the polarity value of
each country involved.
1: procedure CRAWLER(SubsetW eb)
2:
for i ← 1, SizeSubsetW eb do
3:
InternetResources(i) ← DownloadURL((Get(URL(i)));
4:
end for
5: end procedure
6: procedure FILTER(InternetResources,T erm)
7:
for i ← 1, NumberofInternetResources do
8:
if SyntacticF ilter(InternetResource(i)) then
9:
if NoiseF ilter(InternetResource(i)) then
10:
noise(InternetResource(i))
←
InternetResource((i));
11:
else
12:
if SemanticF ilter(InternetResource(i)) then
13:
T itles(InternetResource(i))
←
Split(T itles(InternetResource(i)));
14:
Descriptions(InternetResource(i))
←
Split(Descriptions(InternetResource(i)));
15:
P osts(InternetResource(i))
←
Split(P osts(InternetResource(i)));
16:
end if
17:
end if
18:
end if
19:
end for
20: end procedure
21: procedure SYNTESIZER(P osts)
22:
for i ← 1, NumberofP osts do
23:
ClusterMultilingual(i) ← ClusterMultilingual(P osts(i));
24:
P atterns(i) ← P atterns(P osts(i));
25:
end for
26: end procedure
27: procedure POLARITY(W eb)
28:
InternetResources ← Crawler(W eb);
29:
P osts ← F ilter(InternetResources, ”P anAmericangames2011”);
30:
Clusters ← Syntesizer(P osts);
31:
for k ← 1, NumberofClusters do
32:
P olarityV alue(k) ← P olarityV alue(Cluster(k), MLO);
33:
Sum(k) ← OpinionV alue(k);
34:
end for
35: end procedure
Fig. 1: The PanAmerican approach
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS AND PERFORMANCE
RESULTS
The following section includes a detailed description of
how the experiment was conducted. The ﬁrst part describes
the objectives of the experiment and the second part focuses
on the results obtained after the experiment was conducted.
The experimental setup had four objectives: 1) to obtain a
subset of Internet resources related to the 2011 Pan American
Games, 2) to delete noise in the Internet resources obtained,
3) to classify sets of posts that are close in meaning and group
them into clusters, and 4) to assess the polarity of each cluster.
The analysis was carried out in two ways: 1) the crawler
component was run in order to obtain Internet resources over
a period of three months, and 2) the type of PanAmerican was
carried out for 168 Internet resources.
The ﬁrst task was to obtain posts in Internet resources
using the crawler component. However, the output is a set of
Internet resources that grows rapidly with data irrelevant to the
analysis. For that reason it was necessary to adjust the crawler
component to the event. The focus was placed on Internet
resources related syntactically to the term ”Pan American
games 2011” in order to reject those Internet resources, which
were not related to this event. We deal with two problems: a)
the seed [19] had 300 related Internet resources so the crawler
component was restricted to a search of four levels deep and
b) identifying the source country based on the meaning of its
posts is a major task. Thus, we assumed that, depending on
the Internet resources, the top level domain of the post was
used for the country of the author.
The second task was to ﬁlter out Internet resources not
related semantically to the event and as a result classiﬁed
as noise by the ﬁlter component. For example, some of the
following Internet resources had a Pan American 2011 term
but not all contained data related to the event; there are noise
traders who use the same term but with a different meaning:
{http://www.emailbrain.com/134087/rss,
http://feeds2.feedburner.com/noc-aho\,
http://www.argentina.ar/rss/rss_prensa_es.xml,
http://www.dushi-curacao.info/1-dushi-curacao.html,
http://www.bahamasolympiccommittee.org/_rss/news,
http://www.amandala.com.bz/inc/rss.php?id=11806,
http://bmxbolivia.org/?feed=rss2,
http://www.olympic.ca/fr/,
http://co.elpais.feedsportal.com/c/33807/f/607321/index.rss,
http://juegospanamericanos.ain.cu/feed/,
http://www.colimdo.org/rss.aspx,
http://ministryofhealth.gov.ky/feed/rss.xml,
http://www.elcaribe.com.do/rss,
http://www.avn.info.ve/rss/6 , etc. }
As a result, we obtained a corpus of 3500 posts extracted from
one hundred sixty-eight different Internet resources, sampled
from a comprehensive range of 2011 Pan American Games
Internet resources with 147 MB of text.
The third task was to ﬁnd group similarities so as to repre-
sent in a lower dimension space the PanAmerican analysis. The
PanAmerican approach synthesizes the corpus into clusters
with similar data. As an example, we show three posts that
are grouped to their similar themes:
Commonwealth Youth Games Team Selected,
Team Bahamas Deports Mexico with 3 Medals,
BOC Ammounces Guadalajara 2011 Pan Am Games Team
The PanAmerican approach processes each one of the
clusters and extracts the six most relevant patterns for the task
of PanAmerican; these patterns are also assessed through a
parser that performs semantic matching between each pattern
and the MLO ontology in order to carried out the tagging of
polarity.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

The MLO ontology measures are shown in Table I where
the numbers of local instances are the same for all the four
languages involved. For example, PositiveVerbs in Spanish
amount to one hundred instances and this number is the
same for each of the other languages: English, Portuguese and
French.
TABLE I: MULTILINGUAL LEXICAL ONTOLOGY (MLO)
MEASURES
Measures
Type
Local
Inferred
NumberofT riples
11616
1
NegativeAdjectives
1092
0
P ositiveAdjectives
1468
0
NegativeAdverbs
52
0
P ositiveAdverbs
100
0
Internetresources
286
0
NegativeNouns
880
0
P ositiveNouns
800
0
T itles
1000
0
DomainInternetResources
1
0
NegativeV erbs
472
0
P ositiveV erbs
400
0
owl : Class
22
0
owl : DatatypeP roperty
22
0
owl : NamedIndividual
5400
0
owl : ObjectP roperty
13
0
owl : Ontology
1
0
Each cluster is classiﬁed using a well-known formula of
the sum of the value of the patterns polarity that is shown in
(8).
f(n) =
( n > 0
if n is Positive (P)
n < 0
if n is Negative (N)
n = 0
if n is Neutral (Z)
(8)
A partial result is shown in Table II where Cluster 2 (C2)
contains posts, which are linked to people in wheelchairs,
despite the fact that the ﬁrst post is not explicitly linked to
that term. However, Tito Bautista was a participant with a
wheelchair, so it is correctly speciﬁed. The C2 PanAmerican
result is positive (P) polarity.
The C6 language is French and most of the posts are nega-
tive; therefore, the PanAmerican analyzer component value is
negative (N) polarity.
In C5, the ﬁrst two posts are in Portuguese and the third
post is in Spanish; all of these are linked to the Brasil term.
The ﬁrst two posts are neutral polarity and the third is negative
polarity and as a result the cluster is negative polarity.
TABLE II: A PARTIAL VIEW OF CLUSTERS COMPONENT
OUTPUT
Clusters
Cluster of Posts
C1 (P)
M´exico llega a la Villa
Miranda de M´exico, una favorita de Guadalajara
Respalda el Presidente Calder´on propuesta de EGM
para buscar los Juegos Ol´ımpicos para Jalisco
C2 (P)
Perseverancia y coraje, palabras que deﬁnen a Tito Bautista
Seleccionados mexicanos liderearon el Circuito
Nacional de Tenis en Silla de Ruedas
El Tenis en Silla de Ruedas entrar´a en acci´on
C3 (Z)
Registration [closed] Sport Management Course
Start of CAC Games 2010
Pan American Games 2011
C4 (P)
Team Bahamas Departs Mexico with 3 Medals
DIF Jalisco y COPAG hacen mancuerna
Commonwealth Youth Games Team Selected
C5 (N)
Lettre de d´emission du Ministre de la Justice
Affaire B´elizaire : Rapport de la Commission
Sp´eciale d´u2019Enqueate (Partie 1)
Brasil equipo a vencer en Voleibol Sentados
C6 (N)
Mission afghane: d´epart devanc´e de l´uAustralie?
NY: Un homme aurait voulu faire sauter des sites
Tripoli veut juger Seif al-Islam en Libye
A. Performance Results
In the ﬁrst place, the crawler component identiﬁed four
Internet resources for each participating country in the 2011
Pan American Games and therefore obtained 168 Internet
resources containing 5600 posts as shown in Fig. 2
Fig. 2: Identiﬁcation of the 5600 posts structure based on num-
ber of words, tokens, unigrams, bigrams, trigrams, fougrams,
and ﬁvegrams.
At this point, the ﬁlter component was applied in order to
delete posts, which contained noise (2100) and posts seman-
tically related to the event (3500) were identiﬁed. Next, 1000
clusters were obtained using the synthesizer component. Fi-
nally, 588 positive clusters, 336 neutral clusters and 76 negative
clusters were tagged using the polarity analyzer component.
To measure the accuracy of the cluster classiﬁcation task
we used well-known formulae in the area of information
retrieval as shown in equations 9 through 12, where precision
and recall were evaluated for each polarity (P, Z, N).
Precision was calculated by dividing the True Positives
(TP) between the sum of True Positives and False Positives
(FP) as shown in (11). Recall is the division between True
Positives and the sum of True Positives and False Positives as
shown in (9).
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Recall ≡ TPRate = TP/(TP + FN))
(9)
FPRate = FP/(FP + TN))
(10)
Precision = TP/(TP + FP))
(11)
F − Measure = 2TP/(2TP + FP + FN))
(12)
The results for precision for each polarity -Positive, Nega-
tive and Neutral (P, N, Z) respectively- are shown in Table III.
The highest accuracy is in the negative polarity with a value
of .9.
TABLE III: DETAILED ACCURANCY OF POLARITY COMPO-
NENT
TP Rate
FP Rate
Precision
Recall
F-Measure
Polarity
0.997
0.204
0.875
0.997
0.932
P
0.118
0.001
0.9
0.118
0.209
N
0.762
0.096
0.8
0.762
0.78
Z
The clusters that were correctly classiﬁed amount to 85.1%
and the faulty were 14.9% . The sample comprised 1000
clusters derived from 3500 posts that were ﬁltered from 168
Internet resources from 42 countries and 4 languages. The
absolute and relative errors are also shown in Table IV.
TABLE IV: STRATIFIED CROSS-VALIDATION OF COMPO-
NENT SYNTHESIZER
Correctly Classiﬁed Clusters
85.1 %
Incorrectly Classiﬁed Clusters
14.9 %
Kappa statistic
0.7007
Mean absolute error
0.1881
Root mean squared error
0.2929
Relative absolute error
52.6328 %
Root relative squared error
69.3158 %
Total Number of Clusters
1000
The PanAmerican results and the medals won for each
country are shown graphically in Fig. 3a and, as it can be
seen, the positive clusters dominate. Fig. 3b shows the polarity
results for each country.
Fig. 3: Medals won in Pan American 2011 Games and Polarity
Results of PanAmerican Approach for each country.
where the Id for each country is in Table V.
TABLE V: ID FOR EACH COUNTRY
Name
Id
Name
Id
Antigua and Barbuda
(ANT)
Guyana
(GUY)
Netherlands Antilles
(AHO)
Haiti
(HAI)
Argentina
(ARG)
Honduras
(HON)
Aruba
(ARU)
Cayman Islands
(CAY)
Bahamas
(BAH)
Virgin Islands (GB)
(IVB)
Barbados
(BAR)
Virgin Islands(US)
(ISV)
Belize
(BER)
Jamaica
(JAM)
Bermudas
(ANT)
Mexico
(MEX)
Bolivia
(BOL)
Nicaragua
(NCA)
Brazil
(BRA)
Panama
(PAN)
Canada
(CAN)
Paraguay
(PAR)
Chile
(CHI)
Peru
(PER)
Colombia
(COL)
Puerto Rico
(PUR)
CostaRica
(CRC)
Dominican Republic
(DOM)
Cuba
(CUB)
Saint Kitts Nevis
(SKN)
Dominica
(DMA)
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
(VIN)
Ecuador
(ECU)
Saint Lucia
(LCA)
El Salvador
(ESA)
Suriname
(SUR)
United States of America
(USA)
Trinidad and Tobago
(TRI)
Grenada
(GRN)
Uruguay
(URU)
Guatemala
(GUA)
Venezuela
(VEN)
In addition, the research hypothesis claimed that the as-
sessments of content producers would be inﬂuenced strongly
by the results of an event regardless of their nationality. From
our results it can be seen that the appraisal in some countries
was positive because of the high number of medals won, as
in the case of the United States, which took 236 medals. This
is in contrast with Honduras, which did not win in any ﬁeld,
and thus, the overall assessment was strongly inﬂuenced and
negatively evaluated, such as is shown in Fig. 3b. Fig. 4 shows
that the correlation coefﬁcient is equal to 0.74, indicating a
strong relationship between the medals won and the global
polarity by each country.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Fig. 4: Shows that the correlation coefﬁcient is equal to 0.74,
indicating a strong relationship between the medals won in
Pan American 2011 Games and the global polarity of the
PanAmerican Approach by each country.
Fig. 5 shows the polarity of six Internet resources -
Resource 1 (R1), ..., , Resource 6 (R6)- for the last thirty-three
countries. For example in Fig. 5(19) the polarity of Jamaica
(JAM) is positive for the ﬁrst three resources, negative for the
following two, and postive for the last one.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has presented an approach to analyse a subset
of Internet resources focused on a speciﬁc event, the PanAmer-
ican Games, and based on four components: a crawler, a ﬁlter,
a synthesizer and a polarity analyzer.
The PanAmerican approach has the following advantages:
it allows analysis of a set of real subjective expressions
used by people and their polarity classiﬁcation as positive,
neutral, or negative. This approach reduces ambiguity and 37.5
percent of noise in the subjective elements and classiﬁes only
those, which are not identiﬁed as noise component. Also, the
PanAmerican approach found out that the polarity of content
producers would be inﬂuenced strongly by the results of an
event with a correlation of .74. Thus, it is possible to conclude
that the polarity of content producers is strongly inﬂuenced by
the results of the event.
In this case, the experiments reported are of a limited
scale and serve mostly to demonstrate that the PanAmerican
approach is feasible. In addition, there is the potential to scale
up to use with a sizeable dataset.
Furthermore, if we included all the posts of Internet re-
sources then the PanAmerican analysis would get an accuracy
less than .5. However, we developed a approach based on an
polarity classiﬁcation with the precision of between .8 and
.9, where the precision for positive and neutral polarity are
acceptable and the recall is also good. In contrast with the
negative polarity where precision is higher but the recall is
very low.
To conclude, one of the beneﬁts of the results of our
research is the MLO presented because it is suitable for
integration with other systems.
Finally, further research should be carried out to explore
geographical differences in jargon and language. For example,
we aim to identify certain evaluative words that are used only
in some local geographical areas.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the Sciences Research Council (CONA-
CYT) for funding this research project and Multiling¨uismo en
ontolog´ıas y linked data (BabelData), TIN2010-17550, funded
by the Ministry of Science and Technology, 2011-2013.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Cambria and A. Hussain, “Sentic computing: Techniques, tools, and
applications,” SpringerBriefs in Cognitive Computation, vol. 2, pp. 1–
135, 2012.
[2]
B. Pang and L. Lee, “Opinion mining and sentiment analysis,” Found
Trends Information Retrieval, vol. 2, pp. 1–135, January 2008.
[3]
S. Somasundaran, T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and V. Stoyanov, “Qa with atti-
tude: Exploiting opinion type analysis for improving question answering
in on-line discussions and the news,” In International Conference on
Weblogs and Social, pp. 1–8, 2007.
[4]
V. Stoyanov, C. Cardie, and J. Wiebe, “Multi-perspective question
answering using the opqa corpus,” in Proceedings of HTL-EMNLP
2005, pp. 923–930, 2005.
[5]
L. V. Lita, A. H. Schlaikjer, W. Hong, and E. Nyberg, “Qualitative
dimensions in question answering: Extending the deﬁnitional qa task,”
In AAAI-2005, 2005.
[6]
N. Chiluka, N. Andrade, and J. Pouwelse, “A link prediction approach
to recommendations in large-scale user-generated content systems,”
Advances in Information Retrieval, The 33rd European Conference on
Information Retrieval (ECIR 2011), 2011.
[7]
S. Morinaga, K. Yamanishi, K. Tateishi, and T. Fukushima, “Mining
product reputations on the web,” ACM Press, pp. 341–349, 2002.
[8]
L. Ungar and D. Foster, “Clustering methods for collaborative ﬁltering,”
AAAI Press, Menlo Park California, 1998.
[9]
R. Higashinaka, M. Walker, and R. Prasad, “Learning to generate
naturalistic utterances using reviews in spoken dialogue systems,” ACM
Transactions on Speech and Language Processing (TSLP), 2007.
[10]
A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani, “Sentiwordnet: A publicly available lexical
resource for opinion mining,” In Proceedings of the 5th Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-06, pp. 417–422, 2006.
[11]
http://nlg18.csie.ntu.edu.tw:8080/opinion/userform.jsp
(Accessed:
September 2013).
[12]
A. Pak, “Automatic, adaptive,and applicative sentiment analysis,” Th`ese
de l’ ´Ecole Doctorale d’Informatique de l’Universit´e Paris-Sud, June
2012.
[13]
T. Wilson, P. Hoffmann, S. Somasundaran, J. Kessler, J. Wiebe, Y. Choi,
C. Cardie, E. Riloff, and S. Patwardhan, “Opinionﬁnder: a system
for subjectivity analysis,” Proceedings of HLT/EMNLP on Interactive
Demonstrations, pp. 34–35, 2005.
[14]
A. A. Gruzd, S. Doiron, and P. Mai, “Is happiness contagious online? a
case of twitter and the 2010 winter olympics.” IEEE Computer Society,
pp. 1–9, 2011.
[15]
M. Thelwall, “Heart and soul: Sentiment strength detection in the social
web with sentistrength,” To appear in Holyst, J. (Ed). Cyberemotions,
pp. 1–14, 2013.
[16]
J. E. Campos-Quirarte, L. I. Barbosa-Santillan, and A. Castro-Munguia,
“A focused crawler in order to get semantic web resources (csr),”
Thirteenth Mexican International Conference on Computer Science
(ENC’13), Morelia (Mexico), pp. 1–6, October 2013.
[17]
P. Domingos and M. Pazzani, “On the optimality of the simple bayesian
classiﬁer under zero-one loss,” Machine Learning, vol. 29, no. 2-3, pp.
103–130, 1997.
[18]
Y.-S. Kim, W. Street, and F. Menczer, “Feature selection in unsupervised
learning via evolutionary search,” Proc. 6th ACM SIGKDD Interna-
tional Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2000.
[19]
http
:
//www.guadalajara2011.org.mx/es/rss
(Accessed:
September
2013).
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Fig. 5: Polarity of six Internet resources -Internet Resource 1 (IR1), ..., , Internet Resource 6 (IR6)- for the last thirty-three
countries. For example in Fig. 5(19) the polarity of Jamaica (JAM) is positive for the ﬁrst three resources, negative for the
following two, and postive for the last one.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

