A Regression Model of Location Selection for Beverage Chain in Taiwan
Hui-Chi Chuang
Institute of Information Management
National Cheng Kung University
Tainan City, Taiwan, R.O.C.
e-mail: huichi613@gmail.com
Yi-Chung Cheng
Department of International Business Management
Tainan University of Technology
Tainan City, Taiwan, R.O.C.
e-mail: t20042@mail.tut.edu.tw
Chih-Chuan Chen
Interdisciplinary Program of Green and Information Technology
National Taitung University
Taitung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
e-mail: ccchen@nttu.edu.tw
Abstract—Location selection
plays a
crucial
role
in the
restaurant industry, especially for the beverage chains. A
comprehensive
location
selection
model
and
appropriate
analytical technique can improve the quality of location
decisions,
attracting
more
customers
and
substantially
impacting market share and profitability. Location selection is
a significant part of strategic management activities. In
Taiwan, thanks to its special cuisine culture, the environment
of
beverage
industry
is
very
competitive
and
versatile.
Therefore, it is very important to have an efficient location
selection process for a beverage chain, for both franchiser and
franchisees. This study establishes a regression model for the
turnover of a local beverage chain in the city of Tainan in
southern Taiwan. The model is based on the factors that would
affect the location selection, such as crowd flow in front of the
chain stores, resident population, complementary stores, and
competitive stores. For franchiser, the model can be applied to
stores in different areas, and for the franchisees, the model can
help them to decide the location of the stores.
Keywords- Location selection; Regression; Beverage Chain;
Customer intention.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the food and beverage industry, right location selection
is one of most important strategic decisions for the success of
the business. In Taiwan, thanks to its warm climate and
special cuisine culture, the beverage industry is very
prosperous. The most common and the easiest way to start a
business is to be a franchisee of a beverage chain for its low
entry barrier.
In general, the franchiser would provide the know-hows,
such as business process and techniques and help with the
planning, while it is the franchisee who is in charge of the
location
selection.
Location
selection
results
in
the
convenience of service and how many customers can be
attracted, and, as a consequence, influences customer loyalty
and operation performance [1]. Therefore, for a franchisee,
location selection is crucial to the success of the business.
There are more than 200 chain brands in Taiwan's beverage
industry. In 2017, there were more than 21,000 beverage
stores. On average, every person drinks seven cups of
beverage monthly. Due to fierce market competition, the
location of the beverage store is even more important.
Most studies on location selection focus on the major
factors that influence the turnover. This study takes into
account the “shop rent to gross profit” ratio. Although it is
crucial to the franchisee’s profit, most location selection
methods just apply an estimated value, which could be quite
different from the real value. Moreover, the better the
location is, the higher the rent would be. It is an important
issue that the franchisee has to take into account.
This study proposes a regression model with turnover as
the dependent variable and with location selection factors as
independent variables. Both franchiser and franchisee can
determine the store location based on the predicted turnover
and the store rent. The proposed model can help the
franchiser to make the decision on whether to develop the
business in a certain area, while it can help the franchiser to
determine the location of the store.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
provides some necessary literature review while Section 3
describes the methodology. The model evaluation results and
discussion are summarized in Section 4. Conclusions are
drawn in Section 5.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Franchising is an important way for enterprises to expand
their markets, especially for the business environment in
Taiwan, where small and medium-sized enterprises are
established, and to join the franchise of small brands is the
first choice for young people to start their own businesses.
Thanks to the special cuisine culture in Taiwan, the beverage
industry is very well developed and various beverage chains
are competing in the market. It is the most common and the
easiest way for a young entrepreneur to join a beverage chain
as a franchisee. In the extremely competitive beverage
market, store location is crucial to the success of the
beverage store.
Right location selection is one of the strategic decisions
that carries importance for the success of the business. The
location selection problem for all kinds of organizations
could be assessed in a wide range of issues with regard to the
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-731-3
IMMM 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

following critical aspects: plant location selection, store and
warehouse location selection, shopping centre location
selection, retail site location selection and healthcare centre
and hospital location selection that have the similar problems
[2]. Davis et al. identified a number of factors that have
influence on the success of food and beverage industry,
among which location of food service facility is the most
important feature [3]. Location selection results in the
convenience of service and how many customers can be
attracted, which, as a consequence, would affect customer
loyalty, operation performance, and the market share and
profitability of a company [1]. A location decision usually
involves a long-term commitment of resources, making this
issue very important [4]. Several factors need to be taken
into account, such as choice of commercial area, competitive
stores, complementary stores, and traffic flow.
The choice of commercial area is a decision problem that
needs to take into account a large number of criteria and to
identify the best option among alternatives, such as ease in
accessibility, parking facilities, and located at a street corner
[5][6]. The selection of commercial area directly affects the
performance of the store [7]. Therefore, it is important to
have a thorough investigation on the commercial area to
assess the performance of the store [8]-[10].
Jaravaza and Chitando investigated the role of store
location in influencing customers’ store choice [11]. The
research shows that customer store choice decisions are
heavily hinged on store convenience, such as shorter
travelling distance, complementary services, and convenient
public transport. Traffic density is another important issue.
Although high traffic density means high crowd flow, it also
has a downside of traffic jam,
which
would
impair
consumers’ intention of coming into the commercial area
[12]. For high traffic density areas, one needs to consider the
parking facility or if the store is on the street in the location
selection process.
In Taiwan, the density of beverage stores is extremely
high, that is, it is easy to find various beverage shops of
different brands on the same street, and in some areas of the
same brand. They compete with each other even if they
provide different kinds of drinks. The competition factor
should be taken into account in the location selection process.
The number of competitors and intensity of competition are
included as two criteria. The number of competitors refers to
the number of similar restaurants in the vicinity. The
intensity of competitors refers to the scale of beverage stores
in the vicinity [13]. Although competitors would compete for
the customers, in some cases, high intensity of competitive
stores could attract more customers.
During the last few decades, there has been a significant
increase in one-stop shopping strategies. Shoppers tend to
economize on the amount of time they spend on shopping by
making multi-purpose shopping trips, combining purchases
for different product categories and reducing the number of
trips during a particular time period [14]. Multi-purpose
shoppers often bypass closer stores to visit agglomerated
stores that are further away in order to shop for different
types of goods or indulge in different activities on the same
trip [15]. Therefore, this study takes into account the
complementary stores.
The most often used conventional location selection
methods include checklist methods, analog approaches,
regression models and location allocation models [13]. The
checklist method uses a list of location factors, and
systematically evaluates each of the candidate locations, and
then identifies the most suitable locations. The analog
approach aims to determine the boundary of the interested
commercial area and predict the turnover of the new location
[16]. To this end, researchers have to find out some similar
stores in the earlier stage and investigate their drawing
powers in the different areas and locations, then the turnover
of the new location can be evaluated. The regression model
has been widely used in various fields, which determines the
relationship between the major factors and the business
performance, by identifying a regression function with the
business performance as the dependent variable and the
major factors as the independent variables.
Some techniques of artificial intelligence have been
applied to location selection problems, such as artificial
neural
networks
and
fuzzy
set
theory
[13][17][18].
Jungthirapanich
developed
a
decision
support
system
incorporating a linear additive multi-attribute utility method
and a database system which collects the location data
extracted from public documents and reports [19].
III.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In this study, a regression model is applied to predict the
turnover of a beverage store. Based on the studies on
location selection in the literature [12][20], and local domain
experts’ advice, it takes into account several independent
variables
such
as
crowd
flow,
residential
population,
complementary stores, and competitive stores.
A. Regression Model
In statistics, linear regression is a linear approach to
modelling the relationship between a scalar response (or
dependent variable) and one or more explanatory variables
(or independent variables). The case of one explanatory
variable is called simple linear regression. For more than one
explanatory variable, the process is called multiple linear
regression [21].
Given
a
data
set
of
n
statistical units, a linear regression model assumes that the
relationship between the dependent variable y and the k-
vector of regressors x is linear. This relationship is modeled
through a disturbance term or error variable ε — an
unobserved random variable that adds "noise" to the linear
relationship between the dependent variable and regressors.
Thus, the model takes the form
y = ܾ଴ + ܾଵݔଵ + ܾଶݔଶ+? ? ܾ௞ݔ௞+ߝ,(1)
where the constant ܾ଴ is the
intercept term, and
ܾଵ, ܾଶ, ? ? ܾ௞ are known as effects or regression coefficients,
is the error term. Usually, in statistics, the linear least
squares method is applied for estimating the unknown
parameters in a linear regression model. Let ܾ෠௜ denote the
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-731-3
IMMM 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

squares
estimator
of ܾ௜
.
Then,
the
estimator ofݕ, denoted asݕො, can be presented as follows.
.
(2)
The coefficient of determination, denoted R2, is the
proportion of the variance in the dependent variable that is
predictable from the independent variable(s). It provides a
measure of how well observed outcomes are replicated by
the model, based on the proportion of total variation of
outcomes explained by the model [22]. The coefficient of
determination normally ranges from 0 to 1. The greater the
value of the coefficient, the stronger the relationship
between
the
independent
variable
and
the
dependent
variables.
The most general definition of the coefficient of
determination is
(3)
Two kinds of hypothesis testing, t-tests are applied to
test the significance of each coefficient, respectively, and F-
test the model significance. The corresponding statistics
area is as follows.
ݐ௜=
௕෠೔
௦௘(௕෠೔),
,
(4)
whereݏ݁(ܾ෠௜) denotes the standard error of ܾ෠௜.
ܨ=
ோమ/௞
(ଵିோమ)/(௡ି௞ିଵ)
(5)
B. Model development
Based on the studies on location selection in the literature,
and local domain experts’ advice, at the initial stage, this
study takes into account eight major factors that are crucial
to location selection of beverage chain [12][20]. They are (1)
crowd flow, (2) residential population, (3) target customers
in the commercial area, (4) complementary stores, (5)
mutually
exclusive
shops
(6)
competitive
stores,
(7)
advantages in establishing the store, and (8) disadvantages in
establishing the store. During the initial stage, the results
show that three variables, target customers, advantages in
establishing the store, and disadvantages in establishing the
store, are not significant in this case. Meanwhile, to the
research object of this study there are no mutually exclusive
shops in the commercial areas. Therefore, this study takes
into account four major factors for location selection of the
beverage chain, and they are (1) crowd flow in front of the
store, (2) residential population in the commercial area, (3)
complementary stores, and (4) competitive stores.
The dependent variable Y represents the turnover of the
store, and the four independent variables are X_1: crowd
flow,
X_2:
residential
population,
X_3:
number
of
complementary stores, and X_4: number of competitive
stores. The regression model can be described as follows.
(6)
where the constant ܾ଴ is the intercept term, and
are known as effects or regression coefficients, and
is
the error term. Let ܾ෠௜ denote the squares estimator of ܾ௜
. Then, the estimator ofݕ, denoted asݕො,
can be presented as follows.
Y෡ = ܾ෠଴ + ܾ෠ଵܺଵ + ܾ෠ଶܺଶ + ܾ෠ଷܺଷ + ܾ෠ସܺସ.
(7)
IV.
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
This study investigated a beverage chain including 27
stores and located in the North, Central, East, South, Anping
and Yongkang districts of Tainan City. These districts are
areas where the population of Tainan is more concentrated.
We
collected
crowd
flow,
residential
population,
complementary stores, and competitive stores to predict the
turnover of a beverage store. The description of the
independent variables is as follows.
(1) crowd flow in front of the chain stores: slack season (July
to September); peak season (October to May); non-holiday
(Monday to Friday) and holidays (Saturday to Sunday or
national holidays). Pick one hour from the daytime (10:00 to
17:00) and evening (17:00 to 22:00) to collect the crowd
flows.
(2) residential population in the commercial area: collect the
number of households within a radius of 250 meters centered
on the location. If it is a general household, 4 people are
calculated. If it is an office building, it is based on the
number of employees registered in the business. If it is a
factory, the number of people who enter the factory at 8:00 is
considered.
(3) complementary store: such as restaurant, seafood shop,
barbecue restaurant, Internet café.
(4) competitive store: the number of stores serving drinks.
This study utilizes crowd flow, residential population,
complementary stores, and competitive stores as independent
variables and turnover of a beverage store as dependent
variable to develop the prediction model. The regression
model is as follows:
Turnover = 0.354* ‘crowd flow’ + 0.270* ‘residential
population’ + 0.655* ‘complementary stores’ + 0.088*
‘competitive stores’.
In this paper, we use Analysis of Variance (ANOVA),
which is a collection of statistical models and their
associated estimation procedures, to analyze the differences
among group means in a sample. From Table I, the F-value
(MSreg. / MSerr) of the regression model is 26.347 and p-value
is .000. The P value is the probability of finding the observed
results when the null hypothesis of a study question is true. If
the value less than 0.05, it means that the prediction model is
statistically significant. Table II shows that the predictive
power of the model is 79.6% (adjusted R2). The p value of
crowd flow, residential population and complementary stores
are less than 0.05, respectively, it means these three factors
are significant and positive influence to turnover, on the
contrary competitive stores are not significant to turnover.
The results show that the number of complementary stores
has the greatest influence on the business of the beverage
chain, followed by the crowd flow in front of the stores, and
the resident population in the region has the least influence.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-731-3
IMMM 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

TABLE I.
THE ANOVA TABLE OF THE PREDICTION MODEL FOR THE
TURNOVER OF THE FRANCHISEES OF A BEVERAGE CHAIN IN TAIWAN
Model
df
SS
MS
F
P
regression
4
8.727E11
2.182E11
26.347
0.000
error
22
1.822E11
8.281E9
total
26
1.055E12
df : degree of freedom
SS : sum of square
MS : mean square
F : MSreg. / MSerr.
P value : significance
TABLE II.
COEFFICIENTS OF THE REGRESSION MODEL FOR THE
TURNOVER OF THE FRANCHISEES OF A BEVERAGE CHAIN IN TAIWAN
Model
UnStd. coef.
Std. coef
β
t
P
B
Std. Error
(constant)
6164.964
52532.577
0.117
0.908
Crowd flow
39.441
18.519
0.354
2.130
0.045
Resident
population
55.378
19.397
0.270
2.855
0.009
Complementary
stores
6473.280
1336.359
0.655
2.844
0.000
Competitive
stores
-2465.031
3260.591
0.088
-0.756
0.458
R = 0.910, R2 = 0.827, adjusted R2 = 0.796
UnStd. coef. : Unstandardized coefficient
Std. coef. : Standardized coefficient
V.
CONCLUSION
Thanks to Taiwan's unique culture of cuisine, an
extremely competitive beverage industry exists. For a
beverage
chain,
usually
the
franchisor
takes
the
responsibility for planning, counseling as well as offering
services, such as training and support. On the other hand,
while the franchisees take the franchisor's business systems,
training and know-how and put it into practice in their
location, they typically are responsible for most of the costs
and risks. As the franchisor holds all the data of each
franchisee, such as turnover and the location information, if
it can provide services, such as location selection advice and
turnover forecasting to its franchisees, it can help franchisees
to avoid unnecessary losses, and hence it would be mutually
beneficial to both parts. Moreover, it can also improve
corporate reputation and establish a better brand image.
This study focuses on the location selection problem of a
local beverage chain in the city of Tainan in southern Taiwan,
where the climate is warm all the year round and it is very
common to see people with a cup of tea in hand, and
therefore, it forms a special beverage industry with tea shops
and beverage booths everywhere. A regression model was
proposed for location selection. The results show that the
number of complementary stores in the area has the greatest
impact on the business of the beverage chain, followed by
the crowd flow in front of the stores, and the resident
population in the region has the least impact.
The number of competing stores did not show significant
impact on turnover, indicating that the target beverage chain
has established reputation in the city such that even though
there are stores of different beverage chains in the area,
consumers would still choose their favorite brand.
Although this study only focuses on the chain beverage
stores in Tainan, it can be applied to other cities and different
cuisine industries, to identify the factors that have impact on
the business.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This study was supported in part by the Ministry of
Science and Technology, ROC, under contract MOST 107-
2410-H-143-005.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. H. Tzeng, M. H. Teng, J. J. Chen, and S. Opricovic,
“Multicriteria selection for a restaurant location in Taipei,”
International Journal of Hospitality Management, vol. 21,
no.2, pp. 171-187, 2002.
[2]
T. Hernandez, “Enhancing retail location decision support:
The
development
and
application
of
geovisualization,”
Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, vol. 14, no. 4,
pp. 249-258, 2007.
[3]
B. Davis, A. Lockwood, P. Alcott, and I. S. Pantelidis, “Food
and beverage management,” Routledge, 2018.
[4]
T. Y. Chou, C. L. Hsu, and M. C. Chen, “A fuzzy multi-
criteria decision model for international tourist hotels location
selection,” International journal of hospitality management,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 293-301, 2008.
[5]
M. Akalina, G. Turhanbi, and A. Sahinc, “The application of
AHP approach for evaluating location selection elements for
retail store: A case of clothing store,” International Journal of
Research in Business and Social Science, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 1-
20, 2013.
[6]
C. Y. Shen and K. T. Yu, “A generalized fuzzy approach for
strategic problems: The empirical study on facility location
selection of authors’ management consultation client as an
example,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, no.3,
pp. 4709-4716, 2009.
[7]
L. Simkin, “SLAM: Store Location Assessment Model-
Theory and practice,” OMEGA International journal of
Management Science, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 53-58, 1989.
[8]
C. A. Ingene and R. F. Lusch, “Market selection decisions for
department stores,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 56, no. 3, pp.
21-40, 1980.
[9]
D. Grewal, M. Levy, and V. Kumar, “Customer experience
management in retailing: an organizing framework,” Journal
of retailing, vol. 85, no. 1, pp. 1-14, 2009.
[10] J. A. Pope, W. R. Lane, and J. Stein, “A multiple-attribute
decision model for retail store location,” Southern Business
Review, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 15-25, 2012.
[11] D. C. Jaravaza and P. Chitando, “The role of store location in
influencing customers’ store choice,” Journal of Emerging
Trends in Economics and Management Sciences (JETEMS),
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 302-307, 2013.
[12] H. Erbiyik, S. Özcan, and K. Karaboğa, “Retail store location 
selection problem with multiple analytical hierarchy process
of decision making an application in Turkey,” The 8th
International Strategic Management Conference, Procedia –
Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 58, pp. 1405-1414, 2012.
[13] R. J. Kuo, S. C. Chi, and S. S. Kao, “A decision support
system for selecting convenience store location through
integration of fuzzy AHP and artificial neural network,”
Computers in Industry, vol. 47, pp. 199-214, 2002.
[14] P. T. P. Leszczyc, A. Sinha, and A. Sahga, “The effect of
multi-purpose shopping on pricing and location strategy for
grocery stores,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 85-99,
2004.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-731-3
IMMM 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

[15] A. Ghosh and S. L. MacLafferty, “Location strategies for
retail and service firms,” Lexington Books, 1987.
[16] S. B. Cohen and W. Applebaum, “Evaluating store sites and
determining store rents,” Economic Geography, vol. 36, no. 1,
pp. 1-35, 1960.
[17] J. Wang and B. Malakooti, “A feedforward neural network for
multiple criteria decision making,” Computers & Operations
Research, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 151-167, 1992.
[18] G. S. Liang and M. J. J. Wang, “A fuzzy multi-criteria
decision-making method for facility site selection,” The
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 29, no. 11,
pp. 2313-2330, 1991.
[19] C. Jungthirapanich, “An intelligent decision support system for
facility location.”
University of Missouri/Rolla Rolla, MO,
USA”1992.
[20] F. F. Wang, L. F. Chen and C. T. Su, “Location selection
using fuzzy-connective-based aggregation networks: a case
study of the food and beverage chain industry in Taiwan.”
Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 161-
170, 2015.
[21] D. A. Freedman, “Statistical models: theory and practice,”
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
[22] R. G. D. Steel and J. H. Torrie, “Principles and Procedures of
Statistics with Special Reference to the Biological Sciences,”
McGraw Hill, 1960.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-731-3
IMMM 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

