Semantic Description of Text Mining Services
Katja Pfeifer
SAP Research Dresden
SAP AG
01187 Dresden, Germany
katja.pfeifer01@sap.com
Alexander Schill
Computer Networks Group
Technische Universit¨at Dresden
01062 Dresden, Germany
alexander.schill@tu-dresden.de
Abstract—Today, a huge amount of crucial business knowl-
edge is hidden in unstructured text sources, such as word
documents, web pages or forum entries. In order to exploit
this knowledge text mining techniques were developed that are
able to automatically extract or annotate entities, their relations
or sentiments from textual sources. Recently, a number of text
mining services that offer REST or SOAP APIs for easy con-
sumption were published. These services differ strongly in their
mining abilities and result quality and are often constructed for
speciﬁc use cases. In practice, it is often desirable to combine
results of multiple services to increase quality and functionality.
However, this result combination is difﬁcult since descriptions
of service functionalities are often rarely documented and
not standardized so that searching for speciﬁc text mining
characteristics is time consuming and complex. In this paper
we introduce a categorization of text mining services and
provide a novel description ontology for describing functional
characteristics of a text mining service. The ontology, being of
interest for practitioners as well as researchers, is completed by
application examples and descriptions that are made publicly
available. Through the ontology and the descriptions presented
in this paper the automatic use and combination of different
text mining services is enabled.
Keywords-Text Mining; Semantic Description; Service Ori-
ented Architecture.
I. INTRODUCTION
Today, more than 80 percent of business-relevant informa-
tion only exists in unstructured, mostly textual form such as
web pages, ofﬁce documents or forum entries as estimated
in [7]. Exploiting this knowledge in business intelligence
applications will be crucial for business competitiveness in
future. In order to satisfy the need for knowledge extraction
from text, a large quantity of text mining approaches have
been developed (see [10] for an overview). These support
a wide range of knowledge harvesting tasks like the clas-
siﬁcation of text documents, the recognition of entities and
relationships or the identiﬁcation of sentiments. Recently,
more and more of these text mining solutions were made
publicly available as Web - or Rest Services (e.g., Open-
Calais [23] and AlchemyAPI [17]) to simplify consumption
and integration.
Even though there are many text mining solutions avail-
able, some major problems remain unsolved. Text mining of-
ten still faces the problem of inaccuracy and incompleteness,
and therefore, limits the conﬁdence in information extracted
by text mining solutions. Moreover, most of the solutions
are developed for speciﬁc use cases and are not usable for
others.
In order to alleviate these problems, we strive for a
combination of multiple text mining services as described
in [20]. The idea is to raise the quality of text mining
by combining the strength and weaknesses of different
approaches. Unfortunately, searching for speciﬁc text mining
functionalities and combining these is cumbersome and often
leads to a great amount of manual work.
In this paper, we address the need for a comprehensive
semantic description of text mining services to simplify the
search for speciﬁc mining functionalities and therefore allow
to automate the combination of text mining services. In
particular we make the following contributions that are of
interest for practitioners as well as researchers:
• We classify existing text mining services and highlight
their similarities and differences.
• We propose a novel description ontology that can be
used to comprehensively describe text mining services.
• We present descriptions for common text mining ser-
vices and made them publicly available.
• We show that the descriptions can be used to select text
mining services based on their functionalities.
The remaining paper is structured as follows: In Section II,
we further motivate the need for combining text mining
results and introduce a system architecture that supports
automatic combination of existing services. Related work is
reviewed in Section III. To infer the information necessary
for the descriptions, we classify existing text mining services
in Section IV. The novel description ontology is introduced
in detail in Section V and complemented by application
examples in Section VI. Finally, Section VII concludes our
paper.
II. MOTIVATING TEXT MINING SERVICE COMBINATION
In order to further motivate the need for a combination
of text mining services, an example is given in Figure 1.
The ﬁgure shows an extract of a BBC news article together
with text mining results that were extracted by four different
services - in particular, OpenCalais, AlchemyAPI, FISE [12]
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 1.
Analysis of a business news by several text mining services
and Evri [5] (the news article and the text mining results
were retrieved on March 9, 2011). All of them are able to ex-
tract some entities such as companies, cities or products, but
differ in the completeness and correctness of the results and
the used annotation taxonomies. In addition, some services
extracted more enhanced information such as relationships
or overall topics and sentiments.
It is desirable to combine the results of these different
services as proposed in [20]. Figure 2 illustrates a possible
architecture of a system that is able to combine several text
mining services. The lower part depicts a number of exem-
plary services (S1-S3) offering text mining functionalities
with inconsistent interfaces and different entity taxonomies
(T1-T3). We introduce a layer of wrappers that harmonize
the individual service interfaces on the syntactical level and
are considered in-depth in future work. These wrappers
should be manually or possibly semi-automatically provided
by the community or the service provider. They are simple
services rewriting and adapting the original service answers
to a uniﬁed format in order to facilitate the reuse and
combination of the service results.
Additionally, we propose that each service functionality
is semantically described using a standardized text mining
ontology. This is needed since most services are often only
rarely documented or documented in non machine-readable
form on a website. Furthermore, available descriptions only
specify the services on a syntactical level regarding their
interfaces, their data types and bindings and their access
modalities. The semantic description can then be put into
a registry that helps to automatically ﬁnd the adequate
services for an envisioned text mining task. A text mining
combination system is able to call multiple text mining
services and combine their results.
Figure 2.
Architecture of service-oriented Text Mining
By extending the work of [20], the current paper focuses
on the semantic description of text mining services. Before
we start to introduce our work, we will give an overview on
related work and distinguish it from our contributions.
III. RELATED WORK
The ﬁrst service-oriented text mining approaches, espe-
cially in the domain of information extraction, have been
discussed by Habegger et al. [9] and Grover et al. [8].
Both approaches break down information extraction pro-
cesses into single partial operations and offer a language or
accordingly an ontology for the basic description of these
service artifacts. In contrast to our ontology, none of them
offers a semantic description capable to specify text mining
functionalities for complex services. A ﬁrst service-oriented
information extraction system that uses text mining services
is presented by Starlinger et al. [21]. It connects biomedical
text mining services having standardized interfaces and a
common taxonomy and combines their results to improve
extraction quality. An automatic identiﬁcation of services
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Service
Domain
Taxonomy
Text Mining Functionalities
NER
RE
TC
CT
KE
SA
AIIAGMT[11]
biomedical
(en:) genes
-
-
-
-
-
AlchemyAPI
generic
list
en,fr,es,de,it,pt,ru,sv;
LD, ED, QE
-
en,fr,es,de,it,
pt,ru,sv
en:LD
en,fr,es,de,it,
pt,ru,sv
en,fr,es,de,it,pt,ru,sv:
polarity; d-, e-, k-level
BeliefNetworks [1]
generic
-
-
-
en
-
-
Evri
generic
service call (types &
facets)
en; links to Evri
knowledge base
-
en
-
-
-
Extractiv [6]
generic
list
en; LD, ED
en; (QE)
en
-
-
-
FISE
generic
list (DBpedia types)
en; basic LD
planned
-
-
-
-
OpenAmplify [15]
generic
(en: proper nouns)
(en: actions)
en
-
en
en: polarity; d-level
OpenCalais
business,
ﬁnance,
generic
owl (types & attr.)
for en/ list (types &
attr.) for es,fr
en; LD, ED
es,fr
en
en: list
en: social tags -
-
PIE [22]
biomedical
(en:) protein
en: protein interactions -
-
-
-
uClassify [24]
generic
list (topic hierarchy)
-
-
en
-
-
en: polarity, mood; d-level
Table I
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING TEXT MINING SERVICES
based on their functionalities and corresponding descriptions
is completely missing in this approach.
The CLARIN project [4] has the vision to create a
research infrastructure of language resources and therefore
also touches the problem of descriptive meta data for lan-
guage services. In [14], a minimal set of meta data for
language tools is detected. In contrast to our work, the
CLARIN project mainly focuses on basic language tools
(e.g., tokenizer, POS-tagger) and the (semi-)automatic build
of chains between those tools. CLARIN does not review
complex end user services as we do and additionally does
not provide an ontology for describing the functionality of
end user services like OpenCalais or AlchemyAPI.
Different web service description languages exist to de-
scribe services regarding their functionalities, the used data
types, the protocols and the provided interfaces. The W3C
standard Web Services Description Language (WSDL) [3]
was established for the syntactic description of services.
More recent approaches [13], such as the Ontology Web
Language for Services (OWL-S), Web Service Modeling
Ontology (WSMO) and Semantic Annotations for WSDL
and XML Schema (SAWSDL) added additional semantic
descriptions in order to allow the automatic selection of ser-
vices based on their functionalities. Nevertheless, all seman-
tic descriptions need a well-deﬁned ontology for describing
the service features (even the functionality description of the
OWL-S proﬁle needs complementary ontology elements to
specify the input, output, precondition and effect properties).
As stated above, there has been no such ontology for
describing text mining services comprehensively. To the best
of our knowledge, we are the ﬁrst to approach this problem
providing an ontology for describing text mining services.
IV. CLASSIFICATION OF TEXT MINING SERVICES
We intensively studied existing text mining services with
regard to the functionalities they offer and their special
characteristics and limits. We provided a ﬁrst overview of
existing services in [20], which we extended in Table I,
focusing on the text mining speciﬁc characteristics. We
selected text mining services from different domains with
different functionalities (named entity recognition, relation-
ship extraction, categorization, concept assignment, keyword
extraction, sentiment analysis) and tried to cover the most
established one. First of all we studied the domain the ser-
vices have been designed for. We mainly discovered generic
services (i.e., not being specialized for any speciﬁc domain)
and services from the biomedical and business domain. We
further analyzed the different text mining functionalities and
identiﬁed six main types:
• Named Entity Recognition (NER) where entities are
identiﬁed and classiﬁed into predeﬁned categories (e.g.,
person, organization),
• Relation and Interaction Extraction (RE) for the iden-
tiﬁcation of relationships between two or more entities,
• Text Classiﬁcation/Categorization (TC) where cate-
gories are assigned to text documents,
• Concept Tagging (CT) for the assignment of speciﬁc
terms that are derived from the text content (the terms
do not have to be included in the text),
• Keyword Extraction (KE) where the essence of the
text is extracted through the identiﬁcation of the main
keywords of a text and
• Sentiment Analysis (SA) for the extraction of any sub-
jective information from text (e.g., polarity, attitudes,
mood).
We studied these six text mining types more exten-
sively and identiﬁed their essential properties. All types are
language-dependent and most functionalities are currently
only provided for English text input. The information ex-
traction tasks NER, RE and in parts also TC are identifying
elements of predeﬁned categories. Therefore, the service
providers generally release a taxonomy deﬁning the entities,
relations and classiﬁcation categories (by an ontology ﬁle,
a list on the service website or indirectly via some service
calls). The taxonomies differ in their semantic and syntactic
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 3.
Ontology for the description of text mining services
granularity - some are enhanced with attributes and facets,
others are only providing ﬂat basic types. Under SA, we
recapped all text mining functionalities touching subjective
information. Although some of the features could also be
classiﬁed under other text mining types like NER (as the
subjective information is extracted on entity level), we
hold that it is a text mining type on its own. For better
speciﬁcation, we differentiated between three analysis levels
- document (d), entity (e) and keyword (k) - and indicated
the exact sentiment type a service provides.
Further extraction features are offered by several services
for some text mining types. The most common feature is the
Linked Data (LD) support, where the extracted objects are
linked to existing LD sources with additional information
(e.g., a link from the person entity Barack Obama to a LD
URL characterizing him). Another feature is the disambigua-
tion of entities (ED) where detected instances are resolved
to a unique instance (e.g., IBM and IBM Corp. are resolved
to one entity). One service additionally provides a quotation
extraction (QE), where person entities are complemented by
quotations from this person found in the input text.
Based on the analysis of existing text mining services,
we conclude that a description language for text mining
services should satisfy the following requirements: describe
the domain the service is designed for (R1), indicate the
text mining type(s) provided by the service (R2) plus the
respective languages (R3), point to the ontologies used for
the predeﬁned category types (R4) and describe the special
features being available for the text mining types (R5).
Additional information on the used extraction methodology,
service charges and limitations can complete the description.
In the following we will present an expandable ontology
for the description of text mining services satisfying the
mentioned requirements.
V. THE TEXT MINING DESCRIPTION ONTOLOGY
Figure 3 presents our high level ontology for the de-
scription of text mining services. We especially focused
on the expandability and simplicity of the ontology and
modeled it with the Resource Description Framework (RDF)
Schema [2]. We chose RDF since it is easy to use and
provides sufﬁcient mechanisms to deﬁne classes, properties
and their relationships. RDF allows for easy extensibility and
re-use of existing well-deﬁned and more speciﬁc ontology
parts and also supports user service speciﬁc extensions.
In addition, it is not a problem to interlink the syntactic
service description to a description provided in RDF. Before
we explain this interlinking of classical descriptions with
our extension, we will shortly introduce the classes and
properties of our text mining description ontology.
The class TextMiningService is the entry point for a
semantic description of a text mining service and can be
used for the interlinking of the classical service description
and the text mining speciﬁc description. An instance of this
class represents a service with a well deﬁned interface that
offers some text mining functionalities. Via the property
supportsExtractionType, speciﬁc text mining functionalities
indicated by instances of the class ExtractionType are linked
to the service (R2). Several subclasses of ExtractionType
are available for the exact speciﬁcation of the text mining
tasks being provided. If a text mining service is specialized
for a certain domain (R1), this will be indicated with the
property isSpecializedFor that connects a TextMiningService
with a Concept from the Simple Knowledge Organization
System (SKOS) [25] ontology. The supported languages of
a service or a concrete text mining type (R3) are given
with the property supportsLanguage pointing to a Language
from DBPedia. Characteristics of the ExtractionType can be
speciﬁed with additional properties (e.g., hasSpecialFeature,
hasNEROntology, hasREOntology, ...). In order to indicate
special features provided by the services (R5), the class
SpecialFeature and some subclasses for concrete features are
provided by our ontology. The extraction ontology used by
a service (R4) can be indicated with instances from the class
ExtractionOntology. These instances are mainly used to link
to the existing taxonomies of the services. The methods used
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

for the extraction can optionally be speciﬁed with instances
from the class ExtractionMethod. We decided to model the
subtypes of SpecialFeature and ExtractionOntology, as well
as ExtractionMethod as classes, as we believe that they
should be further speciﬁed with extra properties in future.
VI. APPLICATION OF THE ONTOLOGY
After having explained our proposed ontology in the
previous section, we will now show how our ontology can
be applied in practice. Semantic service descriptions using
our presented ontology can for example be linked to the
WSDL [3] description of a service through Semantic An-
notations for WSDL and XML Schema (SAWSDL) [13]. In
the following, we show an exemplary semantic description
of the text mining service OpenCalais and the integration
into the syntactic WSDL description.
Figure 4 shows an extract from the annotated WSDL
ﬁle of OpenCalais (The original WSDL ﬁle can be found
at [16]). The pointer to the semantic description can be
integrated as SAWSDL modelReference into any service
model element in the WSDL description. However, as our
semantic description characterizes the service, we prefer
a linkage from the WSDL service element. Other linking
concepts between the syntactic and the semantic description
are of course possible as our semantic descriptions build
upon open standards. We extended the OpenCalais WSDL
service element in Figure 4 with a SAWSDL modelRefer-
ence pointing to a semantic description of the OpenCalais
functionalities.
Figure 4.
Extract from WSDL of OpenCalais service annotated with
SAWSDL
Listing 1 displays an extract of the semantic information
that can be found under the linked URI and all its con-
nected resources. This exemplary semantic description of the
OpenCalais service makes use of our previously introduced
ontology (notice that this is not a complete description of
all the functionalities of the OpenCalais service.).
1
@prefix
oc: <h t t p : / /www. sap . com / tm / descr / openCalais #> .
2
@prefix
tm: <h t t p : / /www. sap . com / tm / descr / ontology #> .
3
@prefix
d b p e d i a : <h t t p : / / dbpedia . org / r e s o u r c e /> .
4
5
oc:OpenCalaisService
a
tm:TextMiningService ;
6
t m : i s S p e c i a l i z e d F o r
d b p e d i a : C a t e g o r y : B u s i n e s s ;
7
t m : s u p p o r t s E x t r a c t i o n T y p e
oc:NEREnglish ,
8
. . .
9
oc:DocumentCategorization
.
10
oc:NEREnglish a
tm:NamedEntityRecognition ;
11
tm:supportsLanguage
d b p e d i a : E n g l i s h
l a n g u a g e ;
12
t m : h a s S p e c i a l F e a t u r e
oc:EntityDisambiguation ,
13
oc:LinkedData ;
14
tm:hasNEROntology
oc:OntologyEnglish
.
15
o c : E n t i t y D i s a m b i g u a t i o n
a
t m : E n t i t y D i s a m b i g u a t i o n
.
16
oc:LinkedData
a
tm:LinkedData .
17
oc:OntologyEnglish
a tm:NEROntology ;
18
n i e : u r l
h t t p : / /www. o p e n c a l a i s . com / f i l e s / owl . opencalais
−4.3a . xml
.
19
. . .
20
oc:DocumentCategorization
a
t m : T e x t C l a s s i f i c a t i o n ;
21
tm:supportsLanguage
d b p e d i a : E n g l i s h
l a n g u a g e
.
22
. . .
Listing 1.
Extract of a semantic description for the OpenCalais service in
N3 notation
We started describing a number of text mining services
with our ontology and will continuously add and extend
descriptions. The ontology as well as the descriptions ﬁles
can be found under [18]. The fake URIs have to be replaced
for usage. The text mining service combination system
makes use of the descriptions. Therefore, the describing
triples are stored in a triple store like Sesame. Adequate
services are then searched as follows.
A. Searching speciﬁc Services
As our descriptions of text mining services use RDF
triples, it is obvious to query the descriptions with the
help of SPARQL [19] a query language based on graph
patterns. We will now demonstrate how to identify and
select text mining services with speciﬁc functionalities that
are described with our ontology. The given queries are just
examples. Actual queries may be much more complex. The
ﬁrst query (Listing 2) selects text mining services for NER
on Spanish text documents where the extracted entities are
connected to Linked Data resources if possible. Figure 5
shows the corresponding query pattern for this SPARQL
query.
1 PREFIX tm:<h t t p : / /www. sap . com / tm / descr / ontology #>
2 PREFIX d b p e d i a :<h t t p : / / dbpedia . org / page />
3
4 SELECT DISTINCT ? s e r v i c e
5 WHERE {
6
? s e r v i c e
t m : s u p p o r t s E x t r a c t i o n T y p e
? type
.
7
? type
a
tm:NamedEntityRecognition
;
8
tm:supportsLanguage
dbpedia:Spanish language
;
9
t m : h a s S p e c i a l F e a t u r e
? f e a t u r e
.
10
? f e a t u r e
a
tm:LinkedData
.
11 }
Listing 2.
SPARQL query to select services providing NER with Linked
Data for Spanish text
Figure 5.
Query pattern for SPARQL query in Listing 2
Listing 3 shows another SPARQL query that selects
services capable to analyze the mood of an English text
document.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

1 PREFIX tm:<h t t p : / /www. sap . com / tm / descr / ontology #>
2 PREFIX d bp e d i a :<h t t p : / / dbpedia . org / page />
3
4 SELECT DISTINCT ? s e r v i c e
5 WHERE {
6
? s e r v i c e
t m : s u p p o r t s E x t r a c t i o n T y p e
? type
.
7
? type
a tm:MoodAnalysis
;
8
tm:supportsLanguage
d b p e d i a : E n g l i s h
l a n g u a g e
;
9
tm:hasAnalysisLevel
tm:DocumentLevel
.
10 }
Listing 3.
SPARQL query to select services providing sentiment analysis
(mood) for English text on document level
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we made a number of contributions that help
to simplify the description, search and reuse of text mining
services and their result combination. First of all, we gave an
overview on existing text mining services and classiﬁed them
according to their functionalities. We further derived a novel
description ontology for text mining services capable to
describe complex end-user services. In contrast to previous
work, we explicitly covered the real mining functionalities
into the descriptions. Auxiliary, we built on open standards
to easily connect descriptions using our ontology to already
existing descriptions and standardizations.
As starting point for further work on the selection, reuse
and combination of text mining services, we described a
number of such services and made them publicly available.
With this basis, the combination of text mining services as
proposed in [20] is enabled. Future work will have to focus
on the well-directed extension of the ontology as well as
the derivation of rules and heuristics for the combination
of the service results and the evaluation of the system.
Another research area we investigate is the matching of
service taxonomies to retrieve mappings between them and
possibly even a global taxonomy. These mappings can then
complement the service descriptions presented in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] BeliefNetworks.
http://beliefnetworks.net/bnws/, retrieved:
April, 2012.
[2] D. Brickley and R. V. Guha.
Rdf vocabulary description
language 1.0: Rdf schema. W3C Recommendation, 10, 2004.
[3] R. Chinnici, J.-J. Moreau, A. Ryman, and S. Weerawarana.
Web Services Description Language (WSDL) Version 2.0
Part 1: Core Language. Technical report, World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C), 2007.
[4] CLARIN. http://www.clarin.eu/, retrieved: August, 2012.
[5] Evri. http://www.evri.com/developer/, retrieved: July, 2012.
[6] Extractiv. http://extractiv.com/, retrieved: August, 2012.
[7] S. Grimes.
Unstructured Data and the 80 Percent Rule.
Clarabridge Bridgepoints, 3rd quarter 2008.
[8] C. Grover, H. Halpin, E. Klein, J. L. Leidner, S. Potter,
S. Riedel, S. Scrutchin, and R. Tobin. A Framework for Text
Mining Services. In AHM’04 Proc. EPSRC, 2004.
[9] B. Habegger and M. Quafafou. Web Services for Information
Extraction from the Web. In ICWS’04 Proc., page 279. IEEE
Computer Society, 2004.
[10] A. Hotho, A. N¨urnberger, and G. Paaß.
A Brief Survey
of Text Mining, volume 20, pages 19–62. Gesellschaft f¨ur
linguistische Datenverarbeitung, 2005.
[11] C.-N. Hsu, Y.-M. Chang, C.-J. Kuo, Y.-S. Lin, H.-S. Huang,
and I.-F. Chung. Integrating High Dimensional Bi-directional
Parsing Models for Gene Mention Tagging. Bioinformatics,
24:286–294, 2008.
[12] Interactive Knowledge Stack.
Furtwangen IKS Semantic
Engine.
http://wiki.iks-project.eu/index.php/FISE, retrieved:
August, 2012.
[13] M. Klusch. CASCOM - Intelligent Service Coordination in
the Semantic Web, chapter Semantic Web Service Description,
pages 41–68. Birkhuser Basel, 2008.
[14] L. Lemnitze, E. Hinrichs, and A. Witt. Language Resources,
Taxonomies and Metadata. In G. Heyer, editor, Text Mining
and Services Proc., volume XIV of Leipziger Beitr¨age zur
Informatik, pages 25–39, Leipzig, 2009.
[15] OpenAmplify. http://www.openamplify.com/, retrieved: Au-
gust, 2012.
[16] OpenCalais WSDL. http://api.opencalais.com/enlighten/?wsdl,
retrieved: August, 2012.
[17] Orchestr8.
AlchemyAPI.
http://www.alchemyapi.com/, re-
trieved: August, 2012.
[18] K. Pfeifer.
Text Mining Ontology and Descriptions.
http://areca.co/20/Text-Mining-Service-Descriptions,
retrieved: August, 2012.
[19] E. Prud’hommeaux and A. Seaborne. SPARQL Query Lan-
guage for RDF. Technical report, W3C, 2006.
[20] K. Seidler and A. Schill.
Service-Oriented Information
Extraction. In Joint EDBT/ICDT Ph.D. Workshop’11 Proc.,
pages 25–31, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.
[21] J. Starlinger, F. Leitner, A. Valencia, and U. Leser.
SOA-
Based Integration of Text Mining Services.
In SERVICES
’09 Proc., pages 99–106, Washington, DC, USA, 2009. IEEE
Computer Society.
[22] K. Sun, S.-Y. Shin, I.-H. Lee, S.-J. Kim, R. Sriram, and B.-T.
Zhang. PIE: An Online Prediction System for Protein-Protein
Interactions From Text. Nucleic Acids Research, 36:411–415,
2008.
[23] Thomson
Reuters.
The
OpenCalais
Web
Service.
http://www.opencalais.com/, retrieved: August, 2012.
[24] uClassify. http://uclassify.com/, retrieved: August, 2012.
[25] World Wide Web Consortium.
SKOS Simple Knowledge
Organization System Reference, August 2009.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

