Information Mining Over Significant Interval on Historical Data 
A Study on World Major Indexes 
 
Sim Kwan Hua  
School of Engineering, Computing & Science 
Swinburne University of Technology 
Kuching, Malaysia 
e-mail: khsim@swinburne.edu.my 
 
 
 
Abstract—Despite the popularity of financial charting software 
catalyzed by the advancement in computing technology over 
the past decade, the analysis of financial historical data 
through charting software remains at the surface of statistical 
description. Analysis of historical data presented typically on a 
price chart should be elevated further to information mining 
that could interpret the fundamental condition on the ground, 
as an important effort to support a good decision making 
process. This paper introduces a new way of interpreting 
historical financial data by calculating the mean value of the 
historical data over a significant interval, and eventually 
mining the high intensity price level. Experiment was 
conducted on historical data of six major world indexes over 
the period of ten years to assess the competency of the use of 
mean value over significant intervals in comparison to static 
interval used in conventional moving averages. The outcome of 
the experiment reveals the relevancy of the use of mean value 
over significant intervals on all the six major world indexes. 
This study institutes and demonstrates a new way of mining 
fundamental information and insight from a historical data 
set; the finding stimulates an innovative way on how data can 
be interpreted to derive information that is crucial in financial 
decision making process. 
 
Keywords-Data Analysis; Time Series Analysis; Data 
Mining; Statistical Analysis; Technical Analysis  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Over the past one decade, financial charting software has 
been a primary tool used in analyzing exchange markets 
such as stocks, futures, commodity and foreign currency 
exchanges. It is reported that more than 75% of 
professionals 
in 
the 
exchange 
markets 
of 
various 
instruments rely on financial charts at some points in 
making their trading decisions [1]. Therefore, mining the 
information required from the price chart forms part of the 
critical components in the decision making process of 
financial market participants. 
The advancement of computing and software technology 
has made financial charting software widely accessible to 
institution and individual retailers; some of financial 
software providers include MetaTrader from MetaQuates, 
Routers MetaStock, TD Ameritrade, Thinkorswin from 
Bloomberg and Lauchpad & Charts from TradeStation. It is 
a very common practice nowadays for brokerage firms and 
investment banks to integrate real-time financial charting 
components into their trading software for use by their 
dealers and clients. 
Furthermore, massive volatility in the more recent year in 
most of the financial instruments worldwide has quite a 
tremendous impact not only on economics but also on both 
social and political aspects. It provokes a major challenge 
confronting everyone ranging from investors, speculators, 
businesses, and even to the level of governmental policy 
makers. As a matter of fact, financial markets are affected by 
many highly interrelated variables such as economics, 
political and even psychological factors in a very complex 
manner, making financial time series one of the most 
difficult analyses among all other time series analysis [2]. 
Market participants worldwide have always shown keen 
interest trying to predict the future of the overall market 
movement in order to maximize their returns, at the same 
time hedging and mitigating their risks again potential 
pitfalls. Real-time charts provided by charting software 
showing the latest price change has become the primary tools 
in helping them in their day to day decision making process. 
Nevertheless, price chart is only a graphical representation of 
historical data from the past. Thus, information mining from 
the price chart becomes extremely vital to conclude a reliable 
decision which is in alignment with the future price 
movement. 
Numerous studies have been attempted trying to analyze 
the financial markets by using various time series analysis 
techniques, alongside with few other popular time series 
models and stochastic models used in signal processing. 
Every single data point on a price chart is a successful 
transaction recorded at certain point in time, and it can be 
regarded as a signal reflecting the equilibrium states of all 
the correlated factors, may it be fundamental, technical or 
even emotional factor [3]. 
Nevertheless, most of the approaches introduced so far 
utilize historical data by performing learning or training on 
them in order to identify certain patterns, or to compute 
probabilities, or even optimizations which involve mostly the 
use of Artificial Intelligent techniques. All these are based on 
the assumption that the history will repeat itself. But, the 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

existence of randomness element in financial market claimed 
by Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) is undoubtedly 
hampering the performance of those approaches.  
To date, very little effort has been made to mine 
information over a selected interval on the price chart. In 
most cases, the whole set of historical data will be used or 
fed into a model without any effort of information mining to 
pre-process the data. Even in technical analysis, which is 
starting to gain some grounds, majority of the technical 
indicators remain as a statistical summary of a set of data 
points in the past. 
This paper aims to mine the underlying transaction 
information from historical data set of a price chart by 
identifying significant interval. In other words, the amount of 
data in the past is not the sole determinant in order to mine 
the required information. Hence, it does not operate on the 
assumption that history will repeat itself, and essentially 
eliminating the concern of random element in financial 
market.  
The experiment and testing are done on six major world 
indexes on data over the past twelve years, starting from year 
2000, and the results will be analyzed and discussed. 
This paper begins with Section I as an introduction; 
Section II concerns the background; Section III elaborates 
on the mean over significant interval approach; Section IV 
describes the experiment conducted; at the same time 
discusses analytical results. Section VI presents the 
conclusion. 
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Generally, there are three schools of thought in financial 
market analysis; they are generally known as Efficient 
Market Hypothesis (EMI), fundamental analysis and 
technical analysis. 
Efficient Market Hypothesis believes that no one can 
achieve above average advantages based on any historical 
and present data. This is also backed by another prominent, 
Random Walk Hypothesis, which states that prices of 
financial instruments wander in a purely random way. 
Likewise, Efficient Market Hypothesis advocates that all 
available information is fully reflected on the price itself [4]. 
Both theories dictate that the previous change in the value of 
a variable, such as price, is unrelated to future or past 
changes. As a result, statistical data collection implicitly 
defines each data point as independent. Based on such 
contextual assumptions, the data can appear random when 
the data points are treated as discrete events.  However, S. 
Taylor (1986), Russell and Torbey (2008) provide 
compelling evidence to reject both of these theories [5]. 
Fundamental analysis from the second school of thought 
studies the underlying intrinsic value of a financial 
instrument by analyzing fundamental factors such as 
economics, financial, accounting and business environments, 
and their effects on its future value. Though fundamental 
analysis possesses the longest and profound history in the 
world of financial analysis, it is not meant for studying the 
volatility and fluctuation of prices around the underlying 
intrinsic value of a financial instrument. The huge volatility 
in financial and commodity markets lately has denoted the 
inadequacy of fundamental analysis to attest those huge 
fluctuations. 
The third school of thought is technical analysis with 
practitioners who analyze primarily upon charts that based 
solely on market-delivered data such as price and volume. 
They perform statistical study rather than examine the 
economics fundamentally driven information in analyzing a 
financial instrument. Consequently, technical analysis does 
not receive sufficient level of scrutiny from academic 
researchers. As such, it served more as a secondary tool in 
financial market analysis [6]. 
Recently, researchers have introduced many different 
approaches in various fields of study as an effort to derive 
more useful information from historical data, which may 
include both fundamental data and technical data in order to 
analyze the financial markets.  
Together with some other Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
techniques, Artificial Neural Network (ANN) has been one 
of the popular models for predicting financial markets. Cao 
Qing, et al. [7] and R. M. Rahman, et al. [8] in their 
respective studies, had used the neural networks to predict 
the future movements of various financial instruments. The 
results showed that the performance of ANN technique in 
forecasting financial instruments was very convincing and 
outperformed conventional linear models. 
Manish Kumar and Thenmozhi M [9] endeavored to the 
use of Support Vector Machines (SVM) on S&P CNX 
NIFY; their result showed that SVM outperforms neural 
networks, discriminate analysis and logic model used in the 
study. Besides, stochastic model is another prevalent 
preference; the work of B. Kaushik [10] specified a two-state 
Markov Chain Model for discredited returns and proposed a 
measure for efficiency by using the modulus of the second 
highest Eigen value of the transition matrix and relates it to 
the speed of convergence of the Markov chain. In a more 
recent study, S. Vasanthi, et al. [11] explored the capability 
of Markov Chain Analysis in predicting indexes of emerging 
markets, and the result showed that Markov model 
outperforms the conventional moving averages in technical 
analysis. 
Apparently, models were built from various areas of 
studies over the years by processing a wide range of both 
fundamental and technical financial data in mining useful 
information to aid in the decision making process of 
financial market participants [3]. So far, little attention has 
been paid to pre-process the data before feeding the data into 
the model for analysis. 
In technical analysis, models have been developed 
mainly based on historical price data, statistical calculation 
such as mean, standard deviation and the rate of change will 
be performed to compute the statistical description required 
to form an understanding of the latest state of a given data 
set. Coherently, different data set will derive different 
statistical description; even selecting two different intervals 
from the same data set will produce two very different 
statistical descriptions. 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Typically, statistical analysis will be represented 
graphically through charting software in the form of 
technical indicators such as Moving Average, Relative 
Strength 
Index, 
Stochastic 
and 
Moving 
Average 
Convergence Divergence. Analysis is normally done by 
selecting a technical indicator to be applied on a set of 
historical data plotted on a price chart. 
Basically, a price chart is composed from price feed 
supplied by the exchange market, where vertical axis 
represents the price level and horizontal axis states the time 
when the transaction is made. In other words, price chart is 
just a graphical representation of historical data plotted on a 
chart. Applying a statistical analysis such as an n-period 
Moving Average on a chart simply insinuates the deriving of 
mean value from the last n data points [12]. The average or 
mean value of a set of price data points derived in the past 
has very little provision on the future value, and to the 
direction of the new price value in the future.  
This is also supported by Efficient Market Hypothesis 
and Random Walk Theory which believe that price is a 
discrete event, thus any information derived from past data, 
including the mean value provides no influential trace on the 
possible value of price in the future. 
Instead of pondering around the typical vindication of 
statistical description, this study aims at mining market 
information from the mean values by focusing on the 
selection of appropriate intervals used in calculating mean 
value. Fundamental information can be mined from mean 
value if the interpretation is based on significant intervals 
from the highest or the lowest price level recorded on a price 
chart. Since moving average is the main way of obtaining 
mean value in financial charting, the investigation will 
therefore, propagate from Moving Averages in technical 
analysis. 
 
III. 
INTERVAL OF MOVING AVERAGES 
In statistics, moving average is a type of finite impulse 
response filter used to analyze a set of data points by creating 
a series of averages of different subsets of the full data set 
[12]. 
Moving average smoothes a data series over the 
fluctuation for a specified time period to delineate and spot 
the overall trend of the past data. In financial series analysis, 
moving average is defined as the average (mean) price of an 
instrument over a specified time period.  
Given a sequence
, an n-moving average is a new 
sequence  
defined from the ai by taking the average 
of subsequences of n term. 
 
 
 
                                     (1) 
In simple terms, it is calculated by adding the instrument 
prices for the most recent n data points and then dividing by 
n [12]. 
Over the years, research efforts have been directed to 
improve analytical power of moving averages through the 
introduction of various types of moving averages, such as 
exponential moving average, weighted moving average, 
accumulative moving average, triangular weighting, double 
smoothing, triple exponential moving average (TEMA), 
geometric 
moving 
average 
and 
many 
more 
[13]. 
Nonetheless, three most commonly used moving averages 
are simple moving average, exponential moving average and 
weighted moving average [14].  
Exponential moving average (EMA) is a type of infinite 
impulse response filter that applies weighting factors which 
decreases exponentially. The EMA for a series Y is 
calculated recursively with: 
 
  
 
      (2) 
 
Where the coefficient represents the degree of weighting 
decrease, it may be expressed in terms of N interval, where α 
= 2/(N+1). Yt is the observation at a time period t and St is 
the value of the EMA at any time period t [13].  
A weighted moving average is any average that has 
multiplying factors to give different weights to data at 
different positions in the sample window; it is expressed in 
the following general form: 
 
            (3) 
 
This gives the weighted moving average at time t as the 
average of the previous n prices (P), each with its own 
weighting factor wt [13]. 
The introduction of a variety of moving average serves as 
a strong evidence of attempts to improve the meagerness of 
moving average via mathematical approaches. However, 
besides optimization techniques to find the most optimal 
interval, literally no other attempt has been made on the 
selection of intervals for calculating moving average. 
As price chart records data points of prices transacted 
over a specific period of time, calculating the mean of the 
data points signifies the average transaction price over that 
period of time, which brings forth a very important 
information; the average overall price level of all the 
participants who involved in the transaction during that 
interval. 
Hence, the selected mean interval is the key in mining 
useful mean or average transaction price. If the interval used 
to calculate mean from the highest or lowest price onward, 
then the portfolio condition of one who has traded during 
that interval can be inferred easily. In other words, a useful 
average transaction price level can be mined by selecting a 
significant interval which starts from a highest or lowest 
price level. 
As the overall average position over a significant interval 
can be known, decision to be made by majority of the market 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

participants can then be anticipated. According to 
decomposition effect of Prospect Theory, intensity of 
reactions and behaviors of market participants will mount 
when the new price level approaches their overall average 
position, which unquestionably will affect the position of 
their portfolios [15]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Mean over significant interval. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Defining highest and lowest point. 
 
As illustrated in Figure 1, since the mean can be 
interpreted as the average transaction level over a specific 
interval, it is critical to mine the mean for the interval from 
T1 onward, interval from T1 onward can be categorized as 
significant interval because the highest price is recorded at 
T1. For that reason, all the participants who entered after T1 
will have a negative impact on their portfolios. The mean 
transaction level for this group of participants is collective at 
price P1 when time reaches T2. In other words, if the price at 
T2 were to reach P1, the portfolios of this group of 
participants will turn from negative to positive, allowing 
them to reach their breakeven point, and high intensity of 
reaction can be anticipated in the decision making process of 
this particular group of people.  
However, prices of financial instruments especially those 
with high liquidity will fluctuate at various degrees of 
magnitude, causing the highest and lowest price to be very 
subjective when it comes to identifying significant interval as 
time moves on. Thus, it is necessary and imperative to 
exercise objectivity in identifying the highest and lowest 
price. 
Therefore, a significant interval used in this study is 
defined as the duration of movement of price exceeding one 
standard deviation away from the 50-period mean, which 
denotes a high intensity of consensus among market 
participants has been reached on the forming of a trend [16]. 
As illustrated in Figure 2, duration from T3 onward will not 
be considered as a significant interval because price at T4 is 
less than 1 standard deviation away below 50-period mean. 
On the other hand, interval from T5 onward is considered as 
a significant interval after T6, where price movement has 
exceeded one standard deviation away at T6. So, the mean 
value over a significant interval should be calculated after 
T6, and this mean value carries vital information on the 
overall position of market participants. It is extremely useful 
in making a favorable decision when price approaches that 
mean value at any point of time after T6. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIEMENT AND EVALUATION 
The experiment was conducted to observe the reaction of 
price when it approaches the mean value over a significant 
interval. This experiment was done on six major world 
indexes over a period of twelve years starting from 2000 to 
the end of 2011. These major world indexes include Dow 
Jones Industrial Average (DJI), Deutscher Aktien-Index 
(DAX), CAC40, FTSE100, Hang Seng Index (HSI) and 
Nikkei225. 
The experiment data used is the daily data of those six 
major world indexes, downloaded from Yahoo Finance and 
the experiment was carried up by using Meta Stock’s system 
tester.   
The evaluation was performed by comparing the reaction 
of price between various conventional moving averages with 
typical static intervals and mean value derived over 
significant intervals dynamically. 
Conventional 
static 
intervals used for comparison in this experiment range from 
10-period to 200-period moving average. 
     In order to differentiate between the normal price 
fluctuation and decent price reaction upon approaching high 
intensity price level, the average daily range of all the 
indexes needs to be computed. This is to identify and 
estimate the normal daily range of price fluctuation for all 
the six major indexes, so that the abnormal price fluctuation 
can be classified. 
      Since the historical data used in this experiment is the 
daily end-of-day data, the average daily range of all six 
major indexes over twelve years testing period was 
calculated and summarized in the following table: 
 
 
 
 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

TABLE I.  
AVERAGE DAILY RANGE 
 
 
It is shown in Table I that the averages of daily range for 
all the indexes studied are logged within range of 1.52% to 
2.35%. This implies that on average, most indexes have a 
normal daily fluctuation of within approximately two percent 
of the index itself. 
Consequently, in this experiment, a valid price reaction 
toward high intensity price level is defined as a price reversal 
into opposite direction for more than five percent from the 
mean value. It is set to be at least twice of the normal daily 
fluctuation range, so that the validity of the price reaction 
can be attested, hence minimizing the possibility that the 
price reaction is caused by normal a daily fluctuation. 
Thus, once the new price data reaches the mean value, a 
reaction will be captured and recorded if the price reacted or 
bounced into opposite direction for more than five percent. 
However, it will be recorded as no reaction if the new 
price level continues to move in its preceding direction for 
more than two percent after hitting a mean value. Likewise, 
the two percent buffer is to allow the normal daily 
fluctuation of the indexes. 
Simulations were run on twelve years historical data of 
the six major world indexes individually, and evaluations on 
the price reaction toward mean value of significant interval 
along with conventional static moving averages were 
recorded. Correspondingly, the observation and evaluation of 
price reaction during the simulation were done for both 
upward and downward movements. 
The outcomes obtained from the experiments are 
presented in the following tables: 
 
TABLE II.  
UPWARD MOVEMENT 
 
 
 
 
TABLE III.  
DOWNWARD MOVEMENT 
 
 
The result in Table II exhibits that in an upward 
movement, there is a probability of approximately 30% for 
price to bounce into opposite direction in response to the 
moving averages with static intervals ranging from 10 
periods to 200 periods. The best probability recorded among 
static interval moving averages is 44% from a 150-period 
moving average on HSI, while the lowest probability deeps 
as low as 12.50% from a 200-period moving average on DJI. 
Notably, the mean from significant intervals yields a 
substantially higher probability of well above 50%; indeed it 
ranges from 55.13% to 60.87% across all the six major 
indexes evaluated in this experiment. 
Similarly, Table III presents the outcome for downward 
price movement, and the result obtained is very consistent 
with the result attained from the upward price movement in 
Table II. All the conventional moving averages with static 
intervals have also recorded a probability of around 30%. 
Again, mean over significant intervals has achieved a 
probability of well above 50%. Moreover, the highest 
probability for mean over significant intervals in a downward 
movement reached as high as 68.29% on DJI. 
A promising reaction of price toward mean value over 
significant intervals has been observed on all the six major 
world indexes over the twelve years testing period, which 
obviously cover different phrases of market condition. 
Conversely, such price reaction fails to be observed on any 
of the conventional moving averages with static intervals. 
Clearly, the mean value over significant intervals has the 
capability to mine a high intensity price level that causes 
noticeable price reaction. 
In summary, the results reveal that the mean value over 
significant intervals has absolute higher probability of 
getting the price to bounce into opposite direction compared 
to all the conventional static intervals of moving averages. 
The obvious differences signify that information mining 
from calculating mean of significant intervals deserve a 
serious attention. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This study explored a new dimension of using technical 
analysis to mine information that represents the underlying 
condition, and not just based purely on statistical 
description. It is believed that the mean calculated from a 
Index 
CAC 
FTSE 
HSI 
NIKKEI 
DJI 
DAX 
Average 
Daily 
Range (%) 
1.78 
1.63 
1.53 
1.52 
2.35 
1.99 
Interval 
CAC 
FTSE 
HSI 
NIKKEI 
DJI 
DAX 
MA10 
30.06% 
31.68% 
28.85% 
30.49% 
34.65% 
31.01% 
MA25 
33.67% 
30.88% 
34.44% 
25.49% 
36.71% 
29.69% 
MA50 
28.95% 
28.00% 
28.57% 
28.57% 
32.35% 
27.54% 
MA100 
30.43% 
25.81% 
36.11% 
27.91% 
24.00% 
26.83% 
MA150 
30.00% 
34.78% 
44.00% 
25.93% 
20.51% 
38.71% 
MA200 
20.83% 
30.00% 
35.00% 
22.22% 
12.50% 
42.86% 
Significant 
Interval 
58.06% 
56.00% 
60.87% 
61.25% 
55.56% 
55.13% 
Interval 
CAC 
FTSE 
HSI 
NIKKEI 
DJI 
DAX 
MA10 
27.47% 
30.28% 
30.72% 
33.54% 
31.72% 
27.34% 
MA25 
27.36% 
25.00% 
24.00% 
39.39% 
27.27% 
28.81% 
MA50 
30.67% 
33.33% 
23.53% 
30.00% 
26.67% 
27.63% 
MA100 
30.95% 
34.48% 
25.64% 
37.14% 
36.36% 
27.66% 
MA150 
32.14% 
33.33% 
26.09% 
45.83% 
40.00% 
21.21% 
MA200 
42.86% 
42.11% 
27.27% 
30.43% 
42.42% 
11.11% 
Significant 
Interval 
61.29% 
55.93% 
65.91% 
59.26% 
68.29% 
59.38% 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

significant high or low can be interpreted as a high intensity 
average price level of majority of the market participants. 
The experiments and preliminary results suggest that mean 
over significant intervals demonstrate a very promising 
accomplishment compared to the other conventional moving 
averages with static intervals. This has also initiated a new 
epoch of how technical analysis can be interpreted to mine 
information from a price chart, and to elevate the 
performance and superiority of charting software in financial 
market analysis. Last but not least, future research should 
explore the possibility of extending this concept of mining 
fundamental information right from price chart to other 
technical indicators, with an expectation for more precise 
information mining in financial decision making.   
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Gehrig and L. Menkhoff, “Extended Evidence on The Use of 
Technical Analysis in Foreign Exchange”, International Journal of 
Finance & Economics, Vol 11, Issue 4, 2006, pp. 327-338. 
[2] G. Boetticher, “Teaching Financial Data Mining using Stocks and 
Futures Contracts”, Journal of Systemic, Cybernetics and Informatics, 
Vol 3, no 3,  2006, pp. 26-32. 
[3] J. V. Hansen,  J.B. McDonald, and  R. D. Nelson. “Some Evidence of 
Forecasting Time-series with Support Vector machines”, Journal of 
Operational Research society,  vol. 57, no.9, 2006, pp. 0153-1063. 
[4] M. G. Kendall and H. Bradford, “The Analysis of Economic Time-
Series- Part1: Prices”. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 116(1), 
1953, pp. 11-34. 
[5] W. M. Martin, “Technical Anaysis: The interface of Retional and 
Irrational Decision Making” Business Review, Cambrige, 11. 2, 
2008, pp. 48-54. 
[6] K. P. Hanley, “Scientific Frontiers and Technical Analysis”, Journal 
of Technical Analysis, vol. 64, 2006, pp. 20-33. 
[7] Q. Cao, K. B. Leggio, and Schniederjans, “A Comparison between 
Fama and French’s model and Artificial Neural Networks in 
Predicting the Chinese Stock Market”, Computer and Operations 
Research 32, 2005, pp. 2499-2512. 
[8] R. M. Rahman, R. K. Thulsiram, and P. T. Thulasiraman, 
“Performance Analysis of Sequential and Parallel Neural Network 
Algorithm for Stock Price Forecasting”, International Journal of Grid 
and High Performance Computing, 3(1), 2011, pp. 45-68. 
[9] K. Manish and M. Thenmozhi, “Predictability and Trading Efficiency 
of S&P CNX Nifty Index Returns Using Support Vector Machines 
and Random Forest Regression”, Journal of Academy of Business 
and Economics, Vol.7(1), 2007, pp. 15-23. 
[10] B. Kaushik, “A Measure of Relative Effieciency of Financial Markets 
from Eigen value based Mobility Indices”, Finance India, Vol.XVI, 
No.4, 2002, pp. 1419-1425. 
[11] S. Vasanthi, M. V. Subha, and Thirupparkadal Nambi, “An Empirical 
Study on Stock Index Trend Prediction using Markov Chain 
Analysis”, Journal of Banking Financial Services and Insurance 
Research, Vol 1, 2011, pp. 72-91. 
[12] M. F. Triola, “Essientials of Statistics, 4th Edition”, Addison-Wesley, 
Longman Inc, 2011, pp. 112-126. 
[13] P. J. Kaufman, “Trading Systems and Methods”, John Wiley & sons, 
1998, pp. 66-88. 
[14] L. Stevens, “Essential Technical Analysis: Tools and Technique to 
Spot Market Trend”, John Wiley and Sons, 2002, pp. 218-238. 
[15] M. Massa and N. W. Geotzmann, “Disposition Matters: Volume, 
Volatility and Price Impact of a Behavioral Bias”, Yale ICF Working 
Paper, No. 03-01, 2003.  
[16] K. H. Sim, “Recognizing the Formatioin of Trend: A standard 
Deviation Approach”, Proceeding of 4th International Conference of 
Interation Sciences: IT, Human and Digital Content”, IEEE press, 
2011, pp. 136-142. 
 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

