Link Analysis among Sightseeing Spots based on Geo-Image Analysis
–Towards Majority-based Route Recommendation in Sightseeing–
Kohei Tashiro∗, Atsushi Shimada†, Hajime Nagahara‡ and Rin-ichiro Taniguchi‡
∗Graduate School of Information Science and Electrical Engineering Kyushu University Fukuoka, Japan
Email: tashiro@limu.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp
†Faculty of Arts and Science Kyushu University Fukuoka, Japan
Email: atsushi@limu.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp
‡Faculty of Information Science and Electrical Engineering Kyushu University Fukuoka, Japan
Email: nagahara, rin@limu.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In recent years, photo sharing sites such as Flickr,
Picasa and others have become popular. These sites are open
to public and many photographers upload their photos to share
them with family, friends and people in the world. Each photo has
several types of metadata including date, time, tags, geo-locations
and others, which are automatically produced by a camera or
manually provided by the owner. Researchers are interested in
such a large-scale image database and use it for image analysis,
image annotation, scene understanding and other purposes. Our
research focuses on sightseeing images. Analysis of these images
shows not only famous sightseeing spots but also links between
several sightseeing spots, i.e., popular sightseeing routes. We
extract such information through analysis of image metadata.
Furthermore, we characterize the sightseeing spots by link type.
We developed application software for smartphones in which
recommendation information based on the above analyses are
displayed. We performed several ﬁeld tests of real scenes, ﬁnding
that the recommendation information is useful to travelers.
Keywords–user-generated contents; big data analysis; sightsee-
ing spot; sightseeing links; characteristic analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
There are many kinds of User-Generated Contents (UGCs)
on the web, such as Twitter, Facebook, Picasa [1], Flickr [2],
YouTube,and WiKi. UGCs provide an opportunity to share our
daily activities with family, friends and/or people in the world.
In recent years, many researchers have been attracted to UGCs.
They wish to create new social value through analysis of the
great number and types of people’s activities.
Our research focused on the UGC Flickr, which has a
large image database, for analyzing activities in sightseeing.
Many people upload photos taken during sightseeing, on which
they put text labels. Moreover, each photo has geo-location
information regarding where the photo was taken. We used
such“ tagged images ”for analysis of sightseeing activities.
Among these images, our method ﬁnds sightseeing spots and
link strength. Characteristics of each location are classiﬁed into
four types. The analyzed information is very useful for route
recommendation, navigation systems and others. We developed
an application available to Android smartphones, and used it
for ﬁeld testing in the city of Nagasaki, Japan. In this paper, we
present the potential of the large image database for application
to the sightseeing recommendation system.
II.
RELATED WORK
There are several research works regarding recommenda-
tion systems for sightseeing. Zheng, Zhang, Xie and Ma [3]
estimated sightseeing routes from GPS logs. In addition, they
determined sightseeing spots of interest to many people. The
advantage of their approach is exact route estimation using
GPS. However, existing GPS datasets are not as large as image
datasets on the web, so there is difﬁculty in performing large-
scale analysis.
Cao et al. [4] proposed a recommendation system for
sightseeing spots at global scale. Their system receives a
keyword query from a user. Then, some images related to the
keyword are selected. Finally, the system recommends certain
images as candidate sightseeing spots. Arase, Xie, Hara and
Nishio [5] analyzed sightseeing behavior from pictures taken
by tourists. These approaches focused on a relatively large
area.
In contrast, our approach focuses on city or town areas
to ascertain the behavior of tourists more precisely. We use
photographer information, photo time and location information
from the metadata. We also analyze characteristics of each
sightseeing spot and relative strength (see explanation below)
between spots, and assist route choices. We do not determine
a sightseeing route solely to recommend it. Instead, we rec-
ommend consecutive sightseeing spots from the place where a
tourist stays, by analyzing spots with strong connection to the
location of that stay.
III.
OVERVIEW OF THE PROPOSED IDEA
Fig. 1 shows an overview of the processing ﬂow. First, a
large number of geo-tagged images are collected from Flickr
(Step 1). The images are divided into rough groups in terms
of city or town levels. Second, geo-clusters are made from the
images in each group (Step 2). We regard each geo-cluster as
a sightseeing spot. Third, the number of people who moved
from one spot to another is counted within all combinations
of spots (Step 3). This number is used for calculating the
strength of a link between two sightseeing spots. Furthermore,
the sightseeing route of an individual is assessed by referring
to the owner’s ID and timestamp of each geo-tagged image.
Finally, characteristics of each spot are investigated according
to the strength of inﬂow and outﬂow links (Step 4).
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 1: Flow of the proposed method
IV.
LINK AND CHARACTERISTIC ANALYSIS
A. Dataset Property
Flickr provides not only a large image dataset but also
attributes called“Exif”. For example, representative attributes
are owner ID, geolocation (latitude and longitude), timestamp,
and others. These items were the most important information
in our research. Therefore, we collected images including this
information.
B. Discovery of Sightseeing Spots
Sightseeing spots are discovered by clustering the collected
images. The geolocation of each image is investigated to
construct geo-clusters. We cluster the geolocation in using
the nearest neighbor method. This is because the number of
sightseeing spots is unknown. We continue clustering until the
closest distance is greater than a threshold. Although image
composition should be investigated to generate more accurate
clusters, based on recent research it is difﬁcult to identify
an object among images. This is why we used geolocation
only for generating geo-clusters. The latter are regarded as
sightseeing spots.
C. Link Strength Estimation
We represent a directed link between two sightseeing spots
by Li,j, where i and j indicate individual sightseeing spots.
Li,j and Lj,i are distinguished to consider the direction from
i to j and j to i, respectively. Li,j is determined by the owner
ID and timestamp of the image. For instance, if two images
are taken by the same owner at sightseeing spots i and j and
the timestamp of the image at i is followed by the one at j,
we establish a directed link between Li,j.
The strength of the directed link Li,j is deﬁned by M(Li,j)
and is calculated by counting the number of people who
moved from i to j. A larger value of M(Li,j) indicates
strong connection between the two sightseeing spots, i.e., many
people tend to visit these spots consecutively.
D. Characteristic Analysis
We analyze characteristics of each sightseeing spot based
on the directed links explained above. First, the number of
directed links is summed. With consideration of link direction,
we sum two types of links. One is inﬂow, which denotes all
links connected from any spot to spot j. The other is outﬂow,
or links ﬂowing out from spot j. The calculation is done as
follows.
Sin(j) =
∑
i∈I
M(Li,j)
(1)
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 2: Estimated spots and links in Kyoto
Sout(j) =
∑
i∈O
M(Li,j)
(2)
, where Sin(j) and Sout(j) are inﬂow and outﬂow scores of
spot j, respectively.I is a set of inﬂow links from any spot i
to the focused j, and O is a set of outﬂow links from spot j
to any other spot.
Next, we classify a characteristic of each spot into four
types, based on Sin(j) and Sout(j) ”
Route Type
A spot whose Sout(j)/Sin(j) ≈ 1 and Sin is a
small value, with few inﬂows and few outﬂows.
Convergence Type
A spot whose Sout(j)/Sin(j) ≪ 1, with many
inﬂows and few outﬂows.
Divergence Type
A spot whose Sout(j)/Sin(j) ≫ 1, with few
inﬂows and many outﬂows.
Hub Type
A spot whose Sout(j)/Sin(j)
≈
1 and Sin
is a large value, with many inﬂows and many
outﬂows.
V.
EXPERIMENT
A. Outline
We investigated the effectiveness of the proposed method
in three situations. Two focused on sightseeing in the cities
of Kyoto and Nagasaki in Japan, The other one focused on
people’s activities in an amusement park (Tokyo Disney Resort
[6]). We collected 16,210 images of Kyoto taken by 934
owners, 10,144 images of Nagasaki by 209 owners, and 16,250
images of the amusement park by 240 owners.
B. Estimated Spots and Links
There were 33 estimated spots and 82 links in Kyoto,
whose strengths M(Li,j) ≥ 2 are shown in Fig. 2. Thick lines
Figure 3: Estimated spots and links in Nagasaki
Figure 4: Estimated spots and links in amusement park
denote stronger links. Thirty-three sightseeing spots and 111
links were discovered in Nagasaki, as shown in Fig. 3. Twenty-
eight spots and 91 links were discovered in the amusement
park, as shown in Fig. 4. We found that most estimated spots
were at famous sightseeing places. We discuss details of the
results in the following subsection.
C. Estimated Type of Sightseeing Spots
We analyzed characteristics of estimated sightseeing spots
in the two cities and amusement park. Given the page limita-
tion, we show only results for Kyoto. Representative results of
each type are shown in Table I and Fig. 5. These results are
discussed in the next subsection.
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 5: Estimated type of sightseeing spots
TABLE I: Characteristics of sightseeing spots in Kyoto
Type
In
Out
O/I
Sightseeing spot
Route
1
1
1
Nishi Hongan-ji
Convergence
3
0
0
Kinpuku-ji
Divergence
2
4
2
Yoshida Shrine
Hub
8
7
0.875
Demachi Bridge
D. Discussion
1) Discussion of experimental results: We now address one
of the results shown in Fig. 6. We put famous sightseeing
spots on a map and found that the estimated spots nearly
matched actual locations. A strong link was assessed between
Nijo Castle and Kyoto Gosho. These spots are close, and some
magazines introduce them as recommended spots in their area.
This is why many people moved between the two spots. A
strong link was also established between Demachi Bridge and
Shimogamo Shrine. In the festival season, many people walk
around these spots in Kyoto. The spot of Demachi Bridge was
determined as a hub type, as shown in Fig. 4. There are bus
stops and a subway station around this bridge, so this location
is often used for connection between several sightseeing spots.
The estimated results reﬂect such actual situations. Also, we
address another one of the results shown in Fig. 7. A strong
link was assessed between Dejima and Shian Bridge. It is
possible to access by one tram. Thus, these spots likely to
be visited together. The estimated results reﬂect such actual
situations.
On the other hand, some estimated spots did not correspond
to any famous places. Some are failure cases caused by images
in the dataset with no relation to sightseeing. If we introduce
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

image processing for ﬁltering out such negative samples, this
kind of problem will be reduced. Other cases are“secret”spots
found by tourists. Such information is not listed in sightseeing
magazines. The proposed method therefore has great potential
to mine such latent spots.
Figure 6: Strong links between sightseeing spots in Kyoto
Figure 7: Strong links between sightseeing spots in Nagasaki
2) Comparison with Other Methods: Here, we compare the
related methods with ours. In most research recommending
sightseeing information to tourists, strength of relationship
between sightseeing spots is not taken into account. In our
method, we use this strength, thereby providing more detailed
information for tourists.
Okuyama and Yanai [7] recommended sightseeing routes
to tourists using images with metadata. In their research,
the presence of relationships among sightseeing spots was
considered, but not their strength. With only presence, it is
impossible to prioritize selected sightseeing spots. When we
consider the selection of one spot from multiple candidates,
our method is superior because it is possible to rank by a
clear element of strength of relationship.
Zheng, Zhang, Xie and Ma [3] recommended sightseeing
routes using strength of relationship among sightseeing spots
in addition our method. However, their method differs from
ours because they uniquely determined sightseeing routes.
Furthermore, this method has a problem in that it may propose
sightseeing spots in which tourists are not interested for part
of the route. An absence of choice causes this problem. In
contrast, we recommend multiple sequential sightseeing spots
from the location where a tourist stays, by analyzing spots
with strong connection to the stay location. Thus, tourists
can select among candidates in which they are interested. As
mentioned above, existing GPS datasets are not as common
as image datasets on the web, making large-scale analysis
difﬁcult. Therefore, when we consider the variety of route
selection and amount of data, our method is superior to that
of Zheng, Zhang, Xie and Ma.
Lu [8] also recommended sightseeing routes using strength
of relationship among sightseeing spots. They suggest a rec-
ommend route based on staying time of each tourist. This idea
considers each tourist’s characteristics in terms of staying time,
but the recommended route does not always meet the demand
of the tourist since it is not easy to make a plan of staying
time in advance. On the other hand, our proposed approach can
suggest several candidates of recommended routes for decision
making.
E. Field Test
We developed a prototype route recommendation appli-
cation that works on smartphones. The application is now
available on the Android 4.X OS with a GPS sensor. A smart-
phone acquires location information (latitude and longitude)
via the GPS, and then the location is sent to the server.
The server retrieves several routes close to the current user
location. Finally, the smartphone receives the route information
and shows it as recommended routes on the display (Fig. 8).
The application shows several arrows to suggest the next
sightseeing spots from the current location. Thicker arrows
indicate strong links (i.e., a strongly recommended place based
on the analysis).
We conducted a ﬁeld test in Nagasaki. About fourty people
joined the experiment. The application was installed on their
smartphones, and the people enjoyed sightseeing in Nagasaki.
Note that the displayed arrows are just recommendations, and
a user need not follow them.
We conducted questionnaires before and after the exper-
iment. In the pre-questionnaire, we asked the subjects two
questions:
Q1
Have you ever enjoyed sightseeing in Nagasaki?
Q2
Have you already planned where to go during this
sightseeing?
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 8: Application screen
TABLE II: Results of a questionnaire
Group
Q1
Q2
Ratio
Type 1
Yes
Yes
30%
Type 2
Yes
No
54%
Type 3
No
Yes
13%
Type 4
No
No
13%
We made four groups according to their answers, as shown
in Table II. The rightmost column lists the ratios of people
belonging to each group.
According to the post-questionnaire, we discovered that
people in Type 1 and Type 3 tended to follow the recom-
mendation more than those in Type 3 and Type 4. Please note
that a displayed arrow navigates a user to a major sightseeing
spot because it came from majority analysis. This is why
people with no advance planning were affected by the arrows.
Nonetheless, we think that sightseeing spots determined by a
minority will be also useful information for people of Type 1
and Type 2, since they would like to visit “ mysterious ”
spots that they have never seen. We are certain that the
proposed method can be easily extended to ﬁnd such minority-
determined spots.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new method to determine
sightseeing spots and link their strengths. A large number of
images collected from Flickr were analyzed for establishing
the spots and link strengths. In addition, characteristics of the
sightseeing were also assessed. This information was acquired
from analyses of metadata that were attached to images shared
in a large image database. We are certain that these types
of information are applicable to route recommendations for
sightseeing. We developed a prototype route recommendation
application on smartphones and conducted onsite experiments
in the city of Nagasaki. Through questionnaires and interviews
of test subjects, we found that route recommendations dis-
played on the smartphone are useful, especially for people who
did not decide sightseeing routes in advance.
In future work, we will tackle the following issues.
•
We will introduce image and label processing to ﬁlter
out non-useful images. The current system used all
images from around the sightseeing areas. Some of
these were unrelated to sightseeing. Such images can
be ﬁltered out if they are categorized using image
contents and labels. Furthermore, image analyses will
provide representative photos that are frequently taken
around sightseeing spots. Such information will be
helpful to determine subsequent visitation spots.
•
We will improve the application design. The current
application shows several arrows from the current
location to major sightseeing spots. Through the ques-
tionnaire in the ﬁeld test, we found that minority-
determined spots are also useful for visitors. There-
fore, it is important to change recommendation infor-
mation in terms of visitor characteristics.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Picasa,” http://picasa.google.com/. [retrieved: May, 2014].
[2]
“Flickr,” http://www.ﬂickr.com/. [retrieved: May, 2014].
[3]
Y. Zheng, L. Zhang, X. Xie, and W.-Y. Ma, “Mining interesting locations
and travel sequences from gps trajectories,” ACM World Wide Web
Conference, 2009, pp. 791–800.
[4]
L. Cao, J. Luo, A. Gallagher, X. Jin, J. Han, and T.S.Huang, “A
worldwide tourism recommendation system based on geotagged web
photos,” IEEE International Conference on Acoustics Spech and Signal
Processing, 2010, pp. 2274–2277.
[5]
Y. Arase, X. Xie, T. Hara, and S. Nishio, “Mining people’s trips from
large scale geo-tagged photos,” International conference on Multimedia,
2010, pp. 133–142.
[6]
“Tokyo disney resort,” http://www.tokyodisneyresort.co.jp/. [retrieved:
May, 2014].
[7]
K. Okuyama and K. Yanai, “A travel planning system based on travel
trajectories extracted from a large number of geotagged photos on the
web,” Paciﬁc-Rim Conference on Multimedia, 2011, pp. 657–670.
[8]
X. Lu, C. Wang, J.-M. Yang, Y. Pang, and L. Zhang, “Photo2trip:
Generating travel routes from geo-tagged photos for trip planning,” ACM
International Conference Multimedia, 2010, pp. 143–152.
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

