Automated Reference Model Generation and Utilization for Dimensional Control of 
Large Scale Assemblies and Assembly Processes
Teuvo Heimonen  
Optical Measurement Laboratory 
Kemi-Tornio University of Applied Sciences 
Kemi, Finland 
Teuvo.Heimonen@tokem.fi 
Markku Manninen 
 
A. M. S. Accuracy Management Services 
Oulu, Finland 
Markku.Manninen@ams-oulu.com 
 
 
Abstract—A lot of manual user interaction with computer 
aided design and analysis software is currently needed for 
dimensional control of large scale assemblies. This user input is 
required for both selecting the vital entities to be measured and 
analyzing the results of the measurements. In this paper an 
automated approach for reference model generation and vital 
entity selection is presented. The reference model generation is 
guided by user editable knowledge base and it is based on data 
extraction from computer aided design data. Prospects to 
utilize 
the 
generated 
reference 
model 
for 
automated 
manufacturing accuracy analysis are also outlined. The 
software implementation made has proved to be feasible for 
different kinds of dimensional control needs of large scale 
assemblies, and outweighs the current state of the art both in 
speed, completeness, and versatility. 
Keywords-accuracy control; large scale assemblies; data 
extraction; dimensional inspection 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A  modular construction is today a typical way to build 
large scale objects like ships, submarines, offshore platforms, 
airplanes, and bridges. In this manufacturing approach, the 
final product is assembled by joining separate, large 
subassemblies (blocks) one after another. 
One of the main interests in the assembly process of large 
scale objects is how different blocks can be fit together 
optimally. If the two blocks to be joined do not fit properly, 
corrective reworking is needed, causing extra costs and time 
delays [3]. In order to expedite the joining process, the 
geometry of the blocks is measured and verified (as-built to 
as-designed) before the joining.  
It is common in modern industry that the dimensions and 
the shape of the objects to be manufactured are designed 
computer aided. Thus geometrical design data of parts and 
products is almost always available in the form of computer 
aided design (CAD) files. These files can be used directly as 
sources of geometric information and thus the idea to use 
CAD data as a reference for as-built to as-designed 
verifications has been brought forth, see e.g., [1]. However, 
the CAD data typically contain a lot of unnecessary 
information 
from 
the 
dimensional 
accuracy 
control 
viewpoint. Thus the extraction of the essential data out of 
CAD data is needed. Currently, this vital entity selection and 
extraction is performed by using different kinds of 
interactive approaches requiring a lot of manual work, 
caution, and time. 
In the case of large scale objects, the implementation of 
an automated vital entity (e.g., point to be measured) 
selection seems to remain an extremely challenging and thus 
an unsolved task. Reasons for this comprise 
 
The differences in the CAD data and systems: an 
approach designed for a certain CAD data format or 
CAD system is typically not feasible with another 
 
One of a kind manufacturing -property of large scale 
objects: vital entities are neither the same nor in the 
same place on the object 
 
The rules, principles, and practices to choose the 
vital entities are different in different applications 
and in different organizations: the expertise to select 
vital entities is undocumented tacit knowledge of the 
personnel. 
There are few papers addressing automatic vital entity 
extraction and the generation of a reference model for as-
built to as-designed verifications of large scale objects 
(readers interested in computer aided inspection planning for 
smaller sized objects are referred to [10]). Manninen et al. 
[4] seems to be the first and only paper in which a workable 
implementation (for shipbuilding) was presented. However, 
even though the basic ideas and principles presented in [4] 
have been proven to be feasible, it has been noted that the 
implementation is not flexible enough for different kinds of 
(complicated) blocks, different kinds of practices for 
choosing the vital entities, and different kind of measuring 
and as-built to as-designed analysis needs in different 
shipyards. The main drawback of the implementation 
presented in [4] is that it analyzes only planar surfaces of 
CAD data leading both instability and incomplete reference 
models in case of CAD models comprising curved surfaces. 
The implementation is also slow, restricted to only one CAD 
format (dxf) for input, and comprises no support for 
automatic manufacturing analysis. 
In this paper, a knowledge base guided approach to 
automatically generate reference models for dimensional 
manufacturing accuracy analysis of large scale objects is 
proposed. This reference model generation comprises the 
reduction of CAD data and selection of vital entities essential 
and sufficient for dimensional control purposes. The 
automatic reference model creation and vital entity selection 
processes are controlled through a set of parameters. The 
identification information and values of these parameters 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

form an information source, which is called a knowledge 
base in this paper. 
Some prospects to utilize the generated reference model 
for manufacturing accuracy analysis are also presented. The 
main new idea in this sense is the automated manufacturing 
accuracy analysis. It comprises computation of quality 
figures for a certain set of user defined structure types and 
combining these quality figures to form a comprehensive 
quality database (quality figure tree) of the object 
manufactured. In addition to be used in analyzing the 
dimensional accuracy of the object manufactured, this 
quality data is intended to be utilized for monitoring the 
manufacturing and assembly processes. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: In Section 
II, a new approach is presented at the general level. Some 
implementation issues are commented on as well. Then, in 
Section III, some results of our experiments with 
shipbuilding data are presented, and finally, in Section IV, 
we conclude by summarizing the results and presenting ideas 
for further study. 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE APPROACH 
In this section, we present our approach at the general 
level with some examples. First, the general flow of the 
reference model creation is given, and then, in subsections 
II.A to II.C, the utilization of the knowledge base, the 
recognition 
of 
vital 
structures, 
and 
the 
automated 
manufacturing accuracy analysis are presented. 
The creation of the reference model and vital entity 
selection is purely based on geometric information. The 
process progresses through the following steps (see also Fig. 
1): First, the file containing the CAD data is read into the 
system and all geometric data is converted to a boundary 
representation (see e.g., [5, 8]). We utilize Open Cascade 
Technology [6] for this step, since it provides ready-made 
interfaces for this operation. Then, each face of the boundary 
representation is analyzed to find out, which side (nominal 
side, non-nominal side, thickness side, see Fig. 2) of a 
structure (e.g., steel plate) the face represents and classified 
on the basis of this analysis for further processing. After all 
faces have been “side-classified”, the nominal side faces are 
studied once again in order to find out whether bigger 
structures can be constructed by stitching a set of faces 
together. The results of the stitching phase are either planar 
or curved surfaces. These surfaces are then checked against 
size limits for acceptable objects, and either accepted or 
excluded. If needed, the application specific recognition of 
vital structures can be performed in this phase. Finally, a 
reference model of “intelligent objects” (see [4]) is created 
and finalized by dividing the points of the model into vital 
(to be measured) and non-vital points according to the 
instructions given in the knowledge base controlling the 
reference model generation. 
A. Utilization of knowledge base 
 The end-user is able to guide the automatic reference 
model creation and vital entity selection processes through a 
set of parameters. The identification information and values 
of these parameters form an information source, which is 
called a knowledge base. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Reference model generation process. 
 
Figure 2.  Nominal and non-nominal sides of a steel plate. Besides the 
nominal and non-nominal sides there are four thickness sides in this 
example. Vital points (points to be measured), shown here with black dots, 
should be generated on the nominal side of the plate. 
The structure of the current knowledge base has been 
developed together with several dimensional control and 
shipbuilding experts. Currently, it comprises two main 
sections: a general section and an application specific 
section. The end-user can edit the values of the parameters in 
the general section but otherwise (identifications, the 
structure of the knowledge base) the general section of the 
knowledge base is meant to be edited only by the software 
engineer. The general section of the knowledge base 
currently comprises  
 
Tolerance information to be assigned to the various 
objects in the reference model 
 
Information for selecting correct nominal side for 
each structure to be included into the reference 
model 
Nominal 
side
Non-nominal 
side (hided)
 
 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

 
Size and location limit information to control 
whether a CAD structure is to be accepted to or 
excluded from the reference model (see Fig. 3 for 
example of the effect) 
 
Information where to generate vital points (points to 
be measured) in some special cases (see Fig. 4 for 
example of the effect) 
 
Information whether some of special details, like 
holes or curved structures are to be included into the 
reference model (see Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 for examples 
of the effect) 
 
Information 
for 
automatic 
alignment 
of 
the 
measurement data to the reference model 
The application specific section of the knowledge base is 
used to define the vital structures to be recognized and to be 
used in manufacturing accuracy analysis. This section is 
completely user editable even though some keywords need 
to be used in order to guarantee the knowledge transfer 
between the knowledge base and the software. This section 
includes information for 
 
Recognition of the vital structures 
 
Vital structure -wise selection of the quality figures 
to be computed 
 
Combining the lower level quality figures to upper 
level quality figures 
 
Constructing the quality figure tree of the quality 
figures computed (see Fig. 6 for an example). 
B. Recognition of vital structures 
Vital structures are different for different large scale 
assembly applications. Thus application specific knowledge 
to recognize the vital structures from CAD data is needed. 
Currently, this information is given in an interchangeable 
recognition data module of the knowledge base. Thus 
different applications can be handled easily by changing the 
contents of this module to be suitable for the application. 
In the recognition data module identification (name), 
recognition, recognition process and quality figure type 
information is given for each structure wanted to be 
recognized and further used in the manufacturing accuracy 
analysis. The recognition information is simple geometric 
data to classify a structure, and could currently comprise 
size, location, and orientation limits. The recognition process 
information is used to control the classification process. It 
informs the system in which order the recognition 
information should be applied when trying to classify an 
input structure. Quality figure type information is a list of 
quality figures to be computed for the structure after the 
actual (measured) data are available. A weight, which is used 
when quality figures are combined in manufacturing 
accuracy analysis, is given for each quality figure as well. 
We have demonstrated the recognition of vital structures 
in shipbuilding applications. In our demonstrations structures 
like whole block, decks, bulkheads, stiffeners, block faces, 
engine foundations, basic plane, centre plane, and special 
points were recognized. The quality figures computed for 
these structures comprised flatness, straightness, location, 
orientation, length, width, height, and cross-measures. 
C. Automated manufacturing accuracy analysis 
In order to pack the information offered by numerous 
quality figures computed for each vital structure, these 
quality figures are statistically combined to form a 
hierarchical, tree-like presentation of the manufacturing 
quality of the block. This manufacturing quality tree is saved 
as an xml-file and can thus be browsed afterwards to check 
any detail of the manufacturing quality (see Fig. 6). 
The vital structure types for which the quality figures are 
computed can be selected by using the knowledge base. For 
each structure type, which is identified to be recognized, a 
set of quality figures to be computed can be selected (from a 
list of available quality figures). 
There are two types of quality figures in our approach. 
The basic quality figures are the lowest level quality figures 
obtained by comparing a geometric feature (either directly 
measured or computed by using measured data) to the 
corresponding design value for the feature in question. Thus 
the basic quality figures are direct measures of dimensional 
accuracy of the feature in question. The combined quality 
figures are obtained by combining two or more quality 
figures to a one (higher level) quality figure. 
Each quality figure has at least value, weight, and 
location information assigned to it. Combined quality figures 
have also statistical data available. Usually, the unit of the 
quality figure is also given but if the quality figure is a 
combination of values with different units, the unit is not 
defined. 
The value of a basic quality figure is a deviation of the 
actual data from the design or desired data. The value may, 
in some cases, also be negative. The closer the value is to 
zero the better. 
A weight is used when combining quality figures in order 
to emphasise the significance of some measured data or 
quality figures more than others. As mentioned above, 
weights can be given quality figure -wise for each structure 
to be recognized in the application specific section of the 
knowledge base. The default weight is one for each quality 
figure meaning that each quality figure will have equal 
importance. 
Two types of location information is presented: the 
location point, which is typically a centre point of the input 
data of the quality figure, and the bounding box, which limits 
the size of the space from where the input data was obtained. 
Currently, the main purpose of the location information is to 
identify to which structure the quality figure in question is 
related to but later the location information can be used to 
put the quality information data in the correct place in a 
graphical presentation. 
For combined quality figures, several statistical figures 
(maximum, minimum, weighted arithmetic mean, standard 
deviation, and mean deviation) are computed and saved. As a 
value (result) of a combined quality figure either the root 
mean square error (RMSE) or weighted arithmetic mean is 
used. The RMSE, which is related to the arithmetic mean 
(mx) and the standard deviation (s) of the sample data (xi) 
 
, (1) 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

where n is the number of samples, is used when the basic 
quality figures are combined. Thus, when the RMSE is used, 
the value of the combined quality figure includes information 
of both average error (bias) and deviation of the data. It 
should be noted that, in our approach, the sample data (xi) to 
be used in (1) is derived from actual to design comparisons, 
and thus, RMSE (not RMS) is indeed obtained.  
The weighted arithmetic mean is used, when already 
combined quality figures are further refined to a higher level 
quality figures. An example of this is an integration of 
similar quality figures of different structures of the same type 
(e.g., flatness quality figures of all block faces of the block). 
This kind of integration is continued until a quality figure 
tree, from simple point deviations up to the overall quality of 
the whole block, has been constructed. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTS 
The approach presented has been experimented in several 
shipbuilding cases. Separate knowledge base instances have 
been built for several different kinds of block types from two 
different shipyards. The CAD data provided by the design 
department of the shipyard have automatically been reduced 
to form a reference model by using our software modules, 
and obtained results have been evaluated together with the 
personnel responsible for the dimensional control in the 
shipyard. Then the actual blocks have been measured by the 
measurement group, and finally, the measured data have 
been aligned to the reference model and quality figures 
computed. In the following sub-chapters some detailed 
observations of the experiments are presented. The overall 
results of the feasibility of the proposed approach are 
summarized in Section IV. 
A. Usability of different CAD file formats 
As a CAD data format both dxf [2], iges [9], and step [7] 
formats were evaluated and each format was found out to be 
equally suitable. No significant difference was observed 
either in the generated reference model or the vital entities 
selected to be measured. 
B. Validity of reference models for dimensional control 
The reference models created automatically were suitable 
for dimensional control purposes. The amount of detail could 
be controlled by the values of the parameters in the 
knowledge base, and thus the data extraction process could 
be tuned to be suitable for the needs of the inspection task in 
question (see Fig. 3, Fig. 4, and Fig. 5). Some minor 
problems were detected in the reconstruction of the curved 
surfaces (e.g., shell plates of the ships) but the deficiencies, 
which these problems lead to, were more esthetical than 
practically meaningful from the dimensional control point of 
view. 
The validity of the vital points, i.e. percentage of the vital 
points that are actually measured, and percentage of the 
points that are measured but not classified as vital in the 
reference model, will be studied later in detail when the 
approach has been adopted into actual use properly. 
Preliminary studies indicate about 90% result for both cases, 
which has been judged to be acceptable at this point of 
development work. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Examples of a knowledge based guided reference model 
generation: Two halves of the same block imported by using different 
instructions given in knowledge base. The upper reference model has more 
details and vital points included (also holes) than the lower model. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Example of a knowledge based guided vital point generation: 
“If a bulkhead or a stiffener has a notch (corner cutout), use notch point 
(FR9), otherwise make an offset point 100 mm from the corner of the 
bulkhead or the stiffener (FR21o). Create points also on the deck edge in 
the position where the bulkhead or stiffener goes under the deck (FR9es 
and FR21es)”. 
 
Figure 5.  Four examples of generated reference models. 
 
 
 
 
 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

C. Import time comparison 
The time to create a reference model depends on the 
amount of data in the CAD file, the complexity of the 3d 
structure, and the amount of analysis the knowledge base 
instructs to be done during the reference model generation 
process. The reference model  generation time with the new 
approach was compared to the current state-of-the-art 
approach [4] by creating reference models by using both 
approaches on the same normal laptop computer. Our 
approach proved to be significantly faster (Table I). 
TABLE I.  
REFERENCE MODEL GENERATION TIME COMPARISON 
 
D. Data reduction 
One purpose of the reference model generation is to 
reduce the data available in the CAD models. The reference 
model should comprise all data and structures needed for 
performing the measurements and visualizing the model 
judiciously. However, unnecessary data and structures 
should be excluded in order to offer illustrative and clear 
model. 
All the evaluated  models were approved by the 
measurement 
personnel 
and 
dimensional 
control 
management by inspecting the models visually. The amount 
of data reduced was computed by comparing the number of 
3d objects defined in the CAD model and in the generated 
reference model. The amount of data was reduced typically 
to less than 2% of the original (Table II). 
TABLE II.  
DATA REDUCTION 
 
E. Quality figure computation 
Quality figure computation was experimented by 
defining several different structures into the application 
specific module of the knowledge base. The structures, 
which were used in  all our experiments, comprised block as 
whole, block face, deck, bulkhead, stiffener, and special 
points. In some specific experiments some additional 
structures like foundations, center plane, and basic plane 
were evaluated. The size, location and direction information 
was given for the recognition of the structures. 
Instead of finding out the actual quality of the blocks 
measured, the purpose of the quality figure computation 
experiments was to evaluate the feasibility of the approach. 
From this point of view, the results obtained from our 
preliminary experiments were encouraging: The structures 
were correctly recognized, correct points were used for the 
computations of different quality figures, and lower level 
quality figures were successfully combined to the upper level 
quality figures of the quality figure tree. An example of an 
automatically generated quality figure tree is shown in Fig. 
6. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The automated, knowledge base guided approach for 
reference model generation proposed in this paper seems to 
offer a step forward for the dimensional control and accuracy 
analysis of large scale objects. The following advances have 
been accomplished:  
 
Possibility to use different CAD formats 
 
Possibility to import more complicated structures 
than with the current state-of-the-art approach 
 
Significantly faster reference model generation than 
with the current state-of-the-art approach 
 
Significant data amount reduction (compared to the 
amount of original CAD data) 
 
Recognition of user defined structures vital for 
dimensional accuracy analysis 
 
Creation 
of 
comprehensive 
quality 
database 
advantageous to dimensional accuracy analysis of 
the object in question and for monitoring the 
assembly process  
 
Flexibility and better suitability for different kinds of 
dimensional control needs by using user editable 
knowledge base. 
The usability of the quality data obtained from the 
proposed automated manufacturing analysis has not been 
properly evaluated yet. In order to utilize the data e.g., for 
monitoring the assembly process and long-term statistical 
process control further studies are needed. For example, it 
has to be studied, which statistical quality figures need to be 
computed and how these figures should be combined in 
order to properly serve the process monitoring. The current 
implementation serves as a good starting point for these 
studies. 
In this paper, the studies focusing on the automation of 
the reference model generation and manufacturing accuracy 
analysis were reported. Even though very promising results 
were obtained, it should be noted that some amount of user 
CAD-file 
       Generation time [s] 
size [MB] 
Reference [4] 
Our approach 
2,4 
55 
4 
3,3 
65 
6 
3,7 
60 
5 
4,4 
85 
6 
7,4 
240 
12 
11,3 
600 
18 
21,9 
1625 
35 
 
CAD-file 
Number of 3d objects 
Percentage 
size [MB] 
CAD 
REF 
REF / CAD 
2,4 
8515 
141 
1,66 % 
3,3 
10875 
93 
0,86 % 
3,7 
10500 
51 
0,49 % 
4,4 
13687 
212 
1,55 % 
7,4 
25431 
501 
1,97 % 
11,3 
37890 
454 
1,20 % 
21,9 
71707 
557 
0,78 % 
 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

interaction is and will be needed. How this interaction (e.g., 
for editing the knowledge base) should be arranged, must 
also be considered properly in the future in order to obtain a 
useful system for the industry of large scale assemblies. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Example of an automatically generated quality figure tree. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
STX 
Europe 
Rauma 
Shipyard, 
IHC 
Merwerde 
Kinderdijk Shipyard, and measurement service company 
Prismarit Ltd. are gratefully thanked for the co-operation. 
Tekes, the Finnish Funding Agency for Technology and 
Innovation, is acknowledged for the financial support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Ailisto, “CAD model-based planning and vision guidance 
for optical 3D co-ordinate measurement”, Technical Research 
Centre of Finland, VTT Publications 298, 1997. 70 p. + app. 
63 p. 
[2] Autodesk Inc., Autocad 2012, DXF Reference, February 
2011. 262 p. Available from: http://images.autodesk.com/adsk 
/files/autocad_pdf_dxf-reference_enu.pdf. [7 June 2012]. 
[3] M. Manninen and J. Jaatinen, ”Productive Method and 
System to Control Dimencional Uncertainties at Final 
Assembly Stages in Ship Production”, Journal of Ship 
Production, vol. 8, no. 4, 1992, pp. 244 - 249. 
[4] M. Manninen, J. Linna, and K. Jacobsen, ”Object Oriented 
Software for CAD Based Dimensional Analysis and 
Alignment Control of Steel Structures in Hull Assembly”, 
12th International Conference on Computer Applications in 
Shipbuilding. Busan, Korea, 23.-25. August 2005. 
[5] M. Mäntylä, An Introduction to Solid Modeling. Computer 
Science Press, College Park, MD, 1988. 
[6] Open Cascade S.A.S., Open CASCADE Technology, 3D 
modeling & numerical simulation. Available from: http:// 
www.opencascade.org/. [7 June 2012]. 
[7] SCRA, Step Application Handbook, ISO 10303, Version 3. 
175 p. Available from: http://www.uspro.org/documents 
/STEP_application_hdbk_63006_BF.pdf 2006. [7 June 2012]. 
[8] I. Stroud, Boundary Representation Modelling Techniques. 
Springer, 2006. 
[9] U.S. Product Data Association, Initial Graphics Exchange 
Specification IGES 5.3. 621 p. Available from: http://www.us 
pro.org/documents/IGES5-3_forDownload.pdf. [7 June 2012]. 
[10] F. Zhao, X. Xu, and S. Q. Xie. ”Survey paper: Computer-
Aided Inspection Planning-The state of the art”,. Computers 
in Industry, vol. 60, issue 7, 2009, pp. 453-466. 
 
 
 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

