Knowledge Management System IMMPETUS (KMSI) - Connoisseur 
 
 
Osman Ishaque 
Department of Automatic Control and Systems 
Engineering 
The University of Sheffield  
Sheffield, UK 
E-mail: O.Ishaque@sheffield.ac.uk 
 
George Panoutsos 
Department of Automatic Control and Systems 
Engineering 
The University of Sheffield,  
Sheffield, UK 
E-mail: g.panoutsos@sheffield.ac.uk  
 
Mahdi Mahfouf 
Department of Automatic Control and Systems 
Engineering 
The University of Sheffield  
Sheffield, UK 
E-mail: m.mahfouf@sheffield.ac.uk 
 
Lucian Tipi 
Sheffield Business School 
Sheffield Hallam University 
Sheffield, UK 
Email: L.Tipi@shu.ac.uk  
 
Abstract— 
KMSI 
(Knowledge 
Management 
System 
IMMPETUS) is a web based portal which facilitates 
IMMPETUS (Institute for Microstructural and Mechanical 
Process Engineering: The University of Sheffield) users, 
potentially providing a web area where data mining, data 
archiving, data retrieving are systematically carried out. It is a 
versatile web portal which can handle raw data, research 
knowledge and sharing of information with transparent access 
by the whole of the IMMPETUS research team. This includes 
internally and externally generated data and knowledge, past 
and present. Hitherto, KMSI has focused on hierarchical 
structures with bi-directional communication between the 
various levels. KMSI’s previous configuration had limited 
functionality in terms of collaboration among project groups 
and across the whole of the IMMPETUS. Contributions of 
knowledge by individual members are now promoted as this is 
vital for Information Management and help users to track 
their project work. In this paper, we explain how Microsoft 
SharePoint 2010 framework technology can easily be used to 
develop; a versatile web portal to systematically include 
optimal experimental design, data analyses, collaboration, and 
overall knowledge management. 
Keywords-information storage; data sharing; data mining, 
knowledge management; decision making. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
“IMMPETUS is a research institute providing its wide 
range of services to integrate metallurgical, mechanical and 
thermal considerations in developing soundly based models 
for process planning and control to achieve target 
microstructures and product properties within increasingly 
fine tolerances and greater efficiency” [1]. IMMPETUS 
constitutes itself with the help of three disciplines of control 
systems, mechanical systems and engineering materials to 
produce world leading research. IMMPETUS, as an 
institute, is internationally renowned for its innovative 
approach for the study of the thermomechanical processing 
of metals, which includes Steel, Aluminium and Titanium 
alloys. IMMPETUS research emphasizes on; (1) the deeper 
physical understanding of the thermo mechanical behaviour, 
and the development of the associated models with adequate 
accuracy and transparency, (2) the identification of optimal 
processing  routes to achieve pre-defined microstructural 
and mechanical properties [1]. 
A. Requirements 
 
Over a period of time spanning more than a decade 
IMMPETUS has since evolved and the number of research 
projects carried out under its umbrella has significantly 
increased. Academic supervisors are responsible for 
managing various research projects simultaneously from 
microstructure to modelling and control. During the project 
development phase collaboration and information sharing 
among the various groups is essential; once a project is 
completed all the artefacts and mature data are needed for 
future usages of development and research work. 
The collection of data, analysing the results and sharing the 
right information across the research staff is a vital task for 
all researchers.  
Our aim with this work was to develop, using the latest 
technologies, a system; (1) which easily scales across the 
IMMPETUS potentially giving any research project a 
dedicated web-based work area where one can store project 
artefacts and will be able to quickly retrieve the desired 
content whenever it is needed, (2) a team-oriented 
collaboration tool to help project members to monitor project 
progress, (3) potentially providing knowledge sharing, 
document storage and advanced user-controlled features, and  
(4) services to store and analyse experimental data.  
37
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

II. 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 
Knowledge management systems (KMS) are IT systems 
developed to store, manage and share on organization‟s 
knowledge. These IT-based systems are significantly 
important to facilitate and enhance the processes of 
knowledge creation, storage and retrieval [2].  
It is a challenging task to capture all the data from 
various sources and to disseminate the most adequate 
information using IT systems. Gathering all the data from 
various sources and processing it in order for it to have some 
meaningful information is in itself a thought-provoking job.  
IT systems are becoming the tool relied upon by many 
organisations around the globe to decide on how to manage 
electronic records [3].  
The list of vendors who provide various software 
solutions to manage data and information is rather long but 
difficult to report in full. Gartner has published a comparison 
of „Enterprise Content Management Systems‟ [4] being 
provided by some of major vendors. It is however worth 
noting that it is not always straightforward to purchase 
ready-made systems that suit one organization‟s needs, but 
many customising work will be needed. 
III. 
KMSI CONFIGURATION 
KMSI‟s configuration is fundamentally organised so as 
to gather the experimental data, expert knowledge, 
preliminary results, mature data, and document storage. 
Because group collaboration is also promoted, it has the 
potential of providing a robust infrastructure for storage and 
collaboration, a foundation platform for a web-based project 
areas (workspaces) and services, and a more efficient way of 
using tools for information-sharing that help users stay 
connected and informed across the whole of IMMPETUS.  
A. Why Dynamic Knowledge Management System ? 
Dynamic 
Knowledge 
Management 
Systems 
are 
concerned with the sharing of knowledge that already exists 
but also focus on the production of new knowledge [5]. 
In IMMPETUS, every research project has its own 
boundaries and requirements; therefore the KMSI system 
architecture is designed to handle various types of 
information in a holistic way. A platform was needed where 
all past research information is located and current projects 
artefacts can be stored, content can be accurately classified, 
and information sharing can be made easy in a fashion where 
group collaboration is a core element. When new research 
projects are initiated in IMMPETUS more web-based project 
areas are required within existing KMSI structure having all 
modules which are vital to complete that specific project  
B. Putablity and Findability 
The information process should be made easy for 
uploading the content and retrieving the desired information 
effectively which represents hub of knowledge management.  
“Putability is the quality of putting content into an 
information management and retrieval system with the 
correct metadata.” [6]. 
“Findability is the quality of being locatable or 
navigable” [6], in other words it is the process which helps to 
find desired content easily even intuitively.  
It is vital for better decision making to obtain the desired 
information whenever it is needed. KMSI is designed to put 
and locate the desired content quickly using „SharePoint 
2010 Search‟ [7] to best fit with modern age IT 
requirements. 
C. Technology Used 
Microsoft latest software and technologies are used to 
build such a robust portal. Some of the details about the 
hardware and the software used to configure KMSI are as 
follows: 
a) Hardware 
 
2 Processors, 2.53.Ghz, Core-2 Quad 
 
Ram 16 GB 
 
2 Hard disks 250GB each for Operating 
System, configured on Raid-1 
 
3 Hard disks 500GB each for data base, 
configured on Raid-5 
b) Software 
 
Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 (64 bit) 
 
Microsoft SharePoint 2010 (64 bit ) 
 
Microsoft SQL Server 2008 (64 bit) 
D. KMSI’s Architecture 
KMSI‟s architecture has been designed so as to 
accomplish all IMMPETUS information management 
requirements; its dynamic structure can easily be extended 
for developing future web-based project and knowledge 
sharing areas. The contribution of knowledge by individual 
members has also been added as it is vital for Information 
Management and storage. Latest technologies are used to 
enhance the usability and boost the ability of storing, sharing 
and publishing information. The Server Administrator can 
create as many areas as required which inherit features from 
the core platform. The baseline hierarchy aims at providing 
more flexibility and knowledge sharing between members 
using more intuitive ways. Information retrieval from 
experimental equipment is integrated in a customizable 
manner which has the flexibility to alter interfaces as per 
diverse project requirements. Architecture has the potential 
to import experimental results directly from some modern 
equipment using their API (application programmable 
interface) which enhances its productivity.  
The three main different web applications have been 
created on IIS (Internet Information Services) web server 
having their own separate data-bases to keep the process 
isolation. The web applications within KMSI are as: 
(1) Data Libraries Area: A publication web site which 
archives all important information using modern web 
interface. Information stored here is available to all 
IMMPETUS members.   
(2) Projects Area:  The web application designed within 
KMSI, having multiple project sites and sub-sites. Each 
IMMPETUS core project has its own workspace or web site. 
38
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Content modification rights are only given to the members of 
that particular project area. 
(3) Personal Area: Members have their own personal area 
where one can store all kind of work related information and 
restrict access privileges. 
The two core features of the web-applications are as: 
(1) Advanced Search: SharePoint 2010 Search service [7] 
is connected with all of three web applications. Users are 
able to find information quickly and easily using advanced 
filters. 
(2) Security: Permission levels are enhanced at multiple 
levels especially at Project Area, Personal Area and file 
level. 
Figure 1 depicts the current structure associated with 
KMSI. 
 
1) Data Libraries Area: 
One may wish to publish a particular content on the 
IMMPETUS intranet whether it is individual documents, 
web pages, theses, publications, annual reports, images, 
videos, experimental data or records with strict regulatory 
requirements 
being 
fully 
managed 
within 
KMSI‟s 
architecture. The documents library includes many levels of 
sites and sub-sites, so that one may use the navigation bar to 
quickly browse to the content that one wants. Data libraries 
are provided with advance filtering and sorting features. 
Information stored here is protected and only authorised 
users are able to read it. An on-line survey area is also 
created and results can be stored and viewed in an efficient 
graphical manner. A multimedia library is also provided 
where images, audio and video files are being stored; media 
assets such as videos can be watched directly from the 
library. The optimum supported media file size is 150MB 
but up to 2 GB of video file can be stored here [8].  
Currently, about 2800 different documents and files have 
been stored on various data libraries; the average size of a 
document/file is about 2 MB. Figure 2 shows the KMSI 
„Data Libraries Area‟ home-page for browsing the public 
libraries. 
 
 Figure 1. KMSI‟s configuration model 
 
Figure 2. KMSI‟s „Data Libraries Area‟ 
2) Projects Area 
KMSI has a dedicated website for each IMMPETUS 
project which acts as a vehicle for effective collaboration 
and information storage infrastructure for members. Each 
project area has a facility to store documents, files, 
experimental data, and organise stored data into different 
kinds of libraries. Microsoft SharePoint 2010 Team-site [9] 
templates are used to develop different project workspaces 
because they are highly flexible and designed to encapsulate 
collaboration features. Microsoft SharePoint 2010 and 
Microsoft Office are so strongly integrated that they provide 
a strong platform for collaboration and sharing [9]. Users 
having the necessary access rights are able to check-out, 
check-in, lock or share document(s) among whole of the 
project team where the permissions have been assigned. 
Online project management tools are also provided within 
Projects Area to view the progress of the project tasks. Each 
library is configured to store up-to 25versions of a file; the 
maximum file size which one can upload is restricted to 
250MB. Figure 3 depicts the structure associated with 
Projects Area. 
 
Figure 3. Projects Area structure 
39
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Five core data libraries are provided to store and share 
information in a „Project Area‟ as follows:  
a) PDF Files: This data library is built to store all PDF files 
which one can also share with other members. 
b) Project Files: All types of project related files can be 
saved here such as Matlab, Abaqus, and MSC Nastran etc.  
c) Presentations / Other files: This library is to store all 
presentations and power point slides. Users are also able to 
maintain versions of each file stored here.  
d) Multimedia: Users are able to store all project related 
pictures and videos here.  
e) Experimental data: This is a vital part of the Project Area 
where members are able to save records and data generated 
from experiments. Each project may have one or more 
records library e.g. Hille Mill, ASP (Arbitrary Strain Path), 
TMC (Thermo Mechanical Compression), and DIC (Digital 
Image Co-relation) etc.  Figure 4 shows an interface to store 
experimental data onto KMSI server. 
 
3) Personal Area 
Personal web areas are designed for IMMPETUS 
academic staff, research associates and PhD students. This 
site provides a central location to manage and store one‟s 
documents, content, images, and useful information. 
„Personal Area‟ serves as a point of contact for other users 
within IMMPETUS to find some information about the 
user, user skills, and user interests [10]. 
 
Figure 4. Hille Mill experimental data storage form 
One can customise the information and the content on 
his/her personal web area. The user can manage 
(save/edit/delete) documents, lists, and images within his/her 
web area. Personal web area also facilitates users to organize 
and get their information when and wherever it is needed 
using a secure connection over the internet. 
4) Advanced Search 
A previous study [11] found the following: (1) “Typical 
employees spend an average of 3.5 hours per week trying to 
find information but not finding it.” (2) They spend 3.0 
hours more recreating information they know exists, but 
that they simply cannot locate”. 
KMSI provides an intuitive and flexible user interface, 
improved relevance, and the ability to search unstructured 
and structured information such as databases, all public 
information across the KMSI portal especially focusing on 
project sites, data libraries and experimental records. 
Advanced search filters help narrowing the search results to 
find the desired content quickly. Information can be refined 
using web area, author, date, document type (pdf, doc, docx, 
xls etc.), or using tags associated with the content. Figure 4 
shows the search results returned by the system against the 
keyword „steel‟. 
5) Security 
A set of permissions can be granted [12] to KMSI 
members on a securable object such as a project site, 
document library, experimental data rig, folder, item, or 
document. Permission levels enable the user to assign a set 
of permissions to other KMSI members so that they can 
perform specific actions on their project area.  
The following permission levels are granted:  
 Full Control: This permission level contains all 
permissions (Administrator rights).  
 Area Members: Can add, edit, and delete items in 
existing lists and document libraries. Assigned to those 
who are members of that project area.   
 Read: Read-only access to the KMSI, users with this 
permission level can view items and pages, open items, 
and documents. This permission level is by default 
assigned to all IMMPETUS members within „Data 
Libraries Area‟.  
 File Level Permission: Each site contains additional 
securable objects that have a particular position in the 
site hierarchy, and user can also set different levels of 
permission on various folders, files and contents. 
Figure 6 illustrates file level permissions for different 
users. 
 
40
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

Figure 5. Search results and data refiners 

Figure 6. File level permissions for four different users. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
IT tools and technologies, such as Microsoft SharePoint 
2010, are providing robust platform which can be used to 
develop the Knowledge Management Systems as per one‟s 
requirements. Our system (KMSI), which is based on 
Microsoft SharePoint 2010 technology, helps users gather 
information in a holistic fashion, regardless of the type of 
file or information. It also helps users to find, manage and 
keep track of the updated information in an efficient 
manner. 
KMSI provides IMMPETUS members the necessary 
tools to manage their documents, research papers, and 
experimental records in an efficient way. Even more 
importantly, all this information is easily shared between 
users, such as project teams, Departments, and/or 
IMMPETUS members. The experimental data storage 
facility is improved and data can be easily exported to 
comma separated values (CSV) or Microsoft Excel format.  
 
We were required to disseminate the required 
information to subsribed users whenever it is added onto the 
public libraries or in some project areas. Information is 
normally filtered and processed using „managed meta data‟ 
[13], content types or using file attributes which help the 
system to identify information and re-route the information 
to the appropriate data libray or to some „Project Area‟.  
We are having some difficulties to incorporate 
experimental data directly from some experimental 
equipment. It is also required to crawl inside some content 
like Matlab and Abaqus data-files; we are still doubtful how 
iFilters [14] help to dig inside those files. In future, we are 
also willing to add virtual experimental equipment inside 
the KMSI to perform experiments remotely using various 
data models which is a challenging and brainstorming job.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Engineering and 
Physical Sciences Research Council for their financial 
support under grant Ref. No. EP/E063497/1.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] IMMPETUS, 
“About”, 
www.immpetus.group.shef.ac.uk,  
(Last Accessed 18 July 2011) 
[2] Maryam Alavi and Dorothy E. Leidner, “Knowledge 
Management 
and 
Knowledge 
Management 
Systems: 
Conceptual 
Foundations 
and 
Research 
Issues,” 
MIS 
Quarterly, Vol. 25, No. 1 (Mar., 2001), pp. 107-136.  
[3] Bill English, Briand Elderman and Mark Ferraz, Microsoft 
SharePoint 2010 Administrator‟s Companion, 1st ed., 
Microsoft Press, (2011), pp. 439-440. 
[4] Toby Bell, Karen M. Shegda, Mark R. Gilbert and Kenneth 
Chin, “Magic Quadrant for Enterprise Content Management”, 
16 
November 
2010, 
http://www.gartner.com/technology/media-
products/reprints/microsoft/vol14/article8/article8.html, (Last 
Accessed 12 August 2011) 
[5] Boris 
Pluskowski, 
Dynamic 
Knowledge 
Systems, 
http://www.imaginatik.com/site/pdfs/WP-0602-
1%20Dynamic%20Knowledge%20Systems.pdf,  
“unpublished”, (Last Accessed 12 August 2011) 
[6] Bill English, Briand Elderman and Mark Ferraz, Microsoft 
SharePoint 2010 Administrator‟s Companion, 1st ed., 
Microsoft Press, (2011), pp. 397-398. 
[7] Microsoft, Enterprise Search, http://technet.microsoft.com/en-
us/enterprisesearch/default.aspx , (Last Accessed 12 August 
2011) 
[8] Microsoft Technet, “SharePoint Server 2010 capacity 
management”, 
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/cc262787.aspx,  (Last Accessed 12 August 2011) 
[9] Microsoft Technet, “Collaboration site planning”, May 12, 
2010, 
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-
gb/library/cc262388.aspx, (Last Accessed 12 August 2011) 
[10] Microsoft 
Technet, 
“My 
Site 
Overview” 
, 
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ff382643.aspx, 
(Last Accessed 18 July 2011) 
[11] Bill English, Briand Elderman and Mark Ferraz, Microsoft 
SharePoint 2010 Administrator‟s Companion, 1st ed., 
Microsoft Press, (2011), pp. 442-443 
[12] Microsoft Technet, “Plan site permissions”, December 16, 
2010, 
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/cc262778.aspx, (Last Accessed 12 August 2011) 
[13] Microsoft 
Technet, 
“Managed 
metadata”, 
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-gb/library/ee424402.aspx 
, 
(Last Accessed 12 August 2011) 
[14] Microsoft Technet, “File types and IFilters reference”, 
November 
11, 
2010, 
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/gg405170.aspx, (Last Accessed 12 August 2011) 
 
41
IMMM 2011 : The First International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-162-5

