The Mining and Analysis of Data with Mixed Attribute Types
Ed Wakelam, Neil Davey, Yi Sun, Amanda Jefferies, Parimala Alva, Alex Hocking 
School of Computer Science 
University of Hertfordshire 
Hatfield, UK 
e-mail: {e.wakelam, n.davey, y.2.sun, a.l.jefferies, p.alva, a.hocking3}@herts.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Mining and analysis of large data sets has become a 
major contributor to the exploitation of Artificial Intelligence 
in a wide range of real life challenges, including education, 
business intelligence and research. In the field of education, the 
mining, extraction and exploitation of useful information and 
patterns from student data provides lecturers, trainers and 
organisations with the potential to tailor learning paths and 
materials to maximize teaching efficiency and to predict and 
influence student success rates. Progress in this important area 
of student data analytics can provide useful techniques for 
exploitation in the development of adaptive learning systems.  
Student data often includes a combination of nominal and 
numeric data. A large variety of techniques are available to 
analyse numeric data, however there are fewer techniques 
applicable to nominal data. In this paper, we summarise our 
progress in applying a combination of what we believe to be a 
novel technique to analyse nominal data by making a 
systematic comparison of data pairs, followed by numeric data 
analysis, providing the opportunity to focus on promising 
correlations for deeper analysis. 
Keywords-Data Mining; Educational Data Mining; Data 
Analytics; Numeric, Nominal Data Analysis; Dimensionality 
reduction; Knowledge Extraction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
We are initially investigating the potential to apply 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques to improve e-learning 
systems in both educational and business settings [1], In 
particular, we are focussing upon how learning systems can 
be designed to adapt to individual students during the 
learning activity.  This adaptability would enable the e-
learning system to monitor and adjust the teaching based 
upon a wide variety of analyses of the knowledge and 
performance of the student. In order to achieve this, we are 
investigating how student attributes may be analysed and 
deployed.  
Our first steps have been to perform a variety of analyses 
on open source published student data [2] in order to identify 
factors which correlate with student performance [3]. 
Significant advances in the field of data mining [4] are 
providing opportunities for tools to be deployed in analysing 
education data [5]. There have also been continued 
developments in Machine Learning (ML), which aims to 
determine how to perform important tasks by generalizing 
from examples [6].  
These results may then be used to improve the design of 
adaptive learning systems [7] using contemporary AI 
techniques.  
In section II, we discuss each of the types of student 
features relevant to our research: Categorical, comprising 
Nominal and Ordinal, and Measurement (Quantitative). 
Section III introduces the open source student data set which 
we have used to explore applicable analysis techniques. In 
section IV, we describe our experimental analysis of this 
data, summarising our results in section V. Finally, we 
discuss our conclusions in section VI including further work 
already underway and recommendations for future work. 
 
II. 
EXISTING DATA ANALYSIS TECHNIQUES 
A. Categorical Data 
 
Nominal Features 
Nominal data is data where the feature values are labels 
such as male/female or yes/no. There are a number of 
statistical techniques available to analyse nominal data sets, 
notably Chi-square and Cramer’s V [8]. Each has its own 
limitations, for example, sensitivity to sample size and a 
stronger than justified evidence of correlations [9].   
In the case of nominal data, it is not possible to compare 
attributes directly in order to search for correlations. 
However, we can compare the correspondence between 
groupings of attributes and we have explored the use of what 
we believe to be a novel technique to do so. In this case, we 
have chosen to compare correlations between pairs of 
attributes [10].  Future work is underway to apply alternative 
nominal data analysis techniques to our data in order to 
compare our results and to identify the strengths and 
weaknesses of our technique. 
 
Ordinal Features 
Ordinal data is a type of categorical data in which order 
is important.  The originators of our data set do not 
categorise any of the student data captured in their study as 
ordinal. 
B. Measurement (Quantitative) Data 
There are a variety of statistical techniques available to 
analyse quantitative (numeric) data sets. In this case we have 
selected to use Principal Components Analysis (PCA) to 
reduce the dimensionality of our data and Growing Neural 
Gas (GNG) to identify potentially interesting clusters of data.  
GNG [11] has been successfully used to identify clusters in 
data for many applications such as the analysis of Hubble 
Space Telescope images [12] and automatic landmark 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-477-0
IMMM 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management (includes DATASETS 2016)

extraction in images [13]. PCA and GNG have also been 
successfully combined for intrusion detection [14]. 
III. 
PORTUGUESE STUDENT DATA SET 
In order to investigate the predictive accuracy of student 
achievement data was taken from a set of students from a 
Portuguese study [15]. This data consists of information 
taken from two Portuguese secondary schools and each 
student has 33 attributes. The data includes three labels: first 
period grade, second period grade and final grade. The 
subjects are Mathematics (395 students) and Portuguese 
Language (649 students) and the data was collected during 
the 2005-2006 academic year. The attributes comprise 16 
numeric (including the labels: first period, second period and 
final performance grades) and 17 nominal (Tables I and II).   
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLES OF THE NUMERIC ATTRIBUTES 
Identifier 
Description 
Age 
Student's age (numeric: from 
15 to 22) 
Absences 
Number of school absences 
(numeric: from 0 to 93) 
Studytime 
Weekly study time (numeric: 
1 - <2 hours, 2 - 2 to 5 hours, 
3 - 5 to 10 hours, or 4 - >10 
hours) 
 
TABLE II.  
EXAMPLES OF THE NOMINAL ATTRIBUTES 
Identifier 
Description 
Gender 
Student's gender (binary: "F" 
- female or "M" - male) 
Mjob 
Mother's job (nominal: 
"teacher", "health" care 
related, civil "services" (e.g., 
admin or police), "at_home" 
or "other") 
Romantic 
With a romantic relationship 
(binary: yes or no) 
 
For consistency we have adopted the original attribute types 
as used in the Portuguese study, although there are a small 
number of the attributes defined as numeric which could be 
considered as ordinal. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL ANALYSIS 
A. Analysis of Nominal Data 
Our method is to compare the correspondence between 
pairs of our nominal data attributes. To illustrate, the 
technique, here is a worked example of a data set of 4 
students, each with 2 nominal attributes (Table III). 
TABLE III.  
EXAMPLE DATA SET 
Student 
Attribute 1 (a1) 
Attribute 2 (a2) 
s1 
p 
x 
s2 
p 
y 
s3 
q 
z 
s4 
p 
y 
 
After setting a counter to zero we compare every possible 
pairing of student attribute values in the attribute 1 column of 
Table III with the corresponding pair in the attribute 2 
column. If the selected pair from attribute 1 have the same 
value and the corresponding pair from attribute 2 also have 
the same value then we increment the counter by 1. Similarly 
if they both have different values then we increment the 
counter by 1. Otherwise, we decrement the counter by 1 (see 
Table IV).   
So, for example, looking at step 1 below, the values of 
attribute 1 are both “p” (i.e., the same), whereas the values of 
attribute 2 are “x” and “y” (i.e., different), so we decrement 
the counter by 1. However, looking at step 2, the values of 
attribute 1 are “p” and “q” (different), and the values of 
attribute 2 are “x” and “z” (different), so we increment the 
counter by 1. 
TABLE IV.  
STEP BY STEP PROCESS 
Step 
Student 
pairing 
a1 
a2 
Score 
Cumulative 
counter 
1 
(s1 s2) 
(p p) 
(x y) 
-1 
-1 
2 
(s1 s3) 
(p q) 
(x z) 
+1 
0 
3 
(s1 s4) 
(p p) 
(x y) 
-1 
-1 
4 
(s2 s3) 
(p q) 
(y z) 
+1 
0 
5 
(s2 s4) 
(p p) 
(y y) 
+1 
1 
6 
(s3 s4) 
(q p) 
(z y) 
+1 
2 
 
We repeat this process for all combinations of attribute 
values and the resultant counter totals are used to populate a 
correlation matrix. This is done by inserting the counter total 
into the correlation matrix cell which corresponds to the 
respective attribute. Obviously, each attribute fully correlates 
with itself resulting in identical values across the matrix 
diagonal. We normalise our resulting matrix by dividing all 
entries by this value to keep all correlation matrix values 
between -1 and +1 (see Table V). 
TABLE V.  
NORMALISED CORRELATION MATRIX FOR 
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE 1 
 
a1 
a2 
a1 
1 
1/3 
a2 
1/3 
1 
 
Positive values represent positive correlations between 
the respective attributes, negative values represent negative 
correlations and the magnitude of the value represents the 
strength of the correlation.   
For example, where there are a high proportion of student 
pairs where the corresponding attributes, such as Mother’s 
job and gender are correspondingly the same or different this 
will result in a relatively higher correlation value (for 
example, 1/3 in Table V) between the two attributes. 
For each attribute, we evaluate its correlation with all 
other attributes and find the mean value over all these 
correlations. As a first indicator of interesting attributes, 
particular attention was paid to those correlations where the 
magnitude of the mean value was high in comparison to the 
mean values of other attributes. Those correlations where the 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-477-0
IMMM 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management (includes DATASETS 2016)

magnitude was above the mean for that attribute then 
provided additional correlations for consideration.   
We applied the technique to each of the Mathematics and 
Portuguese language data sets in turn. For each data set, we 
were then able to identify those pairs of attributes that were 
most strongly correlated – whether positively or negatively. 
This enabled us to consider the potential influences on 
student behaviours. 
We were also able to compare the correlations in the 
Mathematics data set with those in the Portuguese language 
data set. 
Using the correlation matrix generated by this technique 
we then produced corresponding PC1 v PC2 scatter plots for 
each of our Mathematics and Portuguese Language student 
data sets in order to visualize potential clusters for future 
analysis and comparison with any clusters identified in our 
numeric data. In order to visualize and more easily identify 
potential clusters we produced a PCA scatter plot for each of 
the four final grade intervals (using final grades 0-5, 6-10, 
11-15, 16-20 as our labels) for each student data set. 
B. Analysis of Measurement Data 
After normalisation of the Mathematics and Portuguese 
Language student numeric data sets, respectively (by 
subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation) 
we performed a linear Principal Component Analysis (PCA), 
plotting each of the leading three principle components, PC1 
v PC2, PC2 v PC3, PC1 v PC3. In each Figure, the amount 
of variance accounted for by the respective principal 
components is reported. For example, in Figure 1 PC1 and 
PC2 account for 26% of the total information in the data. 
In each case a visual inspection suggested possible 
clusters. In order to try and identify these clusters we applied 
GNG, with key parameters set to 50 training runs and a 
maximum of 200 nodes. This technique [16] identified a 
small number of clusters and their respective centroids as 
well as allowing us to identify the actual students in each 
cluster.   
V. 
RESULTS 
We are looking to identify interesting correlations in our 
student data attributes, providing the opportunity to focus on 
promising correlations for deeper analysis. 
A. Nominal data 
 Mathematics students 
The top and bottom three cross-correlating attributes 
ranked by highest and lowest mean value are shown in 
Tables VI and VII respectively. 
TABLE VI.  
HIGHEST MEAN VALUE MATHEMATICS STUDENT 
ATTRIBUTES 
Attribute 
Mean value 
Higher education wish 
0.23 
School 
0.19 
Parent cohabitation 
0.18 
 
TABLE VII.  
LOWEST MEAN VALUE MATHEMATICS STUDENT 
ATTRIBUTES 
Attribute 
Mean value 
Paid tutor 
0.008 
Gender 
0.006 
Extra-curricular activity 
0.003 
 
Our results show potential correlations may exist 
between the student’s wish to take Higher Education and 
other nominal attributes - the school attended and parent 
cohabitation status, followed by receipt of extra educational 
support, Mother’s job, access to the internet, the reason for 
choice of school and nursery school attendance. 
Mother’s job also shows potential correlations with other 
factors, including the wish for higher education, parent 
cohabitation, school attended, educational support and choice 
of school. 
Paid extra tuition does not correlate strongly with other 
factors, even parent’s jobs, which we might have expected. 
This is also true for students receiving educational support 
from within the family. However, future analyses may show 
that such extra tuition correlates with student performance 
measured by their grades.   
Internet access also shows potential correlations with a 
number of factors, including the wish for higher education, 
school attended, parent cohabitation, address, the level of 
educational support by the school and Mother’s job. 
Factors which show very low correlations with others are 
the level of extra-curricular activities, whether the student 
was male or female and paid tutoring, followed by romantic 
relationships, Father’s job, and family size. 
 Portuguese Language students 
The top and bottom three cross-correlating attributes 
ranked by highest and lowest mean value are shown in 
Tables VIII and IX respectively. 
TABLE VIII.  HIGHEST MEAN VALUE PORTUGUESE 
LANGUAGE STUDENT ATTRIBUTES 
Attribute 
Mean value 
Paid tutor 
0.20 
Higher Education wish 
0.18 
Parent cohabitation 
0.16 
 
TABLE IX.  
LOWEST MEAN VALUE PORTUGUESE LANGUAGE 
STUDENT ATTRIBUTES 
Attribute 
Mean value 
Family education support 
0.02 
Gender 
0.01 
Extra-curricular activity 
0.003 
 
Our results show potential correlations may exist 
between paid tutoring, the student’s wish to take higher 
education and parent cohabitation followed by educational 
support and Mother’s job. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-477-0
IMMM 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management (includes DATASETS 2016)

Paid extra tuition shows potential correlations with a 
number of other factors including the level of educational 
support, the wish for higher education, parent cohabitation, 
and Mother’s job. This is also true for extra educational 
support provided by the school, correlating with the use of 
paid tutors, parent cohabitation, and Mother’s job. 
Mother’s job shows potential correlation with the use of 
paid tutoring, educational support, parent cohabitation and 
attendance at a nursery school. 
Internet access only correlated modestly with other 
factors for Portuguese language students. 
Factors which show very low correlations with others are 
the level of extra-curricular activities, student gender and 
family educational support, followed by romantic interest, 
guardian, Father’s job and school attended. 
 Comparisons between Mathematics and 
Portuguese Language analysis results 
The wish to take higher education shows potential 
correlation with Mother’s job, cohabitation status and receipt 
of extra educational support for both sets of students.   
In both cases Mother’s job correlates with other factors. 
In contrast, Father’s job, along with romantic relationships 
and extra-curricular activities shows very low correlations 
with other factors in both sets.   
Additional educational support provided by the school 
also shows potential correlation with a number of other 
factors in both sets. 
In comparison with Portuguese language students, paid 
extra tuition in the case of Mathematics students does not 
correlate strongly with other factors. 
Interestingly, gender, considered to be an influential 
factor, does not correlate well with other attributes in either 
set. 
In the case of Mathematics students, internet access 
shows potential correlations with a number of factors, such 
as the wish to take further education, school attended, and 
parent cohabitation. However, in the case of Portuguese 
Language students, internet access shows only modest 
correlations. 
 Principal Component Analysis 
As described in section 1, above, a PCA projection will 
allow visualization of multi-dimensional data in a two 
dimensional representation. For each data set the initial PCA 
plot including all final grades proved too challenging to 
visualize and so we produced four plots, one for each of the 
four final grade intervals. We have included one example 
from each data set. Principle component analysis of our 
Mathematics and Portuguese Language student data shows 
no evidence of potential clustering.   
For example, a PC1 v PC2 nominal data plot of 
Mathematics students’ achieving final grades of between 11 
and 15 (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Mathematics nominal data PC1 v PC2 Final Grades 11-15 
A further example shows a PC1 v PC2 nominal data plot 
of Portuguese language students’ achieving grades of 
between 11 and 15 (Figure 2). This data plot appears to 
exhibit a lower boundary delineation which we believe to be 
a result of a predominance of very narrow variances in the 
attribute values in this particular data set. 
 
Figure 2.  Portuguese Lang nominal data PC1 v PC2 Final Grades 16-20 
B. Measurement data 
 Mathematics students 
GNG identified modest clustering in each of the PC1, 
PC2, PC3 comparisons For example, in Figure 3 we can see 
that three clusters have been identified. The centroids are 
shown in red and in each case the students in each cluster are 
identified in order to for look for potential correlations with 
the results of our nominal data analysis. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-477-0
IMMM 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management (includes DATASETS 2016)

 
Figure 3.  Mathematics students numeric data PC1 v PC2 scatter plot 
 Portuguese Language students 
GNG did not identify useful clustering in either of the 
PC1, PC2, PC3 comparisons. In all cases only one cluster 
was identified, for example, in Figure 4. As above, the 
centroids are shown in red.  
 
Figure 4.  Portuguese Lang. students numeric data PC1 v PC2 scatter plot 
We repeated the GNG analysis, adjusting the key 
parameters, increasing the number of training runs from 50 
to 100 and maximum nodes from 200 to 600. However, this 
did not result in improvement.  Further work is underway to 
identify alternative techniques to identify potential clustering 
in the Portuguese Language student numeric data, such as 
Curvilinear Component Analysis (CCA).  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS 
In this paper, we have taken the first steps in exploring a 
mixed attribute type (numeric and nominal) data set provided 
by real student data with the objective of identifying useful 
potential correlations between attributes. 
We have applied a novel approach to the analysis of the 
nominal data, comparing the correspondence between pairs 
of nominal attributes. 
We then investigated if the analysis would identify 
interesting information in the data set, which to some extent 
it did. Our PCA plot of the Mathematics nominal data 
showed no evidence of clustering. Further work is underway 
to apply a non-linear visualization method in order to 
investigate potential clustering. 
We then applied numeric data analysis techniques to 
identify clustering and potential correlations in our numeric 
attributes identifying some potentially interesting patterns. 
In the case of our Mathematics student data using 
Principle Component Analysis followed by the GNG 
technique we were able to identify some clustering of the 
data, however the corresponding analysis of our Portuguese 
Language student data did not identify useful clusters. 
Further work is underway to analyse and make 
comparisons between the numeric and nominal data sets to 
identify correlations, and subsequently to use these analyses 
to develop methods to predict student performance. 
From the educational perspective, this would then allow 
us to perform follow up analyses on the extent to which 
different attributes can influence student achievement. 
Future work includes the application of alternative 
nominal data analysis techniques to our nominal student data 
in order to compare the results and evaluate the advantages 
and disadvantages of these techniques in comparison with 
those of the technique deployed. 
The novel nominal data analysis technique may provide a 
useful additional tool in the analysis of nominal data. We 
have shared the technique and corresponding MATLAB 
code with colleague researchers to gain further feedback on 
its usage and ideas on how to increase the sophistication of 
the method. Please contact us for a copy of the code. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Wakelam, A. Jefferies, N. Davey and Y. Sun, “The 
potential for using artificial intelligence techniques to 
improve e-Learning systems”, 2015. 
[2] P. Cortez and A. Silva, “Using data mining to predict 
secondary school student performance”, in A. Brito and J. 
Teixeira Eds., Proceedings of 5th FUture BUsiness 
TEChnology Conference (FUBUTEC 2008), Porto, Portugal, 
April, 
2008, 
pp. 
5-
12.https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Student+Performanc
e# 
[3] V. Ramesh, P. Parkavi and K. Ramar, "Predicting student 
performance: a statistical and data mining approach". 
International journal of computer applications 63, no. 8, 2013, 
pp 0975 – 8887. 
[4] P. 
Bhalchandra 
et 
al, 
"Prognostication of 
student’s 
performance: 
An 
hierarchical 
clustering 
strategy 
for 
educational dataset." In Computational Intelligence in Data 
Mining—Volume 1, Springer India, 2016, pp. 149-157. 
[5] D. Fatima, S. Fatima,  “A survey on research work in 
educational data mining.” IOSR Journal of Computer 
Engineering (IOSR-JCE), 17, 2015. 
[6] T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, J. Friedman and  J. Franklin, “The 
elements of statistical learning: data mining, inference and 
prediction.” 
The 
Mathematical 
Intelligencer. 
doi:10.1007/BF02985802, 2005. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-477-0
IMMM 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management (includes DATASETS 2016)

[7] D. Clow, "An overview of learning analytics." Teaching in 
Higher Education, 2013, pp. 683-695. 
[8] A. Agresti,  “Categorical data analysis.” Vol. 996. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 1996. 
[9] P. M. Bentler,, and D. G. Bonett, “Significance tests and 
goodness of fit in the analysis of covariance structures.” 
Psychological bulletin, 88(3), 588, 1980. 
[10] P. Ashrafi, “Predicting the absorption rate of chemicals 
through 
mammalian 
skin 
using 
Machine 
Learning 
algorithms.” (Ph.D. unpublished). University of Hertfordshire, 
2016. 
[11] B. Fritzke, "A growing neural gas network learns topologies." 
Advances in neural information processing systems 7, 1995, 
pp. 625-632. 
[12] A. Hocking, J. Geach, Y. Sun, N. Davey, N. Hine,   
"Unsupervised image analysis & galaxy categorisation in 
multi-wavelength 
Hubble 
space 
telescope 
images", 
Proceedings of the ECMLPKDD 2015 Doctoral Consortium 
(ECML 2015), 2015, pp. 105-114. 
[13] E. Fatemizadeh, C. Lucas and H. Soltanian-Zadeh, 
"Automatic landmark extraction from image data using 
modified 
growing 
neural 
gas 
network." 
Information 
Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on 7, no. 2,  
77-85, 2003. 
[14] G. Liu, and X. Wang, "An integrated intrusion detection 
system by using multiple neural networks." IEEE Conference 
on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems, 2008, pp. 22-27. 
[15] P. Cortez, and A. Silva, “Using data mining to predict 
secondary school student performance.” In the Proceedings of 
5th Annual Future Business Technology Conference, 2008,  
pp. 5–12. 
[16] A. Parimala, “Using machine learning and computer 
simulations to analyse neuronal activity in the cerebellar 
nuclei during absence epilepsy.” (Ph.D. unpublished). 
University of Hertfordshire, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-477-0
IMMM 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management (includes DATASETS 2016)

