Sketch of Big Data Real-Time Analytics Model 
 
 
Bakhtiar M. Amen 
School of Computing and Engineering 
The University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
e-mail: bakhtiar.amen@hud.ac.uk 
Joan Lu 
School of Computing and Engineering 
The University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
 e-mail: j.lu@hud.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— Big Data has drawn huge attention from 
researchers in information sciences, decision makers in 
governments and enterprises. However, there is a lot of 
potential and highly useful value hidden in the huge volume of 
data. Data is the new oil, but unlike oil data can be refined 
further to create even more value. Therefore, a new scientific 
paradigm is born as data-intensive scientific discovery, also 
known as Big Data. The growth volume of real-time data 
requires new techniques and technologies to discover insight 
value. In this paper we introduce the Big Data real-time 
analytics model as a new technique. We discuss and compare 
several Big Data technologies for real-time processing along 
with various challenges and issues in adapting Big Data. Real-
time Big Data analysis based on cloud computing approach is 
our future research direction. 
Keywords - Big Data Analytics; Real-time Analytics; Big Data 
state-of-the-art  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The term “Big Data” is universal and has gained 
popularity within the domain of scientist, bioinformatics, 
geophysics, astronomy and meteorology [1]. In fact, all Big 
Data has blind spot areas in which data are missing, scarce, 
or otherwise unrepresentative of the data domain [2]. Big 
Data analytics enable enterprise and scientists to extract 
usable 
information 
out 
of 
enormous, 
complex, 
interconnected and varied datasets. However, from 2.8 
Zettabytes of global data only 0.5% of these data was 
analyzed in 2012 [3]. In addition to this, current Big Data 
techniques and technologies are incapable of storing, 
processing or analyzing data, as data is not extracted by 
particular 
scientific 
disciplines 
(e.g., 
bioinformatics, 
geophysics, astronomy and meteorology). The way in which 
people think about data and data analysis will gradually 
change as well, in addition to the technological possibilities. 
Thanks to the latest internet technologies, the potential for 
harnessing all that can be measured and analysed using solid 
data, intelligent sensors and filtering has never been as 
promising and lucrative as today, at the dawn of the digital 
era [4]. 
The Big Data paradigm consists of batch and real-time 
processing [5]. The batch process focuses entirely on 
structured and semi-structured data. Likewise, the goal of 
real-time processing paradigm is to deal with velocity of Big 
Data such as processing streaming data but with low latency. 
This paper aims to review the background of Big Data and 
compare several Big Data real-time processing technologies, 
as well as introduce the new real-time Big Data analytics 
model.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 
2 we briefly overview some concepts of Big Data including 
its definition, characteristics and size. Section 3 presents the 
Big Data domains. Section 4 presents related work. Section 5 
presents an evaluation and discussion. The article culminates 
in a conclusion and recommendation for future work.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
In this section, we present Big Data definitions, its 
characteristics, followed by the Big Data revenue and the 
size of global data. Next, we present a Big Data technology 
map. 
A. Big Data Definition  
Big Data is one of the key buzzwords in the current 
technological landscape, but there is no agreed definition by 
either academia or industry. Chen et al. [6] defined Big Data 
as “Datasets which could not be captured, managed, and 
processed by general computers within an acceptable scope”. 
Hashem et al. [7] also defined Big Data as “a term utilized to 
refer to the increase in the Volume of data that is difficult to 
store, process, and analyze through traditional database 
technologies”. However, these definitions basically state the 
most obvious dimensions of Big Data Volume, Variety, 
Velocity and Veracity. Whereas, the data flows in today’s 
digital era are being produced around the clock and all over 
the world. 
B. Big Data Characteristics 
The conjunction of these four dimensions helps both to 
define and distinguish Big Data. Volume refers to the 
amount of data from Terabyte to Petabyte and Exabyte to 
Zettabyte [6]. Variety refers to various data sources collected 
from web logs, social networks, machines, sensors, 
transactions and the internet of things, in different formats of 
semi-structured and unstructured [8]. Velocity refers to the 
speed at which data is generated and the speed of data 
transfer [7]. Data has become an extremely valuable factor in 
business productivity and the opportunity to discover new 
value from it. The 4V’s of Big Data are shown in Figure 1.  
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-415-2
IMMM 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

 
Figure 1.  The characteristics of Big Data 
C. Size of Global Data 
The size of digital data has been growing at an increasing 
rate. Figure 2 depicts the size of created data volumes in 
percentages across the USA, West Europe, India and the rest 
of the world. According to the International Data 
Corporation (IDC) study, the size of global data in 2009 was 
1.8 Zettabyte, it increased to 8 Zettabyte in 2015 [9]. It is 
doubling in size every two years, and by 2020 the digital 
universe data is estimated to be 44 Zettabytes [10].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The scale of global data generates in percentages. 
Furthermore, the explosive growth of global data 
increased rapidly. In fact, 90% of the world's entire data was 
created since 2012 [11], whereas only 10% of all these data 
is structured data compare to 80% is unstructured data [11]. 
Figure 3 depicts the scale of global structured data versus 
unstructured data.  
 
 
Figure 3.  The scale of universe data format  
D. Big Data Revenue 
Manyika et al. [12] estimated that the power of Big Data 
analytics guaranteed 60% of potential revenue through new 
opportunities from location-aware and location-based 
services. In reality, the ambiguous demand in the Big Data 
era is more related to business insights since the 4Vth Value 
of Big Data has been introduced. Big Data revenue increased 
from $3.2 billion to $16.9 billion between 2010 and 2015 
[6]. However, the potential value to consumers, business and 
users are estimated to be $700 billion in the next ten years 
[7]. 
E. Big Data Real-time State- of-the-art 
Hadoop is known as innovative in Big Data analytics, 
since Hadoop has the ability to touch 50% of the global data 
by 2015 [13]. In fact, Hadoop and MapReduce have been 
criticized by both academia and enterprises for their real-
time limitations. The MapReduce programming model is an 
open-source version of Hadoop [13][14]. Fan et al. [14] 
stated that Hadoop made a world record in sorting one 
petabyte of data within 16.25 hours and one terabyte of data 
in only 62 seconds. Furthermore, the Hadoop ecosystem 
consists of several projects as introduced only the real-time 
applications in Figure 7. 
Twitter has developed storm in 2011 [10][15] for data 
streaming processing. Storm is an open source and it has 
been improved in scalability while maintaining a low latency 
for real-time data stream processing, which integrates with 
other queuing and bandwidth systems. Storm consists of 
several moving parts, including the coordinator (ZooKeeper), 
state manager (Nimbus) and processing nodes (Supervisor). 
Yahoo has developed S4 in 2010 [13][14][16] for data 
stream parallel distributing processing. Kafka also developed 
LinkedIn in 2011 [16] for the purposes of messaging 
processing. Spark [9] Stream is an extension of Spark that 
supports continuous stream processing. In practice, some 
other new computing models have recently been introduced 
for stream data processing (e.g., GraphLab and Dryad), 
which are suitable for machine learning and data mining 
programming models [16] . 
III. 
BIG DATA DOMAINS 
In this section, we describe some of the challenges and 
issues of Big Data in several disciplines from both industry 
and scientific perspectives.   
A. Big Data in the Bio-Medical Sector 
Kambatla et al. [17] highlighted that “healthcare and 
human welfare is one of the most convincing applications of 
Big Data analytics, it is a fastest growing datasets”. In fact, a 
large amount of medical data sources like RMI scans, 
bioscience data, and genomic data are becoming more 
complex and difficult to be captured, storage, and analyzed 
[18]. Although, China attempts to collect and store 30 
million of traceable biological samples by 2015 [19]. 
Manyika et al. [12] stated that every year the USA has 
wasted more than $2 trillion in healthcare sectors. 
Implementing Big Data analytics technique has helped the 
US to save $300 billion as well as helping Europe to save 
over $149 billion. In addition, bio-informatics requires new 
advanced computational techniques to support efficient 
knowledge discovery. 
Structured Data 
Semi-structured Data 
Unstructured Data 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-415-2
IMMM 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

B. Big Data in Enterprise 
Facebook, Google, Yahoo and Falcon are creating large 
scale of data. As an example, Wal-Mart produced over 1 
million customer transactions per hour across 6000 stores 
[6]. Amazon Web Services (AWS) has also been successful 
in IaaS services with 70% of their market share including the 
most popular Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2). A Simple 
Storage Service (S3) enables the processing of 500,000 
queries over millions of terminal operations from third party 
sellers each day [6][20]. Akamai also managed to analyze 75 
million events per day. However, the most observable 
domain in Big Data analytics is value [20]. Hence, Data has 
become extremely valuable in enterprise to produce 
productivity and business predictions.  
C. Big Data in Scientific Research 
Every day NASA solar observatory and telescopes are 
capturing more than 1.6 TB of high quality images and 
collecting 140 TB data from the large synoptic survey 
telescope [21]. Likewise, one space satellite generates over 
800 gigabytes of data on a daily bases. In 2012, the Earth 
Observing System Data and Information System (EOSDIS) 
also succeeded in distributing more than 4.5 million 
gigabytes of data per day [20]. However, physicists and 
astronomists have made numerous efforts to engage with 
massive crowded data for many years to test the novelty of 
our universe. 
D. Big Data in Engineering  
The key challenge in the area of engineering is the 
discovery of techniques that are able to process machinery 
and the internet of things data. These sources are creating 
massive amounts of data through embedded networking and 
real-time approaches. The size of the internet of things data 
is estimated to be one trillion by 2030 [20]; this includes 350 
billion annual meter readings. The volume of data generated 
in engineering is by a wide range of sensors, through power 
plants, machinery data and GPS as well as electronic devices 
[22].  
IV. 
RELATED WORK 
Patel [23] highlighted several issues and challenges in 
storing, processing and analyzing data in real-time. The 
author argued that highly efficient algorithm and technology 
will enhance the accuracy of valuable information [24]. 
Ranjan [24] investigated in different Big Data applications 
and discussed their differences from traditional analytics, and 
he also described the new solutions for real-time Big Data 
analytics. Kambatla et al. [17] implemented several projects 
in a real-time data caching and processing graph in one of 
Google’s distributing systems. The author also highlighted 
that current technology such as Hadoop incapable of 
processing large-scale of graphs. Hadoop mainly consists of 
two components; Hadoop File System (HDFS) and 
Programming model (Map Reduce) [25]. HDFS stores huge 
data set reliably and streams it to user application at high 
bandwidth and MapReduce is a framework that is used for 
processing massive data sets in a distributed fashion over a 
several machines. It has two parts- job tracker and task 
tracker [26].  
Hu [27] proposed HACE theorem which characterizes 
the features of the Big Data revolution, and recommends the 
Big Data processing model, from a data mining perspective. 
Moreover, the rapid growth of complex diversity and 
dimensionality of the Remote Sensor (RS) lies in collected 
metadata to analyze as stated in [28]. The recent lower level 
parallel programming was comprehensively engaged with 
RS image processing along with a multi-level hierarchical 
cluster. Hence, parallel programming is required for RS 
applications to predict accurate results. According to Ma et 
al. [28], the current Big Data analytics model is beyond the 
capabilities of processing and analyzing real-time Satellite 
Data.  
The scale of remote satellite data is depicted in Figure 4; 
this scale demonstrates the volumes of satellite Data per day 
as well as per year across the world. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Scale of Global Satellite Remote Sensor Data 
Figure 5.  Scale of Global Satellite Remote Sensor Data. 
Two Big Data real-time/stream analytics model were 
found in our literature, known as Simith’s Big Data real-time 
analytics Model [29] and Big Data life cycle management 
model [30]. Khan et al. [16] proposed Big Data life cycle 
management model using the technologies and terminologies 
of Big Data. The author’s proposed data life cycle consists 
of: Data Acquisition/Generation, Data Collection, Data 
storing (temporarily/permanently), and Data Analysis. 
Likewise, Barlow [29] presented Smith’s five phases of the 
real-time Big Data analytics model which includes: Data 
extraction, development model, validation and deployment, 
real-time scoring, and model refresh.  
Barlow also stated that the correct analytics model is 
necessary to process heterogeneous data in real time. 
Furthermore, this model is utilized from the high-
performance of data mining, predictive analytics, text 
mining, and data optimization to enhance the decision 
makers [1][31]. In fact, the heart of any prediction system is 
the Model, for instance, a credit card fraud prediction system 
could leverage a model built using previous credit card 
transaction data over a period of time.  
 
 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-415-2
IMMM 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

TABLE I. SMITH’S BIG DATA ANALYTIC MODEL 
 
Hu et al. [1] categorized Big Data analytics into 
Descriptive, 
Predictive 
and 
Prescriptive. 
Descriptive 
analytics focuses on historical data and the description of 
what occurred previously from Data visualization results. 
Predictive analytics focuses on future probabilities and 
describes the business value outcome. Advanced analytics 
[31] is known as Prescriptive analytics which address the 
decision making efficiently. For example, simulation is used 
to analyze complex systems to gain insight into system 
behavior and identify issues and optimization techniques are 
used to find optimal solutions under given constraints. 
However, only about 3% of companies are utilizing 
prescriptive analytics to predict future events according to a 
recent Gardner Research survey [32].  
V. 
EVALUATION AND DISCUSSION 
Despite the availability of new technologies for handling 
massive amounts of data at incredible speeds, the real 
promise of advanced data analytics lies beyond the area of 
pure technology. The existing Big Data analytics appears to 
be suffering from a lack of effectiveness compared to the 
speed of real-time data volume. Thus, Big Data real-time 
analytics has been proposed to describe the advanced 
analysis methods or mechanisms for massive data [11].  In 
fact, increasing the heterogeneous data in the real-time 
monition from various data sources (e.g., The Internet of 
Things, multimedia, social networking) plays a significant 
role in Big Data. In addition to these, the new real-time 
model shown in Figure 6 is required. Banerjee [33] 
highlighted the traditional analytics versus real-time 
analytics in Figure 5. Banerjee also compared several 
parameters in each feature from storage cost to support cost. 
It shows that Big Data analytics is more reliable in terms of 
data speed, time and velocity compared to traditional 
analytics. This highlights the key differences between the 
realities of yesterday’s analytics and the predictions for 
today’s Big Data analytics.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  The Traditional Analytics versus Big Data Analytics [33] 
Figure 7.  The Traditional Analytics versus Big Data Analytics [33]. 
In addition to these, we implemented the new real-time 
analytics model from Smith’s model as depicted in Figure 6, 
because Smith’s model was precisely based on data mining 
and text mining [28]. As shown in Figure 6, this model 
consists 
of 
five 
phases: 
Data 
Extraction, 
Data 
Cleaning/Filtering, Data Analysis, Data Visualization, and 
Decision-making.  
In the Data extraction phase, Data is required to be 
processed by one of the real-time technologies such as Storm 
and S4 as highlighted in Figure 7. Data must be cleaned 
before being transformed for analyzing to unlock the hidden 
potential value from it. Therefore, the second phase of 
filtering technique is required for two reasons. Firstly, data 
intent to lies in the extracting stage as indicated in [28]. 
Secondly, processing data without filtering means invalid 
results. Data visualization has to communicate and predict 
data through graphics to aid decision-making through 
sophisticated analytics results. In addition to this, advanced 
analytics for massive data is required as a new solution to 
effectively improving decision making in the final phase. As 
a result, the process of Real-time data analytics is still a 
challenging task and the model requires an advanced 
computational and robust real-time algorithm to predict it 
efficiently.   
 
 
 
Figure 8.  The Big Data Real-time analytics model. 
 
Analytic Model 
Descriptions 
Data 
Extraction/Distill
ation 
Like unrefined oil, heterogeneous data types 
are messy and complex. Emerging new 
extracting models and performing accurate 
analysis are necessary and challenging to 
handle unstructured data [11][18]. 
Development 
Model 
In this phase, the model process consists of 
speed, 
flexibility 
productivity, 
and 
reproducibility.   
Validation 
and 
Deployment 
Extracting fresh data and running against the 
model and comparing the results with other 
existing models leading into productivity [13]. 
Real-time 
Scoring 
Data in real-time scoring is triggered by 
actions at the decision layer. At this phase of 
the process, the deployed scoring rules are 
“divorced” from the data in the data layer or 
data mart [21].  
Model Refresh 
Data is always changing, it is necessary to 
refresh the data and refresh the model built on 
the original data. Simple exploratory data 
analysis is also recommended.  
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-415-2
IMMM 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Furthermore, selecting an appropriate real-time analytics 
model and technology depends on data objects. As depicted 
in Figure 7, we highlighted the Big Data real-time processing 
state-of-the-art in terms of its developers, programming 
model, capabilities, and limitations of data structure types. 
We 
highlighted 
each 
application’s 
advantages 
and 
disadvantages as well as their architectures. The results show 
that, first, real-time processing is becoming more important 
in real-time analytics, likewise batch processing remains the 
most common data processing paradigm [28, 34].Second, 
most of the systems adopted a graph programming model, 
because the graph processing model can express more 
complex tasks. Third, all the systems support concurrent 
execution to accelerate the processing speed. Fourth, data 
stream processing models use memory as the data column 
storage to achieve higher access and processing rates, 
whereas batch-processing models employ a file system or 
disk to store massive data and support multiple visiting. 
Fifth, some of these real-time technologies were backed by 
partially fault tolerant and have limitations in their node 
backup as highlighted in Storm and S4 [1][13][14][15][16]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this research, we investigated on two research areas: in 
the first part of study, we presented the concepts of Big Data 
as well as some of the challenges and issues in both industry 
and scientific domains, followed by a comparison of several 
Big Data real-time processing technologies in terms of their 
capabilities and limitations as shown in Figure 7. However, 
each of these technologies were compared in terms of their 
architecture, programming model, data structure capabilities 
(e.g., semi-structured or unstructured), and this helped us to 
highlight their advantage and disadvantages.  
In the second part of our study, we discussed Smith’s five 
phases of the Big Data real-time analytics model as depicted 
in Table 1. Furthermore, we introduced our real-time Big 
Data analytics model as shown in Figure 6.  Throughout our 
investigation, the real-time analytics appears to play a key 
role in Big Data and enrich the potential revenue. Likewise, 
it needs further research and collaborations between the 
scientists and industries to improve the real-time analytics 
bottleneck. In fact, a different storage mechanism is required, 
because all of the data cannot fit in a single type of storage 
area [35]. Hence, Cloud computing is playing an important 
role as it gives organizations the ability to store and analyze 
revolutionized data economically and offers extensive 
computing resources [16].  
As result, the motivation for undertaken this research was 
an attempt to develop a real-time Big Data analytics 
framework which enable to enrich the decision-makers in the 
real-time monition. This research allowed us to identify the 
weaknesses of existing systems, and to design a roadmap of 
contributions to the state of the art. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Our future plan is to investigate on real-time analytics 
based on cloud computing and attempts to answer the 
following questions: 
 
Investigate on existing cloud paradigms and highlight 
their limitations in real-time analytics aspects.   
 
Develop an algorithm for the real-time analytics based 
on cloud computing. 
 
Determine how to test, implement and compare our 
results 
with 
other 
existing 
cloud 
computing 
technologies.  
 
Figure 9.  Big Data stream processing state-of-the-art 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-415-2
IMMM 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

REFERENCES 
[1] Y. W. Han Hu, Tat-Seng Chua,  Xuelong Li, "Toward 
Scalable Systems for Big Data Analytics: A Technology 
Tutorial," vol. 2, pp. 652-687, 2014. 
[2] J. J. Berman, Principles of big data: preparing, sharing, and 
analyzing complex information: Newnes, 2013. 
[3] N. Khan, I. Yaqoob, I. A. T. Hashem, Z. Inayat, W. K. M. 
Ali, M. Alam, M. Shiraz, and A. Gani, "Big data: survey, 
technologies, 
opportunities, 
and 
challenges," 
TheScientificWorldJournal, vol. 2014, p. 712826, 2014. 
[4] G. Aydin, I. R. Hallac, and B. Karakus, "Architecture and 
Implementation of a Scalable Sensor Data Storage and 
Analysis System Using Cloud Computing and Big Data 
Technologies," Journal of Sensors, vol. 2015, pp. 1-11, 2015. 
[5] K. 
Kolomvatsos, 
C. 
Anagnostopoulos, 
and 
S. 
Hadjiefthymiades, "An Efficient Time Optimized Scheme for 
Progressive Analytics in Big Data," Big Data Research, 2015. 
[6] M. Chen, S. Mao, and Y. Liu, "Big Data: A Survey," Mobile 
Networks and Applications, vol. 19, pp. 171-209, 2014. 
[7] I. A. T. Hashem, I. Yaqoob, N. B. Anuar, S. Mokhtar, A. 
Gani, and S. Ullah Khan, "The rise of “big data” on cloud 
computing: Review and open research issues," Information 
Systems, vol. 47, pp. 98-115, 2015. 
[8] N. Khan, I. Yaqoob, I. A. T. Hashem, Z. Inayat, W. K. M. 
Ali, M. Alam, M. Shiraz, and A. Gani, "Big data: survey, 
technologies, opportunities, and challenges," vol. 2014, p. 
712826, 2014. 
[9] J. J. Berman, Principles of Big Data: Preparing, Sharing, and 
Analyzing Complex Information, 1st ed.: Morgan Kaufmann, 
2013. 
[10] D. R. John Gantz, "The Digital Universe in 2020: Big Data, 
Bigger Digital Shadows, and Biggest Growth in the Far East," 
2013. 
[11] C. L. Philip Chen and C.-Y. Zhang, "Data-intensive 
applications, challenges, techniques and technologies: A 
survey on Big Data," Information Sciences, vol. 275, pp. 314-
347, 2014. 
[12] B. Brown, M. Chui, and J. Manyika, "Are you ready for the 
era of ‘big data’," McKinsey Quarterly, vol. 4, pp. 24-35, 
2011. 
[13] C. Dobre and F. Xhafa, "Parallel Programming Paradigms and 
Frameworks in Big Data Era," International Journal of 
Parallel Programming, vol. 42, pp. 710-738, 2014. 
[14] F. H. Jianqing Fan, and Han Liu, "Challenges of Big Data 
Analysis," National science review, vol. 1, pp. 293-314, Jun 
2014. 
[15] B. D. a. Zachary Miller a, William Deitrick a, Wei Hua, Alex 
Hai Wang, "Twitter spammer detection using data stream 
clustering," 2013. 
[16] N. Khan, I. Yaqoob, I. A. Hashem, Z. Inayat, W. K. Ali, M. 
Alam, M. Shiraz, and A. Gani, "Big data: survey, 
technologies, 
opportunities, 
and 
challenges," 
TheScientificWorldJournal, vol. 2014, p. 712826, 2014. 
[17] K. Kambatla, G. Kollias, V. Kumar, and A. Grama, "Trends 
in big data analytics," Journal of Parallel and Distributed 
Computing, vol. 74, pp. 2561-2573, 2014. 
[18] M. C. James Manyika, Brad Brown, Jacques Bughin, Richard 
Dobbs, Charles Roxburgh, Angela Hung Byers, "Big data: 
The 
next 
frontier 
for 
innovation, 
competition, 
and 
productivity," 2011. 
[19] V. C. M. Leung, M. Chen, Y. Zhang, and S. Mao, Big Data: 
Related Technologies, Challenges and Future Prospects. DE: 
Springer Verlag, 2014. 
[20] C. Esposito, M. Ficco, F. Palmieri, and A. Castiglione, "A 
knowledge-based platform for Big Data analytics based on 
publish/subscribe 
services 
and 
stream 
processing," 
Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 79, pp. 3-17, 2014. 
[21] J. Green, P. Schechter, C. Baltay, R. Bean, D. Bennett, R. 
Brown, C. Conselice, M. Donahue, X. Fan, and B. Gaudi, 
"Wide-field infrared survey telescope (WFIRST) final report," 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1208.4012, 2012. 
[22] H. J. Watson, "Tutorial_ Big Data Analytics_ Concepts 
Technologies and Applica," Journals at AIS Electronic 
Library, vol. 34, pp. 1247-1268, 2014. 
[23] A. B. Patel, M. Birla, and U. Nair, "Addressing big data 
problem using Hadoop and Map Reduce," 2012, pp. 1-5. 
[24] B. W. Dan Vesset, Henry D. Morris, Richard L. Villars, Gard 
Little, Jean S. Bozman, Lucinda Borovick, Carl W. Olofson, 
Susan Feldman, Steve Conway, Matthew Eastwood, Natalya 
Yezhkova, 
"Market 
Analysis 
Worldwide 
Big 
Data 
Technology and Service  " IDC Analyse Future, vol. 1, 2012. 
[25] A. Katal, M. Wazid, and R. H. Goudar, "Big data: Issues, 
challenges, tools and Good practices," 2013, pp. 404-409. 
[26] J. Nandimath, E. Banerjee, A. Patil, P. Kakade, and S. 
Vaidya, "Big data analysis using Apache Hadoop," pp. 700-
703. 
[27] X. Wu, X. Zhu, G.-Q. Wu, and W. Ding, "Data Mining with 
Big Data," IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data 
Engineering, vol. 26, pp. 97-107, 2014. 
[28] Y. Ma, H. Wu, L. Wang, and B. Huang, "Remote sensing big 
data computing: Challenges and opportunities," Future 
Generation Computer Systems, vol. in press, 2014. 
[29] M. Barlow, "Real-Time Big Data Analytics: Emerging 
Architecture," pp. 24-25, 2013. 
[30] R. Casado and M. Younas, "Emerging trends and 
technologies in big data processing," Concurrency and 
Computation: Practice and Experience, vol. 27, pp. 2078-
2091, 2015. 
[31] Vijay Srinivas Agneeswaran, "Big Data Analytics Beyond 
Hadoop " pp. 22-23, 2014. 
[32] S. P. Soumya Sree Laxmi P. , "Impact of Big Data Analytics 
on Business Intelligence-Scope of Predictive Analytics," vol. 
Vol.5, 2015. 
[33] A. Banerjee, "Big Data & Advanced Analytics in Telecom: A 
Multi-Billion-Dollar Revenue Opportunity" pp. 7-22, 2013. 
[34] Y. Ma, H. Wu, L. Wang, B. Huang, R. Ranjan, A. Zomaya, 
and W. Jie, "Remote sensing big data computing: Challenges 
and opportunities," Future Generation Computer Systems, 
2014. 
[35] E. B. Dudin and Y. G. Smetanin, "A review of cloud 
computing," Scientific and Technical Information Processing, 
vol. 38, pp. 280-284, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-415-2
IMMM 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

