Data Mining Application for Anti-Crisis Management 
 
Nafisa Yusupova 
Department of Computer Science and Robotics 
Ufa State Aviation Technical University 
Ufa, Russia 
yussupova@ugatu.ac.ru 
 
Gyuzel Shakhmametova  
Department of Computer Science and Robotics 
Ufa State Aviation Technical University 
Ufa, Russia 
shakhgouzel@mail.ru  
 
Abstract—The paper is devoted to data mining as applied to 
anti-crisis 
management, 
in 
particular 
to 
bankruptcy 
monitoring. The decision support system for bankruptcy 
monitoring, based on the intelligent information technologies 
(data mining, expert systems) is considered. The main stages of 
data mining technology applied to anti-crisis management are 
described in detail. The results of data mining implementation 
are estimated.  
Keywords-data mining; forecasting; decision support system; 
anti-crisis management; bankruptcy monitoring 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Anti-crisis management is a process of preventing or 
dealing with the crisis the enterprise (company) is in. This 
definition incorporates two components of the anti-crisis 
management: prevention of the crisis that has not yet come 
and overcoming of the crisis that has already come [1]. 
Interpretation of the anti-crisis management may be different 
depending on the state of the enterprise. In case the 
enterprise is in a stable position, the anti-crisis management 
consists in monitoring which aims at the data retrieval and 
processing and forecasting the enterprise performance. In 
case the enterprise is in an unstable position, i.e. there is a 
bankruptcy risk, the anti-crisis management assumes a form 
of regulation which is a set of measures to protect the 
enterprise in crisis situations and prevent bankruptcy. When 
an enterprise is in crisis it is necessary to resort directly to 
anti-crisis management as an instrument to pull the enterprise 
out of the crisis or to prepare it to be wound up or 
reorganized.  
The carried-out analysis of methods of enterprises 
bankruptcy predicting and the analysis of possibilities of well 
known IT-decisions in this field showed that the 
development of a decision support system for bankruptcies 
monitoring is needed [7]. The data required for anti-crisis 
management are semi-structured data in the majority of cases 
and therefore the application of intelligent information 
technologies is necessary [4][6]. 
The researches into anti-crisis management in the field of 
bankruptcy monitoring have been carried on for a long time 
and can be found in the papers of many scientists, as well as 
in the IT-decisions. These problems are considered in detail 
in [7]. The distinguishing feature of this research is the 
possibility of fraudulent bankruptcy indications forecasting 
at its early stages when it is possible to take preventive 
measures. 
There are two main approaches to enterprise bankruptcy 
forecasting in modern business and financial performance 
practice [1]. Quantitative methods are based on financial data 
and include the following coefficients: Altman Z-coefficient 
(the USA); Taffler coefficient (Great Britain); two-factor 
model (the USA); Beaver metrics system and the others. A 
qualitative approach to enterprise bankruptcy forecasting 
relies on the comparison of the financial data of the 
enterprise under review with the data of the bankrupt 
business (Argenti A-account, Scone method). Integrated 
points-based system used for the comprehensive evaluation 
of business solvency includes the characteristics of both 
quantitative and qualitative approaches. An apparent 
advantage of the methods consists in their system and 
complex approach to the forecasting of signs of crisis 
development, their weaknesses lie in the fact that the models 
are quite complicated in making decisions in case of a multi-
criteria problem, it is also worth mentioning that the taken 
forecasting decision is more subjective. Modern information 
technologies, Data Mining in particular, provide ample 
opportunities for solving the problems of anti-crisis 
management [10]. 
Financial and economic application software that is 
available on the market nowadays is quite varied and 
heterogeneous. The necessity to develop such software 
products is dictated by the need of enterprises to promptly 
receive management data in due time and to forecast the 
signs of crisis development. To one extent or another, tools 
for anti-crisis management are available in a number of 
ready-made IT-decisions [7]. But the data analysis in many 
software products actually consists in providing the 
necessary strategic materials, while software products should 
meet the increasing needs such as analysis and forecasting 
enterprise financial performance in the next period of report. 
The authors of the study aim to develop models and 
algorithms based on intelligent technologies for the detection 
of the crisis state of the enterprise while still in its early 
stages for the timely changes of the development strategy of 
the enterprise, which will increase stability and economic 
independence of the enterprise, as well as reduce the impact 
of the human (subjective) factor on making important 
management decisions. Data mining application in the 
decision support system for anti-crisis management is 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

discussed in this article on the example of monitoring 
bankruptcies. 
The second section deals with the general scheme of the 
proposed decision support system. The main modules of this 
system are the data mining module and the expert system. 
The third section considers in detail the application of data 
mining technology to forecast the financial performance of 
the enterprise (company). Computer-based processing of the 
data on the basis of the proposed system is presented in the 
fourth section. Forecasting of the financial performance of 
the enterprise is made by the analytical platform. The stages 
of the implementation processes are also described. Section 5 
of the article presents the results of the practical application 
of the system which allows assessing the effectiveness of the 
system. 
II. 
DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR MONITORING 
BANKRUPTCY 
The major aspect of the bankruptcy monitoring problem 
is the analysis and identification in good time of the signs of 
fraudulent bankruptcies [1]. 
The basis of the whole complex of techniques for the 
decision support system (DSS) is legally approved 
methodical instructions on accounting and analysis of 
enterprise’ financial position and solvency so as to group the 
enterprises depending on the level of risk of bankruptcy, as 
well as techniques for the identification of the signs of 
fictitious and deliberate bankruptcy. These techniques are 
currently used by auditors and arbitration managers.  
To develop the decision support system for monitoring 
bankruptcy the authors propose the following general 
scheme of DSS (Figure 1) and used knowledge engineering, 
expert system (ES) technology [4] and data mining (DM) 
technology [2][3].  
The expert system technology underlies two modules of 
DSS in bankruptcy monitoring [8]: 
• 
module for grouping companies depending on the 
level of risk of bankruptcy (module1); 
• 
module for the identification of the signs of illegal 
bankruptcy (module 2). 
 
Figure 1.  The general scheme of the DSS in monitoring bankruptcies 
 
Another module of the DSS is a data mining module. 
This module helps to solve problems which include cleaning 
the data for qualitative forecasting and predicting financial 
indicators of the enterprise with the use of several prognostic 
model-building 
mechanisms, 
including 
self-teaching 
algorithms. The objective of this module is to identify 
negative trends in changing financial indicators as well as 
possible signs of fraudulent bankruptcy based on the 
comparative analysis of the current financial indicators and 
financial indicators forecasted by the data mining module. 
Primary, intermediate and resulting data are stored in the 
main decision support database organized according to the 
relational model. To keep the decision support system 
operating the primary data on the company is imported in the 
system either automatically or manually. Interaction between 
the DSS and the user is carried out by means of an interface 
subsystem. 
In the first phase of the DSS the enterprise is classified 
according to the degree of the threat of bankruptcy by means 
of module 1 of the expert system (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.   The steps of the DSS modules using 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Depending on the results, the enterprise is either checked 
for signs of fraudulent bankruptcy (I step, module 1 of the 
expert system), or financial performance is forecasted using 
the data mining technology (II step, DM module). In the 
third phase on the basis of the forecasted values the signs of 
the deliberate bankruptcy are identified (III step, module 2 of 
expert system). On the IV step a report is made for the 
decision maker. 
III. 
DATA MINING MODULE 
The problem which is solved by the data mining module 
in DSS in monitoring enterprise bankruptcy is the problem of 
forecasting financial indicators of the enterprise (company). 
This problem can be seen as a problem of forecasting the 
time series, as the data for the prediction of financial 
indicators are presented in the form of measurement 
sequences, collated at non-random moments of time. In 
contrast to the analysis of random sampling the analysis of 
time series is based on the assumption that successive values 
are observed in equal periods of time. Like many other kinds 
of analysis the analysis of time series implies that the data 
contain a systematic component (generally including several 
components) and a random noise (error) which makes it hard 
to detect regular components. 
A time series may be presented as decomposition of four 
constituents [11]:  
Xt = f (St, Tt, Ct, Rt) 
where St –  seasonality effect; Tt – trend, or systematic 
movement; Ct – fluctuations around the trend with more or 
less regularity (cyclicality); Rt – random (unsystematic) 
residual component. The action of these constituents may be 
interdependent. The models in which the time series is 
presented as a sum of the given components is called 
additive if multiplicative models are in the form of the 
product of numbers. The additive model takes the form: 
Xt=St+Tt+Ct+Rt, the multiplicative one: Xt=St*Tt*Ct*Rt. 
There exist also mixed models. The main task in 
investigating the time series consists in detecting and 
determining the quantification of each component (St, Tt, Ct, 
Rt) for forecasting the future values of the series. 
The dynamics of lots of financial and economic 
indicators has a stable fluctuation constituent. In order to 
obtain accurate predictive estimates it is necessary to 
represent correctly not only the trend but the seasonal 
components as well. The use of data mining methods in 
time series forecasting makes the solution of the given task 
possible. These methods have a number of benefits: 
• 
possibility to process large volumes of data; 
• 
possibility to discover hidden patterns; 
• 
use of neural networks in forecasting allows obtaining 
the result of the required accuracy without determining 
the precise mathematical dependence. 
There are a lot of other benefits of data mining such as 
basic data pre-processing, their storage and transformation, 
batch processing, importing and exporting of large volumes 
of data, availability of data pre-processing units as well as 
ample opportunities for data analysis and forecasting. 
The algorithm for forecasting the companies’ financial 
indicators has been developed. It works as follows (Figure 
3). Let us assume that as a result of transformation by the 
“sliding window” method we obtain a sequence of time 
counts [6]: 
X
X
X
X
n
,
,
,.....,
1
2
−
−
−
 
where X is a current value. Forecasting for 
X+1
 is carried 
out on the basis of the built model. In order to forecast the 
value of 
X+2
 it is necessary to shift the whole of the 
sequence one count to the left so that the forecast of 
X+1
 
carried out earlier could be included in the initial values. 
Then once again the algorithm for computing the predicted 
value will be started. 
X+2
 is calculated with regard for 
X+1
 
and further in a similar way, according to the defined 
forecasting horizon. To debug the prediction algorithm it is 
necessary to define the forecasting horizon as well as the 
table fields which must be filled in to carry out a forecast (to 
calculate the output field of the model). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Main stages of the data mining module 
Forecasting of enterprise financial indicators in the DSS 
can be performed by means of a number of DM techniques 
such 
as 
partial 
and 
complex 
data 
preprocessing, 
autocorrelation analysis, the method of “sliding window” 
and neural networks. 
In solving the problem of forecasting the time series with 
the aid of a neural net it is required to input the values of 
several adjacent counts from the initial set of data into the 
analyzer. This method of data sampling is called “sliding 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

window” (window – because only a certain area of data is 
highlighted, sliding – because this window “moves” across 
the whole data set). The efficiency of implementation 
considerably increases, if we do not sample the data out of a 
number of consecutive records, but successively locate the 
data related to the specific position of the window in one 
record. The values in one of the writing fields will be related 
to the current count and in other ones they will be shifted 
from the current count to the “future” or the “past”. Thus, 
transformation of the sliding window has two parameters: 
“depth of plunging” – the number of the “past” counts in the 
window and “forecasting horizon” – the number of “future” 
counts. It should be mentioned that for the boundary 
positions of the window (relative to the beginning and the 
end of the whole sampling) incomplete records will be 
formed, i.e. records containing empty values for the missing 
past and future counts. The transformation algorithm allows 
either excluding such records from the sampling (in that case 
for several boundary counts there will be no records) or 
including them (in the latter case records will be made for all 
the counts available, but some of them will be incomplete). 
With the use of the neural network the forecasting 
problem can be set in the following way: to find the best 
approach to the function defined by the final set of input 
values (teaching examples). In our case the neural networks 
help to solve the problem of recovery of the missing values 
as well as the forecasting of financial indicators of the 
enterprise being analyzed. 
IV. 
SOFTWARE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE DATA MINING 
MODULE  
The software implementation of the data mining module 
to forecast the financial indicators of the enterprise is 
performed by means of the analytical platform [9]. As it was 
mentioned in Section 3, the data mining module is realized 
by the following main steps: 
1) primary data input (Figure 4); 
2) using of “sliding window” (Figure 6); 
3) neural network programming – constructing and 
teaching (Figures 7, 8); 
4) forecasting (Figure 9). 
 
Figure 4.  Primary data input (graphic representation) 
Let us consider the whole of the data mining process on 
the example of the enterprise’s financial indicator “fixed 
assets”.  
After the input of the initial information preprocessing of 
the raw data is required. Figure 5 shows a possible sequence 
of steps in preprocessing the raw data before using data 
mining models.  
 
Figure 5.  Data preprocessing 
Partial and complex processing are distinguished in 
preprocessing. In partial processing the missing data are 
restored. Abnormal values are edited, noise is subtracted, and 
smoothing is carried out. For these purposes correlation 
analysis, factor analysis, main component method, regression 
analysis and other methods are used.  
In complex processing the lowering of the dimension of 
the input data and/or elimination of irrelevant factors take 
place. Robust filtering, spectral and wavelet analysis are 
used. In practice, partial and complex preprocessing of the 
raw data can be performed in any sequence with any 
parameters at each step, any number of times, that is, the 
preprocessing script can be quite complex [5]. 
Analysis of the primary (“raw”) data is made step-by-
step. Cleaning, transformation and forecasting of the data is 
done individually with each time series of the enterprise’s 
financial indicators. In forecasting the time series by means 
of the neural networks it is required to input the values of 
several adjacent counts from the source data set – “sliding 
window” (Figure 6). 
The efficiency of implementation considerably increases, 
if we do not sample the data every time from a number of 
consecutive records, but successively locate the data related 
to the specific position of the window in one record. The 
experiments show that for “sliding window” the optimal 
value of the depth of plunging is 5, because 5 inputs is 
enough for neural network to forecast the fixed assets.  
 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 6.  “Sliding window” for fixed assets 
The neural network structure for forecasting the 
enterprise’s indicator “fixed assets” has the form 5-4-3-2-1. 
The graph of the neural network and dispersing diagram for 
the neural network quality estimation are shown in Figures 7 
and 8. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  The neural network structure for indicator “fixed assets” 
The dispersing diagram allows estimating the quality of 
the neural network constructing and teaching – the points are 
closer to the central axis the accuracy of the neural network 
model is higher. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The dispersing diagram 
The neural network performance may be evaluated also 
by the errors diagram (Figure 9), that shows the neural 
network error for each of the indices and the average error 
(in percentage). 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

 
 
Figure 9.  The errors of the neural network performance for indicator “fixed assets”(graphic representation) 
The final stage in the program implementation of data 
mining is forecasting (Figure 10).  
 
 
Figure 10.  Results of forecasting of the fixed assets (graphic 
representation) 
Each of the financial indicators has its own prediction 
algorithm that includes the size of the step of the sliding 
window, neural network structure, the form of the activation 
function and its value (Table I). These parameters are 
defined for each enterprise individually. 
TABLE I.  
ALGORITHMS OF DATA MINING APPLICATION TO 
FORECAST ENTERPRISE’S FINANCIAL INDICATORS 
Financial 
indicators 
of  the 
enterprise 
Depth of 
plunging 
of 
“sliding 
window” 
Form of 
the 
activation 
function 
Value of 
the 
activation 
function 
Neural  
network 
structure 
Fictitious 
assets, i.e. 
patents, 
licenses, 
trade marks 
5 
Sigma form 
0.80 
5-3-1 
Fixed 
assets  
5 
Sigma 
form 
1.30 
5-4-3-2-1 
Long-term 
financial 
investments 
3 
Sigma form 
0.95 
3-2-1 
Total 
of 
non-
working 
assets    
5 
Hyper 
tangent 
form 
1.05 
5-3-2-1 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
Reserves of 
forth-
coming 
expenses 
and 
payments  
5 
Arctangent 
form 
1.25 
5-2-1 
Total 
of 
short-term 
liabilities 
4 
Sigma form 
1.10 
4-2-1 
Liabilities 
balance  
5 
Hyper 
tangent 
form 
0.85 
5-2-1 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

V. 
 DATA MINING IMPLEMENTATION EFFICIENCY 
ANALYSIS 
The analysis of the effectiveness of the data mining 
module is based on the comparative analysis of the financial 
indicators for the same period of time, obtained directly from 
the enterprise and forecasted through data mining.  
This approach has been used in state monitoring of a 
number of industrial and agro-industrial enterprises of 
Republic Bashkortostan (Russia). 
The fragment of the analysis of the effectiveness of data 
mining with deviation of the forecasted values of the 
financial indicators from the actual data is presented in Table 
II. 
TABLE II.  
DEVIATIONS OF FORECASTED VALUES FROM ACTUAL 
DATA, IN PERCENTAGE 
 
Analysis of the effectiveness of data mining for values 
forecasting showed that the deviations of the forecasted 
values from the real data are in the range from 1.35% to 
8.74%. The average deviation is about 6.5 %, which is quite 
a good result for forecasting.  
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The data mining application in anti-crisis management 
for bankruptcy monitoring is investigated. The decision 
support system for bankruptcy monitoring including the data 
mining module is developed. The decision maker using the 
DSS may be the top manager or supervisory authority. It is 
possible for users of the system to monitor the major trends 
in the economic processes of the enterprise. With the help of 
data mining means, neural networks in particular, the 
enterprise financial indicators can be forecasted for the 
definite period of time (for example for 3 months). The aim 
of the neural network at this stage is to catch the regularities 
of the financial indicators changes and detect them. Then 
with the help of the expert system the enterprise is classified 
on the basis of the forecasted indicators according to the 
degree of the bankruptcy threat. In other words the condition 
of the enterprise is defined not for present moment but for 
the definite time period (for example for 3 months). It gives 
an opportunity to take measures preventing the enterprise 
from fraudulent bankruptcy. The description of financial 
indicators forecasting based on data mining technology is 
given. For each of the forecasted financial indicators the 
separate forecasting algorithm has been developed. The 
efficiency analysis reveals good results of data mining 
implementation for forecasting financial indicators in the 
decision support system for bankruptcy monitoring. These 
results confirm the possibility of using data mining 
technology in the developed decision support system for 
bankruptcy monitoring. Future work will be connected with 
the increasing accuracy of financial performance forecasts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by grants № 11-07-
00687-а, № 12-07-00377-а of the Russian Foundation for 
Basic Research and grant “The development of tools to 
support decision making in different types of management 
activities in industry with semi-structured data based on the 
technology of distributed artificial intelligence” of the 
Ministry of Education of the Russian Federation.   
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Belyaev and E. Korotkov, Anti-Crisis Management. 
UNITI-DANA, Moscow, 2011. 
[2] A. Syväjärvi and J. Stenvall, Data Mining in Public and 
Private Sectors: Organizational and Government Application. 
Information Science Reference, Hershey, New York, 2010. 
[3] A.V. Senthil Kumar, Knowledge Discovery Practices and 
Emerging Application of Data Mining: Trends and New 
Domains. Information Science Reference, Hershey, New 
York, 2011. 
[4] Peter Jackson. Introduction to Expert Systems. Williams, 
Moscow, 2001. 
[5] A. Barsegyan, M. Kupriyanov, V. Stepanenko, and I. Kholod, 
Technologies of Data Analysis: Data Mining, Visual Mining, 
Text Mining, OLAP. Sec. ed. BHV-Petersburg, Saint-
Petersburg, 2007. 
[6] V. Duk and A. Samoilenko, Data Mining. Peter, Saint-
Petersburg, 2001.  
[7] N. Yusupova and G. Shakhmametova, Intelligent Information 
Technologies in the Decision Support System for Enterprises 
Bankruptcy Monitoring. UNC RAN, Ufa, 2010. 
[8] G. Shakhmametova, D. Amineva, and V. Dolzhenko, “Expert 
System for Decision Support in Anti-Crisis Monitoring,” 
Proc. of the 13-th International Workshop on Computer 
Science and Information Technologies, Germany, Garmisch-
Partenkirchen, 2011. Vol. 1. pp. 151-155.  
[9] http://www.basegroup.ru 20.06.2012. 
[10] http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:ovi:oviste:v:xi:y:2011:i:9:
p:233-236, 20.08.2012. 
[11] V. Afanasyev, The Time Series Analysis and Forecasting, 
Finance and Statistics, Moscow, 2001. 
Financial indicators of  the 
enterprises 
Enterprise 1 
Enterprise 2 
Enterprise 3 
Enterprise 4 
Fixed assets 
3.57 
4.28 
4.86 
5.05 
Long-term investments 
4.62 
1.45 
5.61 
6.63 
Total non-current assets 
4.89 
4.22 
3.77 
3.25 
Total current assets 
  6.32 
4.65 
5.90 
7.56 
All long-term liabilities 
5.41 
8.42 
4.27 
7.34 
Loans and credits 
5.75 
2.05 
7.82 
8.74 
Creditor indebtedness 
2.56 
3.41 
7.68 
1.35 
… 
… 
… 
… 
… 
Tax liabilities 
7.32 
1.91 
6.82 
5.89 
Result 
of 
short-term 
liabilities 
6.83 
5.88 
6.24 
8.67 
Balance of liabilities 
2.42 
4.47 
8.45 
3.57 
Revenue for the period under  
review 
5.87 
3.55 
5.62 
1.52 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-227-1
IMMM 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

