How Happiness Affects Travel Decision Making
Sz-Meng Yang
Institute of the Law of the Sea
National Taiwan Ocean University
Keelung, Taiwan, R.O.C.
e-mail: abc0931881057@hotmail.com
Pei-Chih Chen
Department of Product Design
Tainan University of Technology
Tainan City, Taiwan, R.O.C.
e-mail: t00195@mail.tut.edu.tw
Ruei-Ying Ching
Department of Technology Management
Chung Hua University
Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.
e-mail: jangel580707@yahoo.com.tw
Abstract— Consumer's definition of happiness affects their
product choices; therefore, firms try to portray a happy image
of their products. The sense of happiness varies depending on
our temporal focus. Young people are more focused on the
future and their feelings of happiness lead to excitement, and,
therefore, they tend to choose exciting products. On the other
hand, older people are more focused on the present, therefore,
incline to choose a calm product. Nowadays, in the tourism
industry, more and more customers pay attention to the
psychological level of satisfaction. This study explores the
definition of happiness and temporal focus in terms of journey
which influence consumers’ choice of tourism products. We
also observe whether the change of definition of happiness
affects the choice of journey between the old and young people.
Two experiments were conducted on two groups of students,
one consisting of the graduate students and the other consisting
of the members of the senior citizens learning camp, from a
university of technology in southern Taiwan. The results could
give some suggestions to tourism industry to provide more
enjoyable products to customers.
Keywords- happiness; calm; excitement; temporal focus.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays,
enterprises
begin
to
take
into
account
consumers’
definition
of
happiness
when
developing
marketing strategies. For example, HOLA [1] uses the
advertising slogan "To create a new relationship we love,
you and I are happy to get married!" Convenience store, 7-
Eleven, uses the slogan "The familiar warmth, a brand new
taste. The warmth in the hands is the real happiness in the
heart." to promote "Kanto-Daki", a famous dish originally
from Kanto area in Japan. CHIMEI Group [2] uses "Giving
her all she wants to see is happiness. Giving her all the
wishes is a luxurious happiness" as slogan to promote their
LCD TV screen.
In some situations, the type of happiness is determined
by the temporal focus. When consumers focus on the future,
they incline to choose an exciting option. On the other hand,
when consumers focus on the present, they prefer to choose a
calm option. Therefore, this
study
explores
how the
definition of happiness and temporal focus affect tourists’
choice of itinerary. The results of the experiment could help
the tourism industry design customized itineraries based on
the need of customers. In addition, people can choose their
favorite
itineraries
depending
on
their
definition
of
happiness.
In this research, we observed that young people are more
focused on the future than their elder counterparts, who are
more focused on the present moment. Moreover, the
definition of happiness of the young generations is more
related to excitement, while that of the elder ones is more
related to calmness. We also observed how the temporal
focus affects people’s definition of happiness and choice of
tourism products, as well as the impact of the change of the
temporal focus.
In order to verify the hypothesis, this study conducted
two experiments using two groups of research objects, one
consisting of the graduate students and the other consisting
of the members of the senior citizens learning camp from a
university of technology in southern Taiwan. In both
experiments, the temporal focus of elderly and graduate
students was controlled to verify whether temporal focus
would affect the definition of happiness and the choice
between excitement and calmness. In the first experiment,
graduate students were influenced by focusing on the present.
In the second experiment, elderly students were influenced
by focusing on the future. In both experiments, we explore
how people define happiness, as well as observe their choice
of calm or exciting journeys. In the experiments, the types of
journeys were unknown to the objects. The journeys were
designed during the same periods of time while the price was
not considered.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present literature review. In Section III, we describe
research method. The experiment and discussion are shown
in Section IV. Finally, we present the conclusion and future
work in Section V.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Happiness is abstract and concrete at the same time. It
has a nature of singularity as well as diversity. It is a feeling
and it is also a scenario. Despite the fact that people are
constantly pursuing happiness, they do not know happiness
is quietly controlling our decision. What is happiness?
Happiness is a dream of almost every one. However, the
definition of happiness varies from person to person. There
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

are many kinds of definitions of happiness, such as being
healthy, being accompanied by family or friends, and having
a sumptuous dinner. It does not require exquisiteness to
enhance happiness. Happiness could be simple, and be happy
just because of some ordinary things. Therefore, there is no
standard for the real definition of happiness.
Merriam [3] defined happiness as "a state of health and
happiness
and
satisfaction;
a
pleasant
or
satisfying
experience". So, happiness can be a state of feelings, and it
also can be an experience. Some scholars believe that
happiness is a singularity that means for everyone happiness
is the same [4], [5]. On the contrary, some scholars believe
that happiness is subjective and various. According to their
study, happiness is different for each person [6]. In some
research, happiness is classified into two categories of
positive emotions. The first one includes excitement, joy,
and passion. This type of emotional response is defined as
the positive effect of "high arousal". The second one includes
calm, serene, quiet, and ordinary. This kind of mood is
defined as "low arousal" [7], [8], [9].
However, age can be a proxy mechanism for the
"temporal focus" of the individual's underlying psychological
factors. In other words, when a person is young, the temporal
focus will fall on the more excited sense of happiness. So,
people incline to seek novel and helpful information for the
future. Naturally the attention of young people will focus on
the future. On the contrary, when a person is older, his/her
temporal focus will fall on more calm sense of happiness,
because to the elders it is the most important to enjoy the
present moment. Therefore, personal happiness experience
may come from the temporal focus, rather than age itself.
Even though the age may be a useful signal of personal
temporal focusing, the personal emphasis on the future or the
present is to determine its happiness linked to excitement or
calm.
A person's mood may affect a person's perception of
things, as well as their choice of type. For example, when a
person holds positive emotions, he/she would mostly take
heuristic approaches [10]. Heuristic approaches, also called
tactical approaches, usually refer to finding the solutions
based on limited knowledge or incomplete information, in a
short period of time. For example, when making a decision
on where to go the ski trip between South Korea or Japan,
one finds that the yen depreciated significantly and hence,
chooses to travel to Japan. This reasonable process is a
typical heuristic approach.
When in a good mood, one would tend to be optimistic
about the future, and will not pay attention to immediate
concerns, and naturally, will think on the bright side [11].
Regardless of the way a choice is made, the positive
emotions are directly affecting the choice. In addition,
happiness has singularity and diversity at the same time, that
is, some may have the same definition of happiness while
some may have different definitions of happiness. Therefore,
one would ask whether a person’s happiness plays a role in
selecting a specific option? If so, how does it affect the
choice? For example, when someone defines happiness as
calm, he would incline to choose a calm product, such as
static journey.
According
to
previous
studies,
happiness
can
be
classified
into two categories, namely, excitement and calm
which not only affect the consumer choice of products, but
also affect the consumer evaluation of the products. The
tourism industry should classify the customers based on the
two types of definition of happiness, and furthermore design
favorable tourism products for both types of customers.
To see if guiding the calm consumer to choose more a
calmer journey with the proper advertisements is reasonable,
we propose the first hypothesis.
H1：The definition of happiness will affect the choice,
(a) when happiness is close to excitement, one is more likely
to choose an exciting option than a calm option; (b) when the
happiness is close to calm, one is more likely to choose a
more calming, rather than exciting, option .
In addition to the excitement and calm moods, it is also
shown that "age is a potential psychological factor - temporal
focus." For example, in the choice of diet, young people will
choose delicious food and elder people will choose healthy
and light food. In the choice of brands, elder people tend to
choose familiar and conservative options while young people
will tend to choose a new, creative, unknown brand.
Therefore, we assume that temporal focus will influence the
choice because of the situational factors, and then form the
second hypothesis of this study. Assume that when the focus
is on the future, happiness is defined as the feeling of
excitement, and consumers will tend to choose the exciting
option. Suppose that when the focus is on the present,
happiness is defined as calm feeling, and consumers will be
more likely to choose a calm option.
H2: Temporal focus affects selection, (a) when the
temporal focus is set in the future, the likelihood of choosing
an exciting product is greater than the calm ones; (b) when
the temporal focus is set in the present, the probability of
choosing a calm product is greater than the exciting ones.
Figure 1 displays the conceptual model of the effects of
temporal focus on happiness and choice constructed by H1
and H2.
Figure 1.
The framework of temporal focus to Happiness and Choice [12]
III.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In this study, young people are more focused on the
future than elder people. The tendency, that the elderly
define happiness as calm, is greater than that of the young
people. In the experiment, we also observed that whether the
change of temporal focus will affect the definition of
happiness and the choice between exciting or calm. In this
study, the journey is designed as 15 days package tour to
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Europe (calm journey) and 15 days of self-service tour to
Europe (exciting journey).
A.
Experiment 1: Graduate students and the choice
between exciting or calm journey
The experiment is divided into two parts, experiment 1-1
and experiment 1-2. The subjects are graduate students of a
southern University of Technology. Experiment 1-1 used
"Happy McDonald's" breakfast as subject. A fast-food
breakfast can make people feel excited when they finish their
meal. The researchers began to introduce the design of the
two journeys for them to select. After a few days, we
conducted experiment 1-2. We invited the same subjects to
participate in "Coffee of the day". This was an activity about
providing them free breakfast at Starbucks. In the leisurely
morning, they stayed at a quiet coffee shop and enjoyed
coffee or tea to relax.
After finishing the meal, the researcher introduced the
two pre-designed journey and questionnaires. Participants
were asked to choose the trip they want to attend.
Experiment 1 was finished. The purpose of this experiment
was to know whether the journey of the chosen student is
different from the one chosen for "Happy McDonald's" after
the graduate students had been guided into a calm situation.
That is, whether the graduate students change the definition
of happiness or not by changing the temporal focus.
B.
Experiment 2: Elderly students and the choice between
exciting or calm journey
The experiment is divided into two parts, experiment 2-1
and experiment 2-2. The subjects are elderly people in a
southern University of Technology. In experiment 2-1, they
do a spiritual and meditation course for 30 minutes.
Meditation had been proven to change one's temporal focus
and guide them more easily towards a calm happiness [13],
[14]. When the course was completed, the researcher
introduced
the
two
pre-designed
journeys
and
the
questionnaires. Participants were asked to choose the journey
they want to participate in. In experiment 2-2, the elderly
participants enjoyed the final carnival dinner. The interaction
between the participants during the dinner helped to achieve
the effect of excitement. After that, the researcher introduced
these two pre-designed journeys and the questionnaires. The
participants were asked to choose the journey they want to
join.
IV.
EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSION
The subjects of this experiment were graduate and
elderly students in the southern university of technology.
There are 17 graduate students and they are between 22 and
24 years old. There are 30 elderly students and they are
between 50 and 99 years old.
A.
Experiment 1: Graduate students are about the Choice
of Excitement and Calm journey
In experiment 1-1, subjects are graduate students. Before
the experiment, they are young and their temporal focus is on
future, so they defined happiness as excitement. After the
"Happy McDonald's" experiment, the definition of happiness
was guided to excitement, and the condition was achieved.
Six questionnaires were conducted on the same day and all
of them were valid. From the questionnaire, we asked "Is
there any excitement in the activities of the "Happy
McDonald's"? Six graduate students believed that the
activities will lead them to excitement. Thus, the results of
this study show that there were two possibilities. One was
changing the definition of happiness by the McDonald's
happy atmosphere for graduate students. Another was that
graduate students are more interested in an exciting journey
when the temporal focus is on the future. The results are
shown in Table I.
TABLE I. HAPPY MCDONALD'S EXPERIMENT STATISTIC TABLE
Journey
Happiness
calm
excitement
Total
calm
0
0
0
excitement
1
5
6
Total
1
5
6
Next, in experiment 1-2, subjects are graduate students,
and they are young and temporal focus is on the future, so
they defined happiness as excited. After the "Coffee of the
Day"
experiment,
the
definition
of
happiness
was
successfully guided to calm. There were 12 questionnaires be
conducted on the same day and 10 of them were valid, 2
were invalid. From the questionnaire, we asked "Is there any
calm in the activities of the "Coffee of the Day"? From Table
II, there are eight graduate students choose exciting journey.
Thus, the results of this study showed that there are two
possibilities. One is that the "Coffee of the Day" calm
atmosphere changed the definition of happiness for graduate
students. The other one is that, no matter how happiness is
defined, the temporal focus on the future is more significant.
TABLE II. COFFEE OF THE DAY EXPERIMENT STATISTIC TABLE
Journey
Happiness
calm
excitement
Total
calm
0
2
2
excitement
0
8
8
Total
0
10
10
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

B.
Experiment 2: Elderly students and the choice between
exciting or calm journey
The subjects are elderly students in the University of
Technology of South Taiwan in experiment 2-1. They are
older and focused on the moment and define happiness as a
calm feeling. In the beginning, the elderly students were
invited to participate in an activity about "mental and
physical peace and meditation" and guided students to define
happiness as a sense of calmness. From the 22 questionnaires
distributed, 14 of them were valid and 8 were invalid. The
questionnaire asked "Is there any calm in meditation?".
Among these 14 valid questionnaires, there were 13 elderly
students who felt that meditation led them to calm, and 1 did
not.
In addition, the trainees lead the definition of happiness
as calm. There were 8 students who preferred to choose a
calm journey. On the contrary, the other six elderly students
choose a more exciting travel journey. The results of this
study showed two possibilities. One is that "meditation" can
change the definition of happiness for elderly students. The
other is for the temporal focus on the moment, elderly
students felt more like joining a calm journey. The details are
displayed in Table III.
TABLE III. MEDITATION STATISTIC TABLE
Journey
Happiness
calm
excitement
Total
calm
7
6
13
excitement
1
0
1
Total
8
6
14
In experiment 2-2, the subjects were older and focused
on the moment and defined happiness as calm. In this
experiment, elder students attended the final carnival dinner
and they interacted with classmates and professors during the
dinner
to
achieve
an
excited
mood.
From
the
21
questionnaires distributed, 16 were valid and 5 were invalid.
The questionnaire asked "Was there excitement during the
carnival dinner"?". Among the 16 valid questionnaires, all
students felt that carnival dinner led them to an excited
orientation. In this study, the trainees lead the definition of
happiness is excitement. There are 14 old students prefer to
choose a calm trip, on the contrary, the other two choose a
more exciting journey.
Table IV shows the results of this study, and it showed
two situations, one is the "final carnival dinner" which makes
old students change the definition of happiness. Another is
temporal focus which is on the moment. No matter how to
guide the definition of happiness for calm or excitement,
temporal
focus
had
a
more
significant
effect
than
atmosphere.
TABLE IV. FINAL CARNIVAL DINNER STATISTIC TABLE
Journey
Happiness
calm
excitement
Total
calm
0
0
0
excitement
14
2
16
Total
14
2
16
C.
Comprehensive discussion
In this experiment, we found that elderly students had a
rich experience, and they were familiar with the country,
language communication and even cultural differences.
Those aspects maybe had a partial effect on the choice of
journey. For young graduate students, any of the two
journeys are the same, because both were new, so the
experiment result for young graduate students was more
precise than for older students.
In this study, we repeated 2x2 variance analysis and the
results showed that there was a significant interaction
between
the "temporal
focus"
and
"the
definition
of
happiness" for the journey to be selected. The experiment
showed graduate students’ time focus on the future, and they
feel more happiness from the exciting journey than the calm
one. On the contrary, elderly students focus on the moment
and feel more happiness from the calm journey than the
exciting one. Whether the experimenter was more focused on
the future or the moment, all have the probability to affect
the subjects to choose either an exciting or a calm journey.
Those who focus on the future are more likely to choose an
exciting journey and vice versa. The final analysis explained
that the choice was determined by the definition of
happiness.
Specifically, the possibility of choosing an exciting
journey by the experimental subjects under the temporal
focus was influenced by the definition of happiness as
emotional excitement. However, the possibility of choosing a
calm journey by the experimental subjects under the
temporal focus was influenced by the definition of happiness
as emotional calm. There was a significant effect on the
analysis of temporal focus, making the temporal focus on the
future of the experimental subjects expected more happiness
from the exciting journey. These results showed when the
time was focused, the experimental subjects were expected
to feel happy from the exciting and calm journey, let them to
the choice of journey. Therefore, the results showed that the
definition of happiness and temporal focus will affect the
choice. When the desired happiness comes from the
excitement of ascension, it will tend to choose an exciting
option. Moreover, when the desired happiness comes from
the calm of ascension, it will tend to choose a calm option.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
No matter where they come from, how much money they
have earned, and how old they are, people are constantly
thinking about "what is the meaning of happiness?" This
study began with explaining the dynamic meaning of
happiness to a person, and showing how the definition of
happiness naturally changes over time, and how it affects a
person’s decisions. In addition, the type of happiness
experienced by a person may also change at a particular time,
and one can choose the happiness that he or she wants to
feel.
The experimental results showed that "Happiness is an
option". Also, this study confirmed that the definition of
happiness changes over time, and it affects the decisions of
consumers. The findings in this study could help the tourism
industry to analyze consumer characteristics and then
provide more customized services. Furthermore, it suggests
that the tourism industry can provide guidance for the
consumers to choose happier journeys.
The results of this research are still tentative. In the
future, we will issue more questionnaires to have holistic and
persuasive results.
REFERENCES
[1]
HOLA, https://www.hola.com.tw/, [last accessed June 2017].
[2]
CHIMEI Group, http://www.chimei.com.tw, [last accessed
June 2017].
[3]
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, Springfield, MA:
Merriam-Webster, 2009.
[4]
R. Layard, “Happiness: Lessons from a New Science,” New
York: Penguin, 2005.
[5]
D. Myers and E. Diener, “Who Is Happy?” Psychological
Science, vol. 6(1), pp. 10-19, 1995.
[6]
D. T. Gilbert, Stumbling on Happines. New York: Knopf,
2006.
[7]
L. F. Barrett, “Discrete Emotions or Dimensions？The Role
of Valence Focus and Arousal Focus,” Cognition and
Emotion, vol. 12(4), pp. 579-599, 1998.
[8]
M. M. Bradley and P. J. Lang, “Affective Norms for English
Words (ANEW): Instruction Manual and Affective Ratings,”
Gainesville: University of Florida Center for Research in
Psychophysiology, 1999.
[9]
J.
Russell
and
L.
Barrett,
Core
Affect,
“Prototypical
Emotional Episodes, and Other Things Called Emotion:
Dissecting the Elephant,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, vol. 76(5), pp. 805-819, 1999.
[10] N. Schwarz and G. L. Clors, Mood, “Misattribution, and
Judgments
of
Well-Being:
Informative
and
Directive
Functions of Affective States,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, vol. 45(3), pp. 512-523, 1983.
[11] A. A. Labroo and V. M. Patrick, “Providing a Moment of
Respite: Why a Positive Mood Helps Seeing the Big Picture,”
Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 35(5), pp. 800-809, 2009.
[12] C. Mogilner, J. Aaker, and S. D. Kamvar, “How Happiness
Affects Choice,” Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 39, pp.
312-326, 2012.
[13] D. P. Brown and R. A. F. Thurman, “Pointing Out the Great
Way: Stages of Meditation in the Mahamudra Tradition,”
Boston: Wisdom, 2006.
[14] E. Tolle, The Power of Now:
“A Guide to Spiritual
Enlightenment,” Vancouver: Namaste, 1999.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

