Customer Demands of FinTech in Taiwan 
 
 
Chih-Chuan Chen 
Interdisciplinary Program of Green and Information 
Technology 
National Taitung University 
Taitung, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
e-mail: ccchen@nttu.edu.tw 
Hui-Chi Chuang 
Institute of Information Management 
National Cheng Kung University 
Tainan City, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
e-mail: huichi613@gmail.com 
Ming-Hui Pai 
Department of International Business Management 
 
Tainan University of Technology 
Tainan City, Taiwan, R.O.C.  
e-mail: joyhappy432000@yahoo.com.tw 
Yi-Chung Cheng 
Department of International Business Management 
Tainan University of Technology 
Tainan City, Taiwan, R.O.C.  
e-mail:  t20042@mail.tut.edu.tw 
Sheng-Chun Pai 
Taiwan Certificate Authority, Inc. 
Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.  
e-mail:  a365373@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—In recent year, FinTech advances have been rapidly 
transforming every aspect of our daily life through financial 
services. 
Advancing 
technologies, 
evolving 
customer 
expectation, and changing regulatory frameworks are opening 
doors to disruptive innovation in financial services. In Taiwan, 
although the government has announced 2015 as the year of 
FinTech, the progress of FinTech development is still slow as 
compared to its neighboring countries, such as Hong Kong, 
Singapore and China. This study aims to identify the critical 
success factors for FinTech’s development in Taiwan based on 
customers’ acceptance of FinTechs and innovative financial 
services. A modified Delphi method was adopted in order to 
obtain the most reliable opinion consensus of a group of 28 
experts by subjecting them to a series of questionnaires, which 
was designed to extract customers’ FinTech acceptance with 
respect to the six core functions of financial services, namely, 
payments, insurance, deposits & lending, capital raising, 
investment management, and market provisioning. The results 
showed that FinTechs of payment are more accepted by the 
customers in Taiwan. The top four payment options are highly 
approved by the customers with scores higher than 4.0. These 
four payment options are very popular in China. Therefore, 
the experts all agree that they are promising in Taiwan. 
Keywords- fintech; modified Delphi method; taiwan fintech 
industry 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the recent years, Financial Technology (FinTech) has 
become a popular term in a wide range of operations for 
enterprises or organizations thanks to the advances in 
technology and business innovation, as well as the growing 
market expectations, cost-saving requirement and customer 
demands. Most competitive financial firms are considering 
FinTech as one of their major investments [1]. The 
expanding of the scope of FinTech applications has resulted 
in great challenges in adoptions and planning. Could higher 
economic growth happen? Will the new FinTechs make the 
institutions and markets more efficient and effective? In 
2015, also known as the year of FinTech in Taiwan, the 
Financial Supervisory Commission in Taiwan (TFSB) 
proposed the “Creation of digitized financial environment 
3.0” and it is started the year of FinTech in Taiwan. The 
Taiwanese government also setup a grand office of financial 
technology to promote the FinTech transforming action of 
the finance institutions, aiming to loosen restrictions on 
online banking and its applications [2][3]. However, the 
FinTech development is still slower as compared to its 
neighboring countries, such as Hong Kong, Singapore and 
China [4]. Recently, the Taiwanese government has been 
putting efforts to speed up the FinTech development. For 
example, 
securities 
investment 
consulting 
enterprises 
providing a Robo-Advisor service are allowed to execute 
automated “re-balance transactions” for their clients through 
their computer systems under specific conditions [5]. The 
regulations on electronic payment have been relaxed [6]. 
However, it is still long way to go to fulfill the goals of the 
blueprint of the Financial Supervisory Commission. It is an 
urgent task for the government, industry and academy to 
explore these factors and this leads to the motivation of this 
study.   
The key factors to FinTech success are yet to be 
discovered and their influences on FinTech application need 
to be thoroughly understood. The goal of this study is to 
identify 
the 
critical 
success 
factors 
for 
FinTech’s 
development in Taiwan based on customers’ acceptance of 
FinTechs and innovative financial services. A modified 
Delphi method is adopted in order to obtain the most reliable 
opinion of experts in this field. 
In the final report of the 2015 World Economic Forum 
about the future of the financial services, they have 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

structured a framework of six financial services, namely, 
Payments, Insurance, Market Provisioning, Deposits & 
Lending, Investment Management, and Capital Raising [7]. 
The Taiwanese Financial Supervisory Committee also 
includes the six financial functions in the strategic 
framework [6]. Therefore, this study aims to identify the 
critical key factors of FinTech based on these six functions, 
with the help of experts in finance.   
A modified Delphi method was adopted in order to 
understand, from the point view of the experts, how the 
Fintechs are acceptable by the customers with respect to the 
six financial functions. The results include the key factors to 
FinTech success and the acceptability of the six financial 
functions, respectively. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In Section 2, we defined what is “Financial technology 
(FinTech)” and the latest development status in Taiwan. In 
addition, modified Delphi Method is explained and 
described in detail. 
A. FinTech 
Financial technology (FinTech) is defined as the new 
technology and innovation that aims to compete with 
traditional financial methods in the delivery of financial 
services [8]. FinTech has emerged in both the developed and 
developing world [9], and it has unleashed a new era of 
competition, innovation and job creating productivity in our 
economy, and very worthy of encouragement. However, in 
addition to established competitors, FinTech companies 
often face doubts from financial regulators like issuing banks 
and the governments [10]. Another concern is data security. 
The threats of hacking as well as the needs to protect 
sensitive consumer and corporate financial data are 
unavoidable issues. It poses challenges for regulators, as well 
as for market participants, in balancing the potential benefits 
of innovation with the possible risks. 
FinTech companies and industries are leveraging new 
technology to create new and better financial services for 
both consumers and businesses, which operate in personal 
financial 
management, 
insurance, 
payment, 
asset 
management, etc. Thanks to the increasing popularity of 
digital wallet in online and In-App payment, as well as at 
brick-and-mortar stores, customers’ expectations are getting 
higher, that says, more technologies and applications are 
added to the financial services, such as payable on demand, 
smart assistant, virtual reality. Based on Ventures Scanner’s 
report [11], FinTech sector is organized 16 categories. They 
are, Banking Infrastructure, Business Lending, Consumer 
and Commercial Banking, Consumer Lending, Consumer 
Payments, Crowdfunding, Equity Financing, Financial 
Research and Data, Financial Transaction Security, 
Institutional Investing, International Money Transfer, 
Payments Backend and Infrastructure, Personal Finance, 
Point of Sale Payments, Retail Investing, and Small and 
Medium Business Tools. 
Also, as mentioned earlier, in the final report of the 2015 
World Economic Forum about the future of the financial 
services, they have structured a framework of six financial 
services, namely, Payments, Insurance, Market Provisioning, 
Deposits & Lending, Investment Management, and Capital 
Raising [7]. 
B. FinTech in Taiwan 
In Taiwan, the banking sector is highly supported yet 
tightly regulated by the government. In September 2015, 
Taiwan’s 
Financial 
Supervisory 
Commission 
(FSC) 
officially announced the establishment of its FinTech Office, 
a platform responsible for the planning and promotion of 
FinTech developments, which particularly focuses on topics 
including digitalization of the financial environment, mobile 
payment, third party payment, Internet financing (peer-to-
peer lending), online investment, and the Internet-of-Things, 
among others [2][3]. The FSC declared 2015 as the year of 
FinTech.  A series of actions were taken to promote FinTech 
development in Taiwan, such as requesting all domestic 
banks to offer online financial services, initiating big data 
application projects for the banking industry [12]. 
A FinTech Development Strategy White Paper released 
in 2016 by the FSC detailed the authority’s strategy for 
FinTech development. The white paper followed World 
Economic Forum and planned the major development 
dimensions of six financial services, namely, Payments, 
Insurance, Market Provisioning, Deposits & Lending, 
Investment Management, and Capital Raising [7]. Also, it 
noted a number of objectives for the years to come: 
1. Double the ratio of e-payment within five years from 
the present ratio of 26% via public promotion and 
private sector participation; 
2. Promote blockchain technology and the establishment 
of a special task force in the Bankers’ Association for 
research on applications of the technology; 
3. Support finance innovation efforts of startups through 
the Financial Technology Development Fund and 
provide coaching; 
4. Create a world-class incubation center for fintech 
innovations; 
5. Allow financial institutions to invest in 100% shares of 
fintech companies through reinvestment 
6. Encourage the use of tokenization technology for 
virtual and physical cards; 
7. Raise the percentage of e-orders to 70% and promote 
e-service of securities firms and robo-advisors; 
8. Encourage insurtech development; 
9. Develop physical and virtual branches of financial 
institutions to achieve the diversification of service 
providers and multiple access points of their services, 
as well as improve the existing facilities of financial 
institutions; 
10. Create an integrated, secure online ID verification 
mechanism. 
C. Modified Dephi Method 
The modified Delphi method is a kind of expert 
prediction method, and the purpose is to integrate the 
knowledge and experience of experts in the field for a 
specific issue [13][14]. It makes the results to achieve 
consensus among many experts through specific procedures 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

and steps. In the past, the traditional Delphi method is often 
time-consuming and labor-intensive due to the multiple 
round-trips of the questionnaire. It causes the members to 
reduce motivation to finish the questionnaires and leads to 
low recovery rate of questionnaires. In summary, these 
reasons will make the results lose authenticity and get little 
significance. Therefore, the modified Delphi method, which 
captures the features and advantages of Delphi method has 
been developed [13][14]. It simplifies the process of 
complicated questionnaires. The common way is to omit the 
first round of open ended consultation questionnaire to 
acquire expert opinions. Then, formulate the questions based 
on the relevant research results or the experience of 
researchers. Then, the experts are asked to express their 
personal opinions according to the proposed project. This 
correction method can avoid the difficulty in answering the 
open questionnaire and reduce the influence of low 
questionnaire recovery rate [15][16]. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
In the beginning, we proposed some questions which are 
on the basis of existing literatures and domain experts’ 
suggestions. The questionnaire is to ask the customers’ 
acceptance of FinTechs and it includes six dimensions which 
are Payments, Insurance, Market Provisioning, Deposits & 
Lending, Investment Management, and Capital Raising. For 
example, “What do you think about that people accept the 
mobile Payment?”, “What do you think about that people 
accept the third party Payment?”, “What do you think about 
that people accept the online insurance?”, etc. The key items 
of questionnaire are showed on the next section. 
The first round of the traditional Delphi method is based 
on the experience of experts to answer open-ended 
questionnaires to provide information related to the research 
topics as the basis for the second round of questionnaire 
design. It is time-consuming and labor-intensive, therefore, 
the modified Delphi method is adopted to skip open-ended 
questionnaires provided by expert's experience and then 
replacing by relevant research reviews. In order to improve 
the efficiency of the research, the modified Delphi method is 
used in this paper. The modified Delphi method process is 
showed in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  The modified Delphi method process 
Delbecq et al. [17] indicate that ten to fifteen people 
could be sufficient if the background of the modified Delphi 
subjects is high homogeneous. In contrast, if various 
reference groups are involved in the modified Delphi method, 
we need to invite more people to join. If there are more than 
13 experts in modified Delphi process, the reliability of 
result will be higher than 80% [18]. Based on the principles 
of expert selection, we invited four expert group which 
included 28 scholars and experts related to innovation in 
financial science and technology. The selected experts 
included senior financial experts, law & legal experts, senior 
corporate executives, scholars. After explaining the purpose 
of this study to the group of experts, they help fill out of the 
modified Delphi questionnaire. 
 
IV. 
QUESTIONNAIRE ANALYSIS 
This research aims to explore the customer’s acceptance 
of FinTech from financial experts’ point of view by adopting 
a modified Delphi approach. The modified Delphi method is 
an appropriate method that allows gathering consensual 
subjective judgement from a group of experts [19].  For this 
study, a panel consists of 28 selected FinTech experts from 
four distinct categories, namely, senior executives in finance, 
legal experts, senior executives in general, and academic 
experts. The questionnaire is designed based on the six 
dimensions of Payments, Insurance, Market Provisioning, 
Deposits & Lending, Investment Management, and Capital 
Raising. 
The modified Delphi study composes three rounds. 
During each round, the researchers clearly explained to the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

experts one by one about the purpose of this study. Quartile 
Deviation is used to determine if the consensus of all of the 
28 experts is reached. 
The data were examined thematically and the themes 
were ranked by their frequencies. The results of the analysis 
are shown in Table I. The acceptance score is the average 
score of all experts and the ranking is the sorting according 
to acceptance score. One can see that the experts agree that 
in Taiwan, customers are mostly familiar to the FinTech 
applications with respect to payment. The most popular 
FinTech application is using cellphone for payment transfer. 
It makes sense since mobile transfer payment is one of the 
services provided by all of the banks in Taiwan. The number 
two application is WebATM, which is also a common 
service in Taiwan. Number three is mobile payment, such as 
App, QR code, digital wallet. Mobile payment is very 
popular in China, but it is still at the development stage in 
Taiwan. Thanks to its success in China, all experts are 
confident in its acceptance in Taiwan. Two FinTech 
applications tie at rank number four. They are third party 
payment and digital wallet, such as Apple Pay. All the results 
are shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
RANKING OF THE CUSTOMER ACCEPTANCE OF FINTECH 
No. 
FinTech Application 
Acceptance 
Ranking 
Payment 
1 
Mobile Payment 
4.1 
3 
2 
Third Party Payment 
4.0 
4 
3 
Biormetric Banking 
3.9 
5 
4 
Mobile Transfer 
4.6 
1 
5 
Virtual Card 
4.0 
4 
6 
Cashless Life 
3.8 
6 
7 
WebATM 
4.3 
2 
8 
Virtual Currency  
2.9 
12 
Insurance 
1 
Online insurance 
3.6 
8 
2 
P2P Friendsurance  
3.4 
10 
Deposits & Lending, 
1 
P2P Internet Lending 
3.3 
11 
2 
P2P Internet Exchange 
3.6 
8 
3 
VTM (Virtual Teller Machine) 
3.6 
8 
4 
Cloud Account 
3.6 
8 
5 
Self-ServiceBanking  
3.5 
9 
6 
Mobile loan 
3.6 
8 
Capital Raising 
1 
Online fundraising 
3.3 
11 
Investment Management 
1 
Online Invest Management 
3.9 
5 
2 
Robo-advisor 
3.7 
7 
Market Provisioning 
1 
Big Data and AI for Searching 
Market Information 
3.9 
5 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
This study aimed to explore the FinTech acceptance of 
customers based on the opinions of domain experts. A three 
round modified Delphi approach was adopted with a panel of 
28 FinTech experts from four different categories including 
senior executives in finance, legal experts, senior executives 
in general, and academic experts. The questionnaire is 
designed according to six FinTech dimensions of Payments, 
Insurance, Market Provisioning, Deposits & Lending, 
Investment Management, and Capital Raising. 
The results showed that all the experts agreed that the top 
four of the most popular FinTech applications are mobile 
transfer, WebATM, mobile payment, third party payment 
and virtual card. All top four applications have acceptance 
scores greater than 4.0, which indicates high acceptance by 
the Taiwanese customers. The results reflect the current 
FinTech environment in Taiwan, which can be used for 
FinTech industry and the government to make strategy for 
FinTech development in Taiwan. 
This study is still at tentative. In the future, more FinTech 
applications will be included, and more experts will be 
interviewed and inquired. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to appreciate those who provided insight 
and expertise to greatly assist this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Wigglesworth, Fintech: Search for a super-algo. Financial 
Times, 20, 2016. 
[2] L. L. Wang, T. M. Huang, M. C. Lee, Digital Financial 
Environment Building Program Fully Activated. In D. o. 
Planning (Ed.), Financial Output Monthly. Taipei, Taiwan: 
Financial Supervisory Commission, Taiwan, pp. 5-8, 2015a. 
[3] 
L. L. Wang, T. M. Huang, M. C. Lee, FSC establishes the Financial 
Technology Office to promote the development of financial 
technology. In D. o. Planning (Ed.), Financial Output Monthly. 
Taipei, Taiwan: Financial Supervisory Commission, Taiwan, pp. 5-8, 
2015b. 
[4] M. C. Chen, S. S. Chen, H. M. Yeh, W. G. Tsaur, “The key 
factors influencing internet finances services satisfaction: An 
empirical study in Taiwan,” American Journal of Industrial 
and Business Management, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 748, 2016. 
[5] L. L. Wang, T. M. Huang and M. C. Lee, Securities 
investment consulting enterprises providing a Robo-Advisor 
service are allowed to execute automated “re-balance 
transactions” for their clients through their computer systems 
under specific conditions. In D. o. Planning (Ed.), Financial 
Output Monthly. Taipei, Taiwan: Financial Supervisory 
Commission, Taiwan, pp. 5-8, 2017. 
[6] Financial Supervisory Commission R.O.C (Taiwan), FinTech 
Development Strategy White Paper. Taipei, Taiwan: [Online]. 
Available from:https://www.fsc.gov.tw/ch/home.jsp?id=517& 
parentpath=0,7, 478. 06, 2018. 
[7] World Economic Forum, The Future of Financial Services: 
How disruptive innovations are reshaping the way financial 
services are structured, provisioned and consumed. Ginebra: 
FEM. Consultado en: http://www3. weforum. org/docs/WEF_ 
The_future__of_financial_services. pdf. 06, 2018. 
[8] T. C. Lin, “Infinite financial intermediation,” Wake Forest L. 
Rev., vol. 50, pp. 643, 2015. 
[9] D. W. Arner, J. Barberis and R. P. Buckley, “The evolution of 
Fintech: A new post-crisis paradigm,” Geo. J. Int'l L., vol. 47, 
pp. 1271, 2015. 
[10] Business Insider, India, Groundbreaking FinTech Innovations: 
Threat for banks or opportunity of a lifetime? [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.businessinsider.in/Ground break 
ing-FinTech-Innovations-Threat-for-banks-or-opportunity-of-
a-lifetime/articleshow/61682406.cms, 06, 2018. 
[11] Venture Scanner, Financial Technology Market Overview —
 Q4, 2016. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

[12]  J. L. Hung and B. Luo, “FinTech in Taiwan: a case study of a 
Bank’s strategic planning for an investment in a FinTech 
company,” Financial Innovation, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 15, 2016. 
[13] B. H. Eubank, N. G. Mohtadi, M. R. Lafave, J. P. Wiley, A. J. Bois, R. 
S. Boorman and D. M. Sheps, “Using the modified Delphi method to 
establish clinical consensus for the diagnosis and treatment of patients 
with 
rotator 
cuff 
pathology,” BMC 
Medical 
Research 
Methodology, 2016. http://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-016-0165-8 
[14] D. Khodyakov, S. Grant, C. E. Barber, D. A. Marshall, J. M. Esdaile 
and D. Lacaille, “Acceptability of an online modified Delphi panel 
approach for developing health services performance measures: 
results from 3 panels on arthritis research,” Journal of evaluation in 
clinical practice, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 354-360, 2017. 
[15] R. L. Custer, J. A. Scarcella and B. R. Stewart, “The modified 
Delphi technique-A rotational modification,” Journal of 
Career and Technical Education, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 50-58, 
1999. 
[16] C. C. Hsu and B. A. Sandford, “The Delphi technique: 
making sense of consensus,” Practical assessment, research & 
evaluation, vol. 12, no. 10, pp. 1-8, 2007. 
[17] A. Debecq, A. H. Van de Ven and D. H. Gustafson, Group 
techniques for program planning. Glenview, Illinois: Scott, 
Foresman and Company, 1975. 
[18] N. C. Dalkey, The Delphi method: An experimental study of 
group opinion. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1969. 
[19] V. Mahajan, “The Delphi method: Techniques and 
applications,” JMR, Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 13, 
no. 3, pp. 317, 1976. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

