Logo-DM – A Speech Therapy Optimization Data Mining System 
 
Mirela Danubianu, Adina Luminita Barala 
Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
Stefan cel Mare University of Suceava 
Suceava, Romania 
e-mail: mdanub@eed.usv.ro; adina@eed.usv.ro 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents Logo-DM, a prototype for a 
data mining system dedicated to help the optimization of the 
personalized speech therapy. It uses data collected by 
TERAPERS system that was implemented at the “Stefan cel 
Mare” University of Suceava to assist speech therapists in the 
treatment of children suffering from dyslalia. Over these data, 
some data mining methods has been applied. The patterns 
obtained are useful for specialists for an efficient current 
activity. These can also provide knowledge that serves to 
improve the support offered by TERAPERS by raising the 
quality of its embedded expert system. 
Keywords-computer-based speech therapy; data mining; 
classification; association rules.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Speech impairment, one of the most common issues in 
childhood, might be the source of adult’s integration 
problems in the community. This is one of the reasons why a 
special attention was paid to speech therapy. A speech 
disorder can be corrected, if it is discovered and properly 
treated in due time. However, therapy is a complex process, 
which must be adapted to each child. 
Since 1990-2000, computer-assisted speech therapy 
became a frequent practice. In this context, many Computer-
Based Speech Therapy (CBST) tools or systems were 
developed.  
For example, IBM has developed Speechviewer III 
system [1]. While users perform several speech actions, 
Speechviewer III creates an interactive visual model of 
speech. Another project is the ICATIANI device, developed 
by 
TLATOA 
Speech 
Processing 
Group, 
CENTIA 
Universidad de las Américas, Puebla Cholula, Pue, México 
[2]. It uses sounds and graphics in order to ensure the 
practice of Spanish Mexican pronunciation. The third 
example, Articulation Tutor (ARTUR) [3] provides an 
integrated speech therapy system. It contains two main 
components: an intuitive graphical interface named Wizard-
of-Oz and a virtual speech tutor named Artur. Using audio 
(user’s utterance) and video (facial data) information, the 
system can recognize and reproduce mispronunciations. 
After that, ARTUR suggests the correct pronunciation (audio 
data) and the correct speech elements’ position (virtual 
articulator model). 
The use of these systems has allowed researchers and 
practitioners to collect a considerable volume of data, related 
to children’ particularities, therapeutically paths, and results. 
But, contrary to expectations, a large amount of data does not 
automatically lead to a significant increase of the volume and 
quality of information, because traditional data processing 
tools are not applicable. 
For these reasons, modern methods that aim to discover 
new and potentially useful patterns from large volumes of 
data were implemented. This process is called Knowledge 
Discovery in Databases (KDD) [4]. Its central step is data 
mining that involves the application of algorithms, which 
with 
acceptable 
performance, 
provide 
a 
particular 
enumeration of patterns from data. 
In 2008, at Research Center in Computer Science from 
“Stefan cel Mare” University of Suceava the TERAPERS 
system was implemented.  
This is a CBST that aims to assist the personalized 
therapy of dyslalia – an articulation disorder found to a 
significant percentage of children from age of 3-4 years. This 
is the first CBST developed for Romanian language. During 
its exploitation, data about few hundred cases were collected. 
This was the starting point for the idea to try the optimization 
of personalized speech therapy by data mining techniques.  
Our paper’s purpose is to show an overview of the Logo-
DM system – a dedicate data mining system, that aims to 
optimize the personalized therapy of Romanian children 
suffering from dyslalia.  
This system is designed so that useful patterns can be 
easily discovered by speech therapists. They may use Logo-
DM to analyze datasets obtained by integrating data 
collected in all speech therapy offices that use TERAPERS. 
In Section II, some basic concepts related to the 
Knowledge Discovery in Databases and the position 
occupied by data mining stage within this process are 
presented. Section III refers to speech disorders and their 
implications on the individual’s development. It highlights 
also the complexity of speech therapy. Section IV makes a 
brief description of the Logo-DM system. Finally, Section V 
contains some conclusion and future work. 
II. 
KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY IN DATABASES PROCESS 
AND DATA MINING 
Knowledge Discovery in Databases concept was 
developed as a result of the emergence of very large 
volumes of data, whose analysis was not possible by using 
traditional database techniques. It aims to identify “valid, 
novel, potentially useful, and understandable patterns in 
data” [4], and is a complex, interactive and iterative process. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

In time, many models for this process have been proposed. 
No matter if they originated from academia [4], [5], [6] or 
industry [7], [8] they consist of a succession of steps, that 
start from the understanding the domain and the data that is 
represented, continues with the preparation of data for data 
mining algorithms and their effective implementation in 
order to detect existing patterns, and ends with the 
interpretation of these patterns. 
We used for our system design and implementation 
CRISP-DM model, presented in Fig. 1.  
It starts with a business analysis for determining the 
KDD goals and continues with a data understanding stage 
that aims to collect and describe data and to verify data 
quality. 
In order to give data set the proper format for a certain 
data mining algorithm, a data preparation step is necessary. 
During this step data are filtered and the relevant features are 
selected. Data type transformation, discretization or sampling 
is performed also. 
The central point of KDD process is the data mining 
stage. Data mining performs analysis of large volumes of 
data using specific algorithms. These are designed to offer 
good performances of calculation on large amounts of data, 
and produce a particular enumeration of patterns from such 
data. Using patterns or rules with a specific meaning, data 
mining may facilitate the discovery, from apparently 
unrelated data, of relationships that are likely to anticipate 
future problems or might solve the problems under study. It 
involves the choice of the appropriate data mining task, and, 
taking into account specific conditions, the choice and the 
implementation of the proper data mining algorithm.  
For the next stage, the mined models are evaluated 
against the goals defined in the first stage. The last stage of 
the process uses the knowledge discovered in order to 
simply generate a report or to deploy a repeatable data 
mining process. 
 
 
Figure 1.  CRISP-DM model for KDD 
So, data mining aims to discover, from apparently 
unrelated data, relationships that can anticipate future 
problems or might solve the problems under study. Using 
appropriate methods, data mining is able to provide answers 
for two wide categories of problems: prediction and 
description.  
Although, many researchers believe that prediction is the 
main use of the patterns discovered by data mining, it 
should be noted that often it is preceded by the description. 
For example, prior to predict the state of a patient at certain 
moments, it is necessary to make a description of the 
profiles encountered and to find the best association 
between these profiles and different therapy schemes.  
Both problems require the use of appropriate techniques. 
Classification aims to find a model, which places data 
items in one of several predefined classes, based on 
information from a set of predictive variables.  
Association rules explore relationships or affinities 
between different data that seem to have no dependencies. 
III. 
SPEECH DISORDERS AND SPEECH THERAPY 
Speech and language impairments address problems in 
communication and related areas, such as oral motor 
function [9]. A speech disorder is a problem with fluency, 
voice, and/or how a person says speech sounds.  
Classification of speech into normal and disorder is a 
complex task. Statistics points out that only 5% to 10% of 
the population has a completely normal manner of speaking, 
all others suffer from one disorder or another. 
The most common speech disorders are: stuttering, 
cluttering, voice disorders, dysartria, and speech sound 
disorders. 
Dyslalia is defined as the articulation disorder that 
consists of difficulties in the way sounds are formed and 
strung together. The most encountered problems are 
characterized by omitting, distorting a sound or substituting 
one sound for another.  
Dyslalia has the greatest frequency among handicaps of 
language for psychological normal subjects as well as for 
those with deficiencies of intellect and sensory. Thus, the 
opinion of Sheridan (1946) is that at the age of eight years 
dyslalia are in proportion of 15% for girls and in proportion 
of 16% for boys. In this context, a lot of attention is paid to 
its prevention and treatment.  
In order to obtain the desired results, speech disorder 
therapy should begin as soon as possible. More studies have 
demonstrated that if children are enrolled in therapy early in 
their development, this means younger than 5 years, their 
outcomes are better than those who begin therapy later.  
Differential diagnosis decides upon the therapy for 
correcting language, as psycho diagnosis allows an adequate 
therapeutic program, and the elaboration of a prognosis 
regarding the evolution of the child, along with the 
therapeutic process. The therapy has to be adapted to each 
language therapist, to each particular case, to the child’s 
learning rhythm and style, as well as to the level of the 
impairment. The key issues in dyslalia therapy are shown in 
Fig. 2. 
Modern speech therapy was deeply influenced by the 
use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

On the one hand, the use of computers and other 
communication tools facilitated communication among 
persons with speech disorders. On the other hand, 
computers were used in speech therapy, contributing to the 
acquisition of written and verbal language, helped by 
various computer-based programs and software. 
Analyzing how it is possible to use the computer to 
support therapy, experts have concluded that it can 
contribute to the diagnosis of speech disorder, produces 
audiovisual feedback during the treatment, monitors and 
assesses the therapeutic progress and provides various types 
of practical exercises for children with speech disorders.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Key issues in dyslalia   therapy  
Additionally, the use of a CBST allows to collect and 
store a considerable amount of data about patients, 
diagnoses and treatment schemes. 
The Center for Computer Research in the University 
"Stefan cel Mare" of Suceava has implemented the 
TERAPERS project [10]. TERAPERS is a system able to 
assist teachers in speech therapy of dislalya and to track how 
the patients respond to various personalized therapy 
programs. It contains two main components, as shown in 
Fig. 3: intelligent systems deployed on computers located in 
the speech therapists’ offices and more mobile devices used 
by patients in order to solve the independent homework. 
This system is currently used by the therapists from 
Regional Speech Therapy Center of Suceava.  
During the operating period, data about 300 children 
were collected and stored in the TERAPERS’ database, 
which includes about 60 tables and several hundreds of 
features. 
Anamnesis data collected may provide information 
relative to various causes that may negatively influence the 
normal development of the language. It contains historical 
data and data provided by the cognitive and personality 
examination. 
 
Figure 3.  TERAPERS’ Architecture [11] 
In order to design personalized therapy programs, is 
useful to know: how many sessions per week are necessary 
for each child, exercises that are suitable for each phase of  
therapy, and how can be changed the original program in 
order to be adapted to the patient evolution. In addition, the 
report downloaded from the mobile device collects data on 
the efforts of child self-employment. These data refer to the 
exercises done, the number of repetitious for each of these 
exercises and the results obtained. The tracking of child’s 
progress materializes data that indicate the moment of 
assessing the child and his status at that time. 
All these data can hide useful patterns, which are very 
useful in personalizing speech therapy, and that could be 
detected using appropriate data mining techniques. 
Clustering may group people with speech disorders on 
the basis of similarity of different features and allows 
creating some patients’ profiles. This is a way to help the 
therapists to understand who they patients are. 
Classification places people with different speech 
impairments in predefined classes. Based on the information 
contained in many predictor variables, such as personal or 
familial anamnesis data or related to lifestyle, it can be used 
to join the patients with different segments and to track the 
size and structure of various groups. 
The goal of association rules mining is to identify 
combinations of items that often occur together. In the 
personalized speech therapy area, its task is to determine 
why a specific therapy program has been successful on a 
segment of patients with speech disorders and on the other 
was ineffective. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Those mentioned above, were the basis of the initiative to 
develop a data mining system, dedicated to support efforts to 
better personalize the speech therapy.  
IV. 
LOGO-DM  - A DATA MINING SYSTEM FOR SPEECH 
THERAPY OPTIMIZATION 
A. System Objectives 
The sustainable development, in which special attention 
is given to all aspects of health care and the need to respond 
to the high efficiency requirements have led to the need for 
handling information, such as [12]: “what is the predicted 
final state for a child or what will be his/her state at the end 
of various stages of therapy, which are the best exercises for 
each case, and how patients can focus on their effort to 
effectively solve these exercises, or how the family 
receptivity - that is an important factor in the success of the 
therapy - is associated with other aspects of family and 
personal anamnesis”. For all of these, the answer may be 
obtained by applying data mining techniques on data 
collected by TERAPERS.  
It is also interesting to try to enrich the knowledge base 
of expert system embedded in TERAPERS, with knowledge 
discovered in data mining process. In order to achieve these 
goals, we have proposed the development of Logo-DM 
system. 
Essentially, its objectives aim to perform an analysis of 
available data collected from children assisted by 
TERAPERS system and to prepare them in order to assure a 
proper quality for data mining algorithms, to try to select 
only those features that contribute to the model building by 
removing those that are irrelevant or redundant, to choose 
the most appropriate methods and algorithms for data 
mining, to find models that can help to solve problems 
raised in speech disorders therapy, and to validate these 
models on new cases.  
It is worth mentioning that the patterns, represented as 
rules, provided by Logo-DM, could, after some post-
processing operations, be used to enrich the knowledge base 
of the embedded expert system in TERAPERS. 
Although, market claims many systems that allow data 
mining implementation, such as Weka and RapidMiner, 
their use implies IT skills. Our system is designed so that 
patterns can be easily discovered by speech therapists. They 
process a real dataset obtained by integrating data collected 
by all speech therapists that use TERAPERS. 
B. General Architecture 
The proposed architecture for Logo-DM system is 
presented in Fig. 4.  
The graphical user interface allows the successive 
operations required by the knowledge discovery process. 
The preprocessing module prepares data for data mining 
algorithms and performs data transformation and feature 
selection for patterns building. These operations can be made 
both in centralized, distributed, or parallel ways. 
In order to achieve the proposed goals, the data mining 
kernel performs classification and association rules mining. 
Finally, the extracted models are evaluated by experts. If 
they meet the requirements of novelty and utility, they are 
considered knowledge.  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Logo_DM Architecture 
C. Sistem implementation 
As previously mentioned, the graphical interface 
connects the system with the speech therapist, which is able 
to control the KDD process. The access can be achieved 
through menu options or, for the most common tasks, via 
shortcuts, as presented in Fig. 5. It should be noted that the 
following figures contain Romanian texts, because they are 
screenshots from Logo-DM, which is implemented in 
Romanian.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Logo-DM- Main page 
The main source of data for Logo-DM is the database 
from TERAPERS, which is implemented in Access. In these 
conditions, modules for data acquisition from Access were 
implemented, as shown in Fig. 6. If other data sources are 
required, data can be retrieved from Excel, if they were 
previously converted in this format. 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

 
Figure 6.  Logo-DM – Data aquisition 
In order to implement the data transformation, we have 
considered operation, such as: data type conversion, data 
discretization, or role setting as shown in Fig.  7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Logo-DM – Data transformatiom 
For the first version of the system, we have considered, 
as modeling techniques, classification, and association rules 
mining. 
For convenience of operating, interfaces have been 
dedicated exclusively to methods that, after some tests made 
during the implementation, have been shown to provide the 
best performance over a sample of real data set. 
As shown in Fig. 8, for classification were considered: 
rules-based classification, decision trees, classification by 
association rules (CBA) and the CART algorithm.  
For association rules, we used an implementation of the 
Apriori algorithm to detect frequent itemsets from which, 
subsequently, we build association rules. Obviously, it is 
possible to adjust the values for support and confidence. It is 
also possible to choose, from a set of items, those that will 
be contained in the rules or will be placed in the rule’s 
consequent. Fig. 9 shows the interface that allows all these 
operations. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Logo-DM – Classification interface 
 
Figure 9.  Logo-DM – Association rules mining interface 
 
D. Experimental Results 
In present, we are at the stage where, although the 
amount of data is still low for data mining, the system can 
be tested on the available data. 
At this point, we have considered a real data set 
containing more than 300 cases described by 102 features 
related to personal and familial anamnesis and to complex 
speech examination, expresed in Romanian terms. After the 
feature selection process achieved through an unsupervised 
information-based method [13], we have obtained a set of 
52 relevant features.  
Fig. 10 shows a decision tree built on this data set. It is a 
classification model in which class label is represented by 
the diagnosis. The calculated model accuracy, obtained 
using a test dataset that is about 10% from the training set is 
56,67%, as shown in Fig. 11. 
 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

 
Figure 10.  A classification model 
 
 
Figure 11.  Classification performance  
Speech therapy experts have analyzed this model and 
admitted that in addition to the complex examination of 
language, there are features related to the child’s evolution 
or temperament, such as excitement (“emotivitate”) that 
may lead to a specific diagnosis, such as :”dislalie 
polimorfa”, or “rotacism”, or “stigmatism”, as shown in 
pattern presented above. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Speech therapy is a complex process that must be 
personalized according to the characteristics of each patient, 
especially since they are in very high proportion children. 
The use of information technology in order to assist the 
speech therapy has some immediate benefits and allows the 
collection of a considerable amount of data related to 
personal and familial anamnesis, to the complex evaluation, 
to the therapeutically applied schemes and to the results of 
the various stages of therapy.  
Studies have shown that it should be appropriate to apply 
some data mining methods on these data, such as 
classification, clustering, and association rules, because they 
lead to patterns that can increase the efficiency of speech 
therapy. 
In this paper, we have presented the first version of a data 
mining system, called Logo-DM that was implemented on 
data collected by TERAPERS system. Its aim is to try to 
increase the efficiency of therapy of dyslalia that is assisted 
by TERAPERS.  
Furthermore, we have proposed to finish testing the 
association rules mining, and to complete the data mining 
kernel with clustering algorithms. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] SpeechviewerIII–          
http://www.synapseadaptive.com/edmark/prod/sv3 [retrieved: 
June 2013] . 
[2] R. Laboissière, D. J. Ostry,  and A. G. Feldman, “The control 
of multi-muscle systems: Human jaw and hyoid movements”, 
Biological Cybernetics, vol.74, 1996, pp. 373-384. 
[3] http://www.speech.kth.se/multimodal/ARTUR/index.html 
[retrieved: May, 2013]. 
[4] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth, “The KDD 
process for extracting useful knowledge from volumes of 
data”, Communications of the ACM, vol. 39(11), 1996, pp. 
27-34. 
[5] S. Anand, A. Patrick, J. Hughes, and D. Bell, “A data mining 
methodology for crosssales”, Knowledge Based Systems 
Journal. Vol. 10, 1998, 449–461. 
[6] K. Cios, A. Teresinska, S. Konieczna, J. Potocka, and S. 
Sharma, “Diagnosing myocardial perfusion from SPECT 
bull’s-eye maps – a knowledge discovery approach”, IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, special issue 
on Medical Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 
19(4), 2000, pp. 17–25. 
[7] P. Cabena, P. Hadjinian, R. Stadler, J. Verhees, and A. 
Zanasi, “Discovering Data Mining: From Concepts to 
Implementation”, Prentice Hall, 1998. 
[8] R. Wirth and J. Hipp, “CRIPS-DM: Towards a standard 
process model for data mining”, In Proceedings of the Fourth 
International Conference on the Practical Applications of 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Manchester, 2000, 
pp. 29–39. 
[9] A. 
Brice, 
“Children 
with 
communication 
disorders”, 
Arlington, VA: ERIC Clearinghouse on Disabilities and 
Gifted Education, 2001. 
[10] M. Danubianu, S. G. Pentiuc, O. Schipor, M. Nestor, and I. 
Ungurean, “Distributed Intelligent System for Personalized 
Therapy of Speech Disorders”, Proceedings of  The Third 
International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global 
Information Technology ICCGI, August 2008, pp. 166-170. 
[11] M. Danubianu, I. Tobolcea, and S. G. Pentiuc, “Advanced 
Technology in Speech Disorder Therapy of Romanian 
Language”, Journal of Computing, NY, ISSN: 2151-9617, 
Vol: 1, no.2009, pp. 1-6. 
[12] M. Danubianu, S.G. Pentiuc, I. Tobolcea, and T. Socaciu, 
“Model of a data mining system for personalized therapy of 
speech disorder”, Journal of Applied Computer Science, no. 
6(3), 2009, pp. 28-32. 
[13] M. Danubianu, V. Popa, and I. Tobolcea, “Unsupervised 
Information-Based Feature Selection for Speech Therapy 
Optimization by Data Mining Techniques”, Proceedings of 
ICCGI2012, June 2012, pp. 206-211. 
 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-311-7
IMMM 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

