Bag-of-Features Tagging Approach for a Better Recommendation with Social Big Data
Ming Cheung
HKUST-NIE Social Media Lab,
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Hong Kong
Email: cpming@ust.hk
James She
HKUST-NIE Social Media Lab,
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Hong Kong
Email: eejames@ust.hk
Abstract—The interests of users are always important for person-
alized content recommendations on friendships, events and media
content from the social big data. However, those interests may not
be speciﬁed, which makes the recommendations challenging. One
of the possible solutions is to analyze the user’s interests from
the shared content, especially images with manually annotated
tags. They are shared on online social networks such as Flickr
and Instagram. However, the accuracy of the recommendation
is greatly affected by the accuracy of the tag, which is not
always reliable. This paper demonstrates how a bag-of-features
(BoF)-based tagging approach can help to improve the accuracy
of recommendations using an unsupervised algorithm. A set of
auxiliary tags is used to represent user interests and, hence,
the recommendation. The approach is evaluated with over 500
user and 200k images from Flickr. It is proven that by BoF
tagging (BoFT), friendship recommendation is possible without
friendship/tag information and the recall and the precision rate
are improved by about 50% over using user tags.
Keywords–Image tagging; recommendation; online social net-
work; bag-of-features; annotation; big data.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, sharing social content has become part of our
lives, in which billions pieces of content are shared. Recom-
mending content that matches the user’s interests from the
social big data is important for any social networks. However,
the user’s interests may be hidden, that is the interests are
not speciﬁed in the user proﬁle. With an incomplete set of
data, the content recommendation may be inaccurate. On the
other hand, the user’s interests are reﬂected in the abundance
of social content, especially image, shared on the networks.
A good recommendation is possible through analyzing the
users’ interests reﬂected among shared images. One of the
most important applications is friendship recommendation, the
inference of the connection between two users [1]. One of the
possible ways to analyze a user’s interests from shared images
is through tagging [2]. Tagging, the act of using text to annotate
a social content, is one of the most basic and essential features
in any social networks that helps content recommendation [3].
The tags describe the image and reﬂect the users’ interests
since users with similar interests are more likely to upload
images with similar tags. Connections can be discovered with
the tendency to make friends with someone who shares similar
interests reﬂected in the tags. Fig. 1(a) to (d) is a set of images
and their tags by different users in Fotolog, Flickr, Twitter and
Instagram. The tags include the name of the object, location,
Figure 1: Examples of tagging on: (a) Fotolog, (b) Instagram, (c)
Twitter, (d) Flickr, (e) and the corresponding social graph.
time or even the feeling felt at the time by the user. They are
the major types of tags [4].
A tie between 2 people indicates that there is a connection
between them such as friendship. The strength of connections
among users can be measured by tie strength. People with
higher tie strength such as best friends have a higher inﬂuence
on the user. One of the important elements in measuring the tie
strength is the common interests they share [5]. As tags reﬂect
the interests of users, the tie strength can be estimated by the
similarity of tags and hence, calculate possible connections.
For example, if two users both upload images with the tag,
”Car”, the users are similar in terms of their interest and can be
connected. Reliable tags that can reﬂect the nature of an image
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

are essential for this calculation. However, in most of the social
networks, the tags are added manually and are not always
reliable [6]. They may not be accurate, suitable for analysis,
or, sometimes even available. Some users are not interested in
annotating the images they upload because of the considerably
longer time required than simply uploading the images, as the
user shown in Fig. 1(a). For those tagged images, the tags may
not be a good description of the content. Users may type the
tag wrongly such as the tag, ”Sar” instead of ”Car”, in Fig.
1(b). Some irrelevant tags are added intentionally to increase
the popularity. An example is the tag ”Car” for the picture of
ﬂowers of Fig. 1(c). For a good annotated image, analyzing
the tags is still not an easy task. The tags may have different
levels of details [8] or diverse details. For example, in Fig. 1(d),
the user annotates the object, time and place. As a result, the
social graph by the tags, as shown in Fig. 1(e) has wrongly
connected user C with user D while leaving users A and B
without any connection. These are some common examples of
how a user annotates an image on social networks and how
that annotation affects the discovery of connections.
This paper proposes a novel approach using BoF-based
tagging that makes better recommendations through users’
interests discovered from images uploaded. Instead of using
a supervised approach in [9], this paper proposes an unsu-
pervised approach in which images are grouped visually by
BoF. The approach is also evaluated using a dataset of 542
users and 201006 images and the actual relationship among
users. The results prove that the proposed approach can help
to make a better recommendation. The main contributions
are the following: 1) propose a novel way to represent user
interest with auxiliary tags in an unsupervised manner; 2)
introduce a friendship recommendation approach based on
the auxiliary tags; and 3) verify the recommendation with
the actual relationship from the scraped data. Section II in
this paper discusses previous works. Section III is the general
context of a BoF-based tagging, followed by how to connect
people with similarity in Section IV. Section V shows the
details of the experimental result and Section VI concludes
the paper.
II.
PREVIOUS WORKS
Recommending personalized content from billions of shared
content is always a challenging task. Information overload may
occur so that users have difﬁculty processing the huge amount
of available content. A possible solution is a recommendation
system based on a trust-based approach [10], where the user’s
social connection is considered for ﬁltering the content. The
interest shared is a way to measure tie, the strength of the
social connection [7]. A hybrid approach can combine interests
and the social connections. However, obtaining the user’s
interest is not always available. Although users can enter their
interests for better recommendations, they may not want to
spend time on the annotation. One of the possible solutions
is to analyze the interests reﬂected in the content they have
shared, especially images. This analysis can be based on the
user annotated tags that describe the images. However, those
tags may be inappropriate, wrong or have a different degree of
details. One of the most well-known solutions is Collaborative
Filtering (CF) [11][12], in which the same social content will
be tagged by many users. The ﬁnal tag quality can be improved
[13] by analyzing the tags from different users. Although there
is a promising result by applying CF, it is not suitable for
systems with a large amount of images. The reason behind
is that only small portion of images are popular and receive
many tags. While it gives some of the images appropriate tags,
most of them are left without proper tags for analysis. In image
sharing platforms, such as Flickr, a user can upload hundreds
of images at a time which makes CF inappropriate.
Another possible way is a content-based approach, in which
the visual features are considered in order to annotate an image
[14][15]. However, determining the relationship between the
features and the tags is not a trivial task. The same object can
be visually different among images. In this paper, BoF-based
tagging [16] is applied. The proposed approach makes use of
computer vision techniques in object recognition tasks to infer
interests for friendship recommendations. BoF is an image-
based approach that detects low-level features, and encodes an
image into a feature vector. An unsupervised method is used
for the learning. Images are grouped based on the similarity of
their features vectors and hence the similarity of 2 users can
be calculated. With this approach, it is possible to obtain the
tag given to an image and, therefore, recommendation.
Among different types of content recommendation, friend-
ships, or connections among people, is one the most important
and fundamental functions. This problem has long been stud-
ied. One of the possible ways to make the recommendation is
by the existing connections among people [17][18]. However,
this may limit the recommendations from millions of users
as the connections among users may not available. Friendship
recommendation is also possible with user interests [18] in-
ferred from user input [19] or user generated content [20] and
other personal information [1]. Interests are combined with
the existing connections with a machine learning algorithm in
[21] for recommendation. In [22], the authors focus on how
to make use of the group information on Flickr for friendship
recommendation. The co-occurrence in images can also be a
cue on friendship recommendation [23].
III.
BOF-BASED TAGGING
BoF has been a popular approach to many computer vision
tasks because of its simplicity [16]. BoF is a method to rep-
resent images into feature vectors of local image descriptors.
Fig. 2 is the process of the proposed approach in which Fig.
2(a) is the use of BoF in this work. The different parts of the
BoF tagging are introduced in this section.
A. Feature Extraction
Feature extraction is a process to obtain the local features in
step 1 of Fig. 2. These features can be detected by Harris Afﬁne
detector, or Maximally Stable Extremal Regions detector [16].
The extracted features are relatively consistent with viewing
angles and lighting conditions. They are represented in a way
that is independent of the size and orientation, such as scale-
invariant feature transform (SIFT) [24].
B. Codebook Generation
Codebook generation (step 2 of Fig. 2) is a process to obtain
the visual words that can represent the features obtained in the
feature extraction in step 1 of Fig. 2. It is a clustering process
that groups similar features. The mean vectors of each group
are deﬁned as the visual word, which can be used to represent
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 2: Flow chart of the proposed approach: (a) BoF-based tagging, (b) relationship recommendation.
the features in these images. One of the possible techniques
to obtain those clusters is by k-mean clustering [25], which
groups the visual features based on their visual similarity. The
codebook generation is an ofﬂine process that does not need
to be updated in real time.
C. Feature Coding and Pooling
Feature coding is to encode features with the visual words.
Each feature in every image is represented by a visual word in
feature coding. The images are then represented by a feature
vector in the feature pooling. This process is carried out in
encoding the images in the dataset (step 3 of Fig. 2). One
of the most common approaches is using the histogram that
counts the number of occurrences of each visual word in the
image. The feature vector obtained is used in the clustering to
group images that are visually similar.
D. Clustering and Tagging
The goal of clustering is to group images with similar
feature vectors, that is, group images that are visually similar.
Each cluster obtained in this operation corresponds to similar
objects to which an auxiliary tag is assigned. After obtaining
the cluster in step 4 of Fig. 2, the images in any cluster
are assigned with the same auxiliary tag to reﬂect that they
are visually similar and belong to the same group. It is an
unsupervised operation no assumption is made or information
on the image is known.
IV.
PROPOSED BOF-BASED RECOMMENDATION
This section introduces how to ﬁnd similarities among
people from the result of the BoF tagging (BoFT). The ﬁrst
part introduces how to learn the user proﬁle from the result
of BoF tagging, while the second part discusses how to make
recommendations based on the user proﬁle.
A. BoF Tagging and User Proﬁle
The user proﬁle, which reﬂects the interests of the users
is the key in the content recommendation. A user proﬁle can
be obtained based on user manual input, in which the user
manually inputs what kind of content is their favor. In the
proposed approach, it is assumed that no user input is needed
and the user proﬁle is obtained from the image uploaded as in
step 5 of Fig. 2. The histogram of the tags is used as the user
proﬁle in the proposed approach.
B. User Proﬁle and Recommendation
When the user proﬁle is obtained, the next step is to make
a recommendation to the user. Recommendations are based on
the tie, the strength of the relationship between two people.
An item favored by a user may also be liked by friends of
the user with strong ties. For example, user A likes Ferrari,
while user B likes BMW and user A is user C’s best friend.
As a result, it is more likely that user C likes Ferrari. Content
recommendation is then possible with the value of the tie
calculated by user proﬁle with the following formula:
Scosine(A, B) =
TA · TB
||TA|| · ||TB||
(1)
where TA is the set of tags in the images uploaded by user A
and TB is the set of tags in the images uploaded by user B.
The pairwise similarity is calculated based on the user proﬁle.
It is possible to obtain the tie between two people and ﬁnd
that people with similar interests have a higher similarity. The
tie is assumed to be undirected, which means that the tie is
the same from user A to B and user B to A. Different types
of recommendation is possible with user ties, in particular, the
focus of this paper is on friendship recommendation.
V.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, the dataset, the experiments and the results
are discussed. In this paper, the discussion focuses on discov-
ering the connections among users by the tendency of people
to make friends with people who share similar interests. The
results show that it is possible to infer connections by using
the BoF tagging.
A. Dataset and Experimental Setup
The setting of the experiment is shown in Fig. 3. A set of
201006 images uploaded by 542 users is scraped from Flickr,
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 3: Experiment setting
an online social network for image sharing with millions of
images uploaded and tagged, and the BoF tagging approach
is used to tag those images. The 542 users are selected
randomly from images under the same tag query page to
provide diversity. The user proﬁles from the uploaded images
are built with the tags obtained. Then connections among
users are inferred with the tie calculation and evaluated with
the actual connections scraped with the images. Tables I and
II show the attributes scraped for the users and the images.
TABLE I: MAJOR ATTRIBUTES FOR IMAGES
Attribute
Description
ImageID
the unique ID for the image
Tag
the set of user annotated tags
TABLE II: MAJOR ATTRIBUTES FOR USERS
Attribute
Description
UserID
the unique ID for the user
ImageUploaded
the set of images uploaded by the user
FriendList
the user ID of the user friends
In the dataset, there are a total of 2827409 tags among the
images, on average there are 14 tags per image and 5422
tags per user. There are 152938 unique tags. The average
number of friends of a user is 170 for which there are 902
connections among the 542 users. The goal of the experiment
is to infer those connections using the set of images uploaded
by the users, even without using the friendship information.
The features of all the images are detected by the
Harris-Afﬁne key point detector. They are described by the
Figure 4: Examples of images in clusters
128-dimension SIFT descriptor. The visual words are obtained
by k-mean and then used to represent all the images as feature
vectors. A clustering operation is then used to group images
with similar feature vectors. The images in the same cluster
are assigned with the same auxiliary tag, in which each
cluster has a unique auxiliary tag as in Fig. 4. The auxiliary
tags are then used to build the user proﬁle. the friendship
recommendation is based on the similarity of the user proﬁle
of the users.
Different approaches are implemented for comparisons.
The ﬁrst approach is a random approach (Rand), in which
users are recommended randomly. This is the baseline for the
comparison to simulate the condition that user information
such as friendship is not available. Two other approaches are
also implemented to compare the proposed one. The ﬁrst one
is the Friend-of-Friend (FoF) [26], in which the similarity
is based on the Jaccard similarity of the friend list. The
similarity between two users with more common friends is
higher. The FoF approach serves as the upper bound of the
proposed approach to simulate the condition that information
are available. The second approach is similar to the proposed
approach, but instead of using auxiliary tag, the user annotated
tags are used (UserT). The similarity is based on the tag they
used for their images. It is also interesting to check if the
additional information from BoFT can improve the preference
of the upper bound, FoF. BoFT+ is deﬁned as the following:
SBoF T + = β ∗ SBoF T + (1 − β) ∗ SF oF
(2)
where β is a constant, SBoF T , SF oF
and SBoF T + are
the similarities of the BoFT, FoF and BoFT+. A study on
the performance with different values of β is carried. It is
measured by the area under curve (AUC) on the recall rate
with 5 to 10 recommendation and shown in Fig. 5. A higher
value in AUC implies a better performance. It is observed
that AUC is maximum when β is 0.024. It implies that the
majority of information is from FoF. In all approaches, no
recommendation is made if the similarity between that user
to others are all 0. For example, in the FoF approach, no
recommendation is made if a user has no friend. It is a valid
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 6: Result rate of different approaches: (a) precision, (b) recall.
Figure 5: β vs. AUC for N ⊂ [5, 10]
assumption when information is not available.
The results are evaluated by two popular rates, top N
recall rate and top N precision rate as the following:
Precision =
Tp
(Tp + Fp)
(3)
Recall =
Tp
(Tp + Fn)
(4)
where Tp is the true positive (the recommended connection
is an actual connection), while Fp and Fn are false positive
and false negative respectively. Fp is the case that the rec-
ommended connection is not a connection, while Fn are the
connections that are not recommended. The physical meaning
for precision rate is the percentage of recommended items
is actual connections. The recall is the percentage of actual
connections that is recommended. The higher the values are,
the better the approach is. When more items are recommended,
recall rate is increased, but precision rate decreases. A list of
recommendations is generated for each user with the proposed
approaches. The approaches are evaluated with the top N per
user recall rate and the top N precision rate, in which the top
N users with the highest similarity, are recommended.
Figure 7: Recall rate for BoFT+ and FoF for N ⊂[1,542].
B. Results
Fig. 6 shows the top-N precision and recall rate of different
algorithms for 5 to 10 recommendations per users. It is
observed that FoF, BoFT, UserT and BoFT+ are all better
than using user tags in terms of the two rates. It is clear that
BoFT approach outperforms UserT and random approach and
is much closest to the upper bound, FoF. BoFT+ can only
improve the performance slightly. A detailed discussion can
be found in the next subsection.
C. Discussion
In the experiment, it is observed that all approaches are
better than the random one. The use of BoFT provides a signiﬁ-
cant improvement on the performance of the recommendation.
By BoFT, the recall and the precision rate are improved by
about 50% over UserT. Although the recall rate for BoFT+ is
slightly higher than FoF, the precision rate of FoF is higher
than BoFT+ as shown in Fig. 6. As discussed in previous
section, the additional BoFT information can only slightly
improve the FoF approach. It is also interesting to check the
performance when N is large. The top N recall rate for BoFT+
with 2 values of β and FoF are shown in Fig. 7. When N is
smaller than 100, the BoFT+ approach are only slightly better
than FoF. However, when N is large, the improvement is more
signiﬁcant and the recall is increased by 13.3% with AUC by
BoFT+. As mentioned in the previous section, the higher in
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

FoF approach in terms of the precision rate is that some users
have no common friends with others. If two people have no
common friend, no recommendation is possible. On one hand,
users with no common friend are never recommended to each
other in FoF approach and results in a higher precision rate.
The number of common friends between 2 users can be small,
or even zero. As a result, FoF approach may only capture
relations with high conﬁdence (with common friends) but those
without any common friends. A high precision rate but a lower
recall rate are obtained. On the other hand, BoFT can connect
people through the images they have uploaded and therefore
most users can be reached. The BoFT approach provides a new
way to connect people. The next research challenge is how to
improve the prediction performance such that it is close to the
upper bound with the shared images.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a novel BoF based Tagging approach
to make better recommendations matching users interests dis-
covered from images uploaded It demonstrated how a BoF-
based approach can help discover hidden users’ connections
from the shared images on a social network for a better
recommendation. As user friendship/interests are not always
available, this paper proposes an unsupervised approach to
classify image according to their visual features. Those visual
features represent the user interest, and hence recommendation.
The proposed approach is evaluated by friendship recommen-
dation with a scraped dataset from Flickr with over 500 users
and 200k images. It is proven that the proposed approach can
recommend friendship to user based on the image shared by
the users. With our proposed approach, BoFT, the recall and
the precision rate are improved by about 50%.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by HKUST-NIE Social Media Lab.,
HKUST
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Chen, W. Geyer, C. Dugan, M. Muller, and I. Guy, ”Make new friends,
but keep the old: Recommending people on social networking sites,” in
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, April 2009, pp. 201-210.
[2]
X. Li, L. Guo, and Y. E. Zhao, ”Tag-based social interest discovery,” in
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on World Wide Web,
April 2008, pp. 675-684.
[3]
T. C. Zhou, H. Ma, M. R. Lyu, and I. King, ”UserRec: A user
recommendation framework in social tagging systems.” In Proceedings
of AAAI, July 2010, pp. 1486-1491.
[4]
T. Hammond, T. Hannay, B. Lund, and J. Scott, ”Social bookmarking
tools (I) a general review,” D-Lib Magazine, vol. 2, 2005.
[5]
S. A. Golder and S. Yardi, ”Structural predictors of tie formation in
twitter: Transitivity and mutuality,” in Social Computing (SocialCom),
2010 IEEE Second International Conference on, August 2010, pp. 88-
95.
[6]
L. Kennedy, M. Naaman, S. Ahern, R. Nair, and T. Rattenbury, ”How
ﬂickr helps us make sense of the world: Context and content in
community-contributed media collections,” in Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Multimedia, September 2007, pp. 631-640.
[7]
E. Gilbert and K. Karahalios, ”Predicting tie strength with social me-
dia,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, April 2009, pp. 211-220.
[8]
D. G. Lowe, ”Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,”
International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 60, November 2004, pp.
91-110.
[9]
M. Cheung and James She ”Predicting Peoples Interests and Connections
Using Their Shared Photos,” unpublished.
[10]
F. E. Walter, S. Battiston, and F. Schweitzer, ”A model of a trust-based
recommendation system on a social network,” Auton. Agents Multi-
Agent Syst., vol. 16, February 2008, pp. 57-74.
[11]
X. Zhang, Z. Li, and W. Chao, ”Tagging image by merging multiple
features in a integrated manner,” Journal of Intelligent Information
Systems, vol. 39, August 2012, pp. 87-107.
[12]
B. Sigurbjrnsson and R. Van Zwol, ”Flickr tag recommendation based
on collective knowledge,” in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on World Wide Web, April 2008, pp. 327-336.
[13]
J. Sang, C. Xu, and J. Liu, ”User-aware image tag reﬁnement via ternary
semantic analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 14, February
2012, pp. 883-895.
[14]
E. Moxley, J. Kleban, J. Xu, and B. Manjunath, ”Not all tags are created
equal: Learning ﬂickr tag semantics for global annotation,” in Multimedia
and Expo, 2009. ICME 2009. IEEE International Conference on, June
2009, pp. 1452-1455.
[15]
X. Zhang et al., ”Social image tagging using graph-based reinforcement
on multi-type interrelated objects,” Signal Processing, vol. 93 no. 8,
August 2013, pp. 2178-2189
[16]
Z. Wang, L. Sun, W. Zhu, S. Yang, H. Li, and D. Wu, ”Joint Social and
Content Recommendation for User-Generated Videos in Online Social
Network,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, April 2013, pp. 698-709
[17]
I. Guy, N. Zwerdling, I. Ronen, D. Carmel, and E. Uziel, ”Social media
recommendation based on people and tags,” in Proceedings of the 33rd
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, July 2010, pp. 194-201.
[18]
I. Guy et al., ”Personalized recommendation of social software items
based on social relations,” in Proceedings of the Third ACM Conference
on Recommender Systems, October 2009, pp. 53-60.
[19]
W. H. Hsu, A. L. King, M. S. Paradesi, T. Pydimarri, and T. Weninger,
”Collaborative and structural recommendation of friends using weblog-
based social network analysis,” in AAAI Spring Symposium: Computa-
tional Approaches to Analyzing Weblogs, March 2006, pp. 55-60.
[20]
X. Xie, ”Potential friend recommendation in online social network,” in
Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom), 2010 IEEE/ACM
Int’l Conference on & Int’l Conference on Cyber, Physical and Social
Computing (CPSCom), December 2010, pp. 831-835.
[21]
V. Leroy, B. B. Cambazoglu, and F. Bonchi, ”Cold start link prediction,”
in Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, July 2010, pp. 393-402.
[22]
R. Parimi and D. Caragea, ”Predicting friendship links in social net-
works using a topic modeling approach,” in Advances in Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining Anonymous Springer, May 2011, pp. 75-86.
[23]
H. Kim, J. Jung, and A. El Saddik, ”Associative face co-occurrence
networks for recommending friends in social networks,” in Proceedings
of Second ACM SIGMM Workshop on Social Media, October 2010, pp.
27-32.
[24]
F. Tian, X. Shen, F. Shang, and K. Zhou, ”Automatic image tagging
by multiple feature tag relevance learning,” in Pattern Recognition
Anonymous Springer, 2012, pp. 505-513.
[25]
D. A. Forsyth and J. Ponce, Computer Vision: A Modern Approach.
Prentice Hall Professional Technical Reference, 2002.
[26]
L. L and T. Zhou, ”Link prediction in complex networks: A survey,” in
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 390, March
2011, pp. 1150-1170.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

