        A Study of Exploring the Factors on Women's Choice of Dessert 
 
A-Mei Lin Hsu 
Ph.D. Program of Technology Management 
Chung Hua University 
Hsinchu City, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
e-mail: t90094@mail.tut.edu.tw 
Chiu-Chi Wei 
Dept. of Industrial Management 
Chung Hua University 
Hsinchu City, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
e-mail: a0824809@gmail.com 
 
Hui-Chi Chuang 
Institute of Information Management 
National Cheng Kung University 
Tainan City, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
e-mail: huichi613@gmail.com 
Yi-Chung Cheng 
Department of International Business Management 
Tainan University of Technology 
Tainan City, Taiwan, R.O.C. 
e-mail: t20042@mail.tut.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract—The feeling of happiness can affect people’s choices. 
In order to raise the purchasing power, it is a common way to 
advertise and promote the product with happiness. For 
example, parent-child wedding and car advertisement pursue 
the goal of family happiness. Café uses the feelings of 
happiness as marketing theme to attract in-love couples. 
However, happiness is a subjective and emotional which is 
affected by temporal focus. There are two primary experiences 
of happiness, namely, high awakening (excitement) happiness 
and low awakening (peace) happiness. This study aims to 
investigate how the choice of dessert of a couple is affected by 
the loving atmosphere with temporal focus as well as   
happiness. It uses two dimensions, namely, temporal focus 
(present, future) and loving atmosphere (passionate love, not 
passionate love) to conduct experiments with questionnaires. 
Experimenters are randomly assigned to four experiments for 
verifying research hypotheses. The experimental result shows 
that loving atmosphere affects temporal focus, temporal focus 
affects happiness, and happiness affects choice of dessert. 
 
Keywords- love atmosphere; time focus; happiness 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
It has been shown that consumer behaviors and 
psychology are highly related. The decisions of consumers 
for purchasing products are not only based on the services 
and the qualities, but also affected by their feelings and 
emotions. In other words, times, environment, atmosphere 
and location will cause various purchasing motivations [1]. 
There is a relationship between happiness and consuming 
behaviors, which gives chances for enterprises to make 
advertisement by taking advantages of happy images, such as 
advertisement of cars, real estate, furniture, coffee, even TV 
commercial for oden, a Japanese one-pot winter dish. 
Happiness changes along with the shifts of temporal focus. 
Barrett [2] and Russell and Barrett [3] defined happiness as 
high awakening (excitement) happiness and low awakening 
(peace) happiness, and here both are positive emotions. 
When happiness of a person is in different level of awareness, 
his or her purchasing motivations are different. Happiness 
also affects the feelings of loving atmosphere. Nowadays, 
young people prefer instant love which is called “fast food 
love”. We can see couples post their relationship status on 
Facebook, such as “keep in love”, “celebrate keeping in love 
for one week”, “celebrate keeping in love for two weeks” or 
“celebrate keeping in love for a month” and so on. Soon after, 
we may see someone post the relationship status as “single” 
on Facebook. Therefore, the happiness of loving atmosphere 
is affected by temporal focus. However, how the length of 
keeping in love affects the temporal focus is an important 
issue in this research. First, we consider the number of weeks 
that young people had been falling in love and then we use 
the median of the numbers as the cut point of high 
awakening (excitement) happiness and low awakening 
(peace) happiness. Will women in high awakening 
(excitement) happiness purchase exciting dessert and in low 
awakening (peace) happiness purchase peaceful dessert? In 
the second study, we choose the top 10 desserts from the 
Internet and we invite young people to rate each dessert from 
1 to 5. The dessert which got the highest score is marked as 
"exciting dessert", and on the other hand, the dessert with the 
lowest score is marked as "peaceful dessert". 
The study takes two dimensions, namely, temporal focus 
(present, future), and loving atmosphere (passionate love, not 
passionate love) to conduct experiments and questionnaires. 
Experimenters are randomly assigned to four experiments. 
First of all, couples show their recent photos and share the 
stories of the photos, such as shooting location or travel 
memories in order to recall truly loving atmosphere. The 
experimenters were asked two independent questions and 
two test questions to confirm if the loving atmospheres were 
successfully reminded. After that, they filled out the form of 
questionnaires about happiness and choice of dessert. 
The study includes 200 women in loving atmosphere as 
the experimenters. Questionnaires are based on Likert 5-
point scale and the questions are: 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

1. Is happiness affected by temporal focus and loving 
atmosphere? 
2. How does happiness affect the choice of dessert? 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Consumer behaviors are closely related to psychology.  It 
is well known that consumers’ behaviors and purchasing 
motivation are inseparable. However, it is rarely discussed if 
in-love happiness influences purchasing motivations and 
behaviors. In their study, Trope and Liberman [4][5] 
mentioned that time focus affects one’s view and action, 
such as indulge desire [6] and purchase decision [7]. In 
summary, there is no literature that discusses the loving 
atmosphere and happiness, how to cast influence on 
purchasing behavior, and the interaction between temporal 
focus and loving atmosphere. Therefore, this research is 
motivated to address these issues by investigating how the 
choice of dessert of a couple is affected by the loving 
atmosphere with temporal focus as well as happiness. 
The word happiness has many meanings. It can be 
considered as a broad term for feeling good. Myers and 
Diener [8] defined happiness as “a healthy, happy and 
satisfied state, which is also a pleasant or satisfying 
experience.” Myers and Diener [8] and Layard [9] claimed 
that the meaning of happiness is the same for everyone, 
which means happiness is unity; however, other researchers 
believe happiness is subjective. Happiness does not mean the 
same to each other and happiness is different [10]. 
Furthermore, Barrett [2], Russell and Barrett [3] separate 
happiness in two types: high awakening and low awakening. 
The definition of the former is excited, joyful, elated and 
passionate; the meaning of the latter is calm, quiet, peaceful 
and ordinary. Loving atmosphere refers to the feelings of 
happiness of the couple who are dating. Therefore, the 
happiness found in loving atmosphere could be an 
experience, a status, or a reaction. 
The sense of happiness is a subjective enjoyment, feeling 
and experience, but it is an objective positive emotion or 
mood. Carstensen et al. [11] proposed that age is a potential 
psychological factor for happiness and is defined as temporal 
focus. Young people have longer time to create their own 
future, but when growing older, they do not pay more 
attention to the future and gradually focus on the moment. 
Couples who are in love would also have different subjective 
feelings about happiness based on the time when they 
interact with each other, and thus show different objective 
behaviors for happiness. Is it because young people who 
experience a loving atmosphere can focus more on the future? 
Will young people, who have been in a long-term loving 
atmosphere, tend to focus on the present? This study will 
define the temporal focus in love by designated experiment.  
Argyle suggested that the sense of happiness includes 
two levels of emotions and cognition [12], and in the study it 
verifies 
that 
positive 
emotions 
indirectly 
influence 
consumers' choices by affecting individual cognition. In the 
field of marketing, it is broadly accepted that happiness will 
affect consumers' behavior. Therefore, many advertisements 
take advantage of the sense of happiness to attract the 
consumers, for example, advertising for cars, real estate, 
coffee, and even oden, the traditional Japanese food. All of 
these demonstrate that consumers’ happiness will affect their 
choices of products. In the research of Isen and Patrick, they 
found that positive emotions would affect many choices of 
life with optimism [13], which proves that when people are 
in positive emotions, they would make healthy choices. That 
is, people with positive emotions would be more optimistic. 
With such attitude, people focus more on what are expected 
to happen in the future, but not pay attention to the 
immediate concerns. 
Couples in loving atmosphere are affected by unique and 
distinct happiness, and often have various positive emotions. 
Different positive emotions are accompanied with different 
senses of happiness, and moreover, positive emotions affect 
choices [13]. Therefore, we can conclude that happiness 
plays an intermediate role in the relationship between love 
and dessert selection. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
In this section, we illustrate and display the research 
framework in detail, which is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Research hypothesis framework. 
A. The research hypotheses are as followings: 
H1: loving atmosphere affects temporal focus 
H2: temporal focus affects happiness 
H3: happiness affects choice of dessert 
B. Research variables and operational definition 
1)  Loving atmosphere 
It should distinguish "passionate love" and "not 
passionate love" in order to understand the strength of loving 
atmosphere. 
2) Temporal focus 
This research focuses on the definition of the individual's 
subjective view of present and future. In the study, we adopt 
the item to measure the time by Mogilner et al. [14]. The 
item “I think the future is more important than now” uses a 
5-point scale. “1 means strongly disagree” and “2 means 
disagree", "3 represents normal", "4 represents agree", and "5 
represents strongly agree". The answer strongly disagree or 
disagree represents temporal focuses on "now". The answer 
“strongly agree” or “agree” represents temporal focuses on 
the “future”. If the answer is 3, it means that the 
questionnaire is invalid because it cannot be used to 
distinguish the focus of time and provide valuable 
information. 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

3)  Happiness 
The definition of happiness in this study is reflecting two 
primary experiences of happiness, namely, excited (high 
awakening) and peace (low awakening). Mogilner et al. [14] 
proposed the definition of happiness, the item entitled “I feel 
that a colorful life is happier than a calm and stable life”, 
using a 5-point scale. 
4) Dessert 
Desserts are rated from exciting to peaceful. First, we 
picked 10 different kinds of dessert from the internet. The 
questionnaire is “This dessert makes me excited and happy”, 
with the answer of Likert 5-point scale. 
 
C. Research method 
In order to distinguish the strength of the loving 
atmosphere, in the beginning, we investigate the length of 
time in-love of the experimenters. According to the data, the 
median number of weeks is adopted as the cutting point to 
distinguish "passionate love" and "not passionate love ". 
The 10 desserts are selected from internet, which are 
familiar and favorable desserts to the local people (Table I). 
Every experimenter was asked the question, “Does this 
dessert make me excited and happy”; this can help us define 
the most exciting dessert and the most peaceful dessert. 
We adopt different temporal focuses and loving 
atmospheres to discuss the impact of happiness on the choice 
of desserts. The experiment takes two dimensions, namely 
temporal focus (present, future) and loving atmosphere 
(passionate love, not passionate love) to conduct the 
experiments. Four questionnaires are designed. Respondents 
are randomly assigned to four experiments for verifying 
research hypotheses in this study, four different questions are 
used to test experimenters to evoke the loving atmosphere, 
and to confirm that the loving atmosphere is valid. Finally, 
experimenters were required to answer the questions about 
their status of happiness and choice of desserts. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT AND DISCUSSION 
In order to distinguish the intensity of loving atmosphere, 
in the study, we investigated the experimenter’s during the 
length of their love relationship. Then the median of the 
length is located and used as cutting point of the loving 
atmospheres of “passionate love” and “not passionate love”. 
In the beginning, we did the pre-testing which is focused on 
young people aged 20-30, and a total of 200 questionnaires 
were collected, including 29 invalid questionnaires and 171 
valid questionnaires. According to the study, the average age 
is 24 years old. The average in-love occurrence is 2, the 
average endurance of in-love relationship is 48.57 weeks, 
and the median is 32 weeks. Therefore, the loving 
atmosphere with respect to the length in time of in-love 
relationship defined as “passionate love” for those more than 
or equal to 32 weeks, and "not passionate love" for those less 
than 32 weeks. 
 
 
TABLE I.  TEN SELLECTED DESSERTS 
Dessert name 
Picture 
Dessert name 
Picture 
Ⅰ soufflé 
 
Ⅵ Red bean 
purple rice 
tangyuan 
 
Ⅱ Macaron 
 
Ⅶ Almond 
tofu 
 
Ⅲ Sesame 
paste 
 
Ⅷ mille-
feuille 
 
Ⅳ white 
fungus with 
crystal sugar 
 
Ⅸ Crème 
brûlée 
 
Ⅴ Mille 
Crepe Cake 
 
Ⅹ Longan 
walnut cake 
 
 
The study uses Likert 5-point scale to calculate the rank 
for desserts; the highest scores represent exciting dessert, and 
the lowest scores represent peaceful dessert. According to 
the survey results, mille crepe cake with the highest average 
score of 4 is an exciting dessert, and longan walnut cake with 
the lowest average score of 3 is a peaceful dessert. 
In this study, we adopt different temporal focuses and 
loving atmosphere to evaluate the impact of happiness on the 
choice of desserts. Two dimensions, namely, loving 
atmosphere (passionate love, not passionate love) and 
temporal focus (present, future) were used to conduct the 
experiments. There was a total of four questionnaires and the 
subjects were randomly assigned to four experiments for 
verifying hypotheses. The loving atmosphere is based on 
how they share their loving photos and stories,   
From Table II, the number of young people who are 
passionately in love and focusing on the present is 10, and 
the number of those who are passionately in love and 
focusing on the future is 16. It shows that young people who 
are passionately in love put their focus on the future. The 
number of young people who are not passionately in love but 
focusing on the present is 19, and the number of those who 
are not passionately love but focusing on the future is 15. It 
shows that young people who are not passionately in love 
put their temporal focus on the present. Therefore, the 
hypothesis H1: loving atmosphere affects temporal focus, is 
supported. 
TABLE II.  LOVING ATMOSPHERE V.S. TEMPORAL FOCUS 
love atmosphere 
time focus 
 Passionate 
love 
Not  passionate 
love 
total 
present 
10 
19 
29 
future 
16 
15 
31 
 total 
26 
34 
60 
 
Table III shows that 19 young people whose temporal 
focus is on the present and happiness are peaceful, and 10 
young people whose temporal focus is on the present and 
happiness are excited. Therefore, these young people put 
their temporal focus on the present, and their happiness is 
peaceful. There are 9 young people whose temporal focus is 
on the future and their happiness is peaceful, while there are 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

22 young people whose temporal focus is on the future and 
their happiness is excited. We adopt Chi-square test to 
measure the goodness and fitness of the model. The statistic 
result is significant (p<0.05), and it means the model has 
high fitness to verify the analysis result. Therefore, the 
hypothesis H2: temporal focus affects Happiness, is 
supported. 
TABLE III.  TEMPORAL FOCUS VS. HAPPINESS   
temporalfocus 
happiness 
present 
Future 
total 
peaceful 
19 
 9 
28 
excited 
10 
22 
32 
 total 
29 
31 
60 
 
Table IV shows that the number of young people whose 
happiness is peaceful choosing a peaceful dessert is 18, and 
the number of those whose happiness is peaceful choosing an 
excited dessert is 10. It indicates that low awareness 
(peaceful) of the happiness of consumers positively affects 
the possibility that they would choose peaceful desserts. The 
number of young people whose happiness is excited and 
choosing a peaceful dessert is 7. The number of those whose 
happiness is excited choosing an excited dessert is 25. Then, 
the Chi-square test is used to evaluate the model fitness. The 
result is significant (p<0.05), and it means the analysis result 
is evidential. It indicates that high awareness of the 
happiness of consumers positively affects the possibility that 
they would choose   excited desserts. Therefore, H3: 
happiness affects choice of dessert, is supported. 
TABLE IV.  DESSERT CHOICE VS.. HAPPINESS 
 Happiness 
Dessert 
Peaceful 
excited 
total 
Peaceful (Longan 
walnut cake) 
18 
7 
25 
Excited(Mille 
Crepe Cake) 
10 
25 
35 
total 
28 
32 
60 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the above experimental results, we obtained the 
following conclusion. (1) Loving atmosphere affects 
temporal focus. (2) Temporal focus is affected by happiness. 
(3) Happiness affects the choice of desserts. This result 
proves that people who have optimistic attitudes will make 
healthy choices, and they tend to focus more on the future 
instead of paying attention to immediate worries [13]. This is 
a preliminary study. In the future, we will consider more 
factors which can influence the decision of choice and 
extend the scope of experiment and increase the number of 
questionnaire.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to appreciate all experimenters who 
provided insights and opinions to greatly assist this research.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. M. Tauber, “Why do people shop?,” Journal of Marketing, 
vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 46-49, 1972.   
[2] L. F. Barrett, “Discrete Emotions or Dimensions? The Role of 
Valence Focus and Arousal Focus,” Cognition and Emotion, 
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 579-599, 1998.  
[3] J. Russell and L. Barrett, “Core Affect, Prototypical 
Emotional Episodes, and Other Things Called Emotion: 
Dissecting the Elephant,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, vol. 76, no. 5, pp. 805-819, 1999.  
[4] Y. Trope and N. Liberman, “Time construal and time-
dependent changes in preference,” Journal of personality and 
social psychology, vol. 79, no. 6, pp. 876, 2000. 
[5] Y. Trope and N. Liberman, “Time construal,” Psychological 
review, vol. 110, no. 3, pp. 403, 2003. 
[6] D. Read, G. Loewenstein, S. Kalyanaraman, “Mixing virtue 
and vice: Combining the immediacy effect and the 
diversification heuristic,” Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 257, 1999. 
[7] J. G. Lynch Jr and G. Zauberman, “When do you want it? 
Time, decisions, and public policy,” Journal of Public Policy 
& Marketing, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 67-78, 2006. 
[8] D. G. Myers and E. Diener, “Who is happy?,” Psychological 
science, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 10-19, 1995. 
[9] R. Layard, Happiness: Lessons from a New Science. New 
York: Penguim, 2005.  
[10] D. T. Gilbert, Stumbling on Happines. New York: Knopf, 
2006. 
[11] L. L. Carstensen, D. M. Isaacowitz, S. T. Charles, “Taking 
time seriously: A theory of socioemotional selectivity,” 
American psychologist, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 165, 1999. 
[12] M. Argyle, The psychology of happiness. Routledge, 2013. 
[13] A. M. Isen and R. Patrick, “The effect of positive feelings on 
risk taking: When the chips are down,” Organizational 
behavior and human performance, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 194-202, 
1983. 
[14] C. Mogilner, J. Aaker, S. D. Kamvar, “The Shifting Meaning 
of Happiness,” Social Psychological and Personality Science, 
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 395-402, 2011.  
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-654-5
IMMM 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

