Wireless Transmission of Stereo Images and its Disparity Levels 
Apurva Naik, Keshav Velhal, Kunal Shah, Pratik Raut, Arti Khaparde 
Department of Electronics and Telecommunication 
Maharashtra Institute of Technology 
Pune, Maharashtra, India 
Emails :{apurva.naik, arti.khaparde} @mitpune.edu.in; {keshav.velhal, pratikraut15.11}@gmail.com; 
{kunds18}@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract— One of the promising application of wireless 
transmission is in Computer Vision. Real-time stereo 
images are captured using camera and transmitted to 
another system by using ZIGBEE wireless module. 
Before transmission, image pixels are grouped to form 
packets. These packets when received at the receiver end 
are recovered, and a 3-D image is generated. Also at the 
transmitter, images are segmented by using DPSO 
(Darwinian Particle Swarm Optimization). Segmented 
images are given to the line growing algorithm. Depth 
levels are estimated with the help of disparity values 
obtained from the disparity algorithm. These depth 
levels are transmitted through ZIGBEE module to 
another system. Depth levels received are used to control 
a ROBOT. This proposal is a prototype which can be 
implemented for industrial applications. The present 
paper deals with the Transmitter-Receiver link for 
stereo images and movement of ROBOT proportional to 
estimated depth levels.  
 
Keywords-ZIGBEE; Darwinian Particle Swarm Optimization;  
ROBOT. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
     A two-dimensional camera image does not give 
information about depth levels. However, information about 
depth is required in several applications such as, satellite 
imaging, robotic vision, target tracking and automatic map 
making. Stereo matching is used to extract depth 
information from images [1]. These estimated depth levels 
can be used to control the movement of a ROBOT that can 
be used in robotic vision applications. Until recently, 
stereography was used either for entertainment purpose or 
DEM (Digital Elevation Model) for depth analysis of sea 
bed as, no evidence was found in literature on wireless 
transmission link for transmission of disparity levels. But 
this novel approach will help us to control the unmanned 
vehicle to perform the numerous tasks in medical, mining 
applications and in volumetric analysis of water reservoirs, 
etc., which requires the knowledge of depth. For example, 
one of the applications that can be developed is for 
computer-aided surgery. Images can be captured with help 
of stereoscopic endoscope. These images can be transferred 
to the control room. By doing an analysis and using depth 
information, the surgeon can instruct a ROBOT to perform 
certain tasks.  
 
 
                    Figure 1.  Block diagram of camera  setup. 
 
      For capture of real-time stereo images, the distance 
between two webcams should be at least 6cm [7], which is 
approximately equal to the distance between centers of 
human eyes, i.e., 2.5inches, as shown in Fig. 1. The camera 
should be placed at a distance of 1.8m from the object to be 
captured.  
      For estimation of the focal length camera calibration, the 
toolbox of MATLAB [3] has been used. For estimating the 
focal length of the camera, four images of a chess board, 
each image having different orientation from the other were 
taken. A procedure [3] was followed and the focal length 
obtained was approximately 1300 pixels. Real-time images 
were captured through camera and processed using image 
acquisition toolbox of MATLAB. Pixel values of the images 
were grouped into packets of 2000 pixels and transmitted 
using AT transmission mode of ZIGBEE. Also, disparity 
estimation was carried out and depth levels were calculated.  
These depth levels were also transmitted using ZIGBEE. 
The maximum value of each depth level received was used 
to control the ROBOT movement. At the receiver end, a 
good quality 3-D image was reconstructed. 
 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the experimental setup. Section III describes the 
ZIGBEE module and its protocol, and ROBOT control.  
Section IV gives details of  results. Section V concludes the 
paper. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
      Experimental setup consists of 2 webcams, 2 general 
purpose PCs, 1 PC controlled wired ROBOT, 2 ZIGBEE 
modules (one coordinator node and one router node). 
ZIGBEE modules have been used for transmission of real-
time images and depth values. In the present setup, ZIGBEE 
module of DIGI Company (XBee RF Modules) is used. 
ZIGBEE standard operates on the IEEE 802.15.4 physical 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

radio specification and operates in unlicensed bands 
including 2.4GHz, 900MHz and 868MHz. Each ZIGBEE 
module is connected to a PC via a Serial to USB Convertor 
for communication with MATLAB program. MATLAB has 
been used to encode the image data, and then transmit data 
to the router nodes [4].  At first, the image at coordinator 
node is divided into small packets and then these packets are 
transmitted. The router node receives the image data, in 
form of packets and then MATLAB is used to decode the 
image data. This image data is used to generate a 3-D 
image. Secondly, captured real-time stereo images are 
segmented using Darwinian Particle Swarm Optimization 
[2]. The Segmented images are given to the disparity 
algorithm to estimate the depth values. The coordinator 
node of ZIGBEE module sends this depth data directly. 
Another router node receives the depth data, which is then 
decoded and these decoded values are used to control the 
ROBOT. Block diagram of system implemented for 
wireless transmission is shown in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. System used for wireless transmission. 
III. 
ZIGBEE 
       The ZIGBEE Alliance [6] is a consortium of over 90 
companies that is developing a wireless network standard 
for commercial and residential control and automation 
applications. Wireless communication standards focusing on 
high speed and long range have been applied for cellular 
and local area data networks. Transmission of images by 
using Bluetooth network had been tried, but Bluetooth-
based networks can cover the distance up to 10m, while 
ZIGBEE based networks can be used up to 100m. Bluetooth 
takes three seconds to join a network while ZIGBEE joins a 
network in 30 milliseconds [6]. 
     The Alliance has recently released its specifications for a 
low data rate on wireless network. The design goals for the 
network have been driven by the need for a Machine-to-
Machine (M2M) communication of small simple control 
packet and sensor data, and a desire to keep the cost of 
wireless transceivers to a minimum. ZIGBEE is a wireless 
technology developed as an open global standard to address 
the unique needs of low-cost, low-power wireless M2M 
networks, and it currently uses IEEE 802.15.4 MAC and 
PHY layers, as shown in Fig. 3 [5]. ZIGBEE generally uses 
a single channel for data transmission. A ZIGBEE module 
has three nodes, namely, coordinator node, a router node, 
and an end device node. End-device nodes communicate 
with 
each 
other through a coordinator node. A 
coordinator node is responsible for starting the network 
and for choosing certain key network parameters. The 
end-device nodes not only communicate with the 
coordinator node but also communicate with every router 
node. However, the router nodes processing a routing 
function cannot directly communicate with each other; they 
can communicate only with coordinator [5]. ZIGBEE 
network has three modes of transmission, namely, AT (by 
default), API and API with escape character. In the AT 
(Transparent Mode), data coming into the Data IN (DIN) 
pin is directly transmitted over-the-air to the intended 
receiving radios without any modification. API (Application 
Programming Interface) mode is a frame-based method for 
sending and receiving data to and from a serial UART 
(Universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter). API with 
escape character is an extended version of API which is 
used to prevent data loss in noisy environments. Both API 
and API with escape character are used to insure secure 
communication. In this setup AT (Transparent Mode) mode 
of transmission has been used as it is easy to configure 
ZIGBEE in this mode and currently secure communication 
is not considered in the present prototype. 
                   TABLE  I.   HARDWARE  SPECIFICATIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                  
                                   ZIGBEE module 
 
Operating frequency: 2.4GHz. 
 
Low cost wireless module. 
 
Data rate: 250Kbps. 
 
Operating range: 100ft (30m). 
                Wireless camera       
 
Connection Type – Corded USB. 
 
USB   Type –High Speed USB 2.0. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

A. ZIGBEE Protocol 
      ZIGBEE is best described by referring to the 7-layers of 
the OSI model [8] for layered communication systems. The 
Alliance specifies the bottom three layers (Physical, Data 
Link, and Network), as well as Application Programming 
Interface (API) that allows end developers the ability to 
design custom applications that uses the services provided 
by the lower layers. Fig. 3 shows the architecture adopted 
by the ZIGBEE alliance [5]. 
 
 
Figure 3.  ZIGBEE stack [5]. 
 
B. Limitations of ZIGBEE protocol 
       The 2.4GHz band provides the highest bit rate of 50 
Kbps in IEEE 802.15.4 PHY specification. The physical 
layer supports transfer of only small sized packets which is 
limited to 127 bytes. Due to overhead at the network, each 
packet may contain at most 89 bytes for application data. 
This leads to loss of data during transmission. Therefore, 
there is a need for fragmentation of bit streams larger than 
89 bytes. A ﬂow-control mechanism is also needed to 
acknowledge and request retransmission of missing 
fragments above the network layer [5]. 
  
C. Transmission of image through  ZIGBEE 
      If a large number of pixel values of an image are 
transmitted by using ZIGBEE then there is a loss of data in 
an abrupt manner at the receiving end. For this, the data 
needs to be fragmented. In this case an image of size 115 X 
132 was transmitted using ZIGBEE. An image of size 115 
X 132 has 15180 pixel values. The image is fragmented into 
small packets and each packet contains approximately 2000 
pixel values. For a complete transmission of the image, 
eight packets are required. Since each packet is transmitted 
separately, there is an increase in time taken for 
transmission of the complete image. 
 
D. Control of  ROBOT by using depth information 
     The depth levels estimated from disparity data are 
transmitted through ZIGBEE module. The depth levels 
received by the receiver are used to control the ROBOT. 
Binary data for a specific time delay (depending upon the 
depth levels) is sent from parallel port of the computer to 
ROBOT, according to which it covers a specific distance. 
The data given to a parallel port from MATLAB at data pins 
(D4-D7) goes to the octal buffer IC 74LS244 through db-25 
which is used to reduce DC loading. The output of the 
74LS244 IC is fed to the motor driver IC L239D which 
controls the rotation of the motor, which in turn causes the 
movement of ROBOT. The complete control action of 
ROBOT is shown in Fig. 4. 
 
 
         Figure 4.  Flowchart for ROBOT control. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

IV. 
RESULTS 
    The testing of the present setup was done on several 
images from Middlebury data set [4]. One of the image pair, 
which was transmitted using ZIGBEE and received at the 
receiver ZIGBEE module, is shown in Fig. 5 and Fig. 6.  
. 
   
 
 
Figure 5. Left and Right view of images transmitted. 
 
     
 
 
Figure 6.Left and Right view of images received.  
 
                   
 
 
Figure 7.  Reconstructed 3-D image. 
 
     The time taken to send a complete image was about 60 
seconds; but, as there was loss of data, this image was split 
into eight packets. Therefore, the time taken for 
transmission of each packet of image data was 30.2857 
seconds. Thus, the time taken to transfer the image of size 
115 X 132 was 2.42 minutes. If there is loss of data, 
retransmission is necessary. It was observed that when there 
was a need for retransmission of packets, the maximum time 
taken to transfer a complete image was found to be 3.52 
minutes. In this case, the ROBOT control mechanism is not 
synchronized with the type of image, but it moves forward 
depending upon the number of depth levels in an image. 
However, in the future, it may be synchronized with real-
time industrial control applications. A reconstructed 3-D 
image at the receiver side is shown in Fig. 7.  
     Six different images from Middlebury data set [4] were 
transmitted and received at the receiver. The Peak Signal-to-
Noise Ratio (PSNR) values of received images in db were  
  plotted and are shown in Fig. 8. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  PSNR values obtained for images received at ZIGBEE receiver. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
      A 3-D image was generated at the receiver end. It was 
observed that there is always a compromise between PSNR 
and time taken to transmit the image. The time taken for 
transmitting an image can be reduced by implementing a 
mesh or star topologies using a set of ZIGBEE modules, 
which may give rise to loss of data. The transmission time 
can also be reduced by using image compression techniques 
at the transmitting end but this will affect the PSNR of 
generated stereo images, which, in turn, will affect 
estimation of disparity. In other words, transmission of 
compressed images obtained by using compression 
techniques lead to lossy received images. This is due to the 
fact that transmission of decimal point values requires more 
time as these data has to be converted into string format 
which further increases the size of data. In the future, the 
above algorithms can be implemented on advance 
microprocessors such as, ARM9 [9] which will facilitate 
system on chip wireless transmission modules. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Arti Khaparde, Apurva Naik, Manini Deshpande, Sakshi Khar, 
Kshitija Pandhari, and Mayura Shewale, "Performance Analysis of 
Stereo Matching Using Segmentation Based Disparity Map", ICDT 
2013:The 
Eighth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Digital 
Telecommunications, 21-26, April 2013, Venice, Italy, pp. 38-43. 
[2] 
Pedram Ghamisi, Micael S. Couceiro, Jón Atli Benediktsson, and 
Nuno M.F. Ferreira,  “An Efficient Method for segmentation of 
Images based on Fractional Calculus and Natural Selection”, Expert 
Systems with Applications: An International Journal, vol. 39, iss. 
16, November 2012, pp. 1207-1217. 
[3] 
http://www.vision.caltech.edu/bouguetj/calib_doc/ 
          [retrieved: December 2nd, 2013] 
[4] 
http://vision.middlebury.edu/stereo/data [ retrieved: April 6th, 2014] 
[5] 
Wongsavan Chantharat and Chaiyod Pirak, “Image Transmission 
over ZigBee Network with Transmit Diversity”, 2011 International 
Conference on Circuits, System and Simulation IPCSIT vol. 7 
(2011) © (2011)IACSIT Press, Singapore, pp. 139-143. 
[6] 
www.zigbee.org. [ retrieved:January, 2014] 
[7] 
http://www.dashwood3d.com/blog/beginners-guide-to-shooting-
stereoscopic-3d/[ retrieved:January, 2014] 
[8] 
IEEE Std 802.15.14: Wireless Medium and Physical  Layer(PHY)  
Specification For Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-
WPANs),2003. 
[9] 
www.arm.com[ retrieved :January,2014] 
  
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

