The Inﬁltration Game: Artiﬁcial Immune System for the Exploitation of Crime
Relevant Information in Social Networks
Michael Spranger, Sven Becker, Florian Heinke, Hanna Siewerts and Dirk Labudde
University of Applied Sciences Mittweida
Forensic Science Investigation Lab (FoSIL), Germany
Email: spranger@hs-mittweida.de
Abstract—Efﬁcient and sensitive monitoring of social networks
has become increasingly important for criminal investigations
and crime prevention during the last years. However, with
the growing amount of data and increasing complexity to be
considered, monitoring tasks are difﬁcult to handle, up to a point
where manual observation is infeasible in most cases and, thus,
automated systems are very much needed. In this paper, a system
of adaptive agents is proposed, which aims at monitoring publicly
accessible parts of a given social network for malign actions,
such as propaganda, hate speeches or other malicious posts and
comments made by groups or individuals. Subsequently, some
of these agents try to gain access to crime relevant information
exchanged in closed environments said individuals or groups are
potentially part of. The presented monitoring and investigation
processes are implemented by mimicking central aspects of the
human immune system. The monitoring processes are realized by
network-traversing informant units similar to pathogen-sensing
macrophages, which initialize the human immune response.
The subsequent investigation process is commenced by gath-
ering information automatically about the targeted individual
or group. Furthermore, based on the gathered information one
can identify closed and usually inaccessible environments in the
social network (e.g., private groups). Using so-called endoceptor
units—automatically generated social bots imitating environment-
typical appearance and communication—closed environments are
accessed through individuals susceptible to the bot’s strategy.
Once being part of the closed network, an endoceptor aims to
intercept and report back crime relevant communications and
information to the investigators.
Keywords–social network; prevention; predictive policing; text
mining; autonomous agents; artiﬁcial immune system
I.
INTRODUCTION
Over the last ten years, social networks have grown to
become an essential part in our communication. Despite their
success and advances made, social networks have also pro-
duced central hubs for criminal energy by providing the possi-
bility/means to network as well as interchange and communi-
cate ideas quickly, while remaining private in an environment
difﬁcult to control and monitor by investigators. Thus, for
extreme political groups, criminal gangs and terrorist organiza-
tions, social networks are ideal platforms for planning and ap-
pointing the execution of criminal actions. Therefore, targeted
monitoring of social networks can help to improve strategic
security planning and prevention processes by authorities, as
well as, help to increase the users’ sense of security. Homeland
security and secret services are aware of the importance of
crucial information hidden in these networks and therefore
more and more focus on social network surveillance. Looking
at the increasing number of users worldwide – currently
every third person uses social networks – there is a huge
number of potential proﬁles and communication trafﬁc to be
monitored. This shows the need for an automated and sensitive
solution that is able to cope with the vast amount of data and
computational complexity yielding from it. Yet, besides these
theoretical hurdles, the implementation of such monitoring
procedures is further impaired due to the simple fact that
in most cases crime-speciﬁc information is not discussed in
the publicly accessible environment of social networks. Such
relevant exchanges and discourses are rather made in closed
inaccessible groups.
With respect to the legal limitations, in this work a multi-
agent-based system is proposed, which aims at monitoring
social networks and targeting potential offenders and (mostly)
inaccessible subnetworks of their associates. The presented
strategy utilizes a cascaded system of multi-role agent units,
whose implementation and tasks are inspired by the human
immune system. Similar to the cells involved in the human
immune response (e.g., macrophages, killer cells and T-helper
cells), the framework employs agents capable of sensing mali-
cious actions, such as malign or offensive posts, analysing the
proﬁles of the (potential) offenders, identifying the (mostly
private and inaccessible) subnetworks of associates, entering
these subnetworks as social bots that are automatically adapted
to the appearances, ductus, and characteristic styles of these
associates, and relaying explosive information exchanged in
these subnetworks to the investigators.
In Section 2, we discuss related work presenting imple-
mentations of social network monitoring processes, as well
as in silico realizations of the human response system and
their applicability in this respect. Details about the proposed
framework are presented in Section 3.
II.
RELATED WORK
Research conducted towards monitoring social media in the
context of forensics has given rise to a large body of literature.
In this section, a brief overview on works addressing this issue
is given. Further, in order to put the proposed framework into
context, some of the landmark papers discussing computational
implementations of the human immune response system for
data analyses are summarized. For a more in depth view, please
refer to the notable review paper from Benkhelifa et al. [1]
in which the authors outline some of the recent high-impact
advancements and also propose a digital forensics incidents
prediction framework tailored towards being utilized in cloud
environments.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Complementing the idea of predicting future criminal in-
cidents, in one of the most recent papers Soundarya et al.
[2] elucidated the utilization of so-called genetic weighted
k-means cluster analyses combined with negative selection
schemes in an effort to make predictions based on social media
proﬁling. Although the predictive power looks promising,
implementing the presented prediction scheme successfully in
real life applications is questionable, as underlying features
used in their method are derived from information difﬁcult
to obtain in practice (e. g. the number of logins/sessions per
day and the time duration of individual sessions). Another
interesting idea was presented by Huber et al. [3]. Using
their so-called Social Snapshot method, data can be efﬁciently
acquired from social network websites that are of special
interest for law enforcement agencies. This method is based
on custom-made add-ons for crawling social networks and
underlying web components. The Social Snapshots method
further allows the extraction of proﬁle information such as user
data, private messages and images, and associated meta-data
like internal timestamps and unique identiﬁer. A prototype for
Facebook was developed by the group and evaluated based on
a volunteer survey.
Computational modelling of human immune response
mechanisms and applying such models to various problems
in data mining has been an ongoing research process for over
two decades. In 2000, Timmis et al. [4] published an immune
response-mimicking framework speciﬁcally designed for data
analysis. Furthermore, the group presented a minimalistic for-
mulation of an artiﬁcial immune system and elucidated its ac-
tion/response mechanisms. As another example for application,
Wu & Banzhaf [5] and West et al. [6] independently developed
artiﬁcial immune systems for the detection of transactional
frauds in automated bank machines. Both works employ binary
matching rules paired with fuzzy logic in order to detect
transaction anomalies. Chen et al. [7] discussed a classiﬁcation
technique, which considers some general aspects of immune
response mechanisms. In combination with a population-based
incremental adaptive learning scheme and collaborative ﬁlter-
ing, their method aims at detecting invasive actions targeting
computer networks. Finally, the research group of Karimi-
Majd et al. [8] developed a novel hybrid artiﬁcial immune
network for detecting sub-structures, so-called communities,
in complex networks using statistical measures of structural
network properties.
III.
THE PROPOSED FRAMEWORK
The proposed multi-agent monitoring system, as illustrated
in Figure 1, is inspired by the cellular mechanisms imple-
mented by the human immune system. Although there are mul-
tiple immune response mechanisms and cell types with roles
highly adapted to these individual mechanisms, the general
concept of immune response can be summarized as follows:
mobile recognition cells freely traversing the human body (e.g.,
macrophages) are able to recognize and absorb pathogens, such
as viruses or infectious bacteria, and to report back pathogen-
speciﬁc information upon which an adaptive immune response
is triggered. Subsequently, mobile cells are synthesized that
use the reported cellular information to speciﬁcally target
and destroy invaded pathogens by means of a pathogen-
speciﬁc molecular lock-and-key binding mechanism. Multiple
aspects are implemented in the proposed framework that aim at
mimicking this response concept in the context of recognizing
hostile and malicious activities in the publicly accessible parts
of the environment under investigation (e.g., selected proﬁles
in (sub-) social networks, blogs or internet forums), and
targeting groups of malign entities usually inaccessible to the
public (e.g. closed groups in social networks).
The agent units implemented by the proposed framework
are presented in more detail in the following subsections.
A. Informants
Similar
to
the
biological
role
of
pathogen-sensing
macrophages, the task of informant units is to recognize
potentially dangerous proﬁles within the social network. There
are two basic types of informants, observers Io and classiﬁers
Ic. The objective of the observers is to read along public
discussions, so called feeds. If a post or comment with
potentially dangerous content is detected, the corresponding
proﬁle is reported as a candidate proﬁle pc to a central control
unit, the agency Ψ (Implementation details about the agency
are given later). The algorithmic layout of informants has to
be manifold due to proﬁle appearance variability of potential
offenders. For example, to recognize the proﬁle of a right-
wing individual or organization, an analysis of the images on
the proﬁle or the members or friend lists can be helpful. In this
respect, a binary classiﬁer is trained for each feature, which is
suitable to identify a particular type of potential offender. The
training takes place in the form of semi-supervised learning.
Candidate proﬁles whose membership to a certain potential
offender type are considered to be secured serve as seeds.
In order to minimize the likelihood of a misclassiﬁcation,
all classiﬁers of a certain type of potential offender form an
ensemble which reports a proﬁle as a candidate pc to the
agency by majority vote.
B. Analysts
The analysts A are speciﬁcally tailored towards certain
groups of potential offenders. Their task is to gather in-
formation about candidate proﬁles. Such information could
be, for example, the mood in the network determined by
sentiment analyses, the development of its structural properties,
or planned activities. As a special task, the analysts have to
adapt to the language speciﬁcities of the respective group. In
this way, on the one hand, the ability of the informants to
discriminate proﬁles can be further improved. On the other
hand, such speciﬁcities form the basis for the synthesis of
adapted endoceptors. In the case of a group proﬁle or the
proﬁle of an organization, the opinion-makers are detected
by analysing the communication and subsequently reported
to the agency. The detection of opinion-makers or multipliers
can be conducted by considering the Page Rank algorithm [9]
[10] or Hyperlink-Induced Topic Search (HITS) algorithm [11]
developed to detect hubs and authorities on websites. Further
informative features, such as hashtags, ’@’ references or infor-
mation deduced from discourse analysis, need to be considered
and are readily available in social network environments.
C. Endoceptors
The most subtle type of agents in the framework are
endoceptors E. They are used when certain circumstances
in the analysis justify the assumption that further explosive
information is distributed in closed groups. Endoceptors are a
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

kind of chat bot that adapts to the language behaviour of a
potential offender group and tries to contact the leading mem-
bers in order to become a member of the group. Once included,
endoceptors remain passive and relay distributed information
to the agency. In this way, they imitate the behaviour of a
conﬁdential informant.
D. Agency
In line with the human lymphatic system, a technical
agency Ψ forms both the infrastructural basis of this frame-
work and its bilateral interface to investigators. Such agencies
include, in addition to the set of so-called candidate proﬁles
P c, a set of activation functions α1, ..., αn as triggers for
synthesizing different types of agents. A candidate proﬁle in
this respect can be the public proﬁle of a group or organization
but also the non-public one of an individual. A ranking r(P c)
is assigned to each candidate, which determines whether and
with which priority it is observed and which concrete actions,
i. e., which concrete agent synthesis are triggered by the
agency. Equation (1) shows that the ranking is mainly driven by
two parts. The ﬁrst part takes the frequency of notiﬁcations by
observers into account. The second refers to the mean voting of
all classiﬁers, whereat the individual inﬂuence can be adjusted
by a weight wi with P wi = 1. For example, the classiﬁcation
of the proﬁle of an organization as right-wing extremist might
depend more on the estimation of the image classiﬁer than the
one who makes the same assessment by means of the list of
friends. The inﬂuence of each part of the ranking function can
be controlled by parameter λ with λ = [0, 1], which needs to
be estimated empirically.
r(pc
i) = λ
count(Io, pc
i)
P
P c count(Io, pc
j) + (1 − λ)
|Icj |
X
j=1
wjIcj(pc
i)
|Ici|
(1)
The synthesis of an instance of a speciﬁc agent type is triggered
by an activation function α. Equation (2) shows such a function
for the activation of the analysts. The function decides on the
basis of the rank of a candidate whether or not a threshold is
exceeded and the synthesis is triggered. The threshold value
can be regarded as a kind of intervention threshold. Thus, it
represents a parameter for the implementation of safeguards
against arbitrary surveillance.
αA(pc
i) =
1, if r(pc
i) > ϵ
0, otherwise
(2)
E. Workﬂow
An illustration of the recognition and response mechanism
is given in Figure 2. Individual monitoring steps are labelled A
through E. The ’informant synthesis’—the ad hoc generation
of informant units—is based on a priori expert knowledge
provided by the investigators. The number of informants of a
certain type of concept or topic to be monitored (illustrated by
circle, square and triangle symbols) depends on the structural
properties of the network and the amount of information
exchanged by the users. Again, informants can only access
publicly available information. Once public malicious activity
is detected by an informant (see step A in Figure 2), entity-
speciﬁc information is reported back to the agency (step B
in Figure 2). In the illustration in A, an informant of type
E
XR
P
C={                                }
Agency
f
A(PC)
f
E(A)
Candidates
Agent Generators
E
XL
pc
i
pc
j
A
XR
A
XL
I
F
pc
i
I
C1
I
C2
I
C3
Ensemble
Figure 1. Schematic structure of the proposed framework. The informants
I supply candidate proﬁles pc to the agency where they are registered and
evaluated by means of a ranking function. If a critical value is exceeded,
analysts A are synthesized by a function fA and sent out to collect information
about these proﬁles. This information is the basis for endoceptors synthesized
later by the function fE attempt to inﬁltrate the protected areas of poten-
tially dangerous proﬁles by contacting them in the manner of a chatbot by
sending friendship requests. Once accepted, they remain passive and forward
information to the investigating authorities.
’triangle’ detects malicious activity in a subnetwork of users.
Similarly, in B an informant of type ’cycle’ reports an incident
back to the agency. Subsequently, analyst unit synthesis is
triggered according to an activation function (see Section
III-D for formal details). The set of activation functions and
their importance weighting relative to the number of detected
incidents over time can be interpreted, in a biological sense,
as the number of speciﬁc receptors for the different types of
informants. The more ’alerted’ informants are reporting back
to the agency and are ’bound’ to the agency, the more speciﬁc
informants and receptors are subsequently synthesized. The
ratio of synthesized receptors and informants bound to them
illustrates the weight of the individual activation function.
The role of the analyst unit is to use information retrieved
from the publicly active malign entity to locate the network
of associated malign entities and possible entry points to the
subnetwork (step C in Figure 2). In a next step, this information
is used to synthesize an endoceptor unit (step D in Figure 2).
By mimicking the behaviour and appearance of target entities,
the endoceptor aims at penetrating the closed environment,
thus becoming a part of the network. Information exchanged
by malign entities is now intercepted and communicated back
to the agency module (step E in Figure 2).
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we outlined a framework that allows investiga-
tors from law enforcement agencies and intelligence services to
automatically monitor social networks and collect information
about potentially dangerous activities. The framework is based
on autonomous agents and inspired by the processes in the
human immune system. However, no attention was paid to
an exact replica of the biological processes. For the proposed
framework, it is more important that the system is able to adapt
itself to various disturbances. Therefore, it has to be able to
adjust to the form of proﬁles of potential offenders, inﬁltrate
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

Figure 2. Schematic of the proposed workﬂow. Please refer to Section III-E for implementation details.
them and forward important information to the investigators.
In this way, risks can be detected early and, at best, damage
can be prevented.
Current and future work is mainly concerned with the
design of the analysts, whereat the focus is on the detection of
opinion-makers and the analysis of language style and writing
behaviour in the group as a prerequisite for the synthesis of
chat bots (Endoceptors) that are recognized by that group as
their peers. As a by-product, we can learn how chat bots
can be detected in networks. In parallel, independent sets of
social features have to be found, which are suitable to classify
candidates with the necessary accuracy to address privacy
concerns.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Benkhelifa, E. Rowe, R. Kinmond, O. A. Adedugbe, and T. Welsh,
“Exploiting social networks for the prediction of social and civil unrest:
A cloud based framework,” in Future Internet of Things and Cloud
(FiCloud), 2014 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 565–
572.
[2]
V. Soundarya, U. Kanimozhi, and D. Manjula, “Recommendation
system for criminal behavioral analysis on social network using genetic
weighted k-means clustering.” JCP, vol. 12, no. 3, 2017, pp. 212–220.
[3]
M. Huber, M. Mulazzani, M. Leithner, S. Schrittwieser, G. Wondracek,
and E. Weippl, “Social snapshots: Digital forensics for online social
networks,” in Proceedings of the 27th annual computer security appli-
cations conference.
ACM, 2011, pp. 113–122.
[4]
J. Timmis, M. Neal, and J. Hunt, “An artiﬁcial immune system for data
analysis,” Biosystems, vol. 55, no. 1, 2000, pp. 143–150.
[5]
S. X. Wu and W. Banzhaf, “Combatting ﬁnancial fraud: a coevolution-
ary anomaly detection approach,” in Proceedings of the 10th annual
conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation.
ACM, 2008,
pp. 1673–1680.
[6]
J. West, M. Bhattacharya, and R. Islam, “Intelligent ﬁnancial fraud
detection practices: An investigation,” in International Conference on
Security and Privacy in Communication Systems.
Springer, 2014, pp.
186–203.
[7]
M.-H. Chen, P.-C. Chang, and J.-L. Wu, “A population-based incre-
mental learning approach with artiﬁcial immune system for network
intrusion detection,” Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
vol. 51, 2016, pp. 171–181.
[8]
A.-M. Karimi-Majd, M. Fathian, and B. Amiri, “A hybrid artiﬁcial
immune network for detecting communities in complex networks,”
Computing, vol. 97, no. 5, 2015, pp. 483–507.
[9]
S. Brin and L. Page, “The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web
search engine,” Comput. Netw. ISDN Syst., vol. 30, no. 1-7, Apr. 1998,
pp. 107–117. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0169-
7552(98)00110-X
[10]
——, “The anatomy of a large-scale hypertextual web search engine,”
in Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on World Wide
Web 7, ser. WWW7.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, The Netherlands:
Elsevier Science Publishers B. V., 1998, pp. 107–117. [Online].
Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=297805.297827
[11]
J. M. Kleinberg, “Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment,”
J. ACM, vol. 46, no. 5, Sep. 1999, pp. 604–632. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/324133.324140
[12]
M. Spranger, S. Schildbach, F. Heinke, S. Grunert, and D. Labudde,
“Semantic tools for forensics: A highly adaptable framework,” in Proc.
2nd. International Conference on Advances in Information Management
and Mining (IMMM), IARIA.
ThinkMind Library, 2012, pp. 27–31.
[13]
C. Weinstein, W. Campbell, B. Delaney, and G. O’Leary, “Modeling
and detection techniques for counter-terror social network analysis and
intent recognition,” in 2009 IEEE Aerospace conference, 2009, pp. 1–
16.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-566-1
IMMM 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

