Towards Custom-Designed Professional Training Contents and Curriculums 
through Educational Process Mining  
Process Mining in the Education Domain
Awatef Hicheur Cairns1, Billel Gueni1, Mehdi Fhima1, Andrew Cairns1 and Stéphane David1 
Nasser Khelifa2 
1 ALTRAN Research, 2 ALTRAN Institute 
Vélizy-Villacoublay, France 
e-mails: {awatef.hicheurcairns, billel.gueni, mehdi.fhima, andrew.cairns, stephan.david, nasser.khelifa}@altran.com 
 
 
Abstract—Educational Process Mining constitutes a new 
opportunity to better understand students’ learning habits and 
finely analyze the complete set of educational processes. In this 
paper, we investigate further the potential and challenges of 
Process Mining in the field of professional training. Firstly, we 
focus on the mining and the analysis of social networks 
between course units or training providers. Secondly, we 
propose a two-step clustering approach for partitioning 
educational processes following key performance indicators.  
Keywords- Process Mining; Educational Data Mining; 
Curriculum Mining; Key Performance Indicators; ProM.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recently, education and training centers have started 
introducing more agility into their teaching curriculum in 
order to meet the fast-changing needs of the job market and 
meet the time-to-skill requirements. In fact, modern 
curriculums are no longer monolithic processes. Students can 
pick the courses from different specialties, may choose the 
order, the skills they want to develop, the level (from 
beginner to specialist), the way they want to learn 
(theoretical or practical aspects) and the time they want to 
spend. This need for personalized curriculum has increased 
with the emergence of collaborative tools and on-line 
training which often supplement and sometimes replace 
traditional face-to-face courses. The broad number of courses 
available and the flexibility allowed in curriculum paths 
could create, as a side effect, confusion and misguidance. 
Students may be overwhelmed by the offer and blurred on 
the time required to enter and remain in the job market. 
Moreover, teachers and educators may lose control of the 
education process, its end-results and feed-back. The use of 
information and communication technologies in the 
educational domain generates large amount of data, which 
may contain insightful information about students’ profiles, 
the processes they went through and their examination 
grades. The deriving data can be explored and exploited by 
the stakeholders (teachers, instructors, etc.) to understand 
students’ learning habits, the factors influencing their 
performance and the skills they acquired [6] [15]. Rather 
than relying on periodic performance tests and satisfaction 
surveys, 
exploiting 
historical 
educational 
data 
with 
appropriate mining techniques enables in-depth analysis of 
students’ behaviors and motivations [6] [8]. Educational 
Data Mining (EDM) is a discipline aimed at developing 
specific methods to explore educational. EDM methods can 
be classified into two categories – (1) Statistics and 
visualization (e.g., Distillation of data for human judgment), 
and (2) Web mining (e.g., Clustering, Classification, Outliers 
detection, Association rule mining, Sequential pattern 
mining and Text mining) [15].  However, most of the 
traditional data mining techniques focus on data or simple 
sequential structures rather than on full-fledged process 
models with concurrency patterns [20] [21]. Precisely, the 
basic idea of process mining [1] is to discover, monitor and 
improve real processes (i.e., not assumed nor truncated 
processes) by extracting knowledge from event logs recorded 
automatically by Information Systems. Our research aims to 
develop generic methods which could be applied to general 
education issues and more specific ones concerning 
professional training or e-learning fields for: 
• 
The extraction of process-related knowledge from 
large education event logs, such as: process models 
and social networks following key performance 
indicators or a set of curriculum pattern templates.  
• 
The analysis of educational processes and their 
conformance 
with 
established 
curriculum 
constraints, educators’ hypothesis and prerequisites.  
• 
The enhancement of educational process models 
with 
performance 
indicators: 
execution 
time, 
bottlenecks, decision point, etc.  
• 
The personalization of educational processes via the 
recommendation of the best course units or learning 
paths to students (depending on their profiles, their 
preferences or their target skills) and the on-line 
detection of prerequisites’ violations.  
In this paper, we focus mainly on (1) process model 
discovery, deriving from Key Performance Indicators; (2) 
social network discovery between training courses and 
training providers. We used the ProM framework (i.e., a 
“pluggable” environment for process mining) [7] for process 
discovery and analysis from event logs. For the first time, to 
our knowledge, the present approach handles a professional 
training dataset of a consulting company involved in the 
training of professionals. The rest of this paper is organized 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

as follows. Section II introduces process mining techniques 
and their application in the educational domain. Section III 
presents our approach for social networks mining and 
process models discovery. Section IV describes briefly the 
PHIDIAS platform. Finally, section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
EDUCATIONAL PROCESS MINING 
The purpose of Process Mining is to develop automated 
techniques to extract process-related knowledge from event 
logs [1]. An event log corresponds to a set of process 
instances following a business process. Each recorded event 
refers to an activity and is related to a particular process 
instance. An event can have a timestamp and a performer 
(i.e. a person or a device executing or initiating the activity). 
Moreover, in such logs, events are assumed to be totally 
ordered. The scope of Process Mining includes process 
discovery (i.e., extracting process models from an event 
log), conformance checking (i.e., monitoring deviations by 
comparing model and log), social network/organizational 
mining, automated construction of simulation models, 
model extension, model repair, case prediction, and history-
based recommendations. Educational Process Mining 
(EPM) or Curriculum Mining refers to the application of 
process mining techniques in the education domain [20] 
[21]. Beyond limitations of EDM, EPM enables greater 
insights into underlying educational processes. To illustrate, 
process mining techniques were used by Pechenizkiy et al. 
[13] to investigate the students’ behavior during online 
multiple choice examinations. Southavilay et al. [18] used 
process model discovery techniques to mine and analyze a 
collaborative writing process. Analysis techniques were also 
applied to check the conformance of a set of predefined 
constraints (e.g., prerequisites) with event logs [21]. 
However, the application of Process Mining techniques in 
the education domain faces numerous challenges related to 
event logs’ specificities: 
 
Voluminous Data: event logs in the education domain, 
particularly those coming from e-learning environments, 
contain massive amounts of fine granular events and 
process-related data. Real-life testing showed that most of 
the current process mining techniques/tools are unable to 
handle massive event logs [12] [14] [17].  
 
Heterogeneity and complexity: educational processes are 
complex and flexible by nature reflecting the high diversity 
of behaviors in students’ learning paths. Consequently, 
traditional process discovery techniques generate intricate 
models (spaghetti) which are often very confusing and 
difficult to analyze [22]. 
 
Concept drift: in the education domain, subjacent 
curriculum and trainings may evolve over time and 
occasionally undergo major changes. Concept drift refers to 
a situation where the process will change while being 
analyzed [5].  
 
Interpretation of results by the end users: visualization 
techniques and notation simplification is a major stake to 
facilitate interpretation by the end users, using suitable 
academic notation or lists of recommendations [14].   
III. 
CASE STUDY: ANALIZING TRAINING PROCESSES 
USING EPM TECHNIQUES  
A. Data description and preprocessing phase  
In our case study, the dataset encompasses the 
employees’ 
profiles, 
their 
careers 
(i.e., 
their 
jobs/assignments 
history) 
and 
their 
training 
paths 
(performance and satisfaction surveys throughout the 
different training phases). The data being scattered in 
several databases, we had first to rebuild a consolidated 
event log (using an ETL -Extract, Transform and Load) 
containing the following information: Employee Id, 
Training Id, Timestamp, Training provider Id, Training 
Cost and the List of all the employees’ missions over a three 
years period. Secondly, we transformed this event log into 
MXML (Mining eXtensible Markup Language) format by 
using the ProM Import plug-in [7], with the condition that 
(1) an employee identifier corresponds to a process instance 
identifier (i.e., an employee training path corresponds to a 
process instance), (2) a training identifier corresponds to a 
task identifier tagging ‘start’ and ‘end’ events, with various 
attributes (grades, satisfaction, employee profile, etc.).  
B. Social network mining 
Social Network Analysis (SNA) refers to the collection 
of methods, techniques and tools in sociometry aiming at 
the analysis of the structure and composition of ties in social 
networks [4]. In our case, we conducted mining and analysis 
of the key interaction patterns between training providers 
and training courses, using social mining techniques 
deriving from the process mining field. These techniques 
aim to extract social networks from event logs based on the 
observed interactions between performers and depending on 
how process instances are routed between these performers 
[1] [3]. These interactions can be generated following one of 
these five metrics: (1) handover of work, (2) delegation or 
subcontracting of tasks, (3) frequent collaboration (working 
together) (4) similarity in executed tasks and (5) 
reassignment of tasks. In order to generate social networks 
between training courses, we replaced originator IDs by 
training IDs of the same events (i.e., trainings) during the 
event log conversion step in ProM import. Social mining 
plug-ins generate graphs where each node represents a 
training provider (resp. a training course) where the names 
have been anonymized for privacy reasons. The oval shape 
of the nodes in a graph (see Figures 1 and 3) visually 
expresses the intensity of in and out connections (arrows) 
between the nodes: a higher proportion of ingoing 
(outgoing) arcs lead to greater vertical (horizontal) 
distortion of the oval shape (see Figures 2 and 4). We use 
different views (a ranking view, a stretch by degree ratio, 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

etc.) and two key SNA indicators when generating these 
graphs, depending on the patterns we want to extract. The 
key SNA indicators [4] we used are: (1) Degree Centrality 
of a node (i.e. the number of nodes that are connected to it): 
it represents the popularity of a node (e.g., training courses 
or training providers) in a community (e.g., training paths or 
curriculums). (2) Betweenness Centrality of a node: 
representative of the enabling power of a node to connect 
two different groups (i.e., two different training paths or 
curriculums). A node (i.e., training provider or training 
course) with high betweenness centrality value means that it 
performs a crucial role in the network. We apply these five 
metrics to mine social networks between training providers 
and training courses, giving the following outcome: 
 
1)  Handover of work: within a process instance, there is 
a handover of work from individual i to individual j if there 
are two subsequent activities where the first is completed by 
i and the second by j. In our case, this metric allowed us to 
discover the flow of trainees (specified by the direction of 
the arrows) between training providers and courses. For 
instance, in Figure 1, two providers are connected if one 
performs a training causally followed by a training 
performed by the other provider. We distinguished two 
groups of providers strongly related to each other (clustered 
in cliques) following their causal involvement in training 
paths. Training providers without arc are those which offer 
very stand alone trainings without causal dependency with 
others. In Figure 2, the most important training courses 
(trainings with ID 4 and ID 1) appeared to play a central 
roles in training paths. In Figure 3, the size of training 
courses (with high betweenness) indicates their crucial role 
as a bridge (i.e., intermediate trainings) between different 
types of trainings. We can deduce that:    
• 
Training providers or courses with high degree are 
the most popular ones. Training providers or courses 
with no connection with others represent outliers, 
providing very specific skills, not involved in 
training paths. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Social network showing handovers between providers of the top 
80% of followed training courses using a size by ranking view. 
 
Figure 2.  Social network showing handovers between training courses 
using (1) a rancking view on degree and (2) a stretch by degree ratio. 
                  
 
Figure 3.  Social network showing handovers between the top 60% of 
followed training courses, using a ranking on betweenness centrality and a 
size by ranking view. 
• 
Nodes with no incoming arcs are training providers 
(or training courses) who only initiate learning 
processes (i.e., give the basics), while nodes with no 
outgoing arcs are training providers (or courses) who 
perform only final trainings (i.e., complete training 
paths with the most required skills).  
• 
Training courses strongly connected to each other 
hint popular or typical curriculums (or learning 
paths). The direction of the edges gives the order of 
training courses followed by students in such 
curriculums. 
• 
Training courses or providers with high betweenness 
centrality represent the ones playing a crucial role as 
a bridge (i.e., offering intermediate trainings) 
connecting different types of learning paths. 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

2) Subcontracting metric: A resource i subcontracts a 
resource j, when in-between two activities executed by i 
there is an activity executed by j. In this case, the start node 
of an arc represents a contractor and the end node means a 
subcontractor (see Figures 4 and 5). In this case study, this 
metric allow us to extract complementary patterns between 
training courses and providers. Using SNA measures, we 
deduce that: 
• 
Nodes (i.e., training providers or courses) with a 
high out-degree of centrality (indicated by a 
horizontal oval shapes) usually play the role of 
contractors (the main providers or trainings which 
give basic skills in these training paths).  
• 
Nodes (i.e., training providers or courses) with a 
high in-degree of centrality (indicated by a vertical 
oval shapes) usually act as subcontractors (providers 
or trainings which give complementary notions or 
skills allowing to enhance the notions given by 
contractors in these training paths).  
 
 
Figure 4.  Social network showing subcontracting between training 
providers of the top 90% of followed training courses. 
 
Figure 5.  Social network showing subcontracting between the top 80% of  
followed training courses. 
3) Working together metric: This metric ignores causal 
dependencies but simply counts how frequently two 
recourses are performing activities for the same case (see 
Figure 6). We can deduce from this social network the most 
popular curriculums (training providers or courses that work 
together i.e., are involved together in training paths). The 
difference with the handover metric is that the latter gives us 
the order followed by students in such curriculums.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Social network based on working together between training 
courses using a rancking view on degree. 
4) Similar task metric: This metric determines who 
performs the same type of activities in different cases. In our 
case study, this metric makes sense only to generate 
relationship between training providers. Therefore, it allows 
us to detect training providers who perform the same kind of 
trainings in curriculums.  
     This experience shows that social network analysis based 
on event logs is a powerful tool for analyzing coordination 
patterns between training courses and training providers. 
Such an approach can also be used to mine interesting 
patterns about students’ behaviors in on-line environments 
based on resources’ usage logs and various interaction logs 
(e.g., in the case of an intelligent tutoring system).   
C. Process discovery using Clustering Techniques  
Clustering techniques can be used as a preprocessing step to 
handle large and heterogeneous event logs by dividing an 
event log into homogenous subsets of cases following their 
similarity. One can then discover simpler process models for 
each cluster. For this purpose, several clustering techniques 
have been developed and implemented in ProM [11], such 
as the Trace Clustering plug-in [9] [17], the Sequence 
Clustering plug-in [22] and other clustering approaches 
based on time [11]. Clustering of event logs still remains a 
subjective technique. A desired goal would be to introduce 
some objectivity in partitioning the log into homogenous 
cases. In this paper, in order to identify the best training 
paths, we propose a two-step clustering approach where 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

training paths are firstly partitioned following a performance 
indicator then they are partitioned following their structural 
similarity. The first step consists of creating clusters of 
similar trainees’ profiles based on a training path 
performance indicator expressed via two criteria: (1) 
employability (matching degree between skills required by a 
mission and skills obtained via training) and (2) duration 
between the training end and new job start. Based on 
trainees’ profiles, three clusters are created using the k-
means technique. The optimal number of these clusters 
(three) is determined using a method based on the average 
silhouette of many clustering where the number of the 
clusters is varied [16] [19]. For more details on this method 
we refer the reader to [10]. Figure 7(a)-(b) presents, 
respectively, the clusters we obtained and the silhouette 
used to determine the optimal number of clusters. 
Figure 7.  
(a) Three clusters obtained      (b) silhouette used to        
determines  the optimal number of clusters 
 Let us note that the first cluster groups trainees with the 
best employability factor and the shortest duration between 
trainings’ end and new missions. Cluster 2 and Cluster 3 
group less optimal training paths regarding employability 
factor and period of unemployment. We use the fuzzy miner 
plug-in of ProM (given its robustness to noises) to discover 
the process model from the training traces of the trainees 
grouped in the first cluster. We obtain clearly identifiable 
training paths, as illustrated in Figure 8. Let us note that 
these training paths correspond to the highest performing 
ones regarding employability factor and period of 
unemployment. 
 
Figure 8.  A fragment of the process model showing all the training 
patterns of cluster 1 
In the second step, for further simplification, we group 
training paths (traces in log events) from each of the clusters 
discovered in the first step, following their structural 
similarity using the Sequence clustering technique proposed 
by Veiga and Ferreira [22]. Each cluster is based on a 
probabilistic model, namely a first-order Markov chain. The 
sequence clustering technique is known to generate simpler 
models than trace clustering techniques developed in [22]. In 
our example, when we apply the sequence clustering 
technique on the second group of trainees with an average 
employability (i.e., the second cluster of the first step), we 
obtain three more clusters (cluster 2.1, cluster 2.2 and cluster 
2.3). Figure 9 shows the training model obtained from the 
cluster 2.1 obtained above, where only transitions occurring 
above the threshold of 0.05 are represented.  
 
 
Figure 9.  The process model describing the training paths of the first 
cluster of the second group of trainees (Cluster 2.1), with an edge threshold 
of 0.05 
IV. 
PHIDIAS: A PLATFORM FOR DISTRIBUTED 
EDUCATIONAL PROCESS MINING  
To implement our approach, we aim to develop an 
interactive platform tailored for educational process 
discovery and analysis. This platform will allow different 
education centers and institutions to load their data and 
access advanced data mining and process mining services. 
Such a platform has to address several issues related to: (1) 
the heterogeneity of the applications and the data sources; (2) 
the connection to some web portals and desktop applications 
to allow users dealing with the data and exploiting analysis 
results; (3) the ability to add new data sources and analysis 
services; (4) the possibility to distribute heavy analysis 
computations on many processing nodes in order to optimize 
and enhance platform response time. To reach these targets 
we adopt a Service Oriented Architecture using an Enterprise 
Services Bus (ESB) depicted in Figure 10. This architecture 
is composed of the following elements: data sources, 
Enterprise Service Bus, business applications and tools, web 
services, web portals and connectors. The core of this 
architecture is the application bus which guarantees the 
interoperability and integration of the data sources and 
applications. We have chosen to use ESB architecture in 
order to have a flexible architecture allowing easily plugging 
of new applications, data sources and web portals.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

 
Figure 10.  PHIDIAS Architecture 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTUR WORK 
In this paper, we showed how social mining techniques 
can be used to examine interactions between training 
providers and training courses, involved in students’ training 
paths. We also proposed a two-step clustering approach to 
extract the best training paths depending on an employability 
indicator. Our future work will continue in several directions. 
Firstly, we intend to combine the approach proposed to mine 
interaction patterns with other mining techniques which 
allow to discover interaction patterns between students in 
their collaborative learning tasks, communication actions and 
online discussions [2]. Secondly, we intend to apply the 
conformance checking techniques to check if prerequisites, 
other kinds of constraints and training path templates were 
indeed always respected. Thirdly, we plan to investigate 
further clustering techniques in event logs partitioning to 
extract typical or atypical training paths depending on 
domain specific performance indicators and/or on a set of 
predefined training path templates. Finally, the proposed 
architecture will be implemented and deployed and tested on 
a distributed environment connected to several data sources 
and applications. We plan also to conduct a case study that 
would illustrate the feasibility of process mining approaches 
in an on-line education setting. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. M. P. van der Aalst et al. “Process mining manifesto,” In BPM 
2011 Workshops Proceedings (BPM 2011), Aug. 2011, pp. 169–194, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-28108-2_19. 
[2] W. M. P. van der Aalst and Adriy Nikolov, “EMailAnalyzer: An E-
Mail Mining Plug-in for the ProM Framework,” BPM Center Report 
BPM-07-16, BPMCenter.org, 2007. 
[3] W. M. P. van der Aalst and M. Song, “Mining social networks: 
Uncovering interaction patterns in business processes,” The second 
International Conference on Business Process Management (BPM 
2004), LNCS, vol. 3080, June 2004, pp. 244–260, doi. 10.1007/978-
3-540-25970-1_16. 
[4] C. Aggarwal, “An Introduction to Social Network Data Analytics,” 
Social Network Data Analytics, Springer, 2011, pp. 1-15.  
[5] R. Bose, W. M. P. van der Aalst, I. Zliobaite, and M. Pechenizkiy, 
“Handling Concept Drift in Process Mining,” The 23rd International 
Conference (CAiSE 2011) LNCS 6741, Springer, June 2011, pp. 
391–405, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-21640-4_30. 
[6] T.Calders and M. Pechenizkiy “Introduction to The Special Section 
on Educational Data Mining,” SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, 
ACM, may 2012, pp. 3-6, doi:10.1145/2207243.2207245. 
[7] B. van Dongen, H. Verbeek, A. Weijters, and W. van der Aalst, “The 
ProM framework: a new era in process mining tool support,” The 
26th International Conference (ICATPN 2005) LNCS Vol. 3536, 
June 2005, pp. 444–454, doi:10.1007/11494744_25. 
[8] G. Dekker, M. Pechenizkiy, and J. Vleeshouwers, “Predicting 
Students Drop Out: a Case Study,” The 2nd International Conference 
on Educational Data Mining (EDM 2009), July 2009, pp. 41–50, 
ISBN 978-84-613-2308-1. 
[9] R.P. Jagadeesh Chandra Bose and W.M.P van der Aalst, “Context 
Aware Trace Clustering: Towards Improving Process Mining 
Results,” The SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM 
2009),  April 2009, pp. 401-412. 
[10] L. Kaufman and P. J. Rousseeuw. “Finding Groups in Data: An 
Introduction to Cluster Analysis”. by Leonard Kaufman, Peter J. 
Rousseeuw, March 1990, ISBN: 0-471-87876-6. 
[11] D. Luengo and M. Sepúlveda, “Applying Clustering in Process 
Mining to Find Different Versions of a Business Process That 
Changes over Time,” The Business Process Management Workshops 
(BPM 2011) Aug. 2011, pp. 153-158 doi:10.1007/978-3-642-28108-
2_15. 
[12] J. Munoz-Gama, J. Carmona, and W.M.P. van der Aalst, 
“Conformance Checking in the Large: Partitioning and Topology,” 
The 11th International Conference on Business Process Management 
(BPM 13), Aug. 2013, pp. 130–145, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40176-
3_11. 
[13] M. Pechenizkiy, N. Trčka, E. Vasilyeva, W. van der Aalst and P. De 
Bra, “Process Mining Online Assessment Data,” The 2nd 
International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM 2009), 
July 2009, pp. 279–288. 
[14] M. Reichert, “Visualizing Large Business Process Models: 
Challenges, Techniques, Applications,” The 1st Int’l Workshop on 
Theory and Applications of Process Visualization (BPM 2012) Sep. 
2012, LNCS Vol. 132, pp. 725-736, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-36285-
9_73. 
[15] M., Romero and C., Ventura, “Data mining in education,” The Wiley 
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, 
vol 3, Feb. 2013, pp. 12–27. 
[16] G. Seber, “Multivariate Observations,” Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 1984. 
[17] M. Song, C. W. Günther, and W.M.P. van der Aalst, “Trace 
Clustering in Process Mining,” Business Process Management 
Workshops (BPM 2008) Sep. 2008, LNCS Vol. 17, pp 109-120, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-00328-8_11. 
[18] V. Southavilay, K. Yacef, and R. A. Calvo, “Process mining to 
support students’ collaborative writing,” The 3rd International 
Conference on Educatinal Data Mining (EDM 2010) June 2010, pp. 
257-266. 
[19] H. Spath, “Cluster Dissection and Analysis: Theory,” FORTRAN 
Programs, Examples, New York: Halsted Press, 1985. 
[20] N. Trčka and M. Pechenizkiy “From Local Patterns to Global 
Models: Towards Domain Driven Educational Process Mining,” The 
9th Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications 
(ISDA 
2009), 
Dec. 
2009, 
pp. 
1114–1119, 
doi:10.1109/ISDA.2009.159. 
[21] N. Trčka, M. Pechenizkiy, and W. van der Aalst, “Process Mining 
from Educational Data (Chapter 9),” Handbook of Educational Data 
Mining.. CRC Press, 2010, pp. 123–142, doi: 10.1201/b10274-11. 
[22] G. M. Veiga and D. R. Ferreira,“Understanding Spaghetti Models 
with Sequence Clustering for ProM,” Business Process Management 
Workshops (BPM 2009) Sep. 2009, LNCS vol. 43, pp. 92–103, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-12186-9_10. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-364-3
IMMM 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and Management

