 
Forecasting Transportation Project Frequency using Multivariate Regression with 
Elastic Net Regularization 
 
Alireza Shojaei, Hashem Izadi Moud and Ian Flood 
M. E. Rinker, Sr. School of Construction Management, University of Florida  
Gainesville, Florida, USA. 
Email: a.shojaei@ufl.edu, izadimoud@ufl.edu, flood@ufl.edu  
 
 
Abstract—Knowledge of the number of upcoming projects and 
their impact on the company plays a significant role in 
strategic planning for project-based companies. The current 
horizon of planning for companies working on public projects 
are the latest advertised projects for bidding, which in many 
cases is reported less than a year in advance. This provides a 
very short-term horizon for strategic project portfolio 
planning. In this research, a multivariate regression model 
with elastic net regularization, using economic indices and 
other environmental factors, is built for Florida Department of 
Transportation (FDOT) projects to forecast the number of 
projects they will advertise in the future. The results show that, 
of the predictors considered, unemployment rate in the 
construction sector and the Brent oil price are the most 
significant variables in forecasting FDOT’s future project 
frequency. 
Keywords-Multivariate 
Regression; 
Elastic 
Net 
Rugularization; 
Strategic 
Planning; 
Project 
Portfolio 
Management, Forecasting. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Construction companies, as with many other companies 
working in project-based industries, such as IT, are usually 
managing multiple projects concurrently while looking for 
new projects to maintain their business. The task of 
managing current (ongoing) projects while obtaining projects 
for continuous business is called Project Portfolio 
Management (PPM). A crucial part of the management of a 
portfolio is to make sure that the company resources and on-
going projects are optimally balanced to ensure that not only 
each project meets its objectives but also the whole 
organization meet its overall goals. Management needs to 
make sure that they maximize the utilization of their 
resources by minimizing idle time while not accepting more 
work than they can complete effectively.  
The majority of the literature focuses on internal 
uncertainties that pertain to PPM. In other words, the most 
explored aspect of the uncertainties in PPM is the 
relationships between the projects within the portfolio and 
the interaction between the current ongoing projects and 
possible future projects to measure their compatibility in 
terms of resource demand, and other criteria. However, 
environmental factors, such as economic conditions and 
specific industry conditions (for instance, the number of 
workers in construction) can have a significant impact on the 
portfolio and company’s overall performance. This study 
aims to integrate the environmental uncertainties and 
uncertainties regarding the unknown future projects, so that 
companies can apply this approach in their mid-term to long-
term strategic planning. Martinsuo's [1] review of PPM 
frameworks showed that the uncertainty and continual 
changes in a company’s portfolio has a significant negative 
correlation with its success. As a result, if users can reduce 
the extent of the uncertainties in their planning and have a 
more robust portfolio, it could greatly help their success. In 
summary, this paper proposes a regression model for 
forecasting frequency of FDOT’s future projects, which 
helps the user to estimate the number and timing of tendered 
projects in the future. The novelty of this approach is the 
consideration of environmental uncertainties in the model 
and the provision of quantitative insights into the unknown 
future. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the impact of uncertainty on PPM and how 
unknown future projects can impact strategic planning. 
Section III describes the modeling approach followed in this 
paper. Section IV addresses the regression model for 
forecasting the number of projects in the future. Section V 
presents the conclusions and identifies future directions for 
the research.  
II. 
UNKNOWN FUTURE PROJECTS AND PORTFOLIO 
STRATEGIC PLANNING 
Planning is vital to the success of any construction entity. 
In the public sector, governmental agencies try to forecast 
the needed equity in advance in order to successfully plan the 
number of their future projects. Historically, governmental 
agencies have had a short-sighted view towards predicting 
the future; mainly due to uncertainty in the size of the next 
year’s budget. The process of planning the future is costly, 
slow and traditionally based on historic-data on past projects. 
This process is usually projected one year in advance as 
budgetary issues restrict the ability of governmental agencies 
to define the scope, number, and types of projects that are 
needed in later years. In the private sector, the process of 
defining future projects (in terms of scope, number and 
types) is better planned compared to the public sector. 
However, this planning process is still far from ideal.  
In project management, the process of targeting goals for 
multiple projects in a portfolio of a company is referred to as 
PPM. PPM is defined as “dealing with the coordination and 
control of multiple projects pursuing the same strategic 
goals and competing for the same resources, whereby 
managers prioritize among projects to achieve strategic 
benefit” [2]. PPM deals with two significant tasks, which are 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
complementary: (1) reinforcing investment decisions by 
helping companies to select projects that optimize their 
return on investment and risks associated with them as a 
whole [3]; and (2) optimizing the allocation of resources 
across different projects within portfolios in order to meet 
project goals and minimize risks [4]. The key to effective 
implementation of PPM within any construction entity is 
information. The unknown nature of the future is a primary 
factor that can undermine the success of the PPM process 
[5].  
Uncertainty 
may 
influence 
the 
success 
of 
any 
organization in any discipline [6][7]. In project management, 
uncertainty is referred to as the degree of accuracy in 
determining future work processes, resource variation and 
work output [8]. The Project Management Institute (PMI) 
introduces risk management to the broader context of 
portfolio management. However, PMI does not provide 
many direct and specific guidelines, recommendations, plans 
or procedures on how to effectively manage future 
uncertainties at the portfolio level. Risk management at the 
portfolio level is restricted to naming only a few risk 
management techniques. PMI only suggests some vague 
guidelines on how to detect, monitor and handle 
uncertainties [5]. 
At the scientific level, managing uncertainties in projects 
has usually been handled by analyzing historical project data. 
Many methods and approaches have been used to collect and 
analyze historical data to find trends that might help 
understand how uncertainty impacts the success of projects 
and/or portfolios. Trippi et al. [9] suggest using Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) in portfolio management. Henriksen and 
Traynor [10] developed algorithms to allocate risks and other 
criteria in project selection and portfolio management. More 
advanced analysis methods, such as multi-agent modeling 
[11], multi-objective binary programming [12] and use of 
Bayesian Networks [13] have also been introduced by 
researchers to analyze the uncertainty and/or allocated 
different risks associated with projects at the project and/or 
portfolio levels. However, incorporating future project 
forecasts in portfolio planning with consideration of 
unknown environmental uncertainties remains largely 
unexplored. 
III. 
MODELING APPROACH 
The literature [5][7][14] has looked at forecasting 
unknown future projects with a univariate modeling 
approach where the number of future projects are forecasted 
solely based on the past values of the number of projects. 
This study builds upon this work by forecasting unknown 
future projects using multivariate regression in order to 
incorporate environmental uncertainties in a forecast. The 
data used in this case study is obtained by text mining 
FDOT’s historical project letting database. The database 
covers 12 years (from 2003 to 2015) containing 2816 
projects. The features extracted from the database are each 
project letting date, cost, and duration. Table 1 provides a 
pool 
of 
candidate 
independent 
variables 
including 
macroeconomics and construction indices compiled from the 
literature [5][7][14], which were available at the monthly 
level and did not have any missing values for the explored 
time frame. Table 1 also provides the abbreviation for each 
variable and the sources from which they have been 
obtained. These factors are considered in the regression 
modeling as the dependent (explanatory) variables. 
The integrity and continuity of the data are important as it 
is a time series. As a result, random cross validation was not 
appropriate, and a rolling forecast origin approach was 
adopted for cross-validation, as illustrated in Figure 1. The 
data were divided into two sections, training and testing. The 
training period starts with three years and increases by one 
year in each iteration while the testing period remains steady 
as the three consecutive years after the training set. In other 
words, seven models are trained, and the average error is 
considered as the result of cross-validation. 
TABLE I.  
CANDIDATE INDEPENDENT VARIABLES. 
 
Variable name 
Abbreviation of 
variable 
Source 
Dow Jones industrial 
average Vol 
DJI 
Yahoo Finance 
Dow Jones industrial 
average Closing 
DJIC 
Yahoo Finance 
Money Stock M1 
MS1 
Federal Reserve 
System 
Money Stock M2 
MS2 
Federal Reserve 
System 
Federal Fund Rate 
FFR 
Federal Reserve 
Systems 
Average Prime Rate 
APR 
Federal Reserve 
System 
Producer Price Index for 
All Commodities 
PPIACO 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Building Permit 
BP 
U.S. Bureau of Census 
Brent Oil Price 
BOP 
U.S. Energy 
Information 
Administration 
Consumer Price Index 
CPI 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Crude Oil Price 
COP 
U.S. Energy 
Information 
Administration 
Unemployment Rate 
UR 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Florida Employment 
FE 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Florida Unemployment 
FU 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Florida Unemployment 
Rate 
FUR 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Florida Number of 
Employees in Construction 
NFEC 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Number Housing Started 
HS 
U.S. Bureau of Census 
Unemployment Rate 
Construction 
URC 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Number of Employees in 
Construction 
NEC 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Number of Job Opening in 
Construction 
JOC 
U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics 
Construction Spending 
CS 
U.S. Census Bureau 
Total Highway and Street 
Spending 
THSS 
Federal Reserve 
System 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
Figure 1.  Forecast on a rolling origin cross-validation. 
A. Exploratory data analysis 
To 
develop 
the 
multivariate 
models, 
a 
better 
understanding of the data characteristics was first necessary, 
and that information was gained through an exploratory data 
analysis and the identification of potentially relevant 
predictors. 
The first exploratory analysis consisted of a correlation 
analysis. Figure 2 provides the correlation plot of the 
variables. The color indicates the magnitude of the 
correlation, and the direction of the ellipse illustrates the 
direction of the relationship. Furthermore, the concentration 
of the ellipse tells us about the degree of the linear 
relationship between the variables. Project frequency is 
represented by “freq” in the last row and column. It appears 
that none of the exploratory variables had a strong linear 
relationship with the project frequency.  
B. Feature selection and feature importance 
Feature selection is the process of selecting the most 
relevant predictors and removing irrelevant variables from 
the pool of potentially useful predictors. Depending on the 
model’s structure, feature selection can improve a model’s 
accuracy. This process can be carried out by measuring the 
contribution of each variable to the model’s accuracy, and 
then removing irrelevant and redundant variables while 
keeping the most useful ones. In some cases, irrelevant 
features can even reduce a model’s accuracy. In general, 
there are three approaches to feature selection: the filter 
method, wrapper method, and embedded method.  
Embedded methods implement feature selection and 
model tuning at the same time. In other words, these 
machine learning algorithms have built-in feature selection 
elements. Examples of embedded method implementations 
include LASSO and elastic net. Regularization is a process in 
which the user intentionally introduces bias into the training, 
preventing the coefficients from taking large values. This 
method is especially useful when the number of variables is 
high. In such a situation, the linear regression is not stable 
and in which a small change in a few variables results in a 
large shift in the coefficients. The LASSO approach uses L1 
regularization (adding a penalty equal to the magnitude of 
the coefficient), while ridge regression uses L2 regularization 
(adding a penalty equal to the square of the magnitude of the 
coefficient). Elastic net uses a combination of L1 and L2. 
Ridge regression is effective in reducing a model’s variance 
by minimizing the summation of the square of the residuals. 
The LASSO method minimizes the summation of the 
absolute residuals. The LASSO approach produces a sparse 
model that minimizes the number of coefficients with non-
zero values. As a result, this approach has implicit feature 
selection. The generalized linear method implemented in the 
next section uses elastic net. This approach incorporates both 
L1 and L2 regularization and thus has implicit feature 
selection. 
 
Figure 2.  Correlation plot. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
Feature reduction methods, such as principal component 
analysis (PCA), are widely used in studies to reduce the 
number of independent variables. The output of such 
methods is a reduced set of new variables extracted from the 
initial variables while attempting to maintain the same 
information content. However, using these methods can 
drastically decrease the ability to interpret the significance of 
each input, which in itself can be very beneficial. For 
example, in this study knowing that oil price has a significant 
impact on the frequency of the projects compared to 
construction spending can provide valuable insight both for 
policy makers and contractors. As a result, the authors have 
chosen not to implement feature reduction methods, such as 
PCA. 
Looking at the correlation between independent variables 
and the dependent variable, it became evident that a filter 
method using a correlation analysis was not useful, as all the 
variables had a nonsignificant relationship with the project 
frequency. As a result, an elastic net approach is used in the 
next section. 
IV. 
REGRESSION MODEL 
The general process of model optimization and feature 
selection consisted of first defining a set of model parameter 
values to be evaluated. Then, the data was preprocessed in 
accordance with a 0-1 scale to make sure the high value in 
some variables are not skewing the model’s coefficient and 
other variables importance. For each parameter set, the cross-
validation method discussed earlier served to train and test 
the model. Finally, the average performance was calculated 
for each parameter set to identify the optimal values for the 
parameters. 
Ordinary linear regression is based on the underlying 
assumption that the model for the dependent variable has a 
normal error distribution. Generalized linear models are a 
flexible generalization of the ordinary linear regression that 
allows for other error distributions. In general, they can be 
applied to a wider variety of problems than can the ordinary 
linear regression approach. Generalized linear models are 
defined by three components: a random component, a 
systematic component, and a link function. The random 
component recognizes the dependent variable and its 
corresponding probability distribution. The systematic 
component recognizes the independent variables and their 
linear combination, which is called the linear predictor. The 
link function identifies the connection between the random 
and systematic components. In other words, it pinpoints how 
the dependent variable is related to the linear predictor of the 
independent variables. 
Ridge regression uses an L2 penalty to limit the size of 
the coefficient, while LASSO regression uses an L1 penalty 
to increase the interpretability of the model. The elastic net 
uses a mix of L1 and L2 regularization, which makes it 
superior to the other two methods in most cases. Using a 
combination of L1 and L2, the elastic net can produce a 
sparse model with few variables selected from the 
independent variables. This approach is especially useful 
when multiple features with high correlations with each other 
exist.  
A generalized linear model was fit to the data using the 
cross-validation method discussed earlier. Alpha (mixing 
percentage) and lambda (regularization parameter) were the 
tuning parameters. Alpha controls the elastic net penalty, 
where α=1 represents lasso regression, and α=0 represents 
ridge regression. Lambda controls the power of the penalty. 
The L2 penalty shrinks the coefficients of correlated 
variables, whereas the L1 penalty picks one of the correlated 
variables and removes the rest. Figure 3 illustrates the results 
of the generalized linear model (for each set of parameters 7 
models according to cross-validation method is trained and 
the average error is assigned to the set of parameters under 
study), optimized by minimizing the RMSE with controlling 
alpha and lambda. The optimized parameters were α=1 and 
λ= 0.56. The authors also tested λ higher than 0.56 up to 1, 
however, the coefficients were not well-behaved beyond 
lambda=0.56. 
Figure 4 depicts the LASSO coefficient curves. Each 
curve represents a variable. The path for each variable 
demonstrates its coefficient in relation to the L1 value. The 
coefficient paths more effectively highlight why only two 
variables were significant in the generalized linear model. 
When two variables were excluded, all other coefficients 
became zero at the L1 normalization, and this arrangement 
yielded the best performance. Figure 5 offers the variable 
importance for the generalized linear model with all the 
variables. Only the unemployment rate in construction 
industry, the Brent oil price, and the unemployment rate 
(total) 
had 
non-zero 
coefficients. 
However, 
the 
unemployment rate (total) seemed to be relatively 
insignificant. 
 
Figure 3.  Generalized linear method optimization. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
Figure 4.  Lasso coefficient curve. 
 
Figure 5.  Variable importance of the generalized linear model. 
To further prune the generalized linear model, another 
model with only the unemployment rate in the construction 
sector and the Brent oil price was trained and tested. Table 2 
contains the optimized parameters (coefficients and 
intercept) for the generalized linear models. The general 
unemployment rate had a low coefficient and, upon pruning 
it, the authors saw an improvement in the performance of the 
model. The most important variable was unemployment rate 
in construction having the highest coefficient of 4.03.  
Table 3 illustrates the performance of the optimized 
general linear model using a different dataset on the cross-
validation sections. It was evident that excluding the 
unemployment rate improved the model’s performance over 
most of the cross-validation data sections. It is notable that 
the pruned model performed much better in data section 1 
which had the highest error and produced a more evenly 
distributed error among the different data sections tested. 
The only variables contributing to the final linear model 
were the unemployment rate in the construction sector and 
the Brent oil price. 
Table 4 provides a comparison between the regression 
models proposed in this study and some other univariate 
models studied previously by the authors [5]. Comparing the 
error terms shows that the regression model is not 
outperforming some of the univariate models, such as 
Autoregressive Moving Average (ARMA). However, it 
comes close to the best performing example and it provides 
insight regarding the impact of environmental uncertainties 
on future project streams and thus could be valuable in long 
term strategic planning. 
It is important to note that the result of this model is the 
frequency of FDOT’s unknown future projects, about which 
the user would otherwise have no information. Having 
reliable estimates with known error margins regarding 
unknown future projects can arguably provide more insight 
in strategic planning for a company’s future compared to the 
current conjecture-based decision making. It should be noted 
that the accuracy of the model as long as the model is stable 
(the error is not systematic but random) is acceptable. The 
model is forecasting an unknown-unknown variable in the 
future for which there is no information available regarding 
their existence. However, users can use the output of this 
model including the error margin as inputs to their strategic 
planning.  
TABLE II.  
PARAMETERS OF THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODELS. 
Variables 
Coefficients 
Coefficients (Pruned by one 
variable) 
URC 
3.94 
4.03 
BP 
2.80 
2.77 
UR 
0.11 
----- 
Intercept 
17.14 
17.16 
 
TABLE III.  
PERFORMANCE OF THE GENERALIZED LINEAR MODEL. 
Error term 
RMSE 
MAE 
Feature set 
All 
Pruned 
All 
Pruned 
1 
16.13 
9.78 
13.24 
10.8 
2 
11.58 
11.94 
9.64 
8.56 
3 
13.86 
13.69 
11.6 
8.01 
4 
13.16 
13.14 
10.82 
8.25 
5 
12.07 
10.94 
9.55 
10 
6 
11.03 
10.27 
8.53 
8.6 
7 
10.89 
10.87 
8.6 
11.28 
Average 
12.67 
11.52 
10.28 
9.36 
 
TABLE IV.  
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT MODELS. 
Model 
RMSE 
MAE 
Regression 
11.52 
9.36 
ARMA(8,8) 
10.715 
8.45 
ARMA(12,12) 
11.556 
9.23 
AR(8) 
10.925 
8.48 
Exponential MA (8) 
11.404 
9.02 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
The output of this research can provide quantitative insight 
as a foundation for future planning. It should be noted that 
this model is not a standalone portfolio management 
framework, rather it is a supplement to existing models. For 
example, knowing that there is likely to be a decrease or 
increase in the number of projects in the future can help a 
company prepare in terms of consolidating or expanding its 
resources and assets. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The importance and impact of upcoming projects on a 
project portfolio has been established in previous published 
work. However, little work has been done considering the 
uncertainties regarding incorporating unknown future 
projects in long term strategic planning. In this paper, an 
approach for incorporating environmental uncertainties for 
forecasting the number of unknown future projects is 
presented. A multivariate regression model with elastic net 
regularization was used to forecast FDOT’s unknown future 
projects using economic and construction indices. The results 
indicate that the approach can reduce the impact of 
uncertainties on their portfolio and thus enable development 
of a more robust plan with a better strategic plan. The 
generalized linear model indicated that the best explanatory 
variables were the unemployment rate in the construction 
sector and the Brent oil price. The regression model’s 
performance is no better than other methods tried earlier by 
the authors, such as a univariate autoregressive moving 
average model [5] regressing on project frequency’s past 
value. However, this regression model provides insight 
regarding the impact of environmental uncertainties on 
future project streams and thus could be valuable in long 
term strategic planning. The regression model presented in 
this literature only considers the linear relationship between 
the variables. Exploring non-linear modeling techniques, 
such as neural networks for capturing more complicated 
relationships between the variables would be the next logical 
step in this research. The model developed in this study is 
limited to FDOT projects. However, new regression models 
specific for other databases can be built by following the 
same steps and adopting appropriate alternative sets of 
independent variables. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Martinsuo, “Project portfolio management in practice and 
in context,” Int. J. Proj. Manag., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 794–803, 
Aug. 2013. 
[2] R. G. Cooper, S. J. Edgett, and E. J. Kleinschmidt, “Portfolio 
management in new product development: Lessons from the 
leaders—I,” Res. Manag., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 16–28, 1997. 
[3] H. Markowitz, “Portfolio Selection,” J. Finance, vol. 7, no. 1, 
pp. 77–91, Mar. 1952. 
[4] J. S. Pennypacker and L. D. Dye, “Project Portfolio 
Management and Managing Multiple Projects : Two Sides of 
the Same Coin ?,” in Managing Multiple Projects: Planning, 
Scheduling, and Allocating Resources for Competitive 
Advantage, CRC Press, 2002, pp. 1–10. 
[5] A. Shojaei and I. Flood, “Stochastic forecasting of project 
streams for construction project portfolio management,” Vis. 
Eng., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 11, 2017. 
[6] Y. Petit and B. Hobbs, “Project portfolios in dynamic 
environments: 
Sources 
of 
uncertainty 
and 
sensing 
mechanisms,” Proj. Manag. J., vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 46–58, Sep. 
2010. 
[7] A. Shojaei and I. Flood, “Stochastic Forecasting of Unknown 
Future Project Streams for Strategic Portfolio Planning,” in 
Computing in Civil Engineering 2017, 2017, pp. 280–288. 
[8] J. Dahlgren and J. Soderlund, “Modes and mechanisms of 
control in Multi-Project Organisations: the R&amp;amp;D 
case,” Int. J. Technol. Manag., vol. 50, no. 1, p. 1-22, 2010. 
[9] R. R. Trippi, P. By-Lee, and K. Jae, Artificial intelligence in 
finance and investing: state-of-the-art technologies for 
securities selection and portfolio management. McGraw-Hill, 
Inc., 1995. 
[10] A. D. Henriksen and A. J. Traynor, “A practical r&d project-
selection scoring tool,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 46, no. 
2, pp. 158–170, May 1999. 
[11] J. A. Araúzo, J. Pajares, and A. Lopez-Paredes, “Simulating 
the dynamic scheduling of project portfolios,” Simul. Model. 
Pract. Theory, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1428–1441, Nov. 2010. 
[12] A. F. Carazo, et al. “Solving a comprehensive model for 
multiobjective project portfolio selection,” Comput. Oper. 
Res., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 630–639, Apr. 2010. 
[13] R. Demirer, R. R. Mau, and C. Shenoy, “Bayesian networks: 
a decision tool to improve portfolio risk analysis,” J. Appl. 
Financ., vol. 16, no. 2, p. 106, 2006. 
[14] A. Shojaei and I. Flood, “Extending the Portfolio and 
Strategic Planning Horizon by Stochastic Forecasting of 
Unknown Future Projects,” in The Seventh International 
Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation, 
INFOCOMP 2017, 2017, no. c, pp. 64–69. 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

