Open Access  Business Model and Financial Issues  
Malgorzata Pankowska  
Information Systems Department 
University of Economics 
Katowice, Poland 
malgorzata.pankowska@ue.katowice.pl 
 
 
Abstract—The paper covers considerations on business model 
of open access publication for science and research 
development. The paper is a "state-of-the-art" report about 
existing open access repositories. The author aims to present  
that open access movement strongly depends on financial 
support of research and science development at academic 
institutions. 
Keywords-open access; digital repository; business model; 
financial support 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
The development of the information society and the 
widespread diffusion of information technology gives rise to 
new opportunities for research and learning. Higher 
education institutions have been using Internet and other 
digital technologies to develop and distribute education and 
research results for several years. However, much of that 
materials were locked up behind passwords within 
proprietary systems, unreachable for outsiders. The trend 
towards sharing software programmes (open source 
software) and research outcomes (open access publishing) 
seems to be strong and complemented by the trend towards 
sharing learning resources. The reasons for individuals and 
institutions to use, produce and share open education and 
science results can be divided into basic technological, 
economic, social and legal drivers. The technological and 
economic drivers include improved, less costly and more 
user-friendly 
information 
technology 
infrastructure, 
hardware and software. Legal drivers are new licensing 
schemes that facilitate free sharing and reuse of content. 
Government-supported educational institutions allow for free 
sharing and reuse of resources, assuming that open sharing 
speeds up the development of new learning resources, 
stimulates internal improvement, innovation and helps the 
institution to keep good records of materials and their 
internal and external use.  
There is a need to look for new cost recovery models as 
institutions 
experience 
growing 
competition. 
Other 
arguments cover the altruistic motivation of sharing, personal 
non-monetary gain, such as publicity, reputation and 
opportunities  to reach the market quickly for the competitive 
advantage. The increase of volume of research work 
provided online for free is the natural symptom of science 
development, because storing the knowledge in closed 
libraries is fated. Knowledge for its further development 
must be widely distributed, however the credit should be 
given to all who contributed. The main thesis of the paper is 
that open access does not mean equal opportunities for 
participation in science and research development. The paper 
consists of three parts. The first part includes analysis of 
open access movement premises, the next subchapter 
comprises the discussion on financial problems at open 
repository institutions and an analysis of financial procedures 
to support the selected open access repositories. The third 
part includes the business model of open access repositories' 
development.  
II. 
OPEN SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT PREMISES  
Openness in the technical domain is characterized by 
technical interoperability and functionality. Open standards 
are important since they make it possible for different 
software applications to operate together. The openness 
blurs the traditional distinction between the consumer and 
the producer. The term prosumer is sometimes used to 
highlight the blurring of roles. To adapt or modify a digital 
resource it needs to be published in a format  that makes it 
possible to copy and paste pieces of text, graphics or any 
published media [1]. Development of Enterprise 2.0,  
Marketing 2.0 and social media marketing are the excellent 
examples of prosumers' activities.  
On the push side, it is announced that if universities do 
not support the open sharing of research results and 
educational materials, traditional academic values will be 
increasingly marginalized by market forces. On the pull side, 
a number of possible positive effects from open sharing is 
put forward, such as: broader and faster dissemination, 
people involvement in the problem solving, rapid quality 
improvements 
and 
faster 
technical 
and 
scientific 
development. The free sharing of software, scientific results 
and educational resources is believed to reinforce societal 
development and to diminish social inequality [2].  
According to Dargan [3], open systems offer a building 
block approach to development that makes effective use of 
commercial products and open systems are based on 
standards that define basic system building blocks and 
provide a foundation for reuse, interoperability and 
evolution. 
 
The greatest challenge in designing an open software 
system is selecting which standards to use for an enterprise. 
Another challenge is finding suitable standards-compliant 
commercial products. The third challenge is choosing 
standards that keep pace with technology innovations. 
8
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

According to Kavanaugh [4], open source offers, in addition 
to a very rich set of technologies with long histories, a set of 
new ways to look at certain problems. Issues include:  
 
A variety of new licensing options and claims. 
 
Opportunities to deal with the loosely structured 
community that creates open source software, from 
selecting distributions. 
 
The possibility that open source software is built 
and maintained in different ways. 
Open source software is delivered with source code 
included or easily available. Generally, intellectual property 
(IP) covers three main branches - copyright (original artistic 
and literary works of authorship); patent (inventions of 
processes, machines, manufactures and compositions of 
matter that are useful, new and non-obvious) and trademark 
(commercial symbols) [5]. The copyright and patent acts 
provide 
protection 
for 
intellectual 
property 
against 
unauthorized use, theft and other violations of the rights 
granted by those statutes to the IP owner. According to 
Cronin [6], plagiarism is not a legal but an academic offence 
which may be punishable according to the institution's 
regulation. It may be a legal offence if there are intentions to 
benefit from it financially at the expense of the copyright 
owner.  
Since 1990s the open source software licensing is 
regulated by the activities of Open Source Initiative. The 
most important licenses are the General Public Licenses, the 
Lesser General Public License and the Berkeley Software 
Distribution (BSD) Licenses. Academics worldwide have 
started to use open licenses to create a space in the Internet - 
a creative commons - where people can share and reuse 
copyright material without fear of being sued. The Creative 
Commons (CC) license gives others permission to copy, 
distribute, display and perform the copyright work and 
derivative works based on it, but for non-commercial 
purposes only. If anyone wants to use the work for a 
commercial purpose they must do so in agreement with the 
right's holders. However, there is no clear understanding of 
what constitutes commercial use. Another problem is the 
clause called "Share Alike", meaning that any company 
trying to exploit the author's work will have to make their 
added value available for free to anyone else [1]. 
Researchers, as authors, have plenty of opportunities to 
support open access and get greater reach for their research - 
through open-access journals, open-access repositories and 
author rights management. Hine has noticed that in the 
science fields where book publishing is the dominant mode 
of communication and reputation building, publishers have 
a great deal of control over how those fields are represented 
and when, how and who can access research outcomes [7].  
 Though 
technical 
standards 
are 
necessary 
for 
interoperability, there has been a resistance to data standards 
in many humanities fields because they are perceived as 
necessitating the standardization of research objects and 
imposing a normative practice. In human sciences, there is a 
low-degree of functional dependence and the values and 
goals incorporated in the technologies of one field are less 
likely to be shared by another. In physical sciences (e.g., 
physics, high-energy physics), the knowledge is cumulative, 
atomistic, 
concerned 
with 
universals, 
guaranties, 
simplification, resulting in discovery and explanation. The 
research works are politically well organized, high 
publicable and task-oriented. In humanities (e.g., history, 
linguistics) and pure social sciences (e.g., anthropology, 
geography), the knowledge is reiterative and concerned with 
particulars, qualities and resulting in understanding and 
interpretation. The research works are pluralistic, loosely 
structured, person-oriented and characterized by low 
publication rate. In applied sciences (e.g., mechanical 
engineering), the purposive and pragmatic knowledge is 
concerned with mastery of physical environment and 
resulting in products and techniques. The research works are 
entrepreneurial, dominated by professional values and role-
oriented. Patents substitute for publications. In social 
sciences (e.g., education), the functional and utilitarian 
knowledge is concerned with enhancement of professional 
practices and resulting in protocols and procedures. The 
research works are uncertain in status, dominated by 
intellectual fashions and power-oriented. Publication rates 
are reduced by consultancies.  
The fields of science have different attitudes towards 
publishing processes and e-science is differently understood 
in the particular disciplines. Generally, e-science is defined 
as the combination of three different developments: the 
sharing of computational resources, distributed access to 
massive data sets and the use of digital platforms for 
collaboration and communication [8]. This is accomplished 
by transferring the entire research process into the digital 
environment.    
 
The 
creation 
of 
European 
collaboration 
and 
communication networks in science and scholarly research 
is one of the key elements of the European Research Area. 
This means that collaboration and connectivity indicators 
need to be further developed than they are at present. 
Scientific collaboration networks i.e. research grids, are 
constructed to support academic and research community. 
Some of the notable examples include: TeraGrid, EGEE, 
LA Grid, and D-Grid [9]. Many different grids have 
emerged in the last decade. EGEE is used among the 
European scientific community. BOINC is an open-source 
software platform for computing using volunteered 
resources. XtremWeb is an open source software to build 
lightweight Desktop Grid by gathering the unused resources 
of desktop computers (CPU, storage, network) [10]. 
Nowadays, the grid projects provide access to the open 
repository of research databases and publications, and they 
create the opportunity to utilize open source software as 
well as ensure e-publications on projects' deliverables [11]. 
The open access movement as the worldwide effort was 
initiated by other organizations to provide free online access 
to scientific and scholarly research literature, especially 
peer-reviewed journal articles and their preprints. The open 
9
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

access movement started out with a series of statements and 
declarations: 
 Budapest Open Access Initiative (BOAI), 
 Bethesda Statement on Open Access Publishing, 
 Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the 
Sciences and Humanities [12].   
Open access means the permission for any user to read, 
download, copy, distribute, print, search or link to the full 
texts of the articles, crawl them for indexing, pass them as 
data to software for processing and use them for any lawful 
purpose. The number of open access repositories increases. 
The Registry of Open Access Repositories (ROAR) covers 
2172  active tables of repositories. The other worldwide 
initiative include EBSCO A-to-Z® Web-based tool, DOAJ, 
Bentham Science, OpenDOAR. EBSCO A-to-Z® is the 
industry’s most complete Web-based tool for organizing and 
providing links to all of a library’s e-resources, including e-
journals, titles in full-text databases, e-journal packages, and 
e-books. The Directory of Open Access Journal (DOAJ) 
developed and maintained by Lund University Libraries and 
the e-Depot of the National Library of the Netherlands (KB) 
have started a cooperation in order to secure long-term 
preservation of open access journals. The Swedish Library 
Association is generously acting as sponsor. The aim of the 
DOAJ is to increase the visibility and ease of use of open 
access scientific and scholarly journals thereby promoting 
their increased usage and impact. Currently, the DOAJ 
collection covers about  4000 journals and is characterized 
by a very large number of publishers (2.000+), each 
publishing a very small number of journals on different 
platforms, in different formats and in more than 50 different 
languages. Bentham Science is a major journal publisher of 
92 online and print journals, over 200 open access journals 
and related print and online book series. Bentham Science 
answers the informational needs of the pharmaceutical, 
biomedical and medical research community. OpenDOAR 
is an authoritative directory of academic open access 
repositories. Each OpenDOAR repository has been visited 
by project staff to check the information that is recorded 
there. This in-depth approach does not rely on automated 
analysis and gives a quality-controlled list of repositories. 
OpenDOAR aims to provide a quality assured list of 
academic repositories containing full-text materials that are 
openly accessible. Open access repositories increasingly 
play a pivotal role in the emerging research information 
landscape. Repositories are being deployed in a variety of 
environments 
(education, 
research, 
science, 
cultural 
heritage) and contexts (national, regional, institutional, 
project, lab, personal). They are operating across 
administrative and disciplinary boundaries and interact with 
distributed computational services and social communities. 
Institutions such as universities, research laboratories, 
publishers, libraries and commercial organizations are 
creating 
innovative 
repository-linked 
systems 
for 
management of digital content to enable use, reuse and 
interconnection of information. OpenDOAR directory 
includes 19 Polish repositories. Website design for 
repositories included in the directory is not the same, there 
is an acceptance of freedom of Website portal design. 
Although certain general guidelines were considered and 
approved, the detailed standardization of portal design is 
demanded in the interest of end user to enable searching and 
browsing. Nowadays, site map and navigation do not 
support searching effectively. The end user can recognize 
the hierarchical construction of repository content, but the 
construction of sub-repositories and sub-collections within 
repositories is not so clear and visible, and different names 
for sub-collections are applied. Lack of standardization of 
repository design  revealed the general tendency to connect 
the end user with a particular repository even though in the 
interests of end user is to increase a number of accessible 
collections.  
Taking into account the only one criterion i.e. Ph.D. 
works access, it should be noticed the only 8 out of 35 
Polish digital libraries enable open access to those works. 
Some other (i.e., 5 universities) ensure open access at local 
library to printed copies of Ph.D. works. Only the Rector of 
Polytechnic Institute in Cracow in 2004 has made decision 
that Ph.D. works are accessible in open repository for all. 
According to the survey done in 20 other countries the 
searching results are similar and the general conclusion is 
that universities do not strongly support the Ph.D. works to 
be openly accessible online [13]. For Polish digital libraries 
included in OpenDOAR directory, the unified standard of 
metadata, known as Dublin Core version 1.1 is applied for 
all the stored publications' description. Although interface 
standard for eLibra digital repository Internet portal was 
widely applied, information retrieval is not easy because of 
lack of clear classification of repository content and 
necessity to browse through a mixture of popular daily 
news, old manuscripts, maps, and scientific publications.  
OpenDOAR directory does not cover all of scientific 
research repositories in Poland. Some universities are 
overlooked and they develop their digital repositories within 
other projects. For example, Silesian Polytechnic Institute in 
Gliwice is involved in Springer Open Choice/Open Access 
scientific publication programme. Within that programme 
publication are funded in 100% by the Ministry of High 
Education in Poland within Springer/ICM agreement. 
Although ICT allows for high speed transfer and mass data 
storing, it does not mean a permission for uncontrolled 
redundancy of information. Unfortunately, digital library 
content classification are not cohesive. Lack of clear 
classification of publications results in longer time for 
searching and low effectiveness of information retrieval. 
Therefore it can be suspected that some valuable research 
publication are not quoted.  
III. 
OPEN ACCESS REPOSITORY FINANCIAL PROCEDURE 
Repositories can be organized as a place to share and 
exchange resources, which means that people are either 
users or producers, or they can promote the collaborative 
10
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

production of common resources. Some initiatives of open 
repositories 
have 
institutional 
backing 
involving 
professional staff, others build on communities of 
practitioners or rely on their voluntary work. The survey of 
180 repositories out of 2171 included in the ROAR 
directory allows for identification of some typical 
procedures for funding of open repositories.  
 
For example, Norikazu Hyodo from Ochanomizu 
University Library in Japan reports that  the management 
and operation of the ICT resource rely on the grant from the 
Japanese government. As of last year, Ochanomizu 
University Library got a grant from National Institute of 
Informatics (NII) for open repository development. 
Similarly, the financial support from NII was provided for 
the digital library at University of Tokyo. Paul Thirion from 
University of Liege, Belgium reports that their ORBi - Open 
Repository and Bibliography is completely financially 
supported by the library of the university.  Ruedi Lindegger 
from Universität St. Gallen, Switzerland  responds that for 
maintaining the open  repository  they do not  need much 
money. The applied software is purely open source, but the 
coordinator for the repository is paid by the research 
department of the university. The input of the data 
(publications, projects) is done by the researchers 
themselves. Some additional improvements are done as a 
part  of the administrative budget of the university with  
cooperation of two partner institutions.  
In Finland, Helda - Digital Repository services are a part 
of the core functions of Helsinki University Library and thus 
funded from the library's general operating budget - this 
includes both the repository management work and the 
application level technical development and maintenance. 
For the ICT part (servers, disk space, networking etc.) the 
repository services use the infrastructure provided by the 
University IT Department. Director of Bibliothèque de 
l'EPFL presents that the institutional repository is managed  
and financially supported partly by the library, partly by the 
IT service. Jorgen Eriksson perceives that the running, 
maintenance and development costs of the Lund University 
repository are part of the yearly budget proposal that the 
university library applies for from the central university 
management. So economically it is treated like any other 
task done by the university library.  
HathiTrust 
Digital 
Library 
partners 
pay 
the 
infrastructure costs for the content they deposit. The 
infrastructure is made up of five elements: storage, data 
centers, tape backup, servers and miscellaneous hardware, 
and staff to oversee and maintain these elements. To 
determine the costs for specific amounts of content, each 
element is converted into a per GB cost. The per GB costs 
are then added together to calculate a total per GB per year 
cost. This total cost includes one storage replacement cycle 
(e.g., storage that was purchased in year 1 is replaced in 
year 4 to prevent loss of data). Costs for replacement storage 
are estimated using 10% reductions in storage costs each 
year from the time the initial storage was purchased. The 
total cost also includes the costs of storage and maintenance 
at two redundant storage locations (one at the University of 
Michigan and one at Indiana University). Partners are billed 
on an annual basis and adjustments to the charges are made 
the following year. HathiTrust is an international 
community 
of 
research 
libraries 
consisting 
of 
55 
universities.  
BioMed Central is a science, technology and medicine 
research publisher which has pioneered the open access 
publishing model. Open Repository as  a hosted solution 
from BioMed Central builds and maintains customized 
digital 
repositories 
on 
behalf 
of 
institutions 
and 
organizations. Open Repository is a partner of many 
organizations to support open access and repository 
development worldwide (e.g., Electronic Information for 
Libraries, EIFL, which is  an international non-profit 
organization, COAR (Confederation of Open Access 
Repositories), DuraSpace Registered Service provider that is 
also a non-profit organization, Symplectic software 
company, Wijiti as open source software and technology 
provider).  
At the University of Southampton, UK, e-Prints Soton 
repository is considered to be a core corporate service, 
alongside HR, student records, finance system and the 
content management system and is supported as such. 
RePEc (Research Papers in Economics) www.repec.org 
is a collaboration among archive maintainers worldwide 
who contribute their time to documenting their materials, 
which are then assembled into a virtual database.  RePEc is 
unfunded.   There are various RePEc services, supported by 
the institutions where they run, but that mainly amounts to 
provision of hardware. The managers of RePEc services are 
mainly academics who do not receive compensation nor 
release time for the work they do to develop and maintain 
their services. Exceptions may exist for some services, e.g. 
MPRA at Munich University Library, where those 
maintaining the service may have that in their job 
description.   
 PubMed Central (PMC) as the U.S. National Institutes 
of Health (NIH) digital archive of biomedical and life 
sciences journal literature was developed and is operated by 
the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI), 
a division of the National Library of Medicine (NLM) at the 
U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH). PubMed Central 
charges publishers nothing for including journal content in 
the PMC archive. A publisher is responsible for any costs it 
may incur in creating files that meet PMC's technical 
standards and transmitting them to PMC. UK PubMed 
Central is a service of the UKPMC Funders Group working 
in partnership with the British Library, University of 
Manchester and  the European Bioinformatics Institute in 
cooperation with the National Center for Biotechnology 
Information at the US National Library of Medicine 
(NCBI/NLM) It includes content provided to the PubMed 
Central International archive by participating publishers.  
11
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

Publishing Network for Geoscientific & Environmental 
Data (PANGAEA) as an open access library is hosted by 
Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research in 
Bremerhaven and Center for Marine Environmental 
Sciences (MARUM) at University of Bremen in Germany. 
The PANGAEA is supported with funding by the European 
Commission, the Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research, Deutsche Forschungs gemeinschaft, International 
Ocean Drilling Program.  
Hyper Article en Ligne (HAL) is a multi-disciplinary 
open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of 
scientific research papers, whether they are published or not, 
and for Ph.D. dissertations. The documents may come from 
teaching and research institutions in France or abroad, or 
from public or private research centers.  
IV. OPEN ACCESS BUSINESS MODEL 
Some years ago, the business model was synonymous 
with the revenue model.  The overall business model now 
demands specifying the following component models: 
 Research results model: how the research institutions 
create or acquire the knowledge products. 
 Distribution model: how the research institutions 
deliver or distribute the knowledge products to the 
other researchers. 
 Marketing 
model: 
the 
persuasive 
methods 
researchers and custodians of knowledge use to 
promote 
research 
results 
in 
socio-economic 
environment. 
 Revenue model: how the research institutions get 
revenue.  
The research results, distribution, marketing and revenue 
model can be combined into one business model, 
specifically tailored to the particulars of knowledge 
products, audience, distributions and transactions. The issue 
of who pays for open access article-processing charges is 
still being discussed. In Figure 1, the business model 
covering research results generating and distributing is 
presented. Generally, research works are funded from the 
national or regional budgets as well as from private sources 
and they are conducted by research and development (R&D) 
units, universities and private companies. Today, the 
complexity of research process demands individuals to be 
strongly involved in studying the research results of others, 
therefore researchers cannot work independently on   
knowledge production and dissemination activities of 
others, even if they declare as not affiliated to any 
institutions. However, they can present the research results 
on their own Websites.  Today, only a small percentage of 
all articles have been self-archived, but universal online 
access could be achieved through the open repositories. 
Research results are published by commercial publishers as 
well, as fully or partly open access organizations. Open 
access publishers are sponsored by individuals (pay-for-
publish approach) or institutions (donation approach), 
therefore the open repositories can offer publications free of 
charge to the readers. Simultaneously, publications' market 
is supplied by commercial publishers, who sell books and 
journals to book stores and authorized access libraries.  The 
commercial publishers prefer pay-for-access model as well 
as pay-for-publish. In the latter, researchers spend money 
from research grants on publications.   
     
Figure 1.  Open access repository financial support. 
Although the commercial models are well applied  in  
developed countries, the open access movement encourages 
the researchers having different research and academic 
backgrounds from all around the globe to submit their 
contributions online. The researchers understand that open 
access is an effective way to reach the appropriate audience. 
They know that when managing the intellectual property, 
they are able to maximize the value of the intellectual 
property, not to maximize the protection of closed resources 
of knowledge. Commercial publishing house demands 
authors to be involved in the process of books' and journals' 
editing. In that way they can reduce the intellectual property 
dissemination costs. Generally, the open access  repositories 
are financially supported by the university and regional 
libraries which receive special funds from government 
institutions (i.e. the Ministry of Science, Research and 
Education), as well as from international projects as it is 
visible in the presented above review. However, strong 
support by the non-profit organization and private 
companies is still required. The open access movement and 
open repositories are a way to reduce costs of intellectual 
property production and dissemination, because here authors 
are also requested to work on editing and to be involved in 
R&D Funds 
National Budget 
Ministry of 
Science & 
Research  
PanEuropean & 
Worldwide 
Institutions  
National & 
International 
Private Sector 
Support   
R&D Institutions 
R&D 
Associations  
Government & 
Private 
Universities & 
Institiutions   
Private 
Companies   
Commercial: 
pay-for-access 
pay-for-publish  
R&D Results Publishers 
Open Access 
donation model   
Institutional  
Open Access 
Digital Libraries    
Metasearch Service Organization 
Multi-institutional 
Open Access 
Repositories      
Author's 
Website       
Journal Articles 
Preprints 
Working papers 
Theses or 
Dissertations  
Proceedings  
Memoirs 
Research  Reports  
12
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

peer reviewing. The commercial publisher implements 
blended model of distributing books and journals 
traditionally in printed versions as well as online.  However, 
in the knowledge generating process the costs of production 
are still increased, therefore in the research results 
publication process,  the budget is spent mostly on research 
and development process.   
V. CONCLUSION 
The users need an improvement of access to open 
resources. The rapidly growing number of repositories 
makes it important to find the most relevant and highest 
quality resources. Metadata may improve the function of 
search engines, therefore approaches such as automatically 
generated metadata and folksonomies are being tested as 
applicable. There is an imbalance between the provision of 
open repositories and their utilization. Taking into account 
2172 repositories included in the Registry of Open Access 
Repositories (ROAR) it should be noticed that vast majority 
of open repositories is not based on Western European 
culture, but they are developed in Japan, China and in Latin 
America countries. A number of projects exists in countries 
to support open repositories based on their own language 
and cultures. There is a risk, because this way the 
researchers share their knowledge among one culture 
country, taking into account that it can be a small and less 
developed country. Although there is an idea of repurposing 
the materials and the interoperability  is a key issue for 
further open access movement development, the worldwide 
knowledge exchange is not simple, easy or even rational 
task. The digitalization of knowledge results will be helpful 
but does not solve the problem of understanding research 
results. Open standards implementation is necessary to 
enable research resources searching across repositories and 
downloading, integrating and adapting across platforms. 
Therefore, the development of open standards is a 
specialized 
task, 
which 
requires 
financial 
support. 
Considering the presented above financial procedures, there 
is a general conclusion that the vast majority of repositories 
is funded by national and international organizations, 
therefore there is a risk of consigning less developed 
countries to playing the role of consumers. The most 
frequented quoted publications are the results of research 
done in the well developed countries.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Hereby, I would like to thank all managers of open 
repositories, who supported me in survey on financial 
procedures. 
REFERENCES 
[1] "Giving Knowledge for Free, The emergence of open 
education resources," Centre for educational research and 
innovation, Organisation for economic co-operation and 
development, OECD, 2007. 
[2] A. Swan, "Open Access and the Progress of Science" 
American Scientist, May-June 2007, pp. 197-199. 
[3] P.A. Dargan, "Open systems and standards for software 
product development," Artech House, Boston, 2006. 
[4] P. Kavanaugh, "Open Source Software, Inplementation and 
Management,"  Elsevier, Digital Press, Amsterdam, 2004. 
[5] B.T. Yeh, "Intellectual Property Rights violations: Federal 
Civil remedies and criminal penalties related to Copyrights, 
Trademarks and Patents CRS Report for Congress,"2008, 
http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL34109.pdf, access date: 4 
January 2010. 
[6] C. 
Cronin, 
"Plagiarism, 
copyright, 
Academia 
and 
Commerce," presentation given at Colby College in 
Proceedings of the Conference on Information Ethics and 
Academic Honesty, 2003, http://abacus.bates. edu/cbb/ docs/ 
Cronin.pdf , access date: 4 January 2010. 
[7] Ch.M. Hine, "New Infrastructures for Knowledge Production, 
Understanding e-Science," Information Science Publishing, 
Hershey, 2006.  
[8] T. Hey, and A.E. Trefethen, "The UK e-Science Core 
Programme and the Grid," Future Generation Computer 
Systems, 2002, 18(8), pp. 1017-1031.  
[9] A.B. Mohammed, J. Altmann, and J. Hwang, "Cloud 
Computing Value Chains: Understanding Businesses and 
Value Creation in the Cloud," Economic Models and 
Algorithms for Distributed Systems, Birkhauser Verlag Basel, 
2009, pp. 187-208.  
[10] S. Naqvi, M. Villari, J. Latanicki, and P. Massonet,  "From 
Grids to Clouds - Shift in Security Services Architectures," in 
Cracow '09 Grid Workshop Proceedings, Bubak M. Turala 
M., Wiatr K., Eds. Cracow, Poland, October 12-14, 2009, pp. 
28-36. 
[11] "Tera 
Grid. 
Science 
Gateway 
Home," 
2011, 
http://www.tergrid.org/web/science-gateways/. access date: 
18 July 2011.  
[12] "Budapest Open Access Initiative: Frequently Asked 
Questions," 
August 
4, 
2010 
http://www.earlham.edu/ 
~peters/fos/boaifaq.htm#openaccess. access date: 10 January 
2011.  
[13] M. Pankowska, "Open Access Movement in Science and 
Research", International Conference on Information Society, 
iSociety'2011, Shoniregun Ch.A. Akmayeva G.A. (eds.) 
Infonomic Society, London, pp. 347-353.  
WEBSITES LIST 
[14] Bibliothèque de l'EPFL, http://library.epfl.ch 
[15] BOINC, http:// boinc.berkeley.edu/ 
[16] DOAJ, http://www.doaj.org/ 
[17] D-Grid, http://www.d-grid.de/ 
[18] EBSCO A-to-Z® http://atoz.ebsco.com/ 
[19] EGEE, http://public.eu-egee.org  
[20] e-Prints Soton, http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/  
[21] HAL, http://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/ 
[22] HathiTrust Digital Library, http://www.hathitrust. org/cost 
[23] Helda - Digital Repository, https://helda. helsinki.fi/ 
[24] LA Grid, http://latinamericangrid.org 
[25] NII, http://www.nii.ac.jp/en/ 
[26] OpenDOAR, http://www.opendoar.org/ 
[27] Open Source Initiative, http://www.opensource.org 
[28] Open Repository, http://www. openrepository.com/ 
[29] PANGAEA, http://www.pangaea.de 
[30] PMC, http://www.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/pmc/ 
[31] ROAR, http://roar.epronts.org/ 
[32]   TeraGrid, http://www.teragrid.org  
[33]   XtremWeb, http://www. xtremweb. net/   
13
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

