An Efﬁcient Scheduling in Consideration of the Signaling Overhead for Relay
Networks
Deokhui Lee and Jaewoo So
Department of Electronic Engineering
Sogang University
Seoul 121-742, Republic of Korea
Email: {akirain, jwso}@sogang.ac.kr
Abstract—An efﬁcient scheduling for relay networks is pro-
posed in consideration of the signaling overhead. A source
node informs both relay and destination node about the
resource assignments in every frame. The resource allocation
process generates a substantial signaling overhead, which
inﬂuences the system performance. However, the amount of
the signaling overhead can be reduced by predetermining
resource assignments of future frames. We develop a frame
structure for scheduling and propose an efﬁcient scheduling
in consideration of the signaling overhead. The performance
of the proposed scheduling is evaluated compared with that of
the conventional scheduling in terms of the average capacity as
both the number of relays increases and the average signal-to-
noise ratio increases. Simulation results show that the average
capacity of the proposed scheduling is greater than that of the
conventional scheduling.
Keywords-relay networks; persistent scheduling; signaling
overhead.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the cellular networks, the relay node is one of the
important techniques to improve the spectrum efﬁciency, link
reliability, and coverage. Besides, an efﬁcient scheduling
algorithm is crucial for the efﬁcient use of limited wireless
resource. A scheduler in the relay networks determines a
relay node which relays data from the source node to the
destination node. Therefore, an optimal selection criterion
of the relay node is dependent on the scheduling metric.
A selection of the relay node is important to increase the
system capacity. A signaling message usually broadcasts to
users for every frame. The term signaling overhead is used to
describe the information on the resource assignments and the
path management. However, frequent route changes could
cause high signaling overheads which inﬂuence the system
performance [1]. For example, the amount of effective
resources to transmit data trafﬁc increases as the signaling
overhead decreases. Hence, one of the important roles of the
scheduler is to reduce the signaling overhead.
Many researchers have endeavored to develop an efﬁcient
scheduling algorithm to increase the system performance in
the relay networks [2]-[5]. Lee and Hwang [2] proposed a
scheduling algorithm to reduce the power, where a relay
node is selected on the basis of channel conditions of relay
nodes. Hence, the selected relay node meets the data rate
requirement. In [3] and [4], authors propose a relay node
selection algorithm in order to enhance the system perfor-
mance. In [3], the optimal relay node selection strategies are
proposed under ﬁxed and variable transmit power. In [4], a
centralized utility maximization frame work was introduced
for relay networks. The physical layer transmission strate-
gies are done efﬁciently by optimizing pricing variables as
weighting factors. In [5], the relay selection strategies are
proposed and evaluated in terms of spectral efﬁciency in
the relay cellular network. To determine an optimal route
for a data transmission, the scheduler takes into account the
feature of multi-hop transmission.
However, the scheduling algorithms of [2]-[5] were not
considered the signaling overhead that broadcasts informa-
tion on resource assignments and path management. The
resource allocation process generates a substantial signaling
overhead, which inﬂuences on the amount of the avail-
able radio resources. Hence, the scheduler should consider
the signaling overhead to increase the system capacity.
Some studies have considered the signaling overhead in
the scheduling metric for relay systems [6]-[7]. In [6] and
[7], by taking the signaling overheads transmitted among
relay nodes into consideration, the system capacity was
evaluated. Bletas, Khisti, Reed, and Lippman [8] proposed a
distributed relay selection algorithm for a two-hop ampliﬁed-
and-forward system, where the selection criterion is to select
the relay node which has the best instantaneous signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) across the two-hops. Although these stud-
ies consider the signaling overhead, the scheduling metric
has no consideration to reduce the signaling overhead. The
relay selection strategy was proposed in [9], which intro-
duced a method to reduce the complexity and the signaling
overhead of the relaying process. The feedback message
for the channel state report is considered but the signaling
message is not considered. In [10], the framework has been
proposed for the relay selection in cellular networks while
limiting the feedback overhead and complexity. However, the
signaling message for data transmissions is not considered
in the relay selection criterion.
This paper proposes an efﬁcient scheduling in considera-
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 1.
The multi-relay network
tion of signaling overhead for relay networks.
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows:
Section II contains the description of the system model. In
Section III, we propose an efﬁcient scheduling algorithm
in consideration of the signaling overhead and analyze the
system capacity of the proposed scheduling. We provide
simulation results in Section IV and ﬁnally, Section V
presents conclusions and future works.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
We consider the downlink relay networks, consisting of a
single source, N relays, and a single destination denoted by
S, R, and D, respectivley. The system investigated in this
paper is shown in Fig. 1. We assume that Rayleigh fading
channels [11] between the source and relays, denoted by
S − R links, and the Rayleigh fading channels between
the relays and the destination, denoted by R − D links.
Moreover, independent and identically distributed Rayleigh
fading is assumed across all links. It is assumed that the
entire links have the same average SNR. The source has no
direct link with the destination and the data transmission is
performed by one of N relays. The source broadcasts the
signaling message in order to inform on resource assign-
ments to both relays and the destination. We assume that the
signaling message is only transmitted in S-R link and is not
transmitted in R-D link. Therefore, the signaling message
includes information on both S-R link and R-D link.
Let γi,j denote the instantaneous SNR of i-j link, where
i = {S, 1, · · · , N} and j = {1, · · · , N, D}. For Rayleigh
fading channels, γi,j is an exponential random variable,
and its cumulative density function (CDF), F(γi,j), and
probability density function (PDF), f(γi,j), are given as
F(γi,j)
=
1 − e−
γi,j
¯γ ,
(1)
f(γi,j)
=
1
¯γ e−
γi,j
¯γ ,
(2)
where ¯γ is an average SNR of i-j link.
The relay selection is performed as follows:
Step 1) For each relay link, determine a minimum SNR
S-R link
R-D link
D
T ͙͢͞Պ͚ͣ͠
Պ
D
T ͙͢͞Պ͚ͣ͠
S-R link
R-D link
D
T ͙͢͞Պ͚ͣ͠
Պ
D
T ͙͢͞Պ͚ͣ͠
frame t
frame t+1
Figure 2.
The frame structure of the conventional scheduling
between γS,n and γn,D:
Ωn
=
min
n=1,2,··· ,N{γS,n, γn,D},
(3)
where Ωn is the instantaneous SNR when data is transmitted
by the relay n. The CDF, FΩn(Ωn) and PDF, fΩn(Ωn) can
be formulated as
FΩn(Ωn)
=
1 − Pr (γS,n > Ωn) Pr (γn,D > Ωn)
=
1 − e− Ωn
¯γ e− Ωn
¯γ
=
1 − e− 2Ωn
¯γ ,
(4)
fΩn(Ωn)
=
dFΩn (Ωn)
dΩn
= 2
¯γ e− 2Ωn
¯γ .
(5)
Step 2) The source node selects a relay for data transmis-
sions by following as:
γn∗
=
max
n=1,2,··· ,N{Ωn}.
(6)
We deﬁne a minimum SNR of the selected relay as γ,
i.e., γ = γn∗. The parameter, n∗, means a selected relay.
The PDF, fγ(γ), can be derived by using a knowledge of
order statistics [12], [13]. Using both (4) and (5), the PDF
of γ can be formulated as
Fγ(γ)
=
N
∏
n=1
Pr (Ωn ≤ γ)
=
(
1 − e− 2γ
¯γ
)N
,
(7)
fγ(γ)
=
dFγ(γ)
dγ
= N 2
¯γ e− 2γ
¯γ
(
1 − e− 2γ
¯γ
)N−1
. (8)
III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
A. Conventional Scheduling
In the conventional scheduling, the source broadcasts the
signaling message for every frame to inform the allocations
of radio resources in the downlink relay networks. The
signaling message contains the information that indicates
the path management and resource assignments. For conven-
tional scheduling, we propose a modiﬁed frame structure, as
shown in Fig. 2.
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

S-R link
R-D link
D
T ͙͢͞Պ͚ͣ͠
Պ
D
T ͙͢͞Պ͚ͣ͠
S-R link
R-D link
frame t
frame t+1
D
T ͣ͠
D
T ͣ͠
Figure 3.
The frame structure of the proposed scheduling
Let ζ denote the ratio of the signaling message used to
transmit information to both relays and the destination. The
ratio, ζ, is deﬁned as follows:
ζ
=
Resource used to transmit a signaling message
Resource used to transmit data
.
(9)
Let TD be the frame duration. Then, TD(1 − ζ)/2 denotes
the duration for data transmission at S-R and R-D link,
respectively. The duration of a subframe for S-R link,
ζ + TD(1 − ζ)/2, is different from the duration of a
subframe for R-D link, TD(1 − ζ)/2. The frame structure
is not symmetric between the S-R link and the R-D link.
However, because the duration for data transmissions at
the S-R link and at the R-D link is identical, the frame
structure provides the equal opportunity for each link in view
of the data transmission. The performance of conventional
scheduling is evaluated in terms of the average capacity,
where the capacity, C, is calculated by Shannon’s capacity
as follows:
C
=
log2 (1 + γ) [bps/Hz],
(10)
where γ is the SNR [14]. The average capacity of the
conventional scheduling can then be rewritten by using the
PDF of γ obtained from (8). The average capacity can be
obtained as follows:
¯C
=
TD(1 − ζ)/2
TD
∫ ∞
0
log2 (1 + γ)fγ(γ)dγ
=
1 − ζ
2
∫ ∞
0
log2 (1 + γ)fγ(γ)dγ [bps/Hz],(11)
where the factor of 1/2 is used because the frame is divided
into two subframes, and the factor of (1−ζ) is used because
the signaling overhead is reduced.
B. Proposed Scheduling
To increase the system performance, the source performs
an efﬁcient scheduling taking the signaling message into
consideration. In the conventional scheduling, the signaling
message is transmitted in every frame. However, the resource
allocation process generates a substantial signaling overhead,
which inﬂuences the system performance.
In the fading channel environments, the instantaneous
SNR is somewhat predictable. Hence, the scheduler reduces
the signaling overhead by transmitting an initial assignment
message, which is valid in a following of future frames.
In the proposed scheduling, as shown in Fig. 3, the source
broadcasts information on resource assignments in the sig-
naling message only for frame t and does not broadcast the
signaling message for frame t + 1. The source allocates a
persistent resource to both relay and destination when it ﬁrst
schedules the both relay and destination; and the allocated
resource is valid in frame t + 1. Hence, the signaling
overhead decreases and the effective downlink resource
increases. In the proposed scheduling, if the instantaneous
SNR in frame t+1 is equal or greater than the instantaneous
SNR in frame t, the proposed scheduling may result in
some efﬁciency because the source transmits data without
notiﬁcation of signaling messages. However, if the signaling
message which is predetermined in frame t is not suitable
for frame t + 1, the performance degradation will occur in
frame t + 1.
The instantaneous SNR may vary in every frame in
accordance with the time-varying channel conditions. The
probability that the highest SNR is greater at frame t + 1
than at frame t, is deﬁned as
P
=
Pr(γ1 ≤ γ2),
(12)
where γ1 and γ2 are the highest SNR at frame t and at frame
t + 1, respectively.
The average capacity of the proposed scheduling is
twofold. First, when the source broadcasts the signaling
message, the average capacity for frame t, which is denoted
by C1, can be written as the total capacity averaged over
the PDF, fγ(γ), as follows:
¯C1 = (1 − ζ)1
2
∫ ∞
0
log2 (1 + γ)fγ(γ)dγ [bps/Hz].
(13)
The average capacity, C1, is equal to the average capacity of
the conventional scheduling because the source broadcasts
the signaling message to both relays and the destination.
Second, when the source transmits data without the noti-
ﬁcation of the signaling messages, the average capacity for
frame t + 1, which is denoted by C2, can be written as the
total capacity averaged over PDF, fγ(γ), as follows:
¯CP
=
P · 1
2
∫ ∞
0
log2 (1 + γ)fγ(γ)dγ,
(14)
¯C1−P
=
(1 − P) · 1
2
×
∫ ∞
0
log2 (1 + (1 − α)γ)fγ(γ)dγ, (15)
¯C2
=
¯CP + ¯C1−P
[bps/Hz],
(16)
where the ¯CP and ¯C1−P are the average capacity when γ1 ≤
γ2 and γ1 > γ2, respectively. The SNR variation parameter,
α, is a ratio of amount of a falling SNR value when γ1 > γ2.
The average capacity for frame t + 1 is determined by the
sum of ¯CP and ¯C1−P .
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Table I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Value
Default
Variation
The number of relays, N
5
1∼10
The average SNR of S-R link, γS−R
10 dB
0∼14 dB
The average SNR of R-D link, γR−D
10 dB
0∼14 dB
The signaling overhead ratio, ζ
20%
10%, 30%
The SNR decrease ratio, α
20%
-
The probability, P
80%
60%, 80%, 100%
Figure 4.
The average capacity versus the average SNR, γ (dB)
The average capacity of the proposed scheduling can be
obtained by
¯C
=
1
2
( ¯C1 + ¯C2
)
[bps/Hz].
(17)
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Simulation environments assume the downlink of a re-
lay network with N active relays, in which all relay
links have the same average SNR, ¯γ. Each link of chan-
nels has a Rayleigh channel environment of fγi,j(γi,j) =
1/¯γ exp(−γi,j/¯γ), where γi,j is the instantaneous SNR
from i node to j node where i = {S, 1, · · · , J} and
j = {1, · · · , J, D}. The ratio of the signaling overhead
is assumed to be ζ = 0.2. The probability of γ1 ≤ γ2
is assumed to be P = 0.8. We perform the simulation
according to the value of P because the channel environment
can be experienced slow fading or fast fading. The other
parameters used in our simulation are described in Table 1.
The performance of the proposed scheduling is evaluated in
terms of the average capacity.
Figure 4 shows the average capacity when P = 0.6, 0.8
and 1.0. The average capacity increases as the value of the
average SNR increases. Because the conventional scheduling
uses the signaling message to allocate resource in every
frame, the system capacity decreases as the amount of the
signaling overhead increases, regardless of the probability,
Figure 5.
The average capacity versus the number of relays, N
ζ
ζ
Figure 6.
The average capacity versus the average SNR, γ (dB)
P. However, the proposed scheduling predetermines the
information on the resource assignments for frame t + 1
in frame t. Therefore, the average capacity of the proposed
scheduling is dependent on the probability, P. The proposed
scheduling increases the average capacity by reducing the
number of transmissions of the signaling messages. At γ =
15 dB, the average capacity of the proposed scheduling is
about 12.5% greater than that of the conventional scheduling
when P = 1.0 and about 10.96% greater than that of the
conventional scheduling when P = 0.6.
Figure 5 shows the average capacity as the number of
relays increases when P = 0.6, 0.8 and 1.0. As expected, the
average capacity increases as the number of relays increases.
However, when the number of relays exceeds a certain value
(about 10), the average capacity approaches an asymptotic
limit. The average capacity of the conventional scheduling
has a same performance regardless of the probability, P. At
¯γ = 10 dB, the average capacity of the proposed scheduling
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

ζ
ζ
Figure 7.
The average capacity versus the number of relays, N
increases by about 12.5% when P = 1.0 and by about
10.59% when P = 0.6.
Figure 6 shows the average capacity when ζ = 0.1 and
0.3. The average capacity increases as the value of the av-
erage SNR increases. The proposed scheduling outperforms
the conventional scheduling in an entire SNR region. The
available resource for data transmissions in the proposed
scheduling is greater than in the conventional scheduling be-
cause the number of transmissions of the signaling messages
in the proposed scheduling is less than in the convention
scheduling. At γ = 15 dB, the average capacity of the
proposed scheduling is about 20.17% greater than that of
the conventional scheduling when the ratio of signaling
overhead, ζ = 0.3.
Figure 7 shows the average capacity as the number of
relays increases when the ratio of the signaling overhead
is ζ = 0.1 and 0.3. When the number of relays exceeds
a certain value (about 10), the average capacity approaches
an asymptotic limit. The asymptotic limit of the average
capacity is proportional to the ratio of the signaling over-
head. The proposed scheduling outperforms the conventional
scheduling as the number of relays increases. The average
capacity of the proposed scheduling increases by about
20.3% when ζ = 0.3.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The paper proposed an efﬁcient scheduling in considera-
tion of the signaling overhead for the downlink relay net-
works. Additionally, we developed a modiﬁed frame struc-
ture for scheduling. In the proposed scheduling, the source
broadcasts a signaling message only for frame t and does
not broadcast the signaling message for frame t + 1. Hence,
the signaling overhead decreases and the system capacity
increases. The simulation results show that the proposed
scheduling outperforms the conventional scheduling in terms
of the average capacity. When the ratio of signaling overhead
is 30%, the average capacity of the proposed scheduling is
roughly 20% higher than that of the conventional scheduling.
To develop the proposed scheduling, we have several
directions for future work that can be envisioned. One is to
consider a speciﬁc channel state transition model. Second
is to consider a concrete model for the signaling overhead.
Another is to determine an optimal the number of frames
without the notiﬁcation of the signaling messages.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Research
Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Ko-
rea government (MEST) (2012-0002089 and 2012012059).
Correspondence
should
be
addressed
to
Jaewoo
So,
jwso@sogang.ac.kr.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Wei and R. D. Giltin “Two-hop-relay architecture for
next-generation WWAN/WLAN integration,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 24-30, Apr. 2004.
[2] C. Y. Lee and G. U. Hwang “Fair and minimal power allocation
in a two-hop relay networks for QoS support,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 3864-3873, Nov. 2011.
[3] C. Yan, C. Peng, Q. Peiliang, and Z. Zhaoyang, “Optimal
partner selection strategies in wireless cooperative network
with ﬁxed and variable transmit power,” in Proc. IEEE WCNC,
Mar. 2007, pp. 4080-4084
[4] T. C. Ng and W. Yu, “Joint optimization of relay strategies and
resource allocations in cooperative cellular network,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328-339, Feb. 2007.
[5] Z. Ma, K. Zheng, W. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Route selection
strategies in cellular networks with two-hop relaying,” in Proc.
WiCom, Sep. 2009, pp. 1-4.
[6] H.I. Cho and G.U. Hwang “Capacity optimal design of two-
hop relay network,” IEEE Electronic Lett., vol. 46, no. 18, pp.
1295-1297, Sep. 2010.
[7] H. Viswanathan and S. Mukherjee, “Performance of cellular
networks with relays and centralized scheduling,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 2318-2328, Sep. 2005.
[8] A. Bletsas, A. Khisti, D. P. Reed, and A. Lippman, “A simple
cooperative diversity mothod based on network path selection,”
IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 659-672, Mar.
2006.
[9] I. Krikidis, J. Thompson, S. McLaughlin, and N. Goertz,
“Amplify-and-Forward with Partial Relay Selection,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 235-237, Apr. 2008.
[10] A. Papadogiannis, A. Saadani, and E. Hardouin, “Exploiting
dynamic relays with limited overhead in cellular systems,” in
Proc. Globcom Workshops, Dec. 2009, pp. 1-6.
[11] A. Adinoyi, Y. Fan, H. Yanikomeroglu, H. V. Poor, and F. Al-
Shaalan, “Perforamcne of selection relaying and cooperative
diversity,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 8, no. 12, pp.
5790-5795, Dec. 2009.
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

[12] N. Balakrishnan and A. C. Cohen, Order Statistics and
Inference: Estimation Methods. New York: Academic Press,
1991.
[13] L. Dai, B. Gui, and L. J. Cimini, “Selective relaying in OFDM
multihop cooperative networks,” in Proc. IEEE WCNC, Mar.
2007, pp. 964-969.
[14] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,”
Bell System Tech. J., pp. 379-423, 623-56, 1948.
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

