Enterprise Architecture Quality Management Approach  
  
Malgorzata Pankowska  
Department of Informatics   
University of Economics 
Katowice, Poland 
email: pank@ue.katowice.pl 
 
 
Abstract—Generally, the enterprise architecture (EA) is the 
discipline of designing enterprise guided with principles, 
frameworks, methodologies, requirements, tools, reference 
models, and standards. The EA is responsible for designing 
structures, engineering processes, developing working force, 
exploiting technology and creating opportunities for learning. 
The EA should be accessible for all the organization members 
to receive their acceptance as responsive to user needs. The EA 
modelling effectiveness and efficiency are determined by the 
EA elements quality. Therefore, the paper focuses on 
characterization 
of 
quality 
of 
enterprise 
architecture, 
consideration of key perspectives, measures and indicators.   
Keywords-enterprise 
architecture; 
quality; 
stakeholder; 
maturity model; ArchiMate. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The term "enterprise" can be interpreted as an overall 
concept to identify a company, business organization or 
governmental institution. According to Robins, an enterprise 
is considered as a social entity, with a relatively identifiable 
boundaries [4]. The enterprise engineering is underpinned by 
two fundamental concepts, i.e., enterprise ontology and 
enterprise architecture.  
The enterprise architecture (EA) is defined as a coherent 
and consistent set of principles and guidelines that guide 
system design [6]. Enterprise architecture is also defined as a 
strategic information asset base, which defines the business 
mission, the information and technology necessary to 
perform the mission, the transitional processes for 
implementing new technologies in response to the changing 
mission needs [2]. For the purpose of this paper, the 
enterprise architecture is a general plan or a direction of 
information communication technology (ICT) application in 
the enterprise to achieve strategic business goals. The 
enterprise architecture is a discipline that seeks to explain 
why organizations do what they do and how they can be 
changed to achieve a certain demanded purpose. The 
complete picture of the EA should include answers to the 
following questions: what will be done, i.e., what products, 
services and experiences, who will do the work, how well 
the work is done, who will be offered the results, why 
customers are expected to pay for what they receive, what 
technologies will be developed and applied. Firstly, the paper 
covers discussions on the EA quality issues included in the 
EA frameworks and some special approaches. Secondly, the 
role of stakeholders in the EA development and quality 
assurance is discussed. Thirdly, the proposed approach to 
quality of enterprise architecture (QoEA) evaluation is 
presented.  In this approach, the stakeholder roles, EA 
principles and vision as well as the EA quality  procedure are 
emphasized.  
II. 
ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE AS PRODUCT AND 
PROCESS 
ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2007 architecture standard is the 
fundamental organization, as well as the principles guiding 
its design and evolution. The EA can be considered as a 
process or as a product. The EA as a product serves to guide 
managers in designing business processes and system 
developers in building applications in a way that is in line 
with business objectives and policies. The EA as a process is 
to translate business vision and strategy into effective ICT 
components. It should be noticed that enterprise models are 
applied as a computational representation of the structure, 
activities, processes, information, people, goals, and 
constraints of a business. The EA is to ensure a holistic view 
of the business processes, systems, information, and 
technology of the enterprise [7]. The results of work of 
enterprise architect cover the derived IT strategies, the new 
and modified EA, the new and modified set of EA standards, 
and 
a 
roadmap 
describing 
the 
ICT 
projects 
for 
implementation of new architecture and achieving the target 
state, and a development plan [7].  
Well architected systems can more quickly link with 
external business partners. The EA is to ensure the 
comprehensive understanding and evaluation of the current 
state or the desired state, as well as the interrelationships of 
processes, people and technology affected by ICT projects. 
The organization has bigger consistency of business 
processes and information across business units. The EA 
identifies opportunities for integration and reuse of ICT 
resources and prevents the development of inconsistent 
processes and low quality information. Especially important 
to users is the capability of integrating the information 
among applications and across data warehouses and data 
marts. The ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010: 2011 standard emphasizes 
the stakeholder object in the architecture description (Figure 
1). Architecture description identifies stakeholders and 
system of interests, as well as expresses an architecture. The 
following stakeholders can be considered as having impact 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

on the architecture description: system users, operators, 
acquirers, owners, suppliers, developers, and maintainers. 
The stakeholders are included in the EA quality evaluation 
process, because they are the EA work recipients, although 
they have different interests, risk awareness and impact on 
the system. 
 class Architecture Description 
System-of-Interest
Architecture
Stakeholder
Concern
Architecture 
Viewpoint
Architecture 
Description
Architecture 
View
1..*
identifies
1
1
expresses
1
1
identiies
1
1..*
has
1..*
1
exhibits
1
1
has interests in
1..*
1
identifies
1..*
1..*
1..*
frames
1..*
1
governs
1
1..*
1
governs
1
 
Figure 1.  Enterprise Architecture in IS0/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011. 
Architecture viewpoints establish the conventions for the 
construction, interpretation and use of architecture views to 
respect specific concerns. Architecture view expresses the 
architecture of the system from the perspectives of specific 
system concerns. Architecture views are the main categories 
that are evaluated in the aspect of quality of the EA. They are 
strongly dependent on EA stakeholders, whose qualifications 
for the EA process should also be evaluated. Architecture 
principles as general rules and guidelines are included in the 
EA views, and they guide how a chosen area of goal-oriented 
and efficient endeavor must be exploited and explored. 
Quality discussion should also concern the approval of the 
principles by users, and the principles development for better 
EA development.   
III. 
RELATED WORKS ON EA QUALITY   
A. Enterprise Architecture evaluation problems 
The enterprise architecture as a process of translating 
business vision and strategy into effective enterprise can be 
viewed in many different aspects: 
 business aspect - highlighting what business is 
conducted by the organization, what are its products 
and services,  
 information aspect - providing the information 
engineering 
perspective 
of 
business 
solution 
architecture,  
 work aspect - expressing in terms of work activities, 
associated resources, work locations and its optimal 
techniques, and needed information,  
 application aspect - defining the automated business 
activities and business supporting software,  
 technology aspect - focusing on the technology needed 
to facilitate other components of the architecture [8].  
Evaluating refers to systematic activities undertaken to 
decide on a quality of particular phenomena and visualize 
them in a structural and formal way. The enterprise 
architecture evaluation is to decide on the value-in-use of EA 
objectives, activities, information resources, processes, 
actors, products, requirements and the relationships between 
these entities. The enterprise architecture evaluation can be 
used in different ways. Generally, it improves organization’s 
work, allows the organizational members to review the 
enterprise and to design and implement business processes, 
to change the business structure and to increase the 
efficiency of the business reengineering and business 
strategy 
realization. 
Nowadays, 
the 
EA 
evaluation 
approaches do not offer mutually agreed languages, 
techniques and measures. The EA usually has many 
stakeholders, who establish their own techniques, schemas 
and measures. Although the EA is to provide a holistic 
approach to the enterprise information technology (IT) 
development, the quality of the EA requires different 
measurement methods depending on the stakeholder 
knowledge, 
competencies 
and 
activities. 
The 
EA 
frameworks' developers separate EA evaluation from EA 
implementation. They focus on analyzing the architecture 
models, languages, modeling techniques and propose 
methods for the evaluation of these artifacts. They notice in a 
pre-implementation analysis the necessity to ensure 
coherence among different models, they analyze the 
convergence of proposed models, their scalability, openness, 
agility, sustainability and ability to ensure security. The 
question on the EA quality is not popular in the EA 
engineering methodologies. However, in BIZBOK [1], 
beyond questions provided in Zachman Framework, there is 
a unique question on how well the EA is developed, and 
what metrics and measures are to be applied.  
B. Stakeholders and Quality issues in EA Frameworks  
Nowadays, the EA is considered as the discipline of 
describing enterprises guided with principles, frameworks, 
methodologies, requirements, tools, reference models and 
standards. There are many frameworks that support the EA 
modeling and development, e.g., Zachman Framework (ZF), 
the Open Groups Architecture Framework (TOGAF), the 
Generic Enterprise Reference Architecture and Methodology 
(GERAM), the Purdue Enterprise Reference Architecture 
(PERA), Computer Integrated Manufacturing Open System 
Architecture 
(CIMOSA), 
the 
Lightweight 
Enterprise 
Architecture (LEA), Nolan Norton Framework (NNF), the 
Extended Enterprise Architecture Framework (E2AF), 
Enterprise Architecture Planning (EAP), the Federal 
Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF), Treasury 
Enterprise Architecture Framework (TEAF) [6], [7], [11].  
However, the frameworks mentioned above are product 
oriented and the quality issues are not well discussed in their 
general descriptions. Only some of them, i.e., ZF, TOGAF, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

FEAF, CIMOSA and MODAF emphasize the role of 
stakeholders in the EA development process.  
The ZF provides a basic structure for organizing a 
business architecture through dimensions, such as data, 
function, network, people, time and motivation [13]. 
Zachman describes the ontology for the creation of EA 
through negotiations among several actors. The ZF presents 
various views and aspects of the enterprise architecture in a 
highly structured and clear form. Zachman differentiates 
between the levels: Scope (contextual, planner view), 
Enterprise Model (conceptual, owner view), System Model 
(logical, designer view), Technology Model (physical, 
builder model), Detailed Representation (out-of-context, 
subcontractor), and Functioning Enterprise (user view). Each 
of these views is presented as a row in the matrix. The lower 
the row, the greater the degree of detail of the level 
represented. The model works with six aspects of the 
enterprise architecture: Data (what?), Function (how?), 
Network (where?), People (who?), Time (when?), and 
Motivation (why?). Each view (i.e., column) interrogates the 
architecture from a particular perspective. Taken together, all 
the views create a complete picture of the enterprise. In this 
enterprise ontology there is no place for quality 
considerations. 
Since 1999, the FEAF components of an enterprise 
architecture cover architecture drivers, strategic direction, 
current 
architecture, 
target 
architectures, 
transitional 
processes, architectural components, architectural models, 
and standards. The architect has a responsibility for ensuring 
the completeness of the architecture, in terms of adequately 
addressing all the concerns of all the various views, 
satisfactorily reconciling the conflicts among different 
stakeholders. The framework emphasizes the role of planner, 
owner, designer, builder and subcontractor in the EA 
development process. The FEAF is derived from the 
Zachman Framework, however, the user of the realized 
architecture is not included in the development team. In 
FEAF, the Performance Reference Model (PRM) is a 
standardized framework to measure the  performance of 
major IT investments and their contribution to program 
performance. Within that model the customer service quality, 
process and activity quality, and technology quality are 
measured [7].  
  The Ministry of Defense Architectural Framework 
(MODAF) is the UK Government specification for 
architectural frameworks for the defense industry [9]. The 
MODAF covers 7 viewpoints, i.e., All View, Acquisition, 
Strategic, Operational, System, Service, and Technical. The 
All View viewpoint is created to define the generic, high-
level information that applies to all the other viewpoints. In 
this approach, the architect role is hidden in the particular 
viewpoints. The Acquisition viewpoint is used to identify 
programmes and projects that are relevant to the framework 
and that will be executed to deliver the capabilities that have 
been identified in the strategy views. The Strategic viewpoint 
defines views that support the analysis and the optimization 
of a domain capability. The intention is to capture long-term 
missions, goals and visions, and to define what capabilities 
are required to realize them. The Operational viewpoint 
contains views that describe the operational elements 
required to meet the capabilities defined in the strategic 
views. This is achieved by considering a number of high-
level scenarios, and then defining the element sorts existing 
in the scenarios. The operational views are solution-
independent and do not describe an actual solution. These 
views are available to suppliers and form the basis of 
evaluating the System views that are provided as the 
supplier's proposed solution. The Service viewpoint concerns 
views that allow the solution to be described in terms of its 
services. This allows a solution to be specified as a complete 
service-oriented architecture. The Technical viewpoint 
contains two views that allow all the relevant standards to be 
defined. This is split into two categories: current standards 
and predicted future standard [9].  
The CIMOSA framework is based on four abstract views 
(function, information, resource and organization views) and 
three modeling levels (i.e., requirements definition, design 
specification, and implementation description) [10]. The four 
modeling views are provided to manage the integrated 
enterprise model (covering the design, manipulation and 
access). For the management of views, CIMOSA assumes a 
hierarchy of business units that are grouped into divisions 
and plants. The TOGAF standard takes a holistic approach to 
the enterprise architecture. TOGAF divides the EA into four 
categories of architecture, i.e., business, application, data and 
technology. Similarly to the ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2007 
standard, in TOGAF the minimum set of stakeholders for a 
system covers users, system and software engineers, 
operators, administrators, managers and acquirers. Beyond 
that there are other stakeholders:  
 the executive management, who defines strategic goals,  
 the client, who is responsible for the allocated budget, 
with regard to the expected goals,  
 the provider, who delivers the component elements of 
the architecture,  
 the sponsors, who drive and guide the work,  
 the enterprise architects, who turn business goals into 
reality within the structure of its system.  
In TOGAF, the holistic approach to the EA quality 
management is possible through the application of the 
Architecture Maturity Model (AMM), which is based upon 
capability maturity models as formal ways to gain control 
over and improve architecture processes as well as to assess 
the organization's development competence. Van Den Berg 
and Van Steenbergen consider eighteen key areas of 
architecture maturity, which can be included in the EA 
evaluation process [12]. They are as follows: architecture 
development, use of architecture, alignment with business, 
alignment with the development process, alignment with 
operations, suitability of the architecture, roles and 
responsibilities, coordination of development, monitoring, 
quality management, architectural process maintenance, 
maintenance of architectural deliverables, commitment and 
motivation, architectural roles and training, use of 
architectural roles and training, use of an architectural 
method, consultation, architectural tools, budgeting and 
planning. The development of architecture should be 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

budgeted and planned, however, in such a wide spectrum of 
variables included in the evaluation process, there is a 
question of who is the beneficiary of the multicriteria 
evaluation and what priorities have been established for these 
criteria. In TOGAF 9.1, the enterprise architecture process 
maturity levels are as follows:   
 Level 0: No enterprise architecture program,  
 Level 1: Informal enterprise architecture process 
underway,  
 Level 2: Enterprise architecture process 
under 
development,  
 Level 3: Defined enterprise architecture including 
detailed written procedures, Technical Reference 
Model (TRM) and Standards Profile framework,  
 Level 4: Managed and measured enterprise architecture 
process,  
 Level 5: Continuous improvement of enterprise 
architecture process.  
That model is a result of the Enterprise Architecture 
Capability Maturity Model delivered by DoC (US 
Department of Commerce) [3].   
IV. 
STAKEHOLDERS AND VISIONS AS FUNDAMENTAL OF 
EA QUALITY MANAGEMENT  
Stakeholders are the individuals who have a stake in the 
success or failure of a business. They are people, for whom 
the value is created, who are beneficiaries of the EA 
development decision. Among others, a particularly 
important role belongs to enterprise architect, whose 
competencies should be planned and addressed at two levels: 
the enterprise and the personal level. An enterprise 
competence is an integrated complex of enterprise skills, 
knowledge and technology. To a considerable extent, 
enterprises competencies rest on the competencies of 
employees, i.e., the competencies at the personal level. 
Competencies 
are 
defined 
in 
measurable 
behavior 
characteristics that determine the ability to function 
successfully - knowledge, skills, craftsmanship, attitudes, 
social skills, and personal traits. The competencies cover the 
abilities to cooperate, to take initiative, or show user-
orientation and decision making skills [4]. The important for 
the enterprise architect knowledge aspects cover system 
thinking, 
business 
and 
organization, 
information, 
information technology, enterprise development, and its 
change. The enterprise architects should be able to translate 
the strategic initiatives and areas of concerns into a particular 
enterprise design. Usually, the enterprise architects are 
responsible for documenting, analyzing, and designing the 
business processes, business functions, business objects, and 
the interactions among them. By the analysis of the entire 
organization model, the architects are able to uncover the 
points where there is a need for action and the potential of 
optimization. There is a necessity to ensure the cohesion 
among roles: application managers, project managers, 
process 
architects, 
business 
analysts, 
organization 
consultants, 
infrastructure 
acquirers, 
project 
portfolio 
components' controllers, ICT strategists, IT managers, 
security representatives, risk managers and quality managers.  
The enterprise architect is placed in a network of 
stakeholders. As actors in network, they achieve their 
significance by being in relations with other actors. The 
position of the architect in the enterprise determines the 
associated controls of the EA development activities. 
Techniques used frequently to clarify responsibilities are 
RACI and RAEW [12]. RACI model includes the following 
characteristics:  Responsible (i.e., the individual delivering 
the end result), Accountable (i.e., the person bearing the 
ultimate responsibility for the result), Consulting (i.e., the 
person providing input to reach the result), Informed (i.e., the 
individuals informed about the result) (see Table I). In 
RAEW model, the enterprise architect should be the person 
of Responsibility, Authority, Expertise and Work. Assuming 
that EA quality depends on the stakeholders' qualifications, 
the stakeholder network quality problem could be analyzed 
through 
the 
detail 
specification 
and 
evaluation 
of 
stakeholders' competencies.  
 For the illustration of EA quality considerations, the e-
healthcare system architecture is presented in Figure 2. The 
project was supported by the National Centre of Science, 
grant number 4100/B/H03/2011/40. Stakeholders of the e-
healthcare system contribute to the three kinds of 
architecture (i.e., Business, Application and Technology 
Infrastructure) in a consistent way. Architects in each of the 
architectural areas influence each other's decisions. Software 
architects designing for software reliability need the design 
support of system architects as well as knowledge brokers 
and end users.  
For e-healthcare architecture modeling, the ArchiMate 
language is applied to emphasize the stakeholders in a 
suitable manner to support business agility. In Figure 2, a 
system architecture model in ArchiMate presents the whole 
complexity of EA e-healthcare and as such should be 
considered, although it is organized into some basic layers:  
 BUSINESS containing the following elements: actor 
(i.e., Patient), role (i.e., e-Healthcare Service Recipient, 
Knowledge 
Broker), 
process 
(i.e., 
e-Healthcare 
Consultation Process covering 7 subprocesses), service 
(i.e., e-Healthcare Service Information Browsing, e-
Healthcare Service Conceptualization, e-Healthcare 
Service 
Knowledge 
Component 
Registration, 
e-
Healthcare 
Service 
Knowledge 
Components' 
Catalogue, 
e-Healthcare 
Service 
Knowledge 
Components' Management). In this paper, the e-
healthcare knowledge management is component-
oriented. Therefore, each service consists of some 
knowledge 
components, 
which 
are 
designed, 
constructed and selected to provide optimal advice to 
patients 
and 
their 
guardians. 
The 
knowledge 
components can be further designed as learning objects 
for education of end users and for their community 
considered as organization of learning good medical 
practices.  
 APPLICATION covering elements, such as Financial 
Application, Knowledge Component Management 
System, Portal to External Sources of Knowledge (e.g., 
libraries, journals, document repositories), Service 
Management System, Knowledge Broker- Patient 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

Relation System, e-Healthcare Service Politics and 
Regulations, Risk Evaluation, IT Support. 
 TECHNOLOGY including elements, such as Data 
Server, Application Server. 
 MOTIVATION containing the following elements: 
drivers 
(i.e., 
e-Healthcare 
Consultation 
Needs), 
principles (i.e., e-Healthcare Knowledge Development 
Principles), assessment (i.e., e-Healthcare Consultation 
Evaluation), goals (i.e., Patient Satisfaction, Efficient 
and Effective Response for Patient), requirements (i.e., 
Patient e-Healthcare Requests), stakeholders (e.g., 
Patients and their Guardians). 
In Table I, proposed e-Healthcare organizational 
structure covers the most important stakeholders, i.e., 
Patients and their Guardians (PG), Medical Staff (MS), 
Institutional Investors (II), Knowledge Brokers (KB), 
Information 
System 
Developers 
(ISD), 
Information 
Technology Architects (ITA), Public Healthcare Managers 
(PHM).  
TABLE I.  RACI CHART FOR E-HEALTHCARE  
Key 
Management 
Practices 
PG 
MS 
II 
KB 
ISD 
ITA 
PHM 
e-Healthcare 
Strategic 
Planning  
I 
C 
R 
C 
R 
R 
C 
e-Healthcare 
Knowledge 
Brokering 
C 
C 
R 
A 
R 
R 
C 
e-Healthcare 
Vision 
Development 
R 
C 
C 
R 
I 
I 
C 
Cultural 
Environment 
Capabilities & 
Performance  
A 
R 
R 
R 
R 
A 
C 
 IT Capabilities 
Development 
C 
C 
R 
C 
A 
A 
C 
The ICT 
Investment 
Development & 
Project Planning  
R 
R 
A 
R 
R 
C 
C 
 
Their activities are further precisely specified and 
verified in particular projects. However, at the pre-
implementation stage each person can be evaluated 
according to the following criteria:  
 Reliability: 
capability 
to 
maintain 
a 
level 
of 
performance under stated conditions for a stated period 
of time,  
 Efficiency: ability to work properly to the amount of 
resources used under stated conditions,  
 Suitability: ability to meet stated and implied needs,  
 Agility: capability to receive required effects in stated 
time,  
 Compliance: complying with laws, regulations and 
contractual agreements. 
At the EA development, quality can be evaluated as the 
conformance to the requirements. Every EA product or 
service has a requirement, i.e., a description of what the 
service recipient needs. When a particular product meets that 
requirement, it has achieved quality. The requirements are 
formulated for information, applications, and services.   
TECHNOLOGY layer components are strongly standardized 
and their quality can be evaluated through IT benchmarking.  
The EA quality evaluation focuses on the evaluation of 
certain vision provided by a stakeholder as it is in Figure 2. 
Usually, the vision is supported by the set of principles, 
which 
support 
the 
EA 
analysis, 
development 
and 
implementation. The exemplar principles of EA are as 
follows: 
 data quality is a major factor in enhancing value of e-
healthcare,  
 reusing existing services and knowledge components 
reduces the work required to implement new ones,  
 real-time e-healthcare system monitoring allows 
immediate action to resolve failures and incidents,  
 standardization of EA components help achieve 
economies of scale and improves flexibility,  
 processes must be designed from the patient 
perspective,  
 decision-making must take place at the lowest possible 
organizational level,  
 patient interaction processes must have error correction 
capabilities,  
 all knowledge must have authorizing source,  
 information structure must be based on ArchiMate 
standards, 
 patient data must be accessible to the patient.   
The EA vision and principles are evaluated in the 
following way: 
 identification of the intended stakeholders of the quality 
measurement results,  
 determination of  the post-evaluation decision-making 
responsibilities,  decisions will be some procedures 
with respect to the architecture vision,  
 defining the measures, e.g., : 
o accuracy : data in the EA vision correctly define the 
event or object which they describe,  
o completeness: all the necessary data are present,  
o validity: the data fall between acceptable ranges 
defined by the system architect,  
o consistency: data elements are consistently defined 
and understood,  
o relevance: the EA vision components support a 
decision that needs to be made or a task that needs 
to be performed,  
o presentation: the EA vision is presented in a form 
that makes it easily understandable 
 for each measure, specification of feasible quantifiers, 
and if it is not possible using the "check-mark" 
technique for the acceptance of requirement level 
achievement.  
 on the basis of the assessments in the step above, re-
improvement of the EA vision and principles 
specification. The results of such evaluations of 
measurements will address questions related to the 
occurrence of the undesirable conditions, outcomes or 
principles. The process is also developed to reveal 
omissions, redundancies and any other weaknesses.   
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

 
 
Figure 2.  e-Healthcare Architecture Model. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Although holistic approach to the EA quality 
evaluation was provided in TOGAF as the Architecture 
Maturity Modeling, in this paper, the EA quality 
evaluation is a complex process. Taking into account the 
ISO/IE/IEEE 42010 definition, quality of each of the EA 
elements should be evaluated separately. Although the 
TOGAF framework focuses on EA process quality, this 
paper is to emphasize that EA stakeholders and vision are 
the most important in the quality evaluation process. The 
stakeholders as EA development beneficiaries should be 
the EA quality evaluators. The exemplar specification of 
quality measures were proposed for that EA objects.     
REFERENCES 
[1] BIZBOK™ guide version 4.0. [Online] Available from 
http://c.ymcdn.com/sites/www.businessarchitectureguild.or
g/resource/resmgr/BIZBOKV4IntroductiIn.pdf. 2014.10.12 
[2] CIO Council, Updating the Clinger-Cohen Competencies 
for Enterprise Architecture, 2003, [Online] Available from  
http://www.cio.gov/documents/FINAL_White_Paper_on_E
A_v62.doc, 2016.01.11 
[3] P. Desfray and G. Raymond, "Modeling Enterprise 
Architecture with TOGAF A Practical Guide Using UML 
and BPMN," Amsterdam, Elsevier, 2014 
[4] J.A.P. Hoogervorst, "Enterprise Governance and Enterprise 
Engineering," Berlin, Springer, 2009. 
[5] ISO/IEC 42010, System and software engineering - 
Architecture description. International Standard, Geneva, 
2011.  
[6] M. Lankhorst, "Enterprise Architecture at Work," Berlin,  
Springer, 2005. 
[7] D. Minoli, "Enterprise Architecture A to Z, Frameworks, 
Business Process Modeling, SOA, and Infrastructure 
Technology," London, CRC Press, 2008. 
[8] M. Op't Land,  E. Proper, M. Waage, J. Cloo, and C. 
Steghuis,  "Enterprise Architecture, creating value by 
Informed Governance," Berlin, Springer, 2009. 
[9] C. Perks and T. Beveridge,  T., "Guide to Enterprise IT 
Architecture," New York, Springer, 2003.  
[10] M. Spadoni and A. Abdmouleh, "Information Systems 
Architecture for Business Process Modelling" in Handbook 
of Enterprise Systems Architecture in Practice, P.Saha, Ed.  
Hershey, Information Science Reference, 2007, pp. 366-
382,.   
[11] F. Theuerkorn, "Lightweight Enterprise Architectures," 
London, Auerbach Applications, 2005. 
[12] M. Van Den Berg and M. Van Steenbergen, "Building an 
Enterprise Architecture Practice, Tools, Tips, Best 
Practices, Ready-to-Use Insights," Sogeti, Springer,  2006. 
[13] J.A. Zachman, "Frameworks Standards: What's It All 
About?" In The SIM Guide to Enterprise Architecture, L.A. 
Kappelman L.A. Eds. Boca Raton, CRC Press, 2010, 
pp.66-70. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

