 Assessing Creativity: A Test for Drawing Production using Digital Art Tools 
 The concept, application and assessment of digital art teaching as a means of enhancing creative 
proficiency 
 
Aber Aboalgasm 
School of Computing & Engineering 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
e-mail:u0874270@hud.ac.uk 
Rupert Ward 
School of Computing & Engineering 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
e-mail: r.r.ward@hud.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the Test for Creative Thinking 
- Drawing Production (TCT-DP), including its design, concept 
and mode of assessment, and the practical consequences of its 
application in a specific context. The test was used to evaluate 
the performance of groups of students as part of a case study 
exploring the use of digital art tools for drawing in a junior 
school. The students used specific digital art software via both 
computers and tablets, and also drew manually using a variety 
of devices. TCP-DP evaluates drawing production by means of 
a set of 14 criteria. At the same time, this study used the 
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) theory to assess the ease 
of use and usefulness of the digital tools. The test was trialled 
with students aged 9-10 years in different ability groups. 
There were no significant differences in performance between 
male and female participants. Details of various related 
studies, together with data concerning the reliability and 
validity of the TCT-DP test, are also provided.  The study 
finds that motivation is an important factor in improving 
young people’s artistic ability.  
Keywords - Digital art tools; artistic ability; assessment of 
digital artwork;  assessment of digital tools  
I.      INTRODUCTION 
When considering the adoption of a technological 
approach to art, it can be argued that creative individuals 
should be able to develop their intellect through digital 
drawing activities, along with the development of their 
imagination. It can also be said that the visual image could 
become a means of diagnosing intellectual development. 
The research discussed here found that digital technology 
certainly helped to improve children’s artistic ability and 
enhanced their creative activity. 
 Some previous research has suggested that the 
production of art through computational technology may 
lessen creativity. For example, Lanier discovered that 
technology can lead participants to accept the lowest 
common denominator [1]. Another researcher, Pinsky, 
found that work attempted through computer-based routes 
was “too sanitized” and did not have the “human touch” [2]. 
However, although some have opposed the use of computer 
technology in learning for young children, Cordes and 
Miller argue that the outcomes for youngsters’ development 
as a result of the use of technology in educational settings 
have been widely documented and illustrate positive 
feedback [3]. For example, children who use PCs have been 
found to show several benefits in their intellectual 
development and constructive knowledge, as well as in their 
problem solving and language abilities, in comparison with 
those who do not apply technology in their learning. Thus, it 
seems clear that the use of technology in educational 
environments has shown highly beneficial results. 
The effects have also proved to be positive in the area of 
art and creativity. Matthews and Seow did a study of 12 
children, aged from 2 to–11 years, using electronic paint on 
tablet computers [4]. The observers videotaped children 
drawing with both tablet computers and traditional media 
(pencil, markers, paint and paper) in normal surroundings. 
Similarities were discovered in the children’s work using 
both sorts of media tools, but it was also discovered that 
stylus-interfaced technology offered a unique tool for 
drawing when contrasted with the findings of earlier work 
conducted by Matthews et al. [5], which utilized mouse-
driven electronic paint only. Tzafestas also provides an 
example of working with both digital and traditional tools, 
and using special software in the laboratory of Athens 
Technical University [6]. This involved an attempt to 
integrate traditional methods with digital drawing and 
painting by developing a tool called an ‘Ant Brush’. It was 
found that digital drawing tools could add additional factors 
in terms of colour and line to the user’s design. In fact, the 
drawing tool possessed a limited degree of autonomy. This 
factor proved to be helpful in improving and motivating the 
students’ work, and in giving the children more confidence. 
Additionally, Arrowhead et al. [7] found that using 
computers improved the motivation of elementary children 
in the writing process [7], whilst another researcher, 
Katsiaficas, demonstrates that digital tools can motivate and 
build artistic creativity, as well as being easy to use, 
particularly in circumstances when flexibility is needed with 
regard to source materials and techniques [8]. Haugand 
further adds that the provision of images and sounds to 
support pupils’ natural engagement in the creative process is 
directly concurrent to motivation [9].  
This study intended to investigate whether digital tools 
could help children to express their ideas through drawing. It 
aimed to explore whether there is optimal methods that can 
be used to both strengthen technical skill and develop artistic 
imagination, and to consider how artistic creativity can be 
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

assessed. The study involved the observation and 
interviewing of students in a primary school, in order to 
evaluate how students interacted with both digital and 
traditional tools.  
The remaining sections of the paper are structured as 
follows. Section II presents the methodology used to test 
students in primary school in their use of digital art tools. 
Section III describes how the study used different 
approaches to gain an accurate assessment by using both the 
psychomotor domain taxonomy theory and Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM) theory. Section IV presents the 
new model created to summarize the results derived through 
both the theories mentioned, and Section V provides 
examples of the outcomes achieved using the 14 criteria of 
TCT-DP. Section VI suggests how these 14 criteria may be 
used for assessing artwork, while Section VII discusses how 
the students became more skilful in their use of the digital 
tools. Section VIII evaluates the primary results and finally, 
Section IX provides a conclusion.  
II. METHODOLOGY 
The study population comprised a group of about 25 
students within the age range of 9-10 years old in a primary 
school. The case study was conducted in the UK and tested 
the use of digital art tools in an ICT room. It was carried out 
using a drawing project finalized in collaboration with the 
school, which took 12 weeks. Although the project was 
limited in terms of size, time and setting, it did allow an in- 
depth study. The entire research actually involves two case 
studies, and while the first study has been done, the second 
study is still in progress. Comparison between the two cases 
will enable the research to present accurate results.  
In the first study, the students were tested in their use of 
both traditional and digital tools, and the observer attempted 
to be as non-subjective as possible. The researcher observed 
the pupils’ activity, took notes and recorded how the pupils 
dealt with the technology, as well as noting which tools 
were easy to use and useful. The students used two forms of 
art software, which were Sketchpad (see Figure 7) and Art 
Rage (see Figure 6). The first was utilized via PC and the 
second via tablet.  
The idea chosen by the observer was to create a link 
between an ancient civilization and modern life by using a 
single project to combine ideas. This would allow the 
students to think intensely and use their creative imagination 
effectively. The students first used various traditional tools 
such as pencil, eraser, sharpener, colours and drawing paper. 
After this task, they worked on the same idea using digital 
tools via PC and tablet, but this time applying only drawing 
and painting tools. 
A teacher assisted the students with their work. In noting 
how the children dealt with the technology, and which tools 
were easy to use, the observer considered a number of 
questions. For example, are the pupils using the tools 
correctly to complete the artwork? Do the tools appear to 
encourage creative self-expression? What is the motivation 
behind the pupils’ use of some tools more than others? Is it 
because they are easy to use or because of their usefulness? 
Do the various tools stimulate and motivate children to 
produce creative pieces of artwork? The children’s 
motivation was assessed via questionnaire before the test, 
along with an interview after the test was completed. The 
usefulness of the tools can be assessed through the artwork 
produced, using clear assessment boundaries, as well as 
through continuity of activity and completion of work. 
The teacher’s method and skills can motivate the 
students to improve and build on their artistic ability. For 
example, the teacher can ask the student to use different 
tools in order to explore the function of each. The results 
gained from observation, interviews and questionnaire 
suggest that the majority of pupils (approximately 90%) felt 
that using digital tools increased their artistic skills. They 
also felt that having pictures in the art room enhanced their 
creativity and that their computer skills had improved. In 
addition, a significant majority, particularly among the boys, 
felt that the tools provided a lot of motivation to improve 
their art work. The primary results of observation show that 
about 60% struggled with the ‘Save Picture’, ‘Select’ and 
‘Lines’ functions, the latter being the hardest tool of all. 
About 80% of student struggled with this, so pupils 
preferred to ignore it rather than learn how to use it. Varying 
numbers of pupils found the tools difficult to access and 
remember. All students found the computer useful, with 
very many finding its tools adequate, but some found the 
tablet the most useful. 80% of students found that they could 
not control some tools such as pencil or black felt. The 
reason for this may be that all the tools are controlled by 
mouse, and the mouse cannot always be as flexible and 
adjustable as the human hand for controlling tools.  
The teacher first asked the pupils to work separately, and 
to draw a simple sketch by pencil and paper. Each of them 
did this using their own imagination. After they had finished 
their work, the teacher asked two or three students to 
combine their ideas into one artwork using digital tools. 
Upon completion, the observer noticed how the project had 
changed from a simple idea to a complex, more creative one. 
Specific tools helped the pupils to be creative, such as tools 
for Designing, Stamp and Text, Magic and the Colour tools. 
Figure 1.  Summary of information from questionnaire regarding pupils’ 
use of digital tools. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 1 shows the results of the questionnaires and how 
students interacted with the digital tools. The majority of 
both male and female participants said that they liked to use 
technology, but a higher number of males than females said 
they preferred to use digital tools. PC software was the most 
favoured digital technology, which was preferred by 90% of 
the students and was more popular than the tablet and iPad 
art tools. The pupils said this was because they use 
computers more than other devices in school and also at 
home. Although half of the group that owned iPads/tablets 
found them enjoyable for artwork, 90% found that 
traditional tools were more effective than these digital tools. 
The research can be regarded as valid and reliable 
because the researcher recorded and took pictures of the 
students working in the ICT room, as illustrated in Figure 2. 
Furthermore, other researchers in this field have used similar 
methods with young students. For example, Couse et al. [10] 
examined the viability of tablet computers as a medium for 
digital artwork with children; in particular, they explored 
how easily the children adapted to using them for drawing 
over a six week study in a classroom setting. Both 
quantitative and qualitative data was obtained. Ortegren 
(2012) also conducted a study on the subject of art in 
conjugation with digital media, and investigated how pupils 
perceived certain aspects of teaching and work methods. 
Ortegren’s case study focused on pupils of 7-9 years old 
[11], and also showed the benefits of digital image media 
along with multivoiced teaching. Tanir, et al. [12] conducted 
a further study over 14 weeks with an experimental group. 
Implemented within the undergraduate programme of a 
primary school teaching department, the study suggested 
that learning through visual arts was an effective method for 
primary school teaching. 
 
 
Figure  2. Students working in ICT room using digital art tools for 
drawing. 
III. THE ASSESSMENT OF TOOLS AND THE PSYCHOMOTOR 
DOMAIN  
It would seem that an equal preference for both qualitative 
and quantitative methods can be observed in previous 
research, with case studies, questionnaires and observations 
being the most important methods for research with young 
children. In addition, in a study such as that described here, 
the researcher should be dedicated to helping children use 
different approaches and equipment, and to encouraging 
them to express their opinions, ideas and preferences. It is 
important to “listen to what the children are saying; to be 
non-judgmental and let children ask their questions” [13]. 
Children have different ways of expressing themselves and 
therefore, different methods are needed to capture this 
expression. It has been found that the mixed method 
approach “gives importance to the children’s actions and the 
contexts in which they occur” [14].   
As well as considering the pupils’ perceptions, this 
research attempted to test two theories in the art classroom, 
one of which was the psychomotor domain taxonomy model 
[15]. The psychomotor domain relates to skills that require 
the use of the muscles of the body which may be measured 
according to Bloom’s Taxonomy [15]. These include sports 
skills, writing skills and drawing skills. The theory describes 
several stages involved in learning these skills. As the 
psychomotor domain taxonomy can be used to evaluate the 
development of pupil’s skills, it can be appropriately applied 
to young children who are learning art and gaining 
creativity. The theory was used with students studying art 
and visual media in an ICT room, in order to determine 
whether the use of digital tools for drawing can help 
students to learn in specific stages as they improve their 
artistic ability and develop technological skill.  
The use of strategy in teaching digital art with pupils in 
classroom to develop the artistic creativity 
Assessment of artwork
Assessment of digital tools
Development of the child’s 
performance in digital artwork
Figure 3. The process of measuring improvement in pupils’ achievement. 
The present research concentrates on the stages involved 
in acquiring drawing skills, and how children improve over 
these stages. This domain was tested in relation to pupils’ 
drawing in class using digital tools. The students were tested 
on their response to a new topic they had not tried before, 
which had been chosen by the observer. When the principle 
of psychomotor domain taxonomy was applied, the test 
showed how students quickly learned new skills appropriate 
to their age. The aim was to investigate how pupils would 
improve their performance in drawing using digital tools, 
and how they would respond visually to a project involving 
a new idea. More details about the psychomotor domain 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

taxonomy model in relation to children studying art and 
visual media can be found in [16].  
  This model was then linked to a modified version of the 
Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [17], which is used 
to assess the ease of use and usefulness of digital tools. The 
TAM model is an information systems theory that shows 
how users come to accept and use a particular technology. 
The child’s motivation to create good artwork enhances the 
desire to use digital drawing tools perfectly and to improve 
their performance. This gives the result that when a pupil 
understands how to use the digital tools, and has learned 
which are easy and which are difficult to use, the child will 
grasp the usefulness of particular digital tools. Perceived 
ease of use (PEOU) refers to the degree to which a person 
believes that using a particular system would involve 
making an effort [17]. Perceived usefulness and perceived 
ease of use can be considered cognitive factors.  
The present study suggests that both theories, modified 
TAM model [18] and the psychomotor domain taxonomy, 
[19] can work in parallel to assess how students use digital 
art tools. Both factors can contribute to assessing students’ 
artwork, in order to determine the extent to which digital 
tools help students both artistically and technically. Figure 3 
illustrates the process of measuring improvement in pupils’ 
achievement. 
IV. NEW MODEL FOR THE ASSESSMENT OF CREATIVITY IN 
ART WORK 
In order to summarize the results of the research and to 
test the theories mentioned, it was necessary to modify the 
TAM model for use with children in the field of digital 
assessment. It is very difficult for young people to assess 
ease of use and usefulness based purely on their own 
knowledge, because they still 
 have a lack of experience. Therefore, the researcher 
created an assessment model based on observation, 
interviews and a questionnaire. Figure 4 shows the features 
of a child’s creative levels in association with surrounding 
factors such as culture, background, financial situation, 
opportunities and psychological factors. If all these 
subjective norms in a child’s personality are considered, this 
can help the teacher to motivate young students to explore 
the ease of use and usefulness of tools, because the more the 
child learns, the more motivated he/she will become by new 
ideas. This can provide greater incentive to learn how to use 
new tools effectively. This in turn will allow them to achieve 
technical skill, to improve artistic ability and enable them to 
have sufficient understanding to evaluate the tools.  
However, this method of evaluation is not sufficient to 
assess the benefits of the tools in terms of their effect on the 
students’ creativity. Therefore it was necessary to find an 
effective method of assessing and evaluating artwork, and 
one such method is “The Test for Creative Thinking - 
Drawing Production” (TCT-DP). This concept uses a set of 
14 criteria to assess artistic creativity [19]. It was designed 
to evaluate artwork produced by traditional methods, but 
this study intended to use these same criteria to test visual 
art work produced using digital tools. 
 
Figure 4. New prototype based on Modified TAM Model  
V. EXAMPLES OF CRITERIA 
Before attempting to measure the creative use of digital 
tools, it is important to consider what is meant by creativity 
and why it is important in education. There are many 
definitions. Traditionally, only very talented people were 
called ‘creative’, such as da Vinci, Einstein, Darwin, 
Shakespeare and others. More recently, it has been widely 
accepted that all individuals can be creative, and creativity 
does not occur only in the traditional arts and sciences. 
Creativity is regarded as an essential skill for any individual 
and for society. The National Advisory Committee on 
Creative and Cultural Education (NACCE), established in 
1999, offers a definition of creativity which is useful for 
education, describing it as “imaginative activity fashioned so 
as to produce outcomes”. This definition is useful because it 
includes five characteristics of creativity: using imagination; 
a shaping process; having and achieving purpose; being 
original; and judging value. All these things, successfully 
taught, can result in work that has value to others, as well as 
helping the individual who produces the work to develop a 
type of mental activity that may be described as “possibility 
of thinking” [20]. 
In order to assess artistic creativity, however, certain 
criteria must be used. With regard to assessment of 
traditional art work, the conceptual deliberations of experts 
led to the development of a set of 14 key criteria which, as a 
whole, constitute the TCT-DP construct. In this study, these 
14 criteria were used to assess the digital artwork, along 
with the tools already mentioned. 
A. Assessment of Drawing Production (TCT-DP) as used 
in this study 
Davis summarizes in his review of TCT-DP that it is 
“…a new, carefully developed, and possibly useful 
creativity test. Some researchers are impressed with its 
Assessment of creativity in artwork 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

potential for identifying creatively gifted children [21]. It is 
difficult to assess whether it will do more than existing 
American creativity tests. Efficiency of administration and 
scoring is a definite plus”. In addition, Cropley's (1996) 
review maintains that “The TCT-DP is a major addition to 
the battery of creativity tests. It offers an approach to 
creativity tests that goes beyond the divergent-convergent 
thinking distinction [22]. It also goes some way towards 
incorporating non-cognitive aspects into measurement of 
creativity”. Davis adds that “The procedure itself is 
interesting for the people being tested as well as for those 
scoring the test. The manual reviewed here is highly 
readable, and is also thorough, in providing not only 
practical instructions but also convincing theoretical and 
technical material justifying use of the test by both 
researchers and practitioners” (p.227). The test author totally 
agrees with Davis’ final statement, that “As with limitations 
that plague all creativity tests, the TCT-DP should be used 
in conjunction with other information (e.g., another 
creativity test, or teachers’ or parents’ ratings) in order to 
minimize false negatives - missing creative children whose 
variety of creativity is different than that measured by a 
single test” (p.91).  
The present research used the design, concept and 
evaluation scheme of TCT-DP, as described by previous 
experiences and results of its application [20]. The adoption 
of this approach was designed to reflect a more holistic 
concept of visual media, as it was used to evaluate 
proficiency in the use of digital art tools. More specifically, 
it was used to assess the ability of children of primary age to 
use such tools to produce creative artwork. 
 
VI. NEW APPLICATION OF TCT-DP  
The current study suggested that the application of these 
14 criteria could be used to help assess artwork created 
using digital tools (see Figure 5), in order to investigate 
whether the tools could contribute to and strengthen 
children’s artwork. This application could be used in the art 
classroom to evaluate enhancement of students’ artistic 
ability and imaginative development. Two sides of the 
application would be required, one side for teaching and a 
second side for students. Each student would have their own 
storage area where they could save all their work.  
All the applications would be linked to the internet, to 
enable the students to send their art work to the teacher via 
email, and to allow the teacher to give the students feedback 
and scores, again by email. Students would not be able to 
see each other’s work or feedback. The teacher would have 
a list of criteria showing clearly what tools students had used 
in their work and which they had not, because this record of 
tools used would enable the teacher to assess any creative 
enhancement in students’ work correctly. In addition, the 
students would know from the feedback where they had 
made mistakes. 
 
 
Figure 5. Application tested to ascertain its effectiveness in assessing 
pupils’ artwork with digital tools. 
This application was tested to determine whether 
students’ artwork could be assessed, whilst at the same time 
evaluating the creative enhancement of their work using 
digital tools and the suitability of the tools for their age 
range. 
VII. 
DISCUSSION 
The main aim of the case study was to investigate 
whether digital art tools were able to motivate the children 
to improve their artistic ability, express their imagination 
and develop their technical skill. It appears that digital 
drawing tools can help to improve artistic creativity in 
children by providing ways of trying out new ideas, and new 
ways of thinking and problem solving. The research found 
that the concepts and digital tools complemented each other. 
The more the students used and worked with the tools, the 
more they were able to progress their ideas. As they became 
skilful at utilizing the tools, they were motivated to produce 
good work and learned how to be creative with them. The 
teacher’s role is very important in stimulating students to use 
the tools correctly, encouraging them to apply the 
appropriate tools for each step, and motivating them by 
assessing their artwork. By the end of the project, the 
students had learned how to evaluate the tools correctly, 
after correcting mistakes many times and sometimes using 
inappropriate tools before finding ones that worked more 
effectively. The observer noted how the children’s approach 
changed during the sessions. For example, when the students 
started working, their thinking was simple and realistic. 
Later they changed from naturalism to more abstract ideas 
because their thinking had improved since they learned how 
to use the digital tools. The students also learned from each 
other, especially when they were encouraged by their 
parents, family, the environment and the school. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 6. Students drawing with Art Rage software using a tablet. 
Figure 7. Students drawing with Sketchpad software using a computer. 
     The research found that motivation is an essential factor 
in the progress of the student, as is interaction between 
them, for example, to give the student new ideas they had 
not used before. Sometimes they repeated the same work at 
home, creating competition among the students. All these 
factors helped to motivate them to interact with the tools. It 
can therefore be said that the research produced successful 
results. 
VIII.  EVALUATION 
The researcher found that it is important to explore a 
range of strategies and methods of teaching art, not just 
because art is a practical and technical subject, but also 
because it is different from any other school subjects. 
Although the outcome was successful, it must be accepted 
that not everyone is interested in working with digital tools, 
or in creating art by digital means only. Another observation 
was that many of the students struggled to understand the 
distinction between ease of use and usefulness. They could 
grasp the meaning of ease of use, but not the concept of 
usefulness.   
However, it was interesting to note that, in general, ease 
of use was not the main motivation when the children used 
digital tools. They found more ease and enjoyment, 
generally, when using traditional methods. The most popular 
digital methods were sometimes the easiest to use, but 
according to their own statements, it was not the ease of use, 
but the successful effects the tools provided, which 
motivated the children to use them. It seems, therefore that 
enjoyment and artistic satisfaction counts more, to the 
pupils, than ease of use. Thus, usefulness is more valuable 
than easiness. 
IX. CONCLUSION 
Based on the information from observation, interview 
and questionnaire, it can be said that the children worked 
well and felt that the digital tools had improved their 
creative ability. They were quite strongly motivated to use 
them by a wish to create good artwork, and also by the drive 
to improve their technological skills. There was also some 
understanding of the value of these tools in learning other 
subjects.  
It seems that, in general, ease of use was not the main 
motivation when the children used digital tools. They found 
more ease and enjoyment, generally, when using digital and 
traditional methods. The most popular digital methods were 
sometimes the easiest to use, but according to their own 
statements, it was not the ease of use, but the successful 
effects, the tools provided, which motivate the children to 
use them. It seems, therefore that enjoyment and artistic 
satisfaction counts more, to the pupils, than ease of use; the 
usefulness is more valuable than easiness. Also, the 
motivation is important for young students to enhance their 
artistic ability and improve their creative activity. The 
modification TAM model showed itself to be very useful in 
assessing the value of traditional and digital tools. 
 Psychomotor domain taxonomy was also useful 
according to the children’s progress in learning to use digital 
software. It helped in noting and assessing the students’ 
progress generally. The Test for Creative Thinking - 
Drawing Production (TCT-DP) is still under testing. We 
hope this test will help us gain more results in assessing 
digital artwork. In our opinion, the digital tools did improve 
the children’ artistic expression and creativity. 
This study is still in progress and will be completed 
soon. These are only the primary results from the sample 
test. The final outcome will enable a more detailed 
consideration of the effectiveness of the TCT-DP 
application in assessing the pupils’ artwork. This will in turn 
enable a fuller evaluation of the extent to which digital tools 
can enhance students’ creative proficiency. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Lanier, “You are not a Gadget: A Manifesto”. Journal of 
Communication, New York, ISSN0021-9916, 2010. 
[2] M. I. Pinsky, “The gospel according to Disney: Faith, trust, 
and pixie dust”, Westminster John Knox Pr., 2004. 
[3] C. Cordes and E. Miller, “Fool’s gold: a critical look at 
computers in childhood”. College Park, MD: Alliance for 
Childhood. Children and computers in pre-school157, 
British Educational Communications and Technology 
Agency, 2005. 
[4] J. Matthews and P. Seow, “Electronic paint: Understanding 
children's representation through their interactions with 
digital paint”. International Journal of Art & Design 
Education, vol. 26, 2007,  pp. 251-263. 
[5] J. Matthews and J. Jessel, “Very young children use 
electronic paint: A study of the beginnings of drawing with 
traditional media and computer paintbox”. Visual Arts 
Research, 19(1), 1993, pp. 47–62. 
[6] E. S. Tzafestas, “Integrating drawing tools with behavioral 
modeling in digital painting”. Proceedings of the 2000 
ACM workshops on Multimedia, ACM. 2000, pp 39-42. 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

[7] D. Arrowood and T. Overall, “Using technology to 
motivate children to write: Changing attitudes in children 
and 
preservice 
teachers”. 
Society 
for 
Information 
Technology 
& 
Teacher 
Education 
International 
Conference, 2004, pp. 4985-4987. 
[8] D. Katsiaficas, “Digital drawing exploring the possibilities 
of digital technology as an essential tool and component in 
contemporary drawing”.  Department of Art, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA. Fine Art in Egypt 20, 2008, 
pp. 1-8. 
 
[9] S. W. Haugland, “What Role Should Technology Play in 
Young Children's Learning? Part 1”, Young Children, vol. 
54, 1999, pp. 26-31. 
[10] L. J. Couse and D. W. Chen “A tablet computer for young 
children? Exploring its viability for early childhood 
education”. Journal of Research on Technology in 
Education, vol. 43, no. 1, 2010,  p. 75. 
[11] Ö. Hans, “The scope of digital image media in art 
education”. Computers and Education Journal, ISSN: 0360-
1315 vol. 59, Issue 2, 2012, p. 793. 
[12] T. A.  Kaynar  “Teaching visual arts in primary school 
teaching departments with postmodern art education 
approach”. Procedia, Social and Behavioral Sciences 
Journal, 
ISSN:1877-0428, 
Vol. 
51,  
DOI:10.1016/j.sbspro.2012, pp. 1044-1049. 
[13] A. Clark, S. McQuail, P. Moss and T. Coram, “Exploring 
the field of listening to and consulting with young 
children”. Research Report  (London, DfES), 2003, p. 445. 
[14] A. Greig and J. Taylor, “Doing Research with Children: A 
practical guide”. Sage, 2012.  
[15] M. Wighting, J. Baker and L. Grooms, “Development of an 
instrument to measure perceived cognitive, affective, and 
psychomotor learning in traditional and virtual classroom 
higher education settings”. The Internet and Higher 
Education 12.1. 2009,  pp. 7-13. 
[16] A. S. Aboalgasm and R. Ward, “Evaluating the Use of 
Digital Art Tools for Drawing to Enhance Artistic Ability 
and Improve Digital Skill among Junior School Students”.  
International Journal of Social Education, Economics and 
Management Engineering, Vol.8, No.10, 2014, pp. 3287-
3288. 
[17] F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, 
and user acceptance of information technology”. MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 13, no. 3, 1989, p. 319. 
[18] A. S. S. Aboalgasm and R. Ward, “Applying a Modified 
Technology Acceptance Model to the Use and Assessment 
of Digital Art Tools”. The International Journal of the 
Image, Volume 4, Issue 4, August 2014, pp.71-83. 
[19] K. K. Urban, “Assessing Creativity: The Test for Creative 
Thinking-Drawing Production (TCT-DP)”. International 
Education Journal, vol. 6, 2005,  pp. 272-280.   
[20] B. Jeffrey and A. Craft “Teaching creatively and teaching 
for creativity: distinctions and relationships”. The Open 
University, UK, published online: 07 Oct 2010, p. 77-87. 
[21] G.A. Davis, “Review: Test for Creative Thinking - 
Drawing Production”. Gifted and Talented International, 10 
(2),  1995, pp. 90-91. 
[22] A. Cropley, “Review of Test zum Schoepferischen Denken 
- Zeichnerisch (TSD-Z) [Test of Creative Thinking - 
Drawing Production (TCT-DP)]”. High Ability Studies, 7, 
1996, 
pp. 
224-22.
 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

