GIS-based Hydrogeological Database and Analysis Tools 
 
 
Violeta Velasco, Enric Vázquez-Suñè, Rotman Criollo 
Mar Alcaraz, Alejandro Serrano, Alejandro García 
Institute of Environmental Assessment and Water Research 
(IDAEA), CSIC, 
Barcelona, Spain 
violeta.velasco@upc.edu 
enric.vazquez@idaea.csic.es 
 
 
Isabel Tubau 
Institut Geològic de Catalunya (IGC) 
Barcelona, Spain 
isabeltubau@hotmail.com  
Radu Gogu and Dragos Gaitanaru 
Technical University of Civil Engineering (UTCB) 
Bucarest, Romania 
radu.gogu@utcb.ro 
Abstract—A software platform was developed to facilitate the 
development of 3D hydrogeological models. It is composed of a 
hydrogeological geospatial database and several sets of tools 
developed in a GIS environment. The geospatial database is 
used for the management of a great amount of different data 
types coming from different sources (geophysical, geological, 
hydrogeologicals, hydrological and others). The instruments 
enable us to create 3D geological models and allow further 
hydrogeological analysis. This platform offers interoperability 
with other external platforms. 
 
 
Keywords;GIS, geospatial database, groundwater 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 Groundwater represents an important source of water; 
therefore, evaluating and predicting its availability and 
accessibility is one of the main tasks in Integrated Water 
Resources Management (IWRM) [2]. In an IWRM 
framework, the development of hydrogeological models is 
required in order to predict the impact of different land and 
water management. Moreover, all data required in modeling 
should be easily accessible to decision makers and modelers 
[3]. 
Models are a representation of the reality [6], but reality 
is elusive. A comprehensive hydrogeological model must 
use all kinds of information available such as geological, 
hydrometeorological, 
geographical, 
hydrochemical, 
hydrogeological and environmental information among 
other. 
Each 
aforementioned 
field 
complements 
the 
interpretation of the rest of the fields. For instance, a proper 
hydrochemical analysis allows us to reinterpret the geology, 
or a comprehensive geological analysis enables us to 
perform a proper hydraulic parameterization that can be 
complemented with pumping or tracer tests. 
In practice, this interpretation task may face several 
difficulties: i) managing and integrating this vast amount of 
time and spatial data collected from diverse source and 
gathered in different formats [5], [25] and ii) the existence 
of gaps between data collection and modeling due to the 
necessity of a seamless integration between databases with 
raw data, databases with models data and models [19]. 
Moreover, the scarcity of comprehensive tools for the 
management of spatial-temporal dependent hydrogeological 
data, including all the information required for a wide range 
of groundwater modeling platforms (e.g. hydrochemical, 
geological and flow modeling) further complicates their 
interpretation. 
Most common in practice software dealing with 
hydrogeological data are specifically designed to manage or 
interpret separately the different aspects involved in a 
groundwater analysis. For instance, GOCAD [12] is mainly 
used for 3D geological modeling whereas a comprehensive 
hydrochemical analysis can be performed by using 
AQUACHEM [1]. Other hydrogeological analysis such as 
aquifer tests interpretations can be easily managed using 
EPHEBO [9]. 
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) may serve as 
an efficient tool for interpreting and analyzing groundwater 
data [21], joining most of the aforementioned aspects in a 
single platform. However, some procedures are still missing 
refinements (e.g. detailed geological analysis, specific 
hydraulic tests management …). 
In this context, a GIS-based platform has been 
developed. It is composed of a geospatial database and a set 
of toolbox that arranges all the available data into a coherent 
structure and provides support for its proper management, 
analysis and interpretation. Furthermore, it facilitates the 
pre- and post-processing of the hydrogeological data for 
modeling. 
The presented work forms part of a wider on-going 
framework for the facilitation of detailed hydrogeological 
modeling 
that 
includes 
further 
hydrochemical 
and 
geological GIS–based analysis tools. These tools are 
described in [23] and [24]. Here, we describe new details of 
the 
hydrogeological 
database 
regarding 
to 
other 
hydrogeological data (e.g. heads measurements, hydraulic 
tests) and the innovative analysis tools orientated to the 
visualization and retrieval of these data. 
These technologies were applied to some studies such as 
the metropolitan area of Barcelona (Spain) (e.g. [22]) and 
the urban area of Bucharest (Romania) (e.g. [14]). 
The organization of the paper is as follows: First, 
Section II presents the design and functionalities of the 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

geospatial database (subparagraph A) and the instruments 
developed in the GIS environment (subparagraph B). The 
main conclusions arising from the application of the 
software are presented in Section III. 
II. 
GIS-BASED HYDROGEOLOGICAL PLATFORM 
This software platform was designed taking into account 
the different tools and methodologies that the water 
managers use to evaluate, integrate and analyze the wide 
range 
of 
information 
for 
the 
construction 
of 
a 
hydrogeological 
model. 
Consequently, 
the 
following 
requirements were adopted during the design of the software 
platform: (1) A geospatial database with appropriate data 
store and management (HYDOR), (2) Data processing and 
analysis tools of geological and hydrogeological analysis in 
a GIS environment, (3) Interaction with external software 
for further analysis and (4) Post-processing. 
 
A. The hydrogeological Geospatial database (HYDOR)  
The 
geospatial 
database 
represents 
geospatial 
information based on the Personal Geodatabase structure 
provided by the ArcGIS (ESRI) concept. Its structure 
facilitates: 1) data standardization and harmonization; 2) the 
storage and management of large amount of spatial features 
and time-dependent data; and 3) the creation and the 
execution of simple queries. 
In order to ensure the standardization and harmonization 
of the data, several libraries (e.g. list of lithology, type of 
wells) were created, taking into account standard guidelines 
(e.g. INSPIRE [15]). Additionally, schemas of some 
features have been directly imported from others sources 
such as O&M [16], OGCWaterM.L2.0 [17] or WFD [11] to 
assure correct future data exchanges. 
The main components include geographical (e.g. Digital 
Terrain Model) , hydrological (e.g. river, lakes, wetlands), 
environmental (e.g. vulnerable or protected areas, soil uses), 
geological 
(e.g., 
boreholes 
lithological 
description, 
stratigraphic units, depth to bedrock), geotechnical (e.g. 
laboratory 
tests) 
, 
hydrochemical 
(physic-chemical 
parameters), hydrogeological (e.g. well descriptions, head 
measurements, extraction measurements), data coming from 
field tests such pumping tests, tracer tests or other in situ 
tests (CPT, diagraphy) and administrative features (e.g. 
water directives, entities). 
The data derived from interpretation and modeling 
efforts are stored separately, thus allowing further 
interpretation. 
A sketch of some of the components related to 
hydrogeological points of measurements and hydraulic field 
tests are shown in Figure 1. 
B. GIS-based tools 
The set of analysis tools were developed as an extension 
of ArcMap environment (ArcGIS; ESRI) [10]. They were 
created with ArcObjects, which is a developer kit for 
ArcGIS, based on Component Object Model (COM), and 
programmed in Visual Basic using the Visual Studio 
(Microsoft) environment. 
They have been set up to manage, visualize, analyze and 
interpret the data stored in the spatial database. This set of 
tools is separated in three main modules represented by 
different toolbar termed HEROS, QUIMET and HYYH. 
The first module (HEROS) allows the user to exploit the 
geological data stored and to facilitate the geological 
interpretation. Detailed stratigraphic columns of the selected 
boreholes can be generated using customized queries. 
Creating automatically a geological profile is further 
possible by displaying the boreholes lithological columns 
and the geophysical and geotechnical field-tests’ results 
together with the defined stratigraphic units. Based on an 
interactive analysis environment, the user is able to analyze 
and to define the possible existing correlation surfaces, 
units, and faults. The obtained information represented by 
the geological units can be then converted within a 3D 
environment. Finally, employing the resulting geological 
model in support of the hydraulic parameterization for 
hydrogeological modeling is also possible (for further 
information see [23]). 
The second module (QUIMET) is composed of a set of 
instruments for analysis that cover a wide range of 
methodologies for querying, interpreting and comparing 
groundwater quality parameters. They include, among 
others, chemical time-series analysis, ionic balance 
calculations, correlation of chemical parameters, and 
calculation of various common hydrogeochemical diagrams 
(e.g. Schöeller-Berkaloff, Piper, and Stiff). The GIS 
platform allows the generation of maps of the spatial 
distribution of several hydrogeochemical parameters and of 
the aforementioned specific hydrogeochemical diagrams. 
Moreover, it is also possible to perform a complete 
statistical analysis of the data including descriptive statistic 
univariate and bivariate analysis, the generation of 
correlation matrices of several components, calculation of 
correlation graphics, and so on [24]. 
The last module (HYYH) has been designed to analyze 
and visualize different hydrogeological measurements and 
hydraulic field tests results (see Fig 2). 
Contour maps and further spatial operations of the depth 
or thickness of the aquifers could be generated using 
customized queries. Likewise piezometric maps can be 
created for the selected points and for the selected period of 
time with another command included in this toolbar. 
Finally, multi-criteria query forms enable the user to 
analyze and visualize different data and interpretations 
derived from pumping and tracer tests. 
All the results obtained by using the aforementioned 
toolbars can be further analyzed using other inbuilt tools of 
ArcGIS, such as the Geostatistical Analysis toolbox or 
Spatial Analysis Tools. 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 1: Simplified conceptual diagram representing the main contents in the hydrogeological database. The 1 and 1*.. represents the cardinality of the 
relationship between tables (further information of the database can be seen in [23]and [24]). 
This software platform offers interoperability with 
external software for further analysis of the hydrogeological 
data, such as Hydrochemical modeling packages (e.g. 
EASYQUIM ; [8] and MIX; [4] ), or codes designed to 
facilitate 
the 
hydraulic 
test 
interpretation 
(e.g. 
EPHEBO).Thus, the user pre-process the required spatial-
temporal data in the same GIS environment and through the 
use of the export commands integrated in the different 
toolbars aforementioned, the results are transferred 
automatically through input/output predefined files.  
III. 
CONCLUSION 
The GIS-base software platform presented in this paper 
offers a user friendly GIS environment with a large variety 
of 
automatic 
tools 
developed 
specifically 
for 
the 
management and analysis of hydrogeological data to 
facilitate their integration and interpretation. 
Despite the complexity of the internal structure of the 
database, the consultation and the introduction of the data is 
simple using the different query forms and instruments. 
This software platform enables us to set up an updatable 
model database for further interpretations. Thus, each model 
study does not have to start from scratch. 
The tools developed add a spatio-temporal analysis 
required to complete the analysis to other external platforms 
such as EASYQUIM or MIX. Moreover, with adequate 
adjustments this software platform could be readily linked 
to other programs such as PHREEQC [18], SGeMs [20], 
MODFLOW, and EASYBAL [7] considerably increasing 
the variety of hydrogeological calculations. 
 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
Figure 2: Toolbar HYYH integrated as an extension in ArcMap. It is composed of several commands: 1) inbuilt tools of ArcGIS (select, add data, 
statistical tools, etc) and three different multi-criteria query forms for interpreting hydrogeological analysis. 
REFERENCES 
[1] AQUACHEM (2013) Schlumberger Limited. Available at 
http://www.swstechnology.com. Accessed 09/07/2013. 
[2] BarthelR. Sonneveld, B. Götzinger, J. Keyzer, M. Pande, S. 
Printz, A. Gaiser, T. (2008), Integrated assessment of 
groundwater resources in the Ouémé basin, Benin, West 
Africa. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth, 34, pp.236–250. 
[3] Carrera-Hernández, J. Gaskin, S. (2008), The Basin of 
Mexico 
Hydrogeological 
Database 
(BMHDB): 
Implementation, queries and interaction with open source 
software. Environmental Modelling & Software, 23, pp.1271–
1279. 
[4] Carrera, J., Castillo, O., Vàzquez-Suñé, E., Sanchez-Vila, X., 
(2004), A methodology to compute mixing ratios with 
uncertain end members. Water Resources Research, vol. 40 
(12), Art. w12101. 
[5] Chesnaux, R., Lambert, M., Walter, J., Fillastre, U., Hay, M., 
Rouleau, A., Daigneault, R., (201), .Building a geodatabase 
for mapping hydrogeological features and 3D modeling of 
groundwater systems: Application to the Saguenay–Lac-St.-
Jean region, Canada. Computers & Geosciences, 37(11), 
pp.1870–1882. doi:10.1016/j.cageo.2011.04.013. 
[6] Cunge, J. A. (2003), Of data and models, Journal of 
hydroinformatics, pp.75–98. 
[7] EASYBAL (2013) Hydrogeological group (GHS), Institute of 
Environmental Assessment and Water Research (IDAEA- 
CSIC) and Department of Geotechnical Engineering and 
Geosciences, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC). 
Available at http://www.h2ogeo.upc.es.Accessed 18/07/2013. 
[8] EASYQUIM (2013) Hydrogeological group (GHS) of 
Technical University of Catalonia (UPC) and Institute of 
Environmental Assessment and Water Research (IDAEA), 
CSIC, Barcelona, (Spain). Available at www.h2ogeo.upc.es. 
Accessed 03/06/2013. 
[9] EPHEBO (2013). Hydrogeological group (GHS), Institute of 
Environmental Assessment and Water Research (IDAEA- 
CSIC) and Department of Geotechnical Engineering and 
Geosciences, 
Universitat 
Politècnica 
de 
Catalunya 
(UPC).Available 
at 
www.h2ogeo.upc.es. 
Accesed 
18/07/2013. 
[10] ESRI (2013) ArcGIS 10x Environmental Systems Research 
Institute, 
Redlands 
(United 
States). 
Available 
at 
http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis/arcgis-for-desktop. 
Accessed 03/06/2013. 
[11] European Communities (2009) ,Guidance Document No: 22 
Updated Guidance on Implementing the Geographical 
Information System (GIS) Elements of the EU Water policy, 
192 
pp, 
Available 
at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/water/water-
framework/facts_figures/guidance_docs_en.htm. 
Accesed 
18/09/2013. 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

[12] Gocad (2011) gOcad research group ASGA. Available at: 
http://www.gocad.org. Accessed 18/09/2013. 
[13] Gogu, R., Carabin, G., Hallet, V., Peters, V., & Dassargues, 
A. (2001). GIS-based hydrogeological databases and 
groundwater modelling. Hydrogeology Journal, 9(6), pp. 555–
569. doi:10.1007/s10040-001-0167-3 
[14] Gogu, R., Velasco, V., Vazquez-Suñè, E., Gaitanaru, D., 
Chitu, Z., Bica, I., (2011) .Sedimentary media analysis 
platform for groundwater modelling in urban areas. Adv Res 
Aquatic Environ 5, pp.489–496. 
[15] INSPIRE (2013)Infrastructure for Spatial Information in 
Europe , D2.8.II.4 Data Specification on Geology – Draft 
Technical 
Guidelines. 
Available 
at: 
http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/Data_Specifications/
INSPIRE_DataSpecification_GE_v3.0rc3.pdf. 
Accessed 
18/09/2013.  
[16] O&M (2013), D2.9 Guidelines for the use of Observations & 
Measurements and Sensor Web Enablement-related standards 
in INSPIRE Annex II and III data specification development. 
Available 
at: 
http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/documents/Data_Specifications/
D2.9_O&M_Guidelines_v2.0rc3.pdf .Accesed 18/09/2013. 
[17] OGC® WaterML 2.0 (2012): Part 1- Timeseries.Available at: 
http://www.opengeospatial.org.Accessed 18/09/2013.  
[18] Parkhurst, D.L., Appelo, C.A.J., (2013). Description of input 
and examples for PHREEQC version 3. A computer program 
for speciation, batch-reaction, one-dimensional transport, and 
inverse geochemical calculations: USGS Techniques and 
Methods, book 6, chap. A43, 497 pp. 
[19] Refsgaard, Jens. Hojberg, Anker. Moller, Ingelise. Hansen, 
Martin. Sondergaard, V. (2010). Groundwater Modeling in 
Integrated Water Resources Management-Visions for 2020. 
Ground water, 48, pp.633–648. 
[20] Remy, N., Boucher, A., Wu J., (2009). Applied geostatistic 
with SGems. Cambridge University Press, New York, United 
States of America. 
[21] Strassberg G. (2005) A geographic data model for 
groundwater systems. Dissertation, University of Texas, 
Austin, pp 229. 
[22] Velasco, V., Cabello, P., Vázquez-Suñè, E., López-Blanco, 
M., Ramos, E., & Tubau, I. (2012). A sequence stratigraphic 
based geological model for constraining hydrogeological 
modeling in the urbanized area of the Quaternary Besòs delta 
(NW Mediterranean coast , Spain ), Geologica acta, 10, pp. 
373–394. doi:10.1344/105.000001757. 
[23] Velasco, V., Gogu, R., Vázquez-Suñè, E., Garriga, a., Ramos, 
E., Riera, J., & Alcaraz, M. (2012), The use of GIS-based 3D 
geological tools to improve hydrogeological models of 
sedimentary media in an urban environment. Environmental 
Earth Sciences. doi:10.1007/s12665-012-1898-2. 
[24] Velasco ,V., Tubau, I., Vázquez-Suñè, E., Gaitanaru, D., 
Gogu ,R., Alcaraz, M., Serrano, A, Ayora, C., Sánchez-Vila, 
X., Fernàndez-Garcia, D., Fraile, F., Garrido T. GIS based 
Hydrochemical Analysis Tools (QUIMET), 7th Euregeo, 
Bologna, Italy, Vol 1, pp419-420, Juny 2012 . 
[25] Wojda, P., & Brouyère, S. (2013). An object-oriented 
hydrogeological data model for groundwater projects. 
Environmental Modelling & Software, 43, pp 109–123. 
doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2013.01.015. 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

