Hybrid Multistep Multiderivative Methods for the
Schr¨odinger Equation and Related Problems
Ibraheem Alolyan
Chair of Actuarial and Applied Mathematics,
Department of Mathematics, College of Sciences,
King Saud University,
P. O. Box 2455, Riyadh 11451,
Saudi Arabia
Email: ialolyan@ksu.edu.sa
Theodore E. Simos
Department of Mathematics, College of Sciences,
King Saud University,
P. O. Box 2455, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia
and
Laboratory of Computational Sciences,
Department of Informatics and Telecommunications,
Faculty of Economy, Management and Informatics,
University of Peloponnese,
GR-221 00 Tripolis, Greece
Email: tsimos.conf@gmail.com
Abstract—In this paper we will present a new methodology
for the development of efﬁcient hybrid multiderivative multistep
methods for the approximate solution of the Schr¨odinger equation
and related initial-value or boundary-value problems with solu-
tions, which their behavior is periodical or oscillating. The main
characteristics of this new methodology are (1) the vanishing of
the phase-lag on its level of the hybrid multiderivative method
and (2) the vanishing of the its derivatives on its level of the
hybrid multiderivative method. We apply the new methodology
on a four-step hybrid type multiderivative method. A comparative
error and stability analysis will be presented for the new produced
method. The new constructed method will ﬁnally be applied to
the resonance problem of the Schr¨odinger equation in order to
show its efﬁciency.
Keywords—Numerical solution, Schr¨odinger equation, multistep
methods, hybrid methods, multiderivative methods, interval of
periodicity, P-stability, phase-lag, phase-ﬁtted, derivatives of the
phase-lag
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Schr¨odinger equation is a very important mathematical
model in quantum mechanics, which describes how the quan-
tum state of some physical system changes with time. This
mathematical model was ﬁrst formulated in late 1925, and pub-
lished in 1926, by the Austrian physicist Erwin Schr¨odinger
(see for details [1])
The numerical solution of the the radial time-independent
Schr¨odinger equation and of the related initial-value or
boundary-value problems with periodical and/or oscillating
solutions is investigated in this paper.
The radial time independent Schr¨odinger equation :
q′′(r) = [l(l + 1)/r2 + V (r) − k2]q(r).
(1)
is a boundary value problem. The one boundary condition is
the following:
q(0) = 0
(2)
and the other boundary condition, for large values of r,
determined by the physical conditions and parameters of the
speciﬁc problem.
In order to have the completion of the above mentioned
mathematical model, we have give the following deﬁnitions of
the functions, quantities and parameters presented in Equation
1 :
1)
The function W(r) = l(l + 1)/r2 + V (r) is called
the effective potential. This satisﬁes W(x) → 0 as
x → ∞,
2)
The quantity k2 is a real number denoting the energy,
3)
The quantity l is a given integer representing the
angular momentum,
4)
V is a given function, which denotes the potential.
The main purposes of this paper are (1) to introduce a
new procedure in order to obtain efﬁcient methods for the
numerical solution of second order initial or boundary value
problems of the form q′′ (x) = f (x, q (x)) with periodical
and/or oscillating solutions and (2) to develop (based on the
previous mentioned procedure) an efﬁcient hybrid four-step
multiderivative method.
II.
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHODOLOGY
In Sciences and Engineering there are a signiﬁcant number
of real problems, which have models, which can be expressed
as initial or boundary value problems of the above mentioned
category (for example, the Schr¨odingers equation, Dufﬁngs
equation, etc).
The new procedure for the development of efﬁcient multi-
derivative multistep methods consists the following stages:
•
The determination of the form of the hybrid multi-
derivative multistep method (i.e., method with more
that one stage, higher order derivatives and more than
one step)
•
On each level of the hybrid multiderivative multistep
method the vanishing of the phase-lag
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

•
On each level of the hybrid multiderivative multi-
step method the vanishing of the derivatives of the
derivatives (the order of the derivatives depends from
the free parameters that the hybrid multiderivative
multistep method has)
•
The determination of how much more efﬁcient are the
new developed methods i.e., the investigation on how
the vanishing of the phase-lag and its derivative affects
the efﬁciency of the produced numerical methods
•
The determination of how much more efﬁcient are
the new developed methods compared with those
developed via the vanishing of the phase-lag and its
derivatives in the whole of the method (and not on
each stage).
Problems for which the algorithms presented in this paper
are efﬁcient for this approximate solution are:
1)
problems with oscillating and / or periodical solu-
tions,
2)
problems in which the functions cos and sin are
presented in their analytical solution,
3)
problems in which combination of the functions cos
and sin are presented in their analytical solution.
The aim and scope of the present research is the construc-
tion of a two-stage, four-step hybrid multiderivative method
with the following properties:
1)
the maximum possible algebraic order
2)
the vanishing of the phase-lag on each stage of the
method
3)
the vanishing of the derivatives of the phase-lag on
each stage of the method. The maximum order of
the derivatives to be vanished is dependent on the
free parameters which we have. The number of free
parameters is dependent by the form of the hybrid
two-stage, four-step multiderivative method
The satisfaction of the above purposes requires the com-
putation of the phase-lag and its derivatives for the speciﬁc
method. In [2] and [3], Simos and co-authors has proved
a direct formula for the computation of the phase-lag for a
2 n-step method. We mention here that the computation of
the derivatives of the phase-lag is based on the previously
mentioned formula.
In order to investigate the efﬁciency of the new produced
method, we will apply the following studies:
1)
The local truncation of the new developed method
will be compared with those of other methods of the
same form (comparative error analysis),
2)
The Stability (interval of periodicity) of the new
obtained method will be determined and
3)
Finally, the new produced method will be applied to
the resonance problem of the radial time independent
Schr¨odinger equation (see for more details [4]) and
the results will be compared with those of other well
known methods in the literature.
III.
STUDY OF THE PHASE-LAG OF SYMMETRIC 2 n-STEP
METHODS
The general problem we face in the paper is the numerical
solution of the the initial or boundary value problem of the
form q′′ (x) = f (x, q (x)) via multistep multiderivative ﬁnite
difference methods.
In order to investigate the above mentioned problem we
apply the follow procedure
•
We divide the interval of integration [a, b] into n +
1 intervals {xi}n
i=0 of equal length. The length h =
|xi+1 − xi| is called step-size of the integration.
•
For the approximate solution of the above described
problem we consider the general 2 n-step ﬁnite differ-
ence multistep multiderivative method of the form:
n
X
i=−n
ai qk+i
=
h2
n
X
i=−n
bj
i f (j)
xk+i, q (xk+i)

,
j = 0, 1, . . .
(3)
where f (j)
xk+i, q (xk+i)

is the derivative of j order
of: f

xk+i, q (xk+i)

and f (0)
xk+i, q (xk+i)

=
f

xk+i, q (xk+i)

.
Using the integration step-size deﬁned above, the
method (Equation 3) is applied over the above men-
tioned integration area. In this paper we will study
the speciﬁc category of methods (Equation 3), which
are symmetric i.e., the category of methods for which:
ai = a−i, bi = b−i, i = −n(1)n.
•
We investigate now the phase-lag of the above men-
tioned method. The study demands the following
procedure:
•
In order to deﬁne the phase-lag for the above category
of methods, we use the scalar test equation:
q′′ = −φ2 q
(4)
•
If we apply a symmetric 2 n-step multiderivative
method to the above test equation (Equation 4), the
following difference equation is produced:
An(w) qk+n + . . . + A1(w) qk+1 + A0(w) qk +
+A1(w) qk−1 + ... + An(w) qk−n = 0
(5)
where w = φ h, h is the step length and A0(w),
A1(w), . . ., An(w) are polynomials of w = φ h.
•
We note here that in our analysis the corresponding
characteristic equation is also required. The character-
istic equation of the difference equation (5) is given
by:
An(w) λn + ... + A1(w) λ + A0(w) +
+A1(w) λ−1 + ... + An(w) λ−n = 0
(6)
•
The calculation of the phase-lag can be done via the
following theorem which is proved by Simos and co-
workers (see [2] and [3]):
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Theorem 1:
[2] and [3] The symmetric 2 n-step
method with characteristic equation given by Equation
6 has phase-lag order q and phase-lag constant c given
by:
−c wq+2 + O

qn+2 − c1 pn+1 − c1 pn−1 + pn−2 =
= h2
"
a4

VI.
CONCLUSION
A new methodology for the construction of effective hybrid
multiderivative multistep methods for the approximate solution
of the Schr¨odinger equation and related problems with peri-
odical or oscillating solutions is presented in this paper. It is
mentioned that the important parts of this new methodology
are (i) the vanishing of the phase-lag on its level of the
hybrid multiderivative method and (ii) the vanishing of the its
derivatives on its level of the hybrid multiderivative method.
As an example, we applied the new methodology on a four-
step hybrid type multiderivative method. From the numerical
results produced from the application of this new developed
four-step hybrid type multiderivative method to the resonance
problem of the Schr¨odinger equation it is easy for one to see
the efﬁciency of the new methodology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the ”Distinguished Scien-
tists Fellowship Program” of the King Saud University for the
support of their participation in the INFOCOMP 2013.
REFERENCES
[1]
L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshits, Quantum Mechanics. Nonrelativistic
Theory [in Russian], Nauka, Moscow, 1974.
[2]
A. Konguetsof and T. E. Simos, A Generator of Hybrid Symmetric Four-
Step Methods for the Numerical Solution of the Schr¨odinger Equation,
Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 158(1), 2003, pp.
93-106.
[3]
T. E. Simos and P. S. Williams, A ﬁnite difference method for the
numerical solution of the Schr¨odinger equation, Journal of Computational
and Applied Mathematics 79, 1997, pp. 189-205.
[4]
Ibraheem Alolyan and T. E. Simos, A new four-step Runge-Kutta type
method with vanished phase-lag and its ﬁrst, second and third derivatives
for the numerical solution of the Schr¨odinger equation, Journal of
Mathematical Chemistry, 2013, 51(5) pp. 1418-1445.
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

