 
 
Rotation-oriented Collaborative Air Traffic Management  
 
Udo Inden  
Cologne University of Applied 
Sciences 
Research Centre for Applications of 
Intelligent Systems (CAIS),  
Cologne, Germany 
e-mail: udo.inden@fh-koeln.de 
Stephan Tieck 
EADS Innovation Works 
Research Team "The Future of 
Flying - Services, Maintenance 
& Logistics”, 
Hamburg, Germany 
e-mail: stephan.tieck@eads.net 
Claus-Peter Rückemann 
Leibniz Universität Hannover / 
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität 
Münster (WWU) / North-German 
Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN), 
Münster, Hannover, Germany 
e-mail: ruckema@uni-muenster.de 
 
 
Abstract—Considering developments in aviation industry and 
ICT a framework of further steps of integration in Air-Traffic 
Management is drafted. Intelligent management systems and 
distributed parallel data processing is envisioned for including 
sequences of flights into collaborative ATM. This includes 
options provided by latest developments regarding the Internet 
of Things as well as of Things that Think, i.e. manifesting 
autonomous behavior in a complex operations environment. 
Advanced communication system components, verification 
methods, and mission critical communication networks are 
utilized to interlink distributed compute, storage, and High 
End Computing resources and create a fast, secure, and 
reliable system and operating environment.  
Keywords-Air Traffic Management (ATM); aircraft rotation; 
complex operations system, intelligent organization; “Things that 
Think”, operations flexibility; real-time management; criticality 
management; High End Computing; distributed resources; high 
performance communication networks. 
 I.  INTRODUCTION 
Aviation operations systems are of considerable comple-
xity and facing an enormous growth of traffic. The SESAR 
program (Single European Sky Air Traffic Management Re-
search [15]) prepares for a shift from central control towards 
a stepwise deployment of a self-organizing and intelligent 
managerial organization which will include the “intelligent 
aircraft”. Future Air Traffic Management (ATM) employs 
intelligent functionality to track, maintain or if need be re-
cover the plan of flights by hedging it against unplanned 
events respectively to coordinate its recovery.  
Complex operations are marked by large numbers of un-
expected, thus unplanned events and we define intelligence 
as the ability of a system to targeted and timely response [5]. 
But any response needs to re-allocate resources or to employ 
additional ones – i .e. it needs flexibility in terms of disposa-
ble buffers. If they are exhausted the system will be unable to 
capitalize on any intelligence.  
Aviation systems are critical if delays of flights are about 
to propagate without chance to recover. Criticality [9] is a 
holistic property of a system in a point of time and likewise it 
needs a holistic and timely scope of management. For this, 
we suggest extending the flight-oriented scope of ATM by 
establishing an additional focus on aircraft rotations. Rota-
tions are sequences of flights of an aircraft in a period of 
time (e.g. a day) and with this include the chance of manag-
ing interdependencies of flights. For this we suggest using 
the capabilities of future “intelligent aircrafts” [1] developed 
under the regime of the SESAR program. Accordingly we 
consider examining potential contributions by the upcoming 
internet of things (IOT) and of “things that think” (TtT) be-
ing equipped for some autonomous reasoning and collabora-
tive decision making. [6] [7] 
Pursuing this approach among others requires deeper re-
search on the control parameters of aviation systems and on 
appropriate IT-support particularly with respect to potential 
contributions of intelligent things and distributed processing 
of data. Further systems are to be tested effectively integrat-
ing communication technologies and the world of things.  
The paper provides an initial framework of intelligent re-
al-time ATM applications based on the convergence of gro-
wing challenges, current improvement programs and novel 
developments of ICT. ATM programs and basics of aircraft 
rotations are explained. Sections four and fife sketch pro-
posed architecture and scenarios of intelligent, rotation-
oriented ATM and discuss benefits of managing system crit-
icality. Section six structures related computing strategies. 
Finally conclusions and an outlook are presented.  
 II.  ADVANCING AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT 
With ten-thousands of flights, starts, landings and related 
ground operations, with millions of passengers (and ship-
ments) air traffic forms a massively distributed system of 
actors (pilots, air and ground controllers, ground and termi-
nal service providers, customers, etc.), highly interdependent 
but each deciding with at least some autonomy and with only 
local, thus limited information.  
At the same time raising urgencies of environmental con-
cerns or the growth of travel by 8.8 % and of traffic by al-
most 5 % annually [2] systemically aggravate the mix of pro-
blems, while tight public budgets and political constraints to 
extend infrastructures and small profit margins in the indus-
try limit options to respond.  
This system inevitably emerges floors of interference, in-
teracting with external events (weather, security …) and pre-
paring the ground for butterfly-effects. E.g., one ownerless 
suitcase can block a terminal and delay many flights. Along 
operational relationships then quickly service failures propa-
gate across continental and intercontinental networks.  
25
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

 
 
Thus maintaining planned services or – more general – 
safe and efficient operations requires material and (close to) 
real-time management capabilities. An obvious strategy is to 
advance traffic management for a more efficient use of re-
sources: With the (political) objectives to accommodate a 
threefold of current traffic, to improve safety by a factor of 
10, to reduce environmental impacts by 10 % and to cut 
ATM costs by 50 % large and coordinated joined public-
private undertakings have been started in all major aviation 
areas, e.g., SESAR (likely to go into its deployment phase by 
2014) in Europe and NextGen ATM in the US [2][3]. 
Future systems include GPS-based control of 4-D flight 
trajectories, system-wide information management (consis-
tent undelayed data sharing, improved proceedings and algo-
rithms) or a higher degree of automation of control and of 
procedures to stabilize or recover flight plans. As a major ad-
vance aircrafts will get more choice in choosing routes rather 
than being limited to air-streets. With further improvements 
and supported e.g., by advanced Airborne Collision Avoid-
ance Systems (ACAS) spatial separations of aircrafts will be 
agreed by peer-to-peer principles: Therefore the “intelligent 
aircraft will be a critical element in 21st century ATM.” [3].  
  
Fig. 1 
Converging Developments 
These programs have horizons of implementation of 10 
to 15 years. In this time and after we assume three develop-
ments to converge (Fig. 1): Challenges to ATM will continue 
to increase, ICT will provide new options to answer and the 
current generation of ATM innovations will be implemented. 
With these developments reasons, technology and organiza-
tional concepts to integrate a wider scope of ATM converge. 
And with distributed parallel processing also issues of Grid 
and High-End Computing are touched. In the following we 
try an initial framework of these applications scenarios.  
 III.  MANAGEMENT OF AIRCRAFT ROTATIONS  
Rotations (figure 2) cover deeper interdependencies be-
tween flights which cannot be managed on the level of indi-
vidual ones. The intrinsic complexity of aviation systems – 
materializing in the form of failure propagation across net-
works – emerges on the level of rotations which also triggers 
the complexity of individual flight operations. This shall be 
explained on the example of scheduled airline services.  
Rotations are planned in answer to the demand for trans-
portation between origins and destinations in terms of its 
volume and distribution in time (daytimes and frequencies of 
service within a period), to connecting flights (e.g., in hub-
and spoke networks), to distances (flight-time) or to availa-
bility of slots at airports as well as to the load-factors of air-
crafts (utilization of a given fleet of aircrafts). Rotations in-
clude a number of legs (flights). I.e., problems which have 
occurred in the first leg may affect subsequent ones. In case 
of transfer connections the problem may also propagate to 
rotations of aircrafts operating connected flights. And with 
aircrafts also crews move in networks, air-craft maintenance 
is planned or many inventories of equipment distribute. 
Operations footprints – in terms of direct (variable) costs, 
resource and infrastructure utilization (fixed costs), environ-
mental efficiency (emissions, consumption of water) depend 
on the efficiency of rotations. For example maintenance foot-
prints are to be managed on that level. While rotations are 
efficient if all flights are efficient it is not true that maintain-
ing the efficiency of individual flights automatically main-
tains the efficiency of their interdependencies and inefficien-
cies are likely to accumulate high expenses.  
In competition airlines need to manage conflicts between 
aircraft utilization asking for short(er) ground times (aircrafts 
only make money when they fly) and service quality by 
trend affected by such measures. If propagation of service 
failures turn into dissatisfaction of customers an airline with 
e.g., 100 aircrafts, each in average rotating in a network with 
six legs per day, has to calculate whether and how 5 minutes 
more ground-time for each of the 600 legs = 3000 minutes = 
50 hours (equal to the average employment of 3 aircrafts) of 
idle time is paid by the avoided annoyance of passengers.  
Legacies accumulating in operations systems are the se-
cond major driver of operations complexity. And in the mul-
ti-national, very political, hierarchically organized and for 
good reasons also very risk-avers world of aviation change 
takes time and time produces “renovation holdups”. Tidying 
up such holdups is the core of lean-management programs. 
Since current management principles have been settled short-
ly after World War II. SESAR or NextGen are of that type. 
In front of this background a paradigm shift is inevitable 
(and a challenging change program).  
Lean-management programs can provide a respite. But 
stress will return and the “granularity of object and time” [4] 
will increase: An ownerless suitcase may block a terminal, a 
late push-back, a defect stair, literally any disorganized re-
source may ruin rotations. And under stress it makes a dif-
ference whether resources are planned offline and “the next 
free one” is ordered to service or whether they are continu-
ously tracked and planned online to events. I.e., there is rea-
son considering the integration of the layer of flight rotation 
into real-time service maintenance. This layer will interact 
but not interfere with ATM concerned with the flights.  
A threefold of current traffic will be reached in 15–20 
years, soon compared to the time it needs to realize new air-
ports in Europe. Thus any large airport is under continuous 
physical as well as organizational re-construction. In the 
words of a senior manager of a large European one: “We are 
evolutionary driven.” Thus if flights and not rotations are the 
organizing principle of control achievements of SESAR or 
NextGen are easier to be consumed by growth or by compe-
tition (for example cost cutting, service / quality increase). 
26
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

 
 
 IV.  ON THE ARCHITECTURE OF AN INTELLIGENT ATM  
 The capability of timely adapting activity to unexpected 
change (intelligence) emerges from the capability of acting 
units (agents) in a distributed system to freely associate or re-
associate in a context which establishes interdependence for 
a certain time. A rotation is an example of such a context. I.e. 
objectives are achieved by autonomous re-allocation of re-
sources or – if solution space is exhausted – to relinquish 
minor objectives for maintaining superior ones.  
 
Fig. 2 
High-level Model of Rotation-oriented ATM 
Ideally, all agents are satisfied with their individual plans 
and plans of all agents are non-contractively coordinated. 
Then an unplanned event may cause, that at least one agent 
has become unable to achieve its objectives and now will try 
to improve again by re-negotiating its contracts with other 
agents. I.e., dissatisfaction propagates along services asked 
from respectively provided to other agents until a new satis-
fying solution is achieved.  
This depiction equals design principles of a multiagent 
system emerging intelligence from relation-based interacti-
ons by associating to each other accordingly to the fit of pro-
perties (e.g., need, capability, objectives) as described in 
ontologies (structured domain knowledge). Market-based 
coordination is a promising approach. [5] However we do 
not suggest developing another mirror-MAS for simulating 
or managing a real operations system. 
 A. Collaboration scenario 
Rather we consider including all relevant stakeholders, 
whether persons, objects or systems concerned and taking a 
relevant role in the current operations context by inviting 
them to a “Service Maintenance Conference” (SMC) taking 
place in an appropriate network environment (a private, pro-
prietary cloud). It compares to an on-demand conference call 
which is organized accordingly to MAS principles. Figure 2 
gives a basic idea who or “what” may participate:  
 
The aircraft takes the chair of the conference, possi-
bly supported by the airline flight-center,  
 
Flight operations:  
o 
Other aircrafts in the operations vicinity if the 
current trajectories of the aircrafts are affected,  
o 
ATM authorities supervising or directly con-
trolling en-route and particularly near-airport 
(“terminal”) flight operations,  
 
Airport ground operators at airports relevant in the 
context, particularly subsequent ones in the rotation: 
o 
Airport control centers.  
o 
Dispatch centers of ground services for air-
crafts, in case also around passengers or cargo. 
 
Potentially further stakeholders of operations.  
In a rough estimate about 100 – 200 instances may be in-
cluded. Currently airport ground services are only coupled to 
ATM via flight plans and flight plan updates. In the model 
we propose to actively engage them in solution finding. The 
way this inclusion will be organized depends on the vision of 
the ICT in 10 to 20 years from now.  
 B. Scenarios and Trends to be Considered 
SESAR architectures rely on SWIMs and consistent re-
planning. In case of unexpected events stakeholders are res-
ponsible to take action accordingly to standard procedures, in 
future supported by systems developed by SESAR. Thus as a 
first step this new ICT is to be connected into a peer-to-peer 
network forming a second layer of ATM which interacts but 
not directly interferes with the first layer: flight management.  
Yet there is another trend, marked by the visions of the 
Internet of Things [6] respectively of Things that Think [7] 
e.g., the next generation of aircrafts. The Car-2-Car Commu-
nication Consortium [8] is a further example aiming among 
others at avoiding accidents or the exchange of route infor-
mation. At airports apron field vehicles (push-backs, tank- or 
de-icing trucks) will manage their activity. Dolleys (transport 
carts) will be RFID tagged, motorized boarding stairs with 
GPS and suitcases be equipped with tags remembering own-
ers not to leave them behind.  
In 2020+ not only aircrafts but most critical resources at 
airports will be able of some autonomy; almost any other 
will be at least connected. Directly or non-directly they will 
be able to participate in SMCs.  
 C. Concluding Scenario 
This “internet of things that think” develops because ICT 
makes it possible and affordable with cheaper and better per-
forming hard- and software. But the fundamental driver is 
different: Managing under conditions of high complexity and 
dynamics implies that more single objects become source or 
subject of events [4] and that reliable, correct and immediate 
information matters. In these environments centralized con-
trol fails and not at least “things” will obtain autonomy. They 
are equipped with sensors and with capabilities of reasoning 
or become users of the internet because this enables to cap-
ture and exploit first-hand information.  
This is summarized in the sigh of a dispatcher “If I would 
know where it is!”. The timely and correct answer makes the 
difference between a solution and a service breakdown. 
Thus, the second scenario is that not just some hundred 
but thousands of “things that think” will participate in SMCs 
and because of the interdependence of rotations of aircrafts 
in several SMC in parallel. The result is a heterogeneous ho-
lonic network of ad-hoc SMCs and invitees include complex 
ATM systems, less complex dispatch systems for ground 
services, human agents like air controllers and service dis-
patchers and things: the aircraft and likely many others.  
27
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

 
 
 V.  BENEFITS: MANAGEMENT OF SYSTEM CRITICALITY 
In the scene drawn in Figure 2 interference occurs in the 
second leg, hours ahead of the event planned at airport 4. 
Since there is obviously plenty of time to organize response 
offline - what is the benefit of (almost) real-time re-schedu-
ling in this case? Actually it is the “criticality” of the system, 
a major control parameter of managing complex systems.  
 A. Benefit of Real-Time Maintenance of Rotations 
Effective response to unexpected events implies that (1) 
non-expected states of operations occur (and that respective 
information is valid), and that (2) the system is “intelligent”, 
i.e., able of finding a solution which (3) can be physically 
implemented: There must be leeway to re-allocate resource. 
Therefore flexibility (buffers, slack, or redundancy) is the 
“raw material” of operations intelligence.  
But flexibility is a volatile resource. In this moment it is 
available, in the next it is not: I.e., decisions made in the sce-
ne of Figure 2 are bets on the flexibility available 10 hours 
later. And finally flexibility may be “out of stock”.  
The benefit of real-time maintenance of aircraft rotations 
is hedging these bets over the time left – and with this the 
overall efficiency of the system! There is no steady state in 
aviation operations. There is constant change only. Even if 
all internal parameters are controlled (very unlikely) there 
are enough external ones. Given a threefold of current traffic 
thousands of maintenance conferences will run in parallel 
and the “flexibility status” of the system will fluctuate. 
 B. Criticality 
Criticality is a decisive control parameter of managing a 
complex system. The concept has been coined in physics 
where it defines the scale-free point of a phase transition 
(e.g., from liquid to solid) or the transition from stability into 
instability of a pile of sand or of snow forming an avalanche. 
[9] In the meantime this concept has been adapted by many 
sciences, among others in economics, in history science [10] 
or in business [11]. 
As a result from experiences and case studies, in the con-
text of the new concept we can define:  
 
criticality as phase of transition amid capability and 
incapability to act due to exhaustion of flexibility. 
 
Intelligent real-time service maintenance (organized 
in SMCs) as a tool to actively manage criticality. 
 
the role of the aircraft as a „supervisor‟ of criticality 
management with respect to rotations‟ efficiency.  
The parameter of criticality focuses intelligence on the 
system-wide management of the most critical resource: flex-
ibility (for an example see [12]). It is to be expected that this 
holistic approach combined with aircrafts which actively ma-
nage their rotations and related interdependencies will in-
crease the economic efficiency of the overall system.  
 C. Focus of further Research  
Resources of aviation systems are massively distributed 
in terms of functionality, space, organization or time – as 
flexibility is: Successfully responding to unplanned event 
may require coordinated, timely action of resources provid-
ing different functionality at different places, controlled by 
different organizations. In accordance with the market-based 
multi-agent approach explained above managing criticality 
equals managing liquidity (the volume of circulating money) 
by a central bank. This induces questions like  
 
How can flexibility be measured and criticality be 
estimated?  
 
Do operations‟ processes and performance (costs, 
quality, resilience …) exhibit “typical” patterns?  
 
Can patterns of causal behavior be exploited respec-
tively how will non-causal patterns be treated?  
 
How does the distribution of flexibility (e.g., buffers) 
affect measuring and managerial options?  
 
How can SMCs be efficiently organized and techno-
logically facilitated?  
Answers to these questions will have impact to a theory 
of augmented intelligent organizations and the theory of vol-
atile resources and both research as well as implementation 
will have to rely on technological advancements.  
 VI.  COMPUTING STRATEGIES 
In the past, ATM has not yet been apprehended as a do-
main of High End and High Performance Computing. High 
Performance Computing can be essentially defined to make 
use of the current high end resources available for a specific 
purpose. Making use of these resources can help to solve the 
performance barriers for practical ATM implementations in a 
next stage of development.  
There are many practical problems with ATM systems 
that require immense computing power, for example, solu-
tions that have to consider a large number of mesh points or 
locations need a huge number of operations to be calculated. 
On the other hand, one single processing step can otherwise 
afford a huge amount of memory. Complexity and state of 
basic high end technological development so far refrained 
from considering HPC technologies and HPC resources for 
implementing the components needed. With the last year‟s 
improvements in understanding these complex systems, inte-
grated High End Computing has got into the focus of devel-
opment. From the past studies we understand:  
 
how to create a SOA concept for rotation manage-
ment, compatible to the SESAR SOA ATM-model. 
 
how to create collaboration models for system and 
architectures management and operation. 
The main research topics resulting include: 
 
Distribution, job allocation to distributed resources. 
 
Capacity constraints versus size and granulation of 
problem. 
 
Robustness of algorithms and overall systems. 
 
Security of information and computing. 
 
Management and operating of HEC and HPC net-
works and resources. 
The research program being defined by these issues in-
cludes the main sections (a) collaboration, management, and 
operating issues, (b) trust in information and computing, and 
(c) robustness and criticality. 
28
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

 
 
When an unforeseeable change within existing planning 
occurs, the triggering of schedule modifications events from 
airplanes will be a suitable means for improving capability to 
respond. For optimizing the processes and sequences it is 
necessary to develop a performance based approach using 
HEC and High Performance Computing (HPC) strategies. 
 A. Collaboration, Management, and Operating 
The resulting conceptual work used is based on the expe-
riences and case studies done within collaboration projects 
over the last years. Based on the collaboration framework 
operation and management can consider multidisciplinary 
collaboration and legal aspects and integrate Service Orien-
ted Architectures (SOA) and Resources Oriented Architectu-
res (ROA) as with the GEXI framework studies [13, 14]. 
With the common heterogeneous structure necessary to build 
networked systems naturally strengths, facilities, and capa-
bilities of disciplines, services, and resources provider 
groups differ. Collaboration aspects are the basic require-
ment for efficient and reliable systems engineering and 
maintenance, especially with complex multidisciplinary dis-
tributed systems and algorithms.  
Two general computing paradigms and derivative com-
binations are available for organizing and particularly for 
coordinating across SMCs envisioned: ground-based compu-
ting and mobile airplane-based computing. In both cases 
compute requests have to be scheduled. In the case of 
ground-based solutions, requests and data will have to be 
sent to a ground based computing infrastructure. In the mo-
bile airplane-based case a request has to be scheduled in or-
der to get up-to-date information from the ground-computing 
and do pre-calculation on-board. Both architectures are clear-
ly defined by capacity computing requirements.  
 B. Trust in Information and Computing 
The implementation for a mission critical logistics com-
puting chain has to rely on fast broadband networks and a 
secure network infrastructure which first of all needs to be 
interoperable with standards defined by SESAR or NextGen. 
Information exchange can be handled by means of verifica-
tion [14]. The implementation considers signatures from a 
Certification Authority (CA) and checksums. The communi-
cation network used for air-ground communication will pref-
erably be based on a dedicated network, highly protected, 
among other things against intrusion and Denial of Service 
(DoS) occurrences. 
 C. Robustness and Criticality 
In order to work out in-time compute tasks, communica-
tion and computation have to be completed within less than 
about five minutes wall clock time. Certified information 
transfer is the base for secure any reliable information sys-
tem usage and computing. In any case with mission critical 
implementations of distributed computing and mobile com-
ponents a fallback solution is essential, based on data replica-
tion and emergency procedures. As non deterministic aspects 
will reduce the robustness of systems, the problem size is 
reduced to problem cells with defined conditions, like re-
sources consumption and wall clock times, so that safe 
fallback states will be available for ongoing operation. This 
will facilitate the application of control procedures and intel-
ligent automation of required operational tasks. 
 D. Concepts and Requirements 
Various strategies and technologies can be used to make 
practical use of integration with HEC resources. Current base 
for providing computing power are: 
 
High End Computing (High Performance Compu-
ting, Supercomputing). 
 
Distributed and Services Computing (Cloud Com-
puting, Grid Computing, Distributed Computing, 
MultiCore and ManyCore technologies). 
The requirements to exploit high end resources and mo-
bile highly performant resources leads to interlink intelligent 
systems with High End Computing and  Distributed and Ser-
vices Computing resources, mostly for capacity computing 
purposes. Integration of information and computing systems 
is commonly implemented using framework interfaces. 
Therefore a modularization of interactive and batch access to 
resources is mandatory. The solution is based on flexibility 
with parallelization: Loosely and massive parallel computing 
can be achieved using dynamic event triggering and on the 
other hand MPI and OpenMP implementations. 
Regarding data and information exchange there is a 
strong need for dedicated high end networks. As with the 
environment middlewares and modular facilities, like ac-
counting and communication services are needed for practi-
cal operation. Essential system components have to be build 
on common standards. Network, system, and data security is 
most important for mission critical systems. 
 VII.CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
With the results presented in this paper we have shown 
that the new paradigm with rotation-oriented Air Traffic 
Management for extended collaborative ATM can be a solu-
tion for future economic management. High end computing 
resources, communication networks, and High Performance 
Computing architectures are used to deliver the compute 
power needed. The concepts on criticality do support the 
need for mission critical systems. Operating complex dy-
namical system architectures, computing and information 
system resources can be handled with flexible collaboration 
frameworks in order to achieve efficient complex systems 
integrating information system technology and the world of 
“things that think” as well. This will allow a flexible and 
economic change and risk management and sustainable op-
eration concepts. Advanced communication system compo-
nents, verification methods, and mission critical communica-
tion networks are utilized to interlink distributed compute, 
storage, and High End Computing resources and create a 
fast, secure, and reliable operating system environment. 
The goal for the near future is to make use of HEC re-
sources like cloud computing and future High Performance 
computing systems. High end resources can be integrated 
with information, communication, and logistics systems by 
creating appropriate interfaces and services. The systems 
supported will gain access to distributed computing and stor-
29
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

 
 
age power not available locally under any economic aspects 
otherwise. The demands for High End Infrastructure as a 
Service and provisioning of services will lead to a definable 
level of reliability and quality (QoS, QoD, QoE).  
For the next generation of large complex intelligent sys-
tems we need fully integrated network and component man-
agement solutions. Following the technology improvements 
of services implementation, the mid-term focus is the inte-
gration of "High End Computing as a Service". In the future, 
developments and concepts will focus on bringing this con-
cept into life with industry scale systems.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful to all partners in past and current programs 
for fruitful discussions and collaboration in projects and 
project developments contributing to concepts presented in 
this paper. Particularly we want to name Airbus R&T Man-
agement, Hamburg, DE; KölnBonn-Airport, Cologne, DE; 
Modular Galley Systems GmbH, Elchingen, DE; Vienna 
University of Economics and Business, Institute for Trans-
portation and Logistics Management, Vienna, AU; FGM-
AMOR, Graz, AU; Controlling Chaos Technologies, Han-
nover, DE; Knowledge Genesis, Samara / Swisttal, RU/DE; 
Institute for Control of Complex Systems / Russian Acade-
my of Sciences, Samara, RU; Manchester Business School, 
Centre for Service Research, Manchester, UK; Rzevski So-
lutions, London, UK; Intelligent Communications and 
Broadband Networks Laboratory (ICB-Net) Athens, GR; 
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Zentrum für 
Informationsverarbeitung, Münster, DE; European Legal 
Informatics Study Programme, Partner University: Hanno-
ver, DE; North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN),  
We also owe our thanks to the German Federal Ministry for 
Economics and Technology as well as to the German Aero-
space Center / Project Agency for financial and managerial 
support of related research projects.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Scherer, “Executive VP Strategy & Future Program-
mes”, Airbus, quoted in D. Thisdell, “Aircraft must be 
smart swimmers to make next-gen ATM work”, Flight 
International 14/01/11 News Article. 
[2] P. Hotham, “SESAR & NextGen Working together for 
Aviation Interoperability”, Presentation to the Royal 
Aeronautical Society Annual Conference, London, April 
14th 2011; original source: ICAO, International Civil 
Aviation Organization, 2011, URL: http://www.sesarju.e
u/news-press/news/sesar-ju-royal-aeronautical-society-
annual-conference-815 [accessed: 2011-05-10]. 
[3] booz & co., “Final Report, Adequate and Innovative 
Funding Mechanisms for the Preparation and Transition 
to the Deployment Phase of the SESAR Programme”, 
Sept. 2010, URL: http://ec.europa.eu/transport/air/sesar/d
oc/2-2010_09_28_funding_and_financing_of_sesar.pdf 
[accessed: 2011-05-20]. 
[4] M. Rauer, S. Karadgi, D. Metz, and W. Schäfer, “Real-
Time Enterprise – Schnelles Handeln für produzierende 
Unternehmen”, in Wirtschaftsinformatik, Mai 2010, 
download / purchase link URL: http://www.wirtschaftsin
formatik.de/index.php;do=show/site=wi/sid=c51138b3f4
9d6d3de7ae7bf711bde1ac/alloc=12/id=2730 [accessed: 
2011-05-20]. 
[5] G. Rzevski, “A practical Methodology for Managing 
Complexity”. Emergence: Complexity & Organization - 
An International Transdisciplinary Journal of Complex 
Social Systems. Vol. 13, Nos. 1-2, 2011, ISSN 1521-
3250, pp. 38-56. 
[6] “Radio Frequency Identification and the Internet of 
Things”, European Commission, Information Society, 
URL: http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/rfid
/index_en.htm [accessed: 2011-05-20]. 
[7] Things That Think, “TTT Vision Statement”, URL: 
http://ttt.media.mit.edu/vision/vision.html [accessed: 
2011-05-14]. 
[8] Car to Car Communication Consortium, URL: 
 
http://www.car-to-car.org/ [accessed: 2011-05-14]. 
[9] K. Christensen and N. Moloney, “Complexity and 
Criticality”, Imperial College Press Advanced Physics 
Tests – Vol 1, 2005, ISBN:   978-1-86094-504-5.  
[10] R. Cliver, “Tremors in the Web of Trade: Complexity, 
Connectivity and Criticality in the Mid-Eighth Century 
Eurasian World”, The Middle Ground Journal, Number 
2, Spring 2011. 
[11] “Complexity-Based Crisis-Anticipation for Corporations, 
Investors and Policy-makers”, Ontonix, 2008, URL: 
http://www.ontonix.com [accessed: 2011-05-20]. 
[12] U. Inden, R. Franken, “Final Report: CESSAR – Confi-
guration and Evaluation of Service Systems with RFID”, 
Cologne University of Applied Sciences, (Sub-Research 
project 2011-5-7 in collaboration with Airbus, EADS. 
Funding: German Federal Ministry of Economics and 
Industry, Program Management: PT DLR Cologne, 
Project Number: MT06005), (in publication). 
[13] Rückemann, C.-P., “Integrating Future High End Com-
puting and Information Systems Using a Collaboration 
Framework Respecting Implementation, Legal Issues, 
and Security”, in International Journal on Advances in 
Security, 3(3&4):91-103,2010. ISSN:1942-2636,  URL: 
http://www.iariajournals.org/security/sec_v3_n34_2010_paged.
pdf [accessed: 2011-05-01]. 
[14] Rückemann, C.-P., “Envelope Interfaces for Geoscien-
tific Processing with High Performance Computing and 
Information Systems”, in Proceedings of the Internati-
onal Conference on Advanced Geographic Information 
Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 
2011), DigitalWorld 2011, February 23-28, 2011, 
Gosier, Guadeloupe, France, pages 23-28. XPS, Xpert 
Publishing Solutions, 2011, ISBN: 978-1-61208-003-
1, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?article
id=geoprocessing_2011_2_10_30030 [accessed: 2011-
05-20]. 
[15] http://www.eurocontrol.int/sesar/public/standard_page/o
verview.html  
 
 
30
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

