 
 
 
 
 
The Designing and Implementation of a Smart Home System with Wireless  
Sensor/Actuator and Smartphone  
 
Omar Ghabar 
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield- UK 
Email: omar.ghabar@hud.ac.uk 
 
Joan Lu 
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield- UK 
Email: j.lu@hud.ac.uk
Abstract—This paper presents the design and implementation 
of a prototype system that employs standing techniques for 
smart home sensing and control for a future home 
environment. Smartphones currently show great potential in 
sensing, processing and communication capabilities. The 
prototype provides solutions for communications between 
home users, electronic equipment and a Smartphone. The 
home equipment is linked wirelessly via Wi-Fi technology to a 
household server, which can be controlled through the smart 
phone using an iOS application.  In particular, the main 
objective of this work is to design a system named Wireless 
Sensor Actuator Mobile Computing in a Smart Home 
(WiSAMCinSM) that makes multifunctional contributions to 
assisting elderly people in their daily lives. Part of this system 
has been tested within the laboratory; firstly, through a WI-Fly 
Serial Adapter using Tera Term technology, and secondly, 
through WI-Fly and iPhone using the Ad hoc network. The 
prototype system consists of a Smartphone, Microcontroller 
Unite (STC89C52RC), WiFly-RN370 and seven sensors, as well 
as an iMac and a Personal Digital Assistant (PDA). The 
prototype system has been implemented based on the 
Smartphone and commercially available low cost sensors, 
actuators and logic converters. Results show great potential in 
employing the information and evaluation of high quality 
prototypes for the functions of data acquisition. 
      Keywords–smartphone; sensors/actuators; smart home; WI-
Fly.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
It is widely known that embedded sensors and actuators 
within mobile computing in the smart home can be  useful 
in improving elderly people’s daily lives [1]. Today, elderly 
people are the fastest growing segment of the population in 
developed countries, and they want to live as independently 
as possible; but, these lifestyles come with risks and 
challenges. The ageing population has continued to grow 
since 1950; the world percentage of elderly people has 
increased steadily from 8% in 1950 to 11% in 2009 and is 
expected to reach 22 % by 2050 [2]. It has been noted that 
the continuing decrease in the mortality rates for the elderly, 
means that the proportion of older people in the population 
will continue to increase [2]. 
The smart home is equipped with wireless sensors and 
actuators to recognise environment-sensing data and to 
control electric devices. The technology will be converted to 
a digital system mapping the movement of the body within 
the environment surrounding it. This will then be 
transmitted to the Microcontroller Unit (MCU) to perform 
certain applications, for example: monitoring, appliance 
control, and processing, most of which require and utilise 
software information. This is in addition to the automatic 
transmission by means of an algorithm located in a different 
address [3].   
All phones also come with the ability to communicate 
over the cellular networks, and most have built-in short 
range communication capabilities such as Bluetooth and 
Wi-Fi, that can allow them to communicate with and control 
appliances in their surrounding environment [4]. Khan et al. 
[5] found that over the last decade, the mobile computing 
service has been commonly accepted and has become an 
integrated digital method of assistance, not only for key 
computing and communication mobile devices, but also for 
other purposes, such as predicting the global environment, 
controlling greenhouses and for social networking.  
Smart phones are now the preferred mode of interaction 
with many appliances because the phone is always available 
and can provide a better user interface with its improved 
hardware. Precedents exist for people using their phones to 
control their environment remotely [4]. 
The model in this study is the wireless Sensor Actuator 
Mobile Computing in Smart Home (WiSAMCinSH), which 
consists of various appliances to monitor occupant activity 
and can also be used in other circumstances to control the 
devices that are used indoors. The system is equipped with a 
number of wireless sensors and actuators that can make 
decisions and acquire data according to the behaviour of the 
house occupant. The Smartphone technology is used to 
receive information from wireless sensors in real time. It is 
believed that information collected from sensors can engage 
with a large proportion of data to indicate possible human 
behaviour. That kind of information can be gathered and 
transferred to the Smartphone or a personal computer for 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
storage and analysis using advance computation and data 
processing methods. 
     The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
describes the background, with respect to wireless sensor/ 
actuator and mobile computing in a smart home. Section 3 
introduces the prototype system used in formulation of the 
method of smart home design. Section 4 presents the system 
design by describing the prototype for human mobile 
computer interaction in a smart home and how it can 
integrate with other equipment such as wireless sensors, 
actuators and the MCU, using a wireless network. Section 5 
outlines the appliances and technology used with sensor 
implementation. Section 6 defines two techniques to set up 
configurations of the test plan using Tear Term and 
smartphone. Section 7 considers an evaluation of the results 
while Section 8 provides the conclusion and future work. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Alam et al. [6] reviewed collective information on  
various technologies used in the smart home, and defined 
the smart home as “an application of ubiquitous computing 
that is able to provide user context-aware automated or 
assistive service in the form of ambient intelligence, remote 
home control, or home automation‖. Ding et al. [7] used a 
survey to assess the effect that various sensor technologies 
have on sensing environments and infrastructures mediated 
in the smart home, where appliances are located on elderly 
people and placed in the home infrastructure.  
Recent studies by Makonin et al. [8] and Kononen et al. 
[9], which involved integration between mobile computing 
and computational intelligence, provide an opportunity to 
assist inhabitants dynamically with interaction in smart 
home technologies. These devices and patterns of usage are 
the main concentration of new projects. There is therefore a 
need to understand more about integrating, locating and 
implementing these technologies to help occupants in 
constructing additional resources to enable decision making. 
 
Tag4M and Wi-Fi were used to measure temperature, 
humidity, light and pressure in a room environment in the 
smart home.  The use of hardware and software techniques 
presented a condition for the monitoring of the ambiance in 
the room. The results illustrate that gathering data using Wi-
Fi Tag might be a preferable method in wireless application 
[10].        
Data are gathered from the sensors and actuator network 
to monitor the environment and activity of regular living; 
and these are then communicated through a base station, 
finally being saved in a central database [11].  
Suryadevara et al. [12] and Majeed [13]  have recently 
developed a well-being function for the elderly in the 
intelligent home, with the support of devices using ZigBee 
[12] and wireless sensor. The well-being function is used to 
compute the run time of the system design as a related 
procedure throughout. It takes the sensing action period 
from the specific records of the workstation system. This 
index was instantaneously detailed in the database for 
upcoming information processing and estimation of the 
uncommon behaviour of the occupants.  
Rather than use a massive amount of monitoring 
devices, Gaddam et al. [14] have experimented with a 
limited number of expensive wireless sensors of high 
quality, to deal with the challenges of the prototype system 
and reliability. They suggested a microcontroller with 
wireless radio frequency communication, for example 
ZigBee; which allows for the data collected from sensors 
and transmitted to a base station to be installed on a PC.  
Some experiments have been done by linking wireless 
sensors to electronic equipment such as: a kettle; 
microwave; bed; and TV; to determine the reliability and 
performance of the system design.  The results showed that 
for longer distances reliability decreases and also, the effect 
of Wi-Fi noise caused communication to become unreliable. 
In 2012, Jiang et al. [15] carried out a number of 
investigations into the methods used to monitor the home 
environment, including: pressure, temperature, humidity, 
and electric power. The method it was hoped could solve 
any problems that arose and give warning alarms instantly 
to the mobile agent. The authors found that the prototype 
system includes three aspects, namely, (i) the mobile agent 
is not causing any delay in the network, (ii) there is a 
decreased latency in the data stream, and finally, (iii) the 
technology of WSN support is used to resolve the difficulty 
of knowing whether a location is inhabited.  
Makonin et al. [8] presented a method called a Smart 
Intervention 
(SI); 
this 
function 
involved: 
residents 
requirements, home, context, and measurements. The 
devices used in this module included: sensors, actuator and 
wireless network. Formula (1) below has been used in 
experiment to control the light in the middle of the night 
when the occupants get out of bed. It was found that this 
system design has the benefit of permitting the functionality 
to be extensible and flexible in the smart home, and it can be 
developed for many other numbers of reasons.    
                                                                        
where Hs is the state before measurements, H is the 
home, O is the occupant, Ctx is the context-aware, Aut is 
the automations and E is the evaluation for accuracy and 
ability.    
III. METHOD EMPLOYED IN SMART HOME 
Through the benefits of the application of sensors such 
as actuators, wireless adapters, and processor units, many 
previous developments in the smart house have been 
replaced. As mobile computing becomes more universal, 
there will be an increasing number of computerized devices 
in our environment  that are capable of being controlled 
[16].  
Framework theories for human and mobile computing 
interaction in the smart home, particularly for elderly 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
people, are nonexistent, especially in the area of smart 
phone and wireless sensors and actuators. On the other 
hand, smart intervention is lacking in its description of 
human-home interaction. Because of this, there is a 
motivation to develop a method that can be used to support 
work with the system design used by residents in the smart 
home. Therefore, the main function of Smart Intervention 
(SI) can takes the following formula (2)  [8] : 
                                                                 
where H’s is the home state, R is the resident, WS/A 
refers to wireless sensor and actuator, Ctx is the context-
aware, Aut is the home automation, Hs is the smart home 
and E is the evaluation for reliability, efficiency, and 
usability.  
The electrical equipment in the smart home needs to be 
controlled by actuators in order to maintain it within a 
certain range of data collection, such as: temperature and 
light to execute the action of on or off immediately, or as 
scheduled by the resident’s command. The smart home 
intelligence network is to detect serious conditions that can 
be picked up by the smart home sensors, when there is a 
likelihood of an event taking place. In addition, smart 
intervention can be used to elicit an interaction between the 
environment and the home equipment. For example, a better 
automatic action can be made regarding the data received 
from the environment in the smart home, such as regulating 
the light and fan. This can be done with the scheduled 
intelligent intervention which are in built, when the devices 
are correctly switched on or off by the occupants. 
 
IV.  SYSTEM DESIGN 
Regarding the formula of the smart intervention in the 
previous section, we add one parameter to this equation 
namely; wireless sensors and actuators, to be engaged in this 
prototype system. The comprehensive system architecture 
from the communication, electronic devices and data 
management viewpoint is given in Fig 1. Different 
challenges based on the design and, related to sensing and 
control in detecting the wireless network, have been 
addressed in the related work. 
 
Figure 1: Block Diagram of General Architecture. 
 
The system design is based on a wireless adapter: 
WI-Fly-RN370, rather than other wireless technology, 
because this has the ability to cover up to 300m in an open 
area, as well as being able to connect with the smartphone 
and PC through Ad hoc or infrastructure networks. 
 
The service remains an open topic; new methods of 
methodical design, conceptual models, and common 
architecture are required. Complete technical solutions and 
technology need to be included in the scheming sensors so 
as to improve the computer system, and to work with the 
physical user intervention. This will enable us to explore a 
universal extendible smart home architecture that assists 
these models in working together and to show it alongside 
our prototype WiSAMCinSH.   
Consequently, this study will attempt to provide 
sensitive architecture and technology solutions to common 
context, effectively collecting discrete sensor technologies 
under an ambient background. This will result in automated 
proactive and personalized service and optimization of 
context-aware decision making. 
Through the benefits of the applications of sensors such 
as actuators, wireless adapters, and processor units, many 
previous developments in the smart house have been 
replaced. Working on developments to the prototype will 
ensure that newly created interfaces allow for features with 
which the user has interacted previously. 
 
A. 
Framework Layers for WiSAMCinSM 
This section shows the WiSAMCinSH architecture 
system consisting of four layers; as shown in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2 .Framework Layers in the Prototype System. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
1) 
Electronic Layer: In the electronic layer, which is 
located in the lowest level, the sensors and actuators are 
organised in rooms in different places to gather raw data 
such as obstacle avoidance, human body activity, light 
levels, smoke, humidity, temperature, and ultrasonic 
distance measuring, as well as to control the appliances that 
the householder decides to use, for example a fan, light, or 
heater. 
This 
information 
is 
collected 
by 
MCU 
(STC89C52RC), which is connected to a WI-Fly adapter 
and can also be used to store an application program 
embedded with flash memory. 
2) 
Communication Layer: In the communication layer, 
sensing information from different sensors is used according 
to their applications. This layer communicates with the 
application layer and then transmits the users’ decision to 
the electronics section, and transfers information written or 
read to the successive interface consisting of an iPhone and 
computer control.  This data is transmitted through a TCP/IP 
socket where an Ad hoc or infrastructure network has the 
ability to use wireless connections to several WI-Fly 
adapters. 
3) 
Application Layer: The application layer is able to 
build platform interfaces with elderly people, for example a 
user can get data or make decisions using the smartphone, 
personal computers, or tablets. Moreover, the householder 
can send commands to a wireless sensor over the 
microcontroller unit, if any abnormal information is 
received. Reliability, satisfaction, effectiveness, efficiency, 
and usability are requirements for everyday use and this 
device is able to provide all these. In addition, there is a 
control program in the application layer that can be operated 
through the smartphone or PC to acquire the data from the 
sensors. 
4) 
Service Layer: The database server and Internet in 
the service layer is where information is gathered from the 
sensors and actuators. This layer provides a computing 
service based on the database. Important and useful 
information from historical data can predict abnormal 
conditions, such as: very high humidity; natural gas or 
smoke using the smoker sensor; and so on. At the same 
time, the database system offers an opportunity for another 
user to share the information, for example, a healthcare 
professional can monitor the situation of their patient. 
V. 
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
The main model system is broken down into two main 
parts; hardware and software that are currently available in 
the laboratory. 
B. 
Hardware Parts 
 
Wireless adapter (WiFly-RN370). 
 
MCU (STC89C52RC). 
 
Seven kinds of sensors. 
 
 IPhone (Version iOS 6.1.3) and iMac version 
10.7.5. 
C. 
Software Parts 
 
 C language for MCU. 
 
 Objective-C for iPhone application.    
 
1) WI-Fly (RN-370): The Wireless adapter is powered 
by: an external AC to 5V DC and two AAA batteries which 
run up to eight hours on full charge. The device is connected 
with only a RS-232 serial port interface of the DB9. It 
receives information from sensors over the MCU, and then 
sends it to end devices such as iPhone and PC. The data is 
also transferred over a reliable TCP/IP socket using an Ad 
hoc or infrastructure network. This has the benefit of low 
wireless construction and can be connected to any type of 
WI-Fly serial adapter. An overview of this set up can be 
shown in Figure 3. 
There are different types of connections available to 
create Wi-Fi applications, for example: remote environment 
sensors, control and monitoring appliances, diagnostics, and 
mobile phone connections; such as GPS and sensors. 
Therefore, WI- Fly configurations can be set as peer-to-peer 
(Ad hoc) networking to an iPhone, by using an IP address 
which is (169.254.1.1) and Subnet mask (255.255.0.0), with 
the need to set the Service Set Identifier (SSID) and WI- 
Fly-GSX-a5 in a wireless mobile computing network [17]. 
2) 
Microcontroller 
Unit 
(Logic 
Converter): 
The 
Microcontroller Unit is connected to the computer in order 
to collect data from sensors, pre-process raw data, and direct 
data to the phone. It is also connected to a wireless module 
Wi-Fi to accept the wireless connection through the smart 
home server. The STC89Cxx series MCU is an important 
part of the system design as it is an 8-bit single-chip 
microcontroller. This chip is compatible with outlying 
device communication that monitors resident activity, and 
motion by gathering data from sensors, interfaced with the 
WI-Fly wireless transceiver, and embedded with 64K bytes 
flash memory to store data, which is shared with In-system 
Programming (ISP). It also has an, In-system Application 
(ISA) to assist the operators. These communication 
requirements are based on a microcontroller need to be 
adapted 
with 
a 
Universal 
Asynchronous 
Receiver 
Transmitter (UART) [18]. This is an appliance that 
transmits and receives raw information from the choice of 
MCU to support a low level programming language. C 
provides many different ranges of development tools and 
pins diagrams, as illustrated in Figure 4.  
Figure 3 Overview of the WI-Fly Adapter Connection 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
P3.7
37
XT2
38
39
XT1
40
GND
P2.4
P2.5
P2.6
P2.7
17
18
19
20
P3.3
33
P3.4
34
35
P3.5
36
P3.6
P2.0
P2.1
P2.2
P2.3
13
14
15
16
RCT
29
P3.0
30
31
P3.1
32
P3.2
P0.7
VCC
ALL
PSN
9
10
11
12
STC89C52RC
40I-PDIP-40
1209HIR889-
90C
P1.4
25
P1.5
26
27
P1.6
28
P1.7
P0.3
P0.4
P0.5
P0.6
5
6
7
8
P1.0
P1.1
22
23
P1.2
24
P1.3
VCC
P0.0
P0.1
P0.2
1
2
3
4
Humidity 
Sensor
Smoke
 Sensor
VCC8
5
VCC7
6
7
VCC6
8
VCC5
VCC1
VCC2
VCC3
VCC4
1
2
3
4
 VCC 5V
GND5
5
GND6
6
7
GND7
8
GND8
GND1
GND2
GND3
GND4
1
2
3
4
GND
Temperature
 Sensor
21
21
Actuator1
Actuator2
Actuator3
Heater
Light
Fan
Light Sensor
Body Sensor
Obstacle 
Sensor
Distance Sensor
 
Figure 4 Microcontroller Units STC89C52RC-schematic pin diagrams of the system. 
 
3) 
Sensors Involved: There is great demand for the use 
of sensors for several applications in the prototype. The 
most commonly used being: obstacle avoidance sensor, 
smoke sensor, human detection sensor, light level sensor, 
humidity sensor, temperature sensor, and ultrasonic distance 
measuring. These are the different types of sensors that have 
been used in the system design. The main idea of this 
function is to transfigure physical variables in reality to 
digital variables and real numbers, which are processed in 
the computing system.  
The function of the temperature sensor DS18B20 [19] is 
to gather data from the room environment, when the 
software program runs in the MCU. The brightness sensor 
BH1750, is dependent upon the level of light in the home; 
the smoke sensor ZYMQ-2 is used to monitor whether there 
is any smoke or gas close to the sensor area; the humidity 
sensor HR202LM393 is used to sense the level of nearby 
humidity when environmental humidity is high; the obstacle 
avoidance sensor E18-D50NK has a detection distance 
between 3cm and 80cm with an adjustable resistor; the 
human body sensor DYP-ME393 reliably detects the human 
body when it comes to within seven meters of the sensing 
area; the last sensor is the ultrasonic distance measuring 
HC-SR04 [20], used to measure distance from 2cm to 4m 
when the function is working well.  
4) 
Smart Phones and PCs (End Use): In this system, the 
implementation of an end-use like iPhone, Android, 
BlackBerry and Windows Phone as the platform for the 
prototype system means they can receive the gathered 
information from sensors and control the actuator. The 
smart phone platform can be programmed using Object-C to 
communicate over CFNetwork sockets. Zdziarski offers a 
code using a CFNetwork socket to connect between the web 
server and smart phone or among peer-to-peer networks 
such as Ad hoc connections [21].  
5) 
Software Structure: The information gathered from 
the seven sensors are stored in the memory of embedded 
system STC89C52RC provisionally, then when it is 
running, the software program and compiler passes through 
the Test Program in Debugger (Keil uVision3) for the 
debugger instruction. At the same time the program 
language C also will run in the STC-ISP.exe, after selecting 
the hex file and the port from the PC to be ready for sending 
the collected data over wireless technology.  
The iPhone SDK (Version IOS 6.1.3) and Apple iMac 
version 10.7.5 run with Xcode version 4.6.2 were used in 
this experiment. Objective-C and Cocoa Touch were the 
programs that were most used in the implementation of this 
part of the project, where Cocoa Touch is used by Object-C 
which offers the structure for iPhone application. 
VI. TESTING PLAN 
A. Experiment Condition:  
Testing the prototype system firstly required 
connection of the seven types of sensors to the MCU 
as follows: obstacle avoidance sensor; human body; 
brightness; 
smoke; 
humidity; 
temperature 
and 
ultrasonic distance measuring; to the ports from P2^0 
to P2^7 of STC89C52RC. This unit has the ability to 
gather data from 32 sensors; because it contains four 
sets of ports P1, P2, P3 and P4 - each with eight pin. 
The WI-Fly Serial Adapter is interfaced with the MCU by 
using connector Pin DB9; it is also connected through serial 
port communication RS232. This appliance is designed to 
work with an input power supply from 4.5 to 5 VDC. There 
are three cable interfaces (RXD, TXD and GND) between 
the WI-Fly and Microcontroller and five cable interfaces 
between the WI-Fly and computer.  
B. Steps: 
There are two techniques to setup configurations of the 
software as follows: 
1) Setup Configuration through WI-Fly Serial  
Adapter Using Tera Term: This configuration is used 
through the Ad hoc Mode (point to point), with switch 1–
ON. The Ad hoc Mode powers up the Wi-Fly device, which 
is only connected between two appliances that are 
Smartphone (iPhone) or PC, to gather the data or control a 
device through the serial interface as shown in Figure 5. 
This WI-Fly device needs to set the constructor default 
value as follows: Service Set Identifier SSID, which is 
WiFly-GSX-a5 to the IP address (169.254.1.1), IP net mask 
of (255.255.0.0), and TCP port (2000) [22].  
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The value of the seven sensors using Tera Term screen. 
 
Once the connection is linked with the Ad hoc mode, it 
might take up to one to two minutes to share an IP address 
with the computer. Next, click ―OK‖ if the connection is 
successful. The program of Tera Term will show the 
message ―HELLO‖. After that, the user can receive 
information from various sensors that were connected with 
the MCU and WI-Fly using program Tera Term. This also, 
displays the data regarding the environment and locations of 
the operator to the sensors.  
2) 
Setup Configuration through WI-Fly RN370 using 
iPhone:  To set [15] WI-Fly and iPhone using the Ad hoc 
Mode interface, it is not required to have the Access Point to 
set up the Wi-Fly network data together. The wireless 
appliance can accept information directly, and it is point to 
point communication.  
Firstly, move Switch 1 Ad hoc to position ―ON‖ in the 
WI-Fly and switch on the power supply. Secondly, the 
wireless network is connected with an iPhone via the WI-
Fly. It is possible to build a wireless system with a 
Smartphone using Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol 
(DHCP).  
The Smartphone will create an Ad hoc Mode using 
Service Set Identifier (SSID) and the associated WI-Fly 
holders of a number of IP addresses.  In this case the client 
iPhone will be their IP address: 169.254.1.1. The sensing 
data is first collected by the MCU, and then sent to the 
Smartphone within the WI-Fly transceiver, as shown in 
Figure 6. 
Figure 6. The value of seven sensors collected by iPhone. 
VII. EVALUATION 
The 
accuracy 
of 
the 
sensors’ 
measurement 
is 
distinguished according to the performance of each sensor. 
The results will show how the accuracy can be faithful to 
the actual value. The most improved sensor has high quality 
of performance. To succeed, we must make a comparison 
with other evaluations and use real word results such as 
distance measuring meters to contrast with the ultrasonic 
distance sensor. 
 
The results have been taken from some sensors, such as; 
obstacle, human body, brightness, temperature, and 
ultrasonic distance sensor; in order to further understand 
whether or not these sensors can work accurately according 
to their functions. The first experiment began with the 
temperature sensor to measure the room temperature.  The 
results were measured at each hour from 9am to 8pm for 
three days. The results in Figure 7 show evaluation of the 
temperature sensor which took place for three days in the 
sensor system. The average measured temperature in the 
room during the three days in the morning and afternoon 
was recorded using temperature sensor (DSI-2B20). There 
was a rise in temperature between 20.5°C and 24.5 °C from 
9am to 4pm. After that, the afternoon temperature shows a 
fluctuation between 4pm and 8pm with average temperature 
between 24°C and 24.5 °C. Generally, the graph illustrates 
that the average temperature is mostly high in the afternoon 
and low in the early morning. 
A comparison can be made between the results of room 
temperature monitoring using the TC1046VNB sensor when 
the temperature rises up with a heater [10], and the result of 
this experiment for the same situation using the  DS18B20 
sensor. It can be understood that temperature increased 
when the heater began to warm up and started to drop when 
the heater was switched off.   
 
For the ultrasonic distance sensor measurement Figure 8 
shows the accuracy of measurement results between 5cm 
and 80cm by using an obstacle object to measure the 
distance between the sensor and the object. The sensor has 
the exact results between 5cm and 40cm. After that the 
sensor results vary from 45cm to 60cm, showing some 
errors with 0.9cm for each 5cm, then the measurement drops 
to 1.1cm, and starts to increase by 5cm up to 80cm. This 
sensor still needs more work to improve its accuracy and 
measuring of distance.  
The third step was to identify whether the obstacle, 
human body and smoke sensors can be implemented for 
long distances using an ultrasonic distance sensor to 
measure the distance between the sensors and the object 
detection. The graph in Figure 9 shows how in this 
experiment the performance results of three sensors were 
initiated, from a distance of 5cm and then increased up to 
80cm. The obstacle sensor can be interacted with the object 
from 5cm to 40cm with high voltage (1), than drops to (0)  
volt from 45cm to 80cm. However, the human body sensor 
can be attracted with the object between 5cm and 80cm with  
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I TEST AND EXPECTED RESULTS 
(Note: √ represents acceptable) 
high voltage (1).  The smoke sensor was however not tested 
because there was no event related to this function in the 
room. 
Another comparison was made [23], using light 
brightness sensors LDR to measure the light intensity during 
daytime. To evaluate the brightness sensor BH170 in this 
prototype system, the results were taken between 9am and 
8pm with and without light in the room as illustrated in 
Figure 10 and 11, to show the performance of the light 
sensor to be used with LED light in the smart home and 
controlled by smart phone. In addition, the accuracy 
designates just how faithfully the sensor can measure the 
real world factor value.  
Test results are shown in Table I. According to the 
information collected from the data, there are two methods 
of sensory perception. Firstly, the four sensors: obstacle, 
human body, smoke, and humidity express their results in a 
digital format, comprising factors of zero and one. 
Secondly, the temperature, brightness, and ultrasonic 
distance sensors produce results in an integer format. 
 
VIII.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Conclusion 
This paper defined the different types of technologies 
and equipment related to the design system to control and to 
sense smart home appliance operated by Smartphone and 
personal computer. It was also used to sense unusual 
patterns during daily activities. This project offered a 
comprehensive wireless system from the Smartphone host 
user to the end appliance used by an elderly or a disabled 
person at home. Additionally, different aspects, such as 
methods elaborated in the smart home and methodology 
have been explored. Furthermore, four framework layers of 
architecture design have been explained according to their 
implementation in smart space. The module system has been 
integrated with some technology to build software and 
hardware systems, as well as requiring a user interface 
consisting of Smartphone and PC to be simple to use for 
elderly people. This investigation contributes to the 
following points: 
 
The system intends to implement smart home control 
at both a basic level, with active sensing, and at a 
higher level, which also includes user home 
automation. 
 
The system aims to create a convenient and 
inexpensive development within the area of home 
sensing system. 
B. Future Work 
The next stages will be setting the network connection 
wireless adapter with wireless router and server. After that, 
a MySQL database table will be created to receive the script 
language code, which will be run by PHP. And then, with 
the network the sensor data from the mobile can be sent to 
the server and saved in the database for computing tasks. 
Moreover, extra works have been decided on for 
experiment and investigation in the next steps, such as using 
an ultrasonic distance sensor to make it more accurate to 
measure up to 4m, as well as assisting with the human body 
and obstacle avoidance sensors for monitoring issues. Home 
automation is a part of the research; therefore some 
appliances will be involved in the prototype, such as 
actuator to control the fan, LED light and heater using 
Smartphone to assist the occupant. Another future piece of 
work, will be computing algorithms to investigate reliability 
and usability which has been necessitated by information 
from various sensors and the control of electrical devices. 
Finally, other Smart phones such as, Android and 
BlackBerry will be involved in the system design.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
I would like to express my deep gratitude and respect to 
Zhaozong Meng whose advice and insight was invaluable to 
me, because of all I learned from him. I would also like to 
thank his assistant for the expert guidance.      
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Medjahed, D. Istrate, J. Boudy, J.-L. Baldinger, and B. 
Dorizzi, "A pervasive multi-sensor data fusion for smart home 
healthcare monitoring," in Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ), 2011 IEEE 
International Conference on, 2011, pp. 1466-1473. 
[2] U. Nations, "World Population Ageing 2009 " Economic and 
Social Affairs, 2010  
                
Sensor Type 
 
             Function 
               Methods 
 
     Expected 
 
     Results 
 Tear Term 
      iPhone 
Obstacle 
Avoidance obstacle of object in line 
 
 
 
 
   0 or 1  
        1 
Human body 
Human body sensing 
 
 
 
 
   0 or 1 
        1 
Smoke 
Detection gas and smoke 
 
 
 
 
   0 or 1 
        0 
Humidity 
Humidity detection and raindrop 
 
 
 
 
   0 or 1 
        0 
Light 
Measure intensity of light 
 
 
 
 
(0 - 1000 ) Lux 
(0 - 753 ) lux 
Temperature 
Measure room temperature 
 
 
 
 
(3 - 40) °C 
(19.18 - 
24.87)°C 
Distance 
Measure current distance 
 
 
 
 
(0.2cm - 4m) 
(0.2- 60) cm 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
[3] M. A.-Q. a. J. S. Jeedella, "Integrated wireless technologies 
for smart home applications," inTech, p. 42, 2010. 
[4] J. Nichols and B. A. Myers, "Controlling home and office 
appliances with smart phones," Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 
vol. 5, pp. 60-67, 2006. 
[5] W. Z. Khan, Y. Xiang, M. Y. Aalsalem, and Q. Arshad, 
"Mobile phone sensing systems: a survey," Communications 
Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 15, pp. 402-427, 2013. 
[6] M. B. I. R. a. M. A. M. A. Muhammad Raisul Alam, "A 
Review of Smart Homes—Past, Present, and Future," IEEE 
Transactions on System Man and Cypernetics-Part C:, vol. 
42, pp. 1190-1203, 2012. 
[7] D. Ding, R. A. Cooper, P. F. Pasquina, and L. Fici-Pasquina, 
"Sensor technology for smart homes," Maturitas, vol. 69, pp. 
131-136, 2011. 
[8] L. B. a. F. P. Stephen Makonin, "A Smarter Smart 
Home:Case Studies of Ambient Intelligence," IEEE CS, p. 9, 
2013. 
[9] V. Könönen, J. Mäntyjärvi, H. Similä, J. Pärkkä, and M. 
Ermes, "Automatic feature selection for context recognition in 
mobile devices," Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 6, pp. 
181-197, 2010. 
[10] S. Folea, D. Bordencea, C. Hotea, and H. Valean, "Smart 
home automation system using Wi-Fi low power devices," in 
Automation Quality and Testing Robotics (AQTR), 2012 IEEE 
International Conference on, 2012, pp. 569-574. 
[11] A. 
L. 
Sawsan 
Mahmoud, 
Caroline 
Langensiepen, 
"Behavioural 
pattern 
identification 
and 
prediction 
in 
intelligent environments," Elsevier Applied Soft Computing, 
p. 10, 2013. 
[12] N. Suryadevara, S. Mukhopadhyay, R. Rayudu, and Y. 
Huang, "Sensor data fusion to determine wellness of an 
elderly in intelligent home monitoring environment," in 
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference 
(I2MTC), 2012 IEEE International, 2012, pp. 947-952. 
[13] B. A. M. a. S. J. Brown, "Developing a well-being monitoring 
system—Modeling and data analysis techniques," Elsevier, p. 
10, 2006. 
[14] A. Gaddam, S. C. Mukhopadhyay, and G. Sen Gupta, "Trial 
& experimentation of a smart home monitoring system for 
elderly," in Instrumentation and Measurement Technology 
Conference (I2MTC), 2011 IEEE, 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[15] Z. Jiang, X. Gu, J. Chen, and D. Wang, "Development of an 
Equipment Room Environment Monitoring System based on 
Wireless Sensor Network and Mobile Agent," Procedia 
Engineering, vol. 29, pp. 262-267, 2012. 
[16] A. Rosendahl, J. F. Hampe, and G. Botterweck, "Mobile 
Home Automation-Merging Mobile Value Added Services 
and Home Automation Technologies," in ICMB, 2007, p. 31. 
[17] R. Networks, "Wifly Serial Adapter RN-370 & RN-374," 
Install Guide and User Manual, vol. 1.00, p. 21, 2009. 
[18] L. STC MCU, "STC89Cxx. STC89LExx Series MCU Data 
Sheet,," Data Sheet, 2011. 
[19] M. Integrated. (2008). DS18B20: programmable resolution 1-
wire 
digital 
thermometer. 
Available: 
http://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/DS18B20.pdf 
[20] C. Technologies, "Ultrasonic Ranging Module HC-SR04," 
User's Manual, vol. v1.0, p. 7, 2012. 
[21] J. Zdziarski, iPhone SDK Application Development: Building 
Applications for the AppStore: O'Reilly Media, Inc., 2009. 
[22] T. Teranishi. (2007, February). Tear Term Version 2.3. 
Available: 
http://logmett.com/index.php?/products/teraterm.html 
[23] A. Goswami, T. Bezboruah, and K. Sarma, "Design of an 
embedded system for monitoring and controlling temperature 
and light," Int. J. Electron. Eng. Res, vol. 1, pp. 27-36, 2009. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The evaluation of temperature sensor (DS18B20): (a) the temperature 
when the heater is on (b) the dashed line for average value 
Figure 8.  The ultrasonic measuring sensor and the dashed line is the 
real 
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
Temperature Experiment (C)
Time Measurment (H)
 
 
Day1
Day2
Day3
Average
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Illustrate the results of three digital sensors 
 
Figure 10. Graphical illustration of the brightness intensity during daytime with 
light 
 
Figure 11. Light intensity during daytime without light. 
 
5 cm
10cm
15cm
20cm
25cm
30cm
35cm
40cm
45cm
50cm
55cm
60cm
65cm
70cm
75cm
80cm
Obstacle
0
1
Obstacle
Body
 Smoke
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Time Measurment (9am to 8pm)
Light Intensity [LUX]
Brightness Sensor when light off
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
Light Intensity [LUX]
Time Measurment (9am to 8pm)
Brightness Sensor when light on
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

