User Centered Approach Identifying Mobile Device Application  
Malgorzata Pankowska 
Information Systems Department 
University of Economics 
Katowice, Poland  
pank@ue.katowice.pl
 
 
Abstract— Nowadays, people widely utilize mobile devices e.g., 
smart phones and tablets into their daily lives. Educational 
institutions for years have developed the wireless networking 
environments, providing students with flexibility of accessing 
the educational resources and creating the opportunities for 
downloading the academic publications and course materials 
at a desired time and location. The paper aims to reveal the 
purpose of usage of mobile devices by the university students 
as well as to illustrate by case study on SAP Business One 
academic course the benefits of Bring Your Own Device 
(BYOD) approach at universities.   
Keywords-mobile 
devices; 
m-education; 
BYOD; 
user 
centered approach.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
Mobility is not only the most important market and 
technological trend within information and communication 
technology (ICT) as Krogstie argues [13], but first of all the 
most typical characteristics of contemporary life style. 
Literature studies mostly focus on clarification and 
explanation of construction of mobile devices, investigation 
of the technological issues, research on mobile information 
systems influence on the business organization, and on 
implementation and evolution of mobile information 
systems. Starting the research on mobile information system 
development requires to explain  the theoretical background. 
Beyond that, certain novelty in research results is required as 
well as the applied methodology should be explained.  
The paper consists of three parts. The first part covers 
explanation of theoretical background of methodologies 
applied for research of end user behaviour in their work with 
mobile devices and mobile enterprise information systems. 
The second part includes discussion on application of mobile 
devices in different socio-economic domains: healthcare, 
marketing, 
business, 
banking, 
education 
and 
public 
administration. Next, the short survey research results are 
discussed on new media and mobile devices usage by 
university students. The fourth part of the papers comprises a 
case study on opportunities to apply bring your own device 
(BYOD) strategy to support  university computerized 
infrastructure.   
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES FOR MOBILE DEVICES 
MANAGEMENT  
During the last years, the Internet and mobile 
technologies have changed people’s life, work and 
communication. The evolution has made it possible to have 
access to information and software applications anytime and 
anywhere.  There are three trends connected with mobile 
technologies that are driving economy: user centered 
innovation development, new mobile devices innovation and 
new infrastructure innovation [12]. The concept of user 
centered innovation ranges from innovations created by the 
user to user direct involvement in the innovation process. 
There are a couple of methodologies for research realization 
on the mobile devices' acceptance and deployment by users.  
User centered mobile device innovation implies that 
companies are striving to deliver innovations that generate 
user value or  user experience unmatched by the competitors. 
These methods require an understanding of user needs and 
user values as well as the ability to translate these into 
unique products and experiences. The methods for research 
on user acceptance of mobile devices are as follows: user 
experience, user centric management, and user experience 
design.   
A. 
User Centered Development Process  
User centered development process is a product 
development process focusing on usability throughout the 
entire development process and further throughout the 
product life cycle. The key principles of the approach are as 
follows: user focus, active user involvement, evolutionary 
system 
development, 
simple 
design 
representation, 
prototyping, evaluation of user in a context, holistic design, 
process customization [11]. The purpose of user centered 
development (UCD) is to develop products with a high 
degree of usability. The user becomes the centre of focus on 
the usability goals, environment, tasks and workflows [7]. 
Design methods of UCD approach include prototyping and 
participatory design. Among the evaluation methods, there 
are usability inspection methods, and user testing methods 
such as laboratory and field tests. Major issues considered in 
this approach cover the expertise regarding users' own work, 
sustainable innovation opportunities, and the linking of the 
work practices, technology and the work environment 
context [18].  
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

B. 
User Centric Management 
 User centric management (UCM) is a philosophy and an 
approach to business management that puts users first in all 
decision making. The approach is realized to ensure 
frictionless, easy and intuitive interactions between the 
company and its stakeholders [16]. For example, the 
business organizations are under strong influence of user 
critique provided online, therefore they carefully analyze 
their website content and distribute only what is not harmful 
for them. They create a certain environment for users to 
increase their personal satisfaction and software usability.  
C. 
User Experience  
The concept of user experience is understood as the 
subjective relationship between user and application or daily 
use technical devices. It goes beyond the usability of the 
application or device, focusing on the personal outcome that 
the user gets from interacting with the application or device 
while performing a task [9]. In Human Computer Interaction 
(HCI), the term designing for experience is about 
considering the user, the task and the context when designing 
a computer application [8]. Usually, projects have a larger 
context that the users understand and 
Information 
Communication Technology (ICT) people integrate into their 
planning. This context is the project's ecosystem and it 
includes the environment they are working within the 
company culture, the general type of work they all will be 
engaged in and the people with whom they interact within 
the roles and responsibilities. According to Beccari and 
Oliveira, the user experience orientation concentrates on a 
project’s goals, but not just to attain effectiveness, efficiency 
and satisfaction, but to enhance the entire experience and 
emotions resulting from the use of a product, system or 
service [5]. For example, user experience in games is 
evaluated using a variety of concepts, i.e., immersion, fun, 
presence, 
involvement, 
engagement, 
playability 
and 
entertainment. Bernhaupt noticed that user experience 
includes a look on all the qualitative experience a user is 
making while interacting with a product, and the emotions 
made during interacting with a special type of product, i.e., 
mobile phones [6].  
III. 
MOBILE DEVICES' APPLICATION REVIEW 
According to McGrane research, [15] 86% of smart 
phones owners say they use their phone while watching 
television. The numbers are even higher for tablet owners. 
71% of smart phone users say they are searching for more 
information on their mobile device after seeing an 
advertisement on TV, in print, or online [15]. 
The e-business is constantly changed into mobile (m-
business) . Mobile business is the best where the consumer is 
driven by a sense of urgency, and when they need to have 
their goods and services immediately for upcoming functions 
and events, although the consumer must wait for delivering 
material product. User with the same device is able to 
communicate over a wireless network and view office 
documents at the same time. In today's mobile commerce 
paradigm, when users are empowered by mobile solutions, a 
number of benefits emerge: increased employee productivity, 
faster response times to business changes, streamlined 
business processes, improved customer satisfaction, and 
increased competitive advantage [10]. M-commerce enables 
users to access the Internet without the need to find a place to 
plug in through the cable connection. People can buy and sell 
goods and services through wireless handheld devices and 
they are able to receive updated information concerning for 
instance the flight time on the way to the airport. M-banking 
is a very successful extension to Internet banking [3, 10]. 
The customers' benefits come from the use of mobile devices 
for online payments through e-cash. Mobile users withdraw 
daily news, i.e., stock quotes, weather information, 
entertainment, sports scores from their mobile devices. The 
mobile operators and service providers have access to several 
types of advertising information, therefore, with the 
cooperation with advertisers, they are able to distribute 
personalized advertisements to the prospective customers. 
This approach demands an acceptance of message recipients.  
Generally, mobile marketing is used in connection with 
other marketing events, i.e., campaigns on television,  in 
printed journals or on the web portals. This is referred to as 
integrated marketing. Nowadays, integration of mobile 
marketing with social networks sites is an effective approach 
to increase brand awareness and loyalty. Social networking 
supports building brand awareness and loyalty, and creates 
the Internet image of the company, but the mobile devices 
and mobile applications radically speed up the activities. 
Known as next-generation technology, mobile enterprise 
systems can either be enterprise system extended to support 
process mobility or separate mobile applications on mobile 
devices integrated with existing enterprise systems. The 
mobile enterprise systems require the further re-engineering 
of business processes as well as development of special 
repositories for temporal data storing on mobile devices. 
Mobile enterprise system technologies combined with other 
technologies such as bar code, GPS (Global Positioning 
System) and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) can 
offer a 
substantial efficiency 
and 
cost-effectiveness 
improvements. In the same way, supply chain management 
and procurement management processes benefit from mobile 
devices and mobile applications. The main characteristic  of 
a mobile business process is the mobility of human and 
physical resourses involved in the process. Mobile devices 
allow to track goods delivery and movements of vehicles. 
According to Alag, the application of m-business can be 
distinguished as global use in outdoor settings  in  
interorganizational logistics chains, or local usage e.g., in 
hospitals, libraries, universities or hypermarkets [1].  
M-healthcare enables connecting medical devices to 
mobile phones and permits the patient data to be transmitted 
to remote clinics healthcare systems for further processing 
[4]. Some of the mobile applications that are downloaded to 
patient handsets can provide answers to medical questions 
without necessary connecting to a remote clinical centre, 
therefore patients and their relatives can self-control 
automatically and only occasionally contact the hospitals. 
Mobile devices are not only simple voice communication 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

devices. They are a medium to create on demand voice, 
music, text, video and image communications [19].   
IV. 
BYOD STRATEGY BENEFITS AND WEAKNESSES 
During the development of mobile devices and services, 
the consideration of market offers plays an important role. 
Inadequate market orientation is the main reason of failures 
in the development of mobile services. However, the 
business considering enterprise wide process mobility 
requires a mobility strategy. The mobility strategy should 
guide operations and technology employees through the 
process redesign, application design, and implementation of 
the mobile enterprises systems. Alag argues that mobility 
strategies depend on factors, such as the business nature, 
strategic goals, need for process mobility, existing IT 
infrastructure and financial budgets [1]. Mobility strategies 
are unique for enterprises and cover many important 
problems e.g., risk and expected benefits of mobile devices 
usage, BYOD approach implementation. For instance, 
making decisions and quantifying risks about mobile devices 
is hard without good investigation of the mobile devices' 
usage in a business organization. Some organizations permit 
end user to take care of device management but some may 
want more protection. Anyhow, the business organization 
should be able to track, monitor, and control mobile network 
usage for business purposes. For example, if any of the users 
work with critical and unique data, they should consider 
using a backup and recovery solution. BYOD is a recent idea 
to exploit the personal communication devices for the work-
related tasks. Although, some business organizations have 
for years provided smart phones, laptops and tablet 
computers to employees, nowadays, personally-owned 
mobile devices are permitted to access the organization's 
networks and data.  The obvious advantage for the enterprise 
is cost savings achieved by not having to purchase these 
employee-owned devices. According to the Forrsights 
Workforce Employee Survey, Q4 2011 in North America 
and European Union countries 57% of users choose work 
devices themselves and spend their own money.  For the 
netbooks, it is 51%, for tablets it is 48%, for laptops it is 
41%, but for PC desktops it is only 16%.  
The BYOD-specific security and control issues are as 
follows: protection of sensitive data and intellectual property, 
protection of networks to which BYOD devices connect, 
responsibility and accountability for the device and 
information contained on it, removal of the data in case of 
the device loss, malware protection, ensuring that employee-
owned devices are properly backed up at all times [14]. Silva 
presented findings that 77% of responding business 
professionals said that the use of mobile devices in the 
workplace is important to achieving business goals, but 
simultaneously, 76% of respondents believe that mobile 
devices introduce a serious risk [17]. The survey revealed 
that only 39% of the devices have security controls to 
mitigate the risk and nearly 59% of respondents admitted to 
malware infections over the last 12 months of unsecured 
laptops, smart phones, and tablets. Business organizations, 
particularly in government, health care and defence face new 
legal questions: ownership of devices, buying the device, 
ownership of the information on the device. There is no clear 
answer, therefore the companies should consider the context, 
in which their employees' devices are used and if the 
employees' use of the devices for work purposes is very 
limited and concerns non-critical information, then BYOD 
strategy can make sense and it adds convenience at a 
predictable cost. However, the companies have several 
classes of users and have to choose a different provisioning 
and cost strategy for each separately.  
V. 
M-EDUCATION 
Soon, computer laboratories will not need to be 
supported by desktop computers, instead there is an 
opportunity to use private mobile devices to connect through 
Internet to servers and utilize business applications. 
However, wide implementation of mobile education is still a 
challenge. Some of the problems are mobile service costs, 
the need to change attitudes and institutions' policy against 
using electronic devices [19]. Development of mobile 
learning 
is 
driven 
by 
an 
opportunity, 
necessity, 
innovativeness and perceived weaknesses of e-learning. 
Nowadays, private enterprises and government sponsored 
programs and educational institutions are in a key position to 
find new ways to emphasize the role of m-learning and focus 
on 
user 
experience 
for 
further 
m-learning 
system 
development. M-learning means also the change of learning 
process paradigm. M-learning is not simply a direct 
extension of e-learning. So, what may work perfectly well in 
traditional education or even in e-learning system, may not 
fit the dynamic mobile environment. M-learning seems to 
support individual learning in the special context. Glossaries, 
dictionaries, phrasebooks, learning tips, examples, games 
and other learning aids are important in m-learning. M-
learners within a community share ideas, stories, opinions or 
ratings, and utilize the student-to-student and student-to-
teacher interactions. Mobile devices allow for the realization 
of education process in a particular  socio-natural context, 
where teachers are able to explain more  precisely the course 
topics during field works. For instance, students can learn 
biology in the forest. M-grading and m-testing are also 
possible with mobile phones. For example, during a course 
in the big university hall a concrete questions are randomly 
sent to the particular, chosen students who are obliged to 
answer within a few seconds. Teachers can provide feedback 
via Short Message Service (SMS) or other means regarding 
homework assignments or test scores  to a group of students. 
However, it can be stressful for teachers, who are obliged to 
answer  students anytime and anywhere. In some cases, 
mobile learning is seen as an adjunct to more traditional 
learning or e-learning. For example, students  call together 
for group projects or entertainment events. The use of the 
small screen of mobile device for animations, graphs, 
equations perhaps is trendy, and the graphical user interface 
makes course materials more appealing to students. There 
are some considerations for defining m-learning systems 
compared to the traditional e-learning system. Some 
important issues are as follows: 1) understanding which 
mobile systems model is to be used 2) controlling the access 
of student data on mobile devices and 3) the profile of the 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

student. For the designing of m-learning system, student 
must be at the design centre. Some business software 
development companies support e/m-learning providing  
business application online. For instance, SAP realizes SAP 
Business One and SAP ERP courses online. Students have 
access to remote server from their own private notebooks. In 
computer laboratories students used to utilize the university 
desktops, but more and more frequently they prefer to work 
on their own personal notebook. They are able to create their 
own data bases and realize all business transactions. Their 
data is secured, each student receives individual login and 
password for their own private access to the SAP Business 
One applications. So, students have access to the applications 
wherever they are at school, university open spaces and 
corridors in buildings. They can work at home, and they do 
not need to have special software license, but rather login 
and password to  access the Internet. The unlimited number 
of students can take part in the provided online course 
materials. When asked what they considered to be new and 
innovative about their experience of m-learning, students 
talked 
about 
the 
following 
qualitative 
advantages: 
availability of data and applications, flexibility, portability, 
easy navigation and intuitiveness of SAP Business One, 
efficiency of m-course provision in comparison with the 
traditional 
learning, 
comfortability, 
communication 
possibility and the sense of being in control. For years, the 
same two options (i.e., PC versus notebook) were offered to 
teachers. They can provide courses directly from university 
desktops or change to their own notebook. For some of them, 
teaching 
directly 
from 
personal 
notebook 
is 
more 
comfortable and safe. It allows teachers to keep all data files 
under control.  
VI. 
RESEARCH ON MOBILE DEVICE USAGE BY STUDENTS 
So far, some research has been done on factors 
influencing mobile technologies successful implementation. 
According to Amberg et al., for a systematic research 
process there is a need for a comprehensive, complete and 
disjunctive classification of factors influencing mobile 
services. Although, in literature there are some detailed 
approaches identifying concrete factors, generally the factors 
can be divided into four groups: structure (who?) process 
(how?) outcomes (for what?) and market (what?) [2]. The 
structure dimension describes the required input factors for 
the mobile service development. So, there is the need to 
answer who is the recipient of the service or mobile device. 
In this research, the university students are the recipients of 
mobile services and devices. The process dimension 
represents the required processes during the product 
lifecycle. There is  a question of how or in what processes or 
procedures students use the mobile devices. In this research, 
work, entertainment and education are the basic processes of 
mobile devices' usage. The outcome of a mobile service and 
device can be divided into procedural outcome and impact of 
the outcome. In this research, the usage of mobile devices is 
to increase knowledge resource or to develop social 
relationships. The procedural outcome can be evaluated at 
the end of the service provision. The impact of the mobile 
service and mobile devices has a long term character. This is 
significantly determined by the end-user's acceptance. The 
fourth, market dimension covers services and devices  
vendors, their brands and concrete products.  However, these 
issues are out of the scope of this research.   
It is generally believed that the rapid development of 
mobile technologies as well as the increase of mobile 
solutions for students call for a user-centered research to 
develop further applications. Therefore, the research is 
focused on analysis of students behaviour and students 
attitudes towards mobile devices. The short questionnaire 
was distributed during the first lecture at the beginning of the 
semester, after the presentation of the course curricula 
among the students of Logistics Information Systems, 
Business Information Systems and Corporate Architecture 
courses at the University of Economics in Katowice, Poland. 
114 students answered the questionnaire.  They accepted the 
questionnaire as important for the evaluation of their 
competencies to use mobile devices in learning processes as 
well as in other activities. Generally, the students' tasks can 
be categorized based on the areas that can be affected by 
mobile technologies. So, there are three categories of 
students' tasks: information tasks, interaction tasks, and 
planning tasks [2]. Although, each category of tasks has 
specific requirements in terms of mobile support and there is 
a need to fit mobile technologies characteristics with the 
requirements in terms of content, processing, and device 
portability, this research considers which devices are used 
for 
learning, 
occupational 
works 
and 
for 
social 
communication.  
The first question in the survey concerns the issue of 
what devices and technologies are utilized by the students. 
The answers are included in Table 1.  
TABLE I.  
TECHNOLOGIES AND MOBILE  DEVICES USED BY 
STUDENTS  
Technology and 
Device 
Purpose of usage  
Learning 
Occupation 
Social 
Relations 
No 
use 
stationary phone 
2a 
31 
41 
50 
mobile phone  
35 
60 
103 
9 
smart phone 
30 
27 
57 
56 
iPod 
3 
0 
3 
109 
iPad 
6 
3 
8 
106 
notebook 
76 
55 
72 
33 
netbook 
23 
18 
24 
83 
desktop computer 
49 
37 
50 
44 
tablet 
11 
6 
14 
93 
GPSdevice 
1 
32 
38 
52 
RFID device 
0 
6 
2 
108 
automatic personal 
identification 
2 
7 
1 
106 
biometric  
identification 
2 
5 
2 
106 
a. number of positive answers, index applies to all numbers in Table  
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

In Table 1, the number of positive answers are included. So, 
mobile phones (103 positive answers) and notebooks (72 
positive answers) are the most popular devices for social 
relations development as well as for learning and for 
occupational work. Young people, i.e., students reject 
stationary phones for mobile phones and smart phones.  The 
devices 
for 
automatic 
identification 
and 
biometric 
identification are still not very popular, although new 
passports are supported by the biometric identification of 
the owner. They still use desktop computers for learning, 
because at university laboratories there are desktop 
computers available, and only part of them prefer to use 
their own computers. However, 54% of surveyed students 
have answered they use their own mobile devices for 
occupational works, 89% of the students use owned  devices 
in learning processes at university. Only 34% of students 
declared that they prefer to access the Internet from only 
one device. 76% of the students use different mobile devices 
for different purposes. 46% of the surveyed students believe 
that access to Internet from only one device is realized more 
quickly than access from more than one. Nearly the same 
percent of students believes that access to Internet from one 
device is more efficient (48% of students) and more secure 
(55% of students). Figure 1 presents percentages of students 
who use the devices in comparison with the percent of 
students who do not use the mobile devices and 
technologies.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Percent of students using the mobile devices. 
The second part of the survey concerns the popularity of 
social media, social network portals and communication 
software among students  and use of the technologies for 
learning support, occupational work support and for social 
communication, maintaining contacts with friends and 
families or generally, for social relations development. The 
survey results are presented in Table 2 and Figure 2. Email 
and SMS are the most popular communication forms. All the 
surveyed students use them. The email is called "killer 
application" and it is treated as the basic communication 
form between university faculty staff and students. It should 
be noted that Facebook is also very popular in contrast with 
LinkedIn and Where Are You Now? (WAYN). Twitter is 
widely used in other countries and by politicians, but not by 
students in Poland. Recommender systems are implemented, 
but they are not widely approved by students. They have 
own preferences, instead of using the suggested products. 
Although, sometimes students are not conscious that they 
behave according to recommendations.  
TABLE II.  
COMMUNICATION SOFTWARE AND SOCIAL MEDIA USAGE  
Social media & 
communication 
software 
Purpose of usage  
Learning 
Occupation 
Social 
Relations 
No 
use 
email 
102a 
82 
108 
0 
SMS 
69 
60 
112 
0 
chat room  
50 
33 
76 
28 
Skype 
28 
9 
94 
31 
Facebook  
54 
18 
105 
18 
YouTube 
51 
13 
81 
7 
Twitter 
1 
2 
5 
107 
WAYN 
0 
0 
0 
114 
LinkedIn 
0 
6 
8 
102 
recommender system 
4 
3 
6 
103 
price 
comparison 
portals 
13 
18 
46 
43 
GoogleMaps 
44 
49 
66 
14 
Wikipedia  
84 
29 
26 
13 
discussion fora 
52 
21 
47 
33 
blogs 
16 
6 
37 
66 
open e-book 
repositories 
54 
13 
13 
51 
open e-publication 
76 
20 
22 
26 
a. number of positive answers, index applies to all numbers in Table 
 
Figure 2.  Percent of students using new media. 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

It should be noticed that students readily support their 
educational processes as well as their occupational works by 
knowledge from open repositories. Reading e-publication is 
more comfortable than reading printed materials. The 
research results are very similar to the effects received by 
Wojcik [20]. There is also the tendency visible to reduce 
usage of desktop computers and stationary telephones in 
favour of laptops and mobile devices.  
VII. CONCLUSION  
The paper was to show the university students’ attitudes 
towards mobile devices and new media. Students as 
consumers of mobile devices have been found to rely on 
market information when evaluating innovations. Irrationally 
high price is the main reason of low usage of iPods and 
iPads. Students simply cannot afford these overpriced pieces. 
However, the increase of demand for the devices is expected 
to bring the price reduction. Students do not perceive 
application of RFID and biometric identification in their life, 
although biometric passwords are now widely implemented. 
Simply, students in survey process do not think about the 
opportunities to apply biometrics in daily use. Students are 
rather conservative and need time for the verification of 
usefulness of Twitter, blogs and recommender systems. 
Usability of some new media is bigger for private social 
communication than for business, as it is in the case of 
Skype, Facebook, Google Maps and YouTube. Further 
research would cover analysis of environment, client and 
organizational factors influencing student behaviour in this 
user centered approach. The group of environmental factors 
will cover market issues, infrastructure, culture and skills. 
Organizational 
factors 
will 
comprise 
relevant 
prior 
experience in e-learning, willingness to explore the potential 
of the Internet  and mobile devices. Client factors cover 
convenience of purchasing, prices and quality of the 
products, security and level of maintenance service.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was conducted as part of the Prosumption 
project at University of Economics in Katowice. The project 
is supported by the National Centre of Science, grant number 
NN 115410040. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
H.S. Alag, "Business Process Mobility," in Handbook of 
Research in Mobile Business: Technical, Methodological, 
and Social Perspectives, Volume1, B.Unhelkar, Ed. Idea 
Group Reference, Hershey, 2006, pp.583-601.  
[2] 
M. Amberg, J. Wehrmann, and R. Zimmer, "Factors 
influencing the design of mobile services," in Mobile 
Information Systems, E. Lawrence, B. Pernici, J. Krogstie, 
Eds. Springer NY 2005, pp. 199-213. 
[3] 
A. Ayadi and Ch. Ammi, "Strategic Perspectives in Mobile 
Banking: Technology, Value Creation and Developing 
Factors," Handbook of Research in Mobile Business: 
Technical, Methodological, and Social Perspectives, Volume 
1, B. Unhelkar, Ed. Idea Group Reference, Hershey, 2006, 
pp.420-429. 
[4] 
A. Bamigboye, "Mobile Healthcare: Challenges and 
Opportunities," 
in 
Mobile 
Technology 
Consumption 
Opportunities and Challenges, B.L. Ciaramitaro, Ed. 
Information Science Reference, Hershey, 2012, pp.77-98. 
[5] 
M.N. Beccari and T.L. Oliveira, "A Philosophical Approach 
about User Experience Methodology," in Design, User 
Experience and Usability, Theory, Methods, Tools and 
Practice, A. Marcus, Ed. Springer, Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 13-
22. 
[6] 
R. 
Bernhaupt, 
"User 
Experience 
Evaluation 
in 
Entertainment," in Evaluating User Experience in Games, 
Concepts and Methods, R. Bernhaupt, Ed. Springer-Verlag, 
London, 2010, pp. 3-10. 
[7] 
H. Beyer, User-Centered Agile Methods. Morgan & 
Claypool Publishers, Boston, 2010. 
[8] 
B. Buxton, Sketching User Experiences. Morgan Kaufmann, 
San Francisco, CA, 2007. 
[9] 
E.H. Calvillo-Gamez, P. Cairns, and A.L. Cox, "Assessing 
the Core Elements of the Gaming Experience, " in  
Evaluating User Experince in Games, Concepts and 
Methods, R. Bernhaupt, Ed. Springer, London, 2010,  pp. 47-
72. 
[10] N. Godbole, "Relating Mobile Computing to Mobile 
Commerce," in Handbook of Research in Mobile Business: 
Technical, 
Methodological, 
and 
Social 
Perspectives, 
Volume1, B. Unhelkar, Ed. Idea Group Reference, Hershey, 
2006, pp.463-486. 
[11] J. Gulliksen, B. Goransson, I. Boivie, J. Persson, S. 
Blomkvist,  and A. Cajander, A. "Key principles for user-
centered systems design", in Human-centered software 
engineering 
- 
integrating 
usability 
in 
the 
software 
development lifecycle, A. Seffah,  J. Gulliksen, M.C. 
Desmarais, Eds. Springer, Berlin, 2005, pp. 17-37. 
[12] C. Ihlstrom Eriksson, and J. Svensson, "A User Centered 
Innovation Approach Identifyin Key User Values for the E-
Newspaper," in Developing Technologies in E-Services, 
Self-Services, and Mobile Communication, New Concepts, 
A. Scupola A. Ed. Information Science Reference, Hershey, 
2011, pp.146 -185.  
[13] J. 
Krogstie, 
"Requirement 
Engineering 
for 
Mobile 
Information 
Systems", 
2001, 
http://www.ido.ntnu.no/ 
~krogstie/publications/2001/REFSQ01/draft.pdf, 
retrieved 
August 2013.  
[14] N. Kelson and J. Kalwerisky, "Bring Your Own Device 
(BYOD)," Security Audit/Assurance Program, ISACA, 
2012, http://www.isaca.org/BYOD-AP, retrieved May 2013. 
[15] K. McGrane, Content Strategy for mobile, A Book Apart, 
New York, 2012.  
[16] A. Shapiro, Users not Customers, Penquin Books Ltd. 
London, 2011.  
[17] P. 
Silva, 
"BYOD 
2.0: 
Moving 
Beyond 
MDM," 
http://www.f5.com,  March 8.2012, retrieved May 2013. 
[18] B. Torpel, A. Voss, M. Hartswood, and R. Procter, 
"Participatory Design: Issues and Approaches in Dynamic 
Constallations of Use, Design and Research," in Configuring 
User-Designer Relations, A. Voss,  M. Hartswood, R. 
Procter, M. Rouncefield, R.S. Slack, M. Buscher, Eds. 
Springer Verlag London, 2009, pp. 13-30. 
[19] A. Velokovsky and S. Shammas, "Mobile Education," in 
Mobile 
Technology 
Consumption 
Opportunities 
and 
Challenges, B.L. Ciaramitaro, Ed. Information Science 
Reference, Hershey, 2012, pp. 16-32. 
[20] J. Wojcik, "Attitudes of Polish students towards Web 2.0 
technology," in Creativity Support Systems, Methods and 
Applications, H. Sroka, S. Stanek and M. Pankowska, Eds. 
University of Economics, Katowice, 2012, pp.119-131. 
 
 
 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

