Integrated Tool Support in the Context of Security
and Network Management Convergence
Felix von Eye, David Schmitz, and Wolfgang Hommel
Leibniz Supercomputing Centre, Munich Network Management Team
Garching n. Munich, Germany
Email:{voneye,schmitz,hommel}@lrz.de
Abstract—The convergence of different types of networks, such as
for telecommunication and data transfer, on the hardware layer
has an obvious impact on both network management and security
management, which especially affects network service providers
as well as data centers. This paper argues that also methods,
algorithms, and tools from both research domains, network
management and security management, should systematically be
reviewed for synergies. It ﬁrst analyzes the current state of the
art in both domains and identiﬁes gap areas that require further
investigation. Then, the Customer Network Management for the
X-WiN (WebCNM) network management tool, which started as a
research prototype in the pan-European research and education
network, G ´EANT, is presented along with selected extensions that
were designed and implemented to integrate security management
functionality. Several security event visualization options and
their use within the European industry-focused Safe And Secure
European Routing (SASER) project are discussed.
Keywords–Network management; Security management; Inte-
grated management; Enterprise management; Convergence.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In both research and real-world operations, network man-
agement and security management are often treated as com-
plementary but still largely independent parts of the overall IT
service management performed by network service providers
and data centers. However, this view limits the prospects
in case of, e.g., handling incidents. In many situations both
security events and network events are related and visible
within the same time interval, for example when a security
event results in an unusual or peak usage of the network.
In turn, certain conditions, such as an unreachable service or
device, can be caused either by a denial of service attack or a
fault in the network.
As security management and network management are
typically supported by independent technical management
software tools, such contextual relationships are not visible
without further ado. This motivates a new approach to combine
the information processed by either management tool land-
scape into one, leading to a convergence of selected network
and security management methods and tools. Although it is
obvious that it is neither reasonable nor practically possible
to fully integrate both disciplines currently, we elaborate on
selected event categories that result in operational beneﬁts or
have interesting properties for research that motivate further
investigation.
The work leading to the presented results have been carried
out in the large-scale distributed environment of the SASER-
SIEGFRIED project (Safe and Secure European Routing) [1],
in which more than 50 European research and industry project
partners design and implement network architectures and
technologies for secure future networks. The project’s overall
goal is to remedy security vulnerabilities of today’s IP layer
networks and have them ready for deployment in backbone
networks by the year 2020. Thereby, security mechanisms are
designed based on an analysis of the currently predominant
security problems in the IP layer as well as upcoming issues,
such as vendor backdoor and trafﬁc anomaly detection. The
project focuses on inter-domain network trafﬁc and routing
decisions that are based on security metrics, which are derived
from aggregating and combining security measurements car-
ried out by multiple involved organizations in a cooperative
manner. As this scenario relies on the future internet archi-
tecture and software-deﬁned networks (SDNs), we present a
prototype of a combined security and network management
system, which is independent of any commercial vendor or
operator and has already been used in the context of G´EANT,
the pan-European research network.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section II gives an overview of the current state of the art
and related work regarding network management, security
management, and the convergence of these two disciplines.
Section III presents the WebCNM framework, which serves
as technical basis for implementing an integrated network and
security management platform, and experiences made in the
SASER project. Finally, Section IV concludes the paper and
gives an outlook to future work.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Both network management and security management are
computer science disciplines with a very long, yet only par-
tially overlapping history. In this section, ﬁrst the focus is
clariﬁed by discussing the term management. Then, we analyze
the status quo of network management in Section II-A and the
current state of the art of security management in Section II-B.
Finally, Section II-C reviews related work on the convergence
of both disciplines and outlines how it has inﬂuenced the
improved approach presented in Section III.
In general, management in the context of IT services refers
to any measures and activities that are performed in order to
achieve effective and efﬁcient operations of those IT services
and the required resources in alignment with an organization’s
business goals [2]. Management therefore covers the whole
life-cycle, including planning, provisioning, setup, conﬁgura-
tion, operations and maintenance, and removal; it involves per-
sonnel, procedures, processes, technology, and software tools.
Management must be performed on any abstraction layer,
such as individual physical hardware components or software
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

properties (e.g., application response time) up to an enterprise-
wide and even inter-organizational view. The term integrated
management refers to approaches that successfully deal with
heterogeneity, such as managing hardware by different vendors
or across various types of systems, such as network compo-
nents, servers, and application software. Usually, management
architectures describe various properties of how management
is carried out in an abstract manner. They can be broken down
into four models:
1)
The systems to be managed, referred to as manage-
ment objects, are described by an information model.
2)
The roles of all systems involved in management
along with their types of cooperation are described
by an organizational model.
3)
The communication model describes the exchange
of management-related messages between the roles
deﬁned by the organizational model.
4)
The
function
model
groups
and
structures
the
management-speciﬁc functionality.
A software implementation of a management architecture
is referred to as a management platform. Furthermore, a man-
agement system refers to the sum of organizational structure,
policies, planning activities, responsibilities, practices, proce-
dures, processes, and resources [3]; i.e., a management system
is not just a piece of software, but management software,
such as a management platform and various management tools,
contributes to this overall management system.
A. Network Management Status quo
Network management has evolved over decades with the
growth of intra-organizational enterprise networks and the
Internet. The most inﬂuential foundation for network manage-
ment is the classical OSI management architecture, which pro-
posed the ﬁve functional areas fault, conﬁguration, accounting,
performance, and security (FCAPS) [4].
Fault management, which is closely related to the IT ser-
vice management areas of incident management and problem
management as used by the standard ISO/IEC 20000, deals
with anticipating, detecting, and reacting to any types of
network faults, such as hardware defects, resource exhaustion,
and quality of service guarantee violation. To a large degree,
fault management is based on monitoring one’s network using
both active and passive measurements. Inter-domain fault
management is still non-trivial due to the heterogeneity of the
involved hardware and organizations’ restrictive information
sharing policies [5].
Conﬁguration management is the function area to actively
modify a network component’s parameters. It is an area
for which integrated management has not been established
successfully because of the inherent complexity of the task:
•
Various different types of network components, such
as routers, switches, and WiFi access points must
be supported; they operate on different layers of the
ISO/OSI model.
•
Hardware and ﬁrmware heterogeneity: The same type
of network component, such as a router, often has
vendor-speciﬁc conﬁguration options and still shows a
lack of compatibility when components from different
vendors or product generations are mixed.
•
Scalability: Larger organizations typically must man-
age several thousands of network components; how-
ever, many management tools still lack support for
parallelized operations, e.g., to perform even simple
tasks like ﬁrmware updates.
•
Emerging technologies: Given the cost of network
equipment, it is not unusual that network components
are in use much longer than other types of hardware.
For example, while modern network equipment sup-
ports new management paradigms, such as SDNs, the
majority of components in use today still needs to be
managed using Simple Network Management Protocol
(SNMP).
As a consequence, network component conﬁguration man-
agement is mostly done by using vendor-speciﬁc tools in
practice, which means that organizations need other means
to ensure conﬁguration consistency across network component
types and hardware models.
Accounting, like fault management, is based on monitoring
network components. Various low-level hardware counters are
aggregated and combined to support, e.g., billing processes.
Performance management is closely related to the manage-
ment of service levels. Quality of service parameters typically
include the minimum guaranteed availability of network links
along with their bandwidth and upper limits for undesired
properties, such as packet loss, delay, and jitter. Similarly to
accounting, these parameters may vary with the actual content
that is being transported, because, for example, voice-over-
IP connections have different requirements than bulk data
transfers.
Security management, as far as the traditional network
management is concerned, focuses on security properties of
individual network components, such as authentication and
authorization for management access. While most modern
network components support some additional security features,
such as port-based access control in switches and access con-
trol lists in routers, these features either depend on additional
central security management components, such as a RADIUS
server for user or device authentication, or are clearly limited
by their hardware performance.
B. Security Management Status quo
The classic goal of security management is to ensure the
conﬁdentiality, integrity, and availability of sensitive data as
well as the systems and services that process it. As in other ar-
eas of computer science, there is no single silver bullet security
measure to achieve this goal, but numerous modular security
controls must be combined in a complementary and partially
deliberately overlapping manner, which is often referred to
defense-in-depth and graceful-degradation. Security controls
can be categorized as preventing, detecting, or reacting in
relation to successful attacks.
Derived from the work by Hyland and Sandhu [6], the
following areas of security operations must be considered:
•
System security covers the management of avail-
able software updates, hardening each individual sys-
tem, having malware protection in place, integration
with central security services, such as authentica-
tion servers, and preventing undesired data leakage.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Network components are also considered to be such
systems.
•
Network security encompasses the deﬁnition of secu-
rity zones based on protection requirements, the appli-
cation of virtualization and segregation concepts, such
as virtual local area networks (VLAN), and dedicated
network security components, such as ﬁrewalls and
network-based intrusion detection systems.
•
Access management covers the management of users
along with their roles and permissions as well as
setting up authentication and authorization services.
Privileged accounts, i.e., those used by administra-
tors with full control over a system, deserve special
attention. Physical access to systems also must be
considered.
•
(High) availability is practically only achieved through
some type of redundancy, which includes both hard-
ware and copies of the data.
•
Cryptography is a complex discipline with endless
applications in information security. Flawed imple-
mentations and improper application due to lacking
know-how are also a large source of major security
problems.
Preventive security controls, such as ﬁrewalls and access
control mechanisms, are intended to enforce policies, i.e.,
someone must deﬁne what is allowed or undesired in an a-
priori manner. The proper implementation of these controls can
be checked, e.g., by means of penetration tests. The safe gen-
eral assumption is that at least parts of one’s IT infrastructure
are insecure and the methods provided by the subdiscipline of
vulnerability management assists in identifying those parts. To
prioritize options for the improvement of the overall security
level, risk management methods need to be applied.
However, security monitoring is quite mature. It mostly
relies on aggregating, correlating, and evaluating security
events provided by various dedicated sensors as well as sys-
tems and applications, e.g., via log ﬁles. Intrusion detection
systems passively monitor data as it is processed by the
involved systems and use signatures of known attacks or
outlier detection to register unusual behavior. As most attack
attempts are background noise, i.e., they are not speciﬁcally
targeted against systems known to be vulnerable, correlation
with an asset management database and information from
one’s own vulnerability management greatly help to reduce
the number of false positive alerts. Security information and
event management (SIEM) systems perform this correlation,
prioritize detected security incidents, create reports, and can
be considered to be the security management counterpart of
management platforms in network management.
C. Related Work on Management Convergence
It is obvious that network management and security man-
agement have partially overlapping scopes: Certain network
components, such as ﬁrewalls, are typically operated by IT
security personnel, and security events generated by network
components are being processed by security management tools
as a matter of course. However, this information ﬂow can tra-
ditionally be considered one-way, from network management
to security management tools, without feedback loops and with
completely separated tool sets used.
Convergence of both network and security management has
the meaning that methods, procedures, and tools can jointly
be used for both disciplines, bringing them together as one
to increase effectiveness and reduce the overhead caused by
separate processing of the same data in multiple instances. In
this section, related work in this area is analyzed, which has
inﬂuenced the design of the approach presented in the next
section.
In [7], Dawkins et al. presented a novel network security
management system for tracking large-scale, multi-step attacks
based on data from various speciﬁc sensors in different net-
working domains. Their system provides real-time correlation
and analysis of the data; they focus on an interesting novel
visualization method that provides a kind of heads-up cockpit
display of an entire network that can be used by network
as well as security management personnel. While their work
is intended for converged networks and sensors speciﬁcally
designed for such environments, our approach differs in that
it makes use of existing data sources.
In [8], Kuklinski and Chemouil discuss management chal-
lenges speciﬁcally for SDNs. The propose a mapping of the
classic FCAPS approach and point out the special role of SDN
controllers, for which additional security monitoring mecha-
nisms are proposed. Complementary, Zhu et al. discuss the role
of vendor speciﬁcations in cross domain communication in [9].
They present key requirements for an inter-domain security
infrastructure along with a reference architecture.
Han and Lei compare the policy languages that are used
for network and security management in [10]. The identiﬁed
similarities make it interesting to formulate policies and rule
sets that cover both management disciplines. However, despite
some widely used policy languages, the use of proprietary
policy speciﬁcation formats in various products still fuels
the demand for inter-system conversions. Wang-fei and Qi
developed a novel network management system in [11] with
an emphasis on security management that covers networking
equipment as well as virtual machine servers; it also addresses
combined performance management and uniﬁes the access
control mechanisms of both network components and IT
services.
In sum, despite several approaches towards combining both
management disciplines in prior work, there is no thorough
analysis of which types of network and security events would
be relevant for a uniﬁed management approach and no in-
tegrated management platform exists yet. This motivates the
approach discussed in the next section.
III.
EXTENDING THE WEBCNM FRAMEWORK
WebCNM started as a research prototype for vendor-
independent, multi-domain, and customer-oriented network
monitoring and management visualization. Its core function-
ality consists of the visualization of network maps that are
organized in a tree-based hierarchy. Each network map shows
network elements, i.e., nodes and links of different network
layers, together with current or historic status and metric
information. Detailed historic statistics are provided in a drill-
down manner.
WebCNM was originally developed in the pan-European
research and education network, G´EANT, as part of the
GN3 project (2011-2013). It has been used to visualize
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

network topologies and respective network metrics of many
European and Non-European national research and educa-
tion networks (NRENs) including DFN (Germany), SWITCH
(Switzerland), Uninett (Norway), Pionier (Poland), GARR
(Italy), Surfnet (Netherlands), Renater (France), Hungarnet
(Hungary), MRen (Montenegro), GRNet (Greece), SEREEN
(South-East-Europe), ESNet (Energe Sciene Network, US),
Internet2 (US), RedClara (Pan South/Middle America), RNP
(Brazil), and the pan-European core-network of G´EANT as
well as the optical private network of CERN’s Large Hadron
Collider LHC project (LHCOPN). A signiﬁcantly extended
version is in production as of 2015 for all higher education
institutions connected to the German NREN. WebCNM’s func-
tionalities comprise, among others, customers’ network service
information, network access information/status, network access
accounting, network core status, and network performance
management.
WebCNM was speciﬁcally designed to be extensible in an
ﬂexible and modular manner: It features a JavaScript extension
API, which is independent of the implementation technology
of both the backend and the GWT-based web client, which
allows for a client-side integration with other web pages
and web tools. It is therefore a suitable basis for integrating
functionality related to security management.
A. Integration of Security Events in WebCNM
Before the integration of security events into any network
management tool, it is necessary to analyze which potential
security events have an impact on network connections or
devices. As a ﬁrst step, only direct attacks on network devices,
attacks on the network protocols or on the availability of
systems, services, and the network itself are considered.
As there are a lot of possible attack scenarios, the following
implemented examples highlight some core issues:
•
Port scans: A port scan is often treated as an attack
in which a client attempts connections to a range of
server ports with the goal of ﬁnding active services
and preparing the exploitation of their known vulner-
abilities.
•
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Hijacking: BGP hi-
jacking is the illegitimate takeover of groups of IP
addresses by corrupting inter-domain routing tables.
This attack has a very high impact on network se-
curity but it is difﬁcult to implement as the attacker
has to ﬁrst compromise central network infrastructure
components, such as the backbone routers.
•
Ampliﬁcation Attack: In distributed reﬂective denial-
of-service (DRDoS) attacks, adversaries send requests
to public servers (e.g., open recursive DNS resolvers)
and spoof the IP address of a victim. These servers,
in turn, ﬂood the victim with valid responses and –
unknowingly – exhaust its bandwidth.
•
Backdoor: A backdoor in a computer system is a
method of bypassing security controls, such as user
authentication, in order to enable unsolicited remote
access to a system, obtaining access to data, and
so on, while attempting to remain undetected. While
backdoors on servers and workstations are quite usual
and a well researched topic, backdoors on switches
and routers are still a huge problem.
Out of these threat scenarios, denial-of-service attacks
are the most simple example of security incidents that are
also visible in network management because the bandwidth
utilization parameter increases. To enable the correlation be-
tween network and security events, WebCNM was extended
with an interface to use intrusion detection message exchange
format (IDMEF) based messages [12], which are designed to
exchange security relevant data between systems and domains.
B. Visualization of logins on network devices
In this paper, an example is used to clarify the ideas behind
the new approach, in which logins to network devices like
backbone routers are analyzed. Regular secure shell (SSH) logs
are used as basis, which gives the possibility to detect whether
a suspicious login has occurred.
In WebCNM, any network device can be monitored by
the network management tool part. There are two ways to
determine if there is a security incident. The ﬁrst one is the
alerting by the SIEM system via the IDMEF interface. In
this case, the SIEM system sends an IDMEF message as a
notiﬁcation to WebCNM and this event is then displayed inside
the network management tool. This method is usually used to
inform the network administrators about suspicious events in
the network respectively on network devices. In general, in a
regular sized network there are too many events, so they can
be only analyzed by visualization. In this case, the affected
subnetwork or network device is highlighted inside the network
management system, which helps to ﬁnd possible network
issues.
Inside the SIEM system, the security administrators usually
use a lot of different rulesets, which are able to automatically
detect attacks or misuse of components inside the network.
These rulesets have to be adjusted to produce only a few false
positives and negatives. To detect unknown attacks or to detect
events, which are slightly under the radar, it is necessary to
also manually analyze the communication ﬂows.
This leads to the other way to display security-relevant
events during the direct inspection of the network components.
For example, the log messages of a network device can be
displayed in the network management tool. As the network
management tool is not a SIEM system, it is not able to process
the correlation of events in an automated manner, but instead
can only visualize them for the administrator. This allows net-
work administrators to see suspicious events, e.g., a login to the
network device from outside the management VLAN, which
is quite unusual. Figure 1 illustrates an example of a possible
visualization of SSH logins that has been developed within
the SASER project: It uses GeoIP-based grouping of remote
source addresses and makes it easy to visually distinguish
between successful and failed logins. Brute force attempts to
guess user passwords can be spotted on the right, and clicking
on any edge or vertex brings up more details about the selected
group of events. When viewing more generic events, advanced
color schemes can be used, e.g., to visually identify protocols
or VLANs. In this scenario, the server is only accessible via the
SSH public key method for the administrators, so it is unusual
that there are also connections authenticated with passwords.
In other cases this behavior is completely different, as the
authentication via password is the only possible way to access
a device. This diversity of authentication methods prevents a
fully automated generation of SIEM rules, e.g., for anomaly
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 1. Visualization of SSH logins in WebCNM.
detection, but instead needs manual classiﬁcation. This can be
done very user-friendly via visualization.
As the information collected in such a way is only some
type of metrics from the WebCNM point of view, the used
visualization is not limited to the form shown in Figure 1.
Figure 2 shows some visualizations that were developed to-
gether with the user interface division of FH Potsdam in the
SASER project. Especially for data for which no automated
processing and alerting rules have been implemented, these
visualizations exploit the innate human skill to quickly identify
patterns and outliers that do not match one of these patterns;
therefore, while many of those developed visualizations do
not provide explicitly the necessary information to handle
the potential incidents they indicate, they nevertheless assist
in quickly picking up those events manually that have to be
reviewed further.
These different visualization types were developed, as there
are no visualization types generally applicable to all attack
scenarios or systems. The beneﬁt of the human analysis of the
visualizations is that humans can browse through different vi-
sualization views. If there are any outliers visible, they are able
to correlate them with other outliers in other views enhanced
with their knowledge. Therefore, it is important that there are
ways to switch the kind of visualization. The visualizations
shown in Figure 2 are specially made for detection of ampliﬁ-
cation attacks, denial of service detection, portscan detection,
the correlation between source and destination addresses in
login events, the delays of Transmission Control Protocol
(TCP) connections, and the detection of high trafﬁc network
nodes. Often, the design goal of visualizations is to highlight
differences or similarities of the received datasets. This helps
the network administrators to detect security events before the
attacker becomes visible to the security administrators and
their SIEM system.
C. Evaluation in the SASER Scenario
In the SASER project, the newly designed network man-
agement system was introduced to allow the integrated view
on network and security. The implementation was tested by
several partners to identify whether the concept also works
in real-world scenarios. It turned out in these tests, however,
that the focus on port scans is not very useful for huge
Internet service providers as there are too many messages to
process, which makes the overview very difﬁcult to keep. But
they proposed the small change that the messages of lesser
important events should only be visible if an administrator is
searching for a fault.
On the other side the possible ampliﬁcation vulnerabilities
turned out as very useful. For visualization, there are in
general too many events, but it turned out that especially
for connections with very strict service level agreements it is
useful to know if there is a potential denial of service threat
by a vulnerable device inside the local domain, so the routing
can be set to minimize the risks.
The function to analyze the log messages of a router or
switch with regard to security was determined to be very
helpful, as this work is done by security staff, which often
has limited knowledge about network-side topology changes,
or requires to keep track of those changes manually. Both
alternatives are based on the fact that the root causes of faults
are hard to determine.
Furthermore, the project’s focus on SDN enables a lot of
new possibilities in monitoring and management. As the SDN
controller is designed to get extended with applications, it is
possible to connect the monitoring functions directly to the
controller. This leads to more efﬁcient algorithm implementa-
tions because the export and transformation of the information
is not needed anymore. There are also no additional delays
between the monitoring and the analyzing. As the network
management system is directly connected to the SDN con-
troller, it is also possible to get the information directly from
the controller.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
As the integration of security management functionality,
including the visualization of security events, as an extension
to the WebCNM research prototype has shown, there is an in-
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 2. Different visualizations of security events in WebCNM.
teresting potential for converged network and security manage-
ment tools. Although decisions about which events to include
and how to visualize them still require more research, it is
obvious that future management software suites can cover both
disciplines in integrated manner. While presently only security
events from data sources within an organization have been pro-
cessed, our future work will investigate the inclusion of events
and conﬁguration items created by SDN controllers and so-
called SDN applications with the goal of enabling WebCNM-
based network and security management across organizational
borders. The primary security management challenges to this
extent are restrictive information sharing policies and technical
heterogeneity in the real world, similar to the previous network
management challenges that have successfully been overcome.
In the long term, self-adapting monitoring data sources that
automatically adjust, e.g., their threshold parameters before
raising alarms, will also be integrated into WebCNM.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Parts of this work has been funded by the German Ministry
of Education and Research (FKZ: 16BP12309). The authors
wish to thank the members of the Munich Network Manage-
ment (MNM) Team for helpful comments on previous versions
of this paper. The MNM-Team, directed by Prof. Dr. Dieter
Kranzlm¨uller and Prof. Dr. Heinz-Gerd Hegering, is a group
of researchers at Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich,
Technische Universit¨at M¨unchen, the University of the Federal
Armed Forces, and the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre of the
Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities.
REFERENCES
[1]
“The
SASER-SIEGFRIED
Project
Website,”
http://www.celtic-
initiative.org/Projects/Celtic-Plus-Projects/2011/SASER/SASER-b-
Siegfried/saser-b-default.asp, 2013, [retrieved: 2015-04-10].
[2]
H.-G. Hegering, S. Abeck, and B. Neumair, Integrated Management of
Networked Systems — Concepts, Architectures and their Operational
Application.
ISBN 1-55860-571-1, Morgan Kaufmann Pub., 1999.
[3]
ISO/IEC 27001:2005, Information technology – Security techniques –
Information security management systems – Requirements.
Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization and International Electrotechni-
cal Commission, 2005.
[4]
ISO/IEC 7498-4:1989, Information processing systems – Open Systems
Interconnection – Basic Reference Model – Part 4: Management frame-
work.
International Organization for Standardization and International
Electrotechnical Commission, 1989.
[5]
P. Marcu, D. Schmitz, W. Fritz, M. Yampolskiy, and W. Hommel, “Inte-
grated monitoring of multi-domain backbone connections,” International
journal of Computer Networks & Communications (IJCNC), vol. 3,
no. 1, 2011, pp. 82–99.
[6]
P. C. Hyland and R. Sandhu, “Management of Network Security Appli-
cations,” in Proceedings of the 21st NIST-NCSC National Information
Systems Security Conference.
Arlington, Virginia, USA: National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Oct. 1998, pp. D–86–D–97.
[7]
J. Dawkins, K. Clark, G. Manes, and M. Papa, “A Framework for
Uniﬁed Network Security Management: Identifying and Tacking Secu-
rity Threats on Converged Networks,” Journal of Network and Systems
Management, vol. 13, no. 3, 2005, pp. 253–267.
[8]
S. Kuklinski and P. Chemouil, “Network Management Challenges in
Software-Deﬁned Networks,” IEICE Transactions on Communications,
vol. E97-B, no. 1, 2014, pp. 2–9.
[9]
W. Zhu, L. Vizenor, and A. Srinivasan, “Towards a Reference Archi-
tecture for Service-Oriented Cross Domain Security Infrastructures,”
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

in Internet and Distributed Computing Systems, ser. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, G. Fortino, G. Di Fatta, W. Li, S. Ochoa,
A. Cuzzocrea, and M. Pathan, Eds.
Springer International Publishing,
2014, vol. 8729, pp. 275–284.
[10]
W. Han and C. Lei, “A survey on policy languages in network and
security management,” Computer Networks, vol. 56, no. 1, 2012, pp.
477–489.
[11]
W. fei Zhao and Q. Wang, “Study on Network Management and
Security Access Control,” Communications Technology, vol. 3, 2011,
pp. 93–95.
[12]
H. Debar, D. Curry, and B. Feinstein, “The Intrusion Detection
Message Exchange Format (IDMEF),” The Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF), Request for Comments 4765, Mar. 2007, [retrieved:
2015-04-10]. [Online]. Available: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4765
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

