Challenges for Advanced Applications in Archaeology 
What IT can still learn from humanities 
 
Lutz Schubert 
IOMI, University of Ulm 
Ulm, Germany 
email: lutz.schubert@uni-ulm.de 
Gill Hunt 
Hunt Lancaster 
Lancaster, UK 
email: ghunt@huntlancaster.co.uk 
Keith Jeffery 
Keith G Jeffery Consultants 
Faringdon, UK 
email: keith.jeffery@keithgjefferyconsultants.co.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Computer science frequently considers much of 
humanities and in particular archaeology “trivial”. The “hard 
challenges” were defined by sciences, such as physics. Yet these 
“soft” domains have been and are struggling with challenges 
that still exceed computational capabilities and that cannot be 
solved with current approaches. On the other hand, 
climatological models, remote sensing, agent modelling etc. all 
can benefit from archaeological data and approaches. In this 
paper we review how current computer science is insufficient to 
address the challenges posed in an archaeological context.  
Keywords – advanced applications; archaeology; high 
performance computing; physics; simulation; network analysis; 
social networks; agent systems; theoretical computer science. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Archaeology developed into a complex science only in the 
last century. It brings together experts from numerous 
disciplines to preserve and unveil the (human) past. Though 
archaeology is typically associated with a pen and paper 
science (Figure 1), it may come as a surprise that it adopts 
modern technology fast, such as radiocarbon dating and 
remote sensing [1] [12].  
Due to the nature of the field, namely working with (and 
“in”) the past, the need for complex applications and 
simulations in archaeology is typically not apparent. Yet 
organisations such as the CAA (short for “Computer 
Applications and Quantitative Methods in Archaeology”) 
exist since the 1970s, having identified the need for 
computational power in archaeology early on. 
This paper examines some of the challenges arising from 
archaeology that necessitate complex and state-of-the-art 
computational methods. Existing approaches are frequently 
insufficient to address the requirements and challenges posed 
by this field. The main purpose of this paper is to raise 
awareness of these issues and elaborate how computer science 
methodologies could improve further by addressing them. 
Section 2 thus lists some of these challenges and elaborates 
why current methodologies are insufficient. The final section 
will examine how computer science could contribute to and 
benefit from addressing this field. 
 
Figure 1. Archaeologist mapping the layout of a trench. Source: Wikipedia. 
II. 
THE (HIDDEN) COMPLEXITY OF ARCHAEOLGY 
Archaeology is no domain constrained to a single 
scientific area – as it deals with human behavior over a range 
of unknown factors, it incorporates aspects of social sciences, 
evolution theory and neuropsychology, but also of 
surrounding domains, such as weather and climate. The most 
important aspect however is that all data must necessarily be 
incomplete: not only is there scarce archaeological evidence 
in the first instance, but also such evidence consists only in 
what humans leave behind – and intentions and beliefs leave 
no visible trace. Imagine finding a watch somewhere in the 
street and try to derive what happened from what little 
evidence there is: did the owner lose it? This is unlikely if the 
strap is intact. Did the owner throw it away? Is there any sign 
of damage on the watch? If so, may it stem from being pushed 
around on the street? Was the wearer male or female? Form 
alone may indicate taste, not convention and so on. 
Multiple factors have to be cross-examined when trying to 
reconstruct the potential events that led to the watch being on 
the street. Archaeology does this every day, very much similar 
to forensic criminology with the added complexity that 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

assumptions about (modern) human thinking cannot be 
applied.  
A. Big Data, Data Mining etc. 
The only way to approach the problem consists in 
gathering as much information – ideally hard evidence – about 
the situation as possible and then starting to make assumptions 
over potential relationships, causes and effects. In most cases 
this means that logical errors have to be eliminated first. The 
principle of Ockham’s razor is equally important for 
archaeology as any other science, as e.g. the recent find of a 
Roman coin in Japan demonstrates [2]: an implausible 
explanation would be that ancient Japan by accident minted a 
coin that is absolutely identical to Roman coins, not only in 
shape and depiction, but also in metallurgic configuration. We 
can already note that comparison of type and metal plays an 
important role in identifying the coin’s origin in the first 
instance.  
Such analysis requires an in-depth knowledge about 
Roman coinage, which exceeds the capabilities of a single 
domain expert: metallurgists have to talk with Roman experts 
on coinage and on trading networks etc. Logical consistency 
across all these aspects is difficult to assess – for example the 
implications if some individual Romans may have indeed 
travelled as far as Japan. The amount of data involved in this 
analysis is not only vast and completely differently structured 
across domains, but in most cases only human (i.e. not 
machine) readable. Most importantly, however, it is 
incomplete, basing on scarce evidence and conjecture. Testing 
for logical implications is therefore difficult: not only because 
the data formalizes little of the logical constraints, but also 
because it is simply incomplete.  
Statistical analysis is based on the assumption that 
sufficient sample and reference data exists. In the case of 
archaeological evidence, only little data exists and reference 
data is in most cases conjecture, e.g. when comparing ancient 
structures with modern ones. All data is therefore associated 
with a high error potential, which is insufficiently formalized, 
even though network analysis, sample clustering, typology 
etc. all are based on statistical methods.  
The implicit error must therefore be formalized and taken 
into consideration in analytical methods – and, what is more, 
its implications discussed: a deviation propagated over 
multiple implications / relations not only carries forth but 
increases with all further associated errors.  
Approaches. Modern data mining technologies are quint-
essential for archaeological analysis. Standard methods look 
for clusters in datasets to identify (potential) relationships – 
this essentially means that the analysis stays within one 
ontology. In cross-disciplinary analysis, however, the data 
belongs to different ontologies and their correlation is not 
obvious. Such relationships need to be explicitly defined and 
logically constrained by a metadata set that defines type, 
period, context, location etc. Notably, any find may be cross-
referenced against any other find of same type and from a 
related period. Take the example of the Roman coin: would it 
be possible to travel the according distance given the means 
and conditions at the time? For each according assumption, 
the associated risk of error needs to be taken into account: how 
likely is such travel given the situation and what does that 
mean for all other assumptions made so far? 
Due to the lacking structure of archaeological data, better 
data conversion techniques are needed, including natural 
language processing. As a first step, it would be sufficient to 
extract key words from the data that classify find types and 
context, including location, population, time frame etc. This 
would at least allow that finds and reports can be correlated 
according to their context – even if such information would be 
insufficient for (logical) reasoning. Metadata for scientific 
purposes is constantly being improved, but has not reached 
this level as yet [10]. 
To this end, logical relationships need to be encoded – 
notably, many of them take the form of complex simulations 
themselves (see below), whereas others can be simple 
constraints, such as that the context cannot be older than the 
find. New mechanisms for incomplete reasoning are needed 
that can perform statistical analysis and assumptions on 
insufficient data. By associating an error with the number of 
assumptions violated, Ockham’s razor can be used as a 
qualitative assessment. Regarding our Roman coin in Japan, 
logical explanations include equally trading networks, 
individual travelers and chance reproduction. Given the time 
and circumstances, however, direct travel and trading are 
highly unlikely, as is chance reproduction. This does not mean 
that an indirect trading “chain” could not have existed along 
which route a coin happened to travel as an exotic gift. The 
likelihood of an individual traveler can be calculated by (a) 
the complexity and cost of such a travel, (b) the other evidence 
for exchange, i.e. frequency of similar finds, and (c) relative 
timing of the contexts, i.e. appearance of other finds in the 
same context etc. 
Potential explanations (assumptions) must be encoded and 
their logic must be reproducible. As opposed to this, most 
modern AI focuses on statistical analysis of massive amount 
of (equally structured) data. 
B. Simulating Human Behaviour 
Archaeology is about humans: how they lived, what they 
have done, when and why. However, in an illiterate society, 
ways of thinking leave no traces and even in literate societies, 
written evidence should not be confused with facts [1]. The 
challenge for archaeology therefore consists in relating finds 
to potential behaviour, intentions and way of thinking. Some 
of this behaviour is obvious and straight-forward: a ceramic 
pot indicates that (a) someone was there to leave the pot 
behind and (b) someone made the pot. However, was the pot 
used as a domestic item, was it an item of worship, was it just 
decorative, was it discarded right away? All this cannot be 
gathered from the pot alone. 
As seen (data mining, above), a considerable amount of 
information has to be cross-linked. What is more, though, is 
that human behaviour, intentions and beliefs, capabilities and 
knowledge etc. stand at the middle of the explanation chain 
and form the basis for any conjecture. As indicated above, this 
can obviously take different levels: 
1. Presence. At the most straight-forward level, the 
remains are just indicators for human presence and 
actions, such as that someone must have brought the 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

find to the location, must have made it etc. Notably, 
not always is a find clearly of human origin, as e.g. is 
the case with some Palaeolithic “tools” [3]. This is the 
level of direct archaeological evidence. 
2. Capabilities. At an intermediate level of complexity, 
human capabilities must be taken into consideration. 
This defines whether it was e.g. possible to reach a 
location, build a structure etc. How humans reached 
the American continent is one unsolved question on 
this level. At this level we talk about the assumptions 
that can be substantiated by archaeological evidence 
(existence of boats), but not fully proven. 
3. Belief and Intention. At the most complex level we 
need to argue over belief and actions that are behind 
the evidence. It is a frequent cliché that archaeologists 
classify any evidence without clear functionality as 
“ritualistic”. Indeed, it is difficult to assess the 
intention of an object that has no comparison in 
modern context. At this level, all “evidence” is pure 
conjecture and may change on basis of new theories. 
Whereas knowledge at level 1 and partially at level 2 falls 
clearly into big data management, i.e. cross-checking facts, 
most of level 2 and in particular level 3 are conjecture and base 
on logical possibilities alone. Aspects such as movement of 
peoples require that the behaviour is simulated and the 
likelihood assessed on basis of this simulation. 
Approaches. Human behaviour can be simulated in many 
different ways. Standard approaches consist in agent based 
simulations, which model multiple entities and their 
interactions on a simplified level [4]. There is a considerable 
amount of criticism of these models, as they must naturally be 
incomplete and error prone – it is currently not even possible 
to appropriately simulate how a crowd walks on a street, let 
alone how a whole settlement would behave [5]. 
Human behaviour is complex and cannot be easily 
abstracted, so a major question relates to which human aspects 
have to be modelled in the first instance and how. Much can 
be learned from social network interactions, but care must be 
taken when applying modern contexts to ancient circum-
stances, as behaviour and mindset are in constant flux [1].  
Statistical analyses can reduce the computational effort, 
even though they have a high error margin. They can help to 
eliminate unlikely situations, such as for the Roman “tourist” 
in Japan which would necessitate the according means of 
travel, communication etc. [6] suggest an analysis basing on 
throwing angles and strengths to assess the layout of shell 
middens. This is a highly simplified human behaviour model 
but already allows for some degree of feasibility assessment.  
C. Simulating Climate 
Climate is constantly changing – not only due to human 
interference, but also due to the earth’s rotation and 
movement, leading to glacial and hot periods. The implication 
of such weather changes is obvious and can already be 
observed today: different plants grow in different climatic 
zones, animals (and certainly humans) move to different 
areas, clothing changes etc. In times before Air Conditioning, 
this hit doubly strong and will have caused (and prevented) 
massive movement and settlement patterns, following game 
or reacting to environmental pressure. 
Climate completely changes the face of the earth, from 
rising (and sinking) sea levels to landscapes covered in ice 
sheets or turned into steppes. These changes leave their marks 
and are sometimes directly measurable, such as in tree growth 
(dendrochronology) or remains of marine life in the dessert, 
respectively vice versa [1] [12].  
In the archaeological context climate is only of interest 
insofar as it influences humans [7]. As such, it is only a 
contributing factor to Simulating Human Behaviour (see 
section II.B) and can serve equally as an explanation, as well 
as an obstacle. For example, the movement of Homo Sapiens 
to the American continent is frequently explained by the 
possibility of a connection between North America and 
Siberia (the Bering land bridge) [8]. This land bridge could 
have existed due to a massive amount of water being locked 
in ice, thus causing the sea-level to sink considerably. 
Similarly, the movement of hominins into central Europe from 
Africa may have been made possible by fluctuations (inter-
pluvial arid periods) in the temperature of the Sahara [9].  
Climate conditions apparently play a role in any 
discussion about behaviour influenced by weather, such as 
clothing, foodstuff etc. Therefore, modelling the weather and 
in particular the climatic changes over history is a relevant 
aspect of the argumentation chain related to Simulating 
Human Behaviour (see section II.B). 
Approaches. It is well-known that weather simulation 
belongs to the most difficult tasks in advanced applications 
[11]. While meteorological simulations try to accurately 
predict local, minute changes in the weather, climate models 
can be more coarse-grained, identifying patterns of general 
weather trends over longer periods of time. However, already 
the overall climatic changes in the glacial and interglacial 
periods are difficult to predict and not all factors are known. 
Such models base more on observed factors, such as glacial 
movements and encapsulated CO², than on calculations [12].  
Nonetheless, different models are under development (e.g. 
[13]) and particularly try to provide more local and fine-
grained climatic conditions, so as to assess the size and 
distribution of ice sheets, but also just to predict shorelines, 
climatic zones etc. Such models can be validated partially 
against archaeobotanical finds, i.e. seeds that have been 
preserved under anaerobic conditions. 
D. Physics  
Physics pervade all human life for obvious reasons and 
thus are relevant for interpreting any (archaeological) find –
for example, when arguing why and how a find ended in a 
specific position. Complex physic simulations can (and do) 
contribute to various aspects in archaeology, of which only a 
few examples will be listed here: 
Humans having been killed violently and / or moved after 
death will end up in certain positions and orientation. For 
example skeletons in the Tollense valley have been moved by 
water slides and thus ended up in a collective heap [14]. 
Knowing the shape of the land, the flow of water and intensity 
of rainfall allows reconstructing where the bodies originated 
from, and (to a degree) their original positions. As the process 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

is irreversible, this is not entirely possible – but the order of 
skeletons already indicates how they must have been flooded 
down the hill. Notably, the state of decomposition makes a 
major difference with this respect.  
Related to this, wounds in the body (skeleton) give an 
indicator for strength and direction of a blow or of the 
projectile. Arrowheads embedded in bones tell something 
about the position of the opponents relative to each other, but 
also about how the weapon was used and the force that the 
respective weapon can transmit. Obviously, human factors 
have to be taken into consideration, such as whether the force 
could be created by muscle strength (spear) or whether 
additional means would have been needed (bow). Given e.g. 
the Tollense layout, a reconstruction of the event can thus be 
attempted. 
Other aspects related to physics simulation are e.g. how 
structures or burial mounds collapse and organic material 
decomposes over time. Just as in the Tollense case, the layout 
of the original structure can never be reconstructed from the 
final collapsed heap. Nonetheless, the shape and layout of the 
elements in the heap allow reasoning over the possible 
original structures. By comparing these with existing, similar 
structures (see section II.E), reasonable assumptions about the 
original layout can be made, as well as about the factors that 
led to the final distribution. 
Human intervention is a factor in both scenarios. In the 
first case, humans define in particular the strength and way of 
usage. In the second case, they (may!) define the causes for 
collapse and potential rearrangement of the final structure, e.g. 
if stones were removed or shifted to make space for other 
structures. 
Approaches. Rigid body physics belong to the oldest 
forms of computational simulations and in principle can 
already be employed in the fashion suggested – however, only 
for performing the “forward” calculation, i.e. from a given 
structure to the collapsed heap. Inverting this process is not 
possible, though, and thus the likelihood that a structure will 
lead to the observed distribution is highly unlikely.  
New methods are needed that essentially invert physics, 
i.e. to reconstruct the original layout from the final distribution 
by taking different influencing factors into consideration. 
These include human intervention, which so far is still most 
difficult to model. Essentially, such a model would generate a 
likelihood assessment that a recorded heap relates to a specific 
structure, given the conditions specific to the context of the 
find. 
E. Matching 
By nature, most archaeological finds are in fragments: 
destroyed, decomposed, collapsed etc. Next to the general 
layout of the finds, the actual material and shape of the 
fragments themselves provide indicators for their relationship. 
Consider the various forms of pottery that can be found in 
archaeology: shape, material and texture, respectively 
decoration are good indicators as to whether two sherds may 
have belonged to the same object. This also applies to (human) 
bones, larger sculptures etc.  
Generally, parts are missing, scattered all over the place, 
or even archived in a completely different city / country due 
to different excavation processes, movement after excavation 
etc. Furthermore, due to the vast amount of similar fragments, 
identification of corresponding parts is close to impossible. 
 
Figure 2. Matching sherds on basis of profile information [15].  
In itself, this is a considerable big data process where 
multiple factors need to be compared and cross-correlated to 
identify potential matches. These in turn will have to be 
matched in shape and against types of objects. Ideally, the 
fragments touch and thus have a common breakage area. 
Though this may sound like “just” a fitting task, one needs to 
consider (a) the amount and size of fits and (b) that natural 
processes change the breakage area by smoothing and 
reducing it etc., so that no perfect fit can be achieved anymore. 
Such processes will have to be taken into consideration when 
asserting whether two fragments match [16]. 
In most cases, no 3d models are available, let alone 
provide sufficient details to attempt a match in the first 
instance. As the number of available models increases, so does 
the complexity to match all the available finds – but even just 
within a single excavation, the effort is considerable. 
Approaches. Various approaches exist for automated 
shape matching, but they mostly assume that the fragments 
show near-perfect fits (Figure 2). Fewer approaches consider 
additional factors, such as general shape and continuation of 
patterns or pigments, which in both cases require additional 
knowledge about shapes and types of objects in the period and 
region. It is already helpful to use continuation aspects both 
for the overall shape and for the basic principles of the pattern, 
as discontinuity is comparatively rare.  
As opposed to this, matches of the actual breakage surface 
must be similar, not identical. This means that fragments can 
be placed basing on continuation aspects of shape and 
breakage area: as distance between the sherds increases, the 
breakage surface will have been subject to other processes and 
thus similarity in the surfaces becomes increasingly irrelevant 
– up to the point where intermediate pieces are lacking (the 
distance at which this is the case is influenced by the type of 
material). 
F. Geophysics 
Remote sensing is relevant for archaeology as it is 
generally non-intrusive and thus non-destructive [18]. It can 
provide essential information as to whether an excavation is 
justified in the first instance. Most remote sensing 
technologies base on the principle that differences in density 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

or conductivity of the material can be measured up to a certain 
distance (Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3. Ground Penetrating Radar (left) and map resulting from a 
resistance survey (right). Source: Wikipedia. 
The resulting data is not meaningful on its own and only 
predicts a change in material within the ground. It does 
(currently) not allow any conjecture about the material, let 
alone about the structure itself. Even larger area scans can 
only indicate whether a regular structure (building) may be 
present at all. 
Producing a visual depiction from the raw data takes 
considerable computational power – however, even more 
important is the assessment of the data against known 
structures and comparison of material distribution in 
surrounding ground (i.e. geological properties of the area). 
With such knowledge, the interpretation of the geophysical 
data could be improved considerably. 
Approaches. The task is comparable to big data mining. 
Next to the obvious shape information, however, material 
properties of the objects / structures play an important role as 
they influence the details in the remote sensing data. As of 
now, most remote sensing data focus on larger structures, 
mostly due to the coarse granularity of the data in the first 
instance. 
As with any human (or in fact animal) artefacts, non-
regarding all past and present standardisation efforts, 
individual structures will differ from each, already just 
because of taste. In addition to this, local circumstances, as 
well as the differences in collapse and deterioration will lead 
to strong individual deviations. 
These factors make direct data comparison, as is typically 
the case in other data mining tasks, difficult. Instead, the data 
must be considered indicative, in the sense that certain 
properties are correct rather than the whole structure – this 
includes an indirect match with the possible material 
properties, and a comparison to the rough layout. Layouts 
must be represented as key features with likely positioning, 
because, as noted, the individual layout will differ 
considerably. The likelihood of the layout may thereby be 
linked to the physics simulations discussed above. 
G. 3d images 
3d scanning is a growing field of interest in general, but 
also more and more archaeologists are making use of 
photogrammetry to document the excavation [17]. There is a 
high risk here that this is considered sufficient documentation, 
though it cannot replace profile drawings or good maps, but 
we shall not follow this discussion in this paper. 
Generating 3d models from pictures taken in the open field 
is still time consuming and error prone, where missing 
pictures can only be identified after generation of the point 
cloud, which can take days in itself. Since the excavation will 
have progressed by then, this can lead to considerable 
problems. Better methods are needed to assess quality and 
potential gaps right at the time of taking the pictures, and the 
process in general needs to become more flexible – both 
requires new algorithmic approaches that are highly related to 
performance optimisation in general. 
One should also not ignore the fact that 3d scanning 
generates massive amount of data (i.e. the 3d points) that so 
far cannot be easily processed. Identifying an object in 3d 
space, i.e. which points belong to each other to form an 
artefact of its own, is still basically impossible. Similar 
challenges exist in 2d image analysis, where major progress 
has been made. So far most approaches simply generate a 
mesh of the whole scan, thus not allowing to (re)move 
individual objects, let alone perform an analysis on this level. 
Since the advent of LIDAR scanning [18], processing of 
3d images becomes an important factor for detecting hidden 
and obscured structures, very similar to identifying hidden 
structures in geophysical data (see section II.F). 
Approaches. So far, most approaches rely on methods 
from 2d image processing, such as similarity of colour, 
identification of key features and of their relationship etc., but 
application in 3d is still very limited – not alone because the 
size of data is considerably larger (at least from n² to n³).  
Google and Microsoft already try to incorporate scans and 
3d data from multiple (social) sources, but the sheer amount 
and computational complexity is still an unsolved challenge. 
Ideally, however, multiple sources are integrated in scanning, 
but notably, these will all have to be calibrated individually 
and the data then has to be cross-correlated first. 
Some attempts also try to make use of additional data, such 
as arising from the accelerometer to pre-assess the quality and 
usability of the images, but there is no general good solution 
as yet and the amount of data will only increase. 
H. Others 
Additional aspects include simulation of decomposition of 
organic material, such as wood and flesh, but also of inorganic 
material, i.e. rusting of metal etc. Similar to the collapse of 
structures, reproduction of the original shape or even just 
identifying conjoining pieces is a challenge in itself. 
Reconstruction in general relies on reference material, 
which typically only indicates general layout, not concrete 
shape (such as in the typology of vases). Identifying the 
appropriate structures from fragments is still basically 
unsolved given the complexity of the domain. 
Many more challenges such as this exist. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The list of issues presented in this paper is far from 
exhaustive but already demonstrates the shortcoming of 
current computer science methodologies with respect to the 
needs of archaeology. Specifically, by addressing these 
challenges and incorporating knowledge from archaeology, 
the following improvements could be achieved: 
 
improved geological modelling: archaeology has 
knowledge about more short-term processes, such as 
soil deposition and collapse that can be exploited for 
engineering, city planning etc.; 
 
better human and agent models: anthropology and 
archaeology have information about human move-
ment that is not reflected in simulation, thus leading 
to unrealistic movement and agency models; 
 
prospecting can benefit from prediction models and 
material knowledge gained from excavations; 
 
data mining and big data do not address complexities 
raised by such interdisciplinary fields as archaeology, 
which develops such methods for 100 years now; 
 
statistical analysis is an important field in archaeology 
and needs to be applied differently for network 
analysis, clustering etc. The feedback is rarely 
incorporated (see e.g. [20]);  
 
structure from motion is constantly being improved 
through landscape archaeology and field surveys [17] 
– new more robust methods and better object 
recognition are still being researched; 
 
most simulations model time forward from a given 
situation– in archaeology, time needs to be modelled 
backwards, i.e. leading from effect to cause which in 
turn improves simulation performance and analysis 
capabilities [6]; 
 
dealing with incomplete data by adding assumption 
models: archaeology is using methods for this on a 
daily basis, yet big data still struggles with it; 
 
both fields need better methods to capture the 
probability and likelihood of complex data to be 
correct and to identify logical and improbable errors;  
 
reasoning needs to improve beyond stochastic data 
mapping and in particular needs to include the 
probability that two actions are related. Artificial 
Intelligence concepts from the 90ies already approach 
such issues on a limited scale. 
Not only can computer science improve archaeology 
further, but also knowledge from archaeology can help 
advance computer science capabilities in particular for 
application in any human-centric simulation or modelling. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Sutton, “Archaeology: The Science of the Human Past,” 
Routledge, July 2015 
[2] E. Jozuka, “Ancient Roman coins found in ruined Japanese 
castle,” 
CNN, 
2017 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://edition.cnn.com/2016/09/27/luxury/ancient-roman-
coins-japan/ [retrieved: June 2017] 
[3] K. Wong, “Wild Monkeys’ Stone ‘Tools’ Force a Rethink of 
Human Uniqueness,” Scientific American, 2016 [Online]. 
Available at: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/wild-
monkeys-stone-tools-force-a-rethink-of-human-uniqueness/ 
[retrieved: June 2017] 
[4] G. Wurzer, K. Kowarik, and H. Reschreiter (eds.), “Agent-
based Modeling and Simulation in Archaeology,” Springer 
2015. 
[5] D. Thalmann and S.R. Musse, “Crowd Simulation,” Springer 
2012 
[6] L. Schubert and K. Jeffery, “Modelling Physics in Shell 
Middens,” Proceedings of the CAA 2017, in press 
[7] M. Tallavaara et al., “Human population dynamics in Europe 
over the Last Glacial Maximum,” PNAS, vol. 112, no. 27, pp. 
8232-8237, July 2015 
[8] S. Armstrong Elias, “First Americans Lived on Bering Land 
Bridge for Thousands of Years,” Scientific American 2016 
[Online]. Available at: https://www.scientificamerican.com/ 
article/first-americans-lived-on-bering-land-bridge-for-
thousands-of-years/ [retrieved: July 2017] 
[9] W.J. Burroughs, “Climate Change in Prehistory: the end of the 
reign of chaos,” Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
[10] K. Jeffery and A. Asserson, “Why CERIF?” W3 2016. [Online] 
Available at: http://www.w3.org/2016/11/sdsvoc/SDSVoc16_ 
paper_15 [retrieved: July 2017] 
[11] U. Gähde et al., “Models, Simulations, and the Reduction of 
Complexity,” de Gruyter, 2013 
[12] M.J. Aitken, “Science-Based Dating in Archaeology,” 
Routledge, February 2014 
[13] J.d’A. Guedes et al., “21st-Century Approaches to Ancient 
Problems: Climate and Society,” PNAS, vol. 113, no.51, pp. 
14483-14491. 
[14] A. Curry, “Slaughter at the bridge: Uncovering a colossal 
Bronze Age battle,” Science Magazine 2016. [Online] 
Available 
at: 
http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/03/ 
slaughter-bridge-uncovering-colossal-bronze-age-battle 
[retrieved: June 2017] 
[15] M.I. Stamatopoulos and C.-N. Anagnostopoulos, “3D digital 
reassembling of archaeological ceramic pottery fragments 
based on their thickness profile,” ResearchGate 2016. [Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/ 
301873740_3D_digital_reassembling_of_archaeological_cera
mic_pottery_fragments_based_on_their_thickness_profile 
[retrieved: July 2017] 
[16] F. Stanco, S. Battiato, and G. Gallo, “Digital Imaging for 
Cultural Heritage Preservation: Analysis, Restoration, and 
Reconstruction of Ancient Artworks,” CRC Press, 2011 
[17] M. Llobera, “Archaeological Visualization: Towards an 
Archaeological Information Science (AISc),” J Archaeol 
Method Theory, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 193-223, September 2011 
[18] A.J. Clark, “Seeing Beneath the Soil, Prospecting Methods in 
Archaeology,” Batsford London, 1990 
[19] C. Hopkins, “Lidar archaeology shines a light on hidden sites” 
BBC 2014. [Online] Available at: http://www.bbc.com/future/ 
story/20120827-the-laser-archaeologists [retrieved: May 2017] 
[20] A. Collar et al., “Networks in Archaeology: Phenomena, 
Abstraction, Representation.” J Archaeol Method Theory, vol. 
22, no. 1, pp. 1–32. January 2015 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

