Mixing Power Consumption for Hulled Millet in an Agitated Drum Dryer with 
Discrete Element Method 
 
Tibor Poós, Dániel Horváth 
Department of Building Services and Process 
Engineering, Faculty of Mechanical Engineering 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
poos@mail.bme.hu, daniel.horvath.nk@gmail.com 
Kornél Tamás 
Department of Machine and Product Design,  
Faculty of Mechanical Engineering 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
tamas.kornel@gt3.bme.hu 
 
 
Abstract— There are several technologies in the agricultural, 
food, chemical and pharmaceutical industries for mixing 
granular materials. In these processes the homogenization of the 
particle fractions or the prevention of arch building process play 
very important roles. To select appropriate mixers’ motors 
installed in certain devices, it is necessary to specify the 
rotational speed of the mixer and the power requirement of the 
propulsion engine. This selection is a difficult task nowadays for 
mechanical engineers without measurement or an appropriate 
method for the estimation of power requirement. In researches 
available in the literature, the determination of the mixing 
power requirement is solely analytical and only for devices of 
universal design and geometry, in the case of mixing of certain 
substances. The main purpose of this research is to improve a 
simulation model for determining the power requirement of an 
agitated drum dryer, which can be generally used for modeling 
the mixing process of granular materials with various moisture 
content. In this study, laboratory measurements were made by 
mixing hulled millet and the results were approximated by the 
simulations based on discrete element method (DEM). In order 
to give an exact estimation of the power requirement of a given 
mixer, accurate geometry of the drum dryer and the 
appropriate micromechanical and physical parameters of the 
discrete particle assembly are required. In laboratory tests, the 
mixing power requirements of the agitated drum dryer were 
measured at various rotational speeds (0.48 ÷ 1.58 rev/s) using 
hulled millet with different moisture contents on wet basis (9.6 
÷ 29.5%) with different drum loading factors (5 ÷ 25%). Based 
on results it can be stated that the mixing power requirement is 
greatly influenced by the moisture content of the granular 
material and the rotational speed of the agitator. The 
preliminary DEM simulations and parameter sensitivity studies 
revealed which micromechanical parameters of the contact 
model should be changed in order to simulate the power 
requirements with good approximation. 
Keywords- hulled millet; agitated drum dryer; moisture 
content; mixing; discrete element method 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the agricultural, food, chemical and pharmaceutical 
industries the mixing of granular materials is often 
encountered, and it can be carried out in e.g., agitated drum 
dryers and basic material homogenizer rotary drums. In order 
to achieve the appropriate drying speed, and in the case of 
homogenization, to select the time of operation to achieve a 
uniform particle distribution, it is necessary to strive for the 
proper setting of the mixer's rotational speed. However, 
mixing may result in deterioration, breakage, or fragmentation 
of the grains, which should also be taken into account when 
choosing mixer design and operating parameters, including 
the speed of rotation. The measuring equipment required for 
the laboratory tests of the mixing process is costly and the 
measurements carried out on them are time consuming and 
labor intensive, so the simulation of mixing is becoming 
increasingly important today. To describe the mixing of the 
set, the mechanical properties of the materials used in the 
operation and the geometric parameters of the granules and 
the mixing apparatus are also required. 
Bridgwater [1]  collected the mixer geometries used to mix 
powders and granular materials and the phenomena occurring 
during operations and the researches which describe them. As 
a result, he found that studies of easily bulking materials 
without internal cohesion and hard-to-bulk materials with 
internal cohesion require further research. In an experiment 
with a horizontal shaft drum dryer, the migration of the 
particles was investigated between regions of the blades [1]. 
Between the volumes of the paddle-suspension elements, it 
was observed the amount of tracer-bound particles passed 
through the volume bounded by the other two paddle 
suspension elements. It was considered an event when a 
particle with a tracer passed through another volume. During 
the investigations, movements within the grain aggregation 
were high-lighted, but the internal displacements of the 
different humidity and cohesion sets have not been studied. 
Furthermore, the power required for mixing was not analyzed, 
but rather the quality of mixing was in focus. 
Alchikh-Sulaiman et al. [2] analyzed the mixing of mono-
disperse, bidisperse, tridisperse, and polydisperse granules in 
a drum dryer using discrete element method, which simulation 
results were compared with laboratory measurements. With 
the validated calculation model, the effects of drum rotation 
speed, grain size and initial filling rate on mixing quality were 
investigated. The Hertz-Mindlin contact model was used in 
the simulations, but the modeling of cohesive granular 
assemblies and the effect of the grain size were not dealt with. 
Researches found in the literature have shown that a more 
precise description of mixing in the drum dryers requires 
further research and a small number of researchers have 
studied the effect of moisture content of agricultural granular 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

materials on mixing power consumption. Thus, the aim of this 
research was to create a DEM model that is suitable for 
simulating the measured mixing power requirement results 
achieved with a laboratory agitate. 
II. 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
Before the measurements were started, the test material 
has been prepared. The grains were cleansed from the dust, 
broken particles, and other contaminants and to achieve the 
desired moisture content they were pre-moistened. 
A. Material 
During the measurements, the hulled millet (Figure 1) was 
used. It is an appropriate agricultural material for 
measurements, because it has low granule size deviation, 
hydrophilic, properly homogeneous material structure with 
close to regular spherical geometry, wettable multiple times 
and relatively inexpensive. 
 
Figure 1. Hulled millet 
First the material was cleaned with a wind-separating 
device and an assembly of nearly the same particle size 
distribution was created. A rotating drum uniquely prepared 
for homogenous wet-ting of the material was used. 
Approximately 12 dm3 of millet and the desired volume of 
water was loaded in the drum and agitated for 5 hours at 
predetermined intervals. To determine the resulting moisture 
content, a small sample was placed in a drying oven at 105 °C 
for 24 hours and the initial and final mass of the material was 
weighed. The geometric dimensions of the hulled millet were 
determined by sieve analysis. Based on measurements, it 
could be stated that the characteristic size of hulled millet 
(equivalent to regular sphere diameter) was ~ 1.8 mm. 
B. Laboratory equipment and measurement method 
The measurements of the mixing power consumption were 
performed on a horizontal axial agitated drum dryer. The 
electric power input by the mixing motor was measured with 
a special three phase Datcon PQRM5100-31 type meter at 1 s 
sampling intervals and recorded on a computer. 
The intermittently operated agitated drum dryer consists 
of a 756 mm long, 250 mm wide and 275 mm U-shaped drum 
shown in Figure 2, which is covered by a flat plate. On the 
axis of the drum shaft, there are 22 mixing blades, each 20 mm 
high, 50 mm wide, and the horizontal angle of the plates is 10 
degrees. The speed of the mixer can be adjusted in a wide 
range (0÷95 1/min) with a frequency inverter. The 
measurement started by filling the pre-moistened granular 
material into the drum. The volume of the drum is 47.4 dm3. 
After loading the material, the device was covered with a flat 
plate and then the engine was started at a given speed while 
the electrical power input was measured. At a given filling 
rate, with the given moisture content, the mixing speeds 
during the measurements were as follows: 0:48; 0.63; 0.79; 
0.95; 1:11; 1:27; 1:43; 1.58 rev/s. Approximately the mixer 
was operated for one minute at a given speed, then it was 
turned to a higher speed, so all the cases were measured. The 
mixing power was recorded by the performance transmitter, 
from which the idle power was deducted.  
 
 
Figure 2. The design and dimensions of the mixer and the drum 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

In order to determine the nullperformance, null 
measurements were performed at each speed. The data per 
minute for a given setting was averaged and the idle power 
consumption was deducted from it which was considered to 
be the mixing power consumption for the given conditions. 
C. Discrete element method 
In this research, the Yade [3] open source discrete element 
software was used in which the modeling is done in Python. 
Several types of so-called motors, such as particle con-tact 
models, were available to describe the rheological processes 
TABLE I.  THE PARAMETERS OF THE HULLED MILLET UTILIZED FOR THE DEM SIMULATIONS 
Chosen 
granule 
diameter 
[mm] 
Measured 
moisture content 
(wet basis) 
[%] 
Measured 
granule density 
[kg/m3] 
Calibrated 
elasticity 
modulus 
[MPa] 
Measured 
internal friction 
angle 
[°] 
Calibrated 
strengths 
of the cohesion 
[kPa] 
Calibrated 
dimensionless strengths of 
the cohesion 
[1] 
10±1* 
22.5 
2092 
[6] 
2000 
40.3 
[6] 
61 
[7] 
0.05 
[7] 
* The real mean diameter of the hulled millet was 1.8 mm [6]. 
 
Figure 3. The discrete element model of the agitated drum dryer (1. generating the particle assembly, 2. gravity deposition of the assembly, 3. 
activation of the cohesive contacts, 4. start of the mixing) 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

between the particles (eg. frictional, cohesive and capillary, 
etc.). In the model the frictional-cohesive (CohFrictMat) 
contact model was utilized [4] due to the nature of the task 
being investigated, which is suitable for simulating the 
cohesion due to moisture in the granular material. Table II 
summarizes the parameters of the equipment’s material used 
in the simulations, which were taken from the material 
properties of the steel [5]. 
TABLE II. THE DEM PARAMETERS OF THE EQUIPMENT’S MATERIAL [5] 
Density 
[kg/m3] 
Young’s 
modulus 
[GPa] 
Poisson’s 
ratio 
[1] 
Friction angle 
[°] 
7750 
200 
0.3 
40.1 
The description of the connections between the drum and 
the particles was defined only by frictional relations. The 
mixing’s global parameter settings for the discrete element 
simulations are summarized in Table III. 
TABLE III.  THE GLOBAL PARAMETERS OF THE DEM SIMULATIONS 
Fill 
factor 
[%] 
Global 
damping 
[1] 
Number of 
particles 
[pcs] 
Coefficient of 
critical time step 
[1] 
Time step 
[s] 
15 
0 
3713 
0.7 
3.58 ∙ 10−5 
The time step is divided by the proportional factor and it 
is equal to the critical time step defined by Yade software [3]. 
All other global parameters were left in the default setting. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
The dimensions and setting parameters of the granules 
utilized during the simulation of the mixing process are 
summarized in Table I, which was determined by static 
measurements and simulation calibrations in previous studies 
[6]–[8]. In the present study the Young’s modulus of the 
particles were modified in order to bring the simulated results 
closer to the real measured ones. 
Because of the small size of millet grains, during the 
simulations, hundreds of thousands of particles would be 
needed, which the software could not handle with the 
available computing capacity at the appropriate simulation 
time. Thus the diameter of the particles was increased. The 
first stage of the simulation is to generate the particles with the 
filling rate (Figure 3/1). Then the gravity deposition of the 
assembly starts (Figure 3/2). It lasts until the magnitude of the 
unbalance force ratio drops below 0.001 (Figure 3/3). During 
the next phase, cohesion relationships between the particles 
will be activated, which will be re-activated each time for 
every new particle contact. Finally, at a given rotational speed, 
the mixing starts (Figure 3/4). The sampling of the torque 
applied to the axis was performed at every second for 30 
seconds by the discrete element software. 
The mixing power consumption can be calculated in terms 
of torque and rotational speed. Out-standing simulation 
performance data from the particles hitched by the mixing 
blades and walls of the drum were excluded during the 
 
 
Figure 4. The measured and the simulated mixing power consumption in the case of hulled millet with a filling rate of 15% and 22.5% moisture content 
on wet basis depending on the rotational speed 
P = 3.51n2 + 15.14n + 15.06
R² = 0.99
P = -3.99n2 + 37.39n - 3.11
R² = 0.98
0
10
20
30
40
50
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
Mixing power consumption, P [W]
Rotational speed, n [1/s]
Moisture content on wet basis: 22.5% 
Filling factor: 15%
Measured
Simulated
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

evaluation. Typically, these values were 0W and above 100W. 
The measurement and simulation results of the mixing are 
shown in Figure 4, where polynomial function can be applied 
to the obtained values. 
It can be stated that the results of the simulation model of 
the mixer underestimated the measured power requirements at 
lower rotational speeds (0.48; 0.63; 0.79 rev/s), while at 
higher rotational speeds (0.95; 1.11; 1.43; 1.58 rev/s) the 
simulated results approached them appropriately. The reason 
for this is probably the fact that at lower rotational speeds mass 
transport is typical, while at higher rotational speeds impulse 
transport is common. Table IV summarizes the relative errors 
of the mixing power consumptions obtained by the 
measurements and the simulations. 
Further calibration of the simulation model is required, in 
which parameter sensitivity tests have to be performed. 
Density correction due to porous volume change may be a 
solution in increasing particle size. In this case, while it is not 
advisable to change the density of the material by varying the 
particle sizes during mixing of different granular assemblies 
together, it is indispensable to simulate the mixing power 
consumption in order to mix the same mass as during the 
actual measurements. In addition, slight distortion of the 
geometric shape of the particles can also be a solution for the 
simulations of mixing power consumption at low rotational 
speeds, as using a more intersecting form of grain particles 
than the ball, the movable mass can be increased. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this research, the mixing power consumption of a 
horizontal axis agitated drum dryer was determined by 
laboratory measurements of the mixed moisture-containing 
hulled millet. With discrete element method the mixing 
apparatus and its operation were modeled taking into account 
the operating parameters used during the measurement. 
Simulation of the mixing was carried out by means of previous 
measured material parameters and simulational calibrations, 
and by modifying the modulus of elasticity of the particles. 
The results of the measurements and the simulations were 
compared. The mixing power consumption increased 
polynomial by increasing the rotational speed. It was found 
that the mixer's simulation model underestimated the 
measurement results at lower rotational speeds (0.48; 0.63; 
0.79 rev/s) while at the higher rotational speeds (0.95; 1.11; 
1.43; 1.58 rev/s) they approached them reasonably due to the 
former being mainly mass transport, and the latter being 
mainly impulsive transport. Further calibrations are required 
in which parameter sensitivity tests are performed in the 
granular assembly to give a more accurate description of the 
mass transport phenomenon due to the mixing. In the DEM 
model, the greater relative errors measured at lower rotational 
speeds could be solved by taking into consideration the 
changes in the porous volume due to the increase in the 
particle size, and the slight distortion of the geometric shape 
of the particles 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 This work was supported by Gedeon Richter’s Talentum 
Foundation (19-21, Gyömrői street, 1103, Budapest, 
Hungary), and by the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund 
(NKFIH/PD-116326) and the Higher Education Excellence 
Program of the Ministry of Human Capacities in the frame of 
Water science & Disaster Prevention research area of 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics (BME 
FIKP-VÍZ). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Bridgwater, “Mixing of powders and granular materials by 
mechanical means—A perspective,” Particuology, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 
397–427, 2012. 
[2] 
B. Alchikh-Sulaiman, M. Alian, F. Ein-Mozaffari, A. Lohi, and S. R. 
Upreti, “Using the discrete element method to assess the mixing of 
polydisperse solid particles in a rotary drum,” Particuology, vol. 25, 
pp. 133–142, Apr. 2016. 
[3] 
V. Šmilauer et al., “Dem formulation. In Yade Documentation 2nd 
ed.,” Yade Proj., p. 37, 2015. 
[4] 
F. Bourrier, F. Kneib, B. Chareyre, and T. Fourcaud, “Discrete 
modeling of granular soils reinforcement by plant roots,” Ecol. Eng., 
vol. 61, no. Part C, pp. 646–657, 2013. 
[5] 
J. Horabik and M. Molenda, “Parameters and contact models for DEM 
simulations of agricultural granular materials: A review,” Biosyst. 
Eng., vol. 147, no. Supplement C, pp. 206–225, Jul. 2016. 
[6] 
D. Horváth, “Statikus berendezésekben mozgó szemcsés anyaghalmaz 
modellezése,” presented at the Tudományos Diákköri Konferencia, 
Budapesti Műszaki és Gazdaságtudományi Egyetem, 2017. 
[7] 
T. Poós, D. Horváth, and K. Tamás, “The compare of angles of repose 
with discrete element method and measurement,” in 8th International 
Scientific Conference, Trebinje, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 2017, pp. 65–
70. 
[8] 
T. Poós, D. Horváth, and K. Tamás, “Modeling the movement of the 
granular material in a static equipment with discrete element method,” 
presented at the International Scientific Conference on Advances in 
Mechanical Engineering (ISCAME 2017), Debrecen, Hungary, 2017. 
 
 
TABLE IV.  RELATIVE ERRORS OF MEASURED AND SIMULATED MIXING POWER CONSUMPTIONS 
Rotational speed, [rev/s] 
Mixing power consumption, [W] 
Relative Error, [%] 
Measured 
Simulated 
0.48 
23.46 
15.3 
34.8 
0.63 
25.82 
16.5 
36.1 
0.95 
32.58 
30.32 
6.9 
1.27 
41.09 
37.51 
8.7 
1.58 
48.02 
46.04 
4.1 
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

