Intrusions Detection System Based on Ubiquitous Network Nodes 
 
       Lynda Sellami  
 
                Djilali Idoughi  
                Abderrahmane Baadache  
Department of Computer Science    Laboratory of Applied Mathematics     Laboratory of Modeling and Optimization Systems    
   Bejaia University, Algeria  
           Bejaia University, Algeria                           Bejaia University, Algeria  
         slynda1@yahoo.fr                                djilali.idoughi@gmail.com                abderrahmane.baadache@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—Ubiquitous computing allows to make data and 
services within the reach of users anytime and anywhere. This 
makes ubiquitous networks vulnerable to attacks coming from 
either inside or outside the network. To ensure and enhance 
networks security, several solutions have been implemented. 
These solutions are inefficient and/or incomplete. Solving these 
challenges in security with new requirement of Ubicomp, could 
provide a potential future for such systems towards better 
mobility and higher confidence level of end-user services. We 
investigate the possibility to detect network intrusions, based 
on security nodes abilities. Speciﬁcally, we show how 
authentication can help build user proﬁles in each network 
node. Authentication is based on permissions and restrictions 
to access to information/services on ubiquitous network. As a 
result, our idea realizes a protection of nodes and assures 
security of network. 
Keywords-ubiquitous computing; intrusion detection system 
(IDS); security 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The goal of the current research in distributed computing 
is to abstract the physical location of users and remote 
resources [1][2]. Such an environment is exposed to serious 
security threats that can reach people and equipment, as well 
as data and programs in the virtual world. Therefore, the 
traditional mechanisms that focus only on digital security 
become inefficient. It is important to detect security breaches 
when they occur. This is made possible by intrusion 
detection mechanism. 
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) allow to quickly 
implement new security policies to detect and react as 
quickly as possible against attacks occurring in a network 
[3].    
IDS have already been used in classic and traditional 
environments for overcoming intrusion problems [3]. Our 
goal is to present some IDSs that have been developed for 
ubiquitous environments and examine their limits in different 
areas of Ubicomps. 
In this article, we propose an IDS that aims to overcome 
the problems of intrusions in ubiquitous environments. We 
explore our approach for detecting intrusions (attacks) that 
occur in ubiquitous environments. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents a state of work already done on intrusion detection 
in ubiquitous environments. In Section III details our 
proposal. Finally, conclusion and perspectives are described 
in Section IV.  
II. 
RELATED WORK  
The use of networks and information systems as tools 
becomes necessary for the proper functioning and growth of 
enterprises. The multitude of network usage by known or 
unknown persons (users), turns the networks into potential 
targets for attacks. Users can exploit the vulnerabilities of 
networks and computer systems to access information or to 
undermine their good functioning. 
The security of these networks, targeted by attackers, is 
an issue of paramount importance. For this, IDSs have been 
widely discussed for solving the problems of intrusions in 
networks. Several solutions that have been adopted in order 
to overcome the problems of attacks. 
A. Ubiquitous Environments   
An Intrusion Detection System can be considered as an 
application, in which individuals and organizations often 
express the need and objective of protecting their systems 
against intrusions. 
To face the problem of security and the new requirements 
of the Ubicomp, we introduce and describe the main research 
work in this direction.  
 
1) SUIDS (for Service-oriented and User-centric 
Intrusion Detection System): This is an IDS for ubiquitous 
environments; it is a system for intrusion detection of 
oriented services. SUIDS is suitable for users and deals with 
smart homes and offices [4][5]. It adopts a new mechanism-
oriented service geared to verify and represent user and 
protect a variety of devices in the network against 
intrusions. 
SUIDS treats the issue of heterogeneity of pervasive 
networks in three categories, which are principal nodes, 
service nodes and user nodes. SUIDS organizes the system 
hierarchically in three levels. The first level corresponds to 
the domain manager node. The second level contains the 
principal nodes. The third level is dedicated to service users 
nodes. To detect intrusions, SUIDS builds on the events of 
user behavior. 
The detection algorithm uses a chi-square test to 
determine abnormalities. The chi-square test is applied for 
each specific parameter. 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 1 presents Hierarchical System for Smart-Home: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Hierarchical System for Smart-Home [4]. 
 
2) IDS for IP-Based ubiquitous sensor netwoks: RIDES 
(for Robust Intrusion Detection System for IP-Based 
Ubiquitous Sensor Networks) [6] is a hybrid system of 
intrusion detection. It combines the signatures of attacks and 
the discovery of anomalies (behaviors) for detecting 
intrusions. It uses a distributed algorithm of pattern matching 
for the intrusion detection based on signatures. To ensure the 
detection of intrusion based anomalies, RIDES employs a 
technique of classification based on the notation of SPC 
(Statistical Process Control) technique called CUSUM chart. 
3) An application-oriented solution: That enforcement-
led approach to security is presented by Robinson [7], as a 
background of research related to security in ubiquitous 
computing. It offers a good balance between theory, 
technology and scenarios. It is a method of generalized 
research-oriented application and it is applied on a thesis 
about intrusion detection. This approach is composed of four 
(4) steps. Step 1 is responsible for identifying the scope and 
objectives to be achieved. Step 2 provides the design strategy 
for achieving the objectives of the application. Step 3 
provides hardware and software which can be extended or 
establishes mechanisms to achieve the objectives. Step 4 
evaluates theory and technology proposals based on 
objectives and identified constraints. 
4) Intrusion detection for wireless sensor networks 
based cluster: The objective of this approach is to detect and 
prevent intrusions in sensor networks [8]. Singh et al. [2] 
have implemented the MAC (Media Access Control), 
address of intruders attacking networks.  
The sensor network is composed of a static Base Station 
(BS) and clusters. The BS is located away from sensors, and 
the clusters are composed of a number of dynamic sensor 
nodes.  
Each cluster leader collects data, compresses and transmits 
them to the Base Station [2]. The Base Station keeps track of 
the healthy state of all nodes in each cluster by checking 
information sent by each cluster head to MAC address [2]. 
 
Figure 2. Data communication between base station and heads of clusters 
[2]. 
5) Distributed PCA (Principal Components Analysis) 
approach for intrusion detection in sensor networks: Loo et 
al. [9] present a new approach for distributed intrusion 
detection called PCADID, for attacks detection in wireless 
sensor networks.  
The sensor array is partitioned into groups of sensor nodes. 
In each group, a selected control node cooperates with other 
control nodes in order to build a normal comprehensive 
profile of the network [9].  
The authors have used two (2) approaches [9]: 
 
An approach based on the PCA centralized 
approach, called PCACID. Here each control node 
establishes a normal profile of its own network 
traffic using PCA (Principal Components Analysis).  
 
An approach based on the PCA distributed approach, 
called PCADID. Here each control node using the 
APC establishes its own normal sub-profile for its 
traffic network, and sends it to other control nodes. 
Each control node constructs the normal profile of 
the network 
6) Policy of intrusion detection for ubiquitous sensors 
networks: Xu et al. [10] propose an intrusion detection 
policy for ubiquitous sensors networks. Their approach 
consists of three (3) units: 
 
Unit of data collection: Each sensor node listens to 
communications among neighboring nodes. The 
streamed packets are transmitted to the processing 
unit.  
 
Unit of data processing: The header of packets 
received by the playback unit is interpreted and 
analyzed; the values are then updated in the list of 
verification data.  
 
Handling policy: Compare the current activity of the 
sensors node with the threshold values. If the 
behavior violates these values, the node is identified 
as compromised. 
 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

B. Limits and New Motivations  
The majority of IDSs developed for ubiquitous 
environments are designed for specific areas of application 
or for application scenarios, which limit their generalizations 
for all areas of Ubicomp. We deal with the following 
problems already presented in field of mobile ad hoc 
networks [11] and wireless network [12]: (1) centralization 
of detection, (2) transition to SMS communications, (3) 
excessive consumption of energy, (4) capacity limitation of 
sensors (hardware), and (5) reconfiguration problem when 
changing the architecture and the components.  The IDSs 
developed for Ubicomp are insufficient or incomplete, and 
they need improvements and/or adaptation. 
TABLE I.  
IDSS  LIMITS OF UBICOMPS 
IDS 
Inconveniences 
SUIDS 
-The principal nodes are far from the service 
nodes. 
They 
need 
more 
energy  
-The network connections are consumed in 
communication 
with 
service 
nodes  
-Intrusions that occur during transmission 
may go unnoticed. 
-Existence of the concept of centralized 
detection can not be applied to larger areas 
(administrative building). 
-This solution is not applicable to other areas 
of applications of ubiquitous where we need 
a mass of information to convey and treat  
-Risk of false positives that generates too 
alarms and treatments. 
Application-
led 
-This 
document 
provides 
a 
general 
methodology to search applications oriented 
in Ubicomp. 
-It is applied on application scenarios  
-The solution may not work on all instances 
of an application or other applications with 
different requirements.  
-The 
notion 
of 
reconfiguration 
and 
adaptation must be added. 
Cluster-based 
- It is based on a central controller 
ACP-based 
-It is necessary that each control node up-to-
date has normal profile for PCACID,  
-It is necessary that each control node up-to-
date sounds under normal profile and 
cooperate with other control nodes to update 
the overall normal profile of the network.  
-The normal behavior of the network 
(sensors) changes over time 
Policy 
detection 
 
-Overload 
sensor 
nodes 
through 
the 
collection, 
analysis, 
transmission 
and 
detection. 
III. 
PROPOSITION  
In this research, we propose an IDS for identifying 
intrusion from legitimate users in ubiquitous systems.  
A. Description of the Proposal 
The ubiquitous network consists of several nodes 
(devices, hosts, sensors, etc.). It is difficult or impossible to 
have a global view of ubiquitous network since they are on 
very large scale. For supporting the scalability of ubiquitous 
networks, we focus on network nodes. Each node has 
knowledge of closest neighbors surrounding it. Considering 
a node and its neighbors allow to extend our approach to a 
large number of nodes.  
Therefore, each treatment applied to a node will be 
applied to its neighbors.   
It is assumed that each node of the ubiquitous network is 
provided with the collection unit, and the detection and 
analysis unit. In the case of adhesion of a new node to the 
network, its neighbors send him the two units after an 
existence test. 
Each node of the network has permissions and privileges, 
allowing to perform a number of processing and 
communication with other nodes on the network. Nodes use 
an adapted routing protocol so that they can route messages 
among them.  
B. Overview of the Proposition 
Figure 3 illustrates the functioning of our proposal; it 
consists of four parts, namely, data source, behavior, control, 
and action. 
Data flow is defined by the node (sensor, network packets, 
users query, etc.). The behavior of the node is constructed 
from the data stream. To detect anomalies in the behavior of 
nodes (users), a unit of control and analysis is used to 
compare the actual behavior with the normal profile. When 
an abnormality is detected, an alarm is sent to the node to 
help solve this problem. An abnormality corresponds 
behavior which derived from normal (deviation), or 
unintended (unexpected). 
 
1) Detection approach: There are two ways of detecting 
intrusions, (1) through known attack patterns to match with, 
misuse detection, and (2) through expected normal behaviors 
and identifying deviations as intrusion, anomaly detection. In 
our case, we have used the anomaly detection technique for 
identifying intrusions. This, obviously, requires defining the 
expected normal behaviors of the user that use the service of 
network. Each node creates its normal profile. 
2) Normal profile: Each user accesses a ubiquitous 
network with authentication, which limits access to 
information/services offered by the network. Authentication 
uses the notions of permissions and restrictions of the 
network. This permissions and restrictions allow to build 
normal profiles of users.  
Each node collects information to determine the vector of 
restrictions, and permissions for network access. These 
feature vectors (restrictions and permissions) are the normal 
traffic profile of nodes. Let Vi,k(0) be the feature vector of 
node i of size n, that represents the number of features 
(privileges and restrictions). The number of features is the 
same for all nodes. 
Such that: Vi,k(0) = (vi,1, vi,2, vi,3, ..., vi,n)T, and n is the 
number of characteristics of the node i.  
C. Intrusion Detection Approach 
Figure 3 shows the functioning of our approach:  
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

1) The node presents the data source.  
2)  Normal node profile is built based on the 
permissions and restrictions of the node. This construction 
of the profile is achieved by a unit of construction of normal 
profile.  
3) A collection unit is responsible for capturing 
information (data), which allows to build the current 
behavior a node. 
4) A unit of analysis and control is responsible for 
comparing the current behavior with the normal profile of a 
node. In case of deviation the behavior of a node from  its 
normal profile, an action is sent to the node. 
5)  The action is the behavior of the IDS to a possible 
intrusion; an alarm is transmitted to inform the node and its 
neighbors of the intrusion and that correction of the problem 
is required. 
 
 
Figure 3. Step to the detection. 
 
1) 
Normal profile. 
Normal profile is constructed taking into account the 
activities of the user, as the preferred tool, work habits, 
typing speed, etc. In our approach the construction of normal 
profile is focused on:  frequency; program CPU, I/O, other 
resources, and denied executions. We create profile based-on 
legitimate user data and represent a user's typical behavior.  
User can have permissions and restrictions, which are 
representing by a vector of features. For example, a record 
(01100000100000000001100001001110100000) is a vector 
of features (permissions and restrictions), where 1 is the 
permission, and 0 is the restriction. 
2) 
Anomaly 
All user-based anomaly detection schemes for intrusion 
detection are intrusive behaviors is, by its very nature, 
anomalous [13]. User is acting in an abnormal manner then 
the actions of that user can be classified as intrusive. 
Behaviors can be determined to be abnormal through a 
comparison against a user profile that represents a user's 
typical behavior.  
Users establish a profile based-on the number and types 
of commands they employ. Thus, if a system can discern this 
profile, and commands are employed “outside” of this 
profile, then the system should flag this action as a potential 
intrusion. Commands are presented by authentication of user, 
which appear in the same sequence.   
User profile can take on many forms, is based upon either 
an individual's behavior and/or the typical behavior of the 
individuals in a functional group. Any time that the system is 
not operating in a normal manner there is an increased 
likelihood that an intruder is (or was) present on the system. 
For example, a record: 
 (00100000100001100001100001001110100010) is 
abnormal vector of features. 
D. Intrusion Detection 
The detection phase identifies abnormal vectors. At each 
time interval (t), each node collects a feature vector Vi, k(t). 
This feature vector represents the behavior of a node in this 
time interval. 
Detection of abnormal vector is based on the vector of 
normal profile Vi, k(0) previously established. 
To determine abnormalities, we calculate the distance 
between Vi,k(0) and Vi,k(t) using: 
 

0  ), V , ( )
,
1
t
i
Vi
n





   



Such that n is the number of characteristics of the node i. 
At each node, we calculate the distance of projection of each 
feature vector Vi,k(t). We class Vi,k(t) abnormal, if the 
projection 
distance calculated 
exceeds a predefined 
threshold: 
 


0
, ( )
, (0),

t
Vi
d Vi


: Normal                   

    

0
, ( )
, (0),

t
Vi
d Vi


: Anomaly 
E. Application Example 
In a Smart Office, we have a set of nodes that have 
access to services and information.  
The Smart Office has a central manager, whose management 
tasks are to access services and information in the network.  
The number of nodes connected to the Smart Office is very 
large, which limits the work of central manager and 
encumbers management nodes.  
Our idea is based on nodes and their behaviors. Each 
node accesses the services and information of Smart Office 
with network authentication. This authentication allows the 
authorizations and restrictions of services and information to 
nodes.  
Generally, an intruder accesses the network via a node with 
the objective to access network services. Network protection 
depends on the protection of each node.  
As a possible scenario to demonstrate the system design, 
we assume that Marc works in a Smart Office. He uses his 
PC to work and access network services and information 
requiring an authentication and access control mechanism. 
This authentication gives Marc the right to print, consult the 
database and send emails. Marc cannot update database, 
share data, or use the scanner. All tasks accomplished by 
Marc are tracked. Then his privileges are: print, consult the 
database and send emails, while his restrictions are: update 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

database, share data and use scanner. The normal behavior of 
Marc is expressed by all these restrictions and privileges. 
This allows to build the vector features Vi,k(0) with an initial 
time 0.  
Vi,k(0) = {print, consult, email, update, share, scan}  
Such that I = name of the node (Marc), and k = number of 
privileges and restrictions (= 6).  
1) Intrusion Detection  
When connecting to the smart office, the profiling unit 
built the feature vector corresponding to the normal profile 
of Marc based on his privileges and restrictions.  
In a time interval (t), the collection unit collects information 
about the current behavior of Marc, this allows to build the 
feature vector Vi,k(t) corresponding to his current behavior. 
This vector shows the values of privileges and restrictions 
that Marc had accessed during this time interval.  
The unit of analysis and detection calculates the distance 
between Vi,k(t) and Vi,k(0) to class the abnormal vectors 
(behavior):  
If     

0
, ( )
, (0),

t
Vi
d Vi


: Normal behavior      (3) 
Else                                             : Anomaly  
 
Our idea allows checking all what comes from nodes, for 
monitoring the behavior of the user (node). The analysis and 
detection is performed in each node independently of the 
other nodes. 
2) Positioning of the solution 
IDSs shown in the related work are developed for sensor 
networks, which limits their generalization to ubiquitous 
networks. We also have the problem of overload sensors, and 
update database the profiles and signatures. 
Our solution is based on the authentication by the 
permissions and restrictions of access to information and 
services on ubiquitous network. As such, there is no need to 
update database of the normal profile.  
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF IDSS 
IDSs 
Features    
Construction of 
normal profile  
Data source 
SUIDS 
Learning phase 
Event 
Registration 
Application-led 
Learning phase 
Data packets  
Cluster-based 
Learning phase 
Network 
packets  
ACP-based 
Learning phase 
Network packet 
Our approach 
Based on 
permissions and 
restrictions to access 
network. 
Permissions and 
restrictions  
As the table shows, all works presented in the related 
work section are supported on the normal profile; require a 
learning phase for the construction of the normal profile. 
This phase limits the scalability of the solutions (support of 
new nodes). In our approach the construction of the normal 
profile does not require the learning phase, it based on 
permissions and restrictions to access network.  
For the data source, our approach uses the permissions 
and restrictions of the node, and other approaches are based 
on networks or data packet. 
In our solution, the detection is done on each node 
individually of its neighbors, limiting the cooperation in the 
detection. This is what we focus on. The design of schemes 
for achieving complete or partial cooperation is a topic of 
future research.   
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The principal objective of this work was to ensure the 
safety of ubiquitous networks. We developed an approach to 
detect intrusions; our approach allows to monitor the safety 
of nodes and the network. It consists in searching anomalies 
that could lead to possible attacks, and to take action against 
such attacks.  
We then described our approach; we introduced a new 
way of constructing the normal profile of users based on 
authentication. This approach allows a more flexible analysis 
and detection, which avoids the update of the database of the 
normal profile. We interest to the behavior of the node to the 
network.    
Our idea realizes a protection of nodes and assures 
security of network. This protection is proved by 
authentication abilities to build user profile.  
The problem is still open, while the nodes act 
individually with their neighbors, limiting the cooperation in 
detection. In some case which attacks are complexes, the 
node will not be able to identify intrusion and intruder. 
This article is a work in progress, presenting ideas to be 
developed in our future work. 
As future work, we will complete the intrusion detection 
architecture, investigate the methods to analyze audit data for 
intrusion detection, formulate and evaluate our intrusion 
detection approach.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] OECD, “Guidelines on the protection of privacy and transborder 
flows of personal data,”  http://www.oecd.org/, 2013, [accessed June 
2014]. 
[2] S. K. Singh, M. P. Singh, and D. K. Singh, “Intrusion Detection 
Based Security Solution for Cluster-Based Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” International Journal of Advanced Science and 
Technology, vol. 30, May. 2011, pp. 83-95. 
[3] K. Sellami, R. Chelouah, L. Sellami, and M. Ahmed-Nacer, 
“Intrusion Detection Based on Swarm Intelligence using mobile 
agent,”  International Conference on Swarm Intelligence: Theoretical 
advances and real world applications (ICSI 2011), Cergy, France, 
June. 2011, pp. 1-3. 
[4] B. Zhou, Q. Shi, and M. Merabti, “A novel service-oriented and user-
centricintrusion 
detection 
system 
for 
ubiquitous 
networks, ” 
Proceedings 
of 
IASTED 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communication, Network and Information Security (CNIS’05), Nov. 
2005, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, pp. 76-81. 
[5] B. Zhou, Q. Shi, and M. Merabti, “ A Framework for Intrusion 
Detection in Heterogeneous Environments,” Proc. IEEE Consumer 
Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC 06), vol. 2, 
Jan. 2006, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, pp. 1244-1248. 
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

[6] S. O. Amin and al, “RIDES: Robust Intrusion Detection System for 
IP-Based Ubiquitous Sensor Networks,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 9, 
no. 6, May. 2009, pp. 3447-3468,  doi:10.3390/s90503447. 
[7] P. Robinson, “An Application-led Approach for Security Research in 
Ubicomp,” The Third International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing, Munich, Germany, May. 2005. 
[8] P.F. Tiako and L. Gruenwald, "Collaboration framework for data 
compensation in sensor networks," In Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Electro/Information Technology, May. 
2008, pp 504-509. 
[9] C. Loo, M. Y. Ng, M. Palaniswami, and C. Leckie, “APC-based 
Distributed Approche for Intrusion Detection in WSNs,” International 
Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 2, no.4, Dec. 2006, pp. 
313-332. 
 
[10] J. Xu, J. Wang, S. Xie, W. Chen, and J. U. Kim, “Study on intrusion 
detection policy for wireless sensor networks”, International Journal 
of  Security and Its Applications, vol. 7, no. 1, January. 2013, pp. 1-6.  
[11] I. Parker, J. L. Undercoffer, J. Pinkston, and A. Joshi, “On Intrusion 
Detection in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,” 23rd IEEE International 
Performance Computing and Communications Conferenc , Workshop 
on Information Assurance, April. 2004, pp. 1-6. 
[12] F. Adelstein, P. Alla, R. Joyce, and G. G. Richard, “Physically 
Locating Wireless Intruders,” Proc. IEEE 2004 IAS Conference, Las 
Vegas, Nevada, vol. 1, April. 2004, pp. 482—89. 
[13] J. Marin, D. Ragsdale, and J. Sirdu, “A hybrid approach to the profile 
creation 
and 
intrusion 
detection,” 
In 
DARPA 
Information 
Survivability Conference &amp, Exposition II (DISCEX'01), Vol. 1, 
IEEE 2001, pp. 69-76. 
 
 
 
 
 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

