Management Information Systems in Health Sector: Evidence of Mandatory Use 
Ioannis Mitropoulos 
Dept. of Business Administration,  
Technological Education institute of Western Greece  
Patras, Greece 
e-mail: mitro@teiwest.gr 
 
 
Abstract — The purpose of this study is to investigate the 
factors that negatively impact the development of health 
information systems and the documentation of the theoretical 
model for the Mandatory Use of Software Engineering. The 
factors were investigated through a structured questionnaire 
on 120 users of the system of the General Hospital of Lamia in 
Greece, who had recent experience in the introduction of an 
integrated information technology system. The results of the 
analysis 
shows 
that 
targeted 
interventions 
of 
the 
administration of the Hospitals to inform, about expected net 
benefit of users, contribute to the acceptance and therefore to 
the functional and comprehensive introduction of information 
systems in health, highlighting the actual substance as tools in 
modern decision making. 
 
Keywords-management information systems; health care; 
hospital; Greece. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rapid increase in health expenditure creates problems 
of sustainability in National Health Systems worldwide. 
Decision making in health aims to search and select the best 
solutions that define the best use of limited resources, the 
most efficient and qualitative confrontation of the health 
needs of the population and the maximization of the social 
benefit. Management Information Systems (MIS) in health 
sector is the critical tool for rational decision making and 
integral documentation in any effort of planning / 
programming 
implementation. 
The 
success 
of 
the 
implementation 
of 
management 
information 
systems 
depends on the attitude of users towards them especially 
under an environment that its used is mandatory, such as in 
hospital services that its use is imposed. Understanding the 
reasons why people accept or reject the information and 
communication technologies has proven decisive factor for 
their survival.  
The best known bibliographic models-theories that have 
been developed to better understand the factors that 
contribute most to the user acceptance of the new technology 
are: the theory of reasoned action proposed by Ajzen and 
Fishbein [1], the model of acceptance of technology [2-3], 
the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology [4] 
and the integrated research model of Wixom and Todd [5]. 
We apply the above theories in hospital sector to show 
that the lack of user acceptance is the key barrier to the 
success of new information systems. We address the factors 
that explain why users accept or reject information systems 
and how their acceptance is affected by the mandatory use. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the theoretical model and the research questions. 
Section III describes the statistical inference analysis and 
presents the results. Section IV addresses the conclusions.  
II. 
PRESENTATION OF THE RESEARCH TOOL  
The introduction of the Information System in the 
General Hospital of Lamia in Greece was implemented in a 
coordinated way and replaced the majority of previous 
procedures. It involved employees of all specialties 
(administrative, nursing, medical and paramedical staff) who 
are Integrated Information System users.  
Therefore, we can consider the environment of the 
hospital as a mandatory environment and thus useful to 
investigate it through the model discussed above for 
mandatory environments (Model for Mandatory Use of 
Software Technologies - MMUST) of Koh, Prybutok, Ryan 
and Wu [6]. 
Based on the above theoretical model, the research 
hypotheses are as follows: 
• 
H1: Higher quality information is associated with a 
higher level of satisfaction on the information. 
• 
H2: Higher level of satisfaction on the information 
is associated with a higher level of expected performance. 
• 
H3: Higher level of expected performance is 
associated with more positive attitude while using the 
system. 
• 
H4: The social influence has a positive direct 
impact on the expected performance. 
• 
H5: The positive attitude is associated with 
extensive use of the system. 
• 
H6: The attitude of the user of the system is 
positively correlated with the user satisfaction by the system. 
• 
H7: The use of the system is positively correlated 
with net benefits. 
• 
H8: The overall satisfaction on the system is 
positively correlated with the net benefits. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 1. MIS acceptance model correlation and R2 results 
Use                      
(R2 = 0.073) 
Overall Satisfaction       
(R2 = 0.117) 
0.342 
0.270 
Quality and 
Satisfaction on 
the Information 
Expected 
Performance     
(R2 = 0.104) 
Social Impact 
Attitude             
(R2 = 0.063) 
Net Benefits      
(R2 = 0.226) 
0.195 
-0.233 
0.251 
-0.216 
-0.378 
Based on the MMUST model, we use a structured 
questionnaire with the following dimensions: Information 
Quality; Satisfaction on the Information; Attitude; Expected 
Performance; Social Influence; Use; Overall Satisfaction; 
and Net Benefits. The responses were measured according to 
a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 'strongly disagree' to 
'strongly agree'. The statistical analysis carried out was a 
series of controls to determine whether our sample match the 
proposed model that investigates the acceptance of 
information systems for mandatory environments. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Statistical analyses were conducted using the Statistical 
Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS 18). Exploratory 
factor analysis using principal axis factoring with oblique 
rotation was conducted to explore the factor structure of the 
MMUST.  
Therefore, in terms of the factors-variables created are: 
• 
Factor 1 - Expected Performance (PE). 
• 
Factor 2 - Quality and Satisfaction on the 
Information (IQIS). 
• 
Factor 3 - Net Benefits (NB). 
• 
Factor 4 - Use (US). 
• 
Factor 5 - Overall Satisfaction (OS). 
• 
Factor 6 - Social Impact (SI). 
• 
Factor 7 - Attitude (AT)  
Considering the above, significant correlations exist 
between factors in the MMUST model. For example factor 1 
"Expected Performance (PE)" has positive correlation 
coefficient (0.195) with Factor 2 "Quality and Satisfaction on 
the Information (IQIS)". On the other hand factor 1 has a 
coefficient of determination R2=0.104 (ie, explained 
variance), when regression with factors 1 and 6 is performed. 
Figure 1 shows the analytic results.  
The results showed that the MMUST model is partially 
confirmed, for the interpretation of user acceptance. It was 
found that the level of customization that shows the sample 
of user responses is quite low. Regarding the factors 
"Information Quality" and "Meeting on the Information", the 
factorial analysis revealed the existence of a single factor, 
which we called "Quality and Satisfaction on the 
Information" instead of the two separate factors that 
appeared in the original model. This indicates a match and 
absolute relevance of these two concepts in the minds of 
users. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Exploring the model proved that the determinants of 
acceptance is the “attitude” (as the central key variable) and 
"the view of the Net Benefits' (as the ultimate objective). The 
strengthening of these points should be therefore the focus 
and the interest of Administrations. Also, 'the contribution of 
social influence' is important, which importance increases in 
mandatory environments and is a factor that can greatly be 
enhanced by management. 
These findings provide a useful tool to extract certain 
conclusions concerning the operations of the hospital 
administration to increase acceptance and therefore the use 
and performance of Information Systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research has been co-funded by the European Union 
(European Social Fund) and Greek national resources under 
the framework of the ‘Archimedes III’ project of the 
‘Education and Lifelong Learning’ Operational Programme. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Ajzen, and M. Fishbein, "Understanding attitudes and 
predicting social behavior," Prentice-Hall, 1980. 
[2] F. Davis, "Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use and 
user acceptance of information technology," MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 319-340, 1989. 
[3] S. Y. Yousafzai, G. R. Foxall, and  J. G. Pallister, 
"Technology acceptance: A meta-analysis of the TAM: Part 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

1," Journal of Modelling in Management, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 
251-280, 2007. 
[4] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, 
"User Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a 
Unified View," MIS Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 425-478,  
2003. 
[5] B. H. Wixom, and P. A. Todd, "A theoretical integration of 
user satisfaction and technology acceptance," Information 
Systems Research, vol 16, no.1, pp. 85-102, 2005. 
[6] E. C. Koh, R. V. Prybutok, D. R. Ryan, and Y. Wu "A Model 
for Mandatory Use of Software Technologies: An Integrative 
Approach by Applying Multiple Levels of Abstraction of 
Informing Science," Informing Science: the International 
Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline, vol. 13, pp. 177-203 
2010. 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

