Computing Individual Mobility Profiles from Mobile Phone Usage Traces 
Miguel Á. Rodríguez-Crespo, Ana Armenta, Alberto Martín-Domínguez, Rocío Martínez-López, Rubén Lara 
Telefónica I+D 
Madrid, Spain 
[miguel, aalv, amd, rml, rubenlh]@tid.es 
 
Abstract—This paper describes the procedures used to 
automatically generate a complete individual mobility profile 
of users of mobile services, based exclusively on geo-located 
phone usage information and without requiring any customer 
interaction. It also presents the results of applying these 
procedures in a test with real data. The individual mobility 
description includes metrics such as area of activity, diameter 
of influence area, location and meaning of the user’s points of 
interest, and frequent itineraries. 
Keywords— Individual mobility; mobile phone usage; center 
of mass; radius of gyration; points of interest; itineraries 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The study of human mobility patterns has received 
growing attention over the past few years, especially due to 
the increasing availability of location data coming from both 
global positioning systems (GPS) and mobile telephone 
usage, which leaves geo-located traces on the operators 
networks [1][2][3][4]. 
Understanding how and when human movements take 
place across our towns, cities or countries is of interest in 
many areas, such as traffic management, transport network 
design or diseases spread control [5][6][7]. However, not 
only a global view of population flows, but also individual 
mobility patterns of a user, are of great interest in a number 
of fields [8]. The knowledge of what locations a user 
periodically visits, over what period, with what frequency, 
what days of the week and at what times of the day [9][10] 
can be used for the provision of contextual services, relevant 
advertising, targeted offers to address the particular mobility 
needs of the user, itinerary planning…  In general, knowing 
locations that are relevant for a user can enable the 
personalization of commercial communications or service 
interactions and improve their relevance. 
This paper describes the set of procedures implemented 
to obtain a complete description of the mobility profile for 
mobile phone users. These procedures have been tested over 
several million customers from the same country, treated in 
an anonymous way. Future utilization of these procedures 
will imply customers give their previous authorization to 
treat their unanonymized id so they can be offered 
customized services or applications. 
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 describes 
the general framework and the kind of geo-located data we 
use to obtain these profiles. In Section 3, we explain how we 
compute certain areas for every customer. Section 4 explains 
how we detect and label the points of interest of each 
customer. Section 5 describes how we detect the frequent 
itineraries of a user. Finally, in Section 6, we present some 
conclusions and ideas for future work. 
II. 
GENERAL FRAMEWORK 
The method used for computing individual mobility 
profiles works on geo-located events generated by using 
mobile phones. These geo-located events are obtained in a 
non-intrusive way for the users. These events are traces that 
mobile phone usage leave on the network and include 
initiation and termination of voice calls, sending short text 
messages (SMSs) or multimedia messages (MMSs), 
signaling (as data sessions attach/detach events), and so on. 
Geo-located events must contain, at least, the following 
information: an anonymized user id associated to the event, 
and the date, time and location of the event. 
Location information is usually available at a Base 
Transceiver Station (BTS) level. BTSs are the places where 
the antennas that receive and transmit the radio signals from 
and to the mobile phone users are located. So the location 
information in fact refers to an approximate area, not an 
exact place. Even more, the customers’ location is not known 
as a continuous function of time; it is only known at certain 
points in time when customers are interacting with the 
mobile phone network. 
These kinds of events are collected over a period of time 
to obtain the dataset used to compute the mobility profiles of 
the users. 
The work and results presented in this paper are based on 
data collected from Call Detail Records (CDRs) of voice 
calls of customers from a Latin American country over a six-
month period. These data comprise about 7 billion CDRs, 
from more than 16 million customers. There are more than 
5000 different locations (BTSs) over the whole country. 
III. 
CENTER OF MASS, RADIUS OF GYRATION AND 
DIAMETER OF INFLUENCE AREA 
First, some simple but informative descriptors are 
calculated. These descriptors give information about the 
areas where the customers are usually located over the time 
period considered. 
For each customer, a set of locations is obtained, each 
with a count indicating the number of times (ni) we observe 
the customer at that location. Each location is represented by 
a pair of 2-D planar coordinates (xi, yi). The center of mass 
(CM) for a customer is obtained as the location whose CMx 
and CMy coordinates are calculated as the weighted average 
of all the locations known for that user over the time period. 
CMx = 
𝑛!𝑥!
!
!!!
𝑛!
!
!!!
 
(1) 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

CMy = 
𝑛!𝑦!
!
!!!
𝑛!
!
!!!
 
(2) 
As the activity of the customers can be very different for 
workdays and weekends, two centers of mass are calculated: 
a workdays center of mass (CMxwd, CMywd) from the activity 
observed for the user from Monday to Friday, and a 
weekends center of mass (CMxwe, CMywe) from the activity 
observed on Saturdays and Sundays. 
Once the two centers of mass are obtained, two radii of 
gyration (Rwd and Rwe) are calculated for each one. A radius 
of gyration is computed as the weighted average of the 
distances from the customer registered locations to his/her 
center of mass. 
R = 
𝑛!
!
!!!
(𝑥! − 𝐶𝑀𝑥)! + (𝑦! − 𝐶𝑀𝑦)!
𝑛!
!
!!!
 
(3) 
The combination of center of mass and radius of gyration 
defines a circular area where the customer concentrates most 
of his activity. Two circular areas are obtained for each 
customer, one for workdays, given by (CMxwd, CMywd) and 
Rwd, and another one for weekends, given by (CMxwe, CMywe) 
and Rwe. 
Fig. 1 shows an example of the activity areas for a user. 
This user clearly changes his/her known phone usage 
locations from workdays to weekends. 
Figure 1.  Workdays (red) and weekends (green) activity areas defined by 
centers of mass and radii of gyration for a user. 
Another parameter is calculated to complement the 
information given by the centers of mass and radii of 
gyration: the maximum distance between two registered 
locations for a customer over the period of study (diameter of 
the influence area). This information allows identifying users 
that have gone to very distant places during the time period 
and users that have stayed in a more limited area. 
From a general analysis of the locations visited by the 
customers, we can derive some information: 
• 
50% of the customers use less than 9 different BTSs 
during workdays and less than 7 on weekends. Just 
5% of the customers visit more than 51 different 
BTSs during workdays. 
• 
The radii of gyration are less than 4 km for 50% of 
the customers and are very similar for workdays and 
weekends. Just 5% of the customers have radii of 
gyration greater tan 17 km. 
• 
50% of the customers have an influence area 
diameter lower than 20 km in workdays and lower 
than 18 km in weekends. 
IV. 
DETECTION AND LABELLING OF POINTS OF INTEREST 
The second component of the individual mobility profiles 
is the detection and labeling of the users’ points of interest 
(PoIs). The goal is to find the most relevant locations for 
every user, from the set of locations he/she had activity at, 
and to characterize them by labels that give information 
about what each PoI means for that user. 
A. Detection of PoIs 
First, the CDRs of users that have too many or too few 
calls during the time period are filtered out. This way we 
avoid the noise introduced by users not corresponding to an 
individual usage (i.e., switching devices or PBXs of a 
company or business), or corresponding to individuals whose 
activity is too low to extract a meaningful usage pattern. A 
lower limit of 200 calls and an upper limit of 5000 calls over 
the time period were established. More than 8 million 
customers are between these thresholds. For these customers, 
BTSs having at least 5% of the total number of each 
customer’s calls are selected. The customer-BTS pairs that 
satisfy these requirements define the PoIs of that customer. 
B. Labelling of PoIs 
Every PoI is characterized by a communication vector 
that represents its temporal usage pattern. For one PoI 
(customer-BTS pair) this communication vector initially 
contains the number of calls the customer did in the BTS at 
every different hour of the different weekdays (from Monday 
to Sunday), aggregating the values for the same weekdays of 
the whole time period. As not every weekday has the same 
meaning in terms of life activity patterns, it was decided 
(after a previous analysis) to group Monday, Tuesday, 
Wednesday and Thursday in one single kind of weekdays 
(Monday-Thursday), and to maintain Friday, Saturday and 
Sunday as separate kinds of weekdays. 
So, for every customer there are several communication 
vectors (curves), one for each of his/her PoIs, containing the 
number of calls made by that customer in that location at 
every hour of 4 kinds of weekdays (Monday-Thursday, 
Friday, Saturday and Sunday). Each vector has 4×24 = 96 
values. 
As the number of different kinds of weekdays is not the 
same, a first normalization is done dividing each vector value 
by the number of days of its kind of weekday that occurs in 
the time period. This allows comparing the 4 different parts 
of the curves. 
 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

In order to allow the comparison between different 
curves from different PoIs with very different activity levels 
(number of calls), a second normalization is done dividing 
each vector value by the sum of all the vector values. All 
normalized PoI communication vectors will have a resultant 
sum equal to 1. This way the differences between vectors 
focus on the curve shape itself reducing the importance of 
the curve amplitude levels. 
Fig. 2 shows the normalized communication vectors of 
two PoIs, with different shapes that represent different kinds 
of phone usage. The first one is more uniform and regular 
over the different weekdays. The second only presents 
activity from Monday to Friday, especially in the evenings. 
In order to label the communication vectors, it is 
assumed that different shapes (usage patterns over the week) 
imply activities of different nature at those locations. A set of 
clusters (groups) is obtained from the whole set of PoI 
communication vectors of all the customers. A meaningful 
label is assigned to each cluster, related to the usage pattern 
over time. 
About 24 million PoIs (communication vectors) were 
obtained from the dataset. A representative sample of this set 
was selected to run the clustering algorithm (clustering 
training). A partitioning around medoids (PAM) algorithm 
was used. This algorithm allows the use of different types of 
distances to represent the dissimilarity between vectors. In 
particular, a distance based on the Pearson correlation 
coefficient between any two communication vectors a and b 
was used. The distance (dissimilarity) between two vectors 
was calculated as 1 −  𝜌!" , where 𝜌!"  is the Pearson 
correlation coefficient (similarity). So, the distances have a 
minimum value of 0 (exactly the same shape) and a 
maximum value of 2 (exactly the opposite shape). 
Figure 2.  Normalized communication vectors of two PoIs. 
The clustering over the sample of PoI vectors produces a 
vector cluster id (group) assigned to each vector in the 
sample. All the vectors with the same cluster id belong to the 
same group, and a representative vector for the cluster id is 
also obtained. The representative vector of each cluster id is 
the cluster medoid, that is one of the vectors assigned to that 
cluster whose average dissimilarity to all the vectors in the 
cluster is minimal. The cluster centroid can also be obtained 
as an average of all the sample vectors found inside the same 
cluster. 
Once the medoids are obtained, the PoI vectors not used 
in the clustering (or any other PoI vector that could be built 
later) can be assigned a cluster id calculating the distances 
based on the Pearson correlation to the different medoids and 
choosing the cluster id of the representative that is closest to 
the new input vector (has the minimum distance to it). 
The number of cluster or groups has to be given as an 
input to the training phase of the clustering algorithm. As we 
would like to detect many different groups for the PoI 
vectors to find enough different types of locations for a user, 
a value of 20 clusters was used. 
Using the medoid and the centroid for each cluster, a 
label is assigned to them based on the knowledge of the 
social habits and cultural characteristics of the country. 
These are the level 0 labels (detailed set of labels). 
Fig. 3 shows 4 examples of cluster representatives, along 
with the level 0 labels assigned to each. The percentage of 
vectors of the training sample found in each cluster is also 
shown. 
The cluster representatives are later grouped into 5 level 
1 labels, thinking on practical applications that will not need 
as much detail as given by some of the 20 level 0 labels. So, 
any PoI vector is assigned the level 0 label of its closest 
medoid, and the level 1 label is assigned based on a table that 
associates a level 1 label to each level 0 label. 
Figure 3.  Example of medoids (continuous lines) and centroids (dotted 
lines) for 4 clusters, with their level 0 labels and percentages in the sample 
of PoI vectors used in training the clustering. 
The level 1 labels and the percentage of training vectors 
in each of them are: 
• 
Office/Industrial Work 10.03%. 
• 
Commercial Work 16.67%. 
 
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
Kind of Weekday−Hour
hmt00
hmt03
hmt06
hmt09
hmt12
hmt15
hmt18
hmt21
hfr00
hfr03
hfr06
hfr09
hfr12
hfr15
hfr18
hfr21
hsa00
hsa03
hsa06
hsa09
hsa12
hsa15
hsa18
hsa21
hsu00
hsu03
hsu06
hsu09
hsu12
hsu15
hsu18
hsu21
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
Kind of Weekday−Hour
hmt00
hmt03
hmt06
hmt09
hmt12
hmt15
hmt18
hmt21
hfr00
hfr03
hfr06
hfr09
hfr12
hfr15
hfr18
hfr21
hsa00
hsa03
hsa06
hsa09
hsa12
hsa15
hsa18
hsa21
hsu00
hsu03
hsu06
hsu09
hsu12
hsu15
hsu18
hsu21
0
20
40
60
80
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
Cluster 1 Office/Industrial Work 6.72%
Index
0
20
40
60
80
0.00
0.02
0.04
Cluster 10 Work (Commercial) 6.12%
Index
0
20
40
60
80
0.000
0.010
0.020
0.030
Cluster 5 Home 12.05%
Index
0
20
40
60
80
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
Cluster 17 Nightlife Leisure 6.36%
Index
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

• 
Home 39,00%. 
• 
Night/Evening Leisure 9.31%. 
• 
Afternoon Leisure / Shopping 24.99% 
A labeling confidence flag (0/1 value) is obtained based 
on a distance threshold per cluster. The distances of the 
training vectors to the medoids of their assigned cluster are 
used to compute the distances mean and standard deviation 
for each cluster. The sum of the mean and standard deviation 
is the threshold distance for each cluster. If the distance of a 
PoI vector to its closest cluster representative is higher than 
the threshold distance for that cluster, then the label assigned 
to that PoI vector is not considered reliable enough (the 
labeling confidence flag is 0). Otherwise the labeling 
confidence flag is 1. About 15% of the PoI labels are not 
considered reliable enough using this criterion. 
C. Comments on the Results of PoI Detection and Labelling 
The output of the PoIs detection and labelling step is a set 
of locations (BTS’s) of special interest for each customer. 
Each PoI is automatically labelled at two different levels 
(level 0 and level 1) including a labeling confidence flag. 
The labels express the particular meanings of the locations 
for each user. 
Fig. 4 shows some distributions of the number of PoIs 
and labels for the whole set of customers whose data have 
been processed. More than 8 million customers have at least 
one reliable PoI (labeling confidence flag=1) and more than 
20 million reliable PoIs are detected for those customers, 
giving an average number of 2.5 PoIs per customer. The 
black line shows that the highest number of PoIs reaches a 
value of 12. But, the highest number of different level 0 
labels (red line) does not exceed the value of 9 (one customer 
can have more than one location with the same label or 
meaning). Most of the customers have 5 or less PoIs, and 
also 5 or less different level 0 labels.  Regarding the number 
of different level 1 labels (green line), the upper limit of 5 is 
only reached by a very low percentage of customers. 
Figure 4.  Percentage of customers that have X PoIs with labelling 
confidence flag=1 (black line), X distinct level 0 labels (red line) and X 
distinct level 1 labels (green line). 
As each customer profile includes his/her centers of mass 
and radii of gyration, the customer’s PoIs information is 
enriched by flags indicating whether a PoI is located inside 
or outside the activity area defined by one center of mass and 
radius of gyration. This is done both for workdays and 
weekends activity areas to observe if there are any variations 
depending on the type of PoI. 
Fig. 5 shows the percentage of PoIs of a particular type 
(level 1 label) outside the workdays activity area (red line) 
and outside the weekends activity area (green line). It 
includes all the PoIs (even those with labeling confidence 
flag=0). The two horizontal dashed lines show the mean 
values of being outside the activity areas (workdays and 
weekends) for the whole set of PoIs. 
As expected, most of the PoIs are found inside the 
customer’s activity areas (almost 80%), as they represent 
important places for the customers, which concentrate most 
of their activity. Some types of PoIs are clearly above or 
below the mean value. There are variations in the 
percentages of the PoIs being outside depending on 
considering the workdays activity area or the weekends 
activity area. Fig. 6 illustrates those variations, showing the 
percentage of increment of a PoI type being outside the 
weekends activity area relative to being outside the workdays 
activity area. The PoI type labeled as “Office/Industrial 
Work” has the highest weekends/workdays variation (an 
80% variation). It is a positive variation, indicating that is 
much more likely that an “Office/Industrial Work” PoI is 
outside the weekends activity area than it is outside the 
workdays activity area (this is consistent with the meaning of 
that label). The PoI labeled as “Home” has the highest 
negative variation. It is less likely that the “Home” PoI is 
outside the weekends activity area than it is outside the 
workdays activity area (people usually spend more time at 
home during weekends than during workdays). 
Figure 5.  Percentage of level 1 PoI labels outside their customer’s activity 
area (red, workdays activity area; green, weekends activity area) 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
0
10
20
30
40
% of customers having PoIs
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
● % of customers having X PoIs
% of customers having X distinct level0 PoI labels
% of customers having X distinct level1 PoI labels
!
!
!
!
!
!
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Level 1 PoI label
% of level 1 PoI labels outside activity area
% outside workdays activity area
Mean % outside workdays activity area
% outside weekends activity area
Mean % outside weekends activity area
0 Confidence Label Below Threshold
1 Office/Industrial Work
2 Commercial Work
3 Home
4 Night/Evening Leisure
5 Afternoon Leisure / Shopping
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 6.  Percentage of increment in the percentage of level 1 PoI labels 
outside the weekends activity area relative to the percentage of level 1 PoI 
labels outside the workdays activity area 
The relationship between PoI label meanings and their 
location inside/outside the user’s activity areas can be further 
exploited to refine or even correct the initial PoI labels 
assignment. For instance, “Home” PoIs detected out of the 
workdays activity area and far enough from other existing 
”Home” PoIs inside the same user’s workdays activity area 
can be labeled as “Second Residence”. 
V. 
FREQUENT ITINERARIES: MOVEMENTS BETWEEN 
POINTS OF INTEREST 
Focusing exclusively on calls done or received by each 
customer at his/her PoIs, we consider a movement between 
two points A and B when we find two consecutive calls, the 
first one located at point A and the second one located at 
point B. We establish a maximum time difference of 6 hours 
between calls to consider the movement is valid. Each 
movement is spread as a probability over the time period 
between the two consecutive calls, because the exact time 
point when the movement takes place is unknown. 
A movements curve is obtained as a sum of those 
probabilities over the six months period under analysis, 
describing the global probability that the customer moves 
from PoI A to PoI B at a certain hour of the week. When we 
find a minimum number of 6 movements between the same 2 
points of interest of a given customer, we say we have 
detected a frequent itinerary between those 2 points. Finally, 
the itinerary is built as the parts (slots) of this curve above a 
percentage (20%) of its absolute maximum. 
An itinerary description is composed of the peaks from 
the movements’ curve that remain above the amplitude 
threshold, which represent the most probable time points 
when such itinerary takes place. The itinerary description 
also comprises the time-points where the curve intersects the 
threshold, which describe wider time intervals when the 
itinerary between the two PoIs implied would probably take 
place. 
For the movements curve depicted at Fig. 7, the 
corresponding itinerary would contain a set of parameters 
describing the time positions of the 6 peaks that remain 
above the threshold (20% of the maximum amplitude), and 
also the parameters describing the width of those peaks. 
Figure 7.  Movements curve between two PoIs of a given customer across 
the 168 hour intervals of the week (red dotted lines every 5% of the max. 
amplitude). 
Under those assumptions, around 4.5 million customers 
have more than one frequent itinerary between two of his/her 
PoIs. The total number of itineraries detected is about 14 
million, which gives an average ratio of 3 itineraries per 
customer. The total number of peaks that reach the 20% 
maximum amplitude threshold is about 125 million, which 
implies an average of 8 peaks per itinerary. 
The real distributions are not uniform as the two curves 
in Fig. 8 clearly show. The red line represents the percentage 
of customers (from the 4.5 million customers that have at 
least one itinerary) that have X number of itineraries. It has a 
clear maximum at 2 itineraries per customer and decays 
quickly to 7-8 itineraries (higher number of itineraries have 
very low frequency). The green line represents the 
percentage of itineraries (from 14 million itineraries) that 
have X number of peaks that exceed the cutoff amplitude 
threshold. In this case the maximum is located between 5 and 
7 peaks per itinerary. 
Taking into account the kinds of PoIs that are destination 
of the detected itineraries, results are aggregated in order to 
validate internal coherence of the followed procedure. Fig. 9 
shows the sum of itineraries across the 168=7*24 hours of 
the week that start at any kind of PoI with 5 curves for the 5 
different categories of PoI as destination. Itineraries to home 
are majority and take place mainly at evenings of workdays, 
and at both mornings and evenings of weekends. Itineraries 
to “Office/Industrial Work” are mainly detected on mornings 
of workdays. Itineraries to “Commercial Work” are detected 
more likely from Monday to Saturday during the day hours, 
similarly to the itineraries to PoIs labeled as “Afternoon 
Leisure / Shopping”. Itineraries to PoIs labeled as 
0
1
2
3
4
5
% of increment of % of level 1 PoI labels outside weekends activity area
over % of level 1 PoI labels outside workdays activity area
−20
0
20
40
60
80
0 Confidence Label Below Threshold
1 Office/Industrial Work
2 Commercial Work
3 Home
4 Night/Evening Leisure
5 Afternoon Leisure / Shopping
0
1
2
3
Vector 1 29 movimientos
nod 5512680517 bts1 93141 bts2 93630
seq(0, 167)
valores1
l00
l03
l06
l09
l12
l15
l18
l21
m00
m03
m06
m09
m12
m15
m18
m21
x00
x03
x06
x09
x12
x15
x18
x21
j00
j03
j06
j09
j12
j15
j18
j21
v00
v03
v06
v09
v12
v15
v18
v21
s00
s03
s06
s09
s12
s15
s18
s21
d00
d03
d06
d09
d12
d15
d18
d21
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

“Night/Evening Leisure” are mainly detected on late night 
hours. 
Figure 8.  Percentage of customers with X number of itineraries (read line) 
and percentage of itineraries with X number of peaks (green line). 
Figure 9.  Itineraries detected from any PoI as origin to the different kind 
of level 1 PoI categories as destination (results based on a sample 
containing a portion of the total number of itineraries) 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The mobility profiles we have presented provide a 
complete description of how mobile phone users move 
across space and time. The mobility profiles are obtained in a 
fully automatic way, without any customers’ special 
interaction. Computed individual mobility profiles comprise 
workdays and weekends activity areas, influence area 
diameter, points of interest locations and labels, and frequent 
itineraries. These mobility profiles have been applied to 
around 16 million customers of a Latin American country. 
Aggregated analysis of individual metrics show internal 
coherence between several independent procedures. The 
labels of the PoIs that fall outside workdays activity areas 
tend to be mainly related to leisure activities while labels of 
PoIs that fall outside weekends activity areas are much more 
related to work activities. The hour of the week when 
itineraries are detected match well with the label of the 
destination PoI. Itineraries to work PoIs are detected mainly 
on workdays in the mornings, while itineraries to home PoIs 
are more frequent in the evenings during the whole week. 
Although the described method has only been applied to 
voice call events, other kinds of geo-located events could 
also be used to build the individual mobility profiles. The 
higher geo-located event density over space and time, the 
higher precision of the individual mobility profile in 
particular and the social dynamics in general. 
This picture of social dynamics is of great interest for 
companies that want to customize services and applications, 
to better fit each individual’s needs. Mobility profile based 
customer segmentation will probably be one of the direct 
applications of the mobility metrics. 
Obviously, also governments and administrations can 
benefit from the knowledge of human dynamics seen as a 
whole. In that sense, our purpose is to link computed 
mobility profiles (both at individual and joint levels) with 
social variables, to be able to extract a clear picture of how 
population moves across space and time, and analyze the 
differences found for different ages, socioeconomic levels, 
regions, countries, and other segmentation criteria. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. C. González, C. A. Hidalgo, and A. L. Barabási, 
‘Understanding individual mobility patterns’, Nature 453, pp. 
779-782 (Jun. 2008). 
[2] C. Song, Z. Qu, N. Blumm, and A. L. Barabási, ‘Limits of 
predictability in human mobility’,  Science 327, pp. 1018–
1021 (Feb. 2010). 
[3] F. Calabrese, G. Di Lorenzo, and C. Ratti, ‘Human mobility 
prediction based on individual and collective geographical 
preferences’, 13th 1nternational IEEE Conference on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), pp. 312-317 (Sep. 
2010). 
[4] H. Firouzi, Y. Liu, and A. Sadrpour ‘Mobility pattern 
prediction using cell-phone data logs’, EECS 545 Final 
Report (2009). 
[5] F. Calabrese, F. C. Pereira, G. Di Lorenzo, L. Liang, and C. 
Ratti, ‘The geography of taste: analyzing cell-phone mobility 
and social events’, Proc. of the 8th International Conference 
on Pervasive Computing, pp. 22-37 (May, 2010). 
[6] C. Cariou, C. Ziemlicki, and Z. Smoreda, ‘Paris by night’, 
NetMob 2010, pp. 62-66 (May, 2010). 
[7] R. A. Becker, R. Cáceres, K. Hanson, J. M. Loh, S. Urbanek, 
A. Varshavsky, and C. Volinsky, ‘A tale of one city: using 
cellular network data for urban planning’, IEEE Pervasive 
Computing, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 18-26 (Oct.-Dec. 2011). 
[8] B. Csáji, A. Browet, V. Traag, J.-C. Delvenne, E. Huens, P. 
Van Dooren, Z. Smoreda, and V. D. Blondel, ‘Exploring 
mobility of mobile users’, NetMob 2011, pp. 35-37 (Oct. 
2011). 
[9] R. Becker, R. Cáceres, C. Han, K. Hanson, J. M. Loh, S. 
Urbanek, A. Varshavsky, and C. Volinsky, ‘Finding 
meaningful usage clusters from anonymized mobile call detail 
records’ Netmob 2011, pp. 47-49 (Oct. 2011). 
[10] S. Isaacman, R. Becker, R. Cáceres, S. Kobourov, M. 
Martonosi, J. Rowland, and A. Vasharsvky, ‘Identifying 
important places in people’s lives from cellular network data’, 
Proc. of 9th International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing, pp. 133-151 (Jun. 2011). 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

