Multi-layer Power Saving System Model 
Including Virtualization Server and Many-core Server  
 
Joon-young Jung, Dong-oh Kang, Heong-jik Lee, Jang-ho Choi, Chang-seok Bae 
Human Computing Research Section 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Deajeon, Korea  
e-mails: {jyjung21, dongoh, leehj, janghochoi, csbae}@etri.re.kr  
 
 
Abstract— Electric power has become an important part of our 
life and the power consumption is increasing rapidly. In data 
center, the power consumption is also increasing and it is 
essential to reduce the power consumption. Therefore, this 
paper proposes the requirement functions, the platform, and 
the structure of a Multi-layer Power Saving System (MPSS), 
including virtualization servers and many-core servers. 
Nowadays, the servers in data centers are sufficiently powerful 
to support many virtual machines. Therefore, the proposed 
system should be able to manage virtualization servers. We 
implement this system to monitor and control the power 
consumption using Intelligent Platform Management Interface 
(IPMI), the Advanced Configuration and Power Interface 
(ACPI), and the Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling 
(DVFS). Through experimental results, the power consumption 
is reduced about 23%, when the Time-based Dynamic Power 
Management (TDPM) policy is used.  
Keywords-Data Center; Green IT; Management Server; 
Power Saving; Virtualization Server. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There have been many studies to improve energy 
efficiency. Alonso et al. [1] presented a holistic approach to 
have a more efficient consumption behavior without 
lowering the threshold of comfort that consumers are used to. 
Power consumption is also increasing in data centers. 
Therefore, it is becoming a key design issue in data centers 
[2]. Even if the peak performance is required during short 
intervals, it should be supported for customer satisfaction 
using a lot of servers in the data center. Even if system 
components are not always required to be in the active state, 
it should be ready for customer satisfaction. So, an energy-
efficient server has the ability to enable and disable these 
components [3]. The Dynamic Power Management (DPM) 
reconfigures clusters to provide the requested services with 
minimum active components and loads dynamically [4][5]. 
The Voltage and Frequency scaling can reduce the power 
consumption because the consumption energy of a processor 
is proportional to V2 and F, where V and F are the operating 
voltage and frequency, respectively. The Dynamic Voltage 
Scaling (DVS) controls the operating voltages and 
frequencies of the processors according to their workload 
intensities. The DVF works well in web servers typically 
because they have a very large capacity compared to the 
average workload [6]. When a server is idle, it uses about 
60% less power than when it is in use. And servers 
commonly work at around a 5% to 20% utilization rate 
because of the response time. An average of 10% of the 
servers in data centers were unused [7]. Vondra et al. [8] 
presented Time Series Forecasting, which enabled to predict 
the load of a system based on past observations. The 
prediction can be used to decide how many servers to turn 
off at night.  
Modern servers in data centers are powerful enough to 
use virtualization to present many smaller virtual machines, 
where each machine runs a separate operating system [9]. In 
a virtualization system, several users connect to a single 
server and use applications independently [10]. The 
technology for a server virtualization exists. A hypervisor is 
the hardware virtualization technique that allows multiple 
operating systems to run concurrently on a host computer. 
Thus, multiple users can work together with a Virtual 
Machine 
(VM) 
and 
Input/Output 
(I/O) 
devices 
simultaneously. Nowadays, the virtualization server is 
generally used for efficiency in the data center. However, 
energy saving policies have not considered the virtualization 
server [14][15]. Therefore, this paper proposes 3-tier Power 
Saving System (3-PSS) to reduce the power consumption in 
the data center which includes virtualization servers and 
many-core servers. The 3-PSS can monitor and control the 
power consumption of guest OSs in virtualization servers.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we propose MPSS modeling. In Section III, we provide 
the implementation. Section IV provides the experimental 
result, and some concluding remarks are finally given in 
Section V. 
II. 
MPSS MODELING 
A. MPSS Functions  
There are several mandatory functions for the MPSS, as 
shown in Figure 1. The monitoring manager should monitor 
the power consumption of the servers in the data center. The 
power consumption data are also saved to analyze the power 
consumption pattern. The maximum value is used to decide a 
power capping value. The power consumption of the VM, 
single server, rack, cluster, and data center levels may be 
monitored. The emergency condition should be handled by 
using the power threshold alerting function. Whenever the 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

target power budget cannot be maintained, an alert message 
is sent to the user.  
The policy manager analyzes power consumption data. It 
is possible to forecast the power consumption using the 
historical data. The policy manager can dynamically make 
and change the policy to reduce the power consumption. The 
policy may be classified by workload, such as CPU-intensive, 
I/O-intensive, and memory-intensive workload. The policies 
may be used to save the power consumption in the data 
center [16].  
The control manager should control the energy resources. 
It controls the power consumption of VM, node, rack, cluster, 
and data center using Intelligent Platform Management 
Interface (IPMI), the Dynamic Voltage and Frequency 
Scaling (DVFS), and the Advanced Configuration and Power 
Interface (ACPI).   
 
 
Figure 1.  MPSS mandatory functions. 
The reporting manager shows the power consumption at 
the VM, node, rack, cluster, and data center levels. This can 
be used for detailed analysis of the power consumption 
behavior of a particular workload or at a particular time 
interval. The report should be shown periodically and can 
show the power consumption data as a combination of 
location and service. 
B. MPSS Platform 
As shown in Figure 2, MPSS platform consists of the 
server platform, the power management interface, and the 
DPM platform. The server platform consists of the hardware, 
the host Operating System (OS), the hypervisor, and the 
guest OS.  
 
 
Figure 2.  MPSS platform. 
The Baseboard Management Controller (BMC) provides 
the intelligence behind intelligent platform management. The 
BMC 
manages 
the 
interface 
between 
the 
system 
management software and the platform management 
hardware. A hypervisor or Virtual Machine Monitor (VMM) 
is a piece of computer software, firmware or hardware that 
creates and runs virtual machines. The proposed platform in 
Figure 2 is type 2. Type 2 hypervisors are easy to use 
because they typically require no modification of the guest 
OS. The power management interface connects with the 
server platform to monitor and control the power 
consumption by using IPMI, ACPI, and DVFS. The IPMI is 
a standardized computer system interface used by system 
administrators to manage a computer system and monitor its 
operation [11]. The ACPI establishes industry-standard 
interfaces by enabling OS-directed configuration, power 
management, and thermal management of mobile, desktop, 
and server platforms [12]. DVFS may refer to dynamic 
voltage scaling and dynamic frequency scaling [13]. 
Dynamic voltage scaling changes the voltage value used in a 
component depending upon the circumstances. Dynamic 
frequency scaling changes the frequency of a microprocessor 
either to conserve power or to reduce the amount of heat 
generated by the chip. Voltage and frequency scaling are 
often used together to save power. The DPM platform 
consists of the policy manager, monitoring manager, control 
manager, and the reporting manager.  
C. MPSS Structure 
MPSS structure is shown in Figure 3. One power 
management server cannot monitor and control all nodes in 
the data center because there are lots of nodes in the data 
center. Therefore, MPSS has a 3-layer hierarchy structure, 
that is, it has a DPM master server, a DPM group server, and 
nodes.  
 
 
Figure 3.  MPSS structure. 
A DPM group server can monitor and control hundreds 
of nodes, which consists of virtualization DPM nodes and 
stand-alone DPM nodes. The DPM master server can 
monitor and control nodes through the DPM group server. 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

The DPM master server manages the power consumption for 
VMs, nodes, racks, and clusters in the data center using IPMI, 
ACPI, and DVFS. 
A virtualization DPM node is detailed in Figure 4. It 
contains hardware and software components, including a 
BMC board, the ACPI support hardware, a CPU with DVFS, 
a Network Interface Card (NIC), a hypervisor and several 
VMs. Several VMs can be run in a DPM node. Each VM has 
a Power Management Agent (PMA), that includes DVFS, 
IPMI and ACPI modules, to save the power consumption 
and control resources. Each VM also has a hardware 
interface layer that connects the PMA and hardware using 
the hypervisor. The VM uses a group server interface to 
connect with a DPM group server. Each VM sends power 
consumption information and receives control messages 
through this interface. Each DPM node has a BMC board 
and uses OpenIPMI library to collect power consumption 
information. The DPM group master manages and 
periodically requests DPM nodes information. The DPM 
group server sends this information whenever the DPM 
master server requests it. The DPM master server monitors 
and collects DPM nodes information in the Data Base (DB). 
The DPM master server platform with Policy Based 
Management (PBM) and DPM analyzes the monitored data 
and controls nodes in the data center via IPMI, ACPI, and 
DVFS. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Block diagram of virtualization DPM node. 
The PBM manages policies and rules that save the power 
consumption. It can make a policy by using historical data 
automatically. System manager can make a policy directly 
via a user-friendly user interface. DPM monitors energy 
resources in real time and controls them dynamically in order 
to save power consumption. The user monitors and controls 
the data center using the web-based User Interface (UI) 
program. All commands except the system on/off command, 
which uses a BMC interface, make use of the TCP/IP packet.  
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION  
We implemented the power saving system in the data 
center. The DPM master server can monitor nodes in the data 
center, as shown in Figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Node system information. 
There are three kinds of nodes, that is, the many-core 
node, the stand-alone node, and the virtualization node. If 
one node is selected, the system information of that node, 
CPU, memory, network, and disk, is described in detail. The 
usage information of that node can be monitored, as shown 
in Figure 6.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Node usage information graph. 
The nodes in the data center can be controlled to save the 
power consumption, as shown in Figure 7.  
 
 
Figure 7.  TDPM control interface. 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

The selected node can be controlled by the LDPM and 
the TDPM policies. The node can be turned off using the 
IPMI command, and turned on using the IPMI over LAN 
command. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The 3-PSS is tested in the data center, as shown in Figure 
8. The DPM nodes consist of stand-alone nodes, 
virtualization nodes, and many-core nodes. The DPM group 
server connects with DPM nodes using 1Gbps LAN. 
 
 
(a) Test environment                              (b) Test configuration 
Figure 8.  3-PSS test. 
The DPM master server monitors and controls DPM 
nodes through the DPM group server. A load generator 
makes loads and sends those loads to a load balancer which 
distributes loads to DPM nodes. The load balancer is 
controlled by the DPM master server.  
 
 
Figure 9.  The result of time based DPM test. 
 
Figure 10.  The load scheme for time based DPM test. 
We test TDPM with four x86 nodes. The result of the 
TDPM test is shown in Figure 9. The load increases for 4 
minutes and then decreases for 3 minutes, as shown in Figure 
10. We make these loads using the Apache JMeter. These 
loads scenario supposes that 7 users request Web services 
every 30 seconds for 210 seconds.   We use Linux Stress tool 
to consume the power of Web servers when loads are 
requested from the Apache JMeter. 
 
Lt < Lp
Turn On : Node 4
Turn off : Node 1, 2, 3
Yes
Lp < Lt < 2Lp
No
Turn On : Node 3, 4
Turn off : Node 1, 2
Yes
2Lp < Lt < 3Lp
No
Turn On : Node 2, 3, 4
Turn off : Node 1
Yes
No
Turn On : Node 1, 2, 3, 4
 
 
Figure 11.  The autonomous policy based on load. 
When the TDPM policy is used, one node is on while 
three nodes are off from 0 to 92 seconds, all four nodes are 
on from 92 to 348 seconds, then finally, one node is on and 
three nodes are off from 348 to 420 seconds. When the 
autonomous policy is used, the load profile (Lp), which is the 
loads that can be treated one node, is predefined by the DPM 
master server. The DPM master server monitors the total 
loads (Lt), which is the loads that be generated by the load 
generator, and controls the DPM nodes to save power 
consumption. The autonomous policy of this experiment is 
shown in Figure 11. If Lt < Lp , the DPM mater server turns 
on the node 4 and turns off the node 1, node 2, and the node 
3. If Lp < Lt < 2Lp , it turns on the node 3 and the node 4 and 
turns off the node 1 and the node 2. If 2Lp < Lt < 3Lp , it turns 
on the node 2, node 3, and the node 4 and turns off the node 
1. If 3Lp < Lt , it turns on all nodes. The results of the 
autonomous policy is that one node is on from 0 to 62 
seconds and from 396 to 420 seconds, two nodes are on from 
62 to 106 seconds and from 345 to 396 seconds, three nodes 
are on from 106 to 113 seconds, and four nodes are on from 
113 to 345 seconds. In this case, the power used is over 400 
watts, when the policy is not used. However, the reduction in 
power consumption is about 23%, when the TDPM policy or 
the autonomous policy is used.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK   
For saving the power consumption in the data center, we 
considered the MPSS functions and propose the 3-PSS 
platform, and structure for the data center including 
virtualization 
servers 
and 
many-core 
servers. 
We 
implemented this system to monitor and control the power 
consumption using IPMI, ACPI, and DVFS. Through 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

experimental results, the power consumption has been found 
to be reduced by about 23%, when the TDPM or the 
autonomous policy is used.  
For further work, we plan to develop MPSS without 
performance degradation. The performance is an essential 
factor in the data center. Therefore, the performance 
degradation should not occur due to the power consumption 
saving. We will also estimate the number of nodes that can 
be managed by a single server. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of 
MSIP/IITP, [10040696, Development of energy saving green 
server under 1mW/MIPS for cloud service]. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. G. Alonso, M. R. Fernández, J. J. Peralta, and A. C. García, 
“A Holistic Approach to Energy Efficiency Systems through 
Consumption Management and Big Data Analytics,” 
International Journal on Advances in Software, vol. 6, 
numbers 3 & 4, 2013, pp. 261–271. 
[2] E. N. Elnozahy, M. Kistler, and R. Rajamony, "Energy-
Efficient Server Clusters," Proc. 2nd Workshop Power-Aware 
Computing Systems, 2003, pp. 179–196. 
[3] L. Benini, A. Boliolo, and G. D. Micheli, “A Survey of 
Design Techniques for System-Level Dynamic Power 
Management”, IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems, vol. 8, 
no. 3, June 2000, pp. 299–316.  
[4] J. Lorch and A. Smith, “Software strategies for portable 
computer energy management,” IEEE Personal Commun., vol. 
5, June 1998, pp. 60–73. 
[5] L. Benini and G. De Micheli, Dynamic Power Management: 
Design Techniques and CAD Tools. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 
1998. 
[6] P. Bohrer, et al., “The Case for Power Management in Web 
Server,” Power-Aware Computing, January 2002, pp. 261–
289. 
[7] P. Foster, PC and Server Power Management Software, Pike 
Research, 1Q 2010. 
[8] T. Vondra and J. Sedivy, “Maximizing Utilization in Private 
IaaS Clouds with Heterogenous Load through Time Series 
Forecasting,” The International Journal on Advances in 
Systems and Measurements, vol. 6, numbers 1&2, 2013, pp. 
149–165. 
[9] P. Barham, et al., “Xen and the art of virtualization,” Proc. 
ACM Symposium OSP, 2003, pp. 164–177. 
[10] J. Nieh, S. J. Yang, and N. Novik, "A comparison of thin-
client computing architectures," Technical Report CUCS-022-
00, November 2000. 
[11] Intel, Hewlett-Packerd, NEC, and Dell, “Intelligent Platform 
Management Interface Specification Second Generation,” 
October 2013. 
[12] Intel, Hewlett-Packerd, Microsoft, Phoenix, and Toshiba, 
“Advanced Configuration and Power Interface Specification 
revision 5.0,” December 2011. 
[13] L. Sueur, Etienne, and G. Heiser, "Dynamic voltage and 
frequency scaling: The laws of diminishing returns," Proc. of 
the 2010 international conference on Power aware computing 
and systems. USENIX Association, 2010, pp. 1-8. 
[14] Elnozahy, Mootaz, M. Kistler, and R. Rajamony. "Energy 
conservation policies for web servers," Proc. of the 4th 
conference on USENIX Symposium on Internet Technologies 
and Systems, vol. 4, 2003, pp. 8-8. 
[15] Kephart, et al., "Coordinating Multiple Autonomic Managers 
to 
Achieve 
Specified 
Power-Performance 
Tradeoffs,"  International 
Conference 
on 
Autonomic 
Computing, vol. 7, June 2007, pp. 24. 
[16] C. Wissam, and C. Yu, "Survey on power management 
techniques 
for 
energy 
efficient 
computer 
systems," 
Laboratory Report, Mobile Computing Research Lab, 2002. 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

