Procedural Component Framework Implementation and Realisation for
Creation of a Coherent Multi-disciplinary Conceptual Knowledge-based
Holocene-prehistoric Inventory of Volcanological Features Groups
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU), Germany;
Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany;
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents the results of the procedural
component
framework
implementation
and
realisation
for
creation of a coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge-
based Holocene-prehistoric inventory of worldwide volcanological
features groups. The goal is the creation of a sustainable
framework of components, which can be employed for multi-
disciplinary integration of knowledge contexts, especially from
prehistory and archaeology. The component framework has to
enable further coherent conceptual knowledge contextualisation
and georeferenced symbolic representation. This paper provides
the results on experiences of sustainable component integration
and
practical
procedural
implementations
and
realisations.
Future research will address the creation of a component
framework for a Holocene-prehistoric inventory of worldwide
volcanological
features,
which
enables
coherent
conceptual
knowledge integration and contextualisation with prehistorical
and archaeological knowledge resources.
Keywords–Prehistory; Holocene; Knowledge-based Component
Integration; CRI Framework; CKRI.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Coherent conceptual knowledge resources are results of
often complex and long-term multi-disciplinary creation pro-
cesses. Coherent conceptual knowledge resources may have to
achieve an advanced level of implementation before procedural
components can be created for sustainably employing these
resources. The conceptual knowledge implementation for this
inventory is in focus of multi-disciplinary research groups and
matter to be reported in separate publications. Motivation is the
creation of a sustainable and practical component framework
based on coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge.
This paper presents the results of the procedural compo-
nent framework implementation and realisation for creation
of a coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based
Holocene-prehistoric inventory of worldwide volcanological
features groups, which are employing respective coherent
knowledge resources. The goal of this research is the cre-
ation of a sustainable framework of components, which can
be employed for multi-disciplinary integration of knowledge
contexts, especially from prehistory and archaeology, too.
The component framework further has to enable a coher-
ent conceptual knowledge contextualisation and georeferenced
symbolic representation. The coherent knowledge resources
and the practical realisation are fully based on the Compo-
nent Reference Implementations (CRI) framework [1], which
is employing the main implementations of the prehistory-
protohistory and archaeology Conceptual Knowledge Refer-
ence Implementation (CKRI) [2]. CRI provides the required
component groups and components for the implementation and
realisation of all the procedural modules. CKRI provides the
knowledge framework, including multi-disciplinary contexts of
natural sciences and humanities [3]. Both provide sustainable
fundaments for highest levels of reproducibility and standard-
isation and allow continuous and consistent further develop-
ment of discipline-centric and multi-discipline development
of knowledge resources. Both reference implementations are
in continuous further development. The approach conforms
with information science fundaments and universal knowledge
and enables an integration of the required components from
methodologies to realisations for knowledge representations of
realia and abstract contexts [4], namely the Conceptual Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching (CKPM) methodology, considering that
many facets of knowledge, including prehistory, need to be
continuously acquired and reviewed [5].
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II
presents the methodological implementation and realisation,
workﬂow procedure, respective component reference imple-
mentation and integration and coherent conceptual knowledge
implementation for the new inventory. Section III discusses
the procedural potential regarding integration of components,
parallelisation, and implementation features. Section IV sum-
marises lessons learned, conclusions, and future work.
II.
METHODOLOGICAL IMPLEMENTATION AND
REALISATION
Implementation and realisation are based on the CKRI [2].
Components outside the core scope of this geoscientiﬁc, pre-
historic, and archaeological research are employed and can be
extended via the CRI frame [1]. The following implementation
and realisation start with a description of a workﬂow proce-
dure for creation of a coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual
knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric inventory of worldwide
volcanological features groups, followed by the component
implementation and realisation based on the general coherent
multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge implementation.
A. Methodological workﬂow procedure
A workﬂow procedure for the creation closely integrates the
component framework and the coherent knowledge implemen-
tation of the Knowledge Resources (KR):
•
(KR/components selection, continuous development.)
•
Component implementation and realisation.
◦
Scientiﬁc parametrisation of components (includ-
ing algorithms, in each discipline).
◦
Workﬂow decision making.
◦
Country identiﬁcation algorithm.
◦
Country representation algorithm.
◦
Area of Interest (AoI) representation algorithm.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-961-4
INFOCOMP 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

◦
Symbolic representation of country
◦
Symbolic representation of AoI.
◦
Knowledge and discipline depending algorithm
creation.
◦
Knowledge Resources processing.
◦
Chorological assignment and processing, e.g., spa-
tial calculations, e.g., countries and areas.
◦
Chronological assignment and processing, e.g.,
time related calculations, e.g., geological and pre-
historic.
•
Coherent conceptual knowledge implementation.
◦
Coherent conceptual knowledge references, main
tables.
◦
Coherent conceptual knowledge references, auxil-
iary tables.
•
Symbolic representation, generation.
◦
Context area views.
◦
Symbolic representation of features groups, inte-
grated visualisation.
◦
(Further symbolic representation of narratives.)
◦
(Multitude of further contextualisation and narra-
tives.)
◦
. . .
After understanding the selected task-related algorithms and
the fundamentals of knowledge complements many different
realisations can be done straightforward, deploying the CKRI
and CRI framework components.
The symbolic representation of features groups and the
integrated visualisation will provide manifold ways of con-
textualisation. We can only demonstrate a single group of
examples here.
Nevertheless, the realisation of the implemented workﬂow
procedure may depend on the capacities the participating
disciplines want to invest in their education, scientiﬁc research
and contextualisation. It should not be uncommon with today’s
scientiﬁc research to invest increasing resources, 25 to over
50 percent of overall project resources, of each participating
discipline into multi-disciplinary knowledge integration and
contextualisation.
The CKRI and CRI framework can create coherent multi-
disciplinary conceptual knowledge references effectively and
efﬁciently and focus on core tasks within available capacities
of time and other resources available for a workﬂow procedure.
B. Component implementation and realisation
The following passages give a compact overview of the
major component framework integrated with this research.
All the components and references are given, which were
employed for the implementation and realisation and which
are in a continuous further development process towards even
closer integration and standards. More detailed, comprehensive
discussion and examples regarding fundaments are available
with the references on knowledge representations, methodol-
ogy, contextualisation, and conceptual knowledge.
a) Conceptual knowledge frameworks: The created and
further developed reference implementations of conceptual
knowledge frameworks (this research major references in Ta-
bles I and II) are used with the implementation and realisation
KR [6]. CKRI can be created by any disciplines and for multi-
disciplinary scenarios and coherently integrated, e.g., in con-
textualisation for prehistorical and archaeological narratives.
b) Conceptual knowledge base: Conceptual knowledge
base is The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [7],
a general plan for knowledge classiﬁcation, providing an
analytico-synthetic and faceted classiﬁcation, designed for
subject description and indexing of content of information
resources irrespective of the carrier, form, format, and lan-
guage. UDC-based references for demonstration are taken
from the multi-lingual UDC summary [7] released by the UDC
Consortium, Creative Commons license [8].
c) Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks: Rel-
evant scientiﬁc practices, frameworks, and standards from
disciplines and contexts are integrated with the Knowledge
Resources, e.g., here details regarding volcanological features,
chronologies, spatial information, and Volcanic Explosivity
Index (VEI) [9], [10].
d) Formalisation:
All integration components, for all
disciplines, require an explicit and continuous formalisation
[11] process. The formalisation includes computation model
support, e.g., parallelisation standards, OpenMP [12], [13],
Reg Exp patterns, e.g., Perl Compatible Regular Expressions
(PCRE) [14], and common standard methods, algorithms, and
frameworks.
e) Methodologies and workﬂows integration: Methodolo-
gies for creating and utilising methods include model pro-
cessing, remote sensing, spatial mapping, high information
densities, and visualisation. Respective contextualisation of
(prehistoric) scenarios should each be done under speciﬁc
(prehistoric) conditions, especially supported by state-of-the-
art methods, e.g., spatial operations, triangulation, gradient
computation, and projection. The symbolic representation of
the contextualisation can be done with a wide range of meth-
ods, algorithms, and available components, e.g., via LX Pro-
fessional Scientiﬁc Content-Context-Suite (LX PSCC Suite)
deploying the Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) and integrated
modules [15] for visualisation.
f) Prehistory Knowledge Resources: Prehistoric objects
and contexts are taken from The Prehistory and Archaeology
Knowledge Archive (PAKA), in continuous development for
more than three decades [16] and is released by DIMF [17].
The KR support seamless coherent multi-disciplinary concep-
tual knowledge integration for workﬂow procedures.
g) Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources: Several co-
herent systems of major natural sciences’ context object groups
from KR realisations have been implemented, especially
Knowledge Resources focussing on volcanological features [9]
deployed with in depth contextualisation [10] and with a wide
range of contexts [6], [7], [18]. The KR support seamless
coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge integration
for workﬂow procedures.
h) Inherent representation groups: The contextualisation
for the inventory can employ state-of-the-art results from many
disciplines, e.g., context from the natural sciences resources,
integrating their inherent representation and common utili-
sation, e.g., points, polygons, lines, Digital Elevation Model
(DEM), Digital Terrain Model (DTM), and Digital Surface
Model (DSM) representations sources, e.g., from satellites,
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV), z-value representations,
distance representations, area representations, raster, vector,
binary, and non-binary data. Employed resources are High
Resolution (HR) (Space) Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
(SRTM) [19], [20], HR Digital Chart of the World (DCW)
[21], and Global Self-consistent Hierarchical High-resolution
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-961-4
INFOCOMP 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Geography (GSHHG) [22]. SRTM was produced under the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Making
Earth System Data Records for Use in Research Environments
(MEaSUREs) program. The Land Processed Distributed Active
Archive Center (LPDAAC), USA [23], operates as a partner-
ship between the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), USA,
and is a component of NASA’s Earth Observing System Data
and Information System (EOSDIS). Resources are released by
NASA and JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), USA, [24],
[25]. SRTM15 Plus [19], [20] is continuously updated and
improved.
i) Scientiﬁc context parametrisation: Scientiﬁc context
parametrisation of prehistoric targets can use the overall
insight from all disciplines, e.g., parametrising algorithms and
creating palaeolandscapes. Parametrisation is supported for all
contexts and can consider views of participated disciplines.
For the new inventory, parametrisation ranges from contexts,
methods, representation of heights, illumination, symbol de-
sign, symbolic consistency to data locality and parallelisation.
j) Structures and symbolic representation: Structure is
an organisation of interrelated entities in a material or non-
material object or system [18]. Structure is essential in logic
as it carries unique information. Structure means features and
facilities. There are merely higher and lower facility levels of
how structures can be addressed, which result from structure
levels. Structure can, for example, be addressed by logic,
names, references, address labels, pointers, fuzzy methods,
phonetic methods. The deployment of long-term universal
structure and data standards is essential. Relevant examples of
sustainable implementations are NetCDF [26] based standards,
including advanced features, hybrid structure integration, and
parallel computing support (PnetCDF) and generic multi-
dimensional table data, standard xyz ﬁles, universal source and
text based structure and code representations.
C. Resulting coherent conceptual knowledge implementation
The CKRI implementations provide the fundament for the
coherent multi-disciplinary knowledge based integration and
the realisations of the methodological component integration.
Universally consistent conceptual knowledge of CKRI ref-
erences, based on UDC code references, for demonstration,
spanning the main tables [27] shown in Table I. Table II shows
an excerpt of universally consistent conceptual knowledge of
CKRI references, based on UDC code references, spanning
auxiliary tables [28].
The tables contain major UDC code references required
for the implementation and realisation of the methodological
workﬂow procedure, especially for place (countries and AoI),
time (Holocene), and disciplines (volcanology and prehistory).
D. Resulting symbolic representation of features groups
The procedural component framework implementation and
realisation enable the creation of numerous contextualisa-
tions and symbolic representations for the coherent multi-
disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric
inventory of volcanological features groups.
For this research, we choose the resulting symbolic repre-
sentation of a volcanological features group, maars, based on
the coherent conceptual knowledge integration. The sequence
of procedural steps enables contextualisation for ﬂexible larger
TABLE I. CKRI IMPLEMENTATION OF COHERENT CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE CONTEXTUALISATION; MAIN TABLES (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:0
Science and Knowledge. Organization. Computer Science.
Information. Documentation. Librarianship. Institutions.
Publications
UDC:1
Philosophy. Psychology
UDC:2
Religion. Theology
UDC:3
Social Sciences
UDC:5
Mathematics. Natural Sciences
UDC:52
Astronomy. Astrophysics. Space research. Geodesy
UDC:53
Physics
UDC:539
Physical nature of matter
UDC:54
Chemistry. Crystallography. Mineralogy
UDC:55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC:550.3
Geophysics
UDC:551
General geology. Meteorology. Climatology.
Historical geology. Stratigraphy. Palaeogeography
UDC:551.21
Vulcanicity. Vulcanism. Volcanoes. Eruptive phenomena.
Eruptions
UDC:551.2. . .
Fumaroles. Solfataras. Geysers. Hot springs. Mofettes.
Carbon dioxide vents. Sofﬁoni
UDC:551.44
Speleology. Caves. Fissures. Underground waters
UDC:551.46
Physical oceanography. Submarine topography. Ocean ﬂoor
UDC:551.7
Historical geology. Stratigraphy
UDC:551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC:56
Palaeontology
UDC:6
Applied Sciences. Medicine, Technology
UDC:7
The Arts. Entertainment. Sport
UDC:8
Linguistics. Literature
UDC:9
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:902
Archaeology
UDC:903
Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
UDC:904
Cultural remains of historical times
TABLE II. CKRI IMPLEMENTATION OF COHERENT CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE CONTEXTUALISATION; AUXILIARY TABLES (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC (1/9)
Common auxiliaries of place
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally.
Mountains
UDC:(3/9)
Individual places of the ancient and modern world
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(32)
Ancient Egypt
UDC:(35)
Medo-Persia
UDC:(36)
Regions of the so-called barbarians
UDC:(37)
Italia. Ancient Rome and Italy
UDC:(38)
Ancient Greece
UDC:(399)
Other regions. Ancient geographical divisions other than
those of classical antiquity
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
UDC:(4)
Europe
UDC:(5)
Asia
UDC:(6)
Africa
UDC:(7/8)
America, North and South. The Americas
UDC:(7)
North and Central America
UDC:(8)
South America
UDC:(9)
States and regions of the South Paciﬁc and Australia.
Arctic. Antarctic
UDC:“...”
Common auxiliaries of time.
UDC:“6”
Geological, archaeological and cultural time divisions
UDC:“62”
Cenozoic (Cainozoic). Neozoic (70 MYBP - present)
UDC:“63”
Archaeological, prehistoric, protohistoric periods and ages
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-961-4
INFOCOMP 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

and smaller context scales, e.g., generated symbolic representa-
tion (Figure 1) of country identiﬁcation contexts (Figure 1(a))
and generated symbolic representation of AoI contexts for
respective object entities (Figure 1(b)). Generated represen-
tations include integrated CKRI references, projection of to-
pographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for
respective areas, based on the coherent conceptual knowledge.
III.
DISCUSSION OF PROCEDURAL POTENTIAL
Logic is a general limit to many overblown claims, from
universal parallelisation to ‘Artiﬁcial Instruments’.
Therefore, parallelisation can only deliver feasible ap-
proaches for simple, formalised cases of contextualisation and
small parts of much more complex contexts of knowledge. The
goals and complexity of conceptual knowledge-centric tasks
and procedural tasks require the insight of eminently suitable
structures and resources.
The resources, which provide highest potential for the
realisation based on the inventory model are huge, based
on quantity and resulting from quality of the contextualisa-
tion resources. Models are even continuously growing when
considering ongoing state-of-the-art research. In consequence,
these scenarios require a high level of scalability. A realistic
conceptual-procedural environment for the coherent multi-
disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric
inventory of volcanological features groups includes:
•
Different object groups, objects and views, e.g., for over
500 volcanological object entities and features.
•
Multi-dimensional views, e.g., focus dependent views
per objects, e.g., via OpenMP [12] / speciﬁcations [13].
•
Embarrassingly parallel procedures (e.g., knowledge di-
mensional computation), e.g., via OpenMP [12] and
speciﬁcations [13].
•
Job parallel procedures (e.g., knowledge objects and
resources localities).
Table III shows the inherent representation groups used by
the disciplines for the formalised representation of knowledge
integrated for the implementation and realisation (serial, par-
allel, not applicable, n.a.).
The respective locality-license and parallelisation aspects re-
fer to the realisation resources, primarily depending on the re-
spective knowledge and organisation. Therefore, precondition
for implementation is a deep understanding of the knowledge
complexity within a discipline, which is represented by the task
as well as the required formalisations for all the components.
OpenMP is a mature and portable industry standard, which
can be efﬁciently implemented directly by scientists of any
discipline in their contextualisation, methodological workﬂow
logic, and for their workﬂow procedure implementations and
realisations.
Organisation of data structure and formalisation of knowl-
edge are core tasks of a discipline itself and not at all a
technical task. Nevertheless, the organisation of knowledge
also deﬁnes feasible data locality concepts. Parallelisation of
workﬂows with plain-dimension and multi-dimension targets
can differ regarding their contextualisation results.
For example, a plain-dimension workﬂow can deliver dif-
ferent contextualisation contexts of an AoI. A multi-dimension
workﬂow can deliver a certain contextualisation context of an
AoI, depending on further dimensions, views or chorologies.
Therefore, plain- and multi-dimension workﬂows can comple-
ment in chorological and chronological contextualisation while
sharing resources, structural and procedural fundaments.
TABLE III. INHERENT REPRESENTATION GROUPS WITH INTEGRATED
COMPONENTS INVENTORY OBJECT ENTITY EXAMPLE WORKFLOW.
Inherent Representation Group
Locality-License
Parallelisation
Model
Plain
Multi
KR preprocessing, conceptual
On-premise
Ser./par.
Ser./par.
Context preprocessing
Restricted
Ser./par.
Ser./par.
KR processing, conceptual
On-premise
OpenMP
OpenMP
Conceptual knowledge processing
On-premise
OpenMP
OpenMP
PoI
On-premise
OpenMP
OpenMP
Point spatial operations
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Line operations
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Polygon operations
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
DEM
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
PCRE
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Editing
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Projecting
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Cutting
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Sampling
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Filtering
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Illumination
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Triangulation
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Projection
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Filter operations
On-premise
OpenMP
OpenMP
View/frame computation
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Model reduction (frames)
n.a.
OpenMP
OpenMP
Model reduction (animation)
n.a.
n.a.
Serial
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
An example for a model reduction in plain-dimension is,
e.g., generation of multiple context views. An example for
a model reduction in multi-dimension is, e.g., generation of
a video of geospherical satellite view frames with moving
observer position. It is obvious that the workﬂow logic of
the examples also differ in their ways of parallelisation. The
use of on-premise (e.g., in-house) and restricted (distributed)
resources is attributable to the licenses of the core assets,
the knowledge resources. Inherent representation groups are
major matter of scalable processing and conversion (two-
dimensional/three-dimensional) and higher multi-dimensional
workﬂow procedures. Table IV shows the scalability of the ex-
ample workﬂow procedure for parallelised parts of the coher-
ent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-
prehistoric inventory of volcanological features groups, based
on mean requirements for an object entity, with numbers of
objects entities, no, numbers of frames, nf, and numbers of
views, nv, for nf = 1 and nv = 2 as in the above symbolic
representation example of volcanological features groups.
TABLE IV. PARALLELISED PROCESSING OF INVENTORY WORKFLOW
(PARALLELISED KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES AND CONTEXT RESOURCES).
Number of
Wall Time
Number of Object Entities
CPU Cores
Workﬂow (Plain)
no = 100
no = 500
1
no · (nv · nf · 1, 680/1) s
336,000 s
1,680,000 s
36
no · (nv · nf · 1, 680/36) s
9,333 s
46,667 s
The architecture choosen for this realisation is an efﬁcient
36-core-based Central Processing Unit (CPU) (Intel Xeon),
which is taking into account that we commonly use 36 cores
for many basic global approaches, e.g., considering the 360
degrees of a global model. Results on other architectures with
same numbers of respective cores will be highly comparable.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-961-4
INFOCOMP 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 1. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group (maars) based on the coherent conceptual knowledge integration (excerpt).
Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b). Generated
representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
Precondition for parallelisation is sufﬁcient memory for
parallel use of integrated resources. Considering the employed
resources, e.g., SRTM, 128 GB for 36 parallel processes is
comfortable when data limits are cut to the limits required for
the algorithms with the range of a few hundred kilometres area
per object entity.
Wall and compute times, especially of multi-dimensional
workﬂow results, can greatly be reduced from the integrated
parallelisation, which makes the procedural solution highly
scalable. The wall times for numbers of objects entities, no,
illustrate the high scalability when the same workﬂow is
using higher numbers of CPU cores. Probably, most practical
workﬂows may contain parts which cannot be reasonably
parallelised. This is especially true for scientiﬁc tasks with
a certain complexity. The percentage of non parallelised parts
is very low here. For multi-dimension targets, e.g., animations
with nf = 1000 and nv = 1, it may be considered to employ
hundreds to thousands of CPU cores so parallelised wall times
per object can be reduced from days to hours.
Serial and parallel compute times, e.g., for groups of object
entities, are non-linear. For example, mean times for the
same workﬂow realisation may greatly differ for different
object entities. To signiﬁcant extent, this is consequence of
the inherent complexity of the knowledge complements, which
have to be integrated and analysed. In practice, compute times
for object entities may commonly vary to over several hundred
percent. Component and knowledge contributions of different
disciplines may have different weight in their contributions
to the non-linearities. The resulting compute times may even
deliver continuously new and non-linear compute times in a
dynamical workﬂow realisation with knowledge resources and
components, which are in continuous development.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The new approaches for the creation of a sustainable proce-
dural component framework for implementation and realisa-
tion of a coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge-
based inventory proved efﬁcient and sustainable. Based on
the methodology of coherent conceptual knowledge classiﬁ-
cation, the CKRI, and the CRI frameworks, the procedural
and conceptual implementation and realisation of a Holocene-
prehistoric inventory of worldwide volcanological features
groups showed very ﬂexible and scalable, supported by many
scenarios over the last years. The developed framework of
components, can be employed for multi-disciplinary integra-
tion of knowledge contexts. Everything has been done to de-
ploy standards and provide maximum ﬂexibility so that context
from prehistory, archaeology, natural sciences, and humanities
can be be coherently integrated. The component framework
showed to enable an effective and efﬁcient coherent conceptual
knowledge contextualisation and georeferenced symbolic rep-
resentation. Researchers from all disciplines already practice
the procedural component framework development, coherent
conceptual knowledge, and procedure parallelisation in profes-
sional long-term research knowledge and data management.
Future research will address the creation of a component
framework for a Holocene-prehistoric inventory of worldwide
volcanological features, which enables procedural integration
and coherent conceptual knowledge contextualisation with
prehistorical and archaeological knowledge resources.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This ongoing research is supported by scientiﬁc organisa-
tions and individuals. We are grateful to the “Knowledge in
Motion” (KiM) long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-961-4
INFOCOMP 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for par-
tially funding this research, implementation, case studies, and
publication under grants D2022F1P05312, D2022F1P05308,
and D2020F1P05228. and to its senior scientiﬁc members
and members of the permanent commission of the sci-
ence council, especially to Dr. Friedrich H¨ulsmann, Got-
tfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB) Hannover, to
Dipl.-Biol. Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universit¨at
Hannover, for fruitful discussion, inspiration, and prac-
tical multi-disciplinary contextualisation and case studies.
We are grateful to Dipl.-Geogr. Burkhard Hentzschel and
Dipl.-Ing. Eckhard Dunkhorst, Minden, Germany, for proliﬁc
discussion and exchange of practical spatial, UAV, and context
scenarios. We are grateful to Dipl.-Ing. Hans-G¨unther M¨uller,
G¨ottingen, Germany, for providing specialised, manufactured
high end computation and storage solutions. We are grateful
to The Science and High Performance Supercomputing Cen-
tre (SHPSC) for long-term support. / DIMF-PIID-DF98 007;
URL: https://scienceparagon.de/cpr .
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Towards a Component Reference Implementa-
tions Frame for Achieving Multi-disciplinary Coherent Conceptual and
Chorological Contextualisation in Prehistory and Prehistoric Archaeol-
ogy,” International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements,
vol. 14, no. 1&2, 2021, pp. 103–112, ISSN: 1942-261x, LCCN:
2008212470 (Library of Congress), URL: http://www.iariajournals.org/
systems and measurements [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[2]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Towards Conceptual Knowledge Reference Im-
plementations for Context Integration and Contextualisation of Pre-
history’s and Natural Sciences’ Multi-disciplinary Contexts,” Interna-
tional Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 14,
no. 1&2, 2021, pp. 113–124, ISSN: 1942-261x, LCCN: 2008212470
(Library of Congress), URL: http://www.iariajournals.org/systems and
measurements [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[3]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Information Science Paragon: Allow Knowl-
edge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches to Universality,
Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” The International Journal
“Information Models and Analyses” (IJ IMA), vol. 9, no. 3, 2020,
pp. 203–226, Markov, K. (ed.), ISSN: 1314-6416 (print), Submitted
accepted article: November 18, 2020, Publication date: August 17, 2021,
URL: http://www.foibg.com/ijima/vol09/ijima09-03-p01.pdf [accessed:
2022-04-24].
[4]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “From Knowledge and Meaning Towards Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching: Processing and Developing Knowledge Objects
Targeting Geoscientiﬁc Context and Georeferencing,” in Proc. GEO-
Processing 2020, November 21–25, 2020, Valencia, Spain, 2020, pp.
36–41, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-762-7.
[5]
R. Gleser, Zu den erkenntnistheoretischen Grundlagen der Pr¨ahis-
torischen Arch¨aologie.
Leiden, 2021, 2021, (title in English: On
the Epistemological Fundaments of Prehistorical Archaeology), in: M.
Renger, S.-M. Rothermund, S. Schreiber, and A. Veling (Eds.), Theorie,
Arch¨aologie, Reﬂexion. Kontroversen und Ans¨atze im deutschsprachi-
gen Diskurs, (in print).
[6]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Prehistory’s
and
Natural
Sciences’
Multi-
disciplinary Contexts: Contextualisation and Context Integration Based
on Universal Conceptual Knowledge,” in Proc. INFOCOMP 2020, May
30 – June 3, 2021, Valencia, Spain, 2021, pp. 8–14, ISSN: 2308-3484,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-865-5.
[7]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[8]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2022-04-24],
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
[9]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Cognostics and Knowledge Used With Dynamical
Processing,” International Journal on Advances in Software, vol. 8,
no. 3&4, 2015, pp. 361–376, ISSN: 1942-2628, LCCN: 2008212462
(Library of Congress), URL: http://www.iariajournals.org/software/ [ac-
cessed: 2022-04-24].
[10]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Long-term Sustainable Knowledge Classiﬁcation
with Scientiﬁc Computing: The Multi-disciplinary View on Natural Sci-
ences and Humanities,” International Journal on Advances in Software,
vol. 7, no. 1&2, 2014, pp. 302–317, ISSN: 1942-2628.
[11]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, A. Tsitsipas,
L. Schubert, F. H¨ulsmann, O. Lau, and M. Hofmeister, Best Practice
and Deﬁnitions of Formalisation and Formalism. Post-Summit Results,
Delegates’ Summit: The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in
Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 17th Int. Conf. of Num.
Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28, 2019, Rhodes,
Greece, 2019, pp. 1–16, DOI: 10.15488/5241.
[12]
L. Dagum and R. Menon, “OpenMP: an industry standard API for
shared-memory programming,” Computational Science & Engineering,
(IEEE), vol. 5, no. 1, 1998, pp. 46–55.
[13]
OpenMP Architecture Review Board, “OpenMP API 5.1 Speciﬁca-
tion,” Nov. 2020, URL: https://www.openmp.org/wp-content/uploads/
OpenMP-API-Speciﬁcation-5-1.pdf [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[14]
“Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE),” 2021, URL: https://
www.pcre.org/ [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[15]
P. Wessel, W. H. F. Smith, R. Scharroo, J. Luis, and F. Wobbe,
“The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT),” 2020, URL: http://www.
generic-mapping-tools.org/ [accessed: 2022-04-24], URL: http://gmt.
soest.hawaii.edu/ [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[16]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Information Science and Inter-disciplinary Long-
term Strategies – Key to Insight, Consistency, and Sustainability:
Conceptual Knowledge Reference Methodology Spanning Prehistory,
Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Humanities,” International Tu-
torial, DataSys Congress 2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020, Lisbon,
Portugal, 2020, pp. 113, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2020/
ProgramINFOCOMP20.html [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[17]
“The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) license,”
2021, (release 2021), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): All rights reserved. Rights retain to
the contributing creators.
[18]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Impact of Information Science Accompanied
Structural Information on Computation of Knowledge Pattern Matching
and Processing: A Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and
Humanities Conceptual Integration Perspective,” in Proc. INFOCOMP
2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, pp. 1–6, ISBN:
978-1-61208-807-5, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=infocomp 2020 1 10 60015 [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[19]
C. L. Olson, J. J. Becker, and D. T. Sandwell, “SRTM15 PLUS: Data
fusion of Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) land topography
with measured and estimated seaﬂoor topography,” (NCEI Accession
0150537), National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI),
NOAA, 2016.
[20]
B. Tozer, D. T. Sandwell, W. H. F. Smith, C. Olson, J. R. Beale,
and P. Wessel, “Global Bathymetry and Topography at 15 Arc Sec:
SRTM15+,” Earth and Space Science, vol. 6, no. 10, Oct. 2019, pp.
1847–1864, ISSN: 2333-5084, DOI: 10.1029/2019EA000658.
[21]
P. Wessel, “DCW for GMT 6 or later,” 2022, URL: http://www.soest.
hawaii.edu/pwessel/dcw/ [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[22]
P.
Wessel,
“GSHHG,”
2017,
URL:
http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/
pwessel/gshhg/ [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[23]
“Land Processed Distributed Active Archive Center,” 2022, LP DAAC,
URL: https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/ [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[24]
“U.S. Releases Enhanced Shuttle Land Elevation Data,” 2014, JPL,
September 23, 2014, URL: https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/us-releases-
enhanced-shuttle-land-elevation-data [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[25]
“U.S. Releases Enhanced Shuttle Land Elevation Data, Ofﬁcial NASA
SRTM Site,” 2014, Australia, September 23, 2014, URL: https://www2.
jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/ [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[26]
“Network
Common
Data
Form
(NetCDF),”
2021,
DOI:
10.5065/D6H70CW6,
URL:
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/
netcdf/ [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[27]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Main Tables,” 2022, Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: https://udcdata.info/
078887 [accessed: 2022-04-24].
[28]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Auxiliary Tables,” 2022, Universal Deci-
mal Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: https://udcdata.info/
[accessed: 2022-04-24].
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-961-4
INFOCOMP 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

