On-the-fly Routing and Traffic Self-Aggregation Towards Metro-Access Integration 
 
Rodolfo Alvizu, Mónica Huerta, Ricardo 
Gonzalez, Roger Clotet and Laura Rodríguez 
Departamento de Electrónica y Circuitos 
Universidad Simón Bolívar (USB) 
Sartenejas, Venezuela  
alvizu22@gmail.com, mhuerta@usb.ve, 
rgonzalez@usb.ve, rclotet@usb.ve, 
laurarodriguez@usb.ve 
Idelfonso Tafur Monroy 
Department of Photonics Engineering 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 
Lyngby, Denmark 
idtm@fotonik.dtu.dk
 
 
Abstract — The evolution and penetration of Optical Access 
Networks threatens to create a higher electronic bottleneck at 
Metro-Access interfaces caused by the ever increasing users’ 
bandwidth demand. Since most of the newest applications are 
dominated by video-related traffic, there is a pressing need to 
relieve 
the 
electronic bottleneck 
between 
Access 
and 
Metropolitan area networks. In this work we present an 
enhanced version of time-wavelength access architecture with 
on-the-fly routing and traffic self-aggregation. The purpose of 
this architecture is to allow for a transparent Metro-Access 
integration with low latency and reduced power consumption. 
A WDM PON (Passive Optical Network with Wavelength 
Division Multiple Access) architecture was used as reference 
for comparison. The results obtained by the simulation model 
developed in OPNET Modeler show that the WDM PON will 
tend to produce electronic bottleneck issues, even though 
delays and loss rates are not very different in both 
architectures. These bottleneck issues can be avoided by the 
use of on-the-fly routing and traffic self-aggregation, which 
allows traffic to cope with the strict requirements of delay 
sensible applications. The proposed architecture is an 
interesting useful approach for Metro-Access integration and 
future access networks. 
Keywords- Future access network; on-the-fly Routing; Self-
Aggregation; WDM PON; Metro-Access. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The world is witnessing an explosion of high bandwidth 
consuming applications and an ever rising bandwidth 
demand by users. According to Cisco’s Visual Networking 
Index, global IP (Internet Protocol) traffic will grow fourfold 
from 2010 to 2015 [1]. Globally, Internet video traffic is 
expected to grow from 40% of all consumer Internet traffic 
in 2010 to a 61% in 2015. 
To successfully deliver enough bandwidth to end users, 
the bottleneck at access networks must be avoided. 
Therefore, the introduction of optical fiber to the customer 
sites (FTTx; stands for fiber to the x, where x stands for 
Home, Curb, Building, Premises, etc.) has been accepted as a 
solution to relieve the access bandwidth bottleneck and to 
cope with the ever increasing users’ bandwidth demand 
[2][3].  
The FTTH (Fiber To The Home) Council announces a 
continuous global growth of all fiber networks [4]. The 
average broadband access network speed grew 97% from 
2009 to 2010 [1]. Most of this growth has been caused by 
deployments of PONs (Passive Optical Networks) based 
FTTx.  
PON is a point-to-multipoint optical network, which 
connects an optical line terminal (OLT) at the carrier’s 
Central Offices (COs) with several optical network units 
(ONUs) at customer sites. This is done through one or more 
1:N optical splitters. The success of PON relies on its high 
bandwidth, infrastructure cost sharing and its simple 
maintenance and operation which results from the absence of 
electronic active components between the OLT and the 
ONUs.  
As a consequence of its point to multi-point nature, the 
PON’s upstream channel requires a multiple access 
technology. Today’s standards and deployments of FTTx are 
based on Time Division Multiple access PON (TDM PON). 
TDM PON uses a single wavelength for downstream (CO to 
users) and upstream (users to CO). Upstream and 
downstream channels are multiplexed in a single fiber 
through Coarse WDM (CWDM) technology standardized 
according to ITU (International Telecommunication Union) 
G.694.2 (CWDM spectral grid). TDM PON keeps the cost of 
access networks down, by shared among all users the 
bandwidth available in a single wavelength. There are two 
main TDM PON standards used for mass rollouts [4][5]:  
 
Ethernet PON (EPON) technology: specified by the 
IEEE (Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers) as the 802.3ah standard, which is widely 
deployed in United States of America and parts of 
Europe. 
 
Gigabit PON (GPON) technology: specified by the 
ITU-T G.984 standard, which is broadly deployed in 
Japan and South Korea. 
However, TDM PON cannot cope with future access 
networks’ requirements regarding aggregated bandwidth, 
reach and power budget [5]. To solve these problems, it is 
widely accepted that the next evolution step for PON 
architectures is the introduction of wavelength division 
multiple access (WDM PON) [2][3][5]. The WDM PON 
approach assigns an individual wavelength to each ONU. 
This strategy allows the use of higher bandwidth for each 
ONU, a longer reach, better scalability towards higher users’ 
58
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

concentration, and additionally provides transparent bit rate 
channels ONU-CO [3][5]. 
The continuous users’ bandwidth demand growth is 
leading to 100 giga bits per second optical access systems 
[6]. This scenario implies that COs, supporting higher 
concentration of customers (with split ratio extended beyond 
1:64), will have to aggregate and disaggregate traffic in 
volumes reaching tera bits per second. Thus, there will be a 
much higher congestion when managing the increasing 
bandwidth demand at the Metro-Access interface, and future 
applications’ higher requirements on bandwidth guarantee 
and low delay application flow. 
In this paper, we present an accurate performance 
assessment of an optical access network architecture that was 
originally proposed in [8]. This architecture introduces a 
time-wavelength (t- ) routing for an on-the-fly (passively) 
routed, self-aggregating Metro-Access interface. The t-   
routing architecture, based on nonuniform traffic distribution 
in access networks, introduces lightpaths toward the most 
requested destinations, in order to relieve the electronic 
bottleneck and to simplify the Metro-Access interface.  
Wieckowski et al. [8] have explained the advantages of 
the t-  routing architecture over WDM PON. However, there 
is a situation in their simulation model that produces delay 
variations and packet reordering problems. The present 
enhanced version of t-  routing architecture avoids those 
problems, thus allowing traffic to cope with the strict 
requirements of delay sensible traffic. 
The simulation results obtained show that by using this 
enhanced t-   routing architecture, the COs become 
congestion-free, a reduction of the network’s power 
consumption is achieved, and the network is able to address 
different traffic’s requirements. Therefore, the present work 
proves that the use of on-the-fly routing and traffic self 
aggregation is a very attractive approach for Metro-Access 
integration and future access networks. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes 
the Metro-Access interface problem and the t-   routing 
optical access architecture. Section 3 presents related work 
on the t-   routing architecture. Section 4 describes the 
simulation model developed and presents some simulation 
results. Section 5 describes concludes the paper. 
II. 
METRO-ACCESS INTERFACE AND NETWORK  
ARCHITECTURE 
The t-  routing optical access architecture is based on the 
Metropolitan and Access networks traffic profile. 
A. Trafic profile of Metropolitan and Access Networks 
Typical carrier’s network architectures have been 
deployed with one or at least a few interfacing nodes 
(gateways) between different network segments (Access-
Metropolitan-Core). Therefore, there is more traffic that goes 
along different network segments through interfacing nodes 
(remote traffic) than traffic that goes along the same network 
segment nodes (local traffic) [7][9]. 
It has been observed that in a multiple gateway scenario 
traffic demands at IP routing nodes are not evenly distributed 
among all destinations. About four to five major destinations 
comprise the 80-95% of the outgoing traffic in the routers, 
and 50-70% of the traffic goes to one major destination [7]. 
This behavior can lead to insufficient capacity and can cause 
traffic bottlenecks at some points of the network. 
General routing tasks rely on electronic processing, thus 
Optical-Electrical-Optical (O-E-O) conversions are needed. 
Each O-E-O conversion implies a number of complex 
operations (signal amplification, detection, error correction, 
buffering, frame searching, extraction from buffer, packet 
assembly and signal emission) resulting in high complexity 
and power and time consumption. 
B. Time-Wavelength (t-λ) Routing Optical Access network 
Architecture 
The t-  routing optical access architecture exploits the 
traffic profile of access networks to introduce time-
wavelength routing for a passive and self-aggregating Metro-
Access interface [8]. The goal of the architecture is to use the 
nonuniform traffic distribution of access networks to select a 
portion of the traffic and forward it through passive channels 
to perform the on-the-fly routing (passive optical routing). 
By taking advantage of the reduced (electronic) processing 
achieved with on-the-fly routing, the electronic bottleneck 
can be relieved. 
The selection of the traffic portion that will be routed on-
the-fly relies on the analysis and evaluation of a multiple 
gateway traffic-distribution. In this distribution up to 70% of 
the traffic in the access networks is destined to a Metro-
Access gateway (interfacing node), the so called major 
destination [7]. This implies that: 
 
Major destination traffic is sent through passive 
channels using on-the-fly routing at the COs. 
 
Minor destination traffic (local network traffic) is 
sent through electronically routed channels using 
common stop-and-forward policies.  
The underlying idea of the t-   routing approach is 
presented in Figure 1 using a PON to connect N=3 ONUs. 
The architecture arranges ONUs in groups that are equal to 
the number of wavelength in the t-  frame (3 wavelengths in 
the case depicted in Figure 1). For the upstream channel the 
CO makes a time-wavelength assignment and sends a frame 
of interleaving Continuous Wave (CW) seed light to the 
ONUs. 
Each ONU sorts packets at the customer sites on the 
basis of their destination. Colorless reflective modulators are 
used to transmit data by modulating the CW according to the 
predefined time-wavelength assignment [10]. 
A collision free optical self aggregation will be achieved 
by assuring that the upstream signals arrive at the remote 
node (splitting and combining point) properly adjusted in 
time (see Figure 1). Thus, each wavelength at the CO will 
contain data from several ONUs. The self aggregated traffic 
arrives at the CO, where passive channels are routed on-the-
fly (based on the pre-defined wavelength assignment), while 
other packet traffic is sent to local processing units for 
destination inspection, routing and forwarding (electronically 
routed channels). As shown in Figure 1, the CO assigns λ1 as 
passive channel. Hence λ1 is self-aggregated and on-the-fly 
routed towards the major destination. 
59
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

 
 
Figure 1.  Underlying idea of the time-wavelength assignment and Central 
Office (CO) schematic diagram, for time-wavelength routed architecture to 
provide on-the-fly routing to Major destinations. CW: Continuous Wave. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
The fast penetration and the evolution of optical access 
networks will produce higher congestion at COs and Metro-
Access interfacing nodes. Consequently, there will be a large 
pressure to deal with the increasing Quality of Service (QoS) 
demand of future applications requirements. Thus, future-
proof, cost and energy efficient Metro-Access interfaces 
have been extensively investigated [8][10][11]. 
In a former performance evaluation the authors have 
shown the advantages of t-  routing architecture over a 
conventional WDM PON. It was therefore proposed as 
solution for a transparent and self aggregating Metro-Access 
integration [8].  
Nevertheless in the former evaluation the architectures 
were assessed by means of dedicated discrete step-based 
simulation models, with a Poisson process for traffic arrivals 
and packet Loss Rate (LR) as the performance metric [8]. 
Furthermore, an improvement to the simulation model 
developed in the prior evaluation can be attempted because 
the excess traffic in passive channels (on-the-fly routed) 
originally was distributed to electronically routed channels.   
The excess traffic in passive channels constitutes major 
traffic (traffic destined to a major destination) arriving at 
ONUs that produces overflows of buffers associated with the 
passive channels (passive buffers). Therefore, a portion of 
the major traffic goes through on-the-fly routed channels 
and, in the presence of overflows, another portion (the excess 
traffic) goes through electronically routed channels towards 
the major destination. This approach allows to use passive 
channels resources to the maximum and to distribute major 
excess traffic to the electronically routed channels.  
LR was the only performance metric used in the former 
evaluation, and advantages of the t-λ routing architecture 
over WDM PON have been shown [8]. But users are 
demanding 
applications 
with 
requirements 
beyond 
bandwidth and loss rate. According to Cisco’s Visual 
Networking Index, globally Internet video traffic will grow 
from 40% of all consumer Internet traffic in 2010 to 61% in 
2015 [1]. Inelastic traffic applications especially video-
related traffic has been flooding the networks, and future 
optical access networks must address the requirements of 
low delay and jitter. 
The packets will arrive at major destination with high 
delay variations by distributing the excess traffic in passive 
channels through electronically routed channels. This 
behavior will lead to a constant packet reordering at the 
major destination. Packet reordering can be compensated 
with buffering at the price of an additional delay. In future 
optical access networks (managing traffic volumes of tera 
bits per second) the buffer size for packet reordering could 
be prohibitive. We analyze two types of Internet traffic for 
discussing the traffic behavior and the consequences of this 
approach: 
1) Inelastic traffic (voice and video-related traffic): The 
packet reordering compensation adds additional delay. 
Thus, inelastic traffic will be most likely to be discarded 
because, even when reaching the destination, it will not 
fulfill the low delay and jitter requirements. Additionally, 
this traffic (most likely to be discarded) will compete inside 
the t-λ routing architecture for resources with minor 
destination’s traffic. 
2) Elastic traffic (web, mail): TCP (Transport Control 
Protocol), the standard Internet transport protocol for non 
delay sensible traffic, has been proven to be packet 
reordering-sensible. TCP produces unnecessary traffic 
retransmission under constant packet reordering, and can 
lead to bursty traffic behavior, thus increasing the network’s 
overload [12]. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE ASSESMENT 
In the present work, the enhanced t-  routing architecture 
and a conventional WDM PON architecture (as reference) 
have been evaluated by means of simulation models 
developed in OPNET Modeler, an event-based state-of-the-
art network modeling and simulation tool [13].  
A. Simulation Model 
The simulation models are composed of ONU nodes and 
CO nodes, which are connected by point-to-point links with 
several channels (i.e., wavelengths). There is also a Paths 
Computation Entity node used to create the routing tables of 
the nodes and establish the on-the-fly routed paths, based on 
a variation of the Dijkstra algorithm using the DJK OPNET 
Modeler packet [13]. The Metro-Access Interfacing Node is 
a CO node with different attributes configuration. 
Each ONU connected to a CO has a dedicated 
wavelength in the WDM PON models. All the wavelengths 
are terminated at COs to apply electronic routing. 
The t-λ frame in the t-  routing architecture is composed 
by the same number of wavelengths as ONUs managed by 
the CO. Thus each ONU time shares the same number of 
wavelengths as there are ONUs connected to the same CO. 
The CO establishes on-the-fly routed paths from each ONU 
towards the major destination. Hence, those wavelengths 
associated with the major destination are passively routed at 
the COs. 
The models built in the event-based simulation tool 
OPNET Modeler enable a more accurate evaluation. The 
main performance metrics of the model are: 
 
Traffic Loss Rate (LR): relation between bits loss 
and bits sent by the ONUs. 
 
End-to-End Delay (EED): time difference between 
the time instant when a packet’s first bit arrives at 
60
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

ONU and the time instant when the packet´s last bit 
is received at destination. 
The Offered Load has been used to assess the 
architecture under various loads. This translates into different 
degrees of congestion. 
It is well known that Internet traffic presents self-similar 
behavior. Thus the ONU nodes generate the network traffic 
with self-similar arrivals processes, using a variation of the 
OPNET raw packet generator [13]. 
Because the t-  routing architecture has been proposed as 
a solution for a transparent and self aggregating Metro-
Access integration, it must consider that inelastic traffic will 
flood future networks. Therefore, in the developed t-   
routing architecture model (enhanced version) the excess 
traffic in passive channels is dropped at the ONUs. Thus the 
delay variations and the packet reordering problems are 
avoided (see Section 3). 
By dropping the excess traffic at ONUs the electronic 
routing tasks are reduced, avoiding the electronic bottleneck 
at COs (i.e., it moves the network bottleneck for major traffic 
from the COs to the ONUs). The fact is that, if some packets 
should be discarded by a network bottleneck, it is better that 
this happens as soon as possible. And this is precisely what 
the proposed enhanced t-  routing architecture does. 
B.  Performance Assessment Escenario 
Figure 2 presents the simple network topology used in 
the simulation experiments. The topology was selected in 
order to get the possibility to establish some comparison with 
the former evaluation [8]. It consists of five COs with four 
ONUs connect to each CO and a Metro-Access Interfacing 
Node (MN) as major destination. The COs were connected 
to each other in a ring arrangement. Just one CO is connected 
to the MN. 
The performance assessment scenario’s set up was as 
follows. Transmission Rate R = 125 mega bits per second 
(one magnitude order below EPON standard rates). The 
processing rate of the nodes was set to be on line with the 
transmission rate. Buffer sizes were assigned to limit the 
maximum buffer delay at 1 milli seconds in relation with the 
transmission rate; based on design considerations assumed in 
[14].  
The applied traffic model has self-similar arrivals 
processes with Hurst parameter H   0,74; based on empirical 
traffic evaluations [15]. The traffic distribution was the same 
as used in the former evaluation and was taken from a 
multiple gateway traffic assessment, where 70% of the 
offered load (A) is destined to the major destination (i.e., the 
MN) and the rest is equally distributed among the minor 
destinations (i.e., the five COs)[7][8]. 
The t-  frame period was set to 125 micro seconds in the 
t-  routing architecture; compatible with the Synchronous 
Digital Hierarchy (SDH). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Simple Access network topology used for the performance 
evaluation, based on a ring interconection of COs. The Metro-Access 
interfacing Node (MN) represents the major destination (for the 
performance assessment up to 70% of traffic was destined to MN). 
Each frame is composed of four t-  slots (same number 
as ONUs connected to each CO), which were assigned in 
such a way that wavelengths were associated with the MN as 
the major destination and the COs as minor destinations. 
In conventional WDM PON each ONU had its own 
dedicated wavelength, which is terminated at the CO, i.e., no 
passive channels are provided. 
C. Simulation Results and analysis 
Performance assessment was carried out using a worst 
case electronic bottleneck scenario; i.e., up to 70% of the 
offered load (A) is destined to the major destination (MN). 
As there are four ONUs per each CO (see Figure 2), the t-  
frame is composed of four time shared wavelengths. Only 
one wavelength is passively routed towards major 
destination per each CO (i.e., one on-the-fly routed path 
established from CO to MN). In this way each ONU 
perceives up to 25% of the transmission rate to send traffic 
into the passive channel, producing fast overload of the 
passive channels. 
Figure 3 shows the simulation results for LR (Loss Rate) 
and EED (End-to-End Delay) vs. A (Offered Load) for the 
enhanced t-   routing architecture and the conventional 
WDM PON as reference. As can be observed in Figure 3(a), 
the conventional WDM PON has a superior performance, 
based on LR, because of the expected fast overload of 
passive channels in the enhanced t-  routing architecture. 
However the LR in WDM PON tends to worsen when A 
increases (higher degree of congestion in the network) as a 
consequence of the COs’ electronic bottleneck. 
Figure 3(b) presents the EED experienced by the 
enhanced t-  routing architecture, as based on three curves: 
electronically routed paths, on-the-fly routed paths, and 
overall paths. Only one WDM PON EED curve is shown, 
because all packets are electronically routed in WDM PON. 
 
 
61
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.  Simulations Results for 70% of A (Offered Load) destined to Metro Node (MN). 
(a) Loss Rate (LR) vs Offered Load (A); (b) End-to-End Delay (EED) vs. A 
 
Figure 3(b) shows that the electronically routed paths of 
enhanced t-  routing architecture presents the lowest EED   
A, because minor destination traffic (local traffic) perceives 
congestion free COs. The on-the-fly routed paths EED curve 
suggests that the ONUs passive buffers were overloaded for 
A   40%. In Figure 3(b) the enhanced t-  overall EED curve 
indicates that when the passive buffers were overloaded (A   
40%) there is an increasing portion of major traffic that is 
lost, as is clearly showed in Figure 3(a). 
The WDM PON LR and EED curves depict the WDM 
electronic bottleneck problem. Even though we have moved 
the bottleneck from COs to the ONUs in the enhanced t-  
architecture, producing a fast overload of the passive 
channels; the WDM PON performance tends to be worse 
when the network is highly loaded (A   70%). Figure 3(b) 
shows that by using WDM PON the COs tend to get 
congested when the network load is increased. For A   70% 
the WDM PON EED becomes worse than the EED 
experienced by the enhanced t-  architecture. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In a future scenario with higher users’ bandwidth demand 
for video-related traffic (61% of all customer traffic for 
2015) and faster networks, the access network must 
successfully deliver the demanded bandwidth and cope with 
the strict traffic requirements on low delay and jitter. 
A former t-   routing architecture model feature was 
found which produces constant packet reordering and 
performance problems. To deal with this issue we have 
proposed an enhanced version of the t-  routing architecture 
which effectively avoids the reordering packet problems. 
The proposed scheme was evaluated against a traditional 
WDM PON architecture using the OPNET Modeler tool.  
Even though EED on WDM PON and t-  routing are not 
very different, our simulation results showed that the WDM 
PON leads to congestion at COs in presence of nonuniform 
access traffic distribution, as a consequence of the electronic 
bottleneck. In spite of the passive channel’s fast overload at 
ONUs, the use of the proposed enhanced t-   routing 
architecture, allows the COs to remain congestion free, there 
is reduction of the network´s power consumption and the 
network can more efficiently support different traffic 
requirements. 
The introduction of on-the-fly routed passive channels 
based on the nonuniform access traffic distribution could 
represent an interesting useful solution for transparent and 
low latency Metro-Access integration.  
It would be convenient to conduct some additional 
experiments 
introducing 
inelastic and elastic traffic 
differentiation. Using traffic differentiation can assure that 
only inelastic traffic will be sent by the passively routed 
channels, whereas elastic traffic could be sent toward 
electronically routed channels.  
In a Metro-Access integration scenario each CO must 
manage much more than 64 ONUs. However the t-λ routing 
architecture presents a limitation in the number of 
wavelengths that each ONU will manage (the t-λ frame is 
composed of the same number of wavelengths as ONUs 
managed by the CO). In consequence, the scalability on the 
number of ONUs managed by each CO is limited. 
Based on our simulation results, we propose to combine 
WDM PON with the use of on-the fly routing and self 
aggregation for traffic going toward the major destination 
(i.e., Metro-Access Interface). This combination is possible 
by means of hybrid WDM with Sub Carrier Multiple Access 
(SCMA) or with Optical Code Division Multiple Access 
62
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

(OCDMA). Such a combination would provide transparent 
ONU-CO connections and transparent Metro-Access on-the-
fly routed paths (releasing electronic bottleneck) without 
restrictions to increase the number of ONUs per CO. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Part of this work has been supported by the Applied 
Networks and Telematics Group at Simón Bolivar University 
(GRETA-USB), Venezuela, the Metro Access and Short 
Range Systems Group at Technical University of Denmark. 
The author would like to thank the Venezuelan “Fondo de 
Investigación y Desarrollo de las Telecomunicaciones” – 
FIDETEL 
(Telecommunications’ 
Research 
and 
Development Fund) for funding this research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Cisco's Visual Networking Index, Forecast 2010-2015. 
1.06.2011.  
[2] L. G. Kazovsky, W. -T. Shaw, D. Gutierrez, N. Cheng, and  
S. -W. Wong, "Next-Generation Optical Access Networks," J. 
Lightwave Technol., vol. 25, pp. 3428-3442, 2007. 
[3] C. Gee-Kung, et al., "Key Technologies of WDM-PON for 
Future Converged Optical Broadband Access Networks 
[Invited]," 
Optical 
Communications 
and 
Networking, 
IEEE/OSA Journal of, vol. 1, pp. C35-C50, 2009. 
[4] Fiber-to-the-home 
Council 
http://www.ftthcouncil.org. 
12.09.2011 
[5] K. Grobe and J. P. Elbers, "PON in adolescence: from TDMA 
to WDM-PON," Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 46, 
pp. 26-34, 2008. 
[6] J. I. Kani, et al., "Next-generation PON-part I: Technology 
roadmap 
and 
general 
requirements," 
Communications 
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 47, pp. 43-49, 2009. 
[7] P.-L. Tsai and C.-L. Lei, "Analysis and evaluation of a 
multiple gateway traffic-distribution scheme for gateway 
clusters," Computer Communications, vol. 29, pp. 3170-3181, 
2006. 
[8] M. Wieckowski, A. Osadchiy, J. Turkiewicz, and I. Monroy  
"Performance assessment of flexible time-wavelength routing 
for a self-aggregating transparent Metro-access interface," in 
Optical Communication, 2009. ECOC '09. 35th European 
Conference on, 2009, pp. 1-2. 
[9] E. Van Breusegern, et al., "Overspill routing in optical 
networks: a true hybrid optical network design," Selected 
Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 24, pp. 13-
25, 2006.  
[10] A. V. Osadchiy, J. Bevensee Jensen, P. Jeppesen, and I. Tafur 
Monroy, "Colorless receiver enabling crossconnect based 
metro-access interfacing nodes for optically labelled DQPSK 
payload signals," in IEEE Lasers and Electro-Optics Society, 
2008. LEOS 2008. 21st Annual Meeting of the, 2008, pp. 
612-613. 
[11] J. Segarra, V. Sales, and J. Prat, "An All-Optical Access-
Metro Interface for Hybrid WDM/TDM PON Based on 
OBS," J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 25, pp. 1002-1016, 2007. 
[12] L. Ka-Cheong, V. O. K. Li, and Y. Daiqin, "An Overview of 
Packet Reordering in Transmission Control Protocol (TCP): 
Problems, 
Solutions, 
and 
Challenges," 
Parallel 
and 
Distributed Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 18, pp. 522-
535, 2007. 
[13] OPNET 
Modeler. 
OPNET 
Technologies 
Inc. 
http://www.opnet.com/. 12.09.2011  
[14] B. Skubic, C. Jiajia, J. Ahmed, L. Wosinska, and B. 
Mukherjee, "A comparison of dynamic bandwidth allocation 
for EPON, GPON, and next-generation TDM PON," 
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 47, pp. S40-S48, 
2009. 
[15] W. E. Leland, M. S. Taqqu, W. Willinger, and D. V. Wilson, 
"On the self-similar nature of Ethernet traffic (extended 
version)," Networking, IEEE/ACM Transactions on, vol. 2, 
pp. 1-15, 1994. 
63
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

