Performance Evaluation of a Planar Layout of Data Vortex Optical
Interconnection Network
Qimin Yang
Engineering Department, Harvey Mudd College
Claremont, California, USA
Qimin_yang@hmc.edu
Abstract-Optical
interconnection
networks
provide
solutions for high performance computing and communication
networks which demand high throughput and low latency as
well as high scalability. Data Vortex switching network has
been studied previously for such purpose. In this paper, we
focus on implementation issues, specifically on exploration of
an
alternative
layout
that
allows
the
routing
paths
arrangement in such network to be implemented as multiple
parallel
planes.
The
original
multiple
cylinder
three
dimensional architecture is converted to planar structures.
Since the new layout is designed to be functionally equivalent
to the original Data Vortex, the routing performance in
throughput and latency is shown to be very similar to that of
the original network under same network operating conditions.
The effect of injection at different angles is also investigated
for optimized performance. The proposed planar architecture
provides
much
more flexible configuration for
multiple
network levels, and the study validates that it provides
comparable
routing
performance
as
in
original
design.
Because of the flexibility of the new planar architecture, future
work may explore further optimization in routing resources
and performance.
Keywords- Optical Interconnection Network; Data Vortex;
Packet Switched; Routing; Planar Network.
I.
INTRODUCTION
High performance multiprocessor supercomputers and
multiple
I/O
communication
systems
require
high
throughput
and
low
latency
packet
switched
interconnection networks. As optical fiber technology
matured with the optical communication industry, there are
more research efforts recently dedicated to developing
optically implemented interconnection networks for packet
switched operation [1-2]. Considering the tremendous
amount of routing decisions such networks have to make,
recent researches in silicon photonics devices and platforms
are
important
technology
developments
for
seamless
integration of the two domains [3-4]. Instead of converting
existing electronic interconnection networks, the renewed
interests in the area also bring in more innovative designs in
network architectures that can efficiently utilize both
electrical and optical domains. Photonic approaches are
attractive solutions because they can not only easily achieve
the
bandwidth
requirement,
but
also
provide
more
promising potential in power consumption and scalability
challenges that current electronic interconnection networks
encounter [5-6]. A good network design should utilize the
broad
bandwidth
of
optical
domain
while
avoiding
extensive logic processing or optical buffering due to the
lack of the mature technology.
Data Vortex network architecture is designed for
localized high performance interconnection purpose, and it
is scalable to a very large number of communication ports
operated in packet switched mode [7-9]. With reasonable
expense in routing resource redundancy, it is able to
achieve very high traffic throughput while maintaining low
latency and narrow latency distribution, both of which are
extremely important for guarantee of packet’s signal quality
at
the
physical
layer
[10-11].
Data
Vortex
optical
interconnection network relies on a three dimensional
cylindrical topology to efficiently move the data flow from
input to output ports [12-14]. Considering the benefit of
planar structure for physical implementation, this work
focuses on converting the three dimensional topology to
multiple planes of routing levels to facilitate construction
and integration.
The rest of paper is organized as follows: Section II
explains the original Data Vortex switching topology, and
difficulty with large scale system construction in cylinders.
Section III presents the proposed planar layout of each
cylinder level which allows for an equivalent routing
topology. Section IV presents the routing performance
comparison with the original layout and confirms the
feasibility of the proposed system, and Section V concludes
the study and discuss future works relevant to the area.
II.
ORIGINAL DATA VORTEX DESIGN
The original Data Vortex network uses a cylindrical
layout with multiple cylinders of routing nodes along angle
and height dimensions. As an example, Figure 1 (a) shows
the two outer cylinders’ routing paths in a network of A=4
angles and H=4 in height. To allow for clear view, intra-
cylinder paths patterns are also individually shown in
Figure 1(b) for each of the three cylinders. The number of
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

cylinders required is given by
1
log2
H 
due to the binary
decoding nature of the routing process. The additional last
cylinder is typically added, as shown in cylinder c=2 (=C)
in Figure 1 (b), and it maintains the height position; but, it
allows for angular resolution if each angle connects to a
different sets of I/O ports. In addition, the last cylinder
provides optical buffering in addition to the electrical
buffers situated at I/O ports.
c=0
c=1
a=0
a=1
a=2
a=3
(a)
c=0
c=1
c=2
(b)
Figure 1. (a) Two outer cylinders of Data Vortex topology
for A=4, H=4. (b) Intra-cylinder routing paths for each of
the cylinders.
The number of active angles Ain are connected to I/O
ports, so that the ratio Ain/A controls the redundancy in
network operation. The choice of Ain needs to balance
between the support of I/O ports for the given network cost
and the routing performance. The smaller Ain/A results in
better routing performance, but also means supporting of
smaller I/O ports or more expensive implementation as the
required number of routing nodes and optical switches is
proportional to the total number of angle A. The typical
choice of A is small number around 5 because an ideal
operation with Ain/A=1/5 results in the optimum routing
performance [7]. A much larger angle introduces much
longer delay due to the latency associated with the angular
resolution at the last cylinder.
The routing process starts with packets injected at the
outermost cylinder, and after through each of the cylinders
exit to output ports at the innermost cylinder. As shown in
Figure 1, at the specific cylinder, the semi-twisted routing
path patterns repeat from angle to angle which forms a
cylinder by connecting the last angle to the first angle,
allowing the packet to switch between two groups of height
where the corresponding binary bit of the height position
flip back and forth between “1” and “0”. This not only
allows the packets to quickly reach the correct height group,
but also provide multiple open paths to reach their
destination. Once the position group matches the desired
group at the specific cylinder, the packet is forwarded to the
inner cylinder by inter-cylinder paths (gray lines shown)
that simply maintain the current height position. Such
routing process continues until the packet reaches the
innermost
cylinder
and
exits
the
network.
Another
important design of the network is to guarantee single
packet routing for each routing node through a traffic
control
mechanism.
This
greatly simplifies
the
node
implementation and routing decisions, where electronic
processing will not impose serious speed limitation. These
traffic
control
signals
are
distributed
throughout
the
network, and they are used between a pair of relevant nodes,
sent from inner cylinder nodes to inform their outer
cylinder neighbors its traffic condition. In case both have
packets arriving, the inner node is always given higher
priority and the outer cylinder traffic is deflected by staying
at the outer cylinder instead. These control lines are shown
as dash lines between the pair of nodes in Figure 1.
Routing
Logic
F, hi
SOA
SOA
E (same)
S (inner)
Cin
Routing node at ith cylinder
W (same)
N (outer)
combiner
tap
splitter
Cout
Filtering
O/E
Figure 2. Routing node photonic implementation
For the physical implementation, the switches within the
routing node are based on semiconductor optical amplifier
(SOA). It not only allows for fast switching required for
packet switching, but also provide broadband operation
which
allows
for
utilization
of
wavelength
division
multiplexing (WDM) techniques. Specifically, payload data
is modulated onto WDM channels to keep short packet
length while maintaining high data bandwidth, and header
bits that contain the destination information are also
modulated onto different wavelength channels for simple
decoding within the routing nodes. In addition, any power
loss in routing nodes can be easily compensated by the gain
provided by semiconductor optical amplifier [8].
A detailed routing node implementation using optical
components is shown in Figure 2. There are two input paths,
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

where N (North) connects to the outer cylinder node, and W
(West) connects to the same cylinder node. Since the
control mechanism mentioned above guarantees that at
most one packet enters the node, the input paths from N and
W are combined before the header bit extraction and
decoding. The binary header bits of the target address are
encoded using distinct wavelength channels, therefore
simple passive filters and low packet rate optoelectronic
(O/E) detector are used to extract such information from the
optical packet. The single packet is then split to two
potential output paths, one to S (South) to inner cylinder or
one to E (East) to the same cylinder. The routing decision
not only examine the header bit and correct height group,
but also depend on an input control signal Cin so that ensure
it only enters the inner cylinder node when there is no
potential conflict for single packet condition. Similarly, the
routing logic generates a new control signal Cout for its
outer cylinder node for the same purpose. As a result of
control mechanism, packet deflection can happen in Data
Vortex network without packet loss. Packets that are
deflected to stay on the outer cylinder can take advantage of
the multiple open paths, and this causes a rather small
latency penalty in comparison to other existing networks.
SOA switches are used for their fast sub-nanoseconds
switching speeds and internal gain for power compensation
occurring at taps and splitters. More details of signaling and
path connections can be found in the references [7][9].
Previous researches on Data Vortex network have been
mainly focused on network’s routing performance and
physical layer system performances. As more applications
call for such optical interconnection networks, making them
more flexible and easier for construction are of great
importance. So far only a 12x12 small testbed has been
built
mainly
because
it
heavily
relies
on
discrete
components. On one hand, recent researches in either SOA
switching fabric or novel silicon photonic devices provide
more potential for integration at the device and routing
node level. On the other hand, network architectures may
not have the same upgrades for easier implementation. For
example,
a
small
scale
Data
Vortex
can
be
easily
implemented using fiber waveguides and individual node
modules in three dimensions. But, such arrangement could
be very complex and cumbersome for a much larger
network. The difficulties also include keeping every level
aligned
and
synchronized
necessary
for
the
routing
operation. For all paths physically the same length at all
levels, inner levels must somehow wind up paths to occupy
a smaller physical space than its outer level in cylindrical
arrangement.
In addition, due to close coupling of the
electrical layer for routing logic and traffic control with the
optical layer, a fully three dimensional fabrication is not
compatible to integration solutions. One solution is if each
of the routing levels or cylinders can be integrated as a
subsystem on a plane as the electrical circuits naturally
arrange on planes, it becomes a much more manageable
overall system which simply interconnects the planes of
subsystems. The complexity would not grow drastically as
the size of the system. Because connections between the
levels are parallel links, either fiber based on other type of
waveguides in more integrated form can be used.
III. PLANAR LAYOUT DESIGN
To
eliminate
the
incompatibility
of
integration
of
electrical layer in the cylindrical arrangement, and make
Data Vortex easier to construct in large scale networks, this
study explores an alternative layout of the Data Vortex
architecture to allow for planar construction of the multiple
routing levels.
In the logical level, we want to maintain the same
principle of minimizing deflection probability by arranging
the same semi-twisted routing patterns, while allowing for
parallel planes for easy layered integration. To achieve this,
instead of connecting the last angle of routing nodes to the
first angle in the original Data Vortex, we added paths
along the same angle at the first and the last angle (green
paths as shown in Figure 3 and Figure 4), while changing
half of the routing paths in the opposite traveling direction
(red paths vs. blue paths). As a result, traveling on the same
plane now forms a looping pattern similar to the ones by
staying on the same cylinder in the original Data Vortex
network. As examples, Figure 3 and Figure 4 show a
network with H=4 at the first two routing levels (in
comparison to the two outermost cylinders in the original
network layout in Figure 1) for A=4 and A=5, respectively.
As shown, the direction of the same angle green paths at the
first and last angle depends on whether the angle A is even
or odd, and the connection pattern follows the same pattern
between the nodes as in between angles. The same cylinder
paths’ direction also depends on whether A is even or odd
accordingly as shown.
The new layout now allows for parallel planes of
different routing levels that correspond to the original
cylinders. Between different planes, only parallel routing
paths are needed as that in the original Data Vortex
networks. The control signal paths are not shown for a clear
view, but they should be set up similarly between the pair
of nodes from inner cylinder to the outer cylinder whenever
two nodes try to send packets to the same node. These
control paths can be integrated with the optical routing path
on another plane that would be perpendicular to the planes
of routing levels. The control signals apply to the edge
angle nodes in a similar fashion even though the output
node could be located on the same angle. The detailed
organization of nodal circuits on the plane is beyond this
study. Either all nodes of the same plane are fabricated on a
same
platform/board
which
requires
planar
optical
waveguide technology, or nodes of the same angle can be
fabricated on a same board if angles are interconnected by
more
flexible
fiber
waveguides.
Three
dimensional
arrangements are still open, but without the difficulty of
occupying a different size space as in cylindrical networks.
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

(0,0,3)
(0,0,2)
(0,0,1)
(0,0,0)
(0,0,3)
(0,0,2)
(0,0,1)
(0,0,0)
Figure 3. Routing paths in planar layout for A=5 (odd) and
H=4 at the first two levels
(0,0,3)
(0,0,2)
(0,0,1)
(0,0,0)
(0,0,3)
(0,0,2)
(0,0,1)
(0,0,0)
Figure 4. Routing paths in planar layout for A=4 (even)
and H=4 at the first two levels
Logically, the
new layout
forms a very similar
connection as that of the original Data Vortex network, and
the rest designs such as parallel inter-level forwarding paths,
control mechanism and additional last cylinder will all
maintain the same. Therefore, we should expect very
similar routing performance when comparing the new
layout to the original Data Vortex cylindrical layout. On the
other hand, the new same angle paths may affect the routing
performance because nodes at different angles may carry
slightly different traffic load and may result in different
traffic distribution within the network. Packet injection at
different angle should also be investigated with further
details to make sure the planar layout can achieve the same
routing performance as desired.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A custom written C/C++ event simulator is used to
evaluate the new layout Data Vortex architecture. Same
network size is chosen for two layouts while different
traffic load and network redundancy are included in the
study to ensure the performance comparison at various
operation conditions. We choose the network angle to be
A=5 as in earlier studies. A less redundant condition with
increased Ain>1 for the same given A is also studied [7].
The delay performance examines the average number of
hops packets experience in the network over a long period
of simulation time after a steady state is reached. The
throughput performance is presented by the successful
injection rate at the input ports over the same simulation
period. Because it is a non-blocking network, the successful
injection rate reflects the overall data capacity that the
network can handle. A more congested or saturated network
essentially deflects more traffic at outer levels and creates
traffic backpressure up to the injection ports. We always
choose the same angle parameter for comparison to the
original network layout, so angular resolution is not
included for this study.
10
11
12
13
14
15
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Average Latency in Hops
traffic load
Latency Performance
inject a=0
inject a=1
inject a=2
Figure 5. Latency Performance Comparison for injection at
different angles for A=5, Ain=1, H=128
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Injection Rate (%)
traffic load
Throughput Performance
inject a=0
inject a=1
inject a=2
Figure
6.
Throughput
Performance
Comparison
for
injection at different angles for A=5, Ain=1, H=128
First, we study the angular dependence of injection port
in the new planar layout. Due to the symmetry of the layout,
in a network of A=5, we only need to compare routing
performance with injection occur at a=0 (end angle), a=1
and a=2 (middle angle) respectively. Figure 5 and Figure 6
present the latency and throughput performance for A=5
and H=128 with one injection angle Ain=1 at the specified
angle a. The ratio of Ain/A is chosen for the optimized
throughput performance as suggested in previous study. As
shown, we should avoid inject at the end angles where we
loop the packets back in the opposite direction on the same
angle
because
the
injection
rate
and
throughput
performance is shown to be significantly lower. The
performance difference between the two middle angles
however is shown to be negligible. More case studies with
multiple injection angles also show similar results, which
indicates that edge angles should be generally avoided if
possible. The middle angle or angles close to the middle
should be preferred to achieve the best overall performance
in throughput and latency in the new layout. In case the
network operates in much less redundant condition such as
injecting at all A angles, then the edge angles have to be
used as well.
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Average Delay Hops
traffic load
Delay Performance Comparison
Ain=1, Planar
Ain=3, Planar
Ain=5, Planar
Ain=1, Regular
Ain=3, Regular
Ain=5, Regular
Figure 7. Delay performance comparison for two layouts
for different Ain with A=5, H=128
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Injection Rate (%)
traffic load
Throughput Performance Comparison
Ain=1, Planar
Ain=3, Planar
Ain=5, Planar
Ain=1, Regular
Ain=3, Regular
Ain=5, Regular
Figure 8. Throughput comparison for two layouts for
different Ain with A=5, H=128
Next, we compare the planar layout performance with
the original Data Vortex network as shown in Figure 7 and
Figure 8, respectively. Here, all planar layouts use middle
angles
for
injection
angles
to
avoid
unnecessary
performance degradation, while Ain=5 case all angles
including edge angles will be used for injection. The planar
layout results are marked by solid shapes while regular
layout results use hollow shapes for all three redundant
operations. As shown, the routing performances in all cases
are very close between the two layouts. We also notice that
for Ain=1, the regular network achieves a little better
throughput, while the planar layout achieves slight benefit
over regular network in less redundant network conditions,
such as Ain=3 and Ain=5. However, overall, there is very
small difference between the two layouts as long as the
injections are carried out through the middle angles.
Finally, to show the performance evaluation is valid for
all network sizes, we also examine the comparison for
different network heights. It has been confirmed that only
small discrepancies have been observed between the two
layouts and very similar trends are seen, as shown in Figure
7 and Figure 8 for different network sizes.
V.
CONCLUSION
To summarize, an alternative planar layout of the Data
Vortex architecture was proposed to facilitate the three
dimensional integration of the network nodes. This is
accomplished by dividing routing paths along the cylinder
to two different directions, while adding same angle paths
in the first and last angle to form similar routing loops. As a
result, all nodes on the same routing level can be
implemented on a plane, and overall architecture appears to
be multiple planes interconnected. The optical paths and
control links between routing levels along the same angle
can further be put on a plane perpendicular to the routing
level planes, and easily form a three dimensional structure
that facilitates the modular design and synchronization of
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

the overall network. The routing performance is specifically
evaluated and in comparison to the original network
performance under various network conditions and network
sizes. The detailed analysis has shown that the new planar
layout achieves very similar routing performance as that of
original Data Vortex network, and, in general, edge angle
should be avoided for packet injection for optimum routing
performance.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Wonfor, H.Wang, R.V.Penty, and I.H. White, “Large Port
Count
High
Speed
Optical
Switch
Fabric
for
Use
Within
Datacenters”, Journal of Optical Communications and Networks,
Vol. 3, No. 8, pp. A32-39, 2011.
[2]
Shinji Nishimura, Kazunori Shinoda, Yong Lee, Fumio Yuki,
Takashi Takemoto, Hiroki Yamashita, Shinji Tsuji, Masaaki Nido,
Masahiko Namiwaka, Taro Kaneko, Kazuhiko Kurata, Shigeyuki
Yanagimachi, and Naoya Ikeda, “Optical Interconnection for High-
speed Routers”, Optical Fiber Conference, OThH2, 2011.
[3]
T.-Y. Liow, K. W. Ang, Q. Fang, M. B. Yu, F. F. Ren, S. Y. Zhu, J.
Zhang, J. W. Ng, J. F. Song, Y. Z. Xiong, G. Q. Lo, and Dim-Lee
Kwong, “Silicon Photonics Technologies for Monolithic Electronic-
Photonic Integrated Circuit Applications”, Optical Fiber Conference,
OThV1, 2011.
[4]
Noam Ophir1, Kishore Padmaraju1, Aleksandr Biberman1, Long
Chen2, Kyle Preston2, Michal Lipson2, and Keren Bergman, “First
Demonstration of Error-Free Operation of a Full Silicon On-Chip
Photonic Link”, Optical Fiber Conference, OWZ3, 2011.
[5]
R.S.Tucker,
“Green
optical
communications-part
II:
energy
limitations in networks”, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in
Quantum Electronics, Vol. 17, No. 2, pp 261-274, 2011.
[6]
Odile Liboiron-Ladouceur, Pier Giorgio Raponi, Nicola Andriolli,
Isabella Cerutti, Mohammed Shafiqul Hai, and Piero Castoldi,
“Scalable Space-Time Multi-plane Optical Interconnection Network
Using Energy-Efficient Enabling Technologies”, Journal of Optical
Communication and Networks, Vol. 3, No. 8, pp. A1-A11, 2011.
[7]
Q. Yang, K. Bergman, G. D. Hughes, and F. G. Johnson, “WDM
packet routing for high-capacity data networks,” J. Lightw. Technol.,
vol. 19, pp. 1420–1426, Oct. 2001.
[8]
C. Hawkins, B. A. Small, D. S. Wills, and K. Bergman, "The Data
Vortex, an all optical path
multicomputer interconnection
network," IEEE Transactions of Parallel and Distributed Systems,
vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 409-420, Mar 2007.
[9]
Cory Hawkins, D. Scott Wills, Odile Liboriron-Ladouceur, and
Keren Bergman, “ Hiearchical clustering of the data vortex optical
interconnection network”, Journal of Optical Networking, Vol.6, No.
9, pp. 1179-1190, Sep. 2007.
[10] O.Liboiron-Ladouceur, B.A.Small and K.Bergman, “Physical Layer
Scalability of WDM Optical Packet Interconnection Networks”, J.
Lightwave Technology, vol. 24, pp. 262-270, 2006.
[11] A. Shacham, B.A. Small, O. Liboiron-Ladouceur and K. Bergman,
"A Fully Implemented 12x12 Data Vortex Optical Packet Switching
Interconnection Network," Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol.
23, No. 10, pp. 3066-3075, 2005.
[12] Neha Sharma, D. Chadha, Vinod Chandra, “The augumented data
vortex switch fabric: an all-optical packet switched interconnection
network with enhanced fault tolerance”, Journal of Optical Switching
and Networking, Vol. 4, pp. 92-105, 2007.
[13] A. Shacham and K. Bergman, "Optimizing the performance of a
data
vortex
interconnection
network,"
Journal.
Optical
Networking, vol. 6, No. 4, pp. 369-374, April 2007.
[14] A. Shacham and K. Bergman, “On contention resolution in the data
vortex optical interconnection network”,
Journal of Optical
Networking, vol. 6, No. 6, pp. 777–788, June 2007.
[15] http://lightwave.ee.columbia.edu/downloads/acs_workshop/Columbi
a_GaTech_ACS_April16_2010_hw2.pdf (Last retrieved September
2012)
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

