Internationalisation and Localisation of a Wireless Response System for the Arabic 
Language 
 
Abduladim Ali and Joan Lu  
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, United Kingdom 
{Abduladim.Ali@hud.co.uk, j.lu@hud.ac.uk} 
 
Abstract-This paper presents the internationalization and 
localization of a Wireless Response System for the Arabic 
language. It outlines the reasons why Arabic was selected as 
the first language for localization. It states the methods selected 
for localization and why they were selected. The Arabic 
interface was tested using native Arabic speakers and the 
results and analyses of these tests are presented. The paper 
concludes with an examination of the future work required to 
improve the Wireless Response System, for people who use 
Arabic. This work will facilitate future localization of Wireless 
Response System into other languages.  
Keywords- Arabic Language Translation; Internationalization; 
localization; M-Learning; Wireless Response System (WRS) 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Internet and computer technologies are changing the 
way teaching and learning are taking place [1]. Software and 
hardware technology are facilitating new ways of delivering 
education and testing students. This brings with it significant 
changes to the process of education, by making learning 
faster, cheaper and more interactive  [2]. 
These changes are becoming more and more evident in 
the Arabic speaking countries. The adoption of new 
technologies requires new software tools to support them and 
the Wireless Response System (henceforth WRS) is one 
example of  a software that can facilitate this change [3]. The 
WRS is a Mobile Learning (M-learning) technology which 
does not currently  support the Arabic language. This paper 
presents the work done to solve this limitation and discusses 
the localization of the WRS for the Arabic language.  
The WRS was developed using Adobe® AIR® runtime 
and Action Script® with Adobe Flash Builder 4.6.  This 
enables it to run on a range of desktops, smart phones and 
tablets while using a client server configuration, as shown in 
Figure 1 below. The Web Server is Apache with (state PHP 
in full) PHP and a MySQL Database. 
In the rest of this paper we introduce the WRS and place 
internationalization in context. We then discuss M-learning 
in the Arabic speaking world and present the methods used 
to create the Arabic interface for the WRS. Finally, we 
present the results of our tests of the WRS by Arabic 
speaking users. 
II. 
WIRELES RESPONSE SYSTEM (WRS) 
The Wireless Response System (WRS) is an M-learning 
application. It enables the use, of  mobile devices to respond 
and give feedback and in so doing, enhances the student and 
teacher interaction. M-learning is defined as Learning across 
multiple contexts, through social and content interaction, 
using personal electronic devices [4]. The XML Database 
and Information Retrieval (XDIR) research group at the 
University of Huddersfield [5] developed the WRS. 
The WRS, like many M-learning applications, is a 
technology that is used in a wide range of platforms [6] 
including: PC’s, Laptops, Tablets, and Smart Phones; this 
makes it convenient because it is accessible from virtually 
anywhere in the world. This technology only requires the 
user to have access to the internet and a suitable device and 
therefore offers a very interactive learning experience [7]. As 
it is portable and highly responsive for instructors and their 
students, M-learning accommodates the needs of an 
increasingly mobile student population [5]. 
The WRS empowers instructors, both in the classroom 
setting and in the field [8], for example, it enables the 
instructors to create learning material, while they are on a 
field trip to a museum, gallery or visiting a site. This then 
enables them to send the learning material to students and to 
get response instantly. In so doing, they are fully engaged in 
the learning activity. Teachers can monitor student responses 
and adapt the material, to cater for their needs. The ability to 
create learning material, on the spot and in the field, allows 
teachers to provide a more learner tailored Education [9]. 
This enables teachers to meet the specific needs of their 
students. 
One of the limitations of the WRS is its English Language 
interface. Due to this, the need for internationalization and 
localization of WRS was identified. Internationalization was 
necessary because it enabled us to adapt the WRS to many 
different languages. It was a pre-requisite that enabled us to 
complete the localization for the Arabic language. The aim 
of this was to make WRS more accessible to a wider 
international community of teachers and students. 
 
 
 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
Figure 1.  The Architecture of WRS [10].  
 
III. 
INTERNATIONALISATION I18N 
A. Theory  
The term Internationalization can be defined as “the 
process of generalizing a product, so that it can handle 
multiple languages and cultural conventions, without the 
need for redesign. Internationalization takes place at the level 
of program design and document development.” [10]. 
Internationalization is interrelated with translation, 
localization and globalization. Figure 2 below shows this 
relationship. It shows that translation is a core part of the 
localization process, whereas localization is central to 
internationalization [11]. It is important to understand that 
globalization manages the process of making software more 
widely accessible and usable, but internationalization is a 
process that makes the application available in worldwide 
markets. Moreover, localization is an essential step that 
adapts the application to specific linguistic and cultural 
differences of a given region [12] while translation is the 
process of recreating the source language text to a target 
language [13]. 
B. Technology  
The i18n of software is a process of designing and coding 
software to support localization and translation, to various 
languages and locales [14]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Interrelationship of Translation, Localization, 
Internationalization and Globalization. 
 
The WRS was modified to support i18n and is now able to 
support multiple languages. This was achieved through 
changes to the software code which made it easier to insert 
additional languages, as need arises. Users are able to select 
the language of their choice from the interface after starting 
the application. This was implemented in the form of a drop 
down selection box on the home page. 
IV. 
LOCALIZATION L10N  
The term localization has been defined as adapting a 
product to a particular locale [13]. A locale refers to a 
collection of people, who share a common language, writing 
system and any other properties, which may require a 
separate version of a particular product. This could be a 
region, a country, or just a language community [15]. 
The l10n is a process for tailoring software to a specific 
language or a specific region. This is done by adding locale 
specific features into the software such as currency, and date 
formats. A large part of this process is the translation of the 
text used throughout the applications interface [3]. The 
process of translation, in the context of interfaces, is defined 
as "Communicating the meaning of some data and 
information from the original language into another intended 
language" [16]. Kompf states that “translation affects the 
usability of the interface” [16]. Thus, if the translation is 
done successfully, it can increase the number of users of the 
software worldwide [3, 17]. 
The WRS has been translated into Arabic, Italian, 
Romanian and Indonesian. In the rest of this paper, we focus 
on the Arabic localization, with a close look at the interface 
and some of the challenges it presented. 
 
V. 
ARABIC LANGUAGE  
The Arabic language is one of the world’s oldest 
languages.  Currently, it is the fifth most used language 
worldwide. It is spoken by a significant percentage of the 
world’s population. More than 290 million people speak 
Arabic as their first language[17, 18]. As a result, Arabic is 
an important language on the Internet. This is partly due to 
the growing number of Arabic speakers online, many of 
whom are searching for Arabic content and applications 
online. Recent figures from the Internet World Statistics 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

show that there are 90 million Internet users from the Arab 
speaking world [3]. 
A. M-learning in the Arabic Speaking World 
M-learning has become an essential tool used to enhance 
the learning process in the Arabic speaking world. This is 
reflected at the highest levels; in governments and policy 
making circles. In many cases, budgets have been allocated 
and policies implemented in order to enhance M-learning 
[19]. We give some examples from the Arab world below: 
In September 2012, the Qatari government announced, 
that all the instructional content in the public schools would 
be stored in digital format by 2013; this work started in 2011. 
The Kuwaiti government also began rolling out the mobile 
learning products in middle schools, elementary schools and 
kindergartens. By October 2012, all the textbooks in Kuwait 
were digitized [20]. 
In June 2013, the UAE government indicated that they 
would equip all state run schools with learning platforms by 
2015. The UAE Education minister announced that they 
were establishing a state of the art Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) infrastructure in all the 
state schools. They would be publishing 7,000 e-lessons and 
e-contents. They stated that every student in the public 
schools would be using a personal device for learning by 
2017 [20]. The UAE government launched a project to 
provide every student with an electronic tablet and access to 
high-speed 4G networks by 2017. It envisioned that over 
20,0000 personal learning devices would by then be 
distributed to the public schools and students [20]. 
Further to this, the government of the UAE launched the 
federal higher education mobile learning initiative. In this 
initiative, about 14,000 iPads were distributed to all first 
term students in the three federal universities. These tablets 
were preloaded with educational apps [20]. 
Another Arabic speaking country: Egypt has also 
announced a large-scale project, in which over 20 million 
tablets will be distributed to different schools in stages by 
2018. This government had distributed over 10,000 tablets 
by August 2013 [20]. 
    The Saudi Electronic University (SEU) was launched in 
August 2011 by the Saudi government. In 2013, the SEU 
launched their mobile-friendly site in HTML, which can be 
viewed on a smart phone [20].  
In the last example, the Arab Open University makes 
extensive use of mobile learning, in their educational 
programs. They are a pioneer of mobile learning in the 
region, having launched a content library for java-enabled 
phones as early as 2007 [20]. 
These developments in the Arabic speaking world make a 
compelling case for why the WRS should be localized to the 
Arabic language.   
 
VI. 
METHOD USED TO CREATE ARABIC INTERFACE FOR 
WRS 
Two approaches were considered for translating the WRS 
interface: The first was to use online translation tools. 
Several of these tools were tested. Some of these tools were 
discovered to be more widely used than others, for example 
Google Translate [3]. All the tools we tested presented 
problems in a number of areas. These included: grammatical 
structure, spelling, sentence clarity and logic [2] as a result, it 
was difficult to produce clear and understandable Arabic 
translations using this method. While some of these tools 
proved to be more useful than others it was clear that they 
would not be sufficient in themselves. 
The second approach was to use a specialist in the Arabic 
language who was also a native speaker. This approach was 
preferred because it gave a more precise translation, with a 
more consistent style in the Arabic language and vocabulary. 
Adobe Flex Builder 4.6 and Adobe Action Script® were 
used to code the application. This was used for the 
development work on the teacher interface. For the student 
interface, the PHP programming language was used. 
To make the task of localization simpler and more 
manageable for developers, it was divided into two phases: 
the first phase was the translation of both the trigger side and 
response side of the WRS’s interface, and the second phase 
consisted of the testing and the evaluation of these two sides 
to understand how teachers and students experienced them.  
A. Translation of WRS Interface  
The translation Interface was broken down into three 
steps. The first step was to undertake analyses of the system; 
this was achieved by using the WRS in a practical session, 
with teachers and some students. It was done jointly with the 
developers and coders from whom we gained a deeper 
understanding of how the WRS works, for both teachers and 
students. Insight was also gained by using the WRS in the 
role of a teacher and a student on different devices. A 
valuable exercise at this point, was the production of the 
flow charts shown in Figure 3. It shows the different 
elements of the teachers interface. These helped in 
visualizing and understanding the system as a whole.  
The second step required the extraction of all the English 
language text used in the interface. This was very useful as it 
served to highlight all the words and phrases used in the 
interface. A document was at this point produced to manage 
all the WRS’s interface text. An extract from this document 
is shown in Table I WRS Interface Text Translation. 
Language translators and developers maintain this document 
and it is used by developers to code the language into the 
WRS. 
     Developers add any new text used in the application to 
this document. The translators maintain the translations for 
each language. This makes it simpler to code each language 
into the localization files. A unique identifier (UID) is used 
to identify each pair of words or phrases. 
 
TABLE I.  WRS INTERFACE TEXT TRANSLATION 
UID 
English ةيبرعلا                         
1 
Wireless Response System ةيكهسلانا ةباجلاا واظن 
1_1 
Sign in 
 لوخدنا ميجست 
1_2 
Support ىعد 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

The translation involves analyses of each word and its 
use in context. This helped us to produce a more accurate 
translation for the Arabic version. 
The third step of this process required the table, to be 
coded into the application. Because the WRS will support 
several languages, each language will have its own folder 
and a file.  
This file will localize the application to one locale. With 
this structure the WRS will be able to support any additional 
languages that are added in the future. 
 
The final step of the translation process involved testing 
the Arabic interface. First a walk through test was done to 
ensure that all the English text was showing in the Arabic 
language. 
Then, a side by side comparison was made to see how the 
two interfaces looked. Figure 4 shows the student interface 
side by side in the two languages. The same review process 
was done for the teacher interface and an example is shown 
in Figure 5. 
 
Support
 
Exit
 
Sign in
 
Wireless Response System 
 
language
 
English
 
Arabic
 
Chinese 
 
Polish   
 
No
 
yes
 
Existing Users 
 
Username
 
Password
 
Login
 
New users
 
Username
 
Password
 
Email
 
Discipline
 
Affiliation
 
Occupation 
 
Login successfully 
 
Discipline 
 
C Xdir. 2010-2012 V.2-2
 
Submit 
 
Login
 
Current Session 
 
Results
 
Home 
 
Support
 
 1.   
  “Question Type”  
Asking student questions 
 
Yes, No, Do not Know
 
True, False, Do not Know 
 
Alphabetic choice from 3-20 
 
 2. 
“User input contents” 
Input a question for multiple choices 
 
Upload questions from your system:
 
Attach an image 
 
3.     
 “Process control” 
Time:
 
Sound: 
 
Start 
 
Stop
 
Pause 
 
Restart
 
Support
 
Display 
 
Pie
 
Legend
 
Column
 
Grid
 
 search by
 
Year
 
Month 
 
Week
 
Day
 
Support
 
Save Results to File 
 
*.txt
 
*.Pdf
 
*.xls
 
*.csv
 
 
Figure 3.  WRS Teacher Interface Elements . 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
English  
Arabic 
 
 
Figure 4.  WRS Student Interface English and Arabic. 
 
B. Testing and Evaluation of the WRS 
Both the student and the teacher Arabic language 
interfaces were tested. A sample of thirty Arabic speakers 
was used to test the WRS. These users were selected from 
the international student community at the University of 
Huddersfield. While all of them were students, some of them 
were also teachers in their home countries. This enabled 
them to understand and test the WRS from both the student 
and teacher perspective. All the testers were new to the WRS 
and had not used it before. 
      A test script was produced outlining several test cases, to 
test both the student and teacher interfaces. Each tester was 
asked to complete the test cases and provide feedback. 
Testers were asked for any comments or feedback they 
wished to make about the test they had just performed. The 
testers were also asked to evaluate the interfaces, in terms of 
their functionality and usability. 
   The testing environment consisted of a Laptop (PC or 
Apple), iPhone Smart phones, and iPod or iPad tablet 
computers. 
 
English  
 
Arabic 
 
Figure 5.  User Testing of WRS’s Teacher Interface, Functionality and Usability. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

C. Test Cases  
We used test cases to test specific elements of the teacher 
and student applications. Table II shows the test cases we 
used to test the teacher interface. Some of the insights gained 
from this testing are shown in the test results column. Table 
III, on the other hand, shows the test cases used to test the 
student interface of WRS. 
D. Testing the Teachers Application  
In the teacher application interface, functionality and 
usability was tested. The results are presented in Figure 6 
below. A few interesting points emerged from this testing. 
For example, on the results screen, testers found that the 
charts were very useful for viewing the responses from the 
students. However, they found that the date alone was not an 
efficient or effective way to search past tests and results. 
They rated this as below average and suggested that 
improvement could be made to facilitate better searching. 
They also felt that teachers would benefit better if more data 
was collected for each test giving them greater insight into 
the progress attained by students and the effectiveness of the 
teaching material used.  
All the users tested the functionality of the teachers’ 
application. This included the installation and the launching 
of the WRS-Teachers Application, which was done 
successfully by all the testers. They gave this an average and 
an above average rating. 
Signing in was also completed by all the testers. Some of 
the testers suggested the interface could be made simpler, by 
combining the two “Existing Users” and “New User” 
dialogue boxes into one box. Testers suggested that, as the 
“New User” interface would only ever be used once by a 
new user, it should not be shown separately or take up so 
much space on the screen. They pointed out that combining 
them would make the interface less cluttered.  
TABLE II.  TEST CASES USED TO TEST WRS ARABIC TEACHERS APPLICATION AND RESULTS 
No 
Test Case 
Test Result 
1 
Application 
Launch 
All the testers managed to successfully launch the application and select the Arabic 
interface. 
2 
Sign In 
All the testers signed in successfully. Some testers noted that they could not recover 
usernames or passwords to their email addresses. Some of them also pointed out that the 
interface could be improved by combining the existing user and new user’s login boxes 
into one box. 
3 
Current Session 
 Some of the users noted that  the start and stop buttons on the current session screen, 
was Left-to-Right (LTR) and not Right-to-Left (RTL). It was also felt by many testers 
that this interface was a little confusing. Partly because of the mouse over action that 
brings elements into view. These are not shown by default. Some users had to use trial 
and error to discover how to navigate this screen. 
Also, they pointed out that the work flow in this screen was not intuitive, especially for 
the multiple choice questions. 
4 
Result 
Many of the testers commented on the graphs. They noted how it could rapidly inform 
the teacher of the student’s comprehension. They felt this rapid feedback empowered the 
teacher allowing them to adapt the teaching material and testing to focus on specific 
areas. 
5 
Home 
All the testers managed to complete this test case successfully. 
6 
Support 
Testers commented that the font size was too small. The text was not aligned properly to 
the right hand side making it difficult to read. 
7 
Exit 
This test case was completed successfully by all the testers. Some commented that the 
confirmation dialogue box was not necessary. 
 
TABLE III.  
TEST CASES USED TO TEST WRS ARABIC STUDENTS APPLICATION AND RESULTS  
No 
Test Case 
Test Result 
1 
Application 
Launch 
The student application was launched successfully by all the testers and the Arabic 
interface was selected from the language drop down box. 
2 
Sign In 
All the testers signed in successfully.  
Testers suggested Discipline and Student ID was not secure enough for student logins 
and opined that a password would be more appropriate. They also rooted for an option 
for email recovery of lost passwords. 
3 
Respond to 
Questions 
Testers found this simple and easy to use. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
Figure 6.  User Testing of WRS Teacher Interface, Functionality and Usability. 
 
       Testers found the functionality for asking questions was 
limited. They would have liked more question types and due 
to this, they rated it as below average. The testers also rated 
the functionality for “Viewing Results” as below average. 
They suggested it could be improved, to show results for a 
time period for example, one term or one academic year. 
This would enable them to see students’ progress over a 
period of time. Currently the “Viewing Results” only shows 
the result test by test. 
    Testers found Support in the application was minimal for 
the users. This was reflected in the below average rating they 
gave to this. Some testers found the font difficult to read. 
They also suggested more support text could be offered in 
the help text. Our Arabic testers also rated the usability of the 
“Question Types” as below average saying this part of the 
interface could be improved to make it more usable. A 
further suggestion was that the Arabic interface would work 
more effectively if the question was presented in the 
interface alongside the responses 
      The User Input Content was rated as average. Feedback 
from testers suggested that this could be made more efficient. 
Users found the process control simple to use, enabling them 
to control the time allocated for a response to the question. 
The usability of this was rated as above average. Users found 
this very usable and easy to understand. 
     Users rated the efficiency of this interface as average. The 
ability to paste multiple questions into the system it was 
noted would increase the interface efficiency, while the 
ability to save and reuse old questions or adapt them into 
new questions would also improve the efficiency. 
Testers commented on Viewing Results, which they said 
could be improved. Many testers found the charts very 
useful. However, they commented that access to the 
historical results could be made easier and simpler, by giving 
users the option to search using additional criteria. Finally, 
the testing of the Content of Support in WRS identified 
problems with the Arabic font. Many users found this font 
difficult to read. 
E. Testing WRS Student Application  
The student applications interfaces, functionality and 
usability, was tested on smart phones, tablets and PCs and 
the results are shown in Figure 7. Our testers rated the 
interface as above average on the smart phones and tablets. 
Some of our testers suggested the interface while interactive, 
could be improved and made more responsive. They 
suggested that the time remaining to answer the question 
could be shown on the interface. 
Smartphone functionality was tested and the majority of 
testers found it was above average and excellent. All in all, 
testing showed that our users found the student interface 
could be used efficiently, effectively and interactively. 
 
 
Figure 7.  User Testing of WRS Student Interface, Functionality and 
Usability.  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

VII. CONCLUSION  AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Conclusion  
Internationalization and localization of WRS to the Arabic 
language has made it accessible to new users. It has also 
provided a new insight into how the application itself could 
be improved. 
Attention has been drawn to the following: 
1. Testing showed that WRS Arabic interface was 
usable by both students and teachers.  
2. Native Arabic users found the interfaces easy to 
use in the Arabic language. 
3. Improvements need to be made to some parts of the 
interface to help improve the layout, login and 
searching  for students’ past test results 
4. Testers found they needed more questions types to 
test students more effectively. 
5. Users expressed a need for more application help 
to explain how each interface should be used.  
6. Testers suggested that the students’ interface 
should show a countdown of the time remaining to 
answer the question. 
7. Student access to WRS could be made more secure 
by using a password in place of the current Student 
ID number. 
This process, of localizing the WRS to Arabic, has helped to 
pave the way for localization to other languages. It has also 
highlighted ways in which future versions of WRS and 
interfaces could be improved. 
B. Future Work  
Testing has been very valuable in providing feedback and 
insight into the WRS. The XDIR group will incorporate 
these into future versions of WRS. These will include: 
1. More question types. 
2. Improved interface layout and design in order to 
support RTL and LTR languages more effectively.  
3. The WRS interface workflow will be improved to 
help and aid future localization.  
4. The Current Session interfaces will be changed to 
only show what is needed when it is needed. This 
will improve WRS usability and aid future 
localization of the application and at the same time 
make the interface simpler to use. 
5. Future versions of the WRS will also support more 
languages in addition to English and Arabic, these 
will 
include: 
Italian, 
Romanian, 
Turkish, 
Indonesian, Polish and Mandarin Chinese with 
other languages being added as required. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author would like to sincere appreciation for the support 
and constructive discussions from Wei Guo, the Libyan 
embassy; for financial support and (XDIR) Research Group 
at the University of Huddersfield.  
 
REFERENCES 
]1[
 
A. Kurti, M. Milrad, F. Alserin, and J. Gustafsson, "Designing 
and implementing ubiquitous learning activities supported by 
mobile and positioning technologies," in the Ninth IASTED 
International Conference computers and Advanced Technology 
in Education, Lima, Peru, 2006. 
]2[
 
A. Al-Amoudi, H. AlMazrua, H. Al-Moaiqel, N. AlOmar, and S. 
Al-Koblan, "An Exploratory Study of Arabic Language Support 
in Software Project Management Tools," International Journal 
of Computer Science Issues (IJCSI), vol. 10, 201 3.  
]3[
 
N. Albalooshi, N. Mohamed, and J. Al-Jaroodi, "The challenges 
of Arabic language use on the Internet," in Internet Technology 
and Secured Transactions (ICITST), 2011 International 
Conference for, 2011, pp. 378-382. 
]4[
 
H. Crompton, "A historical overview of mobile learning: Toward 
learnercentered education," Handbook of mobile learning. 
Florence, KY: Routledge, p. 4, 2013. 
]5[
 
F. Manga and J. Lu, "An Investigation in the Impact of Mobile 
Learning on today’s Educational Environment," International 
Conference on e-Learning, e-Business, Enterprise Information 
Systems, and e-Government.EEE (2013). WorldComp 2013, 
2013. 
]6[
 
J. Lu, R. P. Pein, G. Hansen, K. L. Nielsen, and J. B. Stav, "User 
Centred Mobile Aided Learning System: Student Response 
System (SRS)," in Computer and Information Technology (CIT), 
2010 IEEE 10th International Conference on, 2010, pp. 2970-
2975. 
]7[
 
Z. Lu and I. Global, Learning with mobile technologies, 
handheld devices, and smart phones: Innovative methods: 
Information Science Reference, 2012. 
]8[
 
J. Lua, Z. Meng, G. Lu, and J. B. Stav, "A new approach in 
improving operational efficiency of wireless response system," in 
Computer and Information Technology (CIT), 2010 IEEE 10th 
International Conference on, 2010, pp. 2676-2683. 
]9[
 
J. Lu, "Student Response System (SRS)/Wireless Response 
System (WRS)–a Next-Generation Student Response System for 
Academia and Industry," 2011. 
]11[
 
B. Esselink, A practical guide to localization vol. 4: John 
Benjamins Publishing, 2000. 
]11[
 
N. De Liso and R. Leoncini. (2010). Internationalization, 
Technological Change and the Theory of the Firm (1 ed.). 
Available: 
http://hud.eblib.com/patron/FullRecord.aspx?p=557254 
]12[
 
E. M. Del Galdo and J. Nielsen, International users interface: 
John Wiley & Sons ,Inc., 1996. 
]13[
 
P. Sandrini, "Website localization and translation," in EU-High-
Level Scientific Conference Series MuTra, 2005. 
]14[
 
S. Casteleyn, F. Daniel, P. Dolog, and M. Matera, Engineering 
Web Applications: Springer, 2009. 
]15[
 
M. A. Jimenez-Crespo ,Translation and Web Localization: 
Routledge, 2013. 
]16[
 
M. Kompf, "Usability and internationalization of information 
technology," Education and Information Technologies, vol. 11, 
pp. 187-189, 2006. 
]17[
 
N. Aykin, Usability and internationalization of information 
technology: CRC Press, 2004. 
]18[
 
G. P. International. (2013). The Arabic Language. Available: 
http://www.globalizationpartners.com/resources/arabic-
translation-quick-facts/the-arabic-writing-system.aspx 
]19[
 
A. Sawsaa, J. Lu, and Z. Meng, "Using an Application of Mobile 
and Wireless Technology in Arabic Learning System," Learning 
with Mobile Technologies, Handheld Devices and Smart Phones: 
Innovative Methods, p. 171, 2012. 
]21[
 
S. S. Adkins, "The 2012-2017 Middle East Mobile Learning 
Market," Ambient Insight Regional Report, 2013. 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

