Sustainable Knowledge Resources Supporting
Scientiﬁc Supercomputing for Archaeological and
Geoscientiﬁc Information Systems
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU),
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover,
North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN), Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents the results from an imple-
mentation of long-term sustainable knowledge resources, which
can be used for documentation, classiﬁcation, and structuring as
well as with scientiﬁc supercomputing resources for advanced
information systems. The paper discusses the current imple-
mentation of information structures and object representations
used with universal classiﬁcation and computation algorithms for
multi-disciplinary, dynamical knowledge discovery. It discusses
practical examples from archaeology and geosciences disciplines,
relying on the content, structure, and classiﬁcation from the
knowledge resources used with various case studies. The com-
bination of universal knowledge resources and computational
workﬂows based on High End Computing (HEC) resources and
Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) allows for the goal of suc-
cessful creation of long-term sustainable Integrated Information
and Computing System components.
Keywords–Integrated
Systems;
Scientiﬁc
Supercomputing;
Sustainability; Knowledge Resources; Information Systems; UDC;
Archaeology; Geosciences; High Performance Computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The amount of data as well as the complexity of informa-
tion keeps steadily increasing. The developments of the last
decades have shown that for a continuous positive progress not
only the efﬁciency must increase, the more, developments must
be made long-term sustainable, too. As the knowledge gathered
during generations should be considered the most important
component to the overall success we need universal knowledge
resources that can handle documentation as well as universal
classiﬁcation and structuring. The knowledge resources should
not only be traditional collections as with digital libraries
[1] and isolated content [2] but, despite any challenges be
accessible with scientiﬁc supercomputing resources in order
to create advanced information systems and implement and
improve workﬂows and recommended operation [3], [4].
So, this decisively contributes to the goal of successful
creation of long-term sustainable Integrated Information and
Computing System components. The created features of the
knowledge resources presented for the ﬁrst time in this pa-
per contain new practical concepts for information structures
and object representations. The objects and derivatives, de-
scribed in this paper, can be used with universal classiﬁcation
and computation algorithms for multi-disciplinary, dynamical
knowledge discovery. This paper presents examples from ar-
chaeology and geosciences disciplines, resulting from practical
case studies on structure and workﬂow modularisation, within
the GEXI collaborations [5]. These are part of a multi-
disciplinary knowledge structure. Further, the implementation
of the knowledge objects is suitable to be used very ﬂexibly
with workﬂows on HEC resources, e.g., with Integrated Infor-
mation and Computing System (IICS) components [6]. Multi-
disciplinary knowledge resources are used to resemble and
document of any information available. As the requirements
for complexity can become arbitrary high, compute resources
have to be used for any more advanced applications. Creating
workﬂows based on the multi-disciplinary knowledge matrix
therefore requires highly performant resources. The structure
of the knowledge objects has to support the modularisation
for application scenarios where the workﬂow has to allow
highly efﬁcient implementations itself. The applicability for
parallelisation of the contributing algorithms with the complex
knowledge trees has therefore been analysed with the case
studies. The motivation for investigating in the efﬁciency
and modularisation of the knowledge trees is the increased
potential for drastical improvements of the Quality of Data
(QoD) with the result matrix, which contributes to advanced
cognition within the multi-disciplinary context.
This paper is organised as follows. Sections II and III
introduce with sustainability and vitality of knowledge-based
architectures and main issues of complexity. Sections IV and
V present a practically used classiﬁcation approach to the
challenges. Sections VI and VII describe the new concept of
object carousels, the discovery of “missing links”, workﬂow,
and computation demands. Sections VIII and IX discuss the
lessons learned and summarise conclusions and future work.
II.
SUSTAINABILITY AND VITALITY
Data mining is not only an analysis step of knowledge
discovery in databases based on informatics but much more
general in data pools. It is an inter-disciplinary as well as multi-
disciplinary ﬁeld of many sciences and computer science.
It means discovering patterns in data pools using methods
implementing statistics, classiﬁcation, artiﬁcial intelligence,
learning and many more based on knowledge resources.
The process targets to extract information from knowledge
resources and gaining content and context, e.g., based on
structure and references, in order to prepare for further use.
Sustainable long-term strategies have to combine operation,
services, and especially the knowledge resources. With the
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

available systems components, we have Resources Oriented
Architectures (ROA), Services Oriented Architectures (SOA),
and “Knowledge Oriented Architectures” (KOA) in addition
[7]. For long-term operation, all three must be obtained from
the creation and operation. Considering the entirety of aspects
necessary for a successful long-term change management with
future information technology structures. Nevertheless, the
KOA is the most important complement as it contains the
highest percentage of the overall investments for the results
and the data that may even not be reproducible later on.
III.
COMPLEX KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CASE
The knowledge resources created can integrate any object.
These objects can be described with universal classiﬁcation,
handled with phonetic algorithms [8], [9], and can refer
to external resources. The overall big data challenges, data
intensive volume, variability, velocity and for future scenarios
especially data vitality, meaning long-term documentation,
usability, and accessibility can be handled in a scalable, mod-
ular way. Further, the components created are considered to
become objects of sustainable knowledge resources, for long-
term persistent big data vitality of documentation, processing,
analysis, and evaluation. The created solution for long-term
use meets a number of attributes, e.g., it should be generic,
superior, adaptable, ﬂexible, seminal sustainable. In summary,
these combined vital features are called “eonic”.
IV.
KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CLASSIFICATION SUPPORT
The operated knowledge resources, based on the LX Foun-
dation Scientiﬁc Resources [8], incorporate UDC classiﬁcation
for any discipline and purpose, e.g., for knowledge discovery
and workﬂows. Practical summarising excerpt subsets for
speciﬁc disciplines are given in Tables I to II.
Table I.
ARCHAEOLOGY KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CLASSIFICATION.
UDC Code
Description
UDC902
Archaeology
UDC903
Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
UDC904
Cultural remains of historical times
UDC”63”
Archaeological, prehistoric, protohistoric periods, ages
UDC56
Palaeontology
UDC55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC711.42
Kinds of town, locality, settlement
UDC720.32
Ancient architecture
Table II.
VOLCANOES KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES CLASSIFICATION.
UDC Code
Description
UDC532
Fluid mechanics in general.
UDC550.93
Geochronology. Geological dating. . . .
UDC551
General geology. Meteorology.
UDC551.1
General structure of the Earth
UDC551.2
Internal geodynamics (endogenous processes)
UDC551.21
Vulcanicity. Vulcanism. Volcanoes. Eruptive phenomena.
UDC551.23
Fumaroles. Solfataras. Geysers. Hot springs. Mofettes.
UDC551.24
Geotectonics
UDC551.26
Structural-formative zones and geological formations
UDC551.4
Geomorphology. Study of the Earth’s physical forms
UDC551.44
Speleology. Caves. Fissures. Underground waters
UDC551.462
Submarine topography. Sea-ﬂoor features
UDC551.588
Inﬂuence of environment on climate
UDC551.7
Historical geology. Stratigraphy
UDC551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC552.2
General petrography. Classiﬁcation of rocks
The UDC sets have been used with the presented com-
putation. UDC [10] currently provides around 70000 entries
in about 100 top classes, whereas the UDC Summary [11]
provides a selection of more than 2000 classes. The multi-
lingual support lists translations in ﬁfty languages [12]. UDC
classiﬁcations have been integrated with tens of thousands of
knowledge objects [9] which are a base for each computation.
V.
COPING WITH THE CHALLENGES
A. Modular components for geoscientiﬁc applications
Complex geophysical exploration is an explicit big data
problem. Data locality and data movements are of essential
importance. Therefore, data handling does take longer a time
than the compute intervals. Due to the short intervals for
licensing and the high costs even the time efﬁciency has to be
increased. This can be supported by parallel techniques [13].
In many multi-disciplinary cases, e.g., explicitely shown with
the case studies [6], [8], the more with growing importance
of evaluation processes, the task- and thread-parallelity has to
be increased both. The data in geosciences and in associated
natural sciences contains the most valuable information be-
cause many of these natural processes change in geological
time intervals. Imaging for oil and gas is one of the most de-
manding tasks in computational sciences. It requires scale-out
architectures, the processing and simulation are computation
intensive as well as data intensive. The data provides long-
term challenges on knowledge and resources to researchers
and industry because of expenses on data collection and long-
term usability.
B. Rising requirements on quantity and computation
As soon as even a selected subset of the available clas-
siﬁcation is integrated with a subset of detailed knowledge
resources, the requirements for computing and interfaces are
rising drastically. The increasing demands for advanced scien-
tiﬁc computing are resulting from the huge number of relations
within the knowledge resources as well as a consequence of
the workﬂows, dynamical interaction, presentation, and visu-
alisation of results. The conditions for the optimal computing
architecture are deﬁned by the application scenario, not by the
knowledge resources themselves.
C. Quality for Quantity
For the discovery of a result matrix from a large quantity
of data, additional high quality resources can be used for
improving the quality of results deduced. The premise is that
appropriate workﬂows and algorithms will be applied. The
high quality knowledge resources have been used as “Quality
for Quantity” (Q4Q), in order to build any additional missing
references in the quantity data. With these HEC and discovery
processes, big data means volume regarding storage, means
variability regarding workﬂow processes, means velocity re-
garding instances, and vitality regarding knowledge resources.
VI.
OBJECT CAROUSELS
The organisation of the knowledge objects can be arbitrary
complex. Many cases can be described in a simpliﬁed way like
a mindmap, which has been used for introducing a new sym-
bolic representation named “object carousels”. The knowledge
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

objects build a kind of dynamical molecules. These molecules
have connectors and references. These connectors can connect
with other knowledge objects by computing references from
any number of directions. The process reminds of rotating
branches of trees, rings, and multi-dimensional objects for
ﬁnding pluggable connections. The creation of object carousels
does have the beneﬁt, that knowledge discovery workﬂows can
be implemented very scalable, using various algorithms for
connecting trees. For example, full text references can be used
between any carousels in order to compute a result matrix.
A. Object mapping
The mapping in Figure 1 shows an excerpt for the vol-
canology context on terrestrial volcanism calculated from the
knowledge resources. These allow to calculate relations via
ﬂexible, user-deﬁned algorithms.
Volcanism
Volcano
Campi
Flegrei
Samples
Vesuvius
Samples
La
Soufri`ere
Samples
Mt. Scenery
Samples
Plate tectonics
Lava
1st level:
Volcano
1st level: Plate tectonics
2nd level: Mt. Scenery
3rd level:
Samples
(Realia)
Figure 1.
Object carousel for terrestrial “volcanism” context with subset of
computed volcano references and examples of levels object relations.
The ﬁgure shows an excerpt of the direct relations by
quality of relations and quality of objects. The colours visualise
object groups or attributes within each ﬁgure. Any object or
attribute can dock-in at any placed deﬁned by the workﬂows,
not depending on the grouping. Nevertheless, the decision
within the workﬂow maybe assisted by the group information.
The knowledge resources can contain objects and relations as
well as classiﬁcation entries. The case study example being
the base for illustrating the different aspects in all the next
sections follows a discovery path (3D), starting discovery on
object and realia references in the volcanology dimension.
B. Information and object usage
In a non-promoted environment, a knowledge search engine
showed signiﬁcant requirements with up to over 500,000
application- and several million object-requests per day. The
study on object usage from international public interest groups
done in a time interval from 1994 to 2012 [5] revealed com-
parable large numbers of accesses and complexity. The object
mapping is a basic part, whereas the algorithmic workﬂow
for improving the quality can be as expendable as using every
information available with each step recursively and iteratively.
The computation share can increase to hours per discovery
instance but computation can be done for any number of
carousels in parallel. The KOA opens ﬂexible support for task
and process parallelity for using objects and object groups or
clusters.
C. Case study views
Suitable views for volcanoes are: Type (of volcano, coarse
categories), date on timeline, size (height). For craters respec-
tive views are: Type (of crater, fragmentary), date on timeline,
size (diameter). An object carousel generated for volcano
types, shows the knowledge resources groups (Figure 2).
Volcano
type
Complex
volcano
Compound
volcano
Somma
volcano
Submarine
volcano
Subglacial
volcano
Unspeciﬁed
type
Strato
volcano
Shield
volcano
Explosion
crater
Caldera
Tuff cone
Scoria
cone
Pyroclastic
cone
Cinder
cone
Lava dome
Volcanic
ﬁeld
Hydroth.
ﬁeld
Fumarole
ﬁeld
Maar
Fissure
vent
Figure 2.
Object carousel for volcano and type references computed for
terrestrial volcanism, providing volcano type references.
An evaluation of the association that users have, showed
that the criteria “date” and “location” are most prominent with
objects if the workﬂow approaches from the “surface (of the
earth)” view. Therefore, mapping and timelining will be the
natural result.
D. Improving quality within the workﬂow
The resources, workﬂow, and classiﬁcation are essential
for a high level of usability quality of results. The elaborate
workﬂow process for improving the quality of results when
calculating a result matrix from a knowledge base is:
a)
Calculate associator attributes and classes,
b)
Compute on a base with large numbers of objects,
c)
Evaluate detailed classiﬁcation information,
d)
Compute for a reduction of numbers of objects,
e)
Create suggestions and recommendations.
The ﬁrst computation block (b) is needed for considering more
objects when applying the further steps afterwards. Here, the
classiﬁcation is essential for improving the quality for the
respective selection process. The second computation block
(d) is necessary for improving a selection process for the
target audience or services. The selection processes can be
signiﬁcantly supported by high quality knowledge resources
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

(Q4Q), e.g., via the authored, classiﬁed, and audited content,
with regular expression search, and phonetical algorithms.
E. Improving coverage: Dark data
In analogy to “dark matter” and “dark energy”, there exists
“dark information” and to an uncertain extent an unknown
driving force in knowledge creation, even building “dark
service” provided via “dark resources”. Those information re-
sources are not wider accessible and it is not known where the
intention of gathering and creation. Anyway, this information
must be considered for any holistic long-term concept as it
provides an important factor for the overall knowledge and
will stay in existance despite of any development. With the
concept of long-term knowledge resources the information
has been integrated in order to extend the base for any
knowledge discovery. Considered methods for integration of
resources are, e.g., references, description or caches. This
further includes seamless updating of information, licensing
of resources, dynamical use of data as well as provisioning of
deﬁned quality and reliability for sources and complements.
VII.
DISCOVERY OF MISSING LINKS
From the disciplines of humanities and archaeology, the
directed tree spanning from settlements to used materials
will show up with a practically deﬁned depth. On the other
hand, starting from natural sciences a directed tree spanning
to materials associated with processes will deliver a natural
sciences path. Along with the different paths, the genetic
connectors of both carousels will show up with links from
both directions. The connecting links, or short “connections”
from the directed search do open new associations that can be
used to discover the overall knowledge much deeper with new
facets and quality, which provide multi-disciplinary links that
have been missing in non-genetic discovery.
In general, any kind of tree path can be generated from
the knowledge resources using a workﬂow and any number
of carousels can be discovered for connections. The follow-
ing example shows a simple two-carousel case (Figure 3).
Computing the object carousels connections is shown for a
historical city carousel and an environment object carousel.
The trees show a subset of computed references computed by
the workﬂow within the knowledge resources. The depth of the
trees may by different for the computation. The connections are
considered as soon as they lead to a deﬁned conformity. In that
case, deﬁned conformity can mean comparable or identical.
The example shows two trees, one from archaeology and one
from natural sciences disciplines. For both, at a certain branch
leading to object referring to stone material, which is shown
by the highlighted red bullets.
A. Computing connections on modular objects
Figure
3
shows
the
principle
used
for
computing
connections with object carousels. It depicts one ﬁtting
branch,
within
archaeology
and
geosciences
associated
objects. Starting with the objects Historical City and
Environment (identiﬁed by large golden bullets) and the
linking objects “stone” the computed carousels show trees
with a subset of references. The workﬂow attributes have been
choosen to provide no tree depth restriction for computation.
The two ﬁtting connection lines within the object carousels
of this example are highlighted in a three-dimensional
representation: Roman : Pompeji : Napoli : Architecture
: Volcanic stone
and
Volcanology : Catastrophe :
: Volcanic stone. In the sample workﬂow the carousel
connections are calculated via non-explicit references of
comparable objects (red objects) from knowledge resources
within trees. In addition, the red circle does mark those
objects at the same depth level, including the ﬁtting object
term for historical city and environment Volcanic stone.
The excerpt of associated multi-disciplinary branch level
objects are Limestone, Impact feature, and Climate
change.The method for creation of non-explicit references
can be deﬁned in the workﬂow. Here, full text mining
and evaluation (red objects) has been used. For derivated
associations additional objects can be computed and extracted
in every branch as well as on all levels.
B. Connecting knowledge
Objects can be connected by various attributes. These may
be attributes associated with content as well as with context.
For example, relations for a volcano object can be connected
and triggered by a large variety of attributes. Table III shows
an excerpt of attributes and examples.
Table III.
ATTRIBUTES LINKING AND TRIGGERING VOLCANO OBJECTS
AND SELECTED EXAMPLES (EXCERPT).
Attribute
Example in Archaeology / Geosciences
Time
Events on timeline
Location
Volcano-impact-settlement locations
Physics
Earthquakes
Chemistry
Volcanic SO2 ejection
Geology
Earth crust, petrography
Catastrophes
Volcanic eruptions, Tsunamis
Etymology
Phlegra, Vesuvius
Cults, religions
Volcano gods
Artefacts
Archaeological objects, “Pompeji” events
Historic events
Volcano, climate, economy, revolution
Relations can refer to any multi-disciplinary topic, building
results from combination of information and generation of new
objects and references, e.g., visualisations and views.
C. Flexible support for HEC and dynamical discovery
The KOA architecture is based on a ﬂexible documentation
and development architecture [9] and integrated with the
case study implementations based on the Collaboration house
framework for disciplines, services, and resources [8]. Building
the tree paths as well as the discovery of connections in the
carousels can be done in parallel, comparable to a modelling
process. This way, while computing one tree it is possible to
follow connections into other disciplines’ branches interesting
for a workﬂow. The task parallel processes can be computed to
look ahead, dynamically discovering ﬁtting relations. On the
other hand it is possible to compute multiple trees and create
intermediate result matrices, which can be used for building
multi-disciplinary results. Referring objects for publicly avail-
able information can be integrated by dynamically building
associations from the knowledge resources as has currently
been done with search engine content, e.g., results from Google
or other dynamical sources.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Volcanology contexti
Non-explicit references
Full text mining and evaluation:
Classiﬁcation, keywords, synonyms, phonetic algorithms,
homophones, category lists, . . .
Historical City
Greek
Antipolis
Antibes
Athens
Athens
. . .
Roman
Altinum
Altino
Venice
Pompeji
Napoli
Pottery
Archit.
Volcanic
stone
Limestone
Geology
. . .
. . .
Environment
Geophysics
Catastrophe
Impact
feature
Volcanology
Catastrophe
Volcanic
stone
Climatology
Catastrophe
Climate
change
Figure 3.
Computing object carousel connections: Historical city and environment object carousels showing trees with a subset of computed references. In this
sample workﬂow the carousel links are calculated via non-explicit references of comparable objects (red) from knowledge resources within trees.
D. Workﬂow and computation demands
Table IV shows the resulting computation times (wall
clock) for straight and broadened application qualities. Straight
means calculating the result matrix directly from the plain data
available, including ranking. Broadened means using full text,
references, and available secondary context information, with
a wide spectrum of topics. It is possible to ﬂexibly support
the knowledge discovery workﬂow by any number and kind
of algorithms and communication. In this case classiﬁcation,
keywords, synonyms, phonetic algorithms, homophones, and
category lists have been used.
Table IV.
STRAIGHT AND BROADENED (SERIAL) APPLICATION
QUALITIES AND COMPUTATION TIMES PER WORKFLOW INSTANCE AND
REQUEST (RESTRICTED TO THREE INITIAL TERMS).
Item
Straight
Broadened
Number of terms (restricted for demo.)
3
3
Comparisons
≈ 90000
≈ 1090000
Selection processes
1540
16700
Intermediate results
420
5100
Final results (selected top 10)
10
10
Classiﬁcation evaluation time share
3 s
30 s
Keyword extraction time share
2 s
4 s
Fulltext support time share
4 s
22 s
Reference support time share
1 s
3 s
Phonetic support time share
3 s
8 s
Instance computation time
3 s
120 s
The example demonstrates the principle and tendency.
Starting a single workﬂow instance with a small number of
3 object terms (Figure 3), this statistically results in:
a)
Straight: Retrieval followed by 90000 comparisons,
delivers 30000 results, ranked to create a top 10.
b)
Broadened: This requires an additional 1 million com-
parisons per term and some 10000 comparisons on
more than one term as well as on subterms, it delivers
90000 results, which are ranked to create a top 10.
In an average of terms, b) results in 3 new top terms better
reﬂecting the context, which means a signiﬁcant improvement
of the quality of the result matrix. As Table IV shows, when
improving the quality, the compute time increases from about
3 seconds to 2 minutes. Over the time the resource usage
increases by about a factor of 50. Due to the structure of the
compute algorithms a part of the workﬂow processes can be
done in parallel before the ﬁnal result matrix is created. Other
advanced workﬂow processes, e.g., those processes where all
the intermediate results must be available before any decision
on the next step can be done, have to be chained for the
purpose of improving the quality. With parallel processing in
the above example the overall time can be reduced to about 30 s
on the same architecture if an increased number of resources
is available. Increasing the number of comparisons by adding
further sources for improving the quality of results increases
the requirements on resources more than linear referring to
the compute time. This is going ahead with a smaller amount
of numerical improvement for the top results. The knowledge
resources fully support this procedure. The broadened serial
and task parallel (dual-core processors) application qualities
per workﬂow instance and request are summarised in Table V.
Table V.
BROADENED SERIAL AND PARALLEL APPLICATION
QUALITIES PER WORKFLOW INSTANCE AND REQUEST (AS ABOVE).
Workﬂow
Broadened
Broadened
Item
Serial
Parallel
Number of terms (restricted for demo.)
3
3
Parallel resources (nodes)
1
10
Instance computation time
120 s
20 s
The resulting computation times per instance can be efﬁ-
ciently reduced exploiting parallelity of resources. Modular-
ising the knowledge resources into dynamical entity groups
of objects is very efﬁcient for a large number of requests
and resources available. This is especially interesting for any
wider economical and practical interactive use. The higher the
complexity of the single, even non-linear, workﬂow is, the less
efﬁcient are todays resources architectures.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

VIII.
DISCUSSION
Regarding the sustainability of the knowledge resources
support it has been practical to consider three main aspects
for creating sustainable KOA architectures.
1)
Scalability and efﬁciency: The workﬂow process can
be modularised and therefore can be implemented as
scalable and parallelised algorithms.
2)
Discovery and content: Big amounts of multi-
disciplinary information will always have to con-
sider inhomogeneous groups of information. With
the described method the barrier between the in-
homogeneous content, for example, between differ-
ent disciplines can be overcome. The knowledge
resources support structuring and modularising the
workﬂows to a deﬁned level. Any references that
might not already exist explicitely in the knowledge
resources can be suggested by a non-tree link. An
example is, computing full text comparisons between
the carousels from the available plain content of the
knowledge resources.
3)
Universal multi-disciplinarity: The knowledge re-
sources allow any number of dimensional space.
Besides that, the knowledge resources allow to use
multi-disciplinary clustering of objects, e.g., cluster-
ing of stones for an archaeological view as well as
for a petrographical view.
These features can be used for a ﬂexible dynamically
guided discovery. Besides the beneﬁts of very ﬂexible classi-
ﬁcation support, e.g., via UDC, expenses are that the creation
and operation do require intensive work.
IX.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Structuring and classiﬁcation with long-term knowledge re-
sources and UDC support have successfully provided efﬁcient
and economic base for an integration of multi-disciplinary
knowledge and IICS components, supporting archaeological
and geoscientiﬁc information systems. With these, the solution
is scalable, e.g., regarding references, resolution, and view
arrangements. The concept can be transferred to numerous
applications in a very ﬂexible way. The overall results on object
carousels and Q4Q workﬂows from the implementation and
case studies are:
•
The quality of data can be most efﬁciently improved
at the knowledge resources components.
•
The quantity of data can be increased by referencing
and intelligent discovery workﬂow algorithms.
•
The quantity of compute and storage resources is both
tightly linked with the quality of data and the quantity
of data and resources requirements.
The knowledge resources can be integrated into a steadily
improving system architecture storing data for successful cre-
ation of sustainable workﬂow deﬁnitions, meaning that the re-
sult matrix of requests can be stored for future use and evalua-
tion. This can be done in a non-incremental way, depending on
the environment of communication, computation, and storage
resources in order to provide an efﬁcient solution. Separate
snapshots of the knowledge resources allow to consider devel-
opments within time. Nevertheless, for service operation this
can result in very high requirements for resources. With the
presented object carousels an undeﬁned number of practical
workﬂows can be created on the knowledge resources. The
object carousels concept is part of the “tooth system” for long-
term documentation and algorithms and the exploitation of
supercomputing resources for use with future IICS.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to all national and international partners in
the GEXI cooperations for the innovative constructive work.
We thank the Science and High Performance Supercomput-
ing Centre (SHPSC) for long-term support of collaborative
research since 1997, including the GEXI developments and
case studies on archaeological and geoscientiﬁc information
systems. Thanks go to the scientiﬁc colleagues at the Institute
for Legal Informatics (IRI), Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, and
WWU M¨unster, as well as to the participants of the EULISP
Programme for proliﬁc discussion of scientiﬁc, legal, and
technical aspects over the last years.
REFERENCES
[1]
“WDL, World Digital Library,” 2013, URL: http://www.wdl.org [ac-
cessed: 2013-05-12].
[2]
“The Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR),” 2013, URL: http://www.
tdar.org [accessed: 2013-07-10].
[3]
Wissenschaftsrat, “ ¨Ubergreifende Empfehlungen zu Informationsin-
frastrukturen,” Wissenschaftsrat, Deutschland, Drs. 10466-11, Ber-
lin, 28.01.2011, 2011, URL: http://www.wissenschaftsrat.de/download/
archiv/10466-11.pdf [accessed: 2013-08-09].
[4]
di Maio, P., “A Global Vision: Integrating Community Networks
Knowledge,” Community Wireless Symposium, European Community,
EC Infoday, Barcelona, 5th October 2012, 2012, URL: http://people.
ac.upc.edu/leandro/misc/CAPS Paola.pdf [accessed: 2013-08-10].
[5]
“Geo Exploration and Information (GEXI),” 1996, 1999, 2010, 2013,
URL:
http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/rprojs/en/index.html#
GEXI [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[6]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Queueing Aspects of Integrated Information and
Computing Systems in Geosciences and Natural Sciences.
In-
Tech, 2011, pp. 1–26, Chapter 1, ISBN-13: 978-953-307-737-6, DOI:
10.5772/29337.
[7]
“ROA,
(Wikipedia),”
2013,
URL:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Resource-oriented architecture [accessed: 2013-09-19].
[8]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Enabling Dynamical Use of Integrated Systems
and Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources for Archaeological Infor-
mation Systems,” in Proc. of The Int. Conf. on Advanced Com-
munications and Computation (INFOCOMP 2012), October 21–26,
2012, Venice, Italy.
XPS, 2012, pp. 36–41, ISBN: 978-1-61208-226-
4, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=infocomp
2012 3 10 10012 [accessed: 2013-06-09].
[9]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Advanced
Scientiﬁc
Computing
and
Multi-
Disciplinary Documentation for Geosciences and Archaeology In-
formation,”
in
Proc.
of
The
Int.
Conf.
on
Advanced
Geo-
graphic
Information
Systems,
Applications,
and
Services
(GEO-
Processing 2013), February 24 – March 1, 2013, Nice, France.
XPS Press, 2013, pp. 81–88, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-251-6, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
geoprocessing 2013 4 10 30035 [accessed: 2013-05-26].
[10]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Consortium (UDCC),” 2013, URL:
http://www.udcc.org [accessed: 2013-04-07].
[11]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCS),” 2013, URL: http:
//www.udcc.org/udcsummary/php/index.php [accessed: 2013-04-07].
[12]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCS) Translations,”
2013,
URL:
http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/translation.htm
[ac-
cessed: 2013-04-07].
[13]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Application and High Performant Computation of
Fresnel Sections,” in Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf., Proc. of The 9th
ICNAAM, Halkidiki, Greece, AIP Press, vol. 1389, no. 1, 2011, pp.
1268–1271, ISBN: 978-0-7354-0956-9, URL: http://link.aip.org/link/
?APCPCS/1389/1268/1 [accessed: 2013-07-07].
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

