Density-Aware Multihop Clustering for Irregularly Deployed Wireless Sensor 
Networks 
 
Sangil Choi and Sangman Moh 
Dept. of Computer Engineering 
Chosun University 
Gwangju, South Korea 
E-mail: wo566@naver.com, smmoh@chosun.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—In wireless sensor networks (WSNs), reducing 
energy consumption in battery-operated sensor nodes is very 
important for prolonging network lifetime. In this paper, a 
density-aware multihop clustering (DAMC) protocol is 
proposed for irregularly deployed WSNs to reduce energy 
consumption. Every node determines the probability that it 
becomes a cluster head (CH) based on the node density around 
itself and, thus, CHs are distributed evenly over the network 
and every cluster has almost the same coverage area. And 
excessively redundant nodes are turned into sleep mode to save 
energy. Then, a multi-level tree in each cluster is constructed 
for low-energy multihop transmissions. In DAMC, the network 
lifetime can be significantly prolonged because the unnecessary 
redundant sensing and transmissions are reduced remarkably 
and the multihop transmissions are used rather than single-
hop transmissions in clusters. The performance study shows 
that the proposed DAMC outperforms the conventional 
clustering protocols in terms of network lifetime. 
Keywords-Wireless sensor network; irregular deployment; 
multihop clustering; energy consumption; network lifetime. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) are widely used for 
various applications such as environment monitoring, 
logistics, target tracking, military fields, home networks, and 
industrial diagnosis [1]. A WSN consists of many battery-
powered sensor nodes that sense their surroundings and send 
the sensed data to a sink node or base station. In many WSNs, 
the batteries are difficult to replace and, even if replaceable, 
the replacement cost is very high [2]. Thus, reducing energy 
consumption in sensor nodes is very important for 
prolonging network lifetime. 
In WSNs, routing is the process of forwarding data 
gathered by sensor nodes to the sink or base station. A WSN 
consists of a lot of sensor nodes, and it is inefficient for all 
the sensor nodes to send their sensed data to the single sink 
node or base station directly. Instead, the sensor nodes are 
grouped as clusters, and every sensor node sends its sensed 
data to its cluster head (CH). Then, the CHs send the 
aggregated data to the sink. Such a hierarchical routing is 
energy-efficient compared to the flat routing that each sensor 
delivers data sensed by itself to the sink directly. 
The typical hierarchical routing or clustering protocols 
are low energy adaptive clustering hierarchy (LEACH) [3], 
low-energy adaptive cluster hierarchy centralized (LEACH-
C) [4], hybrid, energy-efficient distributed (HEED) [5], base 
station controlled dynamic clustering protocol (BCDCP) [6], 
threshold sensitive energy-efficient sensor network protocol 
(TEEN) [7], hybrid protocol for efficient routing and 
comprehensive information retrieval in wireless sensor 
networks (APTEEN) [8], tree-based clustering (TBC) [9], 
and balanced clustering algorithm (BCA) [10]. The well 
known LEACH is the pioneer clustering protocol in WSNs, 
and TBC is the most advanced clustering scheme for 
uniformly deployed WSNs. The recently developed BCA is a 
single-hop clustering scheme targeted for irregularly 
deployed WSNs. The existing clustering algorithms will be 
reviewed in more detail in Section II. 
In many applications such as environment monitoring, 
sensor nodes can be irregularly deployed due to some limited 
condition. For example, when the sensors nodes are 
deployed over a mountain area by a helicopter, there is the 
possibility that they may be irregularly deployed. Such an 
irregularly deployed WSN, the sensing area or coverage area 
of each cluster varies region by region, i.e., there are many 
small-area clusters in dense regions and a few large-area 
clusters in sparse regions. In BCA [10], equal-size clustering 
is achieved even in irregularly deployed WSNs and the 
excessively redundant nodes are turned into sleep mode to 
save energy and to prolong network lifetime. In BCA, 
however, the single-hop transmission from sensor nodes to 
their CH needs more energy consumption compared to 
multihop transmission in a cluster because transmission 
power is exponentially increased with distance. On the other 
hand, TBC [9] implements a multi-level tree within a cluster 
enabling multihop transmission, but it does not take the 
irregular deployment into consideration resulting in severely 
conflicted 
transmissions 
and 
unnecessary 
energy 
consumption in dense regions. 
In this paper, a density-aware multihop clustering 
(DAMC) protocol is proposed for irregularly deployed 
sensor networks to reduce energy consumption and prolong 
network lifetime. The node density in this paper is defined as 
the number of nodes within the node’s sensing range divided 
by the node’s sensing area. During the initial network 
configuration, every node calculates the node density and 
determines the probability that it becomes a CH based on the 
node density so that CHs are distributed evenly over the 
network area and every cluster has almost the same coverage 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

area. Excessively redundant nodes are turned into sleep 
mode to save energy. Then, a multi-level tree in each cluster 
is constructed for low-energy multihop transmissions. In the 
proposed DAMC, the network lifetime can be significantly 
prolonged because the unnecessary redundant sensing and 
transmissions are reduced remarkably and the multihop 
transmissions are used rather than single-hop transmissions 
in clusters. 
According to the simulation results, the proposed DAMC 
outperforms the conventional clustering protocols by up to 
70 percent in terms of network lifetime in the given 
simulation setting. The network lifetime in our performance 
study is defined as the time duration until half of the sensor 
nodes die due to the energy depletion of battery. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In the 
following section, the existing clustering protocols are 
reviewed in detail. In Section III, the operating principles 
and characteristics of the proposed DAMC protocol are 
discussed step by step. In Section IV, the performance of 
DAMC is evaluated via extensive computer simulation and 
compared to the conventional schemes. Finally, the paper is 
concluded in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
For more than a decade, many clustering algorithms 
based on randomness have been studied. Since the pioneer 
clustering protocol LEACH was introduced [3], more 
advanced clustering algorithms have been proposed so far 
[4]-[10]. In this section, they are reviewed with respect to 
major characteristics and improvements. 
A. LEACH 
In the LEACH protocol [3], each round consists of set-up 
phase and steady-state phase. Clusters are formed during the 
set-up phase, and the sensed data are periodically delivered 
to the sink through CHs during the steady-state phase. 
In LEACH, CHs are elected probabilistically every round. 
Every sensor node generates a random number between zero 
and one and, then, it becomes a CH if the generated number 
is less than the calculated threshold value. For a node n, the 
threshold value T(n) at the r-th round is calculated by 









otherwise
,0
if 
,
(  mod 1 )
1
( )
G
n
p
r
p
p
T n

where the given parameter p is the probability that a sensor 
node becomes a CH and G is the set of sensor nodes that 
have not been chosen as a CH for 1/p rounds. If a node n has 
not been chosen as a CH for the last 1/p rounds, T(n) is 
calculated by (1) and, if the generated random number is less 
than T(n), the node becomes a CH at the current round; 
otherwise, T(n) is zero and the node n is not elected as a CH 
at the current round. 
Once CHs are chosen according to the above procedure, 
every CH broadcasts that it has becomes a CH. Then, sensor 
nodes send a join message to the nearest CH based on the 
received signal strength of the broadcast messages. 
In the steady-state phase after cluster formation, sensor 
nodes send the sensed data to their CHs periodically in 
accordance with the TDMA (Time Division Multiple 
Access) schedule assigned by their CHs. CHs aggregate the 
received data and send the aggregated data to the sink node. 
Such a series of procedural steps are repeated every 
round. That is, the CHs are rotated per round because they 
consume more energy than normal sensor nodes. This makes 
all the nodes consume energy as evenly as possible, resulting 
in increased network lifetime. However, when sensor nodes 
are irregularly deployed over the network area, the balanced 
energy consumption is not possible due to unbalanced 
clustering. 
B. TBC 
In the TBC protocol, a multi-level tree is constructed in a 
cluster, in which the CH is the root node [9]. The CH is 
elected in the same manner as in the LEACH protocol. The 
broadcast and join messages are also similar to those in 
LEACH, which are sent by CHs and normal sensor nodes, 
respectively. Unlike LEACH, however, the location 
information of the sensor node is included in the join 
message. 
By receiving the join messages from sensor nodes, the 
CH finds the farthest sensor node, and the distance between 
the CH and the farthest sensor node is denoted as dmax. The 
maximum distance dmax is divided by the tree depth , where 
 is also called tree height or the maximum level of the tree. 
Therefore, the average transmission distance davg between the 
node and its parent node in the tree can be represented by 

max .

d avg  d

The CH is at level 0 in the tree and member nodes are at 
the specific level according to the distance from the CH. 
Figure 1 shows an example of constructing a tree in TBC 
when  is 3. Once the cluster is divided into  concentric 
circles as shown in Figure 1, each sensor node selects an 
upper-level node with the minimum distance from the node 
itself as its parent node. Finally, a single tree is generated. 
 
 
Figure 1.  An example tree in TBC when  = 3. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

In a cluster, the multihop transmission through the multi-
level tree from sensor nodes to the CH reduces energy 
consumption in comparison to single-hop transmission 
because transmission power is exponentially increased with 
distance. Also, the energy consumption is distributed over 
the network. As in LEACH, however, the unbalanced 
clustering causes unbalanced energy consumption over the 
network if sensor nodes are irregularly deployed. In addition, 
if there is an error or failure at the parent node, the messages 
from its children nodes cannot be delivered. 
C. BCA 
In the BCA protocol [10], every cluster area is almost the 
same even when sensor nodes are deployed irregularly over 
the network area. The balanced clustering is achieved by 
electing the CH on the basis of relative node density. For a 
node n, the relative node density D(n) is given by dividing 
node density by network density, where the node density is 
the ratio of the number of nodes within the node’s sensing 
range over the node’s sensing area and the network density is 
the ratio of the total number of nodes in the network over the 
network area. Therefore, D(n) can be represented by 

,
/
/
/
)
/(
)
(
2
2
A
R
N
F
A
N
R
F
D n





where F is the number of nodes within the node’s sensing 
range, N is the total number of nodes in the network, R is the 
sensing range, and A is the network area. 
The CH is selected according to a new threshold taking 
the D(n) into consideration. That is, for a node n, the new 
threshold value 
( )
~ n
T
 at the r-th round is calculated by 

1),
( )
1
( ) (
( )
~( )



D n
N
mT n
T n
T n

where T(n) is the same threshold value calculated in (1), N is 
the total number of nodes in the network, and m is the 
number of living nodes in the network. 
In the region where the node density is high, 
( )
~ n
T
is 
decreased compared to T(n) and, thus, a less number of CHs 
are selected every round. This results in balanced clustering 
even when sensor nodes are irregularly deployed. After 
cluster formation, if the number of nodes in a cluster exceeds 
the average number of nodes per cluster in the network, the 
randomly chosen excessive nodes in the cluster are remained 
sleep every round. That is, the nodes not included in clusters 
in dense regions are remained sleep every round. However, 
when sensor nodes are regularly deployed in the network 
area, BCA incurs extra overhead for calculating the node 
density unnecessarily. 
D. Other Clustering Protocols 
LEACH-C [4] is a centralized version of LEACH. That is, 
the base station elects cluster heads and forms clusters. All 
nodes in the network send a message including position and 
residual energy information to the base station. Based on the 
information, the base station selects cluster heads and divides 
all nodes to the clusters. Then, the base station broadcasts the 
information of clusters to all the nodes which are deployed in 
the network area. 
HEED [5] uses some values which take into account the 
nodes residual energy for cluster formation. A node with 
more residual energy can be elected as a cluster head for 
prolonging network lifetime. If candidates for the cluster 
head have the same residual energy, then their transmission 
costs are compared. 
In BCDCP [6], the complex calculations are assigned to 
the base station as in LEACHC. In cluster formation, base 
station elects a candidate set of cluster heads to determine 
cluster heads. In this scheme, cluster heads send aggregated 
messages to the base station on a multi-hop basis without 
direct transmission. 
In TEEN [7], sensor nodes manage the threshold data 
reactively. The process which excludes the threshold value is 
equal to LEACH. The cluster formation process in TEEN is 
the same as that in LEACH. After cluster formation, cluster 
heads transmit the parameters of the data, the hard threshold 
(HT) value, and the soft threshold (ST) value to their 
member nodes. All nodes collect and transmit data when the 
value exceeds the HT value first. After exceeding HT, nodes 
collect and transmit data only when the measured data 
exceeds ST. 
APTEEN [8] combines the advantages of LEACH and 
TEEN. As a hybrid protocol, APTEEN unites the data 
transmission according to the threshold value of TEEN and 
the periodic data transmission of LEACH. After cluster 
formation, the cluster heads transmit the threshold value and 
parameters that include the TDMA schedule time to the 
member nodes. 
More recently, some works on clustering have been 
reported in the literature [11-13] even though they do not 
achieve a major quantum jump. They mainly focus on the 
improvement of energy efficiency because the energy 
efficiency is one of the most important design criteria for 
prolonging network lifetime in battery-operated wireless 
sensor networks. In addition, they do not take the irregular 
deployment of sensor nodes into consideration yet. 
III. 
DENSITY-AWARE MULTIHOP CLUSTERING 
In 
this 
section, 
the 
operating 
principles 
and 
characteristics of the proposed DAMC protocol are discussed 
in detail. CH selection, sleep node selection, tree 
construction, and sensing and data transmission are presented 
step by step. As in TBC [9], it is assumed that each node has 
the location information of itself and it can adjust its 
transmission power depending on the distance to its receiver. 
A. Cluster Head Selection 
For density-aware clustering in an irregularly deployed 
WSN, DAMC considers the node density for cluster 
formation as in BCA [10]. As mentioned in Section I, the 
node density in this paper is defined as the number of nodes 
within the node’s sensing range divided by the node’s 
sensing area. During the initial network configuration just 
after network deployment, every sensor node calculates the 
node density and determines the probability that it becomes a 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

CH based on the node density. As a result, CHs are 
distributed evenly over the network area. This means that 
every cluster has almost the same coverage area. 
The number of CHs is decided in accordance with the 
probability that a sensor node becomes a CH. Usually, the 
probability is initially set up when sensor nodes are deployed. 
Just after CHs are probabilistically chosen, every CH 
broadcasts that it has become a CH. Each sensor node can 
receive multiple broadcast messages from multiple CHs and 
calculate their received signal strength. Then, each sensor 
node sends a join message to the nearest CH based on the 
received signal strength of the broadcast messages. By doing 
so, cluster membership is determined and every sensor node 
belongs to a cluster. However, the number of nodes in a 
cluster varies cluster by cluster because the node density 
differs region by region in the irregularly deployed WSN. 
B. Sleep Node Selection 
Immediately after CHs are selected, some nodes in 
densely populated clusters should be turned into sleep mode 
to reduce unnecessary energy consumption and severely 
conflicted transmissions in densely deployed regions. That is, 
if the number of nodes in a cluster exceeds the average 
number of nodes per cluster in the network, the randomly 
chosen excessive nodes in the cluster remain in sleep mode. 
The sleep nodes are randomly chosen every round. 
As a matter of fact, the number of sleep nodes in a cluster 
is recalculated depending on the number of living nodes as 
the number of dead nodes is increased over time. That is, the 
number of sleep node in a cluster, 
)
~( ,
S u m
, is calculated by 
c
m
u
S u m

) 
( ,

and 










otherwise
,0
if ( . )
,
)
( ,
)
~( ,
L
S u m
N
m
S u m
S u m

where u is the number of nodes in a cluster, m is the number 
of living nodes in the network, c is the expected number of 
clusters, N is the total number of nodes in the network, and L 
is the minimum number of living nodes in a cluster for 
network operation. 
After the CH selects the sleep nodes randomly, it 
broadcasts the identifiers of sleep nodes to all member nodes. 
Then, the sleep nodes go into sleep mode during the round. 
C. Tree Construction 
For multihop clustering of the selected member nodes 
without sleep nodes in a cluster, a multi-level tree is 
constructed in a cluster as in [9], in which the CH is the root 
node. When each sensor node sends a join message to the 
nearest CH during CH selection, the location information of 
the sensor node is also included in the join message. Once 
the cluster is divided into  concentric circles by the CH, 
where  is tree height, the CH informs its active members of 
the necessary information for parent node selection. Then, 
each sensor node selects an upper-level node with the 
minimum distance from the node itself as its parent node. 
After tree construction, the CH broadcasts the TDMA 
schedule to all the active member nodes. Figure 2 shows an 
example tree composed of 16 active nodes in a 20-node 
cluster when tree height () is set to 3. 
The multi-level tree can reduce energy consumption 
significantly because a series of multihop short-distance 
transmissions consume much less energy than a single-hop 
long-distance transmission. Note here that the transmitted 
signal is usually attenuated in inversely proportional to the 
fourth power of the distance. Figure 3 shows examples of 
cluster formation in an irregularly deployed WSN, in which 
four clustering schemes of LEACH, TBC, BCA and the 
proposed DAMC are compared schematically. In the figure, 
the nodes labeled S are sleep nodes in the densely populated 
clusters. The sleep nodes are randomly chosen every round. 
 
 
Figure 2.  An example tree of 16 active nodes ( = 3). 
 
    
 
(a) LEACH                                        (b) TBC 
    
 
(c) BCA                                       (d) DAMC 
 
Figure 3.  Examples of cluster formation in an irregularly deployed WSN. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

D. Data Gathering and Transmission 
After the cluster formation including tree construction, 
sensor nodes send the sensed data to their CHs periodically 
in accordance with the TDMA schedule. Each CH 
aggregates the received data and sends the aggregated data to 
the sink node by using the CSMA (Carrier Sense Multiple 
Access) protocol. Once a multihop cluster is formed, the data 
gathering and transmission are repeated in rounds as shown 
in Figure 4. In the figure, the back-slashed boxes and the 
subsequent gray boxes indicate the communications from 
cluster members to their CHs and the communications from 
CHs to the sink node, respectively. It should be also noted 
that the node density detection is carried out only once at the 
beginning, but the cluster formation is done in every round. 
 
Figure 4.  Rounds of the proposed DAMC. 
In summary, the energy consumption in DAMC can be 
significantly reduced, resulting in prolonged network 
lifetime, because the unnecessary redundant sensing and 
transmissions are reduced remarkably and the low-energy 
multihop transmissions are used instead of single-hop 
transmissions from sensor nodes to CH in a cluster. 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
In this section, the performance of DAMC is evaluated 
via computer simulation using Matlab and compared to the 
conventional clustering schemes of LEACH [3], TBC [9] 
and BCA [10]. As described earlier, the popular LEACH is a 
pioneer protocol in clustering for WSNs, TBC is the most 
advanced clustering scheme for uniformly deployed WSNs, 
and the recently developed BCA is a single-hop clustering 
scheme targeted for irregularly deployed WSNs. 
A. Simulation Environment 
In our simulation, 200 sensor nodes are deployed over 
the network area of 100  100 m2. The sink node (or base 
station) is fixed at the location (125, 75), and the initial 
energy of each senor node is set to 2 J. In our simulation, two 
irregular deployments are experimented: (i) 100 nodes are 
deployed in the region of 50  50 m2 and the other 100 nodes 
are deployed in the other regions and (ii) 100 nodes are 
deployed in the region of 25  25 m2 and the other 100 nodes 
are deployed in the other regions. Figure 5 shows the two 
irregular deployments of 200 nodes for simulation. 
In our experiment, the energy consumption model [14] is 
as follows: The free space (fs) model is used if the distance is 
less than a threshold d0; otherwise, the multipath (mp) model 
is used. Hence, when transmitting k bits of a message along 
with distance d, the energy consumption can be calculated by 












otherwise
,
if 
,
( , )
( )
, )
(
4
0
2
d
k
kE
d
d
d
k
kE
k d
E
k
E
k d
E
mp
elec
fs
elec
Tx amp
Tx elec
Tx



where d0 is set to 87 m as in [9]. The energy consumption for 
receiving k bits of data is calculated by 

elec
Rx elec
Rx
kE
k
E
k d
E



( )
( , )

In (7) and (8), Eelec is the radio electronics energy 
depending on digital coding, modulation, filtering and 
spreading of the signal. εfs and εmp are constant values for the 
amplifier energy depending on the distance to the receiver 
and acceptable bit-error rate. 
The parameters used in our simulation are summarized in 
Table 1. In the table, Esense is the energy consumption 
required for sensing and Eda is the energy consumption for 
data aggregation. The simulations were performed 100 times 
for each experiment and the mean value of results was used 
as the simulation results. 
 
 
(a) 100 nodes are deployed in the region of 50  50 m2. 
 
(b) 100 nodes are deployed in the region of 25  25 m2. 
Figure 5.  Two irregular deployments of 200 nodes for simulation.. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETER. 
B. Simulation Results and Discussion 
In our performance study, the network lifetime is 
extensively evaluated it is the most important metric in 
WSNs. The network lifetime in our performance study is 
defined as the time duration until half of the sensor nodes die 
due to the energy depletion of battery. So, the number of 
living nodes is observed with respect to round progress. 
Figures 6 and 7 show the number of living nodes per 
round for the two scenarios of irregular deployment 
described in Section IV-A. From the two figures, it is clearly 
shown that the proposed DAMC outperforms the three 
conventional schemes of LEACH, TBC and BCA. In the first 
deployment that 100 nodes are deployed in the region of 50 
 50 m2 and the other 100 nodes are deployed in the other 
regions, the network lifetime is 26 to 57 percent longer than 
the others. In the second deployment that 100 nodes are 
deployed in the region of 25  25 m2 and the other 100 nodes 
are deployed in the other regions, the network lifetime is 26 
to 70 percent longer than the others. That is, it can be easily 
inferred that the improvement is better and better as the 
irregularity increases. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Network lifetime when 100 nodes are deployed in the region of 
50  50 m2 and the other 100 nodes are deployed in the other regions. 
 
Figure 7.  Network lifetime when 100 nodes are deployed in the region of 
25  25 m2 and the other 100 nodes are deployed in the other regions. 
Among the four clustering schemes, LEACH shows the 
worst performance in our simulation. The comparative 
performance of TBC and BCA depends on the irregularity. 
When the irregularity is relatively low, the performance 
difference of them is not significant. With high irregularity, 
however, BCA obviously outperforms TBC as shown in the 
two graphs. The proposed DAMC always outperforms the 
other three protocols. 
In the proposed DAMC, the network lifetime is 
remarkably prolonged. CHs are distributed evenly over the 
network area and every cluster has almost the same coverage 
area. Excessively redundant nodes are turned into sleep 
mode to save energy. That is, the unnecessary redundant 
sensing and transmissions are significantly reduced. In 
addition, a multi-level tree in each cluster reduces energy 
further thanks to low-energy multihop transmissions. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, an energy-efficient clustering protocol 
called DAMC for irregularly deployed WSNs has been 
proposed, in which the local node density and the multi-level 
tree structure are exploited in every cluster. During cluster 
formation, excessively redundant nodes are turned into sleep 
mode to avoid unnecessary redundant sensing and 
transmissions. And the multi-level tree in each cluster 
enables low-energy multihop transmissions rather than long 
single-hop transmissions. Such effects result in significantly 
low energy consumption and prolonged network lifetime in 
DAMC. The performance study has shown that the proposed 
DAMC outperforms the conventional clustering protocols in 
terms of network lifetime. As possible future works, we are 
going to devise a more efficient tree in a cluster and evaluate 
various scenarios of irregular deployment with specific 
probability distributions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported in part by Basic Science 
Research 
Program 
through 
the 
National 
Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of 
Education 
(NRF-2013R1A1A2011744). 
Correspondence 
should 
be 
addressed 
to 
Dr. 
Sangman 
Moh 
(smmoh@chosun.ac.kr). 
Parameter 
Value 
Network area 
100  100 m2 
Location of sink 
(125, 75) 
Number of nodes 
200 
Number of clusters 
10 
Initial energy 
2 J 
Esense 
5 nJ/bit 
Eda 
5 nJ/bit 
Eelec 
50 nJ/bit 
Efs 
10 pJ/bit/m2 
Emp 
0.00013 pJ/bit/m4 
Sensing range 
10 m 
Maximum transmission range 
136 m 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

REFERENCES 
[1] L. Dan, K. D. Wong, H. H. Yu, and A. M. Sayeed, “Detection, 
Classification, and Tracking of Targets,” IEEE Signal 
Processing Magazine, Vol. 19, No. 2, Mar. 2002, pp. 17-29. 
[2] Asaduzzaman and H. Y. Kong, “Energy Efficient Cooperative 
LEACH Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks,” Jounal of 
Communications and Networks, Vol. 12, No.  4, 2010, pp. 
358-365. 
[3] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, 
“Energy-efficient Communication Protocols for Wireless 
Microsensor Networks,” Proc. of the Hawaii International 
Conference on Systems Sciences, Vol. 2, 2010, pp. 10-19. 
[4] W. B. Heinzelman, A. P. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, 
“An Application-Specific Protocol Architecture for Wireless 
Microsensor Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless 
Communications, Vol. 1, No. 4, 2002, pp. 660-670. 
[5] O. Younis and S. Fahmy, “HEED: A Hybrid, Energy-
Efficient, Distributed Clustering Approach for Ad Hoc Sensor 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, Vol. 3. 
No. 4, 2004, pp. 366-379. 
[6] S. D. Muruganathan, D. C. F. Ma, R. I. Bhasin, and A. O. 
Fapojuwo, “A Centralized Energy-Efficient Routing Protocol 
for Wireless Sensor Networks,” IEEE Radio communications, 
Vol. 43, No. 3, 2005, pp. S8-S13. 
[7] A. Manjeshwar and D. Agrawal, “TEEN: A Routing Protocol 
for Enhanced Efficiency in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. 
of 15th Int. Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, 
2001, pp. 2009-2015. 
[8] A. Manjeshwar and D. P. Agrawal, “APTEEN: A Hybrid 
Protocol 
for 
Efficient 
Routing 
and 
Comprehensive 
Information Retrieval in Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proc. of 
Int. Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, 2002, pp. 
195-202. 
[9] K. T. Kim, C. H. Lyu, S. S. Moon, and H. Y. Yoon, “Tree-
Based Clustering (TBC) for Energy Efficient Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” Proc. of IEEE 24th Int. Conf. on Advanced 
Information Networking and Applications Workshop, 2010, 
pp. 680-685. 
[10] H. Shin, S. Moh, I. Chung, and M. Kang, “Equal-Size 
Clustering 
for 
Irregularly 
Deployed 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks,” Wireless Personal Communications, Vol. 82, No. 
2, 2014, pp. 995-1012. 
[11] J.-S. Lee and W.-L. Cheng, “Fuzzy-Logic-Based Clustering 
Approach for Wireless Sensor Networks Using Energy 
Predication,” IEEE Sensors Journal, Vol. 12, No. 9, 2012, pp. 
2891-2897. 
[12] K. Li and K. A. Hua, “Mobility-Assisted Distributed Sensor 
Clustering for Energy-Efficient Wireless Sensor Networks,” 
Proc. of 2013 IEEE Global Communications Conference 
(Globecom 2013), 2013, pp. 316-321.  
[13] L. Xu, G. M. P.  O'Hare, and R. Collier, “A Balanced Energy-
Efficient Multihop Clustering Scheme for Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” Proc. of 7th IFIP Wireless and Mobile 
Networking Conference (WMNC 2014), 2014, pp. 1-8. 
[14] W. Bo, H. Y. Hu, and F. Wen, “An Improved LEACH 
Protocol for Data Gathering and Aggregation in Wireless 
Sensor Networks,” Proc. of 2008 Int. Conf. on Computer and 
Electrical Engineering, 2008, pp. 398-401. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

