Prehistory’s and Natural Sciences’ Multi-disciplinary Contexts:
Contextualisation and Context Integration Based on Universal Conceptual Knowledge
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU), Germany;
Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany;
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents the results of the requirements
study
on
a
new
integration
system
for
conceptual
contextualisation of prehistory’s and natural sciences’ universal
multi-disciplinary
contexts.
The
paper
delivers
the
results
of previous and ongoing research initiatives, which are to
be
integrated
based
on
information
science
fundaments
for a coherent conceptual integration, enabling consecutive
coherent
analysis.
The
methodological
approach
enables
the inclusion of new insight and newly created knowledge,
e.g., via deployment of knowledge resources and structures.
The programmatic approach and new conceptual knowledge
reference implementation span multi-disciplinary knowledge in
a coherent, consistent, and multi-lingual way. The methodology
to consistently integrate knowledge context from prehistory and
archaeology disciplines with knowledge in natural sciences and
humanities is accompanied by ongoing multi-disciplinary case
studies implementing the required methods. The focus of this
research is on knowledge-based methodologies and deployment
of information science methods, especially, universal conceptual
knowledge, for the goal of creating a component framework
of reference implementations for coherent and general multi-
disciplinary contextualisation and context integration, targeting
the creation of new insight, strategies, and perspectives.
Keywords–Prehistory; Natural Sciences; Humanities; Informa-
tion Science; Contextualisation; Conceptual Knowledge.
I.
INTRODUCTION
When dealing with context, the signiﬁcation of the terms
‘complex’ and ‘complicated’ is often mixed up. Complex-
ity is a concomitant phenomenon of context, which, when
not well comprehended, appears complicated. Both, complex-
ity and context, are linked by manyfold inter-dependencies
and often experienced together. Context is witness-context in
many cases, in prehistory and natural sciences. Understanding
context and gathering complexity in a coherent, consistent,
and methodological way are therefore important fundaments,
which can lead to consequent systematical instrumentalisation,
consecutive coherent analysis, and aspiring new insight.
The focus of this research is on knowledge-based method-
ologies and deployment of information science methods, espe-
cially universal conceptual knowledge, for the goal of creating
a component framework of reference implementations for
coherent and general multi-disciplinary contextualisation tar-
geting the creation of new insight, strategies, and perspectives.
This research is part of several extensive long-term strategies
and concentrating on contextualisation and context integration
for prehistory, protohistory, archaeology and their associated
contexts, especially natural sciences and humanities. Contexts
in prehistory are special in a way that there are no direct
historical sources and respectively no literary reference and
documentation. Contextualisation is therefore a main intrinsic
task in prehistory and protohistory. From the knowledge point
of view, also when looking on methodological conditions, pre-
history shares many characteristics and factual conditions with
natural sciences, e.g., geology and soil science. A coherent
conceptual knowledge approach can enable to establish ties
and building bridges between contributing knowledge, includ-
ing future methodologies and contributions from disciplines.
The fundaments of terminology and understanding the
essence of knowledge are layed out by Aristotle, being a
central part of ‘Ethics’ [1]. Information sciences can very much
beneﬁt from Aristotle’s fundaments and a knowledge-centric
approach [2] but for building holistic and sustainable solutions,
supporting a modern deﬁnition of knowledge and subsequent
component instrumentation [3], they need to go beyond the
available technology-based approaches and hypothesis [4] as
analysed in Platon’s Phaidon. Aspects of meaning can be
described using knowledge complements, e.g., considering fac-
tual, conceptual, procedural, metacognitive [2], and structural
knowledge. Especially, conceptual knowledge can relate to
any of factual, conceptual, and procedural knowledge. To a
comparable extent, metacognitive knowledge can relate to any
of factual, conceptual, and procedural knowledge. Knowledge
complements are a means of understanding, e.g., enabling
advanced contextualisation, documentation, prospection, inte-
gration, and analysis. From an information science point of
view, the classical fundaments of episteme, techne, and doxa
are intrinsically tied complements. However, knowledge com-
plements, when consequently applied, do not make the creation
and development of resources instantaneously easier. They
do not make problem solving algorithms simpler. Knowledge
complements do not make scientiﬁc contexts obsolete, they do
neither make qualiﬁed expertise unneeded nor do they lead to
faster education or cheaper gain of research results and insight.
This paper presents the methodological and systemati-
cal fundaments and components for implementing a multi-
disciplinary integration of prehistory and its context. The paper
summarises the results of immanent milestones and, based
on these, proposes the next complementary methodological
and practical resources’ developments. Further, details on
complements and results of speciﬁc application scenarios will
be discussed in separate extended papers.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II
gives the essential background of motivation resulting from
different disciplinary views. Section III presents an overview
of pre-existing and deployed component developments at this
stage, which have been in continuous further development.
Section IV introduces to disciplinary background and require-
ments. Section V presents the methodological fundaments and
components. Section VI presents the respective results of com-
ponent implementations of the integration. Sections VII and
VIII discuss the lessons learned and summarise conclusions
and future work.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-865-5
INFOCOMP 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

II.
MOTIVATION
Complexity is carrying information. Therefore, from in-
formation science point of view, we should take care not
to loose complexity whenever dealing with information. The
complexity of appearing context is commonly even increased
when applying methods from multiple disciplines. So far, there
are no other comparably holistic and systematical approaches
and implementations on conceptual contextualisation known
and published besides the presented approach. Contrary, during
the last decades, it has become common practice to tackle
challenges regarding knowledge and related content solely
with procedural approaches, contrary to the fact that creation
processes, handling, and management may allow more effec-
tive and efﬁcient measures in context of analysis, long-term
development of resources, computation, and processing, Com-
mon ways of implementing procedural approaches as plain
technical solutions are often neither effective nor efﬁcient. In
addition, such approaches often lack long-term adaptability and
scalability.
How can we create a suitable, practical system of coherent
knowledge? Such a system has to conform with information
science fundaments and universal knowledge and has to enable
an integration of the required components from methodologies
to realisations for knowledge representations of realia and
abstract contexts [5]. Many facets of knowledge, including
prehistory, need to be continuously acquired and reviewed [6].
Knowledge itself is part of cognitive processes and requires
an understanding of epistemological fundaments, depending
on participated disciplines and views [7] [8].
We should therefore create a system of balanced fundaments
of sustainable, complementary solutions based on information
science and contextualisation-aware methodologies and com-
plements [9], which allows the application of coherent concep-
tual knowledge in theory and practice. The conceptual knowl-
edge approach should provide facilities expressing instances of
mental concepts and the state of research of their perception.
The creation of object types may be inﬂuenced by criteria, e.g.,
by education, experience, and social context. The approach
should enable further development of practical disciplinary
terminology assignment, e.g., adaption and synchronisation of
terminology.
III.
PRE-EXISTING, ONGOING DEVELOPMENTS
The next sections brieﬂy summarise components used for
addressing knowledge with multi-disciplinary Knowledge Re-
sources (KR).
A. Conceptual knowledge frameworks
The following frameworks are developed and used in prac-
tice with ongoing long-term research and applied for multi-
disciplinary KR. The framework implementations are address-
ing conceptual knowledge for the following disciplines and
scenarios.
•
Environmental information systems conceptual knowl-
edge framework [10].
•
Mathematical and computational conceptual knowledge
framework [11].
•
Prehistory-protohistory
and
archaeology
Conceptual
Knowledge Reference Implementation (CKRI), includ-
ing multi-disciplinary contexts of natural sciences and
humanities [9].
Based on information sciences fundaments, these coherent
frameworks are complementary and fully consistent. The more,
the prehistory framework was created over the last years and is
consequently in continuous further development with ongoing
research projects, application scenarios, and studies.
B. Conceptual knowledge base
The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [12] is a gen-
eral plan for knowledge classiﬁcation. UDC is also the world’s
foremost document indexing language in the form of a multi-
lingual classiﬁcation scheme covering all ﬁelds of knowledge
and constitutes a sophisticated indexing and retrieval tool. The
UDC is designed for subject description and indexing of con-
tent of information resources irrespective of the carrier, form,
format, and language. UDC provides an analytico-synthetic
and facetted classiﬁcation. UDC schedules are organised as
a coherent system of knowledge with associative relationships
and references between concepts and related ﬁelds and are used
by more than 150.000 document collections worldwide. UDC-
based references in this publication are taken from the multi-
lingual UDC summary [12] released by the UDC Consortium
under a Creative Commons license [13]. Facets can be created
with any auxiliary tables. Notations can be used to refer to
external concepts.
C. Conceptual knowledge pattern realisation
A means of choice in order to achieve overall efﬁcient
realisations even for complex scenarios, integrating arbitrary
knowledge, is to use the principles of Superordinate Knowl-
edge. The core assembly elements of Superordinate Knowl-
edge are methodology, implementation, and realisation [14].
Comprehensive focussed subsets of conceptual knowledge can
provide excellent modular and standardised complements for
information science based component implementations, e.g.,
for environmental information management and computation
[10]. The presented implementations strictly follow the funda-
mental methodological algorithm base of the the Conceptual
Knowledge Pattern Matching (CKPM) methodology [5], pro-
viding and accessing knowledge object patterns based on the
Superordinate Knowledge Methodology, which allows system-
atical use and thorough processing. Respective results from
a methodology targeting structures, including implementation,
and knowledge-aware application of the methodology were
layed out and are available with practical examples [15]. Core
eager beaver procedure- and structure-based implementation
components, grep and join, are written in C, as those com-
monly known. Modules can deploy Perl Compatible Regular
Expressions (PCRE) [16] syntax for specifying common string
patterns. The PCRE approach is independent from the pro-
cedural realisation using Shell and Perl [17] for component
wrapping purposes with case studies and implementations.
IV.
CONSIDERATION OF DISCIPLINARY BACKGROUND
Prehistoric context, even for chorologically, chronologically,
and thematically restricted object groups [18] [19] [20] com-
prises of a wide and highly variable spectrum of knowledge,
applied approaches, and formalisation, including abstraction
[21] and documentation [22]. Almost all knowledge is further
referring to complex contexts of many associated disciplines
and views.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-865-5
INFOCOMP 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

In complex scenarios, like multi-disciplinary prehistoric
realia founded contexts, we should utilise as much complexity
and structure with knowledge complements as possible in order
to achieve a high level of integration of factual, conceptual,
and structural but also of procedural and metacognitive knowl-
edge. In practice, these approaches are often not followed.
In many cases, simple convenience of workﬂow tasks might
suggest to integrate ‘data’ available as is. Even standards and
implementations may not be optimal, they can result from
the fact that information and data are often determined by
technological means. The result may be a limitation regarding
the fundamental coherence of knowledge and it may limit the
applicability and use of methods and algorithms.
Basic deﬁcits of simpliﬁed approaches and many com-
monly used frameworks (e.g., context-unaware approaches for
maps/earth services) make these approaches undesirable for a
general and coherent scientiﬁc and methodological realisation.
Further, the application of not well satisfying approaches
and methodological deﬁcits, especially in multi-disciplinary
context, are often fragmented, heterogeneous, and lacking
required coherence and precision [23] or require unnecessary
estimations and approximations [24].
Further, in addition to such contrary practice there are multi-
fold cases, which should direct to more feasible approaches,
e.g., in situations
•
when terminology does –in any case– not reﬂect the
context of respective ﬁndings,
•
when relocated objects require contextualisation and
descriptive conceptual knowledge,
•
where indications of resources are available without
respective artefacts,
•
isolated ﬁndings of various levels exist,
•
when objects with presently isolated contexts require
coherent chronology.
Examples of associated, guiding questions are: How can
existing and emerging knowledge from prehistory and other
disciplines be methodologically integrated? Which multi-
disciplinary contexts and approaches can be considered on
a coherent, consistent information science base? What are
context areas of special characteristics, e.g., where are possible
regions of interest and further research? Which fundaments and
component implementations should be in focus of contextual-
isation?
A basic approach for prehistoric contextualisation should be
characterised by modular components and premises, namely,
•
a coherent, multi-disciplinary methodology, spanning
disciplines and ﬁelds,
•
an overall coherent and consistent knowledge base,
•
principle concepts for knowledge description,
•
implementing the state of the art in information science
and knowledge,
•
considering long-term time ranges for continuous devel-
opments,
•
enabling wide context integration,
•
enabling representation of different views,
•
enabling representation of different actual perceptions,
•
allowing to complement terminology where required,
•
and integration of standards and frameworks.
The premise of coherency of the knowledge base is important
in a way that solutions should not be restricted to proce-
dural components and interfaces, which intrinsically require
additional multi-level formalisation. The coherent approach
can provide required descriptive complements to otherwise
prescriptive terminologies. The integration should be aware of
cognitive visualisation aspects. The contextualisation should
further enable to continuously integrate results of past and
ongoing research of prehistoric on-site context surveys.
V.
METHODOLOGICAL FUNDAMENTS AND COMPONENTS
The methodological and systematical fundaments for con-
textualisation of prehistory, protohistory, and contexts require
modularity and ﬂexibility with structure levels and multi-
dimensional knowledge context, especially regarding
•
prehistoric object groups,
•
prehistoric objects,
•
inter-object group context and references,
•
chorological and chronological context,
•
context correlation for soil context,
•
material context, and
•
toponymic context,
with further natural and environmental context, regarding
methods and extendability, valorisation, analysis, and potential
for new insight. At these conditions and based on the previous
research and project practice, basic fundaments are:
•
Universal, coherent, and consistent conceptual knowl-
edge system.
•
Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks from dis-
ciplines and contexts.
•
Formalisation for complements, coherence, consistency.
•
Methodologies, general problem solution, workﬂow in-
tegration. Implementation and deployment of methods
and algorithms.
•
Prehistory and protohistory knowledge resources and
complements.
•
Natural sciences knowledge context resources and com-
plements.
•
Inherent representation groups of context resources.
•
Scientiﬁc context parametrisation.
•
Universal structures and data standards.
•
Facilities for analysis.
•
Spatial mapping.
•
Symbolic representation of context information.
•
Facilities for automation.
•
Long-term development and sustainability.
Besides obvious reasons, e.g., spatial ranges, serious depen-
dencies are made up by conditions of required mathematical
algorithms and the context of available data. These depen-
dencies cannot be overcome in many cases as, e.g., it is not
possible to get direct data from the original context of a
prehistorical site. Targeting contextualisation, the conceptual
implementation should integrate knowledge for natural con-
ditions and processes, soil-afﬁne and respective soil-related,
e.g., agricultural or geoforensic, contexts. The implementation
should consider different systems of chorologies and chronolo-
gies, e.g., prehistorical and geological time frames, palaeolithic
to neolithic in coexistence with Pleistocene to Holocene and
other conceptual and absolute chronologies. The achieved
results of respective developments and implementations of the
components will be discussed in the following sections.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-865-5
INFOCOMP 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

VI.
METHODOLOGICAL COMPONENT IMPLEMENTATIONS
Focus is on required methodological, conceptual, non-
procedural, non-interactive, and non-technical components.
Practical components for systematical and methodological
implementations are deﬁned and developed according to the
analyses in already realised projects and case studies of prac-
tical scenarios as cited here and described in the references.
Therefore, numerous components and tools, which have shown
not to seamlessly integrate in long-term development environ-
ments are not deployed here. Please refer to the secondary liter-
ature for components less suitable for the intended integration
purpose. The overall component developments required for
this research are inter-depending and not linear. The integrated
components should be kept modular on epistemological base.
A. Conceptual knowledge and complements
The universal conceptual system is deploying the knowledge
framework based on The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation
(UDC) [12]. The approach enables to add multi-disciplinary
knowledge to a knowledge base of a discipline on a coherent
conceptual knowledge base, e.g., refer further ‘hard facts’,
and to allow further advanced critic factual and cognostic
reception. Central component is the prehistory-protohistory
and archaeology CKRI including multi-disciplinary natural
sciences and humanities contexts [9].
B. Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks
The integration includes relevant scientiﬁc practices, frame-
works, and standards from disciplines and contexts, e.g.,
natural sciences. Geosciences and soil science are continuously
delivering updated insight on state of the art research, includ-
ing the geodiversity and standardisation [25] as required for
contextualisation. A practical reference implementation coher-
ent with the contextualisation of prehistory-protohistory and
archaeology conceptual knowledge [9] is currently in develop-
ment within a long-term project accompanying this research.
Essential base context sources should provide worldwide ho-
mogeneous and consistent data [26] allowing extrapolation and
interpolation in various dimensions, e.g., from the School of
Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST), National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), Goddard Na-
tional Space Science Data Center (NSSDC), National Oceano-
graphic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) resources, European Community
(EC) resources, and national and federal organisations and
initiatives for further integration and future solutions.
C. Formalisation
All integration components, for all disciplines, require an
explicit and continuous formalisation [27] process in order
to conform with the information science principles according
to the practices in the disciplines. This includes knowledge
objects and entities as well as procedural components and
addressing aspects of discipline related parole [28].
D. Methodologies and workﬂows integration
Methodologies for creating and utilising methods include
model processing, remote sensing, spatial mapping, high in-
formation densities, and visualisation. The respective con-
textualisation of prehistoric scenarios should each be done
under individual prehistoric conditions, supported by state-
of-the-art methods, especially, consistent sources of standard
algorithms [29], multi-dimensional criteria, spatial operations,
interpolation geodesic computation [30], triangulation [31],
gradient computation [32], and projection [33]. Workﬂow inte-
gration also includes the overall spectrum of problem solving,
e.g., mathematical algorithms, mathematical processes, ﬁlter
processes, but also phonetic and linguistic context support [34].
E. Prehistory Knowledge Resources
Common sources of information in many disciplines are
often not yet aware of universal knowledge concepts and multi-
lingual approaches. Common sources are in many cases not
sufﬁciently coherent, consistent, and structured and more often
they show to be fragmented and heterogeneous. In order to
be independent of these basic shortcomings, all of the ob-
jects, entities, and respective conceptual knowledge references’
excerpts and examples are taken from The Prehistory and
Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA). PAKA has been in
continuous development for more than three decades [35] and
is released by DIMF [36]. Table I shows a plain representation
excerpt of a KR based system [12] [15] of major discipline
object groups implemented for prehistory and protohistory and
their chorological context.
TABLE I. SYSTEM OF DISCIPLINE OBJECT GROUPS AND CONCEPTUAL
VIEW GROUPS [12]: PREHISTORY AND PROTOHISTORY (EXCERPT).
Major Object Group
Conceptual View Group
Ritual places, burials
UDC:903
Cemetery
UDC:903
Barrow
UDC:903
Dolmen
UDC:903
Urn
UDC:903
Earthworks
UDC:903
Settlements
UDC:903
Fortiﬁcations
UDC:903
Architectures
UDC:903
Structures and arrangements
UDC:903
Timber
UDC:903
Stone
UDC:903
Relics, organic and non-organic
UDC:903
Organic
UDC:903
Metal
UDC:903
Artefacts, organic and non-organic
UDC:903
Rock art
UDC:903
Sculptured objects
UDC:903
Resources (usage, mining, etc.)
UDC:903
The conceptual view group is prehistory, prehistoric re-
mains, artefacts, and antiquities. A prehistoric valorisation
sample is the swimming reindeer [37], included in detail in [9].
The resources have been in continuous development, which
follows information science research, and can be consistently
and seamlessly deployed with integrated conceptual reference
frameworks and components.
In addition, the conceptual views groups are a unique,
ﬂexible, and extendable approach of addressing multi-lingual
verbal descriptions with a systematic approach and standard-
ised implementation framework for coherent multi-disciplinary
and multi-dimensional scenarios, beyond plain representation.
F. Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources
Table II shows a plain representation excerpt of an imple-
mented system of major natural sciences’ context object groups
from KR realisations [12] [15].
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-865-5
INFOCOMP 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

TABLE II. SYSTEM OF CONTEXT OBJECT GROUPS AND CONCEPTUAL
VIEWS GROUPS [12]: NATURAL SCIENCES / NATURE (EXCERPT).
Major Object Group
Conceptual View Group
Landmarks
UDC:55+539+63
Height
UDC:55+539+63
Depth
UDC:55+539+63
Caves
UDC:55+539+63
Natural resources
UDC:55+539+63
Rock outcrops
UDC:55+539+63
Well springs
UDC:55+539+63
Soil features
UDC:55+539+63
Volcanological features
UDC:55+539+63
Impact features
UDC:55+539+63
The conceptual view group is earth sciences and geological
sciences, physical nature of matter, agriculture and related
sciences, including geophysics, historical geology, and palaeo-
geography, soil science and research.
G. Inherent representation groups
Table III shows a plain representation excerpt of major
discipline and context object groups regarding their inherent
representation and common utilisation.
TABLE III. DISCIPLINE AND CONTEXT OBJECT GROUPS AND CONCEPTUAL
VIEW GROUPS [12]: INHERENT REPRESENTATION (EXCERPT).
Major Object Group
Conceptual View Group
Points, (Points of Interest, PoI)
UDC:52+004
Polygons
UDC:52+004
Lines
UDC:52+004
Digital Elevation Model (DEM) representations
UDC:52+004
z-value representations
UDC:52+004
Distance representations
UDC:52+004
Area representations
UDC:52+004
Raster
UDC:52+004
Vector
UDC:52+004
Binary
UDC:52+004
Non-binary
UDC:52+004
The conceptual view group is astronomy, astrophysics, space
research, and geodesy, computer science and technology, com-
puting, and data processing, including earth measurement, ﬁeld
surveying, photogrammetry, remote sensing, data processing,
interpretation, mapping, data representation, data handling, and
computer languages.
H. Scientiﬁc context parametrisation
Scientiﬁc context parametrisation of prehistoric targets can
use the overall insights, e.g., from geoscientiﬁc disciplines [38]
[39]. A relevant example is contextualisation with palaeoland-
scapes [40]. In case of prehistory, parametrisation depends on
the prehistorical context, e.g., the geoscientiﬁc parametrisation
and geoscientiﬁc contextualisation depend of the respective
selected prehistorical object groups and associated properties.
The highly inter-dependent complexity can make the scientiﬁc
parametrisation an extremely advanced long-term challenge.
I.
Structures and symbolic representation standards
The deployment of long-term universal structure and data
standards is essential. Relevant examples of sustainable im-
plementations are NetCDF [41] based standards, including
advanced features, hybrid structure integration, and parallel
computing support (PnetCDF) and generic multi-dimensional
table data, universal source and text based structure and
code representations, e.g., American Standard Code for In-
formation Interchange (ASCII). Structure is an organisation
of interrelated entities in a material or non-material object or
system [15]. Structure is essential in logic as it carries unique
information. Structure means features and facilities. There are
merely higher and lower facility levels of how structures can
be addressed, which result from structure levels. Structure
can, for example, be addressed by logic, names, references,
address labels, pointers, fuzzy methods, phonetic methods.
‘Non-structures’ can, for example, be addressed by locality,
source, context, logic, attributes, size, quantity. Structure is and
especially reﬂects knowledge (especially factual, conceptual,
procedural, metacognitive, and structural complements), con-
text, experience, persistence, reusability, sustainability, value,
and formalisation, including abstraction and reduction. Struc-
ture systematics, meaning, levels of structures, and means of
addressing were discussed in detail [15]. We should be aware
that lower structure levels can only be addressed on higher
formalisation levels, independent of the fact that structure may
either be not available or not recognised. Substantial deﬁcits
of lower level structured knowledge representations cannot
be compensated by (procedural) tools. Therefore, addressing
structures on cognostic levels is preferable to isolated proce-
dural means and can be utilised for symbolic representations.
Symbolic representations of prehistoric context information
include graphs, e.g., diagrams using visualisation techniques,
for logical, quantitative, schematic, and semi-schematic char-
acteristics. Concrete examples are relationships of entity rep-
resentations, variables, topological and spatial properties, and
combined representations of abstract and realia properties.
The structures and standards, in integration with formalisation
processes, knowledge system, and components should foster
seamless long-term development and sustainable realisation.
Nevertheless, the complements, which enable ﬂexible automa-
tion capabilites are up to vast parts depending on the context
of how realia are viewed and in consequence how they should
be described and managed, e.g., by formalisation, standards,
consistency, systematics, methodological procedures, structure,
and object groups.
VII.
DISCUSSION
This section reviews the status of integration potentials and
an outlook on concrete targets based on the lessons learned
from the methodological component implementations. The
component related processes are challenging and not trivial,
especially formalisation and parametrisation. This is the more
true for the integration processes. The resulting component
base is the start of the long-term integration project on con-
textualisation for prehistory and multi-disciplinary contexts.
All the presented components were created, developed, and
evaluated with the referred practical project results and case
studies. The conceptual knowledge reference implementations,
especially the prehistory CKRI and components showed that
they are best choice addressing required properties and features
for the tasks. The presented components’ set of reference
implementations and components also allows further develop-
ment, targeting the integration for coherent contextualisation
including required standards from information science, concep-
tual knowledge, prehistory and archaeology, natural sciences
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-865-5
INFOCOMP 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

and geosciences, soil science, satellite and spatial data, and
processing algorithms, for the purpose of contextualisation and
further utilisation and prospection in prehistory and context.
It should be explicitely noticed, that the integrated methods,
resources, and workﬂows have to support features beyond
methodological compatibility, suitability, modularity, and ﬂex-
ibility on the task, e.g., with development, storage, transfer,
and utilisation. Especially, the presented conceptual knowledge
system enables to respect the rights of participated parties and
conform with and adhere to intellectual properties, privacy, and
licensing of resources and components, e.g., with intermediate,
and resulting structures, formats, and procedural components.
In consequence, practical integration can refer to involved
resources and components from all disciplines, prehistory,
geosciences, soil science, remote sensing, application of ref-
erence implementations and standards, creation of knowledge,
procedural realisations, e.g., algorithms and model processing,
and results, e.g., symbolic representation of prehistoric context.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
The focus of this research is on knowledge-based method-
ologies and deployment of information science methods, es-
pecially universal conceptual knowledge, for contextualisation
and context integration of multi-disciplinary contexts of pre-
history and natural sciences, which can enable coherent future
analysis. The long-term research projects in different disci-
plines leading to this publication contributed to the achieved
goal to create a component framework of reference implemen-
tations for coherent and general multi-disciplinary contextual-
isation, which represents more than its component parts. The
integration enables to deal with knowledge complements, e.g.,
factual, structural, and formalised like time periods but also
with metacognitive like experience, meaning, and symbolism.
The presented results are nevertheless the start of a consecutive
long-term integration project and continuing projects in par-
ticipated disciplines. The presented methodological approach
allows to systematically overcome conceptual fragmentation
and to foster on a multi-level coherency for multi-disciplinary
knowledge. The multi-lingual conceptual reference imple-
mentation allows to address problems of various language
dependent fragmentation, e.g., to resolve national and local
terminology fragmentation. This is increasingly relevant for
coherency of inter-disciplinary knowledge in contextualisation.
The new integration system with its components enables
a coherent conceptual integration of prehistory and context
disciplines and can foster the consideration and visibility of
inherent aspects. Methodology and implementation allow a
wide range or multi-disciplinary contexts and approaches for
prehistoric context research for arbitrary regions on interest
based on context knowledge, which can globally kept homo-
geneous and consistent as allowed by publicly available state-
of-the-art resources. Examples are geoscientiﬁc and mathemat-
ical parametrisation and model computations for prehistoric
scenarios. The developed reference implementations and com-
ponents, including the prehistory CKRI and the geoscientiﬁc
reference implementations, have been in continuous further
development to address the continuous development of multi-
disciplinary knowledge resources and new methodological
implementations. Conceptual knowledge system and compo-
nent implementations allow to address and correlate contexts
described by geoscientiﬁc disciplines, e.g., diversity of soil and
properties relevant for prehistory and respective research.
Overall, in result, contextualisation fosters careful and dili-
gent scientiﬁc interpretation. Further research, besides global
applicability of the methodology and implementations, can
focus on the Central European supra-regional studies and
on micro-regional studies in the Northern Germany (North-
Rhine Westphalia, Lower Saxony) and The Netherlands coast
areas. Future research targets further long-term development
of a consistent conceptual knowledge framework focussing on
prehistory and includes context-aware surveys on prehistoric
object groups, multi-disciplinary contextualisation of geodiver-
sity and prehistoric scenarios, modular integration, analysis,
and symbolic representation components for prehistory and
context disciplines. The integration and priorities with infor-
mation science research depend on the state-of-the-art results
and development in contributing disciplines.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This ongoing research is supported by scientiﬁc organisa-
tions and individuals. We are grateful to the “Knowledge in
Motion” (KiM) long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches
Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for partially
funding this research, implementation, case studies, and pub-
lication under grants D2018F1P04962, D2019F1P04998, and
D2020F1P05228 and to its senior scientiﬁc members and
members of the permanent commission of the science coun-
cil, especially to Dr. Friedrich H¨ulsmann, Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB) Hannover, to Dipl.-Biol. Birgit
Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, to Dipl.-
Ing. Martin Hofmeister, Hannover, and to Olaf Lau, Hannover,
Germany, for fruitful discussion, inspiration, and practical
multi-disciplinary case studies. We are grateful to The Science
and High Performance Supercomputing Centre (SHPSC) for
long-term support. / DIMF-PIID-DF98 007.
REFERENCES
[1]
Aristotle, The Ethics of Aristotle, 2005, Project Gutenberg, eBook,
EBook-No.: 8438, Rel. Date: Jul., 2005, Digit. Vers. of the Orig. Publ.,
Produced by Ted Garvin, David Widger, and the DP Team, Edition 10,
URL: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8438 [accessed: 2021-03-07].
[2]
L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, Eds., A Taxonomy for Learning,
Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educa-
tional Objectives.
Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA (Pearson Education
Group), USA, 2001, ISBN: 978-0801319037.
[3]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, F. H¨ulsmann, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, P. Skurowski,
and M. Staniszewski, Knowledge and Computing.
Post-Summit Re-
sults, Delegates’ Summit: Best Practice and Deﬁnitions of Knowledge
and Computing, Sept. 23, 2015, The Fifth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and
Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 13th Int. Conf.
of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–29, 2015,
Rhodes, Greece, 2015, pp. 1–7, DOI: 10.15488/3409.
[4]
Plato, Phaedo, 2008, (Written 360 B.C.E.), Translated by Benjamin
Jowett, Provided by The Internet Classics Archive, URL: http://classics.
mit.edu/Plato/phaedo.html [accessed: 2021-03-07].
[5]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “From Knowledge and Meaning Towards Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching: Processing and Developing Knowledge Objects
Targeting Geoscientiﬁc Context and Georeferencing,” in Proc. of The
Twelfth Internat. Conf. on Advanced Geographic Information Systems,
Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2020), November 21–25,
2020, Valencia, Spain. XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2020,
pp. 36–41, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-762-7.
[6]
R. Gleser, “Klassiﬁkation, Verbreitung und chemische Zusammenset-
zung kupferzeitlicher Metallartefakte and Rhein, Mosel und Saar,” in
Proceedings, Beitr¨age des international Symposiums zur Arch¨aologie in
der Großregion, 14.–17. April 2016, Europ¨aische Akademie Otzenhau-
sen, 2017, pp. 163–189, (title in English: Classiﬁcation, Distribution,
and Chemical Composition of Copper-age Metal Artefacts at the Rhine,
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-865-5
INFOCOMP 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Moselle, and Saar), Arch¨aologentage Otzenhausen, Band 3, Arch¨aologie
in der Großregion, Koch, M. (ed.), ISBN: 578-3-941509-14-6.
[7]
R. Gleser, Rekonstruktion der Vergangenheit: Zur methodischen Eige-
nart pr¨ahistorischen Erkennens. mentis, Paderborn, 2018, pp. 199–237,
(title in English: Reconstruction of the Past: On the Methodical Pecu-
liarity of Prehistorical Cognition), in: A.-S. Naujoks, J. Stelling, and
O. R. Scholz (eds.), Von der Quelle zur Theorie. Vom Verh¨altnis zwis-
chen Objektivit¨at und Subjektivit¨at in den historischen Wissenschaften,
ISBN: 978-3-95743-136-3.
[8]
R. Gleser, Zu den erkenntnistheoretischen Grundlagen der Pr¨ahis-
torischen Arch¨aologie.
Leiden, 2021, 2021, (title in English: On
the Epistemological Fundaments of Prehistorical Archaeology), in: M.
Renger, S.-M. Rothermund, S. Schreiber, and A. Veling (Eds.), Theorie,
Arch¨aologie, Reﬂexion. Kontroversen und Ans¨atze im deutschsprachi-
gen Diskurs, (in print).
[9]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Information Science Paragon: Allow Knowl-
edge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches to Universality,
Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” The International Journal
“Information Models and Analyses” (IJ IMA), vol. 9, no. 2, 2020,
Markov, K. (ed.), ISSN: 1314-6416 (print), (to appear).
[10]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Sustainable Knowledge and Resources Management
for Environmental Information and Computation.
Business Expert
Press, Manhattan, New York, USA, Mar. 2018, Ch. 3, pp. 45–88, in:
Huong Ha (ed.), Climate Change Management: Special Topics in the
Context of Asia, ISBN: 978-1-94784-327-1, in: Robert Sroufe (ed.),
Business Expert Press Environmental and Social Sustainability for
Business Advantage Collection, ISSN: 2327-333X (collection, print).
[11]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Superordinate Knowledge Based Comprehen-
sive Subset of Conceptual Knowledge for Practical Mathematical-
Computational Scenarios,” in The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf.
in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), Proceedings of The 17th
Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28,
2019, Rhodes, Greece, AIP CP, Volume 2293 A.
AIP Press, American
Institute of Physics, Melville, New York, USA, Nov. 2020, pp. 040 002–
1 – 040 002–4, ISBN-13: 978-0-7354-4025-8, DOI: 10.1063/5.0026478.
[12]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2021-03-07].
[13]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2021-03-07],
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
[14]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Principles of Superordinate Knowledge: Separation
of Methodology, Implementation, and Realisation,” in The Eighth
Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in Natural and Applied Sciences
(SACINAS), Proceedings of The 16th Int. Conf. of Num. Analysis and
Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 13–18, 2018, Rhodes, Greece, AIP CP,
Vol. 2116.
AIP Press, American Institute of Physics, Melville, New
York, USA, 2019, ISBN: 978-0-7354-1854-7, DOI: 10.1063/1.5114033.
[15]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Impact of Information Science Accompanied
Structural Information on Computation of Knowledge Pattern Matching
and Processing: A Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and
Humanities Conceptual Integration Perspective,” in Proc. of The Tenth
Int, Conf. on Adv. Comm. and Comp. (INFOCOMP 2020), Sept.
27 – Oct. 1, 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN:
978-1-61208-807-5, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=infocomp 2020 1 10 60015 [accessed: 2021-03-07].
[16]
“Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE),” 2021, URL: https://
www.pcre.org/ [accessed: 2021-03-07].
[17]
“The Perl Programming Language,” 2021, URL: https://www.perl.org/
[accessed: 2021-03-07].
[18]
H.-J. H¨aßler, Ur- und Fr¨uhgeschichte in Niedersachsen.
Nikol,
Hamburg, 2002, ISBN: 3-933203-61-9.
[19]
H. Kr¨ober, Natur und Landschaft in Niedersachsen, Die Naturdenkmal-
Typen. Schl¨utersche Verlagsgesellschaft mbH & Co. KG, 2001, ISBN:
3-87706-616-X.
[20]
R. Wiechers-Weidner, Großsteingr¨aber in Westfalen.
Landschaftsver-
band Westfalen-Lippe, Landesbildstelle Westfalen, 1985, (title in En-
glish: Megalithic Tombs in Westphalia).
[21]
A. Cochrane and A. M. Jones, Eds., Visualising the Neolithic: Abstrac-
tion, Figuration, Performance, Representation.
Oxbow Books, Oxford
and Oakville, 2012, ISBN: 978-1-84218-477-7, Neolithic Studies Group
Seminar Papers 13.
[22]
P. Skoglund, J. Ling, and U. Bertilsson, Eds., Picturing the Bronze
Age.
Published in the United Kingdom by Oxbow Books, Oxford &
Philadelphia, 2015, Swedish Rock Art Series: Volume 3, ISBN: 978-1-
78297-879-4.
[23]
B. Fritsch, M. Furholt, M. Hinz, L. Lorenz, H. Nelson, G. Schaf-
ferer, S. Schiesberg, and K.-G. Sj¨ogren, “Dichtezentren und lokale
Gruppierungen – Eine Karte zu den Großsteingr¨abern Mittel- und
Nordeuropas,” jungsteinSITE, Oct. 2010, ISSN: 1868-3088, (title in
English: Centres of Density and Local Groups – A Map of Megalithic
Tombs in Central and Northern Europe).
[24]
C. Nimura, Prehistoric Rock Art in Scandinavia: Agency and Environ-
mental Change.
Published in the United Kingdom by Oxbow Books,
Oxford & Philadelphia, 2016, Swedish Rock Art Series: Volume 4,
ISBN: 978-1-78570-119-1.
[25]
B. M. Das, Advanced Soil Mechanics; Fifth Edition, 5th ed.
CRC
Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton, London, New York, 2019,
ISBN: 978-0-8153-7913-3.
[26]
“Land Processed Distributed Active Archive Center,” 2021, LP DAAC,
URL: https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/ [accessed: 2021-03-07].
[27]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, A. Tsitsipas,
L. Schubert, F. H¨ulsmann, O. Lau, and M. Hofmeister, Best Practice
and Deﬁnitions of Formalisation and Formalism. Post-Summit Results,
Delegates’ Summit: The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in
Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 17th Int. Conf. of Num.
Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28, 2019, Rhodes,
Greece, 2019, pp. 1–16, DOI: 10.15488/5241.
[28]
F. de Saussure, Cours de linguistique g´en´erale, 1916, (title in English:
Course in General Linguistics), C. Bally and A. Sechehaye (eds.).
[29]
W. H. Press, S. A. Teukolsky, W. T. Vetterling, and B. P. Flannery, Nu-
merical Recipes in Fortran 90, The Art of Parallel Scientiﬁc Computing.
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
[30]
T. Vincenty, “Direct and inverse solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid
with application of nested equations,” Surv. Rev., vol. XXII, no. 176,
1975, pp. 88–93.
[31]
R. J. Renka, “Algorithm 772: STRIPACK: Delaunay Triangulation and
Voronoi Diagram on the Surface of a Sphere,” AMC Trans. Math.
Software, vol. 23, no. 3, 1997, pp. 416–434.
[32]
B. K. P. Horn, “Hill-Shading and the Reﬂectance Map,” Proceedings of
the IEEE, vol. 69, no. 1, 1981, pp. 14–47.
[33]
A. J. Kent and P. Vujakovic, Eds., The Routledge Handbook of Mapping
and Cartography.
Taylor & Francis Group, London and New York,
2018, ISBN: 978-1-138-83102-5.
[34]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Archaeological and Geoscientiﬁc Objects used with
Integrated Systems and Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources,” Int. Jour.
on Adv. in Systems and Measurements, vol. 6, no. 1&2, 2013, pp. 200–
213, ISSN: 1942-261x, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?
articleid=sysmea v6 n12 2013 15 [accessed: 2021-03-07].
[35]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Information Science and Inter-disciplinary Long-
term Strategies – Key to Insight, Consistency, and Sustainabil-
ity: Conceptual Knowledge Reference Methodology Spanning Pre-
history, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Humanities,” Interna-
tional Tutorial, DataSys Congress 2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020,
Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2020/
ProgramINFOCOMP20.html [accessed: 2021-03-07].
[36]
“The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) license,”
2021, (release 2021), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): All rights reserved. Rights retain to
the contributing creators.
[37]
J. Cook, The Swimming Reindeer, ser. British Museum Objects in
Focus.
The British Museum Press, 2015, ISBN: 978-0-7141-2821-
4, (ﬁrst published 2010).
[38]
R. Brinkmann, Abriß der Geologie, Bd. 2, Historische Geologie, neube-
arbeitet von Karl Kr¨ommelbein, 12th/13th ed.
Ferdinand Enke Verlag,
Stuttgart, 1986, ISBN: 3-432-80603-5.
[39]
P. Woldstedt and K. Duphorn, Norddeutschland und angrenzende Ge-
biete im Eiszeitalter, 3rd ed., 1974.
[40]
G. N. Bailey, J. Harff, and D. Sakellariou, Eds., Under the Sea:
Archaeology and Palaeolandscapes of the Continental Shelf, ser. Coastal
Research Library.
Springer International Publishing AG 2017,
2017, vol. 20, ISSN: 2211-0577, ISBN: 978-3-319-53158-8, DOI:
10.1007/978-3-319-53160-1.
[41]
“Network
Common
Data
Form
(NetCDF),”
2021,
DOI:
10.5065/D6H70CW6,
URL:
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/
netcdf/ [accessed: 2021-03-07].
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-865-5
INFOCOMP 2021 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

