Sensitivity of Linear Construction Project Performance to 
Correlation in Task Durations 
Ricardo Eiris Pereira and Ian Flood 
Rinker School, College of Design, Construction and Planning, 
University of Florida 
Gainesville, United States 
email: reiris@ufl.edu, flood@ufl.edu 
 
 
Abstract– The performance of construction work and thus the 
optimality of a plan are impacted directly by uncertainty in the 
performance of productive resources. For repetitive projects, 
smooth work flow is necessary to minimize or eliminate 
interruptions and idle time with the objective of reducing costs 
and meeting schedule deadlines. Earlier research suggests that 
correlation in the duration of repeated activities (where 
durations are stochastic) may be important in determining the 
most favorable plan. This study assesses the significance of 
correlation in this respect, using a Linear Scheduling 
framework for modeling repetitive construction work. A range 
of levels of correlation is considered using linear correlation 
between immediate successor repetitions of an activity. The 
results provide insight into the effects of different degrees of 
correlation on the expected project duration, cost, crew and 
equipment idle times and interruptions. The potential impact of 
correlation on the optimality of a project plan was found to be 
sufficiently high to justify further investigation of the nature 
and impact of correlation in construction. 
Keywords - Linear Correlation; Project Planning; Repetitive 
Construction Work; Risk Management; Stochastic Linear 
Scheduling. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Activity repetition is most prevalent at a low level in a 
work breakdown of construction tasks, such as the cycling of 
equipment in an earthmoving operation or the laying of bricks, 
but it is also common at intermediate and high levels, such as 
the laying of utility lines or the construction of many similar 
floors in a high-rise building.  Modeling repetitive activities 
requires careful attention to ensure accuracy since a small 
error in the estimate of a single repetition translates to a large 
error over many repetitions.  Effects, such as learning and 
forgetting [1] in repetitive activities can be dramatic and if not 
properly addressed can lead to significant errors in the 
estimation of project performance.  Uncertainty in activity 
performance must also be taken into account since it can 
significantly impact the accuracy of project performance 
estimates. Interactions between construction processes are 
usually sufficiently complicated that stochastic effects can 
only be modeled accurately using statistical sampling 
techniques, the most popular of which is the Monte Carlo 
method. 
Rachmat et al. [2] investigated stochastic simulation on 
repetitive projects to incorporate activity performance 
uncertainty in look-ahead scheduling. In this analysis, it was 
concluded that including uncertainty on linear schedules 
improves the forecasting capability of project performance 
and thus helps a scheduler anticipate problem areas and 
formulate new plans that improve project performance. 
Processes that are stochastic can also demonstrate 
correlation between the duration of repeated activities.  
Positive correlation means that if one activity (or repetition of 
an activity) takes longer than expected then the correlated 
activities (or repetitions of that activity) are also more likely 
to take longer. Work on correlation between construction 
activities (repeated or otherwise) is limited, but it is easy to 
demonstrate that positive correlation affects the statistical 
performance of a project by increasing kurtosis, meaning that 
more of the variance in the performance of a project results 
from occasional larger deviations as opposed to more frequent 
smaller deviations. An outstanding question, however, is 
whether the effects of correlation significantly impact the 
optimality of a plan. This paper reports on ongoing research 
into this question, presenting a series of experiments designed 
to assess the potential impact of correlation on project plan 
optimality.  If correlation is found to impact plan optimality, 
then this will justify further work into the nature and impact 
of correlation.  
The paper continues in Section II with a general definition 
of the concept of correlation and a formal definition of 
correlation as it is measured in this paper.  Section III 
introduces the modeling framework adopted for assessing the 
impact of correlation on the performance of a plan, and the 
objective functions used for measuring optimality.  The results 
from this study and their analysis are presented in Section IV, 
and the conclusions along with recommendations for 
continuing the study are presented in Section V. 
II. 
ACTIVITY DURARTION CORRELATION 
In this study, correlation is concerned with the relationship 
between the duration of activities that are subject to 
uncertainty. That is, once the uncertainty about the duration 
for one of the correlated activities has been resolved (such as 
when the activity has been executed on site) then we can make 
a statistically more accurate estimate of the duration of the 
correlated activities. Correlation occurs when the durations of 
different activities are determined by common factors, such as 
excavation activities that operate in similar ground conditions, 
utilize the same crew, and/or are overseen by the same 
superintendent.  This study is concerned with determining the 
significance of correlation in terms of its impact on the 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

optimality of a project schedule. For this reason, a range of 
levels of correlation from 0.0 (no correlation) to 1.0 (perfect 
correlation) will be considered.  Activities that are repeated 
are strong candidates for demonstrating correlation since the 
durations of the repetitions will likely be determined by many 
common factors. Moreover, the impact such correlation may 
have on the optimality of a plan could compound over many 
repetitions and thus quickly become significant.  For this 
reason, this study will consider correlation that occurs 
between repetitions of an activity but not between different 
activities. 
Correlation between the durations of repeated activities 
will be implemented by calculating a normalized weighting of 
the previous repetition duration and a stochastically generated 
duration. That is: 
 
        (1) 
where: 𝐷𝐷𝑛𝑛′ = the duration for the nth   repetition of the    
 
activity; 
 
𝐷𝐷′𝑛𝑛  = a stochastically generated component for 
 
the duration of the nth repetition of the′activity; 
 
𝐷𝐷𝑛𝑛−1 = the duration of the (n-1)th repetition of the 
 
activity; and 
 
𝑘𝑘   = the correlation between the durations of 
 
subsequent repetitions (ranging from 0.0 for no   
 
correlation to 1.0 for perfect correlation). 
       While there is no published work to support any particular 
model for representing correlation of durations for repetitive 
construction activities, the authors chose this approach since 
it is simple to implement. Further work in this aspect of 
correlation modeling is required to determine the most 
appropriate model.  While the studies by Trofin [3] and Flood 
et al. [4] were concerned with how stochastic effects in 
repetitive activities impact project performance, they gave no 
consideration to correlation. Implicitly their model had 
correlation set to k = 1.0 in that all repetitions of a given 
activity had the same duration. Rachmat et al. [2] also gave no 
consideration to correlation, although in their case correlation 
was set implicitly to k = 0.0 in that a new duration was 
generated stochastically for each repetition of a given activity. 
III. 
APPROACH 
A. Modeling Methods 
The Monte Carlo method has been implemented within a 
number of construction planning tools for modeling 
uncertainty, including the linear scheduling method (LSM) 
(see, for example, Wyrozębski, and Wyrozębska, [5]). This 
study will use the SciPy package from IPython [6] for Monte 
Carlo sampling since it provides a convenient framework for 
model development and analysis.  For this study, the expected 
durations and variances of different activities will be allowed 
to differ, while the expected durations and variances for 
repetitions of a given activity will be fixed. 
The LSM methodology represents repetitive activities as a 
production line in time and space on a two-dimensional graph, 
such as illustrated in part (b) of Fig. 1. Time, in this 
illustration, is represented on the horizontal axis and space 
(location of crew or repetition number) on the vertical axis. 
The slope of a production line represents its production rate. 
The slope of the line may be straight if the productivity rate is 
constant or variable if the productivity changes from unit to 
unit. 
B. Objective Function and Objective Variables 
The aim of the study is to determine the impact of 
correlation between the durations of repeated activities on the 
optimality of the project plan.  Two objective variables were 
adopted: Crew Idle Time; and Missed Opportunities. Crew 
Idle Time refers to the total period of time that the crews 
spend idle or inoperative between their start and finish times. 
It is caused by interference between dependent crews, and 
requires one or other of the crews to cease operations 
intermittently or lower their production rate to avoid any 
conflict. Fig. 1.a shows two examples where Crew Idle Time 
would have to be introduced (to activities B and D) to avoid 
the conflict.  In either case, the clash may have been caused 
by the preceding activity progressing more slowly than 
expected and/or the succeeding activity progressing more 
quickly than expected.  The Crew Idle Time would be the 
sum of these two periods of time.  Missed Opportunities refer 
Figure 1. Examples of Inefficiencies in Performance Optimality. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

to periods of time that could have been saved in the execution 
of a project by starting crews earlier. Fig. 1.b includes two 
examples of Missed Opportunities for completing work 
sooner, between activities A and B and between activities C 
and D. The Missed Opportunities would be the sum of these 
two periods of time. 
Missed Opportunities and Crew Idle Time are caused by 
stochastic and correlation effects that result in crew 
performance 
rates 
that 
are 
different 
from 
the 
deterministically derived optimum base plan. This base plan 
assumes that each activity progresses at its expected rate and 
the start times for each activity are set to ensure that crews 
neither spend time idle nor miss any opportunities for starting 
and finishing work sooner. Crew Idle Time represents an 
additional direct cost to the project in that the crews are 
employed for longer periods of time to complete the specified 
amount of work.  Missed Opportunities represent an indirect 
cost to the project in that they lead to a longer than necessary 
project duration and therefore result in unnecessary project 
overhead costs. 
C. Synthetically Generated Test Projects 
Investigation of the research question was completed for a 
sample of synthetically generated projects, similar to the 
approach reported by Trofin [3] for assessing the impact of 
uncertainty on LSM plan optimality. The number of activities 
in each synthetically generated project was set to 10, a large 
enough number to permit complicated interactions between 
crews.  Each activity was represented by its own Beta 
distribution which was used to generate the stochastic 
component of the duration of each repetition of that activity, 
Figure 2. Activity Boundary Generation 
Figure 3. LSM Construction. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

the parameter 𝐷𝐷′𝑛𝑛 in (1).  The Beta distribution parameters for 
each activity were selected using Monte Carlo sampling based 
on the characteristic range of values for these parameters 
published in AbouRizk and Halpin [7] for earthmoving 
operations, as detailed in Eiris [8]. For construction 
simulation, the Beta distribution has been found to provide a 
good representation of the stochastic variance apparent in 
construction activities [9]. 
The synthetically generated 10 activity projects were 
tested for sensitivity to changes in the level of correlation 
relative to the deterministically derived optimum base plan. 
This was undertaken for a range of correlation levels from k = 
0.0 to k = 1.0.  For each level of k, 1,000 alternative outcomes 
for the project were generated using Monte Carlo sampling, 
and each activity was run for 100 repetitions.  Fig. 2 shows an 
example of 1,000 samples for one activity (for k=1.0) and its 
corresponding boundaries and mean.  Fig. 3 shows one of the 
1,000 stochastically sampled outcomes for this project, for all 
10 activities, where k=1.0.  The deviation from the optimal 
plan in Fig. 3 is apparent by both the clashes between activities 
(resulting in Crew Idle Time) and the gaps between 
succeeding activities (amounting to Missed Opportunities), 
which are numerous. The following section provides a 
detailed statistical analysis of how such inefficiencies in 
project performance result from the level of correlation 
between activity repetitions. 
 
Figure 4. Distribution of Impact of Correlation, k, on Crew Idle Time and Missed Opportunities. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

IV. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
The results of the experiments described above indicated 
that lower levels of correlation, between 0.00 and 0.80, did not 
show a significant impact on either Crew Idle Time or Missed 
Opportunities.  However, for higher levels of correlation both 
variables were found to increase geometrically. Therefore, an 
additional 1,000 LSM scenarios were generated for each level 
of correlation ranging from k = 0.80 to 1.00 in increments of 
0.025, to provide a higher resolution in the results for the 
region where performance was found to change most 
dramatically. 
The results of these experiments are presented in Fig. 4, 
with the first graph plotting the frequency of occurrence of 
different Crew Idle Time for different levels of correlation, k, 
and the second graph plotting the same for Missed 
Opportunities. Fig. 5 summarizes these results showing, how 
the mean Crew Idle Time and Missed Opportunities change 
with respect to the level of correlation.  The performance of 
the project was most severely impacted when correlation was 
perfect (k=1.0), in which case the Crew Ide Time was found 
to be on average approximately 7% of the total time the crews 
were active and the Missed Opportunities were approximately 
12% of the optimum base plan’s project duration. Both of 
these values are considered to be significant, warranting 
further investigation of the nature and impact of correlation on 
project planning. 
      The Crew Idle Time and the Missed Opportunities data 
were assessed in a single sample t-test to determine the 
statistical margin of standard error of the sample mean. Each 
level of correlation was tested independently using a 
confidence level of 95%. Table 1 and 2 show the results of 
this test for different correlation levels. For Crew Idle Time 
the average margin of error from the sample mean for all the 
correlation levels was 3.7%. Similarly, for Missed 
Opportunities the average margin of error from the sample 
mean for all the correlation levels was 3.61%. Given that 
these margins of error are all below 5% at the 95% confidence 
level, the sample size of 1,000 LSM test scenarios was 
considered sufficiently large.  
 
 
Figure 5. Summary of Impact of Correlation, k, on Crew Idle Time and Missed Opportunities. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
Table 1. EXPERIMENTAL MARGIN OF ERROR AT 95% CONFIDENCE 
LEVEL, FOR CORRELATION LEVELS 0.0 TO 0.5. 
Correlation Level (k) 
0.0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
% Error – Crew Idle 
Time 
3.74 
3.69 
3.81 
3.82 
3.73 
3.80 
% Error – Missed 
Opportunities 
3.76 
3.62 
3.73 
3.65 
3.58 
3.74 
Table 2. EXPERIMENTAL MARGIN OF ERROR AT 95% CONFIDENCE 
LEVEL, FOR CORRELATION LEVELS 0.60 TO 1.0. 
Correlation Level (k) 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
1.0 
% Error – Crew Idle 
Time 
3.75 
3.76 
3.92 
3.64 
3.06 
% Error – Missed 
Opportunities 
3.67 
3.47 
3.32 
3.45 
3.73 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The impact of correlation between activities on the 
performance of construction projects is not well understood.  
Moreover, existing models of correlation are limited in 
sophistication and largely untested in terms of their accuracy.  
Before investing resources in the development of more 
appropriate models of correlation for construction it was 
decided to first test whether correlation may affect project 
performance significantly.  Specifically, this study had the 
goal of determining whether the optimality of a project plan is 
prone to disruption by unaccounted correlation.  The study 
was limited to correlation between repetitions of an activity in 
a LSM framework, using a simple model of linear 
compounding correlation. Project performance was assessed 
in terms of two objective variables: Crew Idle Time and 
project Missed Opportunities. The results showed that both 
performance indicators are significantly impacted if the level 
of correlation is high (between k=0.8 and k=1.0), in the worst 
case having an expected crew idle time of 7% of crew active 
time and an expected extension to the project duration of 12%. 
These results provide justification for undertaking further 
work developing our understanding of how correlation can 
best be modeled in construction and its impact on project 
performance.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Gates and A. Scarpa. Learning and experience curves. 
Journal of the Construction Division, ASCE, 98(CO1), March, 
proceedings papers 8778, pp. 79–101, 1972.  
[2] F. Rachmat , L. Song, and S. Lee. “Applying a Stochastic 
Linear Scheduling Method to Pipeline Construction”, 3rd 
International Conference on Construction Engineering and 
Management, ICCEM & ICCPM, May 2009, pp 154-162, 
2009. 
[3] I. Trofin. “Impact of Uncertainty on Construction Project 
Performance Using Linear Scheduling”, Master Thesis, Rinker 
School of Construction, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, 
2004. 
[4] I. Flood, R. R. A. Issa, and I.  Troffin. “Optimization of 
Stochastic Linear Schedules”, in proceedings of 11th 
International Workshop, EG-ICE, Weimar, May 2004, pp 182-
189, 2004. 
[5] P. Wyrozębski and A. Wyrozębska.  “Challenges of Project 
Planning in the Probabilistic Approach Using PERT, GERT 
and Monte Carlo”, Journal of Management and Marketing, 
JMM, Vol. 1, Issue 1, November 2013, pp 1-8, 2013. 
[6] F. Pérez and E. G. Granger. “IPython: A System for Interactive 
Scientific 
Computing”, 
Computing 
in 
Science 
and 
Engineering, 
Vol. 
9, 
No. 
3, 
pp. 
21-29, 
doi:10.1109/MCSE.2007.53, 2007. 
[7] S. AbouRizk and D. Halpin. “Statistical Properties of 
Construction Duration Data”, Journal of Construction 
Engineering 
and 
Management, 
10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9364(1992)118:3(525), 525-544, 1992. 
[8] R. Eiris Pereira. “Impact of Linear Correlation on Construction 
Project Performance Using Stochastic Linear Scheduling”, 
Master Thesis, Rinker School of Construction, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL, 2016. 
[9] S. AbouRizk, D. Halpin, J. and Wilson. “Fitting Beta 
Distributions Based on Sample Data”, Journal of Construction 
Engineering 
and 
Management, 
10.1061/(ASCE)0733-
9364(1994)120:2(288), 288-305, 1994.  
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

