Framework for Visual Analytics of Measurement Data
Paula Järvinen, Pekka Siltanen, Kari Rainio
VTT, PL 1000, 02044 VTT
Espoo, Finland
{paula.jarvinen, pekka.siltanen, kari.rainio}@vtt.fi
Abstract-Visual analytics is a recent research field for finding
knowledge  from  data  masses.  It  combines  the  strengths  of
automatic data processing, and the visual perception and
analysis capabilities of the human user. This article represents
a framework for analysis of measurement data with the help of
visual analytics. The framework consists of a message service
platform for collecting and unifying measurement data, and a
visual analytics tool for analysis.  The platform receives data
from different types of measurement devices and transforms
the data into unified format that applications can use through
standard interfaces. With the visual analytics tool users can
analyse  the  data  coming  from  the  platform.  The  tool  shows
data 
as interactive 
visualizations, both 
abstract 
and
descriptive, and suggests analysis methods to the user. User
performs reasoning by interpreting a series of consecutive
visualizations. The framework frees the analyst from the time
demanding data pre-processing and makes analysis possible
without special skills and expertise in data analysis.  A
prototype application to demonstrate the framework is
presented. Examples with real data show how explanations for
building energy consumption can be reasoned with the help of
the visual analytics tool.
Keywords- visual analytics; measurement data management;
information visualization
I.
INTRODUCTION
Advances in sensor and data processing technology have
extensively broadened the reach of measurement data. In
industry, 
sensors 
monitor 
the 
state 
of 
machinery,
environmental meters collect measurements from the
environment, building automation systems store building
information, and enterprises track the actions and behavior of
consumers.
The accumulated data are expected to contain important
knowledge that can be used to improve processes and
support decision making. However, the collected data
coming  from  different  sources  and  forms  requires  a
considerable amount of pre-processing; the relevant data
must be recognized and extracted from the data sources, and
noisy data has to be cleaned. Data values can be in non-
comparable units that have to be harmonized. Before
analysis and visualization data need to be transformed to
specific data formats. The variety of data can be confusing to
the user. Even a simple operational data base can contain
dozens of data entities and each entity dozens of attributes.
The analyst has to find the most meaningful properties and
the right analysis methods.
Visual Analytics is a recent approach to finding
knowledge from data masses [1-8]. It provides tools to
support analytical reasoning. A visual analytic tool processes
the raw data and shows the information in the form of
abstract and interconnected visualizations. Users can then
look for patterns, trends, anomalies, similarities and other
relevant “nuggets of information” from the visualizations.
Users 
can 
launch 
analysis, 
browse 
and 
navigate
visualizations and highlight and select important areas for
further study.
This article represents a framework for visual analytics of
measurement data carried out as part of MMEA
(Measurement, Monitoring, and Environmental Assessment)
research programme under the Finnish Cluster for Energy
and Environment (CLEEN). The framework consists of a
message service platform that collects and pre-processes the
measurement data, and a visual analytics tool for analysis.
The framework provides a streamlined environment for
analysis of measurement data where users reason by
interpreting a series of consecutive visualizations. The tool
combines both information visualization and descriptive
visualizations of the monitored objects. A prototype is
constructed to analyze energy consumption and indoor air
quality measurements of office buildings in a research
campus area in Finland.
The approach provides a novel general purpose data-
analysis environment for measurement data. Data can
originate from different kind of measurement devices as
well as information systems such as data warehouses. Data
are available in uniform format for analysis. Integration of a
visual analytics tool to the platform provides an easy and
comprehensive way to analyse data - no expertize in data
analysis is required. Combining abstract and descriptive
visualizations of measurement data is a novel approach in
visual analytics.
The article is organized as follows. Visual analytics is
introduced in Section II. The framework and the
implementation method are presented in Section III. Section
IV gives examples of how to reason with the help of the
visual analytics tool. Section V ends the article with
conclusions and discussion.
II.
BACKGROUND
Visual analytics is defined as “the science of analytical
reasoning facilitated by interactive visual interfaces” [1, 2].
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

It provides visual tools for finding insight from complex,
conflicting and dynamic data to support analytical reasoning
and decision making. The basic idea of visual analytics is to
unite the strengths of automatic data analysis and the visual
perception and analysis capabilities of the human user.
Humans can easily recognize patterns, colour, shape,
orientation and spatial position, detect changes and
movement, and identify specific areas and items from visual
presentations. Humans are good at reasoning and generating
problem-solving heuristics [10]. Showing data and analysis
results in the form of abstract visualizations is an efficient
way to find insight from data [11]. Computers, on the other
hand, have superior working memory and unlimited
information processing capacity without cognitive biases
[12]. The goal is to create systems that utilize human
strengths while providing external aids to compensate for
human weaknesses [2]. Visual analytics is especially
focused on situations where huge amounts of data and the
complexity of the problem make automatic reasoning
impossible without human interaction.
Visual analytics is a multi-disciplinary research area,
combining information visualization science, data mining,
mathematical and statistical methods, data management,
user interface techniques, human perception and cognition
research. The area has several challenges, listed in [8] and
[9], including management and integration of very large,
diverse and variable quality of datasets.
The markets and research have produced a variety of
visual analytics tools, including tools by major software
houses, analysis and visualization environments, libraries,
application-oriented tools, and technology-oriented tools.
But, the use of visual analytic is not yet widespread. Market
survey companies Frost & Sullivan, ReportLinker and
Gartner Group  have recently recognized the new field and
made references to recommended application areas.
III.
RESEARCH APPROACH
The research was implemented as constructive research,
by
1.
identifying the problems faced when using large
amounts of measurement data to support reasoning
based on the measurements,
2.
creating a reasoning framework, combining the
structural data model of the object monitored and
the measurements,
3.
building a prototype application to prove realistic
implementation possibilities of the framework, and
4.
testing the framework with real life reasoning
examples.
A.
Identifying the problem
Data quality is a well-known problem in data mining
research [13]. The problem is partly caused by missing or
erroneous measurements, as well as disparate data formats
when combing data from several sources. In practical
implementations, for example when comparing and
estimating measurements (for example indoor temperatures,
CO2 values) from different buildings and from the
surrounding environment, the data quality problem is faced
immediately. Buildings have their own building automation
systems, each storing the monitored data in different format.
Things get even more complicated when the building
monitoring 
data 
are 
combined 
with 
environmental
measurements, such as outdoor temperatures or aerosol
emissions that are again represented in different formats.
More problems are faced when trying to use the
measurement data to support reasoning. Often the data are
handled by facility management systems that reduce the
data into simple performance indices and trend graphs. Even
though the tools used by the data reasoning experts, such as
R Statistical computing package [14] contain functions to
import data from different sources, the task of transforming
and importing the data is often the most time consuming
task in the reasoning process. Also, the data analysis tools
often have poor visualization capabilities, producing just
static pictures for human viewing.
B.
Framework
Fig. 1 shows the framework concept. Measurement data
are collected from sensors and databases and delivered to
applications through a message service platform in unified
format. The format provides measurement data as simple
data-timestamp –pairs accompanied with metadata. Our
application, the visual analytics tool receives data from the
platform and stores it into its own database. The database
consists of time stamped measurement values, together with
background data, properties of the monitored object and
metadata of measurements. Data are stored in such a form
that visualizations and analysis can be easily applied.
Performance indices and other quantities are calculated
from the data. In our experiments, building sensor
measurements were used, but the data can be as well
environmental data or human behavior data.
A set of pre-defined data analysis and visualization
methods is coupled to the database. In our example, a set of
analysis methods that is relevant for measurement data, such
as finding correlations, trends, outliers, interesting subsets
and clusters from data, is selected. When a new data set
requires analysis, the data from the platform is loaded to the
visual analytics tool database. The predefined analysis and
visualization methods would be automatically available.
Message service
platform
Visual analytics tool
Monitored object metadata
Analysis and
visualisation
generation
Interactive visualisation
for selecting interesting
data features and objects
Figure 1. Framework concept.
All analysis show results in visual form and the
visualizations are interactive. Visual reasoning is intensified
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

by combining descriptive models of the monitored object
(e.g., maps, 3D models or product structures) with abstract
visualizations. This approach is expected to strengthen the
interpretation of the results and help users set the results into
the right context.
During the reasoning process, the user selects variables
from the database for analysis. The tool guides the user to
choose the most suitable analysis and visualizations based
on user’s selections. For example, if user has selected power
and water consumption measurements for analysis of a
whole week, user is suggested calculation of correlations
and scatterplots with regression lines and time series of
correlations, to start with. Users can select data sets from the
visualization for further analysis.
C.
Visual analytics prototype
A web application was constructed using the framework.
The monitored objects consist of office buildings of a
research campus area in Finland.  Measurements of power,
reactive power, district heat and water used of each
building, and environmental measurements including
outdoor temperature and relative humidity were available,
with measurement frequency measurement/hour. Indoor
temperature, occupancy of people and CO2 measurements
were available of one office building. In addition, the
building gross volume, gross floor area and building age
were available. A map of the campus area was used as
descriptive visualization.
The user gets a visual user interface (Fig. 2), where the
user can select monitored buildings and their properties for
analysis. The buildings can be classified and visualized
using different symbols or colors to help selecting.
Figure 2: User interface.
Visual Analytics Web UI
-
GWT, Google Visualisation API
-
Open Street Map, OpenLayers
-
X3DOM
MySQL
- Measurements
- Measurements’
metadata
- Building metadata
R
- Statistical
computing
Visual Analytics Core
- Statistics and visualisation
generation using R
- Index calculation
- Linking metadata and
statistics
- System configuration
Visualisation interface (Servlet)
JDBC
rJava
Web service (SOAP)
Data Sources
MMEA message service platform
Figure 3. Prototype architecture.
An index for energy performance for each building is
calculated. The set of visualizations and analysis methods
include basic statistics (min, max, mean, standard deviation),
histograms, time series with different time granularities
(hour/day/week), clustering, correlations, scatterplots, linear
regression, time series of correlations, autocorrelations and
cross correlations.
D.
Implementation details
The current prototype application uses a set of open
source technologies for implementing the required features
(Fig. 3). The user interface is implemented as a browser
interface, showing the monitored buildings on Open Street
Map environment. The user interactions and the visual
markers representing the monitored building on the map are
implemented using Openlayers JavaScript library. The
building 3D geometry details can also be shown in the
browser 
interface, 
by 
using 
X3DOM 
(X-Freedom)
technology [15 ].
The MMEA message service platform takes care of
collecting the data from different sensors and other
measurement sources, as well as transforming the
measurements 
to 
unified 
data 
representation. 
The
measurements, together with measurement metadata and
building properties from the Real estate information register
maintained by Finnish Population Register Centre, are stored
in the MySQL database.
Statistical computing is performed using R statistical
library [14]. In the current prototype version, the graphics for
example shown in Figure 2 are generated using R, too.
However, in the future the R graphics will be replaced with
more 
visually 
pleasing 
and 
interactive 
JavaScript
visualizations, using JavaScript visualization packages such
as Google Visualisation API.
Interfaces between MMEA Visual Analytics tool core
and other components are implemented using standard
technologies: browser server communication is implemented
using REST servlets, database is connected to the core via
JDBC, R statistical library is integrated to the core using
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

rJava package, and data are received from message service
platform using Web Service interface.
IV.
EXAMPLE OF USING THE FRAMEWORK
The goal of the visual analytics tool is to help users find
interesting phenomena and explanations to support decision
making.  It  is  performed  by  interpreting  a  series  of
consecutive visualizations. The principle is presented here by
simple examples.
A.
Data overview
Let us assume that a user is interested in the energy
efficiency of the campus area buildings. First, the user gets
an overview of the energy efficiency of the buildings on the
map (Fig. 4). Different colours indicate the energy
performance index values of each building, showing a rough
estimate of energy performance of each building. User can
click the buildings and get more details.
To get a better overview, the user wants to see the basic
statistics and time series of all the buildings (Fig. 5). Figures
show two interesting things: Most buildings have low energy
performance index (i.e., low energy usage) but some have
very high values. The time series show that energy usage on
weekend, and on day and night differ a lot.
Figure 4. Overview.
Figure 5. Basic statistics.
B.
Finding explanations
Next, the user wants to find reasons for the big variances
in the energy performance index values. User considers if the
building age is behind the high energy performance values.
A scatterplot with correlation coefficient value 0.43 and an
ascending regression line give hint that there is some
correlation between age and energy performance index (Fig.
6). The user can select an object from the scatterplot and see
the corresponding buildings on the map. In the scatterplot
user has paid attention to plots that indicate high index value
and building age. The plots prove out to come from one
building that is highlighted on the map.  Similarly, user can
study other background variables.
Figure 6. Correlation with age.
C.
Exploring subsets
The user can also select data subsets of visualizations and
perform analysis with subsets. In the example in Fig. 7, three
clusters are formed based on the indices, and the statistics
and details of one of the clusters are shown.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 7. Analysis of subsets.
D.
Multivariate analysis
The second example is about multivariate analysis. The
example 
studies 
correlations 
between 
the 
energy
performance index, district heat and water consumption (Fig.
8). The figures show that there is a strong correlation
between district heat and energy performance. User wants to
study more this correlation and produces a scatterplot. The
plot shows an interesting pattern that the user wants to study
more.  It  proves  out  to  represent  a  specific  building  that  is
highlighted on the map.
Figure 8. Multivariate analysis.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
A novel visual analytics based approach to tackle the
information overload problem was introduced. It consists of
a framework including a message platform and a visual
analytics tool for experts and researchers to analyze
measurement data. The approach was evaluated with
identification and diagnostics of problems from building
energy consumption.
The trials suggest that the framework provides solutions
to the introduced data analysis problems. It provides a
streamlined general-purpose environment for analysis of
measurement data. Data are available from the message
service platform in a standard form, avoiding the time
demanding pre-processing. The analyst gets high quality data
from the platform and can focus on the analysis task. Also
the same pre-processed data are available to other
applications, thus avoiding overlapping work.
Data analysis has been considered a job that requires
special skills and expertise. With the suggested visual
analytics tool the user needs no beforehand knowledge of
data analysis or statistical methods. The complex analysis
algorithms are hidden behind the user interface. The user
only needs to select data, launch analysis from a pre-defined
set of suitable analysis and interpret the results. Using
abstract 
visualizations 
together 
with 
descriptive
visualizations of the monitored objects intensifies the
interpretation of the results. Thereby the data analysis can be
performed by the domain expert, instead of a data analysis
expert, as before.
Taking new datasets for analysis is straightforward. The
data model of the tool, the user interface and the analysis
methods are general purpose and can be applied as well as to
environmental data or human behavior. Data coming from
the message platform is ready for analysis after simple
specifications. If new analysis methods are required, they
can be easily taken into use from the R statistical package
resources. The only time demanding tasks are adding the
application specific calculations, such as performance
indices, and adding the descriptive visualizations. The
benefits of the framework are summarized in Table I.
TABLE I.
BENEFITS OF MMEA PLATFORM.
x
General-purpose environment for analysis of measurement data.
x
Uniform data format for analysis, independent of individual data
sources.
x
Data is pre-processed only once, proving high quality data for
different kind of applications and saving overlapping work.
x
A general purpose data analysis  tool for non-experts
x
Easy and comprehensive visualizations to reason and interpret
data.
x
More analysis power by combining abstract and descriptive
visualizations.
The current prototype does not contain a full set of
interactive features. A real visual analytics application would
enable making most of the interactions needed in reasoning
by interacting with the visualizations generated by the
system. Creating truly interactive visualizations in the
browser environment is a challenge that will be tackled next.
Another objective would be to develop further the user
support in reasoning. At the moment the tool suggest
analysis methods that are based on the qualities of the
selected data. In addition to them knowledge of user actions
and semantics could be utilized. The user could also discard
obvious relationships to diminish the problem space. The
third goal would be to study the usability of the solution:
does the framework help users to utilize measurement data,
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

find interesting phenomena and explanations, and improve
decision making.
The framework described above enables linking the
measurements into the object that is monitored: in examples
above map based visualization of a set of buildings was used
as a user interface to access the reasoning algorithms.
Currently, the prototype supports map visualization and
experimental 3D model visualization showing the monitored
objects in the browser. In the future the visualizations of the
monitored object will be further developed. Also, the
prototype architecture enables embedding the visualizations
to other user interfaces, such as aerial 3D model, allowing
the user navigate in the 3D model instead of using the map
user interface (Fig. 9).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has been partly funded by the CLEEN Cluster for
energy and environment, a company managing the Strategic
Centre for Science, Technology and Innovation in the theme
energy and environment, Tekes, the Finnish Funding Agency
for Technology and Innovation, and VTT Technical Research
Centre of Finland.
REFERENCES
[1]
P.  C.  Wong  and  J.  Thomas,  Guest  Editors'  Introduction--
Visual Analytics, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications,
vol 24 (5), Sep/Oct. 2004, pp. 20-21 4, No. PNNL-SA-41935.
[2]
J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook,. Illuminating the path: The
research and development agenda for visual analytics. 1st ed.
Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society, 2005. ISBN
0769523234.
[3]
D. Keim, F. Mansmann, J. Schneidewind and H. Ziegler,
"Challenges in visual data analysis" Tenth International
Conference on Information Visualization, London, UK IEEE,
Jul. 2006, pp. 9.
[4]
K.  Cook,  R.  Earnshaw  and  J.  Stasko.  Guest  editors'
introduction: discovering the unexpected. Computer Graphics
and Applications, IEEE, Vol. 27(5), 2007, pp. 15-19.
[5]
P. C. Wong, "Visual analytics science and technology",
Information Visualization, Vol. 6(1), 2007, pp. 1-2. ISSN
1473-8716. doi: 10.1057/palgrave.ivs.9500149.
[6]
D.  Keim,  F.Mansmann,  J.  Schneidewind,  J.  Thomas  and  H.
Ziegler, "Visual analytics: Scope and challenges".In Visual
Data Mining. First edition ed. Heidelberg: Springer, 2008, pp.
76-90.
[7]
M. Streit  and 0. Bimber, "Visual analytics, Seeking the
Unknown", Computer, vol 46(7), Jul 2013, pp 20-21.
[8]
D. Keim, J. Kohlhammer, G. Ellis (eds.), "Mastering the
information age: solving problems with visual analytics",
First edition ed. Goslar, Germany: Eurographics assiociation,
2010.
[9]
J-D. Fekete, "Visual analytics Infrastructure, From Data
Management to Exploration", Computer, vol 46(7), Jul. 2013,
pp 22-29.
[10] S. K. Card, J.D. Mackinlay and B. Shneiderman, Readings in
information visualization: using vision to think. 1st ed.
Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
[11] C. Ware, Information visualization: perception for design.1st
ed. Morgan Kaufmann, 2004.
[12] T. M. Green, W. Ribarsky and B. Fisher, "Visual analytics for
complex concepts using a human cognition model", IEEE
Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
VAST'08, Colubmus, Ohio, USA, IEEE Computer Society,
Oct.2008, pp. 91-98.
[13] E. Rahm, H.H Do "Data cleaning: Problems and current
approaches", IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin 2000, Vol. 23,
No. 4, pp. 3-13.
[14] W. N. Venables, D.M. Smith,. An introduction to R, 2012,
(October 
26 
- 
last 
update). 
Available:
http://cran.r-
project.org/doc/manuals/R-intro.pdf [retrieved Oct. 2012].
[15] X3DOM home page. 
Available:
http://www.x3dom.org/
[retrieved Nov 2013].
Figure 9. 3D model of the campus area with monitored buildings highlighted.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

