A Constraint-Based Graphical Approach to Modelling Construction Systems:  
An alternative to discrete-event simulation 
 
Ian Flood 
Rinker School, College of Design, Construction and Planning, 
University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida, USA 
flood@ufl.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract — An essential part of the planning and control of any 
construction system is the development of a model of the 
project’s key processes.  The Critical Path Method (CPM) is 
the most widely used process modelling method in construction 
since it is simple to use and reasonably versatile.  Most other 
modelling techniques have limited scope being aimed at 
specialized types of project.  Linear scheduling, for example, 
provides excellent visual insight into the performance of a 
system but is limited to modelling construction processes that 
progress along a line, such as tunnels and highways.  Discrete-
event simulation is the most versatile of all modelling methods, 
but it lacks the simplicity in use of CPM and for this reason 
has not been widely adopted in practice.  This paper 
demonstrates an alternative modelling approach designed to 
provide the visual insight of linear scheduling, the modelling 
versatility of simulation, and yet be relatively simple to use and 
understand.  The principles and use of the approach are 
demonstrated in application to three example construction 
industry projects. 
Keywords – interactive modeling, discrete-event simulation, 
process 
modeling, 
graphical 
constraint-based 
modeling, 
visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
The last 100 years has seen the development and 
application of a wide range of methods for modelling 
construction processes.  An analysis of the genealogy [1] of 
these tools shows that they can be grouped into three main 
categories: the Critical Path Methods (CPM); the linear 
scheduling 
techniques; 
and 
discrete-event 
process 
simulation.  Most other tools are either an enhancement or 
an integration of these methods.  For example, 4D-CAD and 
nD-CAD planning methods [2] [3], where one of the 
dimensions is time, are strictly CPM models hybridized 
with 3D-CAD for visualization purposes. 
 
Each of the three main groups of modelling method are, 
unfortunately, only relevant to a restricted range of 
construction planning problems.  The CPM methods (the 
most popular in construction) are well suited to modelling 
projects at a relatively general level of detail, but are limited 
in terms of the types of interactions they can consider 
between tasks [4].  Moreover, CPM models become 
cumbersome when used to model repetitive processes, and 
provide little understanding of the interactions between 
repetitive tasks.  When presented in Gantt Chart format, a 
CPM model provides some visual insight into how a 
system’s logic affects its performance (thus suggesting more 
optimal ways of executing work) but this is limited to event-
based logical dependencies and their impact on time-wise 
performance. 
 
Linear scheduling, on the other hand, is targeted at 
projects where there is repetition at a high level, such as 
high-rise, tunnelling, and highway construction work (see, 
for example, Matilla and Abraham [5]).  These models are 
very easy to understand and represent the system’s logic and 
its 
performance 
within 
an 
integrated 
framework.  
Consequently, they provide the modeller with strong visual 
insight that can help identify more optimal ways of 
achieving the project’s production goals.  For example, they 
show in graphic form how the relative progress of repetitive 
tasks can lead to conflict, both in terms of time and physical 
interference between productive resources (such as crews 
and equipment).  However, linear scheduling cannot be used 
to model non-repetitive work, and it includes some 
simplistic assumptions which often make it difficult to 
model real-world repetitive processes.  For example, 
velocity diagrams (a linear scheduling technique) cannot 
easily represent operations that follow different paths, such 
as two underground utility lines that interact at a cross-over 
point but otherwise follow different routes.   
 
Finally, discrete-event simulation (see, for example, 
Halpin and Woodhead [6]; Sawhney et al. [7]; Hajjar and 
AbouRizk [8]) is very versatile in that it can in principle 
model any type of interaction between tasks and any type of 
construction process (including repetitive and non-repetitive 
work).  However, the effort involved in defining and 
validating a simulation model means that in practical terms 
it is best suited to systems that cannot be modelled 
sufficiently accurately using CPM or linear scheduling.  In 
addition, simulation models provide no direct visual 
indication of how a system’s logic determines its 
performance.  That is, performance is an output from the 
model after it has been fully developed; it is not an integral 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

part of the model and therefore its dependence on the 
model’s logic is not directly apparent.  
 
Most projects include a variety of processes some of 
which may be best modelled using CPM while others may 
be better represented by linear scheduling or simulation.  
However, it is not normally practical to expect planners and 
plan-users to employ more than one modelling method to 
manage a project.  In any case, using several tools that are 
not fully compatible makes it impossible to seek a globally 
optimal solution to a planning problem.  On the other hand, 
the alternative approach of using one tool to represent all 
situations (typically CPM) compromises a user’s ability to 
plan and control work optimally. 
 
Ideally, what is needed is a single tool that is well 
suited to modelling the broad spectrum of repetitive and 
non-repetitive construction work, is highly versatile, 
provides insight into better ways of organizing work, and is 
easy to use.  This paper goes back to basics and proposes a 
new modelling paradigm, Foresight, that addresses the 
above issues.  Section II introduces the principals of the 
Foresight modelling system.  Sections III to V provide three 
case studies demonstrating the application of Foresight to 
construction projects that would otherwise best be modelled 
using discrete-event simulation: a simple earthmoving 
operation, a tunnelling operation; and an underground utility 
laying operation. 
II. 
PRINCIPAL MODELING CONCEPTS OF FORESIGHT 
 
The goal in developing the new approach to modelling 
was to attain the simplicity of CPM, visual insight of linear 
scheduling, and the modelling versatility of simulation.  In 
addition, hierarchical structuring of a model (see for 
example, Huber et al. [9] and Ceric [10]) and interactive 
development of a model were identified as requisite 
attributes of the new approach since they facilitate model 
development and aid understanding of the organization and 
behaviour of a system. 
 
The three principle concepts of the Foresight modelling 
approach are as follows and illustrated in Figure 1:  
Attribute Space.  This is the environment within which the 
model of the process exists.  Each dimension defining this 
space represents a different attribute involved in the 
execution of the process, such as time, cost, excavators, 
skilled labour, number of repetitions of an item of work, 
permits to perform work, and materials.  The attributes 
that make-up this space are the resources that are used to 
measure performance and/or that could have a significant 
impact on performance. 
Work Units.  These are elements that represent specific 
items of work that need to be completed as part of the 
project.  They are represented by a bounded region within 
the attribute space.  A unit can represent work at a high 
level (such as ‘Construct Structural System’), a low level 
(such as ‘Erect Column X’) or any intermediate level.  
Collectively, the work units must represent all work of 
interest but should not represent any item of work more 
than once. Work units may exist in different subsets of 
attribute space. 
Constraints and Objectives.  Constraints define the 
relationships between the work units and the attribute 
space, either directly with the attribute space (such as 
constraint ‘a’ in Figure 1) or indirectly via relationships 
with other work units (such as constraints ‘b’, ‘c’, and ‘d’ 
in Figure 1).  These constraints effectively define the 
location of the edges of the work units.  A constraint can 
be any functional relationship between the borders of the 
work units and/or the space within which they exist.  
Practical examples include: (i) ensuring that crews at 
different work units maintain a safe working distance; (ii) 
ensuring that the demand for resources never exceeds the 
number available; (iii) determining the duration for a task 
based on the number of times it has already been 
repeated; and (iv) ensuring that idle time for a task is kept 
to a minimum.  The objectives are the specific goals of 
the planning study, such as to maximize profits or to 
complete work by a deadline (such as constraint ‘d’ in 
Figure 1).  Fundamentally, they are the same thing as 
constraints, albeit at a higher level of significance, and 
therefore are treated as such within the proposed new 
modelling system. 
 
There are two secondary concepts of the Foresight 
modelling system, both concerned with its structure: 
Nesting.  Work units can be nested within other work 
units (such as work unit ‘D’ in Figure 1 which is shown to 
be within work unit ‘C’ which is respectively part of ‘E’), 
or overlap with each other (such as work units ‘A’ and 
‘B’).  Nesting of work units can be defined explicitly, 
allowing the model to be understood at different levels of 
abstraction, increasing its readability, reducing the 
likelihood of errors in the design of the model, and 
  work unit E 
 
work unit B 
work unit C 
work unit D 
work unit A 
attribute W (e.g. distance) 
attribute X (e.g. time) 
constraint ‘d’ (objective) 
constraint ‘c’ 
(relative) 
constraint ‘b’ 
(relative) 
 constraint ‘a’ (absolute) 
Figure 1.  Schematic illustrating the three principal concepts of Foresight. 
work unit F 
  K 
work unit F 
  K 
work unit F 
  K 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

reducing the amount of work required to define and 
update a model. 
Repetition. Work units can be repeated (such as work unit 
F in Figure 1) and can be implemented at any level within 
the nesting hierarchy, thus minimizing the amount of 
work required to define a model.  Repetition of a work 
unit will include a repetition of all relevant constraints 
and its nested work units and their constraints. 
A specification of Foresight is that model development be 
implemented interactively.  That is, the visual presentation 
of a model is updated and all constraints are resolved as the 
work units and constraints are either edited or added to the 
model.   This way, the modeller can see immediately the 
impact of any changes or additions that are made.  Another 
point to note is that these models are presented as a plot of 
the work units within at least two dimensions of the attribute 
space.  This form of presentation allows the progress of 
work to be visualized within the model’s functional 
structure.  This is an extrapolation of the way in which 
linear scheduling models are presented, and has the 
advantage of allowing the user to visualize directly how the 
performance of the model is dependent on its structure.   
These points will be illustrated in the following three 
example applications. 
It should be noted that Foresight is, strictly speaking, a 
simulation system in that it requires the use of a three-phase 
simulation algorithm to resolve its constraints. 
III. 
SIMPLE EARTHMOVING OPERATION 
The first system to be modelled is that of a simple 
earthmoving system comprising an excavator used to load 
dump trucks.  Figure 2 shows a CYCLONE [6] simulation 
process diagram of this system for a situation where there 
are three trucks (each of 5 cu-yds capacity), and one 
excavator (with a 1 cu-yd bucket).  The excavator must 
therefore perform five cycles to load a truck. 
 
This model, once defined within the computer and validated, 
would be run several times to gain measures of performance 
of the system, such as production rates and queue length 
distributions. 
The Foresight representation of this system is presented 
in Figure 3.  Part (a) of this figure shows the hierarchical 
form of the model (without the main constraints added) 
whereas part (b) shows the model in its normal format with 
all constraints added representing, for example, work unit 
durations, and precedence.   Parts (c) and (d) of Figure 3 
show the model using the variables trucks versus time, and 
excavators versus time respectively.  Figure 3(c) only shows 
the model to the 2nd level in its hierarchy, even though the 
truck activities go down to the 3rd level, to allow a more 
generalized understanding of its performance.  Likewise, 
Figure 3(d) shows the activities of the excavator down to the 
4th rather than 5th level.  These plots effectively show the 
demand for these productive resources over time, indicating 
any idle time and thus possible imbalance in the resource 
combinations. Appropriate statistics concerning these factors 
can be readily extracted. 
Several important differences between CYCLONE and 
Foresight can be understood by comparing the model 
representations of Figs. 2 and 3.  First, it should be 
understood that CYCLONE requires the complete logic of 
the model (as represented by the CYCLONE diagram of 
Figure 2) to be finalized before the system’s performance 
can be predicted in a simulation run.  In contrast, the 
Foresight model integrates the structure and logic of the 
model and the estimated performance of the system within a 
single format (as represented by Figure 3(b)).  This gives 
Foresight a couple of significant advantages.  First, as 
elements are added to the model and its parameters altered, 
the impact of these edits on the estimated performance of the 
system are seen immediately - the model does not have to be 
completed before the simulation results are produced.  This 
is a similar advantage to that seen in other graphically based 
planning tools such as Linear Scheduling.  The second 
advantage is that in a Foresight model, the way in which the 
logic and structure of the model affect  the performance of 
the system is directly visible, which in turn assists in the 
optimization of the design of the system - this point will be 
illustrated in the next case study of a sewer-tunneling 
operation. 
IV. 
TUNNELLING OPERATION  
The second study is concerned with modelling the 
construction of a 2 m internal diameter sewer, where 
tunnelling is through clay and the lining is formed from 
concrete ring segments.  The example is used to illustrate the 
steps in developing a Foresight model for a problem that, 
given its complexities, should otherwise be modelled using 
simulation methods.  
A component oriented approach should be adopted when 
developing a Foresight model, such that each work unit 
represents the construction of a physical component or sub-
start 1 
consolidate 5 
start 3 
generate  5 
Figure 2.  CYCLONE simulation process diagram for a simple 
earthmoving operation. 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

component of the facility under construction.  A top-down, 
hierarchical approach is an effective strategy for developing 
these models, starting with the highest level component (the 
complete facility) and then breaking it down into its 
constituent components.  Figure 4 shows the hierarchical 
structure of the Foresight model of the tunnelling operation.  
At the lowest level in this breakdown are the work units 
Excavation representing the cutting of 1 m length of the 
tunnel, and Concrete Lining which involves placing and 
grouting concrete ring segments in the 1 m cut.  Excavating 
and Concrete Lining are repeated 3 times thereby 
constructing a 3 m length of tunnel, which is then followed 
by Light Track which lays a 3 m length of track used to carry 
a manually propelled train for removal of spoil and delivery 
Figure 3.  Foresight model of a simple earthmoving operation. 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

of concrete ring segments.  If two crews are used for the 
project then the model shown in Figure 4 would be 
duplicated (once for each crew) and placed within a parent 
work unit. 
The work unit at the second highest level represents the 
process of constructing a 3 m section of tunnel, and will be 
repeated for the length of the tunnel.   
Addition of constraints can occur as work units are added 
to the model.  For the tunnel model, the main constraints 
would be as follows: 
 The work units representing 3 m tunnel sections are 
positioned serially both in the Time and Tunnel Length 
dimensions. 
 The work unit representing the Sewer tunnel project 
extends in the Tunnel Length direction to a value equal 
to the tunnel length. 
 The 3 m tunnel section work units start at the left side of 
the Sewer tunnel project work unit and extend all the 
way to (but not beyond) the right side of the Sewer 
tunnel project work unit. 
 The 1 m lined section work units are positioned serially 
both in the Time and Tunnel Length dimensions. 
 The 1 m lined section work units span from the left to 
right side of their 3 m tunnel section work unit. 
 Excavation 
and 
Concrete 
lining 
are 
positioned 
sequentially in the Time dimension. 
 
Completion of any Foresight model requires addition of 
the constraints. For the tunnelling model, this includes 
adding functions specifying the individual heights of the 
Excavation, Concrete lining, and Light Track work units, 
indicating their respective durations, the result of which is 
shown in Figure 5.  For convenience, only the first 30 m of 
tunnel construction is shown.  Note, the progress of the 
project follows a curve, which results from the fact that the 
duration to remove spoil and bring concrete ring segments to 
the tunnel face increases with tunnel length.  Such a 
dependence can be readily established as a function of the 
position along the length of the tunnel. 
There are many refinements that may be made to this 
model to provide more accuracy and/or greater detail to 
allow decisions to be made about equipment types to be 
employed.  Additional detail may involve, for example, 
further decomposition of the Excavation, Concrete lining 
and Light track works units.  Excavation may contain work 
units representing digging at the tunnel face, loading the light 
train, hauling the spoil from the tunnel, dumping the spoil, 
and returning the light train.  Other attributes may be added, 
such as crew members, allowing these to be shared between 
different work units concurrently. 
To illustrate the visual power of these models, consider 
the problem where two separate crews will be employed for 
tunnelling, each starting at the same point but heading in 
opposite directions.  If crew-performance records indicate 
that 1 crew tends to operate about 50% faster than the other 
then we would want to find a starting location that would 
minimize the total project duration.  If the tunnel was 60 m 
in length and employed two crews starting at the midpoint, 
with the slower crew heading to the left and the faster crew 
heading to the right, then the model would appear as shown 
in Figure 6. It can be seen from this chart that the faster crew 
should probably start 3 m or 6 m to the left of the midpoint to 
minimize the project duration – both choices could be tested 
quickly.  Alternatively, an additional dimension could be 
added to the model representing starting the crews at 
different positions along the tunnel length, thus providing an 
automated sensitivity analysis of project duration versus 
starting point for the crews. 
V. 
UNDERGROUND UTILITY LAYING OPERATION 
A Foresight model of an electrical cable laying project, 
complete with constraints, is shown in Figure 7.  The 
operation is typical of the type of process that would be 
  Sewer tunnel project 
 
  3 m tunnel section 
 Light track 
 3 m lined section 
    
 1 m lined section 
  Concrete lining 
 lining 
  Excavation 
Figure 4.  Foresight hierarchical model structure representing a tunneling 
operation. 
Tunnel length 
Time  
Light track 
Excavation 
Concrete lining 
3 m tunnel section 
Figure 5.  Tunnelling model with constraints added. 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

modelled using linear scheduling except that it includes 
some logical features that are beyond conventional linear 
scheduling methods.  
The project comprises four main tasks: Excavate trench; 
Shore trench; Lay Cable; and Backfill, each of which is 
colour coded.  The smaller sized work units represent work 
on 1 m lengths of the project while the larger work units are 
essentially summaries of each task.  Important feature of 
this model are: 
 There are two crews available for excavation work and 
two crews available for shoring.  The first excavation 
crew is faster than the second and will leap frog them 
when they reach their starting point. 
 Shore trench has two constraints relative to Excavate 
trench, a minimum and a maximum permissible 
distance.  The minimum working distance is for safety 
and to prevent interference between the crews.  The 
maximum distance is to minimize the chances of the 
trench collapsing before being shored.  In this example, 
the Shore trench crew must spend some time idle to 
ensure that the minimum distance constraint is not 
violated.  If they operated considerably slower then the 
excavation crew would have had to spend time idle to 
ensure the maximum distance buffer was not violated. 
 A constraint is imposed on both Lay cable and Backfill 
that prevents gaps between their work units within the 
model (effectively meaning they cannot spend time 
Time  
Cable run 
Figure 7.  Underground electrical cable laying operation. 
Tunnel length 
Time  
Fast crew 
Slow crew 
Midpoint of tunnel 
Figure 6.  Tunnelling model with two crews starting at centre and heading in opposite directions. 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

idle).  This constraint reduces the amount of time their 
crews are employed on the project.  As a consequence, 
Lay cable and Backfill are forced to start later. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper the author has proposed a new approach, 
named Foresight, for modelling construction processes built 
on concepts relevant to contemporary project planning.  The 
principles upon which Foresight is based provide it with the 
versatility necessary to model the broad spectrum of 
construction projects that until now have required the use of 
several different modelling tools. The resultant models are 
highly visual in form, representing the progress of work 
within the model structure.  This provides insight into how 
the design of a process will impact its performance, and 
suggests ways of optimizing project performance.  
Research is on-going developing detailed models using 
this method for a variety of project types.  The objective of 
these studies is to determine the successes and limitations of 
the proposed planning method in the real-world, and to 
determine refinements that will increase its value as a 
modelling tool. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Flood, R.R.A. Issa, and W. Liu, “A New Modeling Paradigm for 
Computer-Based Construction Project Planning”, Proc. Joint Intnl. 
Conf. on Cmptg. and Decision-Making in Civil and Building 
Engineering, Montreal, Canada, ASCE, June 2006, pp 1-11. 
[2] B. Koo and M. Fischer, “Feasibility Study of 4D CAD in Commercial 
Construction”, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 
ASCE, 126(4),  2000, pp 251-260. 
[3] R.A. Issa, I. Flood, and W. O’Brien, (Eds.), 4D CAD and 
Visualization in Construction: Developments and Applications, A. A. 
Balkema Publishers, Steenwijk, 2003. 
[4] R.B. Harris and P.G. Ioannou, “Scheduling Projects with Repeating 
Activities”, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management. 
ASCE, 124(4), 1998, pp 269-276. 
[5] K.G. Matilla and D.M. Araham, “Linear-Scheduling: past research 
efforts and future directions”, Engineering, Construction, and 
Architectural Management, Blackwell Science Ltd, 5(3), 1998, pp 
294-303. 
[6] D.W. Halpin and R.W. Woodhead, Design of Construction and 
Process Operations, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, NY, 1976. 
[7] A. Sawhney, S.M. AbouRizk, and D.W. Halpin, “Construction 
Project Simulation using CYCLONE”, Canadian Journal of Civil 
Engineering, 25(1), 1998, pp 16-25. 
[8] D. Hajjar and S.M. AbouRizk, “Unified Modeling Methodology for 
Construction Simulation” Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, ASCE, 128(2), 2002, pp 174-185. 
[9] P. Huber, K. Jensen, and R.M. Shapiro, "Hierarchies of Coloured 
Petri Nets", Proc. 10th Int. Conf. on Application and Theory of Petri 
Nets, (LNCS 483), Springer-Verlag, 1990, pp 313-341S.M. 
[10] V. Ceric, “Hierarchical Abilities of Diagrammatic Representations of 
Discrete-Event Simulation Models”, Proc. 1994 Winter Simulation 
Conference, (Eds. J. D. Tew, S. Manivannan, D. A, Sadowski, and A. 
F. Seila), 1994, pp 589-594. 
 
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

