Testing of feasibility of QKD system deployment in commercial metropolitan ﬁber
networks
Monika Jacak
National Laboratory of Quantum Technology
Wrocław, Poland
jacak.monika@gmail.com
Damian Melniczuk
and Lucjan Jacak
Institute of Physics
Wrocław University of Technology
Wrocław, Poland
lucjan.jacak@pwr.edu.pl
Ireneusz J´o´zwiak
and Piotr J´o´zwiak
Institute of Informatics
Wrocław University of Technology
Wrocław Poland
ireneusz.jozwiak@pwr.edu.pl
Abstract—A description of test-assessment of TELECOM 1550
nm optical ﬁber used for a quantum channel in entangled
Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) setup, EPR S405 Quelle (Aus-
trian Institute of Technology) is presented. The system at work
was observed and parameters related to dark quantum channel
were collected by an appropriately designed test card. Series
of measurements were carried out for various conﬁgurations of
1550 nm (optimal transmission wave-length) optical ﬁber patch-
cord the same as used in standard metropolitan TELECOM
networks including distances up to 6.5 km long. The particular
attention has been paid to model the real lines with welding
points and connectors in view of rigorous requirements regarded
conservation of photon polarization in EPR S405 system. Tests
allowed for assessment of Qantum Bit Error (QBER) level in
standard telecommunication ﬁber infrastructure when trying to
implement entangled QKD system vulnerable in particular to po-
larization perturbations. Another drawback, incommensurability
of the central transmission wave-length in ﬁber with the wave-
length of photons in EPR S405 system, was also assessed and
the possibility of implementation of QKD EPR S405 system with
1550 nm optical ﬁbers has been veriﬁed.
Keywords–Quantum Key Distribution; TELECOM network; op-
tical ﬁbers; quantum cryptography; quantum entanglement; photon
polarization
I.
INTRODUCTION
Quantum cryptography is a newly developed ﬁeld in the
security information area [1]. It is closely related to progress in
Quantum Information Processing (QIP) and utilizes advances
in practical implementation of quantum technology [1][2]. Re-
cently reported achievements in construction of large quantum
computer additionally enhance signiﬁcance of cryptography
methods which would be resistant against attack of quantum
computer. Such a technique is linked to quantum cryptogra-
phy, which is regarded as absolutely safe, at least in theory.
Growing importance of security of information in classical
communication systems create also challenging problems for
sufﬁcient level of safety for communication at least for some
special applications. In this regard, quantum cryptography also
offers in principle unconditional safe protocols for secret key
distribution which can be used for encryption/decryption of
classical communication in OTP (One-Time-Pad) scheme. The
quantum cryptography offers with this respect a method of
quantum key distribution (QKD) over quantum channel of
communication [1]. This channel is, however, extremely fragile
and vulnerable to various perturbations. Requirement to ensure
the sufﬁcient level of so-called quantum coherency needed
for error-less and safe communication is the major drawback
of QKD technology severely limiting distance of quantum
protected information exchange to ca. 100 km over uniform
well selected laboratory optical ﬁbers. Because TELECOM
optical ﬁber networks used commercially in metropolitan
communication systems do not meet prohibitive requirements
for quantum communication as were provided in laboratory
installations, there arose the question of assessment of possible
usage of commercial already installed optical ﬁber networks
to deploy QKD protected communication. This is the aim of
the reported here investigation carried out in National Lab-
oratory of Quantum Technology (Wrocław) in collaboration
with a TELECOM company. In this report we summarize tests
of commercial communication patch-cords of optical ﬁbers
supplied by the TELECOM company, which are the same as
typically installed in metropolitan network. In particular, the
tested lines where attributed with numerous weldings of ﬁbers
and standard connectors also typical in telecommunication
practice. The length of tested quantum lines varied between
several meters up to 6.5 km. The commonly used ﬁbers works
at transmission window close to 1550 nm (infra-red) and the
usefulness of such ﬁbers to apply as quantum channel was an
especially important question to answer.
The object for testing was the QKD system on entangled
photons, EPR S405 Quelle designed and manufactured by
Austrian Institute of Technology (AIT) [3]. Veriﬁcation of
the possibility of application of commercial network ﬁbers
to establish dark quantum channel for EPR S405 Quelle
system was performed with emphasizing the role played by
polarization characteristics of optical ﬁbers because the tested
system employs polarization of photons as ﬂying qubits for
quantum Alice-Bob communication. The photon polarization
has a fragile character and high level of coherence (con-
servation of particular quantum state) is required by QKD
protocol utilizing quantum entanglement phenomenon in terms
of photon polarization.
Moreover, the photons for the dark channel of communi-
cation in the original EPR S405 system have wave-length 810
nm near infra-red photons while the standard 1550 nm wave-
length ﬁbers poorly ﬁt with their transmittance maximum to
the carrying qubit photon wave-length. Therefore, to answer
the question whether is it possible to use EPR S405 system in
commercial networks 1550 nm, commonly utilized at present
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

in city networks in already installed optic ﬁber connections,
seems to be of high signiﬁcance for QKD practical implemen-
tation without additional cost for new connection lines better
adjusted to photon wave-length.
II.
SHORT CHARACTERIZATION OF QKD EPR S405
QUELLE SYSTEM
Generally, there are two types of QKD systems: one type
create systems using nonentangled photons for dark quan-
tum communication, and the second type–systems employing
entangled pairs of photons. The former are more popular
and encode quantum information in the phase of the light,
additionally using quantum generator of random numbers for
tossing the phase. In this sense, they are not strictly quantum
and as a matter of fact it is not proved their equivalence to real
quantum systems with discrete variables, though such a instal-
lations allow for successful implementation of the fundamental
QKD protocol, BB84 [4] and its modiﬁcations like SARG04
[5]. The system on entangled photons is more fundamentally
quantum, as utilizes completely nonclassical phenomenon of
quantum entanglement. At present there is only one such
system produced by Austrian Institute of Technology spin-off
Vienna University conducted by Zeilinger’s group [3]. This
system called EPR S405 Quelle (the acronym EPR indicates
linkage to commonly known Einstein-Rosen-Podolsky paradox
positively resolved by experiment of Aspect in eighties of
the last century [6]). Entanglement takes advantage of linear
property of tensor product of Hilbert spaces, and corresponds
to the decomposition of the wave function of larger system
onto components related to subsystems A and B,
ΨAB =
∑
i,j
cijψA ⊗ ψB.
(1)
Due to this simple property, none of two subsets A or B is
its own pure quantum state as due to summation many various
pure states of both systems ψA(B) contribute to the total wave
function ΨAB. The latter state is called as entangled if the for-
mula (1) cannot be factorized [1]. In such a case, both subsys-
tems are linked in quantum sense and have mutually exchanged
information symmetrically imprinted in both (according to so-
called Schmidt representation) [1][2]. The mutual dependence
of entangled photons utilized in EPR S405 system provides
higher level of security for QKD precluding possibility of
some class of hacker attacks in the case of imperfect opto-
electronics of cryptography devices. This costs, however, the
lower tolerance for various, even small perturbations, because
entanglement is extremely vulnerable and fragile. Therefore,
a veriﬁcation of stability of this system in conditions of real
imperfect optical ﬁber networks is of particular importance.
Two EPR S405 systems are installed and available in Wroclaw
at NLQT WUT and in laboratory of CompSecur.
EPR S405 QKD system was designed to implement E91
protocol [7] accommodated to entangled carriers of informa-
tion, i.e., ﬂying qubits. In EPR S405 system, ﬂying qubits
are associated with polarization of photons because entangled
pairs are created here in the process called Parametric Down
Conversion [8] in a birefringent nonlinear crystal beta Barium
Borate (BBO). In BBO crystal, a photon with energy ¯hω
decays upon nonlinear process into two photons, each with
half the original energy ¯hω/2. Birefringence allows then for
horizontal polarized
photons cone
BBO crystal
laser
beam
vertical polarized
photons cone
entangled
photons
Figure 1.
Generation of entangled photon pair in birefringent, nonlinear
crystal BBO as a result of photon decay into two photons with half energy
each; in the birefringent crystal there are created two conical photon beams
with opposite polarization (upper beam with vertical polarization and lower
beam with horizontal polarization); at the intersection of the cones, the states
have not determined polarization—they are mixed states of entangled photons
creation of two conical beams, the upper one with vertical
polarization and the lower one with horizontal polarization;
see Fig. 5. At the intersection of the two beams the photons do
not have a deﬁned polarization and there are created entangled
states of photons. In EPR S405 Quelle system there is used
BBO crystal illuminated by laser diode (power 500 mW and
wave-length 405 nm [violet]). The wave-length of entangled
photons is thus 810 nm [near infra-red]. Photons are then
separated by prism mirrors and guided along appropriately
selected paths to realize E91 protocol. Generation of entangled
photon pairs takes place in a component located in Alice
station and still entangled photons travel then separately, one
of them to the distant Bob station. Due to quantum link
between both entangled photons any perturbation over the
Alice-Bob channel could be detected by the counterpart photon
at Alice which protect the system against eavesdropping by
third party (Eve), but also rises sensitivity to any noise caused
decoherence. EPR S405 Quelle system allows to organize
communication between Alice and Bob blocks over quantum
ﬁber channel or, alternatively, with telescope open-air con-
nection. According to the producer (AIT), ﬁber connection
has the range of about 50 km, while telescopic connection
has the range of approximately 1 km (provided little optical
perturbations along the open-air connection) [3]. In EPR S405
Quelle system, Alice block is more complicated than Bob
one—it contains a component generating pairs of entangled
photons. Although Bob block is less complicated, both blocks
contain complete sets of avalanche detectors (four in Alice
station and four in Bob station). Each of the stations is
connected to separate computers, which control the system and
quantum key distribution process.
A. Why 1550 nm wave-length optical ﬁber networks?
EPR S405 set allows for two ways of transmitting photons
between parties in quantum communication, depending on
the user decision. If telescopes are chosen, there should be
some modiﬁcations done compared to ﬁber connection (other
conﬁguration elements and classical channel do not need
to be modiﬁed). However, for metropolitan communication
network the optical ﬁber connections would be of more interest
because of highly developed already infrastructure of a city
communication systems.
For generating photon pairs in EPR S405 system it is
used 405 nm laser beam which generates pairs of photons
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

of 810 nm wave-length (in principle it could be shifted
as the properties of BBO crystal are maintained in larger
range and an application of another laser would result in
distinct wave-length, accommodated to optimal Alice-Bob
transmission requirements). 810 nm ﬁts to the so-called ﬁrst
telecommunication window, which was suitable to transmit
light within 800 − 900 nm band. The problem with such
a window is that ﬁbers have relatively high losses at these
wave-lengths. Further development of ﬁber networks led to
proposing of the so-called second telecommunication window.
This window is deﬁned around 1300 nm wavelength. Current
optical networks are, on the other hand, built based on 1550 nm
window (called as third telecommunication window) because
of better transmission properties of optical signal with this
wave-length even over relatively long distances.
Even though the large incommensurability between photon
wave-length and optimal transmission window in the present
standard TELECOM networks it is interesting to verify ef-
ﬁciency of quantum communication over such lines. In the
case of insufﬁcient effectiveness of system work in such
incommensurability condition one would take into account
that the better matching of wave-length can be achieved by
changing either the laser in the system or the network ﬁber.
The latter solution is, however, especially inconvenient as
connected with high cost of new large scale metropolitan
network installation.
In the present report, we summarize the series of tests
which have been carried out on the prototype system EPR S405
Quelle (AIT) using various conﬁgurations of standard 1550 nm
wave-length optical ﬁbers for quantum dark channel between
Alice and Bob stations of the system. The parameters of the
system functioning were collected using the specially designed
data card and referred to the optimal functioning of the system
at laboratory conditions. The main parameter is the Quantum
Bit Error (QBER) which is observed in time when the secret
key is created and distributed between Alice and Bob over
the quantum channel. The collected series of measurements
by use of this card allows for assessment of quality of the
quantum communication over the ﬁber connection especially
in view of coherence losses and polarization perturbations.
This is a central problem, even more important than the signal
attenuation caused by discrepancy of the optimal transmission
window of the ﬁber with photon wave-length, because polar-
ization is the information carrier in the considered system. Un-
predictable perturbations of the polarization are induced due to
birefringence of glass material of ﬁbers connected with random
strain in ﬁbers and also by weldings and connectors typically
used in conventional optical already installed networks. The
measurement procedure and the results are presented in the
following sections.
B. Polarization of photons as ﬂying qubit in quantum channel
Using pairs of entangled photons to transfer information
over quantum channel is based on E91 key distribution proto-
col [7]. The source of pairs of entangled photons sends one of
the photons to Alice and the other one to Bob. The quantum
state of photons is regarded as entangled one with respect to
their polarizations. In the mixed state of single photon of the
entangled pair none polarization is determined, i.e., this is a
mixture of both mutually orthogonal polarizations according to
rules of entanglement. Measurement of the polarization in this
mixed state restores its value and violates entanglement. The
same causes any perturbation and noise along the transmission
line similarly damaging quantum coherence required for QKD
protocol realization. In EPR S405 system the source is located
in Alice block, but it may be installed as a separate element
of the system somewhere in between Alice and Bob. The
entangled photons are delivered to Alice and Bob detectors, in
which their polarizations are measured in randomly selected
ON bases (of two possible bases–vertical-horizontal and diag-
onal π/4, 3π/4). In the next step Alice and Bob use the public
channel to determine only those of the measurements in which
the same bases were selected by both parties, but not revealing
the particular measurement results. That way a shared secret
key is generated in a raw form, which then undergoes classical
treatment (error correction and privacy ampliﬁcation), identi-
cal to all cryptographic key generation procedures, including
QKD. The ﬁrst part of E91 protocol, although different in
photon entanglement from standard BB84 procedure [4], is in
fact equivalent to the latter. It is, however, believed that using
entangled states positively inﬂuences security level, but it has
not yet been proved with all details. Nevertheless, analysis
of attack detections in case of entangled carriers indicates
better performance of such systems. Ekert [7] suggested that
his protocol security level could be increased by using Bell
inequality [9], which is connected to quantum entanglement
and direct application of this criterion for detecting a possible
eavesdropper (unfortunately, it requires using a third basis and
developing the system with more detectors) [10][11]. This
approach also allows to directly verify entanglement of the
states of photons emitted by the source.
The measure of quantum transmission quality is the total
number of errors called Quantum Bit Error, shortly QBER,
as in case of other QKD systems. To reduce its value there
are used error correction procedures and privacy ampliﬁcation
procedures performed over public connection. The reasons of
errors are technical imperfections of the system and possible
eavesdropper. In case the number of errors exceed a preset
error limit, the connection is considered to be eavesdropped
and the whole key is discarded. In case the number of errors
does not exceed the limit, correction procedures allow to elim-
inate errors efﬁciently (to any desired level), but at the cost of
reducing the length of original raw key. The QBER achieving a
fraction of percent up to single percent is considered as a result
good enough to use the cryptographically generated quantum
shared key in communication between Alice and Bob.
III.
DESRCIPTION OF THE TEST PROCEDURE
A. Control of polarization
In the case of photon pair produced and utilized to com-
munication in EPR S405 system, the mutual correlation of
polarization of both counterparts of the entangled pair is ﬁxed
after measurement by Alice, which encoded a bit of cypher
into it. This correlation can be, however, perturb in due of
transmission of the photon to Bob in a ﬁber. This is caused
by a polarization drift in the ﬁber due to its bending, strain
induced birefringence, defects in connectors and in welding
regions. Photons are still correlated, but we do not know at
which angle. To restore perpendicularity we are using manual
polarization controller.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

After putting two perpendicularly aligned linear polarizers
on both paths, we can restore original polarization correlation.
To achieve it, we are changing polarization controller manipu-
lators toward to minimize the number of counts on each path
(on detectors which are counting photons with polarization
perpendicular to applied by polarizers). After one obtains the
values of counts as low as possible, one can, basing on the
properly correlated photon number and the improperly corre-
lated photons number, get the so-called visibility ratio (the ratio
of these two amounts of photons). This ratio, when is higher
than 0.9, is assumed as good enough to start communication
over the quantum channel.
B. Methodology of the test—measured parameter
For quality assessment of quantum channel the observation
of QBER (Quantum Bit Error Rate) value over some time is
convenient. QBER is the most practical parameter displaying
by the system software and describing the quality of quantum
channel because it allows to estimate how much information
could a potential eavesdropper get. This is because that any
action of eavesdropper unavoidably causes errors which is
registered and rises actual QBER. In situation when there is
no eavesdropper, QBER indicates the inﬂuence of all per-
turbations caused by imperfections of optics and electronics
in the system and in the quantum channel. Therefore, the
QBER is a suitable characteristics for assessment of quality of
transmission in the optical ﬁber used as the quantum channel.
The varying in time QBER can be registered and displayed
graphically by the use of special card gathering observed data
and displaying them in the form of an appropriate chart.
C. Standard-mode working system
As the reference ideal quantum channel we used two 1 m
long 810 nm patch-cords and we connected both parties (Alice
and Bob subsystems) by them. Stable room temperature was
maintained (around 20oC). When short patch-cord connection
is used, photon count numbers at both communication sides
are at similar level (130 k to 150 k counts). In this case,
we assume that the system works in an optimal manner
without information losses in the quantum channel. Errors
are cased only by other imperfections of the system out of
the channel. After restoring-polarization-correlation as was
described above, the system was restarted and the appropriate
log-ﬁle from the observed process was written out in duration
of around 15 minutes. Then, the system was stopped, the
log-ﬁle was copied and used as an input ﬁle for GNU R
script which was responsible for the extracting, formatting and
plotting data.
As we see from Fig. 2, the corresponding process of
generation of secret key using the quantum channel with wave-
length 810 nm referencing short ﬁbers in 15 minutes time
window is stable, which we assume as the standard-mode of
system operation.
D. Testing of 1550 nm wave-length ﬁber for quantum connec-
tion in EPR S405 system
For testing the ability to coherently transmit photons in
commercially used telecommunication window (1550 nm), we
have used SMF-28 ﬁber with the following parameters:
Figure 2.
Plot of Quantum Bit Error Rate (QBER) in percents during
functioning of EPR S405 system versus time measured in seconds. After ter-
mination of process, there were additional values calculated—local regression
smoothing function (LOESS) with conﬁdence interval and mean value with
two lines: upper control limit (UCL) and lover control limit (LCL). Smoothing
function is marked with solid line with gray area around which represents 95%
conﬁdence interval. UCL and LCL lines which are placed in distance 3 times
standard error from mean value, are horizontal dotted lines. Since all data
points are placed between UCL and LCL one can assume that plotted results
were obtained in fairly stable process.
•
core diameter [µm]: 8.2;
•
cladding diameter [µm]: 125 ± 0.7;
•
coating diameter [µm]: 242 ± 5;
•
maximum attenuation for 1310 nm [dB/km]: 0.33 to
0.35;
•
maximum attenuation for 1550 nm [dB/km]: 0.19 to
0.20;
•
maximum attenuation for 1625 nm [dB/km]: 0.20 to
0.23;
•
dispersion for 1310 nm [ps/nm km]: less than 1.0;
•
dispersion for 1550 nm [ps/nm km]: less than 18.0;
•
dispersion for 1625 nm [ps/nm km]: less than 22.0;
•
temperature dependence [C]: -60 to +85;
•
single ﬁber length [m] in patch-cord: 802 ± 10;
•
number of weldings/connectors in patch-cord of 6.5
km for length: 5 − 7.
Such ﬁbers were ﬁxed to the system output/input establish-
ing in this way quantum connection between Alice and Bob.
After restoring the proper polarization correlation before each
measurement (in the same manner as described previously) and
achieving an acceptable QBER level, we started recording the
measurement of QBER value over iterating series of repeating
process. The collected results are summarized and plotted in
Fig 3, where three distinct runs of the system with 600 m
length dark channel are illustrated. In Figs. 4 and 5, the QBER
observation for dark channel 1550 nm ﬁber with length 200
m, 400 m and 800 m, for comparison are plotted.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 3.
Improperly functioning system: plot of Quantum Bit Error Rate
(QBER) in percents during three runs of EPR S405 system versus time
measured in seconds. After termination of process, there were additional values
calculated—local regression smoothing function (LOESS) with conﬁdence
interval and mean value with two lines: upper control limit (UCL) and lover
control limit (LCL). Smoothing function is marked with the solid line (which
color corresponding to color of data points) with gray area marked represents
95% One can notice the tendency to rapidly achieve critical level of QBER,
precluding stable quantum communication.
Figure 4.
Multiple plots represents QBER measured for connection with 200
and 400 m (+- 10 m) optical ﬁber 1550 nm. Time window for measurement
was one hour. Despite repeated measurements, connection based on shorter
ﬁber was less stable. The shorter ﬁber brought higher ratio of polarization
drift probably because of quality loss near FC/PC connectors.
Figure 5.
Multiple plots represents QBER observed for connection with 200,
400 and 800 m (+- 10 m) ﬁber 1550 nm. Time window for measurement was
one hour. Despite repeated measurements, connection based on shorter ﬁber
(200 m) was less stable than on two times longer ﬁber (400 m). The longest
ﬁber produced accordingly to expectations the highest instability.
Control charts generated for above measurements show
clearly that there are strong external or internal decoher-
ent/destructive factors that are affecting the whole process. The
initial QBER is quickly and continuously rising during the
process. Moreover, after obtaining QBER value higher than
10 percent, the system stops because of too high value of
error ratio. During the measurements 1 and 2 this too high
value was obtained very quickly (after 454 and 438 seconds,
correspondingly).
IV.
CONCLUSION
Current implementation of entanglement photon pairs
based key distribution system in EPR S405 suffers from the
lack of efﬁcient automatic polarization stability control allow-
ing to instantly verify and improve quantum signal exchanges
when connection between Alice and Bob uses standard 1550
nm ﬁber. By polarization stability, we mean ability to properly
recognize pairs with perpendicular polarizations in both com-
municated parties, i.e., with required polarization correlation in
the entangled pair after measurement. Without this ability, the
data transmitted through the quantum channel are randomly
identifying with constantly rising number of errors, which
interrupts quickly the connection. To restore communication,
the thorough and time-consuming manual regulation of po-
larization is necessary, which makes all the communication
practically impossible.
To overcome this highly inconvenient tendency we propose
to replace the manual polarization control with an highly-
efﬁcient automatic one. Automatic polarization controller
would instantly compensate polarization drift and recover the
system functionality. Such an improvement of the EPR S405
system would result in maintaining a sufﬁciently low and
stable value of QBER ratio allowing entangled QKD over
commercial network, though still for not longer distance than
ca. 1 km and without weldings and connectors. The performed
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

tests indicated also that in order to improve quality of 1550
nm quantum channel, the shift of wave-length of photons
is necessary by application of lower energy laser activating
BBO crystal. This would allow for better matching of optimal
window for transmission of the standard 1550 nm ﬁber. As it
follows from our tests, the welding decreases quality of quan-
tum channel in a critical manner, which is probably connected
with additional polarization mishmash due to a strain and
imperfections in the region of welding or standard connections.
Thus, for establishing of efﬁcient quantum channel avoiding
of weldings and connectors is necessary.
The polarization of optical signal turned out to be very un-
stable for the tested connections, which resulted in very rapid
QBER rise precluding practical usefulness of this connec-
tion for secure quantum exchange of cryptographic key over
practically signiﬁcant distances. The main obstacle was the
polarization decoherence as well as generally poor transmitting
properties of 1550 nm ﬁber for much shorter wave-length
photons used by EPR S405 system. As mentioned above, in
order to maintain the quantum channel active very frequent
manual corrections of polarization control were required so
we expect that by designing and applying of an automatic
polarization control module one would stabilize visibility ratio
and lower QBER to an acceptable level conditioning. Such
a solution together with the change of laser activation energy
toward longer wave-length, might admit future implementation
of entangled QKD systems in commercial networks.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum
Information.
Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2000.
[2]
D. Bouwmeester, A. Ekert, and A. Zeilinger, The Physics of Quantum
Information.
Berlin: Springer, 2000.
[3]
Austrian Institute of Technology, “AIT QKD Software project docu-
mentation,” 2010.
[4]
C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum cryptography: Public key
distribution and coin tossing,” Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computers, Systems, and Signal Processing, 1984, p.
175.
[5]
V. Scarani, A. Ac´ın, G. Ribordy, and N. Gisin, “Quantum cryptography
protocols robust against photon number splitting attacks for weak laser
pulse implementations,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 92, 2004, p. 057901.
[6]
A. Aspect, P. Grangier, and G. Roger, “Experimental realization of
Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen-Bohm Gedankenexperiment: A new violation
of Bells inequalities,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 49, 1982, p. 91.
[7]
A. Ekert, “Quantum cryptography based on Bell’s theorem,” Phys. Rev.
Lett., vol. 67, 1991, p. 661.
[8]
D. C. Burnham and D. L. Weinberg, “Observation of simultaneity in
parametric production of optical photon pairs,” Phy. Rev. Lett., vol. 25,
1970, p. 84.
[9]
J. S. Bell, “On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox,” Physics, vol. 1,
1964, p. 195.
[10]
M. Curty, M. Lewenstein, and N. Lutkenhaus, “Entanglement as pre-
condition for secure quantum key distribution,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 92,
2004, p. 217903.
[11]
A. Garg and N. D. Mermin, “Detector inefﬁciencies in the Einstein-
Podolsky-Rosen experiment,” Phys. Rev. D, vol. 35, 1987, p. 3831.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

