Remote Control and Monitoring of Smart Home Facilities 
via Smartphone with Wi-Fly 
 
Omar Ghabar 
School of Computing and Engineering                    
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
e-mail: omar.ghabar@hud.ac.uk 
Joan Lu 
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Huddersfield 
Huddersfield, UK 
e-mail: j.lu@hud.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Due to the widespread ownership of smartphone 
devices, the application of mobile technologies to enhance the 
monitoring and control of smart home facilities has attracted 
much academic attention. This study indicates that tools 
already in the possession of the end user can be a significant 
part of the specific context-aware system in the smart home. 
The behaviour of the system in the context of existing systems 
will reflect the intention of the client. This model system 
offers a diverse architectural concept for Wireless Sensor 
Actuator 
Mobile 
Computing 
in 
a 
Smart 
Home 
(WiSAMCinSH) and consists of sensors and actuators in 
various communication channels, with different capacities, 
paradigms, costs and degree of communication reliability. 
This paper focuses on the utilization of end users’ 
smartphone applications to control home devices, and to 
enable monitoring of the context-aware environment in the 
smart home to fulfil the needs of the ageing population. It 
investigates the application of an iPhone to supervise smart 
home monitoring and control electrical devices, and 
through this approach, after initial setup of the mobile 
application, a user can control devices in the smart home 
from different locations and over various distances. 
 
Keywords-smartphone; remote control; smart home; ad-hoc; 
context-aware. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, smartphones are becoming increasingly 
successful in the area of context-aware services, such as 
smart home technology, computer-assisted homecare and 
healthcare, and other applications for social and safety 
purposes. Such services appear to recognise users‟ contexts, 
for example their location, current activities, identity and 
surrounding environment [1]. 
Additionally, there has been rapid growth in the field of 
remote 
control 
home 
automation, 
which 
enables 
smartphones to be used to control electronic devices in the 
household. An increasing number of home appliances, such 
as heating, TVs, lights, washing machines, A/V players and 
many other products can be embedded with computer 
technology and controlled by smartphones [2]. There are 
many forms of accessible media which can be used for 
wireless communication by remote control, for example, 
internet services, SMS with GSM, mobile phones and multi 
agent systems (MAS). These systems allow different actions 
to be performed, such as switching a device on or off, 
controlling the level of sound or temperature and other 
functions. 
Such wireless networks of sensors and actuators [3][4] 
have become an area of active research. Sensors and 
actuators can be used to improve the interaction between the 
client and the physical environment. It is thought that by 
2020 [5], there will be between 50 and 100 billion appliances 
connected to the internet. Researchers are trying to promote 
changes to the mode by which each object is activated [6]. In 
addition to sensor technology, the mobile phone has become 
increasingly powerful in the field of computing as well as 
that of communication.  
This paper defines and explains the design of an iPhone 
smart home system, using the Wi-Fly module, for 
monitoring safety in the home environment as well as for 
controlling electronic appliances in the same house. In effect, 
therefore, the prototype system is responsible for both 
monitoring and control, so this research offers a mixture of 
these two functions. The model is highly flexible and can be 
applied to several areas of study. This study describes the 
smart home architecture that can remotely monitor home 
devices and also provide real-time monitoring of home 
safety status through the implementation of a smartphone. It 
focuses on a system which ensures a high level of service for 
the intelligent home, including activity delay when the 
resident leaves the building. Thus, the proposed system 
provides a personal device for monitoring and control of 
different circumstances through the iPhone interfaces which 
are used to process context-aware information. The main 
benefit of the iPhone, compared to the use of a PC, is that it 
can be used from different locations. Various context-aware 
data, to be monitored using Wi-Fly, were tested in the 
laboratory using the iPhone. 
There are very few studies offering a complete 
explanation of the actuators, sensors and robotics built into 
context-aware system design, as this field includes a wide 
variety of technologies and also requires several application 
situations which might be difficult to provide and assess. 
Analysis of specific problems is still at the theoretical stage, 
and few critical studies have yet offered a clear and 
extensive description relating to quality of context  [7].  
There has also been little previous research and 
development work carried out into aspects of the smart 
home, and even the number of users has not been clearly 
determined. Most research has concentrated on feasibility 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

studies and 
the use of 
interactive communication 
technologies with context-aware applications [8].  
This prototype design attempts to offer a solution for the 
challenges relating to wireless sensor/actuator mobile 
computing in a smart home. In designing and implementing 
the architecture of the technologies for such a system, it is 
therefore important to incorporate the sensors and actuator 
devices for computational issues which support the 
occupants‟ interaction with the physical environment. In the 
course of this study, a general context-awareness model is 
investigated, as well as technological solutions that have the 
capability 
of 
sensing, 
monitoring 
and 
controlling 
automation in the smart home.  
The remaining sections of the paper are structured as 
follows. Section II describes related studies with respect to 
wireless sensor/actuator and mobile computing in the smart 
home. Section III presents the system architecture for the 
proposed model, comprising Wi-Fly adapter, sensors, 
actuators, microcontroller unit, end user and database 
server. Section IV outlines the infrastructure for wireless 
adapter network implementation, Section V defines 
techniques to set up application control for both the 
smartphone and the embedded system, and Section VI 
offers the smartphone interfaces. Section VII considers and 
evaluates the results and finally, Section VIII provides the 
conclusion and suggestions for future work. 
II. RELATED WORK 
Wireless technologies in the smart home have been 
studied by many researchers. These studies have used 
different types of wireless technology, such as Wi-Fi, IEEE 
802.15.4, Bluetooth, GSM, ZigBee and Konnex RF (KNX-
RF), [9][10][11][12], and much progress is currently being 
made on this issue. One of the most popular examples is the 
use of wireless sensors and actuators [13], but different kinds 
of technology and home automation devices have been 
integrated with different wireless protocols for ease of use in 
control and data gathering. 
Studies by Hoof et al. [14] show that trends in smart 
home technology are based on the technical potential of their 
function, but are seldom focused on the needs and 
requirements of residents. Therefore, new techniques must 
take into account the attitudes of occupants and earn their 
approval of intelligent home equipment, particularly in the 
context of provision for the aging and disabled population. In 
general, smart home technologies in the residential 
environment require five things to make them „smart‟, which 
are wireless technology, home automation, remote control, 
intelligent control and a database. 
 The most important features of this technology are the 
actuators and sensors. An actuator is used to create an action 
according to the data collected by sensors, which are used to 
decide the action. Currently, developments in technologies 
permit inhabitants to control home appliances without 
difficulty by operating devices such as a remote control, 
smartphone or PC through a mere click. The smart home 
prototype is typically based in a house, with a convenient 
wireless communication system, security and energy saving 
power source to reduce the input of the user. 
Smart home automation is an important subject; it refers 
to the automatic control of equipment and devices in the 
smart home environment. Many studies have proposed 
designs for the system and even smart home products [15]. 
In the system of intelligent home equipment and appliances, 
human control is generally easy. A home automation system 
typically includes an internal network, and practical and 
intelligent rules and equipment for specific use in the home 
network. Systems and equipment can be controlled 
automatically and used to provide information on the home 
automation environment. Another facility is that changing 
the state or mode of a device can change or trigger other 
devices in the smart home environment [16]. 
An article by Alheraish describes the design of a remote 
control model entitled Mobile to Machine (M2M), based on 
the GSM network. The system consists of an embedded 
system, sensor, relay and a mobile to control home 
brightness, monitoring and security issues. Some advantages 
were observed during the experimental stage of this model; 
for example, the system has the ability to use different 
techniques such as SMS and GPRS, and it is appropriate for 
simple applications using ADC or DAC. On the other hand, 
it also has some drawbacks for which the designer needs to 
find suitable solutions. It will be difficult to make the model 
M2M viable before the solutions to these problem are found 
[17]. 
Another study by Acker and Massoth describes a system 
design solution for monitoring and controlling smart home 
technologies, and also for secure access, via smartphone. The 
model system involves a variety of techniques and 
equipment to control home devices, such as a BlackBerry 
smartphone, a sensors box (Allnet ALL 4000) and 
BlackBerry Enterprise Solution. The appliances connected 
included TV and Hi-Fi, and Java Development Environment 
(JDE) software was used. The results which they report 
include three different settings of access time and show 
respectable results in terms of usability. However, the 
drawback was that the BlackBerry smartphone software 
would need to be regularly updated from BES in order to 
maintain a high level of usability [18]. 
Das et al.‟s [19] study makes specific reference to the 
circumstances 
of 
intelligent 
home 
security 
using 
smartphones. They were able to remotely contact and control 
electronic security devices and integrate other services. This 
study managed home automation and security (HASec) 
through the design and implementation of smartphone 
devices‟ processing systems, demonstrating that mobile 
technology can be used to provide the necessary security for 
products as well as operations related to control. The HASec 
system permits different types of mobile phone to access the 
full Web browser.  
Within the smart home setting, one very important 
development would be to make context-aware applications 
available which could assist older people, by making them 
more comfortable and making the activities of daily life 
easier. To succeed in this goal, the current study seeks to 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

incorporate various advances in technology into the smart 
home prototype.  
III. SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
Figure 
1 
illustrates 
the 
comprehensive 
system 
architecture 
from 
the 
viewpoint 
of 
communication, 
electronic devices and data management. These aspects are 
described in the following sections.  
A. Sensors Design 
There are different types of sensors and actuators 
involved in the prototype system. They can also be used to 
obtain a context using systems embedded in the smart home 
environment. These sensors include an obstacle avoidance 
sensor; smoke sensor; human detection sensor; brightness 
sensor; humidity sensor; ultrasonic distance sensor; and 
sound sensors (see Figure 2 for the different types of sensors 
used in the system design). The main aim of this function is 
to transfigure real physical variables into digital variables, 
which are then processed in the computing system. The 
acquisition of this type of context will need features such as 
a wireless adapter, sensors, an embedded system and the end 
user client. More detail can be found in [20]. 
B. Wi-Fly (RN-370) 
 The wireless adapter is powered by an external AC to 
5V DC and two AAA batteries, which can run up to eight 
hours on full charge. The device is connected using only a 
RS-232 serial port interface of the DB9. It receives 
information from sensors over the MCU, and then sends this 
information to end devices, such as an iPhone or PC. The 
data is also transferred over a reliable TCP/IP socket using 
an ad-hoc or infrastructure network. 
C. Microcontroller Unit (Logic Converter):  
The STC89Cxx series MCU is an important part of the 
system design, as it is an 8-bit single-chip microcontroller. 
This chip is compatible with outlying device communication 
that monitors resident activity and motion by gathering data 
from sensors, interfaced with the Wi-Fly wireless transceiver 
and embedded with 64K bytes flash memory to store data, 
which is shared with In-system Programming (ISP). It also 
has an In-System Application (ISA) to assist the operator.  
Figure 1. Framework layers in the prototype system. 
These communication requirements are based on a 
microcontroller which needs to be adapted with a Universal 
Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter (UART) [18]. This is an 
appliance that transmits and receives raw information from 
the choice of MCU to support low level programming 
language C. 
D. Relay (Actuators) Function 
An actuator (SRD-05VDC-SL-C) is an electrical advice 
used to control electronic appliances by opening or closing 
the switches of other circuits. It has an electromagnetic coil 
to operate the switch in two positions, ON or OFF. It is 
activated by signal or electric current that flows through the 
coil, as a result of which the magnetic field attracts an 
armature. Once the current to the loop is interrupted, the 
armature is about twice as strong as the magnetic force to 
return it to its relaxed situation. This actuator is designed to 
be operated with DC voltage, and the diode on the coil is 
often installed to disable the magnetic field from 
disappearing. Most actuators are designed to trigger as 
quickly as possible to achieve the actions. Figure 3 shows the 
relay device used in this research and its connection with 
other electrical and electronic devices in the lab. 
Figure 2. Smart home sensors design.  
Figure 3. The MCU, WI-Fly RN-370 and four actuators connected to LEDs 
and fans. 
Obstacle Avoidance Sensor
Human Body Sensor
Smoke Sensor
Light (Brightness) Sensor
Temperature Sensor 
Humidity Sensor
Ultrasonic Distance Sensor 
    Sound Sensor
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

IV. WIRELESS CONNECTION OF THE ACTUATORS AND 
SENSORS 
The prototype system in the smart home area is described 
by the diagram in Figure 4. The connection and 
communications are variable to enable low cost electronics 
to be employed for the design and implementation of the 
system. The Wi-Fi network is employed to make the 
connection between the electronic devices, as it is widely 
available in most home areas. The sensors and actuators are 
connected by wireless infrastructure to collect the data from 
the sensors and perform the control actions. The wireless 
adapter module RN-370 supports ad-hoc and infrastructure 
networking modes. The user interacts with the system using 
her/his smartphone. The requirements for the wireless 
prototype are given in Table I. The computing of the context 
data is done by the computer service and the decision-
making algorithms.  
A. Ad-hoc Configuration 
To configure the ad-hoc mode, the Wi-Fly adapter needs 
to be set up for the ad-hoc network within the hardware or 
software instructions. To permit the ad-hoc network to 
establish communication with a smartphone through 
hardware, switch 1 must be turned ON. There are different 
kinds of connection available to create Wi-Fi applications, 
for example, remote environment sensors; control and 
monitoring of appliances; diagnostics; and mobile phone 
connections, such as GPS. Therefore, Wi-Fly configurations 
can be set as peer-to-peer (ad-hoc) networking to an iPhone, 
by using the IP address (169.254.1.1) and subnet mask 
(255.255.0.0), with the need to set the Service Set Identifier 
(SSID) and Wi Fly-GSX 21 in a wireless mobile computing 
network [21].  
B. Infrastructure Configuration 
To configure the infrastructure mode using software to 
start communication and associate the network, it is 
necessary to set up two commands for the wireless adapter, 
(1) to start an automation connection with a server and (2) to 
establish automated tracking of a connection from the remote 
host [21]. These setups need the Chortle series access point 
(1100) to connect the infrastructure network with the 
database server. When wireless communication for the local 
area network is set up using a Wi-Fly adapter, the device will 
automatically connect to the network. For context update and 
request to the network, the following commands are used: 
 
($$$); type 3 dollar signs to see message with CMD.  
 
Scan; scan available wireless network. 
 
Set wlan ssid chortle; ask to join the network. 
 
Set ip proto; turn HTTP mode=0x10 and TCP 
mode=0x02. 
 
Set ip host 10.0.0.11; web server DSN 
 
Set ip remote 80; set web server port. 
 
Set sys autoconn 1; automatically connect. 
 
Set 
com 
remote 
GET$/work2/allsensors.php? 
Sample server application. 
 
Set uart mode 2; automatically trigger mode. 
 
Save and reboot; save configuration and restart. 
TABLE I.      ELECTRONIC APPLIANCE ENGAGEMENT 
Appliance 
Employed  
Appliance Models 
Functionality  
Smartphone 
iPhone 4 
Receive the 
information gathered 
from sensors and 
control the actuator 
Actuators 
Relays  
Switch on or off 
Sensors 
Temperature, Sound, 
Brightness, Smoke, 
Humidity, Distance, 
Human Body and 
Obstacle Avoidance 
Gathering data from 
home environment 
Wireless adapter  
Wi-Fly RN-370 
Transfers information 
written or read to the 
successive interface 
Embedded 
system 
MCU-STC89C52RC 
Collect data from 
sensors and pre-
process raw data 
Wireless access 
point 
Chortle (Cisco Aironet 
1100). 
Wireless network. 
Home 
automation 
Fan and Light 
Brightness and 
cooling 
 
 
Figure 4. Wireless communications over ad-hoc and infrastructure 
networks. 
V. APPLICATION CONTROL FOR BOTH 
MICROCONTROLLER UNIT AND IPHONE 
A. Function to Control Microcontroller Unit 
The device can be used to control actions by, for 
example, sending a message via the mobile or keyboard 
including specific characters such as letters and numbers. 
The software program should decode the character message 
to be compatible with other details regarding the electronic 
appliances to be controlled. The action control can be 
accomplished through the output of the microcontroller unit 
after running the software program and passing the complier 
through the test program in Debugger (Keil uVision3) for the 
debugger instruction. At the same time, the program will also 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

run in STC-ISP.exe, after selecting the hex file and the port 
from the PC to be ready for sending the character or action 
over wired and wireless technology.  The following function 
may be used to control home devices: 
 
   
If (OnOff=='0')    RELAYL1 = 0x00; 
 
If (OnOff=='a')    RELAYL1 = 0xFF; 
B. Function to Control iPhone 
The iPhone 4 SDK (version IOS 6.1.3), and Apple iMac 
version 10.7.5 run with Xcode version 4.6.2, were used in 
this experiment. Objective-C and Cocoa Touch were the 
programs most implemented in this part of the project, with 
Cocoa Touch used by Objective-C offering the structure for 
iPhone application. One of the most important applications 
for the iPhone is the connection of the CFSocket function to 
create a TCP socket, as well as to set up the communication 
over the ad-hoc network. For a low level structure, the first 
step is to build the socket context, the second is to create the 
service socket as a TCP and set a callback, and the third is to 
set a local address which is used to connect the socket to the 
server. 
 The final step, when the interface for remote home 
control is linked up, is to offer options for action. For 
example, the user may decide whether the residence needs to 
switch on or off electronic devices, such as lights, fan, heater 
or speakers, or all the appliances together. For the first step 
of remote control, the code used involves simple „IF‟ and 
„ELSE‟ statements to regulate this. When the IF statement is 
defined, UIwatViewController „on‟ status is set to character 
„0‟, 
and 
when 
the 
ELSE 
statement 
is 
defined, 
UIwatViewController „off‟ status is set to character „a‟. The 
same function can be used for the remaining devices, e.g.: 
- (IBAction) switchLight1ValueChanged:(id)sender 
     { 
    NSString *typecode; 
    If (watViewController.switchLight1.on) 
 
    typecode = @"0"; 
    else 
        typecode = @"a"; 
        [alert release]; 
    }} 
VI. MOBILE APPLICATION INTERFACES 
 A mobile application in a smart home system is a critical 
interface between the consumer and the computer system. It 
implements residents‟ control commands and gathers 
context-aware information using HTTP protocol, as well as 
SPLIT and POST functions.  
Three of the selected prototype systems (iOS) for the 
apparatus are as follows. In Figure 5, which is a sample data 
interface, (a) is a login screen interface, (b) is a context 
monitor screen interface and (c) displays the status of the 
device and the control interface. The system design uses 
parts of the embedded system, sensors/actuators, and a 
smartphone located in the smart home environment to 
control home electrical devices using home automation 
within a context-aware computation service prototype. This 
section describes the smartphone (iOS) interface used to 
offer the implementation of context-aware services using the 
functions in the model system.  
The sensing data is first collected by the MCU, and then 
sent to the smartphone via the Wi-Fly transceiver, as shown 
in Figure 6. The figure shows the last observations of the 
experiment exploring the gathering of information from 
sensors using the Wi-Fly serial adapter and iPhone.  
 
Figure 5. Smartphone (iOS) interface for smart home application. 
Figure 6. Values collected from seven sensors by iPhone. 
(a) 
(b) 
              
(c) 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

VII. TESTING AND EVALUATION 
A. Monitoring Environment  
In order to investigate the performance of the monitoring 
and control model within a real time environment situation, 
the iPhone was used to examine and test access time over 
various distances. The experiment concentrated on the time 
period required to connect the Wi-Fly access with the 
smartphone to remotely gather data from the lab 
environment and to remotely control the prototype 
automation system. In this test, the iPhone mobile used was 
linked to the CFSocket network via ad-hoc wireless 
communication. 
 The access period was measured five times, and each 
time the test was initiated when the smartphone holder 
moved into another location. The distance of measurement 
ranged from 1 metre to 25 metres, and the Wi-Fly function 
on the iPhone was updated to start the collection of 
information from the sensors. Once the prototype sensors 
were connected with the TCP/IP socket, an indication of 
whether the network was connected or not was given by 
receiving the notification of “Connection is successful, 
please login” or “Connection is not successful, please try 
again”. The remote control data gathering would begin when 
a successful connection was established. 
The results in Figure 7 show a statistical examination of 
the system design used to monitor the smart home 
environment and the outcome of requests regarding security 
events. The experiment was repeated five times for each 
distance. The performance of all service providers already in 
Wi-Fly networks were tested and showed good stability in 
terms of the implementation of a wireless link. Comparisons 
can be made between the performance of this prototype 
system, using the results for time response in monitoring the 
environment and controlling home facilities, with other 
results for the same situation but using different technologies 
and methods [14].  
Figure 8 shows an evaluation of the results of home 
environment monitoring using eight sensors and different 
locations, times and IDs. The average time response using 
the Wi-Fly 802.11 b/g serial adapter and iPhone smartphone 
was 5.406 u/s at a distance of 0cm, which increased to 5.838 
u/s at a distance of 25m. The signal strength then began to 
decrease at a distance of 27m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Time taken to monitor environment by touch screen. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Average time taken to monitor environment by touch screen. 
B. Device Control 
For the home automation function, on the other hand, 
the performance of the prototype system was able to reach a 
distance of up to 30m. All the devices could be controlled 
from 5m to 30m, but after that the system only gained a 
response from some of the devices, i.e. LED1 and LED2.  
Table II. TEST RESULTS FOR HOME AUTOMATION 
Distance 
5m 
10m 
15m 
20m 
25m 
30m 
All Devices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  x 
Fan1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  x 
Fan2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  x 
LED1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LED2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Note: √ represents acceptable action, x not acceptable action) 
Table II illustrates the control of four electronic 
appliances, comprising two fans and two LED lights, using 
a mobile phone, the Apple iOS 6. It was observed that most 
of the devices responded to the smartphone function from 
distances of between 5m and 25m, as shown by the √ 
symbol. However, when the distance increased to 30m, 
some devices were unable to respond to the action 
command, as shown by the symbol x. The test focused 
mainly on functionality and distance. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Conclusion 
This study presents an important part of a prototype 
system for remote control monitoring of smart home 
facilities using smartphones and low price commercial 
sensor equipment. The system architecture presented is a 
wireless system that may be used to integrate the smartphone 
of the user with the end devices in the smart home. It is also 
hypothesised that this system could be used to enhance the 
comfort and security of an elderly or disabled person living 
alone. In addition, the different features of the prototype, 
such as functions elaborated by smart home technologies, 
have been described, as listed below. 
1) A model for the incorporation of sensors, actuators, 
wireless adapter (WI-Fly RN 370) and computer 
4.5
5
5.5
6
0m
5m
10m
15m
20m
25m
Time Spent 
(Microsecond)
Distance (Meter)
Test1 u/s
Test2 u/s
Test3 u/s
Test4 u/s
Test5 u/s
Average u/s
 
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
0m
5m
10m
15m
20m
25m
Time Spent 
(Microsecond)
Distance (Meter)
Average u/s
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

services for remote control in the smart home 
environment has been theoretically and practically 
demonstrated. 
2) Home automation has been part of the research, 
and therefore a number of appliances have been 
involved in the prototype, such as an actuator to 
control fans and LED lights using a smartphone. 
3)  The use of ad-hoc and wireless network 
infrastructures in this context has been explained. 
4)  The uses of smartphone applications to achieve 
smart home automation between the end user and 
computer service have been described. 
5)  The mobile programming was run with the iPhone 
SDK, using the TCP/IP socket to communicate 
between Wi-Fly and iPhone in order to collect 
information from sensors and to control home 
facilities; the effectiveness of this has been tested 
over a range of distances. 
 This paper has focused on the performance of a 
prototype system combining context-aware services with the 
remote control of home appliances. The results show that 
both monitoring and control of home facilities can be 
achieved very successfully using a smartphone; information 
was gathered from all sensors with a very short time lapse of 
between 5.406 u/s over a distance of 0cm and 5.838 u/s over 
25m. Moreover, the smartphone was able to remotely control 
all the devices over a distance of 5m to 20m, though the fans 
failed to respond to the action command over 25m. 
Nevertheless, there are still some difficulties which require 
further analysis and discussion.  
B. Future Work 
Monitoring and automation control of the smart home is 
an important research application, and may be especially 
valuable for elderly people who live alone. The target is 
clearly to provide a good service and environment by 
employing advanced technology and methods. 
The goals for future work must be case-based reasoning, 
taking into consideration the needs and requirements of the 
elderly or disabled end user, and decision-making rules 
regarding the information required from various sensors and 
how this is used to control electrical devices. 
The precise nature of the set of rules, and the influencing 
factors within various sets of context-aware information, 
may be calculated and determined using methods such as a 
Bayesian network. Another future piece of work should be to 
use computing algorithms to investigate the quality of the 
context which has been created using information from 
various sensors.   
                       REFERENCES 
[1] A. Sashima, Y. Inoue, T. Ikeda, T. Yamashita, and K. 
Kurumatani, "CONSORTS-S: A mobile sensing platform for 
context-aware services," in Intelligent Sensors, Sensor 
Networks and Information Processing (ISSNIP), International 
Conference on, 2008, pp. 417-422. 
[2] J. Nichols, et al., "Generating remote control interfaces for 
complex appliances," in Proceedings of the 15th Annual 
ACM 
Symposium 
on 
User 
Interface 
Software 
and 
Technology, 2002, pp. 161-170. 
[3] F. Xia, Y.-C. Tian, Y. Li, and Y. Sung, "Wireless 
sensor/actuator 
network 
design 
for 
mobile 
control 
applications," Sensors, vol. 7, 2007, pp. 2157-2173. 
[4] S. Yan, C. Qiang, and L. Hong, "Smart home based on 
wireless sensor-actuator networks," China Communications, 
vol. 8, 2011, pp. 102-109. 
[5] W. Lumpkins, "The internet of things meets cloud computing 
[Standards Corner]," Consumer Electronics Magazine, IEEE, 
vol. 2, 2013,  pp. 47-51. 
[6] L. Trappeniers, M. A. Feki, F. Kawsar, and M. Boussard, 
"The internet of things: the next technological revolution," 
Computer, vol. 46, 2013, pp. 0024-25. 
[7] P. Bellavista, A. Corradi, M. Fanelli, and L. Foschini, "A 
survey of context data distribution for mobile ubiquitous 
systems," ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 44, 2012, 
p. 24. 
[8] D. Ding, R. A. Cooper, P. F. Pasquina, and L. Fici-Pasquina, 
"Sensor technology for smart homes," Maturitas, vol. 69, 
2011, pp. 131-136. 
[9] N. Langhammer and R. Kays, "Evaluation of wireless smart 
metering technologies in realistic indoor channels," Wireless 
Communication Systems (ISWCS), 2011 8th International 
Symposium on, 2011, pp. 387-391. 
[10] T. Han, B. Han, L. Zhang, X. Zhang, and D. Yang, 
"Coexistence study for WiFi and ZigBee under smart home 
scenarios," Proc. 3rd IEEE International Conference on 
Network Infrastructure and Digital Content, 2012, pp. 669-
674. 
[11] S. O. Al Mehairi, H. Barada, and M. A. Qutayri, "Integration 
of technologies for smart home application," ed, 2007, pp. 
241-246. 
[12] Y. Tajika, T. Saito, K. Teramoto, N. Oosaka, and M. Isshiki, 
"Networked home 
appliance system using Bluetooth 
technology integrating appliance control/monitoring with 
Internet service," Consumer Electronics, IEEE Transactions 
on, vol. 49, 2003, pp. 1043-1048. 
[13] J. Zhang, G. Song, H. Wang, and T. Meng, "Design of a 
wireless sensor network based monitoring system for home 
automation," ed, 2011, pp. 57-60. 
[14] J. Van Hoof, H. Kort, P. Rutten, and M. Duijnstee, "Ageing-
in-place with the use of ambient intelligence technology: 
Perspectives of older users," International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, vol. 80, 2011,pp. 310-331. 
[15] C. Kühnel, T. Westermann, F. Hemmert, S. Kratz, A. Müller, 
and S. Möller, "I'm home: Defining and evaluating a gesture 
set for smart-home control," International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, vol. 69, 2011, pp. 693-704. 
[16] Y.-W. Kao and S.-M. Yuan, "User-configurable semantic 
home automation," Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 34, 
2012, pp. 171-188. 
[17] A. Alheraish, "Design and implementation of home 
automation 
system," 
Consumer 
Electronics, 
IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 50, 2004, pp. 1087-1092. 
[18] R. Acker and M. Massoth, "Secure ubiquitous house and 
facility control solution," in Internet and Web Applications 
and Services (ICIW), 2010 Fifth International Conference on, 
2010, pp. 262-267. 
[19] S. R. Das, S. Chita, N. Peterson, B. Shirazi, and M. 
Bhadkamkar, "Home automation and security for mobile 
devices," in Pervasive Computing and Communications 
Workshops (PERCOM Workshops), 2011 IEEE International 
Conference on, 2011, pp. 141-146. 
[20] O. Ghabar and J. Lu, "The Designing and Implementation of a 
Smart Home System with Wireless Sensor/Actuator and 
Smartphone," INFOCOMP 2014, The Fourth International 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation, 
2014, pp. 56-64. 
[21] R. Networks. (2010, WiFly Serial Adapter RN-370 & RN-
374. Install Guide and User Manual 1.00, pp.1-21. Available: 
www.rovingnetworks.com 
 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

