Research on Optimal Control of Large File Access upon VPDN 
Jing Feng, Kunpeng Jing,Yang Wu 
Institute of Meteorology and Oceanography 
PLA University of Science and Technology 
Nanjing, China 
e-mail:jfeng@seu.edu.cn  
Xiaoxing Yu 
Department of Information and Networks 
TELECOM ParisTech (ENST) 
Paris, France 
e-mail:yu@telecom-paristech.fr
 
 
Abstract—Facing the optimal problem of meteorological large 
data files access upon Virtual Private Dial-up Networks 
(VPDN), transport back of reliable radar data and optimize 
retrieval of single-server is studied. Focusing on the 
requirements and radar data application, such as images split 
joint of multiple weather radars, the strategies of data division 
and storage are proposed, and an evaluation model named 
Quality of Experience based on Reliability and Time (QoE-RT) 
is presented. Consequently, Adaptive File Access Control 
(AFAC) algorithm is designed and implement, which is 
consisted of reliable file transmission, rapid file retrieval, file 
size 
adjustment 
and 
service 
quality 
evaluation. 
The 
performance is verified by experiments of the file retrieval and 
transmission in actual environment, which shows that the file 
access time is decreased by 20%, transport success rate is more 
than 95%, and the QoE is significantly improved.  
Keywords-optimal cotrol; file access; VPDN; QoE. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
In the field of meteorological and hydrological 
information, there are hundred gigabytes (GB) of data 
collected by satellite, ground observation stations, radar and 
numerical weather forecasting every day. The size of 
individual files might be hundreds of megabytes (MB); some 
raw satellite imagery data is up to a few GB. On the one 
hand, these data needs to transmit back from the detection/ 
observation points to the data center, and on the other hand 
professional users also need to get the national or global 
meteorological data. For motorized stations and mobile users, 
Virtual Private Dial-up Networks (VPDN), a mixed network 
of solid and mobile communication by means of Layer 2 
Tunneling Protocol (L2TP) is often used. For such large files 
like radar mosaic data, satellite images and numerical 
forecast products, using lossless compression method, even 
if the compression ratio is 50%, the data size is still around 
dozens of megabytes, so it is difficult to solve the reliable 
transmission problems upon VPDN radically. It is necessary 
to find a new solution, which can conduce to the efficient 
querying and reliable file transfer. 
Although there are many mainstream network storage 
technologies in large data centers, including  Direct Attached 
Storage (DAS), Storage Area Network (SAN) and  Network 
Attached Storage (NAS), etc.[1], the low-end server clusters 
are efficient solutions in primary sub-center concerned with 
space, funds and other conditions. When the network 
performance and server hardware performance cannot 
change, the server storage strategy and the setting of 
maximum file block not only are important factors which 
affect the Quality of Experience (QoE) of users, but also can 
be set by user and configurate parameters adaptively with 
control program. Therefore, how to provide the management 
efficiency of stand-alone storage is significant for improving 
server access and cluster configuration. 
In general, the optimal control of large file access upon 
VPDN is rarely mentioned, and how to decide the 
transmission block size of large file is not explored yet. For 
example, the user cannot control the partition of file size in 
FTP, which is not easy to guarantee performance [2]. 
According to the business requirements, the characteristics of 
the channel and the network environment, the optimization 
method is studied for large file transfer by dividing big files 
into smaller block size.  
Analyzing the classic New Technology File System 
(NTFS), the relationship between access efficiency of its file 
and directory structure was quantitatively analyzed to obtain 
the optimal results. File access time and transmission success 
rate were both the metrics of Quality of Experience based on 
Reliability and Time (QoE-RT) referring to psychology. 
Facing the transmission of weather radar data, an Adaptive 
File Access Control algorithm (AFAC) was developed with 
the optimal data block segmentation strategy.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The 
background and motivation is described in Section II; the 
strategies for big file optimal transport and storage are 
analyzed in Section III considering the influence of NTFS 
file directory structure and file size; in Section IV, AFAC 
algorithm is presented and evaluated by QoE-RT. Finally, 
the conclusion and future work are given in Section V. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
In remote areas with poor communication of terrestrial 
broadband, deploying meteorological equipment such as 
automatic weather stations, motorized radar, using wireless 
network to transmit data back is a convenient and 
economical way. Although the third-generation (3G) 
network is able to meet the basic requirements of small 
quantities of data transmission, it cannot guarantee the 
weather radar data (dozens or hundreds of megabytes) 
reliable transmission. The optimal control mechanisms of 
data transmission and access need to be studied between sub-
center and measurement station to improve service abilities 
in limited condition. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

A. VPDN–based Solid and Mobile Mixed Network 
Motorized radar usually is deployed on demand with 
around 100KM detection range. Sometimes multiple radars 
compose an observation network, which requires each radar 
data must be transmitted to the data center within the 
stipulated time to split joint images. For this kind of field 
mobile environments, VPDN is a cost-effective way of 
transport, which combines solid lease line and public mobile 
network with designated access point, but data transmission 
is instability in wireless section. 
Adopting tunnel technique, the user data is encapsulated 
by special layer-2 protocol and transported in VPDN [3]. For 
example, China Telecom employs L2TP to establish VPDN, 
and L2TP use the Point to Point Protocol (PPP) link layer 
protocol unit to load data. It allows the both connection 
endpoint of the Layer-2 link protocol and PPP serving at 
different devices via a packet-switched network, e.g., IP 
network, which extends the PPP model and enables PPP 
sessions to cross a frame relay network or the Internet [4]. 
The case of networking is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  The case of VPDN topology with L2TP 
After testing, a phenomenon was found: when the file 
size exceeds a certain threshold, the transmission failure rate 
greatly increased upon VPDN. Therefore, autonomous 
adjustment the size of the data block is the key to improve 
success transmission rate of big file. 
B. Key Optimal Issues for Retrieval in Single-Server  
In the context of this paper, the radar data is uploaded to 
the nearest data center/sub-centers, and is stored on the local 
servers. As valuable data, it will be archived and shared 
momentarily with the two service ways: Push and Pall. In 
practical work, we found that when the number of files on 
the server is more than ten thousand, query retrieval time has 
increased significantly. Meanwhile, the transport is also very 
difficult and often fails when the file size is over 1GB upon 
FTP, even in the LAN environment. 
The efficiency of mobile terminals access data center and 
download big files via VPDN, will directly affect the user 
experience. If the reading time is denoted by
sT , it can be 
expressed in (1). 

1
2
3
sT
T
T
T





1T is locating time of root directory that is related with the 
file system itself; 
2T is the time of traversing the index tree 
that is concerned with structure of the tree; 
3T  concerns with 
the time of control and disk access related to hardware 
performance. Under the same file system and hardware, 
1T and 
3T  are fixed basically, so 
2T  is the only changeable 
factor that impacts on access efficiency.  
III. 
ACCESS CONTROL ALGORITHM AND OPTIMAL 
STRATEGIES OF BIG FILE 
In this section, the influence factors are analyzed 
quantitatively from network behavior characteristics and the 
server’s file system.  
A. Ralationship betwween File Transport  Success Rate 
and Data Size upon VPDN 
Investigating VPDN fundamental network protocol, 
L2TP protocol consists of two components: control messages 
and data messages. Control messages establish and maintain 
the tunnel and connection session, and reliable transport is 
achieved by using flow control and congestion control. Data 
messages are encapsulated as the UDP packet in unreliable 
transmission over public networks.                  
L2TP packet encapsulation structure is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  L2TP PDU format 
From the analysis of L2TP, it is known that the user data 
will be regarded as a transparent load of UDP encapsulated 
even if it adopts TCP-based application layer protocols (e.g., 
FTP) over Internet, so once packet loss, the TCP 
retransmission message will be treated as unreliable transport. 
PPP sends data units by the order, and has higher loss rate 
while the data block is too large or the transport rate is too 
fast. Once the packet loss rate rises, it will lead to 
retransmission mechanism of TCP failed to achieve. The 
default number of TCP retransmissions is three, so if there is 
no acknowledgment message coming back, the TCP 
connection will be ended after three times of retransmission,  
In order to successfully transport big files, the most direct 
way is to split big files into small pieces. However, dividing 
and merging the file will increase overhead, so we must find 
out the maximum size of the file block and have higher 
transport success rate. In the actual environment, 2G, 3G and 
4G networks are mixed, China telecom 3G mobile devices 
were used in experiment scenario considering most area 
covered by 2G and 3G networks. China Telecom uses 
CDMA2000 standard, compatible with GSM, and the basic 
rate as shown in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
CHINA TELECOM RATE OF  2G AND 3G  
Standard 
2G 
3G 
Technique 
GSM 
CDMA2000 
CDMA2000 
Down rate 
236 kbps 
153 kbps 
3.1 Mbps 
Up rate 
118 kbps 
153 kbps 
1.8 Mbps 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

A set of data transport experiments were taken dividing 
the typical data file of C-band Doppler weather radar 
(110MB) into different size. The sending end accesses 
VPDN router (HUAWEI SRG1200) through WLAN router 
(HUAWEI EC177, supports CDMA2000 2G and 3G), and 
the VPDN router is located in our lab as a sub-center, which 
is linked China telecom via the leased line. For different 
length of data block (e.g., from 1MB, 2MB increase to 21M.) 
at different signal strength environments. Using FTP 
command, we tested the success rate by means of Wireshark 
which is a capture toolkit. The statistic results are shown in 
Figure.3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Success rate of different data size upon VPDN 
The experimental results indicate that when the data 
block is less than 4MB, success rate of transport is 100%, 
and the success rate is more than 90% while the data block is 
between 4MB and 10MB. Especially, the success rate is less 
than 3% once the data block exceeds 10MB.  
B. Relationship between NTFS File Directory structure 
and Query Efficiency 
As described in Section 2-B, user-defined directory 
structure plays an important role in efficiency of local query 
access, and there is a large space-optimized for widely used 
working group server. Mainstream local file systems include 
NTFS, File Allocation Table (FAT) and Extended File 
System (EXT). Their main feature is shown in Table II. 
NTFS file system has maximum data upper limit, minimum 
index complexity, and is currently the most widely used 
local file storage system as well. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF TYPICAL FILE SYSTEMS  
Property 
NTFS 
FAT 
EXT2 
Cluster size 
0.5KB-4KB 
4KB-16KB 
4KB 
Max block 
2TB 
4GB 
2GB 
Max partition 
2TB 
128GB 
4TB 
Index structure 
B+tree 
Chained 
Chained 
complexity 
O(logN) 
O(N) 
O(N) 
OS 
Windows 
DOS, Win 95 
Linux 
 
NTFS adopts B+ tree as index structure, and all data 
structures including directory are considered as file and 
indexed in the form of database [5]. When the file number is 
too large, it is necessary to establish multi-level indexing 
mechanism in order to reduce operation of read blocks and 
accelerate the speed of queries. In NTFS partition, partition 
information is stored in the different property files, where the 
most important file is Master File Table (MFT). It is core file 
of NTFS partition, which stores and identifies the basic 
information of all files. It consists of metadata about files, 
including the creating time, location, length, file name with a 
fixed length of 1KB. 
For the small files and directories of less than 1KB, their 
content will be stored in MFT. Otherwise, only the location 
information will be saved in MFT [6]. In the process of 
reading big files, the file system will frequently visit MFT, 
so MFT has crucial impact on the access performance of the 
operating system. 
The relationship between files and folders in NTFS is 
established through the index. If files belong to a same folder, 
their indexes are record by the property table of the folder's 
father in MFT. When the number of files within a folder is 
larger than a certain limit, the file index of the folder forms a 
B+ tree [7], and the root of the B+ tree is still stored in MFT 
record of the father directory. The depth of the tree has a 
crucial impact on the search efficiency, the greater the 
number of tree’s level, the longer the traversal time. The file 
system has different directory tree structure following the 
number of files, and then affects the efficiency of retrieval. 
For instance, if a big directory tree with three-level B+ 
tree is completely full according to limit of order, every B+ 
tree in first level can store 30 entries of index; the one in 
second level can store 900 entries; the one in third level can 
store 27930 entries [8]. When the index entries are more than 
27,930, it will generate the fourth level’s B+ tree. Flat tree 
structure can achieve the best efficiency of retrieval, so a 
reasonable directory structure will enable index tree to be 
balanced and enhance the reading efficiency.  
Having retrieval experiments with 10,000 files and 
100,000 files respectively, on behalf of the three-level and 
four-level B+ tree structure, it covers the general application 
of large directory. By tracking the experimental data and 
contrasting the results, the best number region of directory 
and file was estimated. The sample files (about 800KB in 
size) were put in the N directories averagely, recording its 
search time. Where, the value of N is set as follows: 5, 10, 20, 
50, 100, 200, 500, 1000.The trends of retrieval efficiency are 
shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Comparison of file retrieval efficiency 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

Experiment results say that there is minimum retrieval 
time for 10,000 files with 20 directories, and for 100,000 
files with 50 directories. At this point the B+ tree is balance, 
and the searching time is least for retrieval the leaf nodes. 
C. Adaptive File Access Control Algorithm 
Considering the reliable transmission of big files upon 
VPDN and retrieve optimization in single-server, the 
algorithm for AFAC is designed, which consists of four parts 
such as application configuration, network recognition, 
quality control and data transmission, and its components are 
shown in Figure.5. 
1) User applications: provide system parameter setting 
interface, making it can be dynamically extended; 
2) Network recognition: identify network status, or allow 
user settings, choose modes from CDMA, EVDO, etc.; 
 3) Quality control: complete data encapsulation and 
decapsulation, integrity verification and so on;  
4) Data transmission: send and receive the data block 
using TCP mode, adjust file directory and file block size. 
 
 
Figure 5.  AFAC components 
According to the experimental results in Section 3.2, set 
the initial number of directory is 20, when number of files is 
more than 10,000, each appending 1000 files with an 
additional directory. Based on wireless network technique, 
set the maximum size of the data threshold (the default value 
is 10240KB), sending data block by using dividing strategy 
when the threshold of file size is exceeded and merging them 
at receiving end. For smaller data files, after jointing them to 
a bigger file within the threshold, send it and decapsulate 
respectively at the sending and receiving end. Using AFAC 
for the transport of radar files, make sure the integrity of the 
layer-scan documents in order to effectively utilize the 
successful transmission of data blocks.  
For example, the volume-scan file of X-band Doppler 
weather radar is around 9MB including 6 layer-scanned 
documents, and the volume-scan file of C-band Doppler 
weather radar is around 110MB including 14 layer-scanned 
documents. Thus, for X-band radar data, when the network 
state is good enough, it is transmitted without dividing, but 
for the C-band radar data, it is almost impossible to 
successfully complete the data transport without dividing. 
Normally, a group of radar data is generated every six 
minutes, which consists of base data, images and products, 
occupying total hard disk space approximately 18.11MB (X-
band radar). If the radar is on all day, it performs about 260 
scans and generates approximately 4.65GB data. In order to 
optimize storage, a layer-scanned data can be stored as a file 
in favor of adjusting and optimizing the transport data block. 
Definition 1: The data size of guaranteed delivery 
success rate p is denoted Mp, and the data block size of 
guaranteed delivery success rate 100% is denoted Mc. In the 
same network conditions, there is common sense: Mp > Mc. 
In order to describe the part pseudo code of AFAC 
accurately, several functions and processes are given as 
follows:  
divide_it(F, N):divide the file F into the size of N data block. 
send_it(F):send the file F, and return “0” means fault.  
traversal_it(D, N): look for file that size smaller than N in the 
directory D, and return “0” means no such file otherwise the 
file names.   
merge_it(L,F): merge multiple files L into F.    
Assuming the size of file F is x, the part pseudo code of 
AFAC for data sending module are listed as follows. 
Data sending (F, x, Mp, Mc) 
While (x!=0){ 
1  if  x< Mc  then {S=0;goto 5;} // merge the smaller files 
2      else if  x< Mp  then { 
S= send_it(F); 
if S=0 goto 4; //fault, divide F into smaller block 
                 else x=0; } 
end} 
3 
 else // divide F following  Mp 
{ F1=divide_it(F, Mp); 
S= send_it(F1);  
if S=0 goto 4;  
else { F=F-F1;  x=x-Mp;} 
end} 
4            F2=divide_it(F, Mc); // divide F following  Mc  
S= send_it(F2);  
if S=0 goto 1;// fault, resend 
else { F=F-F2; x=x- Mc; } 
          end} 
5    L=traversal_it(D, Mc); 
If L=0 then { 
while( S=0) {S= send_it(F);}// fault, resend 
x=0; end } 
       else { merge_it(L,F)；goto 1} 
end}  
Figure 6.  The part pseudo code of AFAC  
IV. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION BASED QOE-RT 
Considering the application background of real-time 
access to weather radar file, the experience to network 
Quality of Service (QoS) was investigated, hoping to obtain 
a comprehensive evaluation for above research results. 
A. QoE Model of File Transport upon VPDN 
There are three main QoE evaluation methods such as 
statistics [9], artificial intelligence [10] and psychology [11]. 
The first two of them are suitable for multi-index evaluation 
system, and need certain expert knowledge. The psychology-
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

based on evaluation method refers to the laws of psychology, 
and does not need complex training and computing. It can 
intuitively give the accurate QoE function model related with 
some QoS parameters. Although it cannot solve the problem 
affected by multiple factors, it has better effective in some 
applications. 
The complete raw data of weather radar must be 
transported to information center, and the secondary products 
can be made. Therefore, the base data has to reach the data 
center with 6 minutes and no error for the real-time 
application, e.g., now-casting. For images split joint, the 
radar data detected by several radars must arrive in the data 
center within 15 minutes synchronously. In this application 
mode, the timeliness and correctness are two indicators that 
are cared by user, and can be used to establish the 
corresponding evaluation model. 
So, the QoE model based on Reliability and Time (QoE-
RT) was proposed referencing the psychological principle 
based on the relative waiting time and reliability factors. 
Classic Weber - Fechner law is applicative to large-scale 
range of irritation in middle intensity, which reflecting the 
relationship between QoE (i.e., the amount of feeling) and 
physical (e.g., waiting time) is not a simple linear growth:  
the longer the waiting time, the higher degree of tolerance.  
This relationship is shown in (2). 

ds
dp
 k s


Where dp  presents the change of feeling, s  indicates the 
amount of physical stimulus, ds
s
 
expresses the relative 
change of the physical stimulus, k is a proportion coefficient. 
However, in above application scenario, having a smaller 
waiting time scale and greater irritation, the user experience 
of time is opposite to Weber - Fechner law: the longer the 
waiting period, the lower the degree of tolerance. 
Definition 2: Let 
d
l
 D
represents the relative waiting 
value, where d denotes the actual data transport time, and 
D is time-out limit of data transport. QoE-RT is defined in 
(3). 

(1
)(1
)
,0
1,0
1
s
k
l
k










 

Where, s is evaluation scores of QoE-RT, the lower the 
score, the better the QoE;  is the adjustment coefficient for 
adjusting the weights that concerns with the contribution of 
transport success rate and transport time to evaluation score; 
k is the reliability factor that expresses transport success rate 
changing with the alteration of the file length.  
Fitting the transport success rate curve shown in Figure 3, 
the function about reliability factor k  was obtained in 
(4),
( )
k
 f m
, where, m is the file size (unit: MB). 

1,
4
,4
10
( )
,10
14
0,
14
m
m
m
f m
m
m
m











 









0.01,4
10
0.125,10
14
m
m





 



            
1.04,4
10
1.75,10
14
m
m




 



 
According to the experiment data, the maximum waiting 
time for successfully transport file was the time to transmit 
14MB file, which is computed by the expectations as 
( )
E D  80
. 
According to the result of Figure 3, the file size is related 
to the success rate of file transport, therefore it impacts on 
different QoE levels. Analyzing the experimental data by 
setting four intervals the influence factors  were concluded 
in (5). 
1,
4
0.8,4
10
0.2,10
14
0,
14
m
m
m
m







 








In order to enable the user to intuitively get the results of 
the evaluation, S scores of QoE-RT were graded as five 
ranks and shown in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
QOE SCORE MAPPING 
S 
QoE 
(0,0.2] 
excellent 
(0.2,0.4] 
good 
(0.4,0.6] 
medium 
(0.6,0.8] 
average 
(0.8,1) 
inferior 
B. Performance Evaluation 
In order to evaluate the performance of AFAC algorithm, 
two methods were compared for single file transport and 
multiple files transport with QoE-RT score as follows:  
1) Using conventional FTP, files are stored in a directory 
without any control;  
2) Using AFAC algorithm, set the initial directory 
number as 20.  
We chose the 10,000 files with different size: 2MB, 6MB, 
12MB, 16MB respectively and took 10 tests, and calculated 
the average data obtained. The result is shown in Figure 7.  
For multiple files transport, the experiment scenario is 
same as the single file transport, and the result is shown in 
Figure 8. 
Contrasting the Table III, it is found that for the same 
size file, the score of QoE-RT is similar no matter 
transmitting single file or multiple files. Whereas compared 
with FTP, AFAC algorithm has a higher level of QoE, it is 
shown in Figure 9. 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

 
Figure 7.  The QoE-RT score of single file access 
 
Figure 8.  The QoE-RT score of multiple file access 
 
Figure 9.  Comparison of both QoE scores FTP and AFAC  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Facing the efficient real-time transportation and access of 
meteorological big file in VPDN and NTFS conditions, the 
optimal control strategy was researched. The AFAC 
algorithm was put forward based on the initiative dividing 
big file into several suitable data block and controlling the 
number of directories and files according to the threshold 
values shown by experiment results. Referencing psychology 
QoE evaluation methods, QoE-RT model was established, 
and made the comparison of performance between AFAC 
and conventional FTP. The experiment results indicated that 
AFAC has a better user experience for the condition of weak 
real-time in weather radar data transport.  
In future work, it needs to consider the system overhead 
of file encapsulation and decapsulation for different network 
systems, and integrate the algorithm with autonomous 
network management. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank to the financial support by Nature 
Fund of Science of China with grant No. 61371119. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Wang, “Mass information resource storage and sharing 
technology research,” Information System Engineering, 
2011, pp. 129-131, doi:10.3969/j.issn.1001-2362.2011.11. 
068 (in Chinese). 
[2] Z. Luo, F. Liu, and Y. Xie, “User-Perceived FTP Service 
QoS Parameters and Measurement” IEEE International 
Conference on Network Infrastructure and Digital Content, 
2009, pp. 69-73, doi: 10.1109/ICNIDC.2009.5360792. 
[3] Y. Xu, “Design and Implementation of 3G-based Wireless 
VPDN Business Network,” Environmental Monitoring and 
Forewarning, 2010, pp. 27-30, doi:10.3969/j.issn.1674-6732. 
2010.05.009 (in Chinese).  
[4] V. Rawat, R.Tio, S. Nanji, and R. Verma, Layer Two 
Tunneling Protocol. RFC 3070, February 2001. Standards 
Trackpp.3931L2TPv3,3070,doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.17487/
RFC3070. 
[5] J. Liang and Y. Zhang, “The main data structure of NTFS 
file 
System,” 
Computer 
Engineering 
and 
Design, 
2003,pp.116-118,doi:10.3321/j.issn:1002-8331.2003.08.039 
(in Chinese). 
[6] L. Wang and J. Ju, “Analysis of NTFS file system 
structure,”Computer Engineering and Design,2006,pp.418-
419,doi:10.3969/j.issn.1000-7024.2006.03.019(in Chinese). 
[7] Z. Lu and X. Chen, “The optimization of B+ tree index file 
structure,” Computer Engineering and Design, 2000,pp.40-
44,doi:10.3969/j.issn.1000-7024.2000.03.008(in Chinese). 
[8] W. Wu, K. Liu, D. Jiang, Q. Su, and Z. Chen,  “Dynamic 
analysis of NTFS B+tree big directory structure,” Computer 
Engineering 
and 
Design, 
2013, 
pp. 
1376-1382,  
doi:10.3969/j.issn.1000-7024.2013.04.046(in Chinese). 
[9] R. Huang and Y. Guan, “Data Statistics Analysis,” 
Beijing:Higher Education Press, 2010(in Chinese). 
[10] A. Altuzarra, JM. Moreno-Jiménez, and M. Salvador, “A 
Bayesian priorization procedure for AHP-group decision 
making,” European Journal of Operational Research, 2007, 
pp. 367–382,doi:10.1016/j.ejor.2006.07.025. 
[11] P. Reichl, S. Egger, R. Schatz, and A. D'Alconzo, “The 
Logarithmic Nature of QoE and the Role of the Weber-
Fechner Law in QoE Assessment,” 2010 IEEE International 
Conference on Communications, ISSN: 1550-3607, ISBN: 
978-1-4244-6402-9 doi:10.1109/ICC.2010.5501894. 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-478-7
INFOCOMP 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (contains MODOPT 2016)

