Integrated Learning Environment for Smart Grid Security 
 
Kewen Wang, Yi Pan, Wen-Zhan Song 
Department of Computer Science 
Georgia State University 
Atlanta, USA 
kwang12@student.gsu.edu, {yipan, wsong}@gsu.edu 
Weichao Wang 
Department of SIS 
UNC Charlotte 
Charlotte, USA 
weichaowang@uncc.edu 
Le Xie 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Texas A&M University 
College Station, USA 
Lxie@ece.tamu.edu
 
 
Abstract— Cyber Security of smart grids becomes more and 
more important to our everyday life for its wide implication in 
power systems, a critical infrastructure in a modern society. 
Many universities and corporations have put efforts in this 
field. However, there has been lack of emphasis on educational 
front of this important area. We believe that simulation 
systems designed for research purposes in the smart grid 
security should also be incorporated in education. Hence, this 
paper presents an integrated learning environment for the 
education of smart grid security. The core components of this 
environment are smart grid simulator and a learning website. 
Based on this learning environment, we design course projects 
and learning materials in teaching, so that students can better 
grasp the knowledge of smart grid security. 
Keywords-Cyber Security; Smart Grid Education; Learning 
Environment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the widespread applications of smart grid, its 
security has raised significant interest and concerns among 
industries and academia [1]. A Department of Homeland 
Security report [2] shows that the vulnerability in smart 
meters and smart controllers could allow attackers to 
remotely compromise thousands of such devices and cause 
rolling blackout, which is a great threat to our everyday life. 
Significant efforts have been put on the research of such 
critical infrastructure services, with the example of several 
critical infrastructure research centers being established 
nationwide [3]. 
In contrast with strong emphasis on research in smart 
grid cyber security, the education programs fall behind in 
many aspects. For example, there is a lack of smart grid 
simulation software which provides a platform covering the 
essential components of corresponding security educational 
programs for teachers and students. Although some systems 
about the cyber security of smart grid become available for 
research purposes [4][5][6][7], few of them are suitable for 
education purposes because their software environment and 
programming interfaces are not available to students and 
instructors. The lack of this learning environment brings a 
huge difficulty for the education on smart grid security, 
which could train many people into fast developing industry 
[8][9] of smart grid and teach students necessary knowledge 
in this field. 
Thus, it will be beneficial to solve this problem by 
developing a learning environment for the security of smart 
grid. In this paper, we propose an integrated smart grid 
learning environment for the purpose of smart grid security 
education and describe several course projects and learning 
materials using this learning environment. Section II presents 
the overview of this learning environment; Section III 
describes the details of the course projects using this learning 
environment; Section IV illustrates the learning materials 
available in the environment; Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 
This learning environment mainly consists of two 
components: smart grid emulator and a learning website. 
This smart grid emulator is named Smart-Grid Common 
Open Research Emulator (SCORE). It provides a platform 
for emulating smart grid environment [10], and running real 
smart grid applications by applying virtualization techniques. 
This emulator SCORE needs to be installed in Linux 
environment, and operated by some related commands.  
This process of installation and operation may be not 
easy for the students without computer science background, 
so we design a website for users to facilitate the access to 
this smart grid emulator. This website shown in Figure 1 
provides an easy interface for user to practice in smart grid 
environment without considering complicated software 
environment. It is convenient for students to apply smart grid 
simulation environment to run specified power grid model 
and obtain related power and communication security 
knowledge under this model. After registration through the 
website shown in Figure 2, users can access the emulator that 
need be installed in Linux environment. It presents the 
registration information required. 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
Figure 1.  Website Display. 
 
Figure 2.  User Registration. 
III. 
COURSE PROJECTS DESIGN 
In this learning environment, we design several course 
projects to help students grasp related knowledge. In the 
projects, students are required to modify or write programs in 
the smart grid emulator to simulate the malicious attacks and 
obtain the resulting files showing the power network 
information. Moreover, in some projects, students are 
required to design counter attack plan to defend against such 
attacks. 
A. Grid Topology Attack Project 
After registering, user can access the schedule webpage 
shown in Figure 3. By clicking a time slot grid in this page, a 
new window will pop up to let user input some related 
information about reservation shown in Figure 4. After 
clicking “save” button, this task specified by the user will 
run in access the grid emulator during the time slot. 
In this reservation window shown in Figure 4, a user can 
upload a configuration by clicking the “Choose File” button. 
If  the user does not specify a file to upload, the system will 
use a default configuration file to run the smart grid 
emulator. Actually, this configuration file is *.imn type file. 
It is used to specify the grid topology information including 
node, power line and communication link information.  
The alteration of this file could result in the change of the 
topology of the power grid, which is also the consequence of 
grid topology attack. In this project, we simulate the attack of 
damaging the current smart grid topology [11], by changing 
its topology configuration files. This project is shown in 
Figure 6. A new topology configuration of smart grid will 
result in a new smart grid topology. 
During the running of smart grid, user can download the 
resulting log files, which display the dynamic power flow 
and network information. By clicking the reserved job in the 
schedule webpage shown in Figure 3, a new window will 
pop up to show the information of this running task shown in 
Figure 5. It displays the information about the task, and 
provides a link “ResultFile” to download the resulting log 
files. 
Because a power system needs to balance demand and 
supply, some alterations of such configuration files may lead 
to the fluctuation of the whole power grid, which could be 
observed from its resulting log files.  
Students are required to tamper with some topology 
configuration files and find out its impact on the stability of 
the whole power grid through comparing resulting log files 
before and after configuration files changing. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Schedule. 
 
Figure 4.  Time Slot Reserve. 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
Figure 5.  Result Information. 
 
Figure 6.  Topology Attack Project. 
B. Energy Model Attack Project 
Energy model specifies how the electrical appliances 
consume or supply the electrical power. Furthermore, user 
can customize energy model and run the system with your 
specified energy model by writing energy model programs 
and adding it to smart grid programs. It is possible to execute 
the energy model attack by overwriting the current energy 
model programs with the customized energy model 
programs. For example, modify the energy model to increase 
the power consumption of some electrical appliances may 
lead the whole power out of supply.  
In this project, we implement the attack of altering the 
energy model of smart grid elements such as generator by 
modifying current energy model. This process is shown in 
Figure 8. Students are required to modify the sample 
program written in C++ to implement a new energy model. 
The main part of the sample program is shown in Figure 7. 
This sample program is running in the Smart grid emulator 
SCORE, and it specifies the energy model for appliances in 
the Smart Grid. Users can modify this sample code to 
implement their customozed energy model.  
 
int main(intargc, char**argv) { 
stringself_id = string(argv[1]); //use this to get the node id. 
pid_tpid; 
pid = getpid(); 
EnergyDaemoned(self_id); // init aenergydaemon using the 
node id. 
 
while (1){ 
 
/* You can use the interfaces in EnergyDaemon.h 
 
* to implement your energy modeland interact with 
* the emulation environmenthere 
* The following is just a simple example.*/ 
 
 
srand ( pid+ time(NULL) ); 
 
 
intupdateInterval=rand() % 10 + 1; 
 
 
sleep(updateInterval); 
 
 
srand(updateInterval+pid+time(NULL)); 
 
 
doubledesiredEnergy=rand()%50+1; 
//This sets the desired energy rate of the energy model. 
 
 
ed.setDesiredEnergy(desiredEnergy);sleep(5); 
 
 
ed.setDesiredEnergy(desiredEnergy);sleep(10);} 
 
 
return 0; 
 
 
} 
 
Figure 7.  Energy Model Sample Program. 
Because the programs written by students may not 
execute correctly, instructors need correct the errors in the 
programs and submit it to the emulator. Similarly to the 
previous project, students can reserve a time slot and submit 
a task by specifying the topology configuration file 
containing customized energy model. And user can also 
download the resulting log files to observe the differences of 
the real-time power flow information between using previous 
and customized energy model. 
Moreover, carefully designed alterations on selected 
energy models could keep the whole power system stable, 
which makes this attack not easy to be detected. In this 
project, students are required to design two suits of attack 
plans: one need change energy models of some elements to 
make the power grid system instable, and the other plan need 
change some energy models of a few elements and keep the 
system stable. Also, students are required to download the 
corresponding resulting log files to analyze the power flow 
and network information. 
 
Figure 8.  Energy Model Attack Project. 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
Figure 9.  Authentication Protocol Project. 
C. Authentication Protocol Project 
Besides, we design an authentication protocol project to 
help students understand how authentication works in the 
smart grid environment. This project is shown in Figure 8. 
Authentication is a critical component in network 
security, and it is widely taught in the course of network 
security. The authentication protocol in smart grid could be 
used to protect user data in the advanced smart meters to be 
safely collected by power corporations. And authentication is 
critical to prevent attackers to remotely control users’ 
intelligent electrical appliances. Most important is the 
protection of the power grid control system, which needs 
authentication to access. It is necessary to apply 
authentication protocol to prevent malicious attack of the 
power grid control system. 
In smart grid, authentication process can be skipped to 
reduce communication overhead, and this property could be 
used by attackers to bypass the authentication protocol. In 
Figure 8, attacker could get the communication between 
element A and element B in smart grid without 
authentication.  
In this project, students are required to finish a search 
survey about the authentication in smart grid, and choose a 
senior to design a plan to execute such kind of attack. 
Moreover, students are taught the method to defend such 
attack from the experience of common network security and 
the features of smart grid. Students are required to propose a 
plan to defend against this kind of attack, and demonstrate 
why it could be feasible under the circumstance of smart 
grid. 
 
IV. 
LEARNING MATERIALS 
In addition, this website provides a platform to share 
learning materials like course presentation slides, related 
documents and source codes. We also design some flash 
videos in the web pages to introduce the overview of smart 
grid and its security; to explain complicated security policies, 
infrastructure stability and data privacy in smart grid; and to 
show how attacks and counter-attack work in smart grid 
environment. Students can access this website to obtain an 
in-depth grasp of smart grid security. Based on these learning 
materials, we have developed some course topics to cover 
the main aspects of smart grid security. 
A. Overview of Smart Grid and Its Cyber Security 
This is the introduction to the overall architecture of the 
smart grid including both the physical power system and the 
communication system. For power system, we will introduce 
the functions of the energy generation components, the 
distribution and transmission mechanisms, and the load 
control 
and 
demand 
response 
algorithms. 
For 
the 
communication 
system, 
we 
will 
cover 
various 
communication networks in smart grid, the Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure (AMI), and major smart grid 
industry standards.  
The mutual impacts between the power system and the 
communication system will the emphasized in the materials. 
The cyber security of smart grid will provide the discussion 
of the problems such as the attacks in power system and 
communication system. Since many traditional security 
measures 
such 
as 
authentication, authorization, 
and 
accounting demonstrate unique properties in smart grid, we 
will re-introduce these concepts based on the new application 
environments. 
Moreover, students can access the website to run the 
specified task and download the resulting log files. By 
observing these log files, students will have a clearer picture 
about the dynamical power flow information in smart grid. 
As a special emphasis, we will demonstrate how cyber 
attacks can lead to catastrophic results in physical power 
systems. 
B. Network Security and Infrastructure Stability in Smart 
Gird 
This section provides an in-depth coverage of the 
information network infrastructure in smart grid and its 
security. We will first describe the roles of wide area 
(WAN), local area (LAN), and home area networks (HAN) 
in smart grid. The advantages and disadvantages of different 
techniques to provide last-mile access connection to end 
users through power line communication, wireless networks, 
or cellular systems will be presented. Many network attacks 
in Internet have their companions in smart grid, and we will 
these kinds of attacks in details.  
Since the power system needs to maintain a balance 
between the demands and supply in real-time, we will 
demonstrate how network attacks in the cyber system can 
impact the infrastructure stability of the whole power grids. 
Moreover, the course projects of grid topology attack and 
energy model attack could assist the understanding of the 
attacks in smart grid. From these two projects, students could 
practice the simulated attack in smart grid and analyze these 
attacks’ impact on the stability of power grid system. 
C. Data Security and Privacy in Smart Grid 
This section provides an in-depth coverage of the threats 
to confidentiality and privacy of the data in smart grid. We 
will first describe the data collection, aggregation, 
processing, transmission, and storage procedures in the AMI. 
Since different network protocols may be used at different 
stages of data processing, we will discuss the vulnerabilities 
during the data format transformation procedures.  
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

In this section, we will introduce several concrete 
examples of data manipulation [12][13][14], such as data 
injection attacks [15][16]. Since data transmitted in smart 
grid without sanitization may lead to disclosure of sensitive 
information of end users, we will also introduce the 
countermeasures to preserve user privacy. Besides, the 
course project of authentication protocol will help students 
better understand the data privacy in smart grid and the 
importance of authentication in smart gird. 
D. Examples. False data injection attack 
We present a potential class of cyber attack, named false 
data injection attack, against the state estimation in 
deregulated electricity markets. With the knowledge of the 
system configuration, we show that such attacks will 
circumvent the bad data measurement detection equipped in 
present Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) 
systems, and lead to profitable financial misconduct such as 
virtual bidding the ex-post Locational Marginal Price (LMP). 
An attacker could manipulate the nodal price of Ex-Post 
market while being undetected by the system operator. 
Combining with virtual bidding, such attack could bring 
financial profit to the attacker. A heuristic is developed to 
compute the optimal injection of the attacker, which can be 
formulated as a convex optimization problem and thus 
solved efficiently by the attacker. 
We illustrate examples of financial virtual bidding 
misconducts, which are direct consequences of false data 
injection attack against the EMS state estimators. Figure 10 
shows the topology of the IEEE 14-bus system. There are a 
total of five generators in this system. Table I describes two 
scenarios that are simulated. In both cases, a small subset of 
transmission line flow sensors are compromised by false data 
injection attack. 
A malicious attacker aims at gaining profit from virtual 
bidding. At the pair of the nodes that are pre-specified in the 
third column of Table I, an attacker purchases and sells the 
same amount of virtual power in Day-ahead market at nodes 
j1 and j2, respectively. Based on historical trends, the attacker 
purchases at the lower price node and sells at the higher price 
node 3. In real-time market, the attacker then executes false 
data injection attacks on the selected sensors in order to 
remove a subset of congested lines. To illustrate the effect of 
the attacks on ex-post market clearing prices, we assume that 
the load forecast at day-ahead is perfect. In other words, if 
there were no cyber attacks, the day-ahead LMP will be the 
same as the ex-post LMP. 
In Case I, only one transmission line (from bus 1 to bus 
2) is congested. The attacker chooses to buy virtual power at 
bus4 and sells virtual power at bus 3 in day-ahead market. 
By compromising two line flow sensors with false data 
injection, the transmission line congestion gets relieved, 
leading to a system-wide uniform ex-post market price. 
Figure 11 shows the LMPs with and without the cyber 
attacks. Based on (12), the profit of such transaction is about 
$1/MWh. 
 In Case II, there are three congested lines in the day-
ahead market in Figure 12. By compromising three line flow 
sensors, the desired attack pair of nodes (buses 1 and 2) 
result in the same LMP in ex-post market. The reason is that 
the cyber attacks maliciously lower the estimated line flow 
information, thereby setting the shadow prices of the actual 
congested lines to be zero. The profit of such transaction is 
about $8/MWh. In Table II, we compare the attack efforts 
and expected financial profits for both cases. We use the 
norm infinity of za with respect to the norm infinity of z as an 
indicator of the attack efforts. As the system congestion 
becomes more complex, the potential of gaining financial 
profits by maliciously placing false data attack is also higher. 
 
Figure 10.  IEEE standard 14-bus system. 
 
Figure 11.  LMP with and without cyber attacks  (only one line congestion). 
TABLE I.  
CASE DESCRIPTION 
 
congested lines in day-
ahead (from bus-to bus) 
virtual bidding 
nodes 
compromised 
sensors 
Case 
I 
1-2 
3 and 4 
line flow 
sensors 1-2, 3-
4 
Case 
II 
1-2, 2-4, 2-5 
1 and 2 
line flow 
sensors 1-2, 2-
3, 2-4 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
Figure 12.  LMP with and without cyber attacks (three congested lines).  
TABLE II.  
ATTACK EFFORTS AND PROFITS (ε = 1MWH) 
 
relative efforts


||
||
||
||
z
za
 
profits (% of transaction cost) 
Case I 
1.53% 
2.50% 
Case II 
1.21% 
9.76% 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a web-based smart grid 
learning module for students. It is shown to be beneficial for 
students to grasp the knowledge of security measures in 
smart grids and participate in the practice of smart grid 
security through instructive learning materials and delicately 
designed course projects in this learning environment.  
Currently,  we are working to provide friendly user 
interface and display course project results in graphics, 
especially the interaction parts in this website that provide 
the interface for students to access this learning environment. 
For example, the design of the reminding windows during 
the operations in the website will be improved for students to 
more easily apply the course project in this platform.  
Moreover, an ongoing effort is to evaluate the student 
feedback and learning outcome from this proposed new 
module for smart grid security. This part will include 
designing the evaluation questions to measure the effect of 
the platform after practice of students, analyzing the 
feedback from students' answers to these questions to find 
out the defects and of this platform and improve the whole 
learning environment based these feedbacks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Subcommittee on Smart Grid of the National Science and Technology 
Council. A policy framework for the 21st century grid: Enabling our 
secure energy future. Executive Office of the President, National 
Science and Technology Council, 2011. 
[2] DHS Industrial Control System Cyber Emergency Response Team 
(ICS-CERT). Schneider electric quantum ethernet module multiple 
vulnerabilities.ICS-ALERT-11-346-01,2011. 
[3] DHS. National infrastructure protection plan: Partening to enhance 
protection and resiliency. Department of Homeland Security, 2009. 
[4] T. Godfrey, et al. "Modeling smart grid applications with co-
simulation." Smart Grid Communications (SmartGrid -Comm), 2010 
First IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2010, pp. 291-296. 
[5] V. Liberatore and A. Al-Hammouri. Smart grid communicat- ion and 
co-simulation. In IEEE Energy Tech, 2011, pp. 1-5. 
[6] H. Lin, S. Sambamoorthy, S. Shukla, J. Thorp, and L. Mili, "Power 
system and communication network co-simulation for smart grid 
applications." Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), 2011 
IEEE PES. IEEE, 2011, pp. 1-6. 
[7] J. Nutaro, P. Kuruganti, M. Shankar, L. Miller, and S. Mullen, 
"Intergrated modeling of theelectric grid, communications, and 
control." International Journal of Energy Sector Management, 2(3), 
pp. 420-438, 2008. 
[8] KEMA. The u.s. smart grid revolution: Kema’s perspectives for job 
creation. Prepared for the GridWise Alliance, 2009. 
[9] M. Lowe, H. Fan, and G. Gereffi, "US Smart Grid: Finding New 
Ways to Cut Carbon and Create Jobs." Centre on Globalization, 
Governance and Competitiveness, Duke University (2011). 
[10] S. Tan, W. Song, Q. Dong, And L. Tong, "Score: Smart-grid common 
open 
research 
emulator." 
Smart 
Grid 
Communications 
(SmartGridComm), 2012 IEEE Third International Conference on. 
IEEE, 2012, pp. 282-287. 
[11] D. Choi, L. Xie, "Impact analysis of locational marginal price subject 
to power system topology errors." SmartGridComm 2013, pp. 55-60. 
[12] S. Cui, et al. "Coordinated data-injection attack and detection in the 
smart grid: A detailed look at enriching detection solutions." Signal 
Processing Magazine, IEEE 29.5 (2012), pp. 106-115. 
[13] M. Esmalifalak, H. Nguyen, R. Zheng, and Z. Han, "Stealth false data 
injection using independent component analysis in smart grid." Smart 
Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2011 IEEE International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2011, pp. 244-248. 
[14] J. Lin, W. Yu, X. Yang, G. Xu, and W. Zhao, "On false data injection 
attacks against distributed energy routing in smart grid." Cyber-
Physical Systems (ICCPS), 2012 IEEE/ACM Third International 
Conference on. IEEE, 2012, pp. 183-192. 
[15] L. Xie, Y. Mo, and B. Sinopoli, "False data injection attacks in 
electricity markets." Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 
2010 First IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2010, pp. 226-
231. 
[16] L. Xie, Y. Mo, and B. Sinopoli, "Integrity data attacks in power 
market operations." Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on 2.4 (2011), pp. 
659-666. 
 
 
 
 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

