Design, Development and Implementation of a Hybrid Network with Smart Sensors 
and Power Line Communication for Monitoring of Underground Electricity 
Substation 
Paulo Sausen and Airam  Sausen 
Technology Department 
Regional University of Northwest State 
Ijuí, Brazil 
{sausen,airam}@unijui.edu.br 
Mauricio de Campos  and Camila S. Gehrke  
Electrical Engineering Department 
Federal University of Campina Grande 
Campina Grande, Brazil 
{decampos.mauricio,camila.gehrke}@gmail.com 
 
Renê R. Emmel Jr.  
State Company for Electric Power Distribution of Rio 
Grande do Sul – CEEE/RS 
Porto Alegre, Brazil 
ReneEJ@ceee.com.br 
Fabiano Salvadori 
Electrical Engineering Department 
Federal University of Paraiba 
João Pessoa, Brazil 
salvadori.fabiano@cear.ufpb.br
 
Abstract— The Smart Sensor Networks not only collect data, 
but also perform local processing, and may even operate in the 
system, and thereafter, if necessary, carry out the transmission. 
However, in some cases hybrid networks systems, that combine 
wireless with wired structures, may be more appropriate. The 
objective of this work is to develop a system that integrates a 
set of smart sensors and communication systems for use in an 
underground distribution power substation. The underground 
substation of the distribution system chosen belongs to the spot 
network located in Porto Alegre city, Brazil. Among all 
challenges of this work, establish the communication system 
installed inside the substation with the outside world, is 
without doubt the most complex, because, there are no 
commercial solutions for this problem. This paper presents the 
development of a hybrid smart system based on wireless sensor 
network combined with Power Line Communication. This 
system allows real time monitoring of the substation without 
the need to make any significant changes. 
Keywords-Smart Sensors Networks; Monitoring Underground 
Power Substation; Hybrid Networks Systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The need to manage the processes, combined with 
advances in electronics and wireless communication 
technologies have allowed the design of the Wireless Sensor 
Networks (WSN) [1]. The technology applied to these 
sensors, the data processing and communication networks, 
has allowed the evolution of these systems, which came to be 
called smart sensor networks. The sensors not only collect 
data, but also perform local processing and can act on the 
system and thereafter, when necessary, perform data 
transmission. These intelligent sensor networks enable a 
more effective monitoring and fault detection system, 
improving reliability and network maintenance [2]. 
Among the challenges of design, development and 
installation of smart sensor network can be pointed out 
environments where electromagnetic interference reduces 
performance and can also making it inoperable [3,9]. In these 
cases, hybrid networks that combine wireless systems with 
wired structures may be more appropriate [4]. These hybrid 
architectures still allow better power management of these 
systems, since in some cases the sensor node can be installed 
in difficult access areas. Thus, the physical connection can 
also be used as the redundant system of communication 
system. 
The objective of this work is to develop a system, 
integrating smart sensors and communication systems, for 
use in a power electric underground distribution substation. 
The underground substation of the distribution system 
chosen belongs to the spot network located in Porto Alegre 
city, Brazil. The depth of this substation ranges 4-5 meters, 
under layers of asphalt and concrete. Therefore, another 
challenge of this work was to establish a communication 
system capable of communicating from the inside to the 
outside of the substation, since it is not possible by radio 
communication and there are not available physical 
communication installed for this purpose.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents the Underground Distribution Network. Section III 
presents a description of the monitoring system of substation. 
Section IV describes the partial results obtained from the 
monitoring system, and Section V concludes this work. 
 
II. 
UNDERGROUND DISTRIBUTION NETWORK 
The underground distribution networks represent an 
advantageous alternative for applications in distribution 
systems in great urban centers, which are characterized by 
high concentrations of charge and require high levels of 
quality, continuity and reliability of electricity supplies. 
There are two common ways of connecting underground 
distribution networks, the radial or network systems. The 
network system, also known as spot network system, is a low 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

voltage distribution system, having a set of transformers 
connected in parallel, to supply electric energy to the load. 
This topology allows that the electricity supply is maintained 
even that one or more transformer get out the service as long 
as the total power of the remaining transformer is equal to, or 
greater than, the power consumed by the load. Moreover, it 
allows improving secondary voltage characteristics [5]. 
The spot network system is installed in Porto Alegre city, 
fed with 13.8 kV primary voltages, and 127/220V secondary 
voltages. It consists of 500kVA transformers, submersible, 
hosted in underground chambers. 
The greatest risks in this type of system are: inundation, 
overheating, fault in protection system, theft, and changes in 
system pressure [10]. Figure 1 shows the analog monitored 
quantities:  (i) the current in the primary; (ii) the voltage and 
current on the secondary; and, (iii) temperature of the 
transformer frame and the environment temperature. The 
other quantities are digital type (on or off), e.g., the states of: 
pumps, fans and transformer operational lights. The system 
must also be able to monitor substation inundation and 
intruders. 
 
 
Figure 1. Monitored data by the system. 
 
III. 
DESIGNED SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE FOR 
MONITORING 
The designed system (see Figure 2) is based upon the 
concept of intelligent sensors. The Intelligent Sensors 
Modules (ISMs) may acquire up to four magnitudes, i.e., two 
analogs and two digital, communicating by wireless and/or 
physical network. A second module is designed to be used in 
the acquisition of quantities with fast dynamic and need read 
more than four quantities, e.g., secondary voltages and 
currents of the transformer. This device is referred as Remote 
Data Acquisition Unit (RDAU). 
The Gateway establishes the communication with the 
outside. As earlier mentioned, is not possible to carry out 
communication by radio or wired structure, since the 
characteristics of the substations does not allow the 
deployment of these systems. Thus, we used a Power Line 
Communication (PLC) system, allowing data transmission 
from the inside the substation. In the outside of the 
substation, a General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) transmits 
the data in 3rd Generation (3G) cellular communication 
system to a server. 
The monitoring system has essentially the following 
subsystems (see Figure 2): a) Sub-system for data 
acquisition, b) Remote link, and c) Control subsystem. 
A. Intelligent Sensor Module – ISM 
The ISMs are devices capable of performing data 
acquisition 
functions, 
data 
processing 
and 
transmitting/receiving data. Its architecture (Figure 3) 
consists of a power subsystem, a sensor subsystem and 
communication subsystem. 
 
REMOTE	  SERVER
SUPERVISORY	  CONTROL
DATA	  ACQUISITION	  SUBSYSTEM
(a)
ISM
1
ISM
2
ISM
3
ISM
n
RDAU
GATEWAY
CAN	  BUS
CONTROL	  
SYSTEM
LINK	  
(PLC)
RS232
GPRS
GPRS
(b)
(c)
 
Figure 2. Complete monitoring system. 
 
The subsystems, sensors and communication are 
managed by a PIC18F2580 microcontroller. This was chosen 
because of design requirements and also has the same 
integrated hardware dedicated to CAN (Controller Area 
Network). In addition, supports various peripherals, e.g., 10 
bits Analog-Digital Converter (ADC), four timers, Universal 
Synchronous Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter (USART) 
as serial interface, among others. 
The power subsystem is responsible for powering the 
ISM. The primary source of energy comes from the CAN 
bus and/or battery pack. When necessary, the CAN bus 
system also feeds back into recharging of batteries. This 
system consists of a battery with 900mAh capacity and 7.2 
V. 
 
SENSOR	  
SUBSYSTEM
COMMUNICATION	  SUBSYSTEM
POWER	  SUBSYSTEM
SENSOR
TRF-­‐24G
CAN
MCP
2551
10	  Bits	  AD
CONVERTER
BATERY
CAN	  BUS
PIC18F
2580
 Figure 3. ISM architecture. 
 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

The ISM is equipped with four sensing inputs, two digital 
and two analogs. The analog inputs designed to operate with 
signals in the range of 0 to 5V or 4 to 20mA, depending of 
characteristic of the sensor connected. If the sensor attached 
to the ISM need power, it is provided with the signal 
connector. 
The ISM uses the communication subsystem to 
send/receive data in two distinct ways: via wireless network 
or through physical network. The physical network is 
primarily intended for the redundancy, the wireless network 
is the principal communication to exchange information. The 
device used to radio frequency (RF) communication is the 
TRF-24G 
module, 
which 
employs 
the 
nRF2401A 
transceiver. This device uses modulation GFSK (Gaussian 
Frequency Shift Keying) [12] for transmitting up to 1 Mbps. 
It features integrated antenna and the transmission power can 
be set from -20 dBm to 0, allowing a range of 250 meters 
(without obstacles). 
The physical bus addresses the standard ISO11898-2, 
designed to international standard CAN communication [6, 
7]. It specifies patterns relating to the physical layer of the 
CAN protocol, one being the use of a transceiver device that 
makes the interface between the sensor and CAN bus node, 
making certain electrical conditions provided in the standard 
are met. Amongst these, conditions include the protection 
against short circuits, voltage levels and others. Therefore, 
ISMs were connected to the bus via the CAN transceiver 
MCP2551, Microchip Technology TM. 
ISM prototype (see Figure 4) was developed to 
experimental validation. Each ISM has an address assigned 
by the Gateway when installing the network, organizing 
themselves autonomously (plug and play). 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Intelligent Sensor Module (ISM). 
 
B. Remote Data Acquisition Unit - RDAU 
Figure 5 shows the diagram of the Remote Data 
Acquisition Unit (RDAU), it can be seen that the RDAU is 
divided into three blocks: Communication Subsystem 
responsible for communication device; Sensor Subsystem 
responsible for acquisition of the voltage and current; and 
Power Subsystem that provides power to the system.  
 
COMMUNICATION	  SUBSYSTEM
SENSOR	  SUBSYSTEM
POWER	  SUBSYSTEM
12	  bits	  ADC
DSP
TMS320F2812
TRW
24G
CAN
RS232	  
or	  
RS485
Digital	  Outputs
Digital	  Inputs
Current	  
Sensors
Voltage	  
Sensors
POWER	  SUPPLY
 Figure 5. Remote Data Acquisition Unit (RDAU) Diagram. 
 
The RDAU (see Figure 6) can communicate with the 
Remote Server (RS) via RS 232, RS 485, CAN bus or RF. If 
using the RS 485, CAN or RF, is it possible to connect 
multiple RDAUs to each Link Remote. Is controlled by a 
Digital Signal Processor (DSP) family TMS320F2812. The 
ADC is 12 bit and is programmed to 240 samples/cycle 
acquisition. Figure 5 shows the block diagram of RDAUs. 
 
 
Figure 6. Remote Data Acquisition Unit (RDAU). 
 
The 
RDAUs 
are 
connected 
by 
CAN 
bus 
for 
communication with the RS, but also has an RF 
communication module (model TRF-2.4G) used to perform 
communication with the Gateway and ISM devices. 
C. Gateway 
It has been also developed a Gateway, which is 
responsible for interconnecting the set of sensors (ISMs + 
RDAU) and the PLC transmission system. The essential 
difference from the Gateway to the ISM itself is that there is 
an additional RS232 serial communications port used to 
perform the interconnection with PLC. The Gateway 
physical appearance can be seen in Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7. Developed Gateway. 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
The information exchange between Gateway and ISM is 
under MODBUS communication protocol. This is a master-
slave protocol. Defines a structure of communication 
messages used to transfer analog and digital data between 
microprocessor devices, with detection and information of 
the transmission errors. 
The MODBUS protocol is located at 7th level of the OSI 
Reference Model, which corresponds to the application layer 
that provides "client / server" communication between 
devices connected to different types of buses or network 
topologies [8]. The MODBUS also allows easy integration 
with SCADA systems [11], although these are not the main 
focus of this work. 
The management and addressing the ISMs are performed 
by the Gateway, which in turn, updates and constantly 
checks the presence of new ISMs that for luck are connected 
to the bus. 
 
D. Modem PLC 
The PLC system has been installed in Porto Alegre city, 
in the low voltage cabling of underground network. Is a 
PLC, transmitter/receiver pair, developed from a MODEM 
PLC PL-3120, ECHELONTM.  In this model,  a 
microcontroller whose functions are listed below, is 
connected: 
• 
Transmitter/Receiver 
PLC 
installed 
in 
the 
transformer; 
• 
Data acquisition of the environment temperature and 
transformer frame; 
• 
Generation of data packet to send to the MODEM 
PL-3120 via the serial interface (UART); 
• 
Management control messages sent through the 
electric grid, supplied by MODEM PL-3120. 
 
Transmitter/Receiver PLC installed outside is responsible 
for: 
 
• 
Receiving the data packets sent through the electric 
grid, supplied by MODEM PL-3120 
• 
Checking validity of data received; 
• 
Configuration of Modem GSM/GPRS; 
• 
Generation of data packet for sending for the GSM 
MODEM / GPRS via UART serial interface; 
• 
Control messages management sent via the cellular 
network, delivered by the GSM MODEM / GPRS. 
 
The PLC MODEM PL-3120 NEURON incorporates a 
CPU, 4 Kbytes to application memory and 2 kbytes of RAM. 
The NEURONTM processor executes routines for nodes 
protocols interconnection in a network PLC, Interoperable 
Self Installation (ISI), besides communication protocols, 
with the option to activate or not the CENELEC protocol. 
All these protocols are proprietary and are stored in ROM 
memory on the device. In Figure 8, the blocks diagram can 
be seen, with the constituent parts of a node based on PLC 
PL-3120. 
 
PL	  3120	  38	  TSSOP
Discrete	  
Interface	  
Circuitry
Host	  
Application
Neuron®	  
Core
DSP
Power	  Supply
Rx
A/D
D/A
Power	  Line	  
Transceiver	  
Core
Tx
Coupling	  
Circuit
 
Figure 8 PLC node based on PL-3120. 
 
The MODEM PL-3120 can operate in bands A and C 
defined in CENELEC STANDARD, which are selected from 
the crystal used to trigger the MODEM. The selection of the 
CENELEC band also defines the rate of data transmission on 
the network. By selecting the A band, the communication 
will occur at a rate of 3.6 kbps. 
As presented in the block diagram (Figure 8), it is 
necessary for integration, between the PL-3120 and the 
circuit that couples the modulated carrier to the electric 
network, an interface circuit. The interface circuit is 
composed mainly of an amplifier that can be applied to an 
electric network signal at operation carrier frequency of the 
PL-3120, with up to 1A peak-to-peak. Figure 9 shows the 
circuit diagram of the amplifier output, which forms part of 
the interface circuit. It is a transistor discrete circuit in a 
push-pull modified configuration. 
 
 
Figure 9. TX amplifier. 
Figure 10 presents a frequency response analysis of the 
power amplifier for PLC transceiver. There is a practically 
flat response in the frequency range of 1kHz to 20kHz. In the 
frequency range corresponding of the band A, of the 
STANDARD CENELEC, there is a peak in the curve of the 
amplifier gain. The maximum peak occurs at 100kHz, falling 
abruptly after this frequency. 
 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
Figure 10. TX amplifier frequency response. 
IV. 
PRATICAL RESULTS 
The tested system was installed in the spot network 
system of the CEEE-D (State Company for Electric Power 
Distribution) in Porto Alegre city. 
The monitoring system (ISMs and RDAU) was installed 
in the northeast spot network system (RNE), box-
manufacturing T-103-7A (code CEEE-D), which has the 
feeder 2RNE as energy supplies. The developed Gateway 
manages the receipt of the data system and is connected to 
the PLC signal transmitter, in the low voltage transformer 
output. The approximate distance from the transmitter to the 
receiver is about 250 meters, Figure 11. There is no direct 
path between them. 
 
 
Figure 11. PLC transmitter and receiver signals location. 
Due to the robustness provided by the adoption of hybrid 
structure for the ISMs and RDAU, packet losses in 
communication did not occur. The most critical data such as 
voltage and current, travel through CAN system when the 
data is not received properly by transceivers. 
The proposed system was tested for 90 days collecting 
data at intervals of 10 seconds. In this period, more than 2 
Gb of information that is stored in a database were 
transmitted, the packet loss rate was less than 1%, which 
proves the robustness of the proposed system. A graphical 
interface able to access this database was developed, which 
can be executed from any desktop or mobile device. More 
details on this interface are presented in sequence of the 
paper. 
 
Figure 12. Backup system test (critical case). 
The battery system of sensors nodes operates as backup 
in cases, which the redundancy occurs. In these cases, the 
worst possible condition occurs when the sensor node is 
continuously processing and transmitting data, where his 
current drawn reaches 57mA peak. Thus, we tested a set of 
batteries in extreme conditions of use, so that could be 
evaluated its durability. Figure 12 shows the results obtained 
in the discharge process. The sampling time is 1 second. 
 
 
Figure 13. Real time interface for WEB. 
Figure 13 presents the WEB application developed to 
access the data collected and stored in the database. Any 
user can to access this application from a computer with 
Internet access. 
 
 
Figure 14. Real time interface for IOS (e.g.,IPAD). 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 14 shows the application developed specifically 
to run on devices with IOS operating system (e.g, ipad and 
iphones). Finally, Figure 15 shows the application designed 
to run on devices with Android operating system. 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Real time interface for Android. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a monitoring system designed to 
monitor an underground substation power distribution. 
Advances in electronic communication systems and 
processing, and the high degree of integration, enabled the 
development of a high performance system for these 
applications. 
Among the challenges of this application may be 
highlighted the communication between indoor and the 
outdoor 
of 
the 
monitored 
substation. 
Furthermore, 
considering the difficulty of access to the system, determined 
the use of a hybrid system eliminating the necessity of 
regular maintenance of the batteries. 
The system allows its application in intelligent systems 
and fault detection applications in underground spot network 
system. As future work we intend to investigate different 
modulation types for communication PLC in order to 
improve the transmission rate. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially funded by Companhia Estadual 
de Energia Elétrica do Rio Grande do Sul (CEEE-RS, Brazil) 
and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio 
Grande do Sul (FAPERGS, Brazil). 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
P. S. Sausen, J. R. B. Sousa, M. A. Spohn, A. Perkusich and A. M. N. 
Lima, "Dynamic power management with scheduled switching modes 
in wireless sensor networks," 15th IEEE MASCOTS, pp. 1–8, 2007.  
[2] 
F. Salvadori, M. de Campos, P. Sausen, R. de Camargo, C. Gehrke, 
C. Rech, M. Spohn and A. Oliveira, "Monitoring in Industrial 
Systems Using Wireless Sensor Network With Dynamic Power 
Management," 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Instrumentation 
and 
Measurement, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 3104-3111, Sept 2009. 
[3] 
 F. Salvadori, M. Campos, R. Camargo, C. Gehrke, C. Rech, P. 
Sausen, M. A. Spohn and A. Oliveira, "Monitoring and diagnosis in 
industrial systems using wireless sensor networks.," Intelligent Signal 
Processing, WISP 2007 IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 1–6, 
2007.  
[4] 
G. Sharma and R. R. Mazumdar, "A case for hybrid sensor 
networks.," IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 16, no. 5, 
pp. 1121-1131, Oct 2008.  
[5] 
M. R. Gouvêa, E. C. Belvedere, J. J. Oliveira, P. E. Mascigrande, A. 
P. Costa and R. Brunhetoro, "Development of Standards for 
Underground Hybrid Networks (in portughese)," Aneel, 2005. 
[Online].Available:<http://www.aneel.gov.br/biblioteca/downloads/li
vros/desen_redes.pdf>. [Retrieved:  June, 2012]. 
[6] 
P. Richards, AN228 - A CAN Physical Layer Discussion. Microchip 
Technology 
Inc., 
2002. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
<http://pt.scribd.com/doc/99612719/00228a>. 
[Retrieved:  June, 
2012]. 
[7] 
M. Esro, A. A. Basari, S. Kumar and A. a. S. Z. Sadhiqin, "Controller 
Area Network (CAN) Application in Security System.," World 
Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 2009. Available: 
<http://sharepdf.net/view/48565/controller-area-network-can-
application-in-security-system>. [Retrieved:  June, 2012]. 
[8] 
M. 
ORG., 
MODBUS 
over 
Serial 
Line 
Specification 
and 
Implementation 
guide. 
V1.0., 
2002. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
<http://www.modbus.org/docs/Modbus_over_serial_line_V1.pdf>. 
[Retrieved:  June, 2012]. 
[9] 
S. Roostaee, R. Hooshmand and Mohammad Ataei, “Substation 
Automation System Using IEC 61850,” Proc. IEEE Power 
Engineering and Optimization Conference (PEOCO), 2011, IEEE 
Press, june. 2011, pp. 393-397, doi:10.1109/PEOCO.2011.5970443. 
[10] F. Mioqi, W. Jian, X. Xianghua and w. Guangrong, “System for 
Temperature Monitor in Substation with ZigBee Connectivity,” Proc. 
IEEE Communication Techology (ICCT), 2008, IEEE Press, Nov. 
2008, pp. 26-28, doi:10.1109/ICCT.2008.4716095. 
[11] N. Yellamandamma, T. Sai Kumar, KVH Rao and A. Aggarwal, 
“Low Cost Solution for automation and control of MV substation 
using MODBUS-SCADA,” Proc. IEEE Power Sytems (ICPS), 2009, 
IEEE Press, Dec. 2009, pp. 1-6, doi:10.1109/ICPWS.2009.5442735. 
[12] M. Gast, “802.11 Wireless Networks: The Definitive Guide”,  Second 
Edition, O’Reilly Media, Inc., April, 2005, 656 p. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

