Parallel Interference Cancellation in DS-OCDMA System Using Novel Multilevel 
Periodic Codes 
 
 
Besma Hammami 
National Engineering School of 
Tunis, Tunisia 
hammamibesma6@gmail.com 
Habib Fathallah 
King Saud University 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
habib.fathallah@gmail.com 
Houria Rezig 
National Engineering School of 
Tunis, Tunisia 
houria.rezig@enit.rnu.tn 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we introduce the optimization of Bit 
Error Rate (BER) in parallel cancellation of multiple access 
interference (PIC) using a novel periodic optical encoder 
applied to fiber-to-the-X (FTTX) passive optical network 
(PONs) with a direct sequence optical code division multiple 
access (DS-OCDMA) system. The principle of this structure of 
receiver consists to reduce the output error in the data 
received. The performance of our system is analyzed in a 
synchronous network using multilevel periodic codes (ML-PC) 
and the results are compared with those for different receivers. 
 
Keywords- 
direct-sequence 
optical 
code-division 
multipleaccess (DS-OCDMA); fiber-to-the-X (FTTX); passive 
optical network (PONs); multilevel periodic codes (ML-PC); 
parallel interference cancellation (PIC). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Direct-sequence code-division multiple access (DS-
CDMA) [1] is currently the subject of much research as it is 
a promising multiple access capability for third and fourth 
generations mobile communication systems.  
In Direct Sequence transmission, the user data signal is 
multiplied by a code sequence. Mostly, binary sequences are 
used. To obtain better performance than those obtained by 
the detection single-user, multiuser detection has been 
investigated for links OCDMA [2][3]. 
Indeed, this type of detection, already used for the radio 
CDMA has proven its efficacy in reducing the impact of 
interference on performance [4].  
The advantage of the multiuser detection over single-
user detection is the knowledge of codes of undesired users 
that evaluates more precisely the interference present in the 
received signal. Consequently, the data are better detected.  
In this paper, we present a parallel cancellation method 
(called PIC) developed for radiofrequency systems, applied 
to the direct sequence optical CDMA system, the spreading 
codes considered here are achieved  with a new periodic 
coding scheme [5], that has been previously proposed for 
FTTX monitoring, and to the best of our knowledge never 
explored for data coding/decoding. The receiver studied 
here is constituted by a limiter optical device placed in front 
of a PIC structure.  
Our study is done when the direction of data 
transmission is the uplink direction, from Optical Network 
Unit (ONU), to Optical Line Termination (OLT). Using the 
DS-OCDMA technique for the upstream, would provide 
necessary bit rate, dispensing of synchronization for this 
track. The bit error rate (BER) performances were reported 
in the case of an optical synchronous incoherent DS-
OCDMA system using multilevel periodic codes (ML-PC) 
when applied to FTTX-PON architecture. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Direct Sequence OCDMA system
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

In this paper we compared the efficacy of the receptor 
PIC with the conventional correlation receiver (CCR), and 
then with their amelioration which is the parallel 
interference cancellation with an optical limiter (called 
HL+PIC), we deduce the superiority of HL+PIC structure 
not only in performance but also in regards to feasibility. 
This paper is organized as follows: In the second 
section, we present the description of the DS-OCDMA 
system. In the third section we introduce the principle of the 
parallel interference cancellation structure and their 
improvement. In the fourth section, we evaluate the 
performance of the proposed system through the bit error 
rate (BER).  
II. 
SYSTEM MODEL  
 
In a DS-OCDMA system, users transmit binary data 
equiprobable and independently in an optical fiber. 
Differentiation of users is done by multiplying the data by a 
code (Figure 1). This code should be specific to each user, 
so that we can extract the data by comparing the received 
signal with the desired user code. 
The codes studied in this paper are the multilevel 
periodic codes (ML-PC) [5], which are determined by the 
length of the silent intervals separating the multilevel pulses, 
i.e, its period. The codes length of the ith customers (lci) is 
related by the silent period between the subpulses and is 
given as: 
                              lci=piwTsc                                        (1) 
 
where c is the speed of light, pi=li/cTs  is an integer number 
that determines the length of the ith encoders ring li, Ts is the 
transmitted pulse duration and w is the weight of the code 
(ci). 
In DS-OCDMA system the data of active users are 
spread by multiplication with the code sequence, and at the 
output of the encoder the kth user signal is obtained as: 
 
                                  Sk(t)=akbk(t)ck(t)                                (2) 
                
ak The power level at the output of encoder and bk is the data 
transmitted by the kth user. In the case of multilevel periodic 
codes (ML-PC), the total power for any code with weight  
[4] is:   
 
                                   
                              (3)       
 
ρj is the jth subpulse power level generated by the encoder. 
The first subpulse power level ρ1 is equal to ρ1=s2. . For 
j=2,….,  the level of ρj can be derived as: 
                               ρj=(1-s)2sj-1+(1-s) ρj-1                                         (4) 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Conventional Correlation Receiver for user 1 
 
s is the power coupling ratio which determines the amount 
of power coupled to the ring encoder proposed in [5]. It was 
shown in [5] that the interval of s between 0.5 and 0.6 gives 
good distribution for the power between the subpulses with 
cumulative power that depends on the weight w.  
Finally, at the input of the receiver, the signal S(t) is the 
superposition of signals transmitted by the N users: 
                   
                     (5) 
A) 
Principle of  conventional correlation  receiver  
The conventional correlation receiver (CCR) is the 
simplest receiver in a DS-OCDMA system, the principle of 
this receiver is the estimation of the power contained in the 
chips unit code, to compare thereafter to the decision 
threshold. It provides three functions:  
• Multiplying the received signal by the code of the 
desired user. This step, equivalent to the realization of a 
mask between the received signal and the code sequence, 
can retain only the power present in the chip unit code, 
•  Integration of the signal obtained on the bit time: This 
step evaluates the total power present on the signal 
previously obtained during the interval of a bit time. This 
step provides the value of the decision variable.    
• Decision making by comparison to a threshold: 
comparing the decision variable with the decision threshold 
used to obtain the estimated data. 
Assuming that the user # 1 is the desired user, the decoding 
part of the DS-OCDMA system is performed by correlation 
(Figure 2). 
B) 
Principle 
of 
parallel 
interference 
cancellation 
receiver  
In a structure with parallel cancellation, all undesired 
users are detected at the same time using the conventional 
receiving systems. 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  Figure 3. Schematic of the PIC receiver 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Effect of Hard Limiter on an example of received signal 
 
 
The parallel interference cancellation receiver has the 
principle of the reproduction interference from undesired 
users, to remove it from the total received signal (Figure 3). 
The PIC requires several steps: 
 
• The detection of data sent by each undesired user is done 
by the conventional correlation receiver (CCR) with a 
detection threshold “St”, at the output of each receiver, 
we obtain the estimation 
 of the data sent by the 
undesired user # k,  
• The second step is to reconstruct the signals transmitted 
by undesired users by multiplying the estimated data 
  by the corresponding code 
, 
• We obtain in the third step, the interference term ri(t) 
which is actually the sum of the reconstructed signals,  
then it is subtracted from the received signal r (t):  
 and as, 
, 
then:         
            
         (6) 
• The last step is the detection of the desired user data # 1 
from the signal "cleaned" from the interference S(t). 
This detection is done through a CCR with a decision 
threshold Sf.  
 
C) 
Amelioration  
1) Principle of  hard limiter (HL) 
 
The ideal function of the component called "Hard 
Limiter" (HL) is defined by:  
 
                   
                       (7) 
In practice, this component removes a part of the 
received power to get at the end a signal which each chip 
contains a power equal 0 or 1. For example, in Figure 4, we 
observe that the HL removed a part of the power contained 
CCR #User 2 
C2(t) 
r(t) 
 
C2(t) 
 
  
Σ 
CCR #User 3 
C3(t) 
 
C3(t) 
CCR #User N 
CN(t) 
 
CN(t) 
CCR #User 1 
C1(t) 
 
ri(t) 
 
ri(t) 
+ 
- 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

in the first chip, and left unchanged the rest of the signal. 
Indeed, the power contained in the first chip of the received 
signal has a value of 2, while the one in the same chip after 
the action of HL is 1.  
Thus, the HL has eliminated a part of the interference 
contained in the first chip. On the other side, the chips 
containing a power equal to 1 before the HL remain 
unchanged, and those for which the power was zero. As a 
result, levels 0 and 1 will be unchanged, and levels greater 
than 1 will be reduced to one. This limitation of the power 
in each chip reduces the interference, and removes some 
interference patterns leading to an error.  
 
2) HL+PIC 
To improve the performance of the PIC, the detection of 
undesired users can be achieved by a HL + CCR receiver. 
Thanks to the limiters placed before the receivers of the 
undesired users, the data are therefore better estimated so 
the contribution of these users in the received signal is better 
evaluated. 
III. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
We will present in this section the algorithm used in our 
simulation and we will analyze the results. 
A) Numerical simulation  
At the transmitter of the DS-OCDMA channel, we begin 
by the generation of periodic codes and then the random 
generation of bits sent by each user and random selection of 
N active users among users of the family, afterwards the 
step of the spreading is done by multiplying the data of the 
desired user by the corresponding code, subsequently the 
spreading of data of the undesired users and adding their 
contribution to the signal of the desired user. Finally, we 
sum the encoded data and transmit over a channel assumed 
to be ideal. 
At the receiver, we will follow the different stages of the 
parallel interference cancellation structure described in 
Section II, and to analyze the performance of this structure 
multi-user, we will compare it with another receiver such as, 
the conventional correlation receiver (CCR), and the CCR 
improved by adding an optical limiter (known as Hard 
Limiter), and then the improved of PIC (HL+PIC). 
B) Analysis of results  
The simulation has been carried out in MATLAB to 
evaluate the BER performance for the parallel interference 
cancellation (PIC) and compared it with other receivers 
(CCR, HL+CCR, HL+PIC).  
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
10
0
Sf
Bit Error Rate BER 
BER=f(Sf)
St=0.12
St=0.14
St=0.16
St=0.18
St=0.2
 
Figure 5.  BER versus decision threshold of the undesired users Sf using 
ML-PC, N=6 Users 
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
St
Bit Error Rate BER 
BER=f(St)
Sf=0.1
 
Figure 6. BER versus decision threshold of the desired users St using ML-
PC, N=6 Users 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
-5
10
-4
10
-3
10
-2
10
-1
Network Size N
Bit Error Rate BER 
BER=f(N)
HL+CCR
CCR
PIC
HL+PIC
 
Figure 7. BER versus the network size N 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

So we must first determine the optimal thresholds (St: 
optimal threshold of the desired user, Sf: optimal threshold 
of the undesired users) of the PIC receiver.  
In Figure 5, we plotted the evolution of the BER of the 
PIC receivers with ML-PC codes with period pi, weight 
w=5, s=0.4 and N=6 users. This performance was evaluated 
as a function of the Sf and varying St between 0.12 and 0.2. 
From this presentation, we can observe that the best 
performance is obtained for a decision threshold Sf = 0.1 
whatever the value of St. 
Now, we will fix the value of Sf at 0.1 and we will 
present in Figure 6, the variation of BER as a function of St 
with the same ML-PC code and N=6 users.  So we can look 
that the best performance is achieved when St = 0.2.  
We can conclude that the two optimal thresholds are: 
• 
The optimal threshold of the desired user: St=0.2, 
• 
The optimal threshold of the undesired users: 
Sf=0.1, 
We worked with the two optimal threshold estimated in 
the previous figures, and we plotted the variation of the 
BER as a function of the network size N (Figure 7), with the 
same ML-PC code. First, we can see that the performance of 
the four receivers degrade when the number of users 
increases, but does not exceed 2*10 -2 and that thanks to the 
use of periodic codes. 
Furthermore, we observe that for a given code, the PIC 
allows a number of active users more important than the 
CCR or HL+ CCR. Indeed, for a ML-PC code (with period 
pi, w = 5 and s = 0.4) and BER = 5.5*10-2, the PIC allows 
64 simultaneous users to communicate, while the CCR and 
HL+CCR allow only 20 users at most, to be active on the 
network.  
By comparing the four receivers, one can conclude that 
the best performances are obtained when we work with a 
HL+PIC receiver and here the BER can achieve 3.125*10-5 
for N = 6 users. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
 
In this paper, we investigated the multi-users detection 
with the parallel interference cancellation (PIC) structure by 
comparing it with their amelioration (HL+PIC) and  other 
receivers (CCR and HL+CCR), using a novel coding 
scheme so called multilevel periodic coding (Ml-PC) for 
DS-OCDMA system. We studied the characteristics of these 
codes and investigated their performance in BER. We 
derived the values for an optimum threshold that minimizes 
the bit error rate when we use the PIC receiver. In our 
system, we can achieve almost a BER = 3.125*10-5 for N = 
6 users. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. Goursaud, Naufal M. Saad, Y. Zouine, A. Vergonjanne, C. Aupetit-
Berthelemot, J. Zaninetti, J.P. Cances et J.M. Dumas, “Application of 
temporal optical CDMA in access broadband networks” , 23rd National 
Days of Guided Optics (JNOG 2004), October 2004. 
[2] Y. Zouine, S. M. Naufal, C. Goursaud, A. Julien-Vergonjanne, C. 
Aupetitberthlemot, J.P. Cances and J.M. Dumas «The influence of the 
optical successive interference cancellation in the optical CDMA network», 
XV IEE Int. Symp. On Service and Local Access 2004 (ISSLS 2004), 
Edinburgh, UK, 21-24 March 2004. 
[3] C. Goursaud, S. M. Naufal, Y. Zouine, A. Julien-Vergonjanna, C. 
Aupetitberthlemot, J.P. Cances and J.M. Dumas «Performances of parallel 
cancellation (PIC) receivers in high-speed access optical-networks», 
Wireless and Optical Communications 2004 (WOC 2004), Banff, Canada, 
July 8-10, 2004, pp. 738-743. 
[4] S. Moshavi, “Multi-user detection for DS-CDMA communications”, 
IEEE communication Magazine, pp 124-136, October 1996. 
[5] Maged Abdullah Esmail and Habib Fathallah, “Novel Coding for PON 
Fault Identification” IEEE communications letters, vol. 15, no. 6, June 
2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

