Decision Making and Taking in Changing Ecologies Considering Network Law 
Simon Reay Atkinson 
Complex Civil Systems Research & Project Management 
Program, FEIT, University of Sydney,  
Sydney, Australia 
e-mail: simon.reayatkinson@sydney.edu.au 
Gregory Tolhurst 
Faculty of Law 
University of Sydney 
Sydney, Australia 
e-mail: greg.tolhurst@sydney.edu.au 
Liaquat Hossain 
Information Management Division of Information and 
Technology Studies, The University of Hong Kong 
Hong Kong 
e-mail: lhossain@hku.hk 
 
Abstract—This conceptual paper considers Law as different 
types of network and how an understanding of these networks, 
at the systems level, might assist in decision making and taking 
processes necessary for: information assurance; privacy; and, 
security applications in Law – as may be applied in Cyber 
through emerging legal networks. We first identify the systems 
we might be working with before considering Law as a 
networked ecology. We then look at law beyond existing stable, 
more certain and ruled jurisdictions and how it might be 
applied to decision making and taking in Cyber. We consider 
an example of how law may apply in areas of uncertainty and 
where existing jurisdictional remits may no longer apply e.g., 
in stateless jurisdictions. We conclude by considering how 
Legal Networks may assist in the decision making, taking and 
social problem solving processes in Cyber and so contribute to 
system resilience. 
Keywords-Collaboration; Network Law; Jurisdictional and 
Jurisprudential Networks; Fuzzy Logic; Ecologies; Resilience. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This conceptual paper considers Law as comprising 
different networks and how an understanding of these 
networks at the systems level might assist in the decision 
making and taking processes with particular application in 
addressing complex problem solving such as recovery from 
recession and in Cyber. We first identify the systems we 
might be working with before considering Law as a 
networked ecology. We note that Europe has two different 
types of jurisdictional systems identified as Common Law 
and Statutory / Codified Law. We suggest that in recovering 
from recession, both these ‘conceptual and normative tools 
[will be necessary] to [re]connect…Europe to its institutional 
design’ [1]. Furthermore having both Common and Statutory 
Law may provide a unique European co-adaptive [2] 
advantage by providing the essential variety [3] for complex 
problem solving. Regeneration of Europe without enabling 
interaction between the two codes would potentially ‘exclude 
large groups of citizens from the political process, but also, 
in the long run, destabilize and delegitimize the 
European…project’ [1]. As John Dunne [4] comments, ‘if a 
clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less’. This 
paper looks at law as networks and the lacunae that exist 
between and beyond largely state-based jurisdictions, e.g., in 
Cyber. We consider how such an approach might be applied 
to better managing instabilities, such as containing or 
preventing an epidemic or recovery from recession. We 
identify examples of how law and civil infrastructures and 
their associated networks may interact. We conclude by 
considering Jurisprudential Networks and Network Law and 
how their ecology may exist with similarly entangled legal 
networks. 
Combined, the authors are thematic leads in the areas of 
complex systems, contract law, digital and cyber ecologies, 
the management of knowledge including commercial law, 
restitution and dynamic social networks. The authors’ bring 
this knowledge to bear in the emerging area they posit to be 
‘Network Law’ and ‘Jurisprudential Networks’. Section II 
identifies the legal statutory and network systems and 
structures we may be working within before in the next 
Section examining law as a network. We then consider Law 
where it presently stands and as it may be applied in areas 
beyond the state and thereby more certain jurisdictional 
controls and enforcement. Finally, we consider what may be 
termed ‘Cyber-in-Law’ and scope how such legal ecologies 
may emerge and may assist the decision making and taking 
process. 
II. SYSTEMS IDENTIFICATION 
Communications literature maintains that hierarchical 
structures provide a superficial representation of how work 
actually gets done [5]. Similarly, Stacey [6] posits that 
dynamic organizations should be viewed as a collection of 
informal social networks (i.e., shadow structures beneath the 
formal structures); so allowing their elasticity to sustain 
continuous innovation and learning [7]. Using this as a basis 
for system identification, we consider decision making and 
taking as to ‘how work gets done in networks’; ‘how work 
may be organizationally gradated within Law’, and finally, in 
terms of the two predominant ‘codes’ of law. 
A. Abbreviations and Acronyms 
Within organizations and networks, we consider one of 
the underlying principles to be that of trust and the trusts 
established between networks to allow systems to work 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

without being ordered to do so. These systems we contend 
extend to include Law and its application. As identified by 
Shaw [8]: 
Perhaps 
the 
most 
important 
general 
principle, 
underpinning many international legal rules is that of 
good faith. This principle is enshrined in the UN 
Charter, which provides in Article 2(2) that “all 
Members…shall fulfill in good faith the obligations 
assumed by them in accordance with the Charter”. 
 
Similarly, the International Court declared in the Nuclear 
Tests case [9], inter alia: 
One of the basic principles governing the creation and 
performance of legal obligations, whatever their source, 
is the principle of good faith. Trust and confidence are 
inherent 
in 
international 
co-operation 
[we 
call 
collaboration], in particular in an age when this co-
operation in many fields is becoming increasingly 
essential. Just as the rule of pacta sunt servanda 
[agreements must be kept] in the law of treaties is based 
on good faith, so also is the binding character of an 
international obligation assumed by unilateral obligation 
[10]. 
 
These understanding of trust are very similar to those 
developed by Augustin José Menéndez where he states, inter 
alia: 
The first [instrument] is the instrumental inclusion of 
trust. From the political perspective, trust needs to be 
developed in the EU, to legitimize majoritarian and 
redistributive politics and strengthen center-periphery 
relations. Trust both enhances societal compliance with 
transnational norms of cooperation and conformity, and 
at the same time provides the common framework in 
which transnational cooperation enables the construction 
of social institutions. This is…the implicit trust and 
understanding that comes from a continent full of 
citizens that interact, on a continuous and intuitive basis. 
And that sense of mutual trust that comes from 
communication, and communication alone, can further 
stabilize both the European space and legitimize the 
Union’s position in it [1]. 
 
Mumford [11] considered an important risk factor to be 
trust: ‘because innovation is frequently a journey into the 
unknown, trust is a major factor in its successful 
assimilation’. Contrastingly, Giddens [12] defines trust as 
‘confidence in the reliability of a person, or system, 
regarding a set of outcomes or events’ and Mumford further 
observes ‘risk and trust are inextricably intertwined’. 
Considering good faith as combining trust and confidence 
and taking forward Mumford, Giddens and Mintzberg’s 
[11]-[13] understanding, it is suggested that:  
‘Trust may be a function of the Likelihood of a person or 
system being able to comprehend, explain, understand 
[risk] by logic and deal with a set of outcomes or events’ 
[14]. 
 
Therefore, Risk may be considered as obverse to Trust: 
‘Risk may be a function of both the Likelihood of an 
adverse event occurring and a system or person’s ability 
to comprehend, explain and understand [risk] by logic’ 
[14]. 
.  
We posit (after Hossain & Wigand [10]) that 
organizations need to be seen as dynamic (elastic and plastic) 
social-influence networks (SINners!) In these collaborative 
[14] 
networks, 
complex 
operations 
(requiring 
tacit 
knowledge exchange [15]), are achieved through social (and 
in this respect, also cyber-) interactions beneath the formal 
hierarchical control structures. Co-adaptive [2] viability in 
maintaining operational effectiveness and efficiency [16] 
may therefore depend more on how we socialize and 
capitalize ‘our’ formal (hierarchical) and informal (social) 
networks to achieve shared common goals. In this paper, we 
consider law as a network applying both formal coordination 
by control and rule (CRC) and informal collaborative social 
influence (CSI) networks [17].  We further identify, building 
on work by Harmaakorpi et al. [18] a ‘techno-socio-
economic paradigm’, 
aligning 
significantly 
to 
CRC 
networks, in which: 
‘Info/Techno-Socio (ITS) systems seek to program (as 
opposed to programme) the relationship between 
technical 
processes 
and 
humans 
by 
digitizing 
performance fidelity and coding for repeatable risk free 
procedures in computer-control-spaces so that data and 
communication do not [temporally] contradict each 
other’ [14]. 
 
Info/Techno-Systems [19] are seen to be ideal for 
achieving “in time” coordination by control and rule (CRC). 
By contrast Socio-Info/Techno systems are seen to be 
capable of enabling collaboration (CSI), “over time”, in 
which:  
‘Socio-Info/Techno (SIT) systems stress the reciprocal 
interrelationship between humans and computers to 
foster improved shared awareness for agilely shaping 
the social programmes of work, in such a way that 
humanity and ICT [control] programs do not contradict 
each other’ [16]. 
 
Based on this understanding of the Cyber combining both 
CRC / ITS and CSI / SIT networks, it is considered Cyber- 
may comprise:  
‘A technologically bounded, largely immeasurable, 
strongly scientific, stochastic control space; comprising 
virtual-media and the display of data dealing with the 
real communication of facts and the conceptualization 
of other plausible possibilities, themselves capable of 
generating strong physical and weaker more social 
effects and influencing them’ [20]. 
III. JURISDICTION AND JURISPRUDENCE 
We consider Jurisdiction (from the Latin ius, iuris 
meaning ‘law’ and dicere meaning ‘to speak’) as the 
practical authority granted to a formally constituted legal 
body to make pronouncements on legal matters and to 
administer justice within a defined legal environment. It also 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

refers to the inherent authority of a court to hear a case and 
to declare a judgment and the [sovereign] power to govern or 
legislate; make or enforce laws and the power / right to 
exercise authority in that environment. 
We take a more specific understanding of Jurisprudence 
(juris prudentia) as being about the ecology of law, including 
its cultural and social underpinnings. In this understanding, 
we consider jurisprudence as acting in two interconnected 
ways:  
1. Interstitial issues of law as a social organization and 
legal instrument relating to the local political, sûréte 
(considered in the French as including assurance, 
sureness, trusts, reassurance, safety and security) and 
economic (PŜE) [21] global social ecology in which it 
functions. 
 
2. Existential issues of law as a social institution and 
legal system relating to the global political, sûréte and 
economic social ecologies in which it functions. 
A. Statutory / Codified (Roman) Law and Common Law 
We identify two predominant systems of law: 
1. Common (Customary) Law is a system of laws 
originating from the English Commonwealth (or 
‘common weal / good’) and based on court decisions, on 
the doctrines implicit in those decisions, and on customs 
and usages rather than on codified written laws. It is 
underpinned by a jurisprudential body of law 
responsible for socializing judicial decisions and 
customs, as distinct from those of statute law. Common-
law courts base their decisions on prior judicial 
pronouncements rather than on legislative enactments. 
Under the doctrine of stare decisis, common-law judges 
are obliged to adhere to previously decided cases, or 
precedents, where the facts are substantially the same. 
Customary practice allows common law to adapt to the 
local ecology; at the same time, stare decisis provides 
certainty, uniformity, and predictability and makes for a 
stable jurisdictional environment; 
 
2. Civil / Codified (Statutory) or Roman (Latin) Law is 
a legal system originating in Western Europe, 
intellectualized within the framework of ‘late Roman 
law’ (the Code of Justin overlaid by Germanic law and 
local environmental practices). The most prevalent 
feature is that its core principles are codified into a 
referential jurisdictional system which serves as the 
primary source of law. This contrasts with ‘common law 
systems’ whose intellectual framework comes from 
judge-made decisional law giving precedential authority 
to prior court decisions. Codified or Statutory law is 
written (as opposed to oral or customary); set down by a 
legislature / legislator and approved by its law creating 
jurisprudential 
body. 
Conceptually, 
codified 
law 
proceeds from social abstractions; to formulate general 
environmental principles that distinguish substantive 
(formal / statutory) from procedural (informal / 
customary) rules. It holds case law to be secondary and 
subordinate to statutory law. Consequently the judicial 
ecology is socially inquisitorial and unbound by 
precedent. 
IV. LAW AS NETWORKS 
From the above systems analysis it is possible to consider 
three different network ecologies operating across the law: 
1. Network Law we consider to be: programmable / 
downloadable and to exist within current jurisdictions; 
connecting 
between 
existing 
jurisprudences 
and 
jurisdictions. It is codified / programmed entirely or 
largely by CRC / ITS systems, in which the main 
interaction is between IT, and IT and human users – with 
minimal involvement from the legal system, lawyers and 
solicitors. 
 
2. Jurisdictional Networks we consider to ‘have the 
authority and responsibility for making pronouncements 
on legal matters; administering justice within a defined 
jurisdiction; 
declaring 
judgments; 
legislating 
and 
enforcing laws in time within that environment. They are 
a distinct entity or being contained within existing 
jurisdictions and connecting between them and different 
jurisprudences – and which may create and have value 
by combining / synthesizing the existing historical legal 
codes, for example Common and Customary Law’.  
 
3. Jurisprudential Networks we consider to be: ‘entities 
and beings with a responsibility for understanding the 
social and cultural underpinnings of the law. Over time 
these networks influence law and allow it to adapt to 
change, they promote collaboration. The concern of 
such networks is with law as a social organization and 
law as a social institution’. 
   
A. Jurisdictional Networks 
We consider legal networks as they may be applied 
through Common and Statutory legal systems through the 
associated executive, legislative, judicial and enforcement 
bodies.  In this respect, we identify four hard coordination, 
rule and control jurisdictional networks: the executive; the 
legislative; the judicial and enforcement.  In democracies, the 
executive is provided by the elected ruling party and the 
legislative by parliaments elected to hold the ruling party to 
account and to legislate. This forms the legislative 
jurisprudence. Responsible for implementing (the statutory 
legal system) and interpreting (the customary legal system) 
laws and connecting between the executive, the legislative 
and enforcement bodies is the judiciary. This forms the 
judicial jurisprudence. The third jurisprudence is provided by 
those responsible for enforcing civil legislation – which in 
most states includes policing, taxation, border, health, 
defense and social services administration. This is suggested 
to be the enforcement jurisprudence. Figure 1 situates the 
different legal ‘beings’ as vertically integrated, with the 
public jurisprudence – the conversation of public opinion and 
consent – lowermost. Also shown are the two different codes 
of law: one, Codified / Statutory Law which is more top 
down; the other, Common / Customary Law, which is more 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

rhyzomic. Significantly, the judicial jurisprudence in both 
codes interprets and makes social sense of the law either 
through inquisition (Codified) or precedence (Common).      
 
Figure 1. Jurisdictional and Jurisprudential Bodies 
B. Jurisprudential Networks  
We can identify three principal jurisprudential networks, 
the legislative, the judicial and enforcement, see Figure 2. At 
first glance this appears similar to the jurisdictional networks 
we identified. We do recognize that their responsibilities 
overlap. However, the jurisdictional networks are concerned 
with 
coordination 
and 
control 
(rank), 
while 
the 
jurisprudential networks are concerned with collaboration 
and influence (position). Examined from a horizontal 
perspective, 
jurisprudential 
responsibilities 
may 
be 
considered more in terms of position (than rank) and 
overlapping areas of responsibility. Significantly, this view 
also situates the Law within its civil, public and social 
settings. The inquisitorial and precedential interpretative 
roles of judicial jurisprudence also become clearer. Judicial 
jurisprudence connects between both legislative and 
enforcement jurisprudences. Specialist soft jurisprudence 
networks are identified to exist between the legislative and 
the judicial and the judicial and enforcement networks. We 
call these Statutory and Customary Jurisprudences. From a 
Customary and Statutory Law position, this analysis also 
identifies the priority given to the different judicial 
environments. Under Statutory Law, precedent is given to 
formal / codified rules and then to informal / customary ones. 
The position is reversed under Common Law, which gives 
precedent to informal customs and then to formally codified 
laws (the principle of stare decisis).  
This 
research 
reinforced 
the 
position 
that 
‘for 
understanding 
and 
implementing 
cross-jurisdictional 
decision making and taking one needs to understand the 
different jurisprudences’.  More precisely, one needs to 
interact at the jurisprudential level between both codes and 
specifically with the statutory and customary jurisprudences. 
This is not always well understood – for example the 
continuing struggle between the English Courts and British 
Parliament in implementing European Court of Human 
Rights statutes. Most significantly, it is the social and 
collaborative jurisprudential networks that enable the Law to 
be seen as, shared and practiced justly. 
 
Figure 2. Jurisprudential Networks  
V. DECISION MAKING AND TAKING 
There is a morality / ethicality to the decision making and 
taking process that is not always understood and rarely 
articulated [22]. Considering Boyd’s simple OODA Loop 
(Observe, Orient, Decide, Act) [23] there are essentially two 
loops contained within the one. One loop (Loop 1) is the 
observe-orient-decision-make loop; the other the decision-
take-act loop (Loop 2). Together, arguably, they preserve a 
moral and ethical basis with decisions being made and taken 
based upon the available facts and the three relatives (3Rs: 
time, timing and tempo):  
Loop 1 may be the home of the diplomat, the public 
servant, the researcher, designer and planner [24]. Loop 1 
can be described in terms of its focus upon the 
methodology, on managing the loop from observation 
(experimentation, for example) through to orienting the 
structure appropriately for a decision to be made. The 
danger in Loop 1 is its focus on the levers and structures 
of power not necessarily the agency / and agents 
necessary to implement and carry out its decisions or 
inform its designs [22]. 
  
Loop 2, by contrast, concentrates on decision-taking and 
action with no previous research or observation, scant 
regard for theory and philosophy and believes largely in 
the delivery of action through agency / agents in order to 
exploit the results. This is the home of the Neo-Cons, 
who focus on action as a means of changing the status 
quo in their favor and breaking existing structures, 
methods and processes they see as constraints to their 
behavior. Their emphasis is on controlling the 
perception and the narrative as a means of coordinating  
and dictating the process and methodology [22].  
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

In an adaptive ecology, one would expect the decision 
making and taking process to be continuous. After Bunge 
[25] (who considers knowledge as social), the collaborative 
social, decision making phase may be described more by CSI 
/ SIT networks, while the decision taking phase may be 
described more by coordination, rule and control (CRC / 
ITS) networks. In a legal setting, it may be suggested that the 
jurisprudential 
networks 
provide 
for 
reflection 
and 
adaptation and the jurisdictional networks the necessary 
order for coordination and control. This recognizes work by 
Gray [26] and Luttwak [27] ‘that places emphasis on the 
importance of strategic culture in networked social 
processes and which underpin planning, decision-making 
and so decision-taking: good decisions are not capability 
driven’ [28]. It is often these reflective, social networks that 
are sacrificed to optimization regimes that concentrate on 
objective metrication [16]. 
VI. CYBER-IN-LAW 
Zadeh [29] noted decision making and taking has been 
dominated by Probability Theory, while Clark et al. [30] 
suggested that ‘a new mathematical model, based upon 
vagueness, fuzzy sets and partial possibilities [dealing with 
uncertainty], may be required to advance the science’. Pólya, 
additionally recognized the relative ease of statistical 
programming for verification ‘has tended to favor the 
heuristic [evidence based] reasoning of the mathematician 
rather than the inductive reasoning of the physicist’ [31]. 
Cyber may be seen to consist of both the internet and the 
social networks that the internet supports; connecting 
between two poles. One sub-system may be identified and 
classified as being by “Coordination Rule and Control 
(CRC)” (akin to Network Law) (explicit); the other described 
as being through “Collaboration and Social Influence (CSI)” 
(akin to Jurisprudential Networks) (implicit) [32][33]. These 
system attributes provide the necessary and “requisite 
variety” [3] to enable both control, “in time”, e.g., Just In 
Time (JIT), and influence [34]-[38], “over time”.  
Our research indicates that understanding the connections 
between these poles involves Fuzzy Logic (FL). Emerging 
from Probability Theory (PrTh) with its binary logic-sets 
Zadeh [39] put forward Fuzzy Logic where ‘linguistic 
variables with a truth value ranging in degree between 0 and 
1 may be ‘managed by specific functions’. Its main 
conceptual difference with PrTh, is that Fuzzy Logic 
considers degrees of truth; vagueness (in terms of lack of 
specificity and not knowing precisely); partial truth; partial 
possibility 
[40] 
and 
uncertainty. 
Whereas, 
standard 
Probability Theory deals with the stochastic – thereby global 
– partitioning of certainties; not the understanding of partial 
possibilities or partial truths:  
‘Viewed through the prism of partiality, probability 
theory is, in essence, a theory of partial certainty and 
random behavior. What it does not address – at least not 
explicitly – is partial truth, partial precision and partial 
possibility – facets which are distinct from partial 
certainty and fall within the province of fuzzy logic. This 
observation explains why PrTh and FL are, for the most 
part, complementary rather than in competition’ [29].  
Noting the linkage between PrTh and FL since the 1990s 
Zadeh [29], recognized: ‘the concerted drive toward 
automation [and control] of decision-making in a wide 
variety of fields [e.g., Cyber]…A side effect…is the 
widening realization that most real-world probabilities are 
far from being precisely known or measurable numbers’. 
Tong [41], had previously concluded that: ‘Fuzzy models 
can be made to work…and, even in more complex situations 
(more variables or less data for example) they could capture 
basic behavior’. He considered them relatively simple to 
construct, being themselves quite simple structures whose 
greatest value lay in communicating process to others, where 
the linguistic value of a highly complex [Bayesian] model is 
doubtful. Tong went onto to suggest that fuzzy models are 
perhaps ‘most valuable as tools for understanding basic 
characteristics rather than as detailed descriptions of process 
[and control] behavior’.  
In law we may consider a road speed limit as an example 
of compliance / control by reason of certain sanction. People, 
generally, obey for fear of a fine if caught going over the 
limit [42], and the speed limit may result in a reduced 
number of accidents caused by speeding. We do not question 
the need for formal hard rules; every network needs such 
rules to operate efficiently [43]. A concern may be the extent 
to which it is possible to promote good behavior, including 
in Cyber and beyond state-based jurisdictions, based simply 
on Law. The set speed limit may not promote responsible 
driving; it may simply ensure people do not go over the 
speed limit; indeed, it may simply promote driving at the 
speed limit in all situations, regardless. Traffic conditions 
vary for many different reasons requiring drivers to make 
and take decisions about speed. In this case we are dealing 
with a complex system, for which a hard rule cannot regulate 
behavior. Hence, as noted, the resort to more fuzzy concepts 
[44] for dealing with uncertainty in more complex ecologies, 
such as exists in Cyber. We posit that it is the trust and 
confidence of CSI principles that are central to influencing 
people to act in a good and collaborative way – particularly 
in areas of uncertainty where reflective learning plays a key 
role. In saying this, we do not doubt that well-formed 
principles of CRC / ITS may help, particularly as regards to 
enforcement and providing guidance as to fail-safe protocols 
and procedures. We also note, though, that even enforcement 
agencies are influenced by CSI / ITS principles as they, too, 
are parts of the jurisprudential networks.  
VII. NEW ECOLOGIES 
We consider that in an adaptive system, the decision 
making and taking processes are continuous and part of an 
ecology continuously testing for both success and failure – 
so as to avoid catastrophic degradation. The law can be seen 
as a fixed immovable, post-hoc, metricable object like a 
castle. Examined from a jurisdictional point of view, the 
objective of law can be seen as ‘controlling in order to rule’ 
based upon the representation of evidence (data). The means 
have become the ends and the jurisdiction drives the strategy. 
What constitutes jurisdictional or process knowledge in law 
and control-engineering is not the same as what constitutes 
knowledge in strategy and so decision making and taking. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Strategic knowledge in Law, is vested within its 
jurisprudential social networks as it is within the social 
techné (expert ‘know how’; subjective knowledge of how to 
‘changes things’) and phronesis (reflective wisdom, which 
provides plausible explanation and guidance in times of 
uncertainty’) contained within any successful organization. It 
is this co-adaptive knowledge that is so important in 
understanding decision making and taking. 
We contend that there is a need in the 21st Century, to 
‘put humanity back in the loop’, and that people will be 
employed more often in those complex lacunae where no 
amount of control, rule or coordination will make sense. We 
also see these as being the vital decision making and taking 
commons fundamental to delivering timely laws; design; 
strategies; and, policies that will prevail / pervade ‘over 
time’. We also recognize that resilience does not come from 
the info-techno-socio control type networks but from 
investment in socializing and capitalizing our socio-info-
techno influence networks. One cannot understand these 
complex systems without understanding their underpinning 
networks and how they are managed and controlled; 
influenced and led. Understanding how Law interacts at the 
project, unit, jurisdictional and systems influence and 
jurisprudential levels is therefore important.  Not simply to 
aid understanding in times of crises, but to provide 
sustainable future programmes and to enable timely, 
collaborative, social responses to shocks and uncertainties, 
be they human-made or natural.  
We consider Network Law as a hard entity contained 
within existing Jurisdictional Networks and connecting 
through IT between them and different jurisprudences. We 
suggest that they may have specific value in combining and 
synthesizing historical legal codes, such as Common and 
Codified Law. We do not advocate new laws, for example 
for Cyber, but for improved understanding and the 
establishment of connecting soft networks – hence, 
Jurisprudential Networks – to better socialize connections 
between existing jurisdictions, Network Laws and the cyber-
internet. It is in the area of Cyber and Law that this paper 
makes a contribution and which, based upon the principles 
derived and outlined in this paper including for Fuzzy Logic 
and Fuzzy Law, that the authors are taking forward for 
application and future development. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge in particular the Faculties of Law, 
Engineering and Information Management & Technology at 
the Universities of Sydney and Hong Kong.  
REFERENCES  
[1] 
Menéndez, A.J., "Review of Developments in German, 
European and International Jurisprudence", in Special Issue – 
Regeneration Europe M. Hartmann, and F. de Witte, Eds., 
German Law Journal: Berlin. 2013, pp. 441-712. 
[2] 
Grisogono, A.-M., "Co-Adaptation". Proceeedings of SPIE - 
the International Society for Optics and Photonics, 16 
January, 2006, vol. 6039, article no. 603903. 
[3] 
Ashby, R., An Introduction to Cybernetics,1957, London: 
Chapman and Hall. 
[4] 
Dunne, J., "Meditation XVII: Nunc Lento Sonitu Dicunt, 
Morieris". John Dunne (1572-1631), English, Roman 
Catholic convert to Protestantism, Lawyer, Diplomat, Poet, 
Vicar and Prolocutor to King Charles the First (of England), 
1632, England. 
[5] 
Stacey, 
E., 
"Collaborative 
learning 
in 
an 
online 
environment". Journal of Distance Education. 14(2). 1999, 
pp. 14-33. 
[6] 
Stacey, R.D., Complexity and creativity in organizations, 
1996, San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler Publishers. 
[7] 
Hossain, L., and R.T. Wigand., "Understanding virtual 
collaboration through structuration", in Proceedings of the 
4th European Conference on Knowledge Management, 2003, 
pp. 475-484 
[8] 
Shaw, M.N., International Law. 4th Edition, 1997, 
Cambridge, England: CUP. 
[9] 
ICJ, "International Court of Justice (ICJ) Reports". ICJ 
Reports quoting International Law Research (ILR), 1974, pp. 
253, 257-267; ILR p. 398, 412. 
[10] Hossain, L., and R.T. Wigand., "ICT Enabled Virtual 
Collaboration through Trust". Journal of Computer Mediated 
Communication, JCMC 10 (1) November\. 2004, pp.22-31. 
[11] Mumford, E., "Risky ideas in the risk society". Journal of 
Information Technology, 1996. vol. 11, pp. 321-31. 
[12] Giddens, A., The Consequences of Modernity, 1990, 
Cambridge: Polity Press. 
[13] Mintzberg, H., D. Dougherty, J. Jorgensen, & F. Westley, 
Some surprising things about collaboration - knowing how 
people connect makes it work better. Organizational 
Dynamics. Spring. 1996, pp. 60-71. 
[14] Reay Atkinson, S., A.M., Maier, N.H.M., Caldwell, & P.J., 
Clarkson., "Collaborative trust networks in engineering 
design 
adaptation", 
in 
International 
Conference 
of 
Engineering Design, ICED11, 2011: Technical University of 
Denmark, Lyngby. 
[15] Reay Atkinson, S., S. Lesher & D. Shoupe., "Information 
Capture and Knowledge Exchange: The Gathering Testing 
and assessment of Information and Knowledge through 
Exploration and Exploitation", in 14th ICCRTS: C2 and 
Agility, 2009, CCRP: Washington. 
[16] Reay Atkinson, S., A. Goodger, N.H.M Caldwell, & L. 
Hossain., "How lean the machine: how agile the mind". The 
Learning Organization. vol. 19 issue: 3, 2012, pp. 183 - 206. 
[17] Walker, 
D., 
S. 
Reay 
Atkinson, 
& 
L. 
Hossian., 
"Counterinsurgency through Civil Infrastructure Networks", 
in the Second International Conference on Social Eco-
Informatics (SOTICS) October 21 - 26, 2012, SOTICS: 
Venice. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

[18] Harmaakorpi, V., I., Kauranen, & A., Haikonen., "The Shift 
in the Techno-socio-economic Paradigm and Regional 
Competitiveness", in The 43rd  Conference of European 
Regional Sciences Association (ERSA), 27-31 Aug, 2003, 
Helsinki University of Technology: Lahti Center, Jyväskylä, 
Finland. 
[19] Ropohl, G., Philosophy of socio-technical systems, in 
Society for Philosophy and Technology. vol. 4, 1999, 
Virginia Tech: Blacksburg, VA. 
[20] Reay Atkinson, S., Cyber-: "Envisaging New Frontiers of 
Possibility". UKDA Advanced Research & Assessmnent 
Group, 2009. Unpublished, Occasional Series, 03/09. 
[21] Reay Atkinson, S., I. Hassall, N.H.M. Caldwell, M. Romilly, 
& R. Golding., "Versatile Modular System (VMS™) designs 
for a Versatile Modular Fleet (VMF™)"  in paper presented 
at 
EAWWIV 
Conference, 
2011, 
Old 
RN 
College, 
Greenwich, London. 
[22] Reay Atkinson, S., Vakarau Levula, A., Caldwell, N.H.M., 
Wigand, R.T., & L. Hossain. "Signalling Decision Making 
and Taking in a Complex World", in International 
Conference on Information Technology and Management 
Science (ICITMS 2014), May 1-2. 2014. Hong Kong: WIT 
Transactions on Engineering Sciences (submitted). 
[23] Fadok, D.S., John Boyd and John Warden: Air Power’s 
Quest for Strategic Paralysis, ed. Air-University. 1995.  
Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama: Air University Press. 
[24] Reay Atkinson, S., "Returning Science to the Social". The 
Shrivenham Papers, UK Defence Academy, 2010. Number 
10, July (July). 
[25] Bunge, M.A., "Ten Modes of Individualism - None of Which 
Works - And Their Alternatives". Philosophy of the Social 
Sciences. 30(3). 2000, pp. 384-406. 
[26] Gray, C.S., Weapons Don't Make War, in Policy, Strategy 
and 
Military 
Technology, 
Editor: 
Lawrence, 
1993, 
University Press: Kansas. 
[27] Luttwak, E.N., The Logic of War and Peace, Revised 
Edition, 2001, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
[28] Reay Atkinson, S., and A. Goodman., "Network Strategy and 
Decision 
Taking". 
ARAG 
Occasional, 
UK 
Defence 
Academy, 2008. 11 / 08. 
[29] Zadeh, L.A., "Toward a perception-based theory of 
probabilistic reasoning with imprecise probabilities". Journal 
of Statistical Planning and Inference, vol. 105. 2002, pp. 
233-26. 
[30] Clark, T.D., J.M. Larson, J.N. Mordeson, J.D. Potter and 
M.J. Wierman., Applying Fuzzy Mathematics to Formal 
Modelling in Comparative Politics. Studies in Fuzziness & 
Soft Computing, 2008. vol 225: Springer. 
[31] Pólya, G., Heuristic Reasoning in the Theory of Numbers, in 
Reprinted in: The random walks of George Pólya, G.W. 
Alexanderson, Ed., 1959 (2000), Mathematical Association 
of America: Washington, DC. 
[32] Walker, 
D., 
S., 
Reay 
Atkinson, 
& 
L., 
Hossain, 
"Collaboration Without Rules - A New Perspective on 
Stability Operations", presented at IEEE Cyber Conference, 
14-16 Dec, 2012, IEEE: Washington. 
[33] Reay Atkinson, S., S., Feczak, A., Goodger, N.H.M., 
Caldwell & L. Hossain, "Cyber-internet: a potential eco-
system for innovation and adaptation", in European Alliance 
for Innovation: Internet as Innovation Eco-System Summit 
and Exhibition, 4-6 Oct. 2012, EAI: Riva del Garda: Italy. 
[34] Cartwright, D., Influence, leadership, control, in Handbook 
of Organizations, J.G. March, Editor, 1965, Rand McNally: 
Chicago. pp 1-47. 
[35] David, P.A., "Path Dependence - A Foundational Concept 
for historical Social Science". Cliometrica -The Journal of 
Historical Economics and Econometric History, 2007. 1(2), 
Summer 07. 
[36] Dahl, R.A., "The Concept of Power". Behavioral Science, 
2:3, July. 1957, p. 201. 
[37] Hossain, L., M., D’Eredita, and R.T., Wigand, "Towards a 
Product Process Dichotomy for Understanding Knowledge 
Management, 
Sharing 
and 
Transfer 
Systems 
in 
Organizations". Submitted to Information Technology and 
People, 2002. 
[38] Wrong, D.H., "Some Problems in Defining Social Power". 
The American Journal of Sociology. vol. 73, No. 6 May. 
1968, pp. 673-681. 
[39] Zadeh, L.A., "Fuzzy sets". Information and Control, vol. 
8(3). 1965, pp. 338-353. 
[40] Ross, T.J., J.N., Booker, & W.J. Parkinson., Fuzzy Logic and 
Probability Applications: Bridging the Gap. Fuzzy Logic and 
Probability Applications. 2002. Philadelphia, PA: Society for 
Industrial & Applied Mathematics (SIAM). p. 209. 
[41] Tong, R.M., "Analysis of Fuzzy Control Algorithms using 
the Relating Matrix", in CUED, 1976, Cambridge 
University: Cambridge. 
[42] Schauer, F., "Do People Obey the Law", in Julius Stone 
Address, Sydney University Faculty of Law (unpublished): 
Sydney University, 13 March, 2014. 
[43] Reay Atkinson, S., and J, Moffat, The Agile Organization, 
2005, Washington: CCRP Publications. 
[44] Waldron, W., "Vagueness and the Guidance of Action, in 
Philosophical Foundations of Language and the Law", A. 
Marmor, and S., Soames Eds., 2011, Oxford Scholarship 
Online, www.oxfordscholarship.com: Oxford, retrieved 
March 2014. 
 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

