Environmental Performance Evaluation of  
Different Glazing-Sunshade Systems Using Simulation Tools 
 
Adeeba A. Raheem 
Department of Civil Engineering 
University of Texas – El Paso 
El Paso, TX 79968 
e-mail: aaraheem@utep.edu 
 
Raja R. A. Issa 
Rinker School of Construction Management 
University of Florida 
Gainesville, FL 
e-mail: raymond-issa@ufl.edu 
 
Svetlana Olbina 
Rinker School of Construction Management 
University of Florida 
Gainesville, FL 
e-mail: solbina@ufl.edu 
 
Ian Flood 
Rinker School of Construction Management 
University of Florida 
Gainesville, FL 
e-mail: flood@ufl.edu 
 
 
Abstract— With the increasing capabilities of computer 
modeling and simulation technology, the analysis of options for 
maximizing gains in energy efficiency for buildings can be 
realized more efficiently and cost effectively. Conducting 
building performance simulations allows for the analysis of the 
environmental impacts of buildings at the early design stages. 
Commercial buildings consume nearly one fifth (18 quads) of 
all the energy used in the United States, costing more than $200 
billion each year. The building envelope plays a key role in 
determining how much energy is required for the operation of 
a building. Individual thermal and solar properties of glazing 
and shading systems only provide information based on static 
evaluations, but it is very important to assess the efficiency of 
these systems as a whole assembly under site-specific 
conditions. This paper presents a case study that was 
conducted using computer simulation tools to evaluate the 
environmental impacts of using different types of glazing-
sunshade systems on the overall performance of an office 
building. The case study results show how early stage building 
performance studies using computer simulation tools help 
practitioners in achieving the goals of reduced energy 
consumption and increased indoor comfort in an economical 
manner. 
Keywords- 
Simulation; 
Energy 
consumption; 
Indoor 
comfort; Commercial buildings. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The use of computer modeling and simulation tools 
during the early design phase can be very helpful to obtain 
more reliable building performance predictions [8][19]. The 
models can be a simple building information model (Level 
Of Development (LOD) 200) or detailed one (LOD 300) 
depending on the owner’s requirements or other physical 
conditions [3]. A major advantage of using these tools is the 
comparison of the environmental performance of different 
design alternatives to improve the overall building design 
efficiency [13].  
According to the U.S. Department of Energy [21], 
commercial buildings consumed about 18.26 quads of 
primary energy in 2010, which represents 46% of building 
energy consumption, 19% of U.S. energy consumption and 
18% of U.S. carbon dioxide emissions. Space heating, 
lighting and cooling were the major end uses representing 
26.6%, 13.6% and 10.1% respectively of the total energy 
consumed by the commercial buildings during the same year 
[21]. The energy performance of building envelope 
components is critical in determining how much energy is 
required for heating, cooling and lighting. Energy efficiency 
measures such as properly designed envelopes in commercial 
buildings provide an opportunity to reduce energy 
consumption and costs, and to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions at the same time.  
Florida has become the nation’s fourth largest energy 
consuming state in the commercial building sector utilizing 
about a Quadrillion BTU’s in commercial consumption and 
having a gross expenditure of over $10 billion per year in 
this sector [24]. Of the total energy that Florida produces per 
year, more than 90% comes from non–renewable sources 
like coal and gas contributing 4.8 million metric tons of 
energy 
related 
carbon-dioxide 
emissions 
from 
the 
commercial building sector to the total emissions per year. In 
an effort to decrease the carbon footprint of this high energy 
consumption in commercial buildings, more stringent rules 
for building envelope design have been adopted in the 
Florida Building Code’s Energy Conservation Code section 
[11]. Much of the emphasis is given to the window to wall 
ratio, U-factor and solar heat gain coefficient (SHGC) of 
window glass and frame type while describing the energy 
efficient window strategies in Section 502 (Building 
envelope requirements) of FBC 2010. Although there is a 
potential for the use of advanced window systems such as 
switchable electrochromic or gasochromic windows in 
reducing the overall energy loads, widespread use is unlikely 
to occur in the near future due to high initial costs and lack 
of technical expertise [16][14]. Hence other related options 
such as automated shading systems could be deployed while 
satisfying the thermal and daylighting requirements of the 
occupants. 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Wherever Individual thermal and optical properties of 
glazing/shading systems only provide information based on 
static evaluations. However, it is very important to assess the 
efficiency of these systems as a whole assembly under site-
specific conditions. Cazes [6] found that a positive energy 
balance (which depends on the season, building type and 
operation of the building) can be achieved using advanced 
static glazing combined with well-insulated window systems 
and architectural shading optimized for seasonal impacts.  
Past research has shown that the proper use of shading 
devices may reduce the cooling loads by 15-20% (depending 
on the amount and location of the windows) [4] [5] [9]. The 
occupants in commercial buildings often complain about too 
much solar heat and glare, both of which can be reduced by 
the use of advanced glazing systems that are tuned to reject 
as much heat as possible while transmitting high levels of 
visible light and preventing glare. Combining these advanced 
solar control glazing (static SHGC) and exterior architectural 
shading offers an improved solution [14]. Although there is a 
great potential for advanced window systems such as 
switchable electrochromic or gasochromic windows in 
reducing the overall energy loads, still more research and 
economies of scale are needed so that these systems can 
become cost-effective (market viable) for mainstream 
markets (Table I) [14].  
There are several variables that influence the thermal 
comfort of building occupants such as personal variables, 
environmental variables and physiological variables [1] [10] 
[15]. The personal and physiological variables are 
controlled/owned by the occupants. The effects of external 
environmental variables on the indoor comfort of the 
occupants can be controlled through a proper fenestration 
design. It is critical to design south façades properly since 
during the day they receive a large amount of energy from 
the sun through the glazing and usually most of the sunlight 
gets concentrated in certain areas of the space if the facade is 
not properly designed [17][18]. This may result in glare on 
work surfaces causing discomfort for the occupants [12] 
[25]. 
 
 
TABLE I.  
BEST AVAILABLE TECHNOLOGIES (BAT) FOR WINDOWS 
AND CLASSIFICATION BASED ON MARKET READINESS (ADAPTED FROM [13])  
Key 
Technical 
Attribute 
BAT (Market 
Viable) 
BAT(Pre-
market 
Viable) 
Future 
Technology 
Low U-value 
Triple-glazed, dual 
low-e-coating, 
advanced frames 
Quadruple-
glazed, exotic 
inert gases, 
aerogel-filled 
frames 
Vacuum-
insulated glass, 
market- viable, 
multiple-glazed 
cavity system  
 
Variable 
SHGC 
Automated shade 
control, exterior 
shading, 
architectural 
features 
Dynamic solar 
control  
Dynamic 
glazing  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The research was conducted in three phases: 1) modeling 
and simulation, 2) analysis of total annual energy 
consumption and heat gains through glazing and 3) 
comparison of results for the three best performing glazing-
sunshade systems. 
A. Modeling and Simulation 
The COMFEN 5 [7] software was used for energy and 
visual modeling and simulation. This is a single-zone façade 
analysis tool based on EnergyPlus software and it is used to 
evaluate energy, thermal and visual performance of 
commercial 
building façades using different design 
scenarios. COMFEN provides comparative perimeter zone 
performance results between façade design options.  
The base model used in this research was an office 
building (80’ x 50’) with an area of 4000ft2 located in 
Miami, Florida. The model was designed for the south 
façade consisting of a curtain wall system (glazing/façade 
ratio=0.67). The curtain wall was simulated for 40 different 
glazing-sunshade systems (four glass types, nine shading 
systems and a base case of glazing with no sunshade). The 
base model was simulated using nine different types of 
shading systems for three possible locations relative to the 
window (exterior, between glass and interior)(see Table II).  
B. Analysis of total annual energy consumption and heat 
gains 
The building model was simulated multiple times for 
different glazing-sunshade systems. The results were 
analyzed in terms of total annual energy consumption and 
heat gains through glazing. The three best performing 
glazing-sunshade systems were then selected to compare 
their overall performance in terms of energy and indoor 
comfort. 
C. Comparison of the three best performing glazing-
sunshade systems 
The results obtained through analysis were then 
compared to find an optimum glazing-sunshade system for 
the south façade with the least energy consumption, 
maximum indoor thermal and visual comfort 
TABLE II.  
CATEGORIES OF SHADING DEVICES USED IN THE BASE 
MODEL 
Categories of 
shading 
devices 
 
Types 
 
Venetian 
blinds 
(45°) 
Venetian 
blinds 
(90°) 
Screen Rolling 
shades 
Overhangs 
Exterior 
× 
×
× 
× 
× 
Between glass 
× 
 
 
× 
 
Interior 
× 
 
 
× 
 
 
 
 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

The comparison was made under two categories: 
 
Energy consumption: Annual energy and peak demand 
impacts  
 
Indoor comfort analysis: Thermal comfort, daylighting 
and glare 
IV. 
INPUT DATA FOR MODELING AND SIMULATION 
The following input was used for modeling and simulation: 
 
Geographical location: Miami FL; 25 49′ 26″ N 
80 17′59″W 
 
IECC climate zone= 1  
 
Heating and cooling degree days [10]: HDD=149; 
CDD=4361 
 
Building dimensions (LxW)= 80’ x 50’  
 
Weather data file used= TMY3 
 
Required EnergyPlus file types= *.epw, *.stat, and 
*.ddy 
The climate of Miami is essentially subtropical, 
characterized by a long and warm summer, with abundant 
rainfall, followed by a mild, dry winter. The annual 
temperature profile shows high temperatures during summer 
(above 90°F) with similar peaks of direct and diffused solar 
radiations. Due to high outside temperature, Miami requires 
both sensible and latent cooling most of the year. 
The ASHRAE standard 90.1 was used to determine 
envelope insulation requirements for the Miami climate. The 
lighting and cooling load values were used as suggested in 
the ASHRAE guide for energy efficient small office 
buildings[2]. The outdoor air flow rates used for ventilation 
were based on the area of the building (flow/area: cfm/ft2) 
(ASHRAE 90.1). Average carbon emissions per unit of 
electricity (generated by utility and nonutility electric 
generators) and gas values were taken from data provided by 
the EIA [23]. The selected glazing systems had U-values 
ranging between 0.1 and 0.3 and SHGC below 0.5 with 
double and triple glass types (Table III). These systems were 
comprised of multiple glass-gas layers and their thermal and 
optical properties like U-values, Tvis (visible transmission) 
and SHGC (Solar Heat Gain Coefficient) were calculated 
using WINDOW 7 software. 
TABLE III.  
SELECTED GLAZING SYSTEMS FOR SIMULATION 
V. 
ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND HEAT GAIN ANALYSIS 
The energy consumption and heat gain analysis was 
performed for four sets of glazing-sunshade systems with 
each set comprised of one glazing system with all ten 
selected shadings. The energy consumption was measured 
for four energy usage categories: heating, cooling, fans and 
lighting. For the first set of glazing-sunshade systems, double 
glass (G1- low solar low-E clear (Argon)) with different 
types of shading (S1-S10) was simulated keeping all the 
other design and space parameters the same in each 
simulation. It was observed that the least amount of total 
energy (for heating, cooling, fans and lighting) was 
consumed when overhangs (10) were used whereas exterior 
roller shades (4) were the most efficient ones in reducing 
cooling loads (Fig. 1(a)) due to the least heat gains through 
windows (Fig. 1 (b)).  
For the second set double glass (G2 - low Tvis low-E clear 
(Argon)) with different types of shadings (S1-S10) was 
simulated again keeping all the other design and space 
parameters the same in each simulation. The results in this 
case showed a decrease in the total energy consumption and 
window heat gains for each of the glazing-sunshade systems. 
It was further observed that the least amount of total energy 
(for heating, cooling and electricity) was consumed when no 
sunshade system was used. Similarly, the third and fourth 
sets of glazing-sunshade systems were analyzed and the best 
options were selected for the final comparison in terms of 
energy and indoor comfort. 
VI. 
COMPARISON OF ENERGY PERFORMANCE AND 
INDOOR COMFORT  
Three best performing glazing-sunshade systems were 
selected from the four sets after analyzing their energy 
performance for the south facing curtain wall. These systems 
were: 
 
A1: Double glass low VT low-e (Argon) (G2) with no 
sunshade system (S1) 
 
A2: Double glass low solar low-e (Argon) (G1) with 
overhangs (S10) 
 
A3: Triple glass, dual low-e; pyrolytic (G4) with 
external roller shades (S4). 
 
Figure 1.  Analysis of the first set of glazing-sunshade (G1 and S1-S10): 
(a) Energy consumption 
(b) Annual heat gains through glazing. 
Horizontal axis: 1-no sunshade; 2-External venetian blind 45°; 3-External 
venetian blind 90°; 4-External roller shade; 5-External screen; 6-Between 
glass venetian blind; 7-Between glass roller shade; 8-Internal venetian 
blind; 9-Internal roller shade; 10- Overhangs 
 
ID 
Glazing type 
U-value 
(Btu/h-ft2-F) 
SHGC 
Tvis 
Thickness 
(in) 
G1 
Double glass low 
solar low-E clear 
(Argon) 
0.23 
0.37 
0.7 
0.95 
G2 
Double glass low 
Tvis low-E (Argon) 
0.203 
0.241 
0.371 
0.95 
G3 
Triple 
w/suspended film; 
dual low-E 
0.144 
0.467 
0.631 
1.45 
G4 
Triple, dual low-e; 
pyrolytic  
0.145 
0.3 
0.541 
1.67 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

These selected systems were further compared for 1) energy 
performance and 2) indoor comfort  
A. Energy Consumption 
The total energy usage was calculated as the sum of the 
three energy use types (heating, cooling and electricity (fans 
and lighting). Based on the total annual energy use values, 
double glass low solar low-e with overhangs (A2) was the 
most efficient assembly in the current scenario. From the 
monthly energy consumption profile, it was observed that 
from March through September assembly A2 performed 
better than the other two (A1, A3) but from Jan-Feb and Oct-
Dec all three systems were performing nearly in the same 
manner (Fig. 2) because the direction of conductive heat 
flow is from the inside to the outside of the building during 
these months in Miami. 
B. Indoor Comfort 
Thermal comfort. Three selected systems were analyzed 
in terms of thermal comfort and results were obtained as a 
percentage of people satisfied which is a direct output of the 
software used (Table IV).  
The A3 assembly provided the best thermal comfort as it 
had the highest percentage of people satisfied, and least 
number of hours in a year when hourly temperature set 
points were not met (Fig. 3). 
 
Daylighting and glare analysis. A daylighting analysis 
was performed for the selected systems and daylight 
illuminance maps were generated for a summer day (June 
21st at 11:00AM). These maps display work surface 
illuminances, calculated at 2'-6" (0.762 m) above the floor 
(default value), for the entire space in the form of a 10 x 10 
grid (the grid is scaled to fit the space within the software). 
The maps showed high illuminance values for systems A1 
and A2 near the façade area inside the office, whereas a low, 
but uniform illuminance level was observed when using 
assembly A3 because the roller shades were automatically 
positioned  (e.g. closed either fully or partially) at that time 
of the day (Fig. 4) 
 
 
Figure 2.  Energy consumption: (a) Annual profile, (b) Monthly profile 
The selected systems were further compared to study the 
glare during a clear summer day from the South side. The 
occupant’s position (X=9.3, Y=15.6) and angle of view 
(X=6, Y=-9.6) were defined and point-in-time simulations 
were run for June 21st at 9:00AM, 12:00PM and 3:00PM 
(Fig. 5). It was observed that use of systems A1 and A2 
caused very high values of glare (>185cd/ft2 (2000cd/m2)) 
during the morning and afternoon which is uncomfortable 
for the occupants whereas use of assembly A3 caused low 
glare values (average was less than 69cd/ft2 (750cd/m2)) 
(≈55% less than A1 and 61% less than A2 at noon) during 
most the daytime.  
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
This case study was conducted using energy simulation 
software to look at the environmental of different glazing-
sunshade systems for a glazed office building in the hot and 
humid climate of Miami, Florida. It was observed from the 
analysis that sunshade system behave differently (in terms of 
overall efficiency) with different glazing systems. For south 
facades, exterior shading such as roller shades and overhangs 
are the most efficient options when combined with glazing 
systems having low U-value and SHGC (<0.3). The analysis 
also showed that although the least amount of energy was 
consumed annually when overhangs were used, they are not 
the best option in terms of providing indoor comfort for the 
occupants.  
TABLE IV.  
THERMAL COMFORT ANALYSIS 
 
 
Figure 3. Occupied hours in the building when cooling needs are met. 
 
 
 
Thermal 
Comfort Factors
Window Shading Assemblies 
A1 
A2 
A3 
A3 vs. 
A1 
A3 
vs. 
A2 
Average thermal 
comfort (PPS*) 
86.37 
85.09 
88 
>2% 
>3.3% 
Hourly 
temperature set 
points 
unmet 
(hours) 
1173 
1223 
875 
-289 
-348 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
 
 
Figure 4. Daylight analysis- Top: Daylight illuminance maps; Bottom: 
Perspective view illuminance contour lines. 
 
 
Figure 5. Rendered images from Radiance showing luminance ranges for 
the selected systems (A1, A2, and A3) during different times of a summer 
day (June 21st). 
 
More specifically the following conclusions were reached for 
the south façade glazing-sunshade system design: 
 
Glazing-sunshade systems with very low thermal and 
visual properties (visual transmittance (<0.3), U-value 
(<0.25) and SHGC (<0.25)) like system A1 used in this 
study can provide some degree of sun control without 
any sunshade system but can also increase glare and 
thus do not provide a comfortable indoor environment 
for the occupants. These systems can help in decreasing 
electrical loads but compromise the indoor comfort.   
 
Glazing-sunshade systems with relatively high visual 
transmittance (<0.8), low U-value (<0.25) and moderate 
SHGC (<0.4) (like system A2 used in this study) can 
work efficiently with fixed horizontal shading such as 
overhangs. Because of the low initial cost, this may be 
the preferred system; however, indoor comfort is 
compromised due to high glare during the morning and 
afternoon hours. 
 
Glazing-sunshade systems with a moderate visual 
transmittance (<0.6), low U-value (<0.2) and low SHGC 
(<0.3)) (like system A3 used in this study) worked 
efficiently with external shades, such as roller shades 
and venetian blinds, to reduce cooling loads and permit 
filtered views. Because of less conduction of direct 
sunlight (automated control), glare is reduced at times 
when the horizontal solar angle is low.  
The conclusion of this case study is that for the 
occupant’s comfort relative to the standard thermal and 
visual set points, multiple-pane glazing systems with external 
sunshade systems such as architectural components 
(overhangs) and roller shades are an efficient strategy for 
south facing facades installed on office buildings in Miami. 
Furthermore, the results indicate early building performance 
studies using computer simulation tools are helpful to 
practitioners in achieving the goals of reduced energy 
consumption and increased indoor comfort.  
REFERENCES 
[1] ASHRAE. (1985). Physiological Principles for Comfort and 
Health. Fundamental Handbook, American Society of 
Heating, Refrigerating and Air Conditioning Engineers, 
Atlanta, GA. 
[2] ASHRAE (2004). Advanced Energy Design Guide for Small 
to Medium Office Buildings. Accessed December 12, 2013. 
https://www.ashrae.org/standards-research--technology/ 
advanced-energy-design-guides/50-percent-aedg-free-
download 
[3] AUTODESK. (2013). Autodesk : Sustainability Workshop, 
Accessed December 20, 2014. 
http://sustainabilityworkshop.autodesk.com/buildings/revit-
whole-building-energy-analysis 
[4] Ali, A., and Ahmed, T. (2012). “Evaluating The Impact Of 
Shading Devices On The Indoor Thermal Comfort Of 
Residential Buildings In Egypt”. In Proceedings of the fifth 
international conference of IBPSA-USA, 603-612. Madison, 
Wisconsin.  
[5] Bourg, J. (2008). “Sun Control and Shading Devices”. Whole 
Building Design Guide, National Institute of Building 
Sciences. Accessed January 23, 2014 http://www.wbdg.org/ 
resources/suncontrol.php 
[6] Cazes, B. (2011). ”Windows and glazed area technologies and 
materials in Europe”. IEA (International Energy Agency) 
Building Envelope Technologies and Policies Workshop, 
November 17, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France. 
[7] COMFEN manual. (2012). Accessed January 12, 2014. 
http://windows.lbl.gov/software/ comfen/5/comfen_docs.htm 
[8] Crawley, D. B., Hand, J. W., Kummert, M., and Griffith, B. 
T. (2005)."Contrasting the Capabilities of Building Energy 
Performance Simulation Programs." Proceedings of Building 
Simulation 2005, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, IBPSA, 231-
238. 
[9] Dubois, M. C. (1997). “Solar Shading and Building Energy 
Use: A Literature Review”. Report TABK—97/3049, Lund 
Institute of Technology, Dept. of Building Science, Lund, 
Sweden.  
[10] Fanger, O.P. (1986). “Radiation and Discomfort”. ASHRAE 
Journal, 33-34. 
[11] Florida Building Code (FBC). (2010). Commercial Energy 
Efficiency, 
Chapter 
5. 
Accessed 
December 
21. 
http://www.flaseia.org/Documents/FlyerEnergyJanuary2012.p
df 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

[12] Galasiu, A. D. and J. A. Veitch. (2006). “Occupant 
Preferences and Satisfaction with the Luminous Environment 
and Control Systems in Daylit Offices: A Literature Review.” 
Energy and Buildings. 38: 728–742. 
[13] Hensen, J., and Lamberts, R. (2011).” Building Performance 
Simulation for Design and Operation.” Routledge, UK 
[14] International Energy Agency (IEA). (2013). “Technology 
Roadmap Energy efficient building envelopes”. Accessed 
December 
25, 
2013. 
http://www.iea.org/publications/ 
freepublications/publication/TechnologyRoadmapEnergyEffic
ientBuildingEnvelopes.pdf 
[15] ISO. (1983).  “Determination of the PMV and PPD Indices 
and Specification of the Conditions for Thermal Comfort”.  
DIS 7730, Moderate Thermal Environment.  
[16] Lee, E., Selkowitz, S., Levi, M., Blanc, S., McConahey, E., 
McClintock, M., Arup, O., Hakkarainen, P., Sbar, N., and 
Myser, M. (2002). “Active Load Management with Advanced 
Window Wall Systems: Research and Industry Perspectives.” 
ACEEE 2002 Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in 
Buildings: Teaming for Efficiency, August 18-23, 2002, 
Asilomar, Pacific Grove, CA. Washington, D.C.: American 
Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy. 
[17] Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL). (2004). 
Daylighting: Shading Strategies, Section 5. Accessed 
January13, 2014.  
http://windows.lbl.gov/daylighting/designguide/section5.pdf 
[18] Littlefair, P.J., (1995). “Light shelves: Computer Assessment 
of 
daylighting 
performance”. 
Lighting 
Research 
and 
Technology, 27(2); 79-91. 
[19] Maile, T., Fischer, M., and Bazjanac, V. (2007).” Building 
Energy Performance Simulation Tools - a Life-Cycle and 
Interoperable Perspective.” CIFE Working Paper #WP107 
[20] U.S. Census Bureau. (2009). Table 396. Cloudiness, Average 
Wind Speed, Heating and Cooling Degree Days, and Average 
Relative Humidity -- Selected Cities. Accessed December 21. 
www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2012/tables/12s0396.xls 
[21] U.S. Department of Energy (U.S. DOE). (2011). “Building 
Energy 
Data 
Book”. 
Accessed 
January 
1, 
2014. 
http://buildingsdatabook.eren.doe.gov/ChapterIntro3.aspx 
[22] U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (1997). “An 
Office Building Occupant’s Guide to Indoor Air Quality”. 
Report EPA-402—97-03. Indoor Environments Division, 
Washington, DC. 
[23] U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). (2002). Table 
1. 1998-2000 Average State-level Carbon Dioxide Emissions 
Coefficients 
for 
Electric 
Power. 
Updated 
State-level 
Greenhouse Gas Emission Coefficients for Electricity 
Generation, 1998-2000. Accessed February 26, 2014. 
http://www.eia.gov/FTPROOT/environment/e-supdoc-u.pdf  
[24] U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA. (2010). 
Energy Consumption by End-Use Sector, Ranked by State. 
Accessed March 24, 2014.http://www.eia.gov/state/seds/ data. 
cfm?incfile=/state/seds/sep_sum/html/rank_use.html&sid=US 
[25] Wienold, J., and Christoffersen, J. (2006). “Evaluation 
Methods and Development of a New Glare Prediction Model 
for Daylight Environments with the Use of CCD Cameras.” 
Energy and Buildings, 38: 743–75. 
 
 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-416-9
INFOCOMP 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

