Extending the Portfolio and Strategic Planning Horizon by Stochastic Forecasting of 
Unknown Future Projects  
 
Alireza Shojaei, Ian Flood 
M.E. Rinker, Sr. School of Construction Management, University of Florida  
Gainesville, Florida, USA. 
Email: a.shojaei@ufl.edu, flood@ufl.edu   
 
 
Abstract— 
Providing 
a 
practical 
and 
comprehensive 
methodology to facilitate management and coordination of 
multiple projects in a company’s portfolio is a challenging 
task. Historically, the focus of research has been limited to the 
selection and prioritization of the set of known projects, 
current and near future. It is argued that existing portfolio 
planning models can be improved by adding a stochastic 
generator of project streams that extends the portfolio and 
strategic planning horizon to include future unknown projects.  
The study both identifies the historical factors in the market 
that are strong predictors of the profile of future project 
streams and evaluates alternative modeling approaches to the 
problem. The outputs from the generator are those parameters 
most critical to a company, namely the occurrence and letting 
date of a project, its expected duration, and its expected cost. A 
preliminary case study is presented developing, validating and 
testing the project stream generator for design-bid-build 
highway construction projects let by the Florida Department of 
Transportation (FDOT). 
Keywords - Project Portfolio Management; Stochastic 
Forecasting; Time Series Modeling; Strategic Planning; 
Uncertainty. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Construction companies are usually involved in multiple 
projects at any given time. While different projects progress 
concurrently, they have different goals and objectives.  For 
instance, some projects may have financial objectives while 
other projects’ may be more focused on marketing or 
strategic networking. Consequently, a key managerial duty is 
to allocate resources (such as financial, material, and human 
resources) between these concurrently ongoing projects and 
manage their workflow together to maximize the company’s 
performance [1]. The process of coordinating multiple 
projects as such is a challenging task because each incoming 
project affects all other ongoing projects in terms of their 
schedule and progress [2], and without foreseeing these 
effects, the consequences can be devastating. The goal of this 
study is to develop a stochastic project stream generator to 
forecast unknown future projects in order to extend the 
horizon of strategic planning for construction companies. 
The success of a construction company is strongly 
impacted by its ability to strategically plan for and manage a 
stream of projects, many of which will overlap in time, and 
all of which are subject to uncertainty about their occurrence, 
scope and resource needs.  This task can be broadly 
classified 
as 
Project 
Portfolio 
Management 
(PPM). 
Reference [3] describes PPM as “…dealing with the 
coordination and control of multiple projects pursuing the 
same strategic goals and competing for the same resources, 
whereby managers prioritize among projects to achieve 
strategic benefit.”  Modern portfolio theory was introduced 
by Markowitz [4] within the finance context. McFarlan [5] 
introduced the concept of PPM in an information technology 
project management context. He suggested using projects as 
the elements of a portfolio (instead of investments) to better 
achieve an organization’s objectives as well as reduce the 
overall risk that the organization encounters during execution 
of those projects. 
Providing a practical and comprehensive methodology to 
facilitate management and coordination of multiple projects 
in a company’s portfolio is a challenging task. There are no 
appropriate analytical solutions available for dynamic 
scheduling and resource allocation of project portfolios in 
real-time [2]. Existing proposed mathematical models (such 
as those of [6]–[9]) cannot handle the complexity of real 
world challenges due to a limited consideration of significant 
uncertainties within their models and a lack of provision for 
dynamic and real-time analysis. The primary focus of PPM 
research was initially to improve organizational performance 
by introducing good practices to choose and prioritize 
projects and ensure that the right mix of projects was 
adopted. A recurring theme is the alignment of the projects 
with the organization’s strategy. There is also extensive 
literature on project selection with a mathematical approach. 
In this research, it is not proposed that developed models are 
incorrect. Instead, it is argued they can be advanced by 
adding a stochastic project generator to extend the portfolio 
and strategic planning horizon by stochastically forecasting 
the unknown future projects. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
provides a review of the shortcomings of existing PPM 
models and discusses the impact of uncertainties in PPM. 
Section 3 describes the project stream generator and the data 
used for its development. Section 4 discusses the modeling 
approach and results. Section 5 presents the conclusions and 
identifies future directions for the research. 
II. 
PROJECT PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT AND 
UNCERTAINTY 
Selecting projects from available options and planning 
and scheduling for them have recently received a 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

considerable amount of attention [10]. For construction 
related organizations, such as investors, developers, and 
contractors, it is critical to gather and analyze project 
information to select the best options according to their 
strategic goals and schedule them within the required time 
frame and the financial constraints. This is a complex and 
multifaceted process, which has many contributing factors, 
such as the market condition, the organization’s structure, 
resource availability and so on [11]. Research on this topic 
has come from several different points of view, such as 
selection model criteria and scheduling mechanisms [12], yet 
the primary focus has been choosing the most appropriate 
projects rather than providing a real-time dynamic model to 
address the project selection and scheduling issues [2]. 
Another shortcoming has been to disregard the importance of 
multiple project scheduling and resource allocation under 
influential factors and uncertainties, such as the economic 
situation of the construction industry and companies’ 
organizational changes. Despite the available modeling 
proposals, companies still struggle to optimize and manage 
changes among their projects [12]. One of the reasons for 
this is that the proposed mathematical models cannot address 
the complexity of the real world situation [2]. Excluding 
uncertainties, such as the impact of possible upcoming 
projects or changes in the economic and financial situation of 
the construction industry, are some other noteworthy 
contributing factors to the poor performance of existing 
models. 
The concept of uncertainty is very significant within the 
field of project portfolio management. This has led to an 
extensive literature on uncertainty and the ways to manage it. 
Duncan [13] and Daft [14] demonstrated that changes in the 
business environment combined with projects with high 
complexity always result in an increase in uncertainty in 
parameters, such as the number of projects, their 
performance, and their adherence to the project plan.  
The impact of uncertainty on organizations is well 
established across many disciplines from psychology to 
economics [15]. Environmental uncertainties and their 
relation to organizations are analogous to the state of a 
person with a shortage of critical information about the 
environment. Scott [11] provides an example of the 
definition of environmental uncertainty as variability or the 
extent of predictability of the environment where work is 
executed. They also 
introduce 
some 
measures 
for 
uncertainty, such as variability of inputs, the number of 
deviations in work process, and the number of changes in the 
main products. In the project management context, 
uncertainty in a project is defined as the accuracy of 
predicting the variation of resource consumption, output, and 
work process. Uncertainty in a project can be seen as a 
variation from expected performance of the system under 
investigation. 
The Project Management Institute (PMI) standard for 
portfolio 
management 
despite 
introducing 
the 
risk 
management concept at a portfolio level does not provide 
much information on how managers should handle 
uncertainty and risk within their portfolio. They only provide 
guidelines on categorizing different possible stages and 
processes plus naming some of the possible techniques 
available to handle uncertainties. The PMI only suggests 
monitoring risks and the performance of the project portfolio 
under the monitoring and control process group. The 
proposed framework by the PMI also includes monitoring 
changes in business strategy. This is an important task 
because when it occurs, it might result in a complete 
realignment of the portfolio. The mechanisms involved in 
this realignment are not specified other than restarting the 
whole PPM process from the beginning. Also, ad-hoc 
disturbances to the ongoing and approved project portfolios 
are almost entirely neglected. This oversight is not because 
the topic lacks interest or that authors assume a stable and 
predictable environment. Rather, it can probably be 
explained by the fact that the subject of PPM is relatively 
young and that the researchers and academics preferred to 
focus on more pressing issues in this area. For many 
companies, the environment is unstable, and the high level of 
uncertainty and unknowns resulting from the dynamic 
environment lead to some challenges. Upcoming projects 
significantly affect the performance of a project portfolio [2]. 
The typical approach when a new project is added to the 
portfolio is to update the project portfolio's plans and to try 
to re-optimize everything. 
III. 
PROJECT STREAM GENERATOR 
This paper presents an approach to statistically represent 
unknown future projects to extend the portfolio and strategic 
planning horizon. Forecasting a company’s unknown future 
projects can be based on the company’s past and current 
portfolio data, or it can use historical data from market to 
forecast all the upcoming projects as project streams and 
filter those by bidding success models. In an environment, 
where the supply of the projects is scarce and very 
competitive, using just the company’s past projects to 
forecast the future unknown projects is potentially less 
accurate. Arguably it is more valid to forecast streams of 
unknown projects (all the available projects in the future) 
considering the uncertainties in the context and filter those 
projects by bidding success models to get the final future 
projects in a company’s portfolio. The forecast can 
statistically generate a single set of outputs or stochastically 
produce streams of values as output. Considering the 
uncertainties in the market, the PPM context, and the 
availability of future projects, stochastic forecasting appears 
to be the right choice. 
A preliminary study is underway developing, validating 
and testing a project stream generator for design-bid-build 
highway construction projects let by the Florida Department 
of Transportation (FDOT). The primary data for this study 
were obtained from FDOT’s historical project lettings 
database covering 14 years (from 2003 to 2017). The last 
two years (2015 and 2016) data are withheld to be used as a 
test set for the final model. The model training and selection 
are based on the data from 2003 to 2015, which contains 
2,816 design-bid-build project-letting reports. The outputs 
from the generator are those parameters most critical to a 
company, namely the occurrence and letting date of a 
project, its expected duration, and its expected cost. Other 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

factors, such as economic condition can have an impact on 
the project stream. Table 1 shows a pool of candidate 
variables containing 24 potentially relevant predictors 
including the macroeconomics metrics and construction 
indices that were compiled from the related sources and 
literature [16]. The authors suggest applying a recursive 
feature elimination with a greedy optimization algorithm to 
prune down this list. This method iteratively builds models 
and separates best and worst variables at each iteration. This 
process continues until all reductions have been made. The 
result is the ranking of the variables based on their order of 
elimination. 
The data should be split into three sections as a training 
set, a validating and model selection set, and a testing set for 
the final model. In the preliminary stage, the test set is the 
data from 2015 and 2016, and the data from 2003 to 2015 is 
divided to seventy percent for training and thirty percent for 
validating the model. However, the aim of the study is to use 
cross-validation to show the robustness of the model.  
TABLE I.  POTENTIALLY RELEVANT PREDICTORS. 
 
The data under study can be categorized as time series 
type so the integrity of the data is important and should not 
be tampered with by randomly dividing into different 
sections for validation. In this case, as shown in Figure 1, 
using an evaluation on a rolling forecasting origin method is 
advisable. This method, in general, has two variations, fixed 
window (Figure 1-A) where the training (orange bar) and test 
(blue bar) sets duration is fixed and rolls through time, or the 
training set (as shown in Figure 1-B) window can be 
extended in each trial. Using both methods can help better 
understand the model’s performance and give more insights 
into the characteristics of different time spans of the data. 
 
Figure 1. Evaluation of a rolling forecasting. 
The sequence of generating information in the proposed 
model is shown in Figure 2. The first step is to forecast the 
number of projects (project frequency), for the desired time 
span, using the optimal model based on the training and 
validation from historical data. Next, sampling from project 
cost distribution takes place. At each point in time, the 
number of samples from the distribution is based on the 
number of projects forecasted in the previous step. Finally, 
the same process applies to the duration distribution while 
the possible correlation between cost and duration should be 
considered in the sampling process. 
 
Figure 2. The Sequence of Generating Information. 
The complete set of results from the proposed framework 
can be used as an input to any PPM model to consider 
unknown future projects in strategic planning. 
IV. 
MODELING APPROACH 
The scheme used to develop the model is shown in 
Figure 3. The purpose of this scheme is to look for 
characteristics of data, to capture them in the model’s 
projections, and then to check to see if the model reproduces 
them by using the cross-validation models discussed. The 
univariate model was adopted as a benchmark, which the 
more complex multivariate models should be compared to it 
for improvements in forecast accuracy.  
The first step is modeling the main variables through 
univariate modeling methods, such as Autoregressive (AR), 
Moving Averages (MA), Autoregressive Moving Average 
(ARMA), and exponential smoothing. More sophisticated 
approaches such as artificial neural networks can also be 
implemented considering the availability of the necessary 
data size. After establishing a benchmark, potentially 
relevant predictors were identified to populate a pool of 
candidate independent variables based on a literature review 
and cognitive theories. This brings in the environmental 
uncertainties into the forecast with the aim of improving the 
accuracy of the simulation. These variables are not going to 
have necessarily a causal relationship with the main 
variables; the only concern here is to be helpful in 
forecasting the dependent variable.  
CANDIDATE VARIABLES 
SOURCE 
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCTS (GDP) 
U.S. Bureau of Economic 
Analysis 
GDP IMPLICIT PRICE DEFLATOR 
U.S. Bureau of Economic 
Analysis 
INFLATION RATE 
World Bank 
CONSUMER PRICE INDEX 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
NATIONAL HIGHWAY COST INDEX 
(NHCCI) 
U.S. Department of 
Transportation 
FDOT’S ANNUAL BUDGET 
Florida Department of 
Transportation 
FDOT’S PRODUCT BUDGET 
Florida Department of 
Transportation 
FEDERAL FUNDS RATE 
Federal Reserve Systems 
UNEMPLOYMENT RATE 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
FLORIDA UNEMPLOYMENT RATE 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN 
CONSTRUCTION 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN 
CONSTRUCTION IN FL 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
AVERAGE WEEKLY HOURS 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
PRIME LOAN RATE 
Federal Reserve System 
BUILDING PERMITS 
U.S. Bureau of Census 
MONEY SUPPLY 
Federal Reserve System 
AVERAGE HOURLY EARNINGS 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
EMPLOYMENT COST INDEX (ECI) 
CIVILIAN 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE 
Yahoo Finance 
CRUDE OIL PRICE 
U.S. Energy Information 
Administration 
BRENT OIL PRICE 
U.S. Energy Information 
Administration 
PRODUCER PRICE INDEX 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
HOUSINGS STARTS 
U.S. Bureau of Census 
CONSTRUCTION SPENDING 
U.S. Census Bureau 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

The next step is exploratory data analysis. It starts with a 
graphical comparison of the independent and dependent 
variables, such as scatterplots of pairs of variables. Pearson 
correlation, unit root (stationary or non-stationary test), 
Granger causality (helpful for short term forecasting), and 
cointegration (helpful for long term forecasting) tests are 
among diagnosis tests that are relevant.  
The last step is to choose a set of multivariate modeling 
approaches based on the result of the exploratory data 
analysis and test whether including explanatory variables and 
models that are more complex can improve the accuracy of 
the forecast. The range of the models should test for linear 
and non-linear relationships based on the result of the 
previous step along with variable selection (pruning), 
parameter optimization and finding the appropriate lag 
between variables. 
 
 
Figure 3. Model Development Scheme. 
Models concerning time series data frequently involve 
using the value from one or more previous time steps to 
forecast values at the succeeding point in time; in other 
words, they regress based on past values. In conventional 
modeling, the assumption is that the independent values are 
known, and the dependent values are forecast. However, in 
multivariate time series forecasting, even the independent 
variables’ values in the future are unknown and need to be 
forecast. As a result, the model contains a system of 
equations that forecast both independent and dependent 
variables in the future. This system is recursive when all the 
causal relationships are unidirectional and non-recursive 
(simultaneous) when there is reciprocal causation between 
variables.   
Figure 4 shows four of the possible internal structures of 
the model. Figure 4-A shows the dependencies between the 
inputs and output in a univariate AR model with a lag of two. 
In this example, the forecast value at each point in time is 
based on the two preceding past values. Figure 4-B shows a 
recursive multivariate model where the dependent variable 
forecast is based on past values of itself and the independent 
variables. However, each independent variable is only based 
on its past values. Figure 4-C shows another recursive 
model, which differs from model 4-B in that the independent 
variables also act as input to each other. Figure 4-D shows a 
sample of a non-recursive (simultaneous) model where all 
the variables work as inputs for each other. There is no 
discrimination between dependent and independent variables 
in this approach. 
 
 
Figure 4. Possible Internal Structures of the Model. 
After training and validating the model, some diagnostic 
tests should be conducted to check the stability of the model. 
For instance, checking to see if there is an autocorrelation 
between the residuals of the forecast is an appropriate tool 
for time series forecasts. Also, checking the way error 
compounds and undertaking a sensitivity analysis to see how 
the values of model parameters affect the model’s output can 
give more insight into the performance of the model. 
A. Modeling Project Frequency 
Before modeling the project frequency, it is necessary to 
conduct some preliminary data analysis to quantify the data’s 
characteristics. Correlogram of autocorrelation and partial 
autocorrelation reveals that lag 8 and 12 exceeds the 
significance bounds.  
Testing the stationarity of the project frequency is also 
important. Figure 5 shows the rolling mean and standard 
deviation of project frequency plotted along with the actual 
data. It is visually plausible that the data fluctuate around a 
fixed mean and variance. It can be further justified by using 
an Augmented Dickey–Fuller test (ADF) to see if the data is 
stationary. There are three variations of the ADF test, all 
with the null hypothesis that a unit root is present in a time 
series sample (series is not stationary). If under any of the 
three variations the null hypothesis is rejected it can be 
inferred that the time series is stationary. The ADF test’s 
result (the appropriate lag is chosen based on the Akaike 
Information Criterion (AIC)) shows that the null hypothesis 
can be rejected at 95 percent confidence level. Therefore, the 
frequency series is stationary. 
 
Figure 5. Rolling Mean and Standard Deviation of Project Frequency. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Two approaches can be implemented to forecast project 
frequency: univariate and multivariate modeling. Table 2 
shows the summary of the best univariate models and their 
performance to forecast the project frequency. ARMA and 
exponential smoothing are among the most widely used 
methods to model a univariate time series. ARMA is used to 
model stationary time series data and is typically represented 
as ARMA (p,q), where, p is the autoregressive order and q is 
the moving average order. The order of autoregressive and 
moving average is selected via autocorrelation and partial 
autocorrelation correlograms. Based on the preliminary data 
analysis of project frequency an ARMA (p=8, q=8) is the 
best choice to model the project frequency series. Also, a set 
of seasonal ARMA models fitted to the data and the best 
model is selected via AIC. Moreover, a triple exponential 
smoothing (Holt-Winters) method is implemented, which 
takes into account both seasonal changes and trends. This 
analysis is conducted on two sets, the first containing seventy 
percent of the data as training data and the second 
comprising the remaining thirty percent of the data as a test 
set.  
Table 2 presents the performance of the models on 
training and test sets using Root Mean Squared Error 
(RMSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). The performance 
on the test set is the critical measure to compare the 
performance of the models. The results show that the ARMA 
model outperformed the other models both on the training 
and, more importantly, test sets.  
TABLE II. SUMMARY OF THE UNIVARIATE MODELS' PERFORMANCE. 
 
Figure 6 provides a more in-depth understanding of the 
results by a visual illustration of the performance of the 
ARMA model, showing the difference between the actual 
data and the best performing model. The predicted values are 
shown in blue, and the actual data are plotted in red. Visual 
inspection of Figure 6 shows that the model performs better 
forecasting later values (after 2008) and, likewise, better 
captures the variance of the actual data in these later years. 
However, it is evident that the model’s variance (blue) is less 
than the actual data (red) through the whole data set. The 
gray area represents the prediction intervals for the test data 
set. The dark grey shows the 80% interval and light grey 
shows 95% interval. 
Based on the literature [16]–[18] including explanatory 
variables and using multivariate models can yield more 
accurate results. The next step in this research is to continue 
following the scheme illustrated in Figure 3 using 
multivariate methods to improve project frequency forecast. 
B. Modeling Cost and Duration 
Cost and duration are the two variables that are going to 
be sampled from a fitted distribution from past projects. 
Checking for the correlation between the two variables is 
essential. A Pearson correlation test shows 0.662 correlation 
coefficient with 0.000 significance between the duration and 
cost at the project level. This shows a moderately linear 
relationship between the two variables, and it should be 
incorporated in the model.  
 
 
Figure 6. ARIMA (8,0,8) Forecast. 
Figure 7 shows the histogram, and the corresponding 
fitted distribution for the duration and cost of the projects. 
An Inverse Gaussian distribution with µ= 244.67 and λ= 
273.93 was found to provide the best fit using AIC for the 
duration. A lognormal distribution with (mean log) µ= 
14.413319 and (standard deviation log) σ = 1.524961 was 
found to provide the best fit using AIC for the cost. 
 
Figure 7. Duration (Up) and Cost (down) Distribution. 
Model 
Set 
RMSE        
MAE 
Holt winter  
      (additive seasonal) 
Training 
8.10 
6.58 
Test 
11.73 
8.99 
ARMA(8,8) 
Training 
7.93 
6.28 
Test 
8.82 
6.84 
ARIMA(0,0,1)(0,0,2)[12] 
Training 
9.28 
7.46 
Test 
10.22 
8.15 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

The performances of the various model components 
presented in this section indicate the viability of an 
integrated project stream forecaster that predicts, within a 
simulation environment, the frequencies of projects and 
empirical distributions of project duration and cost. 
Specifically, the generator will produce stochastic streams of 
unknown future FDOT projects. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK. 
This paper has proposed an extension to the body of 
existing project portfolio planning models and discussed a 
methodology for its development. The proposed model will 
extend the horizon of the portfolio and strategic planning by 
enabling users to look more into the future and consider 
unknown (but statistically quantifiable) projects alongside 
the known and current projects in their planning process.  
The proposed model is an additional component to the 
current portfolio management models. A general modeling 
approach with different possible training and validating 
methods is discussed and results of the preliminary research 
on developing, validating and testing a stream generator to 
forecast FDOT projects, in terms of time of occurrence, 
expected duration and expected cost, is presented. It is 
shown how univariate models can be used to forecast project 
frequency and the representing distributions for project cost 
and duration along with the relationship between these two 
variables is discussed.  
A set of potentially relevant predictors including the 
macroeconomics metrics and construction indices are 
identified to further improve the model by using multivariate 
methods in future steps of the research. The next stages of 
this research include further implementation of the suggested 
modeling approach and testing using a real case study.  
It is also proposed to expand the scope of the research by 
adding other characteristics to the project stream generator 
(such as different project types) and implementing it within 
various environmental contexts.  
The complete framework will allow the user to examine 
different bidding and project selection strategies to see the 
impact on a company’s portfolio and the future resource 
demands. Furthermore, it will lead to the selection of a closer 
to optimal strategy and optimal resource distribution for the 
future. Finally, taking into account uncertainties in future 
project streams might decrease the required extent of 
continuous adjustments to a company’s portfolio plan 
resulting from new projects being added to the portfolio. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by the University of Florida 
graduate student fellowships program. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] B. S. Blichfeldt and P. Eskerod, “Project portfolio 
management - There’s more to it than what management 
enacts,” Int. J. Proj. Manag., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 357–365, May 
2008. 
[2] J. A. Araúzo, J. Pajares, and A. Lopez-Paredes, “Simulating 
the dynamic scheduling of project portfolios,” Simul. Model. 
Pract. Theory, vol. 18, no. 10, pp. 1428–1441, Nov. 2010. 
[3] R. G. Cooper, S. J. Edgett, and E. J. Kleinschmidt, “Portfolio 
management in new product development: Lessons from the 
leaders I,” Res. Manag., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 16–28, 1997. 
[4] H. Markowitz, “Portfolio Selection,” J. Finance, vol. 7, no. 1, 
pp. 77–91, Mar. 1952. 
[5] W. F. McFarlan, “Portfolio approach to information systems,” 
Harv. Bus. Rev., vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 142–150, 1981. 
[6] N. Archer and F. Ghasemzadeh, “An integrated framework 
for project portfolio selection,” Int. J. Proj. Manag., vol. 17, 
no. 4, pp. 207–216, Aug. 1999. 
[7] T. R. Browning and A. A. Yassine, “Resource-constrained 
multi-project scheduling: Priority rule performance revisited,” 
Int. J. Prod. Econ., vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 212–228, Aug. 2010. 
[8] A. F. Carazo, et al., “Solving a comprehensive model for 
multiobjective project portfolio selection,” Comput. Oper. 
Res., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 630–639, Apr. 2010. 
[9] M. Engwall, “No project is an island: Linking projects to 
history and context,” Res. Policy, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 789–808, 
May 2003. 
[10] S. S. Liu and C. J. Wang, “Optimizing project selection and 
scheduling 
problems 
with 
time-dependent 
resource 
constraints,” Autom. Constr., vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1110–1119, 
Dec. 2011. 
[11] W. R. Scott, “Organizations: Rational, Natural, and Open 
Systems,” 
Englewood 
Cliffs, 
NJ 
Pren-tice-
Hall.ScottOrganizations Ration. Nat. Open Syst., 2003. 
[12] M. Martinsuo, “Project portfolio management in practice and 
in context,” Int. J. Proj. Manag., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 794–803, 
Aug. 2013. 
[13] R. 
B. 
Duncan, 
“Characteristics 
of 
Organizational 
Environments and Perceived Environmental Uncertainty,” 
Adm. Sci. Q., pp. 313–327, 1972. 
[14] R. L. Daft, “Organziation Theory and Design,” in South-
Western Cengage Learning, 2009, pp. 138–157. 
[15] Y. Petit and B. Hobbs, “Project portfolios in dynamic 
environments: 
Sources 
of 
uncertainty 
and 
sensing 
mechanisms,” Proj. Manag. J., vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 46–58, Sep. 
2010. 
[16] S. M. Shahandashti and B. Ashuri, “Highway Construction 
Cost Forecasting Using Vector Error Correction Models,” J. 
Manag. Eng., vol. 32, no. 2, p. 4015040, Mar. 2016. 
[17] S. Thomas Ng, S. O. Cheung, R. Martin Skitmore, K. C. Lam, 
and L. Y. Wong, “Prediction of tender price index directional 
changes,” Constr. Manag. Econ., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 843–852, 
Oct. 2000. 
[18] J. M. W. Wong and S. T. Ng, “Forecasting construction 
tender price index in Hong Kong using vector error correction 
model,” Constr. Manag. Econ., vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 1255–
1268, 2010. 
 
 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-567-8
INFOCOMP 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

