Study of the Growth of a New Social Network Platform 
 
 
Ning Tang 
Mobile Life and New Media Laboratory 
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 
Beijing, China 
ning.tang0@gmail.com 
Chunhong Zhang 
Mobile Life and New Media Laboratory 
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 
Beijing, China 
zhangch.bupt.001@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, with the rapid development of social 
network sites (SNS), many efforts have been made on the 
analysis of such networks, which is important for us to enrich 
our social network knowledge and improve the SNS design. 
However, most analysis have focused on the very popular SNS, 
there is little comprehensive analysis of growing process of a 
SNS from the exact original stage, therefore, lacking of deep 
understanding how the SNS evolve over time. In this paper, a 
comprehensive growth data set of a new social network site 
constructed by our lab is examined to see the growing process 
of the network and to find some underlying growth 
mechanisms. This observation provides an empirical evidence 
of the Barabási-Albert (BA) model. During the observation, the 
number of new added links is shown to have a linear 
relationship with the number of new added users and there is a 
preferential attachment phenomenon in the link formation 
process. In addition, the degree distribution at different time 
points is presented to see the formation of the power-law 
distribution. Finally, the topological properties are found to be 
stable after a period of development, though the network is still 
growing. 
Keywords-social network sites; growth; power-law degree 
distribution; topological properties. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There are various social network sites nowadays. On 
SNS, users can make friends, share pictures, share videos, 
write blogs and play games. Despite the different goals and 
purposes of various social network sites, they have been 
shown to have a number of common structural features, such 
as power-law degree distribution, small diameter, and high 
clustering coefficient [1][2]. Many previous analysis have 
focused on validating static common features in different 
popular social network sites, however, there is little 
comprehensive analysis of the growing process of these 
features from the exact original stage of a SNS, therefore, 
lacking of deep understanding how the features form over 
time. Although there are some theoretical models [3] that try 
to reveal the underlying mechanisms, an empirical view of 
the formation process is desired.  
An in-depth understanding of the growing process of a 
SNS from the exact original stage can help us learn the 
underlying mechanisms which result in the specific features. 
Mastering the mechanisms enables us to simulate similar 
social networks and provides a possibility for further social 
networking study. What is more, a better knowledge of the 
evolution of the topological properties allows us to predict 
the 
future 
of 
networks 
and 
make 
corresponding 
improvements. 
In this paper, an empirical analysis of the growing 
process of a new social network site from the exact original 
stage is presented to see how its features shape over time. 
The social network is constructed by our lab. The dataset 
used in this paper is the testing data extracted from the server 
for 27 consecutive days. Compared with the crawled data 
sets generally used in previous studies [2][4][5][6], the data 
set used in this paper is a complete and time continuous one 
which may help us make a more comprehensive and more 
accurate understanding of the whole network.  
The number of new added links is found to have a linear 
relationship with the number of new added users—every 11 
additional edges will bring about 6 new users. And there is a 
preferential attachment phenomenon in the link formation 
process—more than 55% of new links are attached to the top 
30% large-degree nodes. Next, the degree distribution at 
different time points is plotted to see the dynamic shaping of 
the 
power-law 
distribution. 
Finally, 
the 
topological 
properties are found to be stable after a period of 
development, though the network is still growing. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Additional 
background and related works are provided in Section 2. In 
Section 3, the methodology for obtaining the data set and its 
limitations are described. In Section 4, an empirical analysis 
of the growing process of the new social network is 
presented. Finally, the conclusion remarks and future work 
are drawn in Section 5. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
A. Topological Properties 
There are some general metrics to characterize the SNS, 
which are called topological properties. 
 
Degree.  Degree is the number of edges incident to a 
vertex of a graph. The node degree distributions of 
many large-scale social networks have been shown 
to conform to power-laws. Power-law networks, also 
known as scale-free networks, are networks where 
the probability that a node has degree k is 
14
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

proportional to k
﹣ γ, for large k and γ ＞ 1. The 
parameter γ, whose value is typically in the range 2 
< γ < 3, is called the power-law coefficient. In 
power-law network, the majority of the nodes have 
small degrees, but a few nodes called hubs have 
significantly high degrees. In 1998, Barabási and 
Albert found that growth and preferential attachment 
were two important mechanisms of the formation of 
power-law networks [3]. Growth means that the 
number of nodes in the network increases over time. 
Preferential attachment means that new links are 
more likely to attach to large-degree nodes. They 
later proposed the Barabási and Albert (BA) model 
based on the two mechanisms. 
 
Diameter.  The shortest path length L between two 
vertices in a graph is the number of edges in a 
shortest path connecting them. The average shortest 
path length <L> is the mean of L between any pairs 
that have at least a path connecting them. Diameter 
D is defined as the maximum of the shortest path 
length. 
 
Clustering coefficient.  Clustering coefficient is a 
measure of degree to which nodes in a graph tend to 
cluster together. Evidence suggests that in most real-
world networks, and in particular social networks, 
nodes tend to create tightly knit groups with a 
relatively high density of ties [7][8]. Clustering 
coefficient of node i in undirected network is defined 
as 

Ci =2E/ K (K—1).

That is the ratio of the number E of edges that 
actually exit between the k neighbors of node i to the 
potential number k (k—1)/2. The clustering 
coefficient C of the whole network is the average of 
all individual Ci . 
Studies have shown that the Web [9][10], scientific 
collaboration on research papers [11], film actors [12], and 
general social networks [13] have small-world properties. 
Small-world networks have a small diameter and exhibit 
high clustering. 
B. Related Works 
Recently, much work has focused on understanding the 
structure and evolution of large-scale online social networks. 
[2][4], present empirical analysis of statistical properties and 
validate the power-law, small-world and scale-free properties 
of several large-scale social networks. Bimal [5] finds that 
while the individual links that constitute the activity network 
change rapidly over time, the average network properties 
remained relatively stable in Facebook. Alan [6] shows that 
new link formation in Flickr follows preferential attachment, 
but the link creation process cannot be explained by the BA 
model alone because users are far more likely to link to 
nearby users than that model would suggest.  
Above researches are all about popular social networks 
which have already processed the common features. But the 
tracing observation of the formation of a new SNS, which is 
helpful for a better understanding of the underlying growth 
mechanisms and helpful for predicting the future of networks, 
is lack of studying. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
To get the growth data of a SNS from the exact original 
stage, a new SNS is constructed by our lab. Then the new 
SNS began to get a test from September 15th, 2010. The 
dataset used in this paper is the user data extracted from the 
server at the end of the test on October 11th. During the 27 
days, 140 users have registered on the platform, including 
110 undergraduates in four classes at Beijing University of 
Posts and Telecommunications and 30 graduate students in 
Mobile Life and New Media Laboratory. The dataset 
contains all the link formation information of the 27 days, 
including the creator, the target and the timestamp. 
In contrast to the crawled data sets used in other papers 
[2][4][5][6], the data set used in this paper is a complete and 
time continuous one, which may help us make a more 
comprehensive and accurate understanding of the whole 
network. However, although our dataset contains all the user 
data, the statistical properties may not be so obvious because 
the number of testing users is small and the testing period is 
short.  
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
The network is composed of users (vertices) and links 
(edges) among them. Since link creation in our network 
requires consent from the link target, a link connecting the 
creator and the target is undirected. Among the 140 
registered users, there are 47 users who have at least one link 
with others, while the remaining 93 people are isolated nodes. 
In the next analysis, we’ll only consider users that connect 
with others. 
In order to learn the evolution of the network, the 
growing process of the network is divided into segments. 
During the test, registration is mainly concentrated in a few 
days and the number of registers varies greatly every day 
(from 0 to 49 per day). To make the partition as even as 
possible, the growing process is divided by the number of 
new added links instead of by days. Finally, the network 
developed to have 77 edges. Considering granularity, the 
growing process is finally divided into seven segments. In 
each segment, 11 edges are added into the network. In the 
following analysis, the network is examined at each end of 
the seven segments. Table Ⅰ shows the number of vertices 
and edges at the seven time points. 
TABLE I.  
THE NUMBER OF VERTICES AND EDGES AT SEVEN TIME 
POINTS 
Time point 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Edges 
11 
22 
33 
44 
55 
66 
77 
Vertices 
10 
15 
22 
30 
36 
41 
47 
 
 
 
15
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

 
Figure 1.  Plot of the number of vertices at seven time points 
A. Preferential Attachment Phenomenon 
The well-known Barabási-Albert (BA) model has been 
shown to result in networks with power-law degree 
distributions. In BA model, new links are attached to nodes 
using a probability distribution weighted by node degree. 
Since the dataset used in this paper is very small, there could 
not be a statistic of the link formation distribution with 
degree. Instead, the number of links that are attached to 
nodes whose degrees rank in the top 30% at the former time 
point is calculated to examine whether there is a preferential 
attachment phenomenon in the link formation process. The 
result is shown in Table Ⅱ. 
It is obvious that there is a preferential attachment 
phenomenon—more than 55% (6/11) of new links are 
attached to the top 30% large-degree nodes.  
Since the establishment of a link needs a creator and a 
target, so the link can be regarded as a directed one in this 
respect. Here we define the out-degree of a node as the 
number of links that it creates, and the in-degree as the 
number of links that it receives. Figure 2 is the statistics of 
the in-degree and out-degree of each user, ranking in 
descending order of the total degree. It is obvious that large-
degree nodes are more likely to be creators.  
From Table Ⅱ and Figure 2, the underlying mechanism 
which results in the power-law degree distribution can be 
figured out. The large-degree nodes are generally active 
users who like to create links, so new links are more likely to 
be established between large-degree nodes and new added 
vertices. What is more, since every 11 additional edges 
generally bring about 6 new users, new nodes are 
continuously added to the network, making the degree 
distribution more and more asymmetrical, as shown in 
Figure 3—more and more nodes have small degrees, while a 
few hub nodes have larger and larger degrees. 
TABLE II.  
THE NUMBER OF LINKS THAT ARE  ATTACHED TO THE 
TOP 30%  LARGE-DEGREE NODES 
Time point 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Edges 
- 
7 
8 
6 
9 
6 
6 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The statistics of the in-degree and out-degree of each user 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
Figure 3.  The change of degree distribution at three time points. 
16
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

B. Topological Properties 
Next there will be a look at the evolution of the 
topological properties. Table Ⅲ is the detailed growing 
information at seven time points. Figure 4 plots the 
changing processes of these properties. It is shown that 
although the network keeps a same expanding speed during 
each time point, all the properties tend to be stable from the 
fifth time point. The network seems to have entered a stable 
stage.  
TABLE III.  
THE TOPOLOGICAL PROPERTIES AT SEVEN TIME POINTS 
Time point 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Average 
degree 
2.2 
2.93 
3 
2.93 
3.06 
3.22 
3.28 
Maximum 
degree 
8 
11 
12 
12 
17 
19 
19 
Clustering 
coefficient 
0.17 
0.29 
0.31 
0.25 
0.2 
0.21 
0.21 
Average 
shortest path 
length 
1.89 
2.06 
2.24 
2.39 
2.73 
2.72 
2.77 
Diameter 
3 
4 
4 
4 
6 
6 
6 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
(d) 
 
(e) 
 
(f) 
Figure 4.  The evolution of the topological properties 
17
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

In order to affirm the new developed network used in this 
paper has the common features that previously observed in 
other large-scale social networks and ensure the above study 
is applicable to general social networks, there is a check of 
the power-law and small-scale properties in the new network. 
Figure 5 is the degree distribution of the final network. 
In Figure 5, majority nodes have small degrees (k=1, 2), 
some nodes have moderate degrees (k=3~9), few nodes (the 
long tail) have very large degrees (k=16, 19). It presents an 
approximate power-law distribution. To a power-law 
network, the cumulative degree distribution also follows a 
power-law form as P (≥ K) ∝k
﹣(γ－1). The above function 
plotted in log-log coordinates is a straight line with slope    
﹣γ—1. Figure 6 is the log-log plot of the cumulative 
degree distribution. Using linear least squares regression to 
get the slope ﹣(γ—1) =﹣1.268. So the degree distribution 
follows a power-law form with γ=2.268 and the network is a 
scale-free network. 
 
Figure 5.  Degree distribution 
 
Figure 6.  Log-log plot of the cumulative degree distribution 
The clustering coefficient C of the whole network is 0.21, 
much higher than that of a corresponding random graph of 
the same size Crand=<k>/N=3.28/47=0.07, <k> is the average 
degree of the undirected network. In addition, the network 
also has a small average shortest path length 2.77. Hence, 
small-word property also exists in this network. 
At the end of the test, the social network has exhibited 
the small-world and scale-free properties after a short-term 
development. Therefore, social networks are born to have the 
common features. It also indicates that the above study of the 
new social network in this paper is applicable to general 
social networks. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In conclusion, the experiment in this paper provides an 
empirical evidence of the BA model. Both growth and 
preferential attachment mechanisms are observed in our 
observation. In addition, a new phenomenon that the number 
of new added users has a linear relationship with the number 
of new added links is observed. The topological properties 
are found to be stable after a period of development. Finally, 
the common small-world and scale-free properties are 
proved to exist in this small-scale social network, indicating 
that the study of the network is applicable to general social 
networks. 
We think our work provides an insight into the 
understanding of the original stage of a social network, 
which will help us know the underlying mechanisms and 
predict the future growth. Much work remains to be done. 
We’ll make a longer and larger-scale observation of the 
growing process of the network to get more statistical 
properties. In addition, other aspects of the network, such as 
user behaviors, are worth studying.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by China-Finland Cooperation 
Project on the Development and Demonstration of Intelligent 
Design Platform Driven by Living Lab Methodology 
(2010DFA12780), 
Architecture 
and 
key 
Technology 
Research on Broadband Wireless Campus Innovation 
Testbed (2010ZX03005-003), the National Key Program of 
New 
Generation 
of 
Broadband 
Wireless 
Mobile 
Communication Network (2011ZX03005-004-02) and Key 
Laboratory of Universal Wireless Communications, Ministry 
of Education. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y.-Y. Ahn, S. Han, H. Kwak, S. Moon, and H. Jeong, 
―Analysis of Topological Characteristics of Huge Online 
Social Networking Services,‖ In Proceedings of the 16th 
World Wide Web Conference (WWW’07), Banff, Canada, 
2007, pp. 835–844. 
[2] A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K. P. Gummadi, P. Druschel, and B. 
Bhattacharjee, ―Measurement and analysis of online social 
networks,‖ In Proceedings of the 5th ACM/USENIX Internet 
Measurement Conference (IMC’07), San Diego, CA, 2007. 
[3] A.-L. Barabási and R. Albert, ―Emergence of Scaling in 
Random Networks,‖ Science, vol. 286, 1999, pp. 509–512. 
[4] Feng Fu, Lianghuan Liu, and Long Wang, ―Empirical 
analysis of online social networks in the age of Web 2.0,‖ 
Physica, vol. 387, 2008, pp. 675–684. 
[5] Bimal Viswanath, Alan Mislove, and Meeyoung Cha, ―On the 
Evolution of User Interaction in Facebook,‖ WOSN’09, 
August 17, 2009. 
[6] Alan Mislove, Hema Swetha, and Koppula Krishna P . 
Gummadi, ―Growth of the Flickr Social Network,‖ WOSN’08, 
August 18, 2008. 
18
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

[7] P. W. Holland and S. Leinhardt, ―Transitivity in structural 
models of small groups,‖ Comparative Group Studies, vol. 2, 
1998, pp. 107–124. 
[8] D. J. Watts and Steven Strogatz, ―Collective dynamics of 
'small-world' networks,‖ Nature, vol. 393 (6684), June 1998, 
pp. 440–442. 
[9] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barabási, ―The Diameter of the 
World Wide Web,‖ Nature, vol. 401, 1999, p. 130. 
[10] A. Broder, R. Kumar, F. Maghoul, P. Raghavan, S. 
Rajagopalan, R. Stata, A. Tomkins, and J. Wiener, ―Graph 
Structure in the Web: Experiments and Models,‖ In 
Proceedings of the 9th International World Wide Web 
Conference (WWW’00), Amsterdam, May 2000. 
[11] M. E. J. Newman, ―The structure of scientific collaboration 
networks,‖ Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
(PNAS),vol. 98, 2001, pp. 409–415. 
[12] L. A. N. Amaral, A. Scala, M. Barthélémy, and H. E. Stanley, 
―Classes of small-world networks,‖ Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences (PNAS), vol. 97, 2000, pp. 
11149–11152. 
[13] L. A. Adamic, O. Buyukkokten, and E. Adar, ―A social 
network caught in the Web,‖ First Monday, 8(6), 2003. 
 
 
19
INFOCOMP 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-161-8

