Biometric Security Systems for Mobile Devices based
on Fingerprint Recognition Algorithm
Michał Szczepanik, Ireneusz J´o´zwiak
Institute of Informatics,
Wrocław University
of Technologies
Wybrze˙ze Wyspia´nskiego 27, 50-370 Wrocław, Poland
Email: {michal.szczepanik, ireneusz.jozwiak}@pwr.wroc.pl
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a selective attention
algorithm which increases the reliability of biometrics security
system based on ﬁngerprint recognition. We compare the
existing ﬁngerprint recognition algorithms and test our own
algorithm on ﬁngerprints database which changes in the
structure as a result of physical damage. We propose new
selective attention algorithms, which help to detect the most
sensitive to damage areas, and add it as step of ﬁngerprint
analyses for the ﬁngerprint recognition procedures. We also
propose a new algorithm, which does not require complex
hardware systems, so it can be applied in new smart mobile
devices, which restrict unauthorized access to sensitive data
or other user resources. The main goal of this work is to
demonstrate the applicability of the developed algorithm in
mobile devices.
Keywords-biometric; ﬁngerprint; minutia group; selective at-
tention algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, mobile phones, tablet PCs and other mobile
devices are an excellent source of data about users. They are
used as a remote ofﬁce, a tool for bank account management,
email management, as well as entertainment like social
media, real time social games, etc. The only applicable
security method is a four-digit pin, which is usually easy
to guess or break. Computational capabilities of current
devices are not as limited as two years before [17]. Today,
mobile phones have the computational capabilities similar to
personal computers which could be bought one or two years
ago; so, why should they not use better security systems,
such as biometrics systems. The accuracy of a ﬁngerprint
veriﬁcation system is critical in a wide variety of civilian,
forensic and commercial applications such as access control
systems, credit cards, phone usage, etc. The main problem,
from an economic point of view, can be the size of the
used system hardware and its cost, and therefore it cannot
be too extensive and advanced. Fingerprints are the most
widely used biometric feature for personal identiﬁcation and
veriﬁcation in the ﬁeld of biometric identiﬁcation [11][19].
Most important for designing the system is the effective-
ness of ﬁngerprint recognition algorithms, which depends
mainly on the quality of digital ﬁngerprint images input and
ﬁngerprint’s physical damage [9]. Current mobile devices
typically use as collateral for a four digit pin code or face
recognition system, which doesnt work when is too darker.
Most ﬁngerprint recognition algorithms are not immune to
damage, so they are not use in mobile devices. The main
problem, which we would like to solv,e is the stability of
the recognition systems with respect to the capability to deal
with ﬁngers damage, will make the system more useful to
the user.
In Section II, we explain the basic parameters and and
measures for the safety and usability of biometric systems. In
Section III, we brieﬂy analyze existing algorithms and how
they work. In Sections IV and V, we present preprocessing
and method for comparing ﬁngerprints by our algorithm. In
the section The quality of the algorithms, we present ﬁrst test
of our algorithm on public ﬁngerprints database. In the next
section, we explain how we represent data for our algorithm.
The most important section of this paper is The experiment,
in which we present results of tests, which are done on real
mobile devices.
II. QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF BIOMETRIC ALGORITHMS
There are two most important performance metrics for
biometric systems [17]: False Accept Rate (FAR), also called
False Match Rate (FMR), is the probability that the system
incorrectly matches the input pattern to a non-matching
template from the database. It measures the percent of
invalid inputs which are incorrectly accepted. False Reject
Rate (FRR), also called False Non-Match Rate (FNMR),
is the probability that the system fails to detect a match
between the input pattern and a matching template from the
database. It measures the percent of valid inputs which are
incorrectly rejected. They can be presented mathematically
as:
FAR(T) =
Z 1
T h
pi(x)dx
(1)
FRR(T) =
Z T h
0
pi(x)dx
(2)
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

where Th is the value of a threshold used in the the
algorithm. Both FAR and FRR are functions of a threshold
T. When T decreases, the system has more tolerance to
intraclass variations and noise; however, FAR increases.
Similarly, if t is lower, the system is more secure and FRR
decreases.
III. HISTORY AND EXISTING SOLUTIONS
First mobile phone with ﬁngerprint recognition system
was developed by Siemens in 1998 [19]. Since that time,
more than 100 phone models had such a protection [15].
Unfortunately, the biggest problem of those systems was
usability. Every day, people are exposed to cuts, wounds
and burns; therefore, it is important that the algorithms are
resistant to this type of damage. The current ﬁngerprint
recognition systems for mobile devices usually use one of
the algorithms: Minutiae Adjacency Graph (MAG), Elastic
minutiae matching (EMM), Delaunay Triangulation (DT),
Pattern-Based Templates (PBT) [10]. The most popular al-
gorithms are based on local and global structures represented
by graphs like in MAG [16]. In this type of algorithms,
local structures to ﬁnd corresponding points to align feature
vector are used ﬁrst, then global structures are matched
[4][5]. This type of algorithm was used by He and Ou
[6], Ross et al. [16]. They also use thin-plate spline (TPS)
model to build an average deformation model from multiple
impressions of the same ﬁnger. Owing to iteratively aligning
minutiae between input and template impressions, a risk of
forcing an alignment between impressions originating from
two different ﬁngers arises and leads to a higher false accept
rate. Typically, a minutia matching has two steps:
• Registration
aligns
ﬁngerprints,
which
could
be
matched, as well as possible.
• Evaluation calculates matching scores using a tolerance
box between every possibly matched point (minutiae)
pairs.
The EMM algorithm typically uses only global matching
where each point (minutia) which has a type, like end
point or bifurcation, needs to be matched to a related
point in the second ﬁngerprint image. Based on elastic
deformations which are used to tolerate minutiae pairs that
are further apart because of plastic disrotations, and therefore
to decrease the False Rejection Rate, so in most popular
algorithms authors increase the size of bounding boxes [13]
to reduce this problem, but as side effect they got higher
False Acceptation Rate (FAR). In this type of algorithms,
for elastic match, TSP [1] also can be used, which provides
better performance than only one parameter of deformation.
The DT algorithm [2][14] is the most popular version of
MAG, so it was tested as separate algorithm. Its structure
based on triangulation connects neighboring minutiae to
create triangles, such that no point (minutia) in P is inside
the circumcircle of any triangle in DT(P). DT algorithm
analyzes the structure of points identically as minutiae
Figure 1.
Typical damages on ﬁngerprint
adjacency graph algorithm, so it also is not resistant to
typical injury of physical ﬁngerprint (see Figure 1).
The Pattern based algorithms [3] compare the basic
ﬁngerprint patterns (like arch, whorl, and loop between
a previously stored template and a candidate ﬁngerprint.
This algorithm requires that the images be aligned in the
same orientation and in the same scale. To do this, the
algorithm ﬁnds a central point in the ﬁngerprint image and
centers on it, and after that, scales to the same size of the
ﬁngerprints ridge. In a pattern-based algorithm, the template
contains the type, size and orientation of patterns within the
aligned ﬁngerprint image. The candidate ﬁngerprint image
is graphically compared with the template to determine the
degree to which they match. Due to the storage of the
original picture for the algorithm there is a high risk that
this image can be read from the memory card reader or
ﬁngerprints database.
IV. FINGERPRINT RECOGNITION ALGORITHM BASED ON
MINUTIA’ GROUPS
The proposed solutions, in contrast to other algorithms,
are more resistant to damage.
A. Fingerprint recognition algorithm based on minutes
groups
For older low-resolution readers it is required to detect
the areas of correct scanning of the ﬁngerprint. First step of
image analysis is the search for the imprint area including
the exclusion of areas containing signiﬁcant damage [18].
Fingerprint image is represented by a gray scale image that
deﬁnes the area of forced application ﬁngerprint for the
reader (see Figure 2).
Ifp(i, j) =< 1, 255 >
(3)
The operation that converts a grayscale image into a
binary image is known as binarization. We carried out the
binarization process using adaptive thresholding. Each pixel
is assigned a new value (1 or 0) according to intensity mean
in a local area and the parameter tg which excludes poorly
read ﬁngerprint areas from the analysis (see Figure 3).
Bfp(i, j) =
1forIfp(i, j) ⩾ tg
0forIfp(i, j) < tg
(4)
The last step is creating the ﬁngerprint mask based on
the binarized image. The Mask for the area of a square
(X, Y ), which size is 2.5 wide edges, is determined by two
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 2.
Original image (Source: own work)
Figure 3.
Image after binarization (Source: own work)
parameters plo, which is a limitation that excludes areas with
an insufﬁcient number of pixels describing the image, and
phi excludes blurred areas, such as moist (see Figure 4).
Ffp(X, Y ) =
Ifp(X, Y )forFimg ⩾ plo ∧ Fimg ⩽ phi
0 otherwise
(5)
Where Fimg is
Fimg =
X
i∈X
X
j∈Y
Bfp(i, j)
(6)
Created mask is used for ﬁnding the most damaged area
in the ﬁngerprint image.
Figure 4.
Mask for ﬁngerprint with detecting damage (Source: own work)
B. Detecting features and leveling of the damage in segmen-
tations
Standard leveling of damage is carried out by calculat-
ing the variance of points and the analysis of brightness.
Based on these two parameters, the frequency of furrows
is calculated, which is used for each ﬁngerprint image.
After applying Gabor ﬁlter [12] to highlight the pits and
valleys, it uses segmentation in accordance with its size,
2.5 width of segment furrow, the image is redrawn. After
that process ﬁngerprints are continuous and lint. In contrast
to the literature, the algorithm does not require additional
transformations to ﬁnd the minutiae, such as converting the
width of 1px furrows. It does not require information about
the orientation of minutiae; it only requires the data about its
position. Therefore, the resulting image is used to ﬁnd the
edge - the minutiae are located at the intersection of the edge
of the furrows. The problem of ﬁngerprint recognition is a
complex process, even in laboratory conditions; therefore, if
used as a system to control access to the mobile devices, it
should be insensitive to certain natural changes or damages
in physical structure of ﬁngerprints, which can include:
incomplete ﬁngerprint, ﬁngerprint parts which can be injured
or burned, blurred, partly unreadable or rotation. In order to
detect the most sensitive to damage areas, we use neural
network with selective attention technique [7]. This type of
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 5.
Mask of ﬁngerprint’s areas vulnerable to damage. (Source: own
work)
neural network is more like an analysis done by a human
[8]. This allows us to create a mask of areas vulnerable to
damage (see Figure 5).
We created 15 different masks, broken down by the type
of ﬁngerprints core also known as ﬁngerprint patterns (arch,
whorl and loop) and the type of ﬁnger (thumb, index ﬁnger,
middle ﬁnger, ring ﬁnger, small ﬁnger). Basing on this mask
we created a ﬁlter, which we use to compare ﬁngerprints
where speciﬁc minutiae are weighted in the decision process
and their score is based on the location on the ﬁngerprints.
V. COMPARISON OF FINGERPRINTS
Minutiae image is divided into segments, each segment is
corresponding minutiaes group is described by parameters
(x, y, nom), where x and y are the coordinates, and nom de-
termines the number of minutiae in the group. Additionally,
one implementation uses an additional parameter specifying
the probabilities of damage in a given segment, which is
estimated by a neural network, based on the distribution of
areas rejected by the mask described by the formula. Current
algorithm implementation searches small groups of minutiae
that that contain up to 5 minutiae (see Figure 6). Then, based
on the neighboring groups (max 4) creates a new large group
(see Figure 7). For each, the orientation parameters and the
number of characteristic points are recalculated. The last
step is to create a matrix of Euclidean distances between
the largest groups.
When comparing the use of two parameters: dx - the
distance deﬁning the difference between groups in the pat-
tern and tested ﬁngerprint, px - the threshold of damage
occurrence probability (determined by whether the group
is under consideration in the analysis), we decide which
groups should be compered and we set the priority for
them. After that we do the comparison of the groups, which
are divided according to the priority, that is deﬁned by the
number of minutiae in the group and selective attention (SA)
algorithms, which are based on probabilities of damage in a
Figure 6.
Fingerprint devided into segments. (Source: own work)
Table I
THE RESULT OF EXPERIMENT USING FVC2004 DATABASE
FAR
FRR
MAG
0.82%
0.65%
EMM
1.23%
1.15%
PBTA
0.15%
1.73%
MGM64
6.60%
0.54%
MGM32
3.23%
0.32%
MGM32 SA
0.38%
0.09%
group segment. This provides quick veriﬁcation of whether
the analyzed ﬁngerprint is consistent with the pattern.
VI. THE QUALITY OF THE ALGORITHMS
First test was done using FVC2004 [12] ﬁngerprint
databases. For each of four databases, a total of 120
ﬁngers and 12 impressions per ﬁnger (1440 impressions)
were gathered. Unfortunately, most of the publicly available
databases of ﬁngerprints do not include the problem of
physical damage, so additionally small damage such as cuts
and burns has been generated on each sample. In most cases
artiﬁcially applied damages cover 5-20% of the ﬁngerprint.
For 10% of the samples they cover approximately 50% of
the area to simulate severe damage.
Most algorithms cannot process ﬁngerprints with severe
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 7.
Detecting relations between minutiaes groups. (Source: own
work)
physical damage correctly. Also, the proposed one has
proven to have a very dangerous level of False Accepta-
tion Rate. After applying the selective attention algorithm,
ﬁngerprint recognition algorithm improved its performance
and reliability. The proposed algorithm has been developed
in such a way, that it uses the property of a damage map,
so its results have improved the most.
VII. CLASSIFICATION AND DATA MANAGMENT USED IN
THE ALGORITHM
The developed algorithm is based on minutiae groups,
where each group is basically represented by the coordinates
- x, y and the number of minutiae - nom contained in the
group. Group covers an area equal to 2.5 the width of the
furrow and its coordinates are in the middle of the square
which is boundaring this area. Number of minutiae in the
group describes its priority. Additionally, a stored parameter
deﬁnes the probability of damage - pd in the area represented
by the group. In conclusion the group is deﬁned as follows:
Mgroup : {x, y, nom, pd}
(7)
Based on these data, a matrix of Euclidean distances
between the groups is created. Data on the characteristic
Table II
THE RESULT OF EXPERIMENT ON SAMSUNG GALAXY SII
FAR
FRR
Average time to decision in ms
MAG
0.80%
0.63%
138
EMM
1.15%
1.20%
127
PBTA
0.25%
1.70%
130
MGM64
6.75%
0.55%
127
MGM32
3.43%
0.42%
128
MGM32 SA
0.43%
0.18%
132
Table III
THE RESULT OF EXPERIMENT ON HTC WIDEFIRE S
FAR
FRR
Average time to decision in ms
MAG
0.80%
0.63%
225
EMM
1.15%
1.20%
220
PBTA
0.25%
1.70%
232
MGM64
6.75%
0.55%
215
MGM32
3.43%
0.42%
228
MGM32 SA
0.43%
0.18%
225
point is limited to its weight (nom) and the probability of
damage pd. Finally we obtain:
Mgroup(I) : {nomI, (pd)I)}
(8)
Mgroup(I, J) : dist(Mgroup(I), Mgroup(J))
(9)
where dist(Mgroup(I), Mgroup(J)) is Euclidean dis-
tances between the group I and J. Data stored for analysis
to prevent reproduction of the original ﬁngerprint image.
Additional storage parameters to estimate the damage allow
us to better match ﬁngerprints in the event of damage.
VIII. THE EXPERIMENT
The tests were conducted on two devices: Samsung
Galaxy SII (see Table II) and HTC Wideﬁre S (see Table
III). For test authors used real ﬁngerprints. Due to the
nature of work, we use real ﬁngerprints. Each user was
exposed to frequent damage of ﬁngerprints, like cuts and
burns presented on Figure 1. All algorithms were compared
using 112 different ﬁngerprints and each had 10 samples.
In the test, we use not optimal algorithm, because ﬁrst
implementation was done in Android SDK, not in NDK,
which allow developer to use more code optimizations, but
need much more time to implement it for speciﬁc devices.
The implementation in Android NDK is planned in future
work. This implementation should also allow us to create
a dynamic mask of the damaged sectors and the most
vulnerable to damage area of the ﬁngerprint for a speciﬁc
user and not only use a general mask, which is hardcoded
in our current implementation to reduce memory usage.
Our algorithm can be used on mobile devices because its
decision time is very similar to other algorithms; however,
other parameters are much better.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new step for ﬁngerprint-
matching approach, which is based on selective attention.
Inserted mask can be hardcoded in the algorithm or gener-
ated in real time by neural network, but it required devices
with better performance. With a hardcoded mask we can
provide signiﬁcant improvement in algorithms we with a
low performance cost. The proposed solution can be used
by everyone who is exposed to damage of ﬁngerprints. The
system can also be applied to protect access to important
data or premises, which are very important for mobile device
users.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Experiment is co-ﬁnanced by the European Union under
the European Social Fund.
REFERENCES
[1] A.M. Bazen and S.H Gerez, ”Fingerprint Matching by Thin-
plate Spline Modelling of Elastic Deformations.”, in Pattern
recognition, vol. 36 (8), 2003, pp. 1859-1867
[2] G. Bebis , T. Deaconu, and M. Georgiopoulos, ”Fingerprint
Identiﬁcation Using Delaunay Triangulation”, in Proc. IEEE
International Conference on Intelligence, Information, and
Systems, 1999, pp. 452-459
[3] R. Cappelli, A. Lumini, D. Maio, and D. Maltoni, ”Fingerprint
Classiﬁcation by Directional Image Partitioning”, in IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis Machine Intelligence, vol.21,
no.5, 1999 pp. 402-421
[4] S. Chikkerur, V. Govindaraju, and E. N. Cartwright, ”K-plet
and coupled bfs: A graph based ﬁngerprint representation and
matching algorithm.”, in LNCS vol. 3832, 2006, pp. 309315
[5] C. Grzeszyk, ”Forensic ﬁngerprint examination marks.” (in
Polish), Wydawnictwo Centrum Szkolenia Policji, Legionowo
1992
[6] Y. He, Z. Ou, ”Fingerprint matching algorithm based on local
minutiae adjacency graph”, in Journal of Harbin Institute of
Technology 10/05, 2005, pp. 95-103
[7] M. Huk, ”Sigma-if neural network as the use of selective
attention technique in classiﬁcation and knowledge discovery
problems solving”, in Annales Universitatis Mariae Curie-
Skodowska. AI Informatica. vol. 5, 2006, pp. 121-131
[8] M. Huk, ”Learning Distributed Selective Attention Strategies
with the Sigma-if Neural Network”, in Advances in computer
science and IT / ed. by D. M. Akbar Hussain. Vukovar : In-Teh,
2009. pp. 209-232
[9] A. Hicklin, C. Watson, and B. Ulery, ”How many people have
ﬁngerprints that are hard to match”, NIST Interagency Report
7271 ,2005
[10] L. Hong, Y. Wan, and A. K. Jain, ”Fingerprint image en-
hancement: Algorithm and performance evaluation” in IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 20,
1998, pp 777-789.
[11] A. K. Jain, A. Ross, and K. Nandakumar, ”Introducing to
biometrics”, Spinger 2011
[12] D. Maltoni, D. Maio, A.K. Jain, and S. Prabhakar, ”Handbook
of Fingerprint Recognition, 2nd Edition”, Springer 2009
[13] S. Pankanti, S. Prabhakar, and A.K. Jain, ”On the individu-
ality of ﬁngerprints”, in Proceedings of Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2001, pp. 805-812
[14] G. Parziale and A. Niel ”A ﬁngerprint matching using minu-
tiae triangulation.”, In: Proc. of International Conference on
Biometric Authentication (ICBA) , Springer, vol. 3072, 2004,
pp. 241-248
[15] N. K. Ratha and V. Govindaraju, ”Advances in Biometrics:
Sensors, Algorithms and Systems”, Springer 2007
[16] A. Ross, S.C. Dass, and A.K. Jain, ”A deformable model for
ﬁngerprint matching”, in Pattern Recognition 38(1), 2005, pp.
95103
[17] A. Ross, K. Nandakumar, and A.K. Jain, ”Handbook of
Multibiometrics (International Series on Biometrics)”, Springer
2011
[18] M. Szczepanik and R. Szewczyk, ”Fingerprint identiﬁcation
algorithm (in Polish)”. KNS, vol. 1, 2008, pp. 131 -136
[19] J.L. Wayman, A.K. Jain , D. Maltoni, and D. Maio, ”Biomet-
ric Systems. Technology, Design and Performance Evaluation,
1st Edition.”, Springer 2005
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-226-4
INFOCOMP 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

