A SAML Metadata Broker for Dynamic Federations and Inter-Federations
Daniela P¨ohn, Stefan Metzger, and Wolfgang Hommel
Leibniz Supercomputing Center
Munich Network Management Team
85748 Garching n. Munich, Germany
Email: [poehn,metzger,hommel]@lrz.de
Abstract—We present the design and concept for a new service to
enable multi-tenant information and communications technology
(ICT) service user authentication and authorization (AuthNZ)
management in the research and education environment, called
G´eant-TrustBroker. G´eant-TrustBroker complements eduGAIN,
an umbrella inter-federation established on top of the national
higher education federations in more than 20 countries world-
wide by the pan-European research and education network
G ´EANT. Motivated by real-world limitations of eduGAIN, G´eant-
TrustBroker enables on-demand establishment of dynamic virtual
federations, reducing the manual workload for the participating
organisations by a high level of automation. Manual interaction is
only necessary when organisational trust-building measures, such
as signing a formal contract between providers, are necessary.
Furthermore, the efforts of converting user information attributes
to the format of a service provider is reduced by a conversion rule
repository. We contrast G´eant-TrustBroker with other state-of-
the-art approaches and present its core workﬂow and the internal
technical architecture.
Keywords–Federated Identity Management; SAML; Shibboleth;
Inter-Federation; Trust-Management.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Any medium-sized and large organisation, e. g., universities
or business companies, provide several ICT services to their
employees, students, and also partners and guests. To access,
e. g., email, web collaboration and printing services, a unique
identiﬁer, usually an username, is assigned to each user. All
required information about users is provided by authoritative
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) servers or rela-
tional database management systems for a centralized Identity
& Access Management (I&AM) solution. This allows a simple
provisioning procedure for new users and a deprovisioning
process in the case of employees leaving a company.
Inter-organisational
identity
management
is
necessary
when either an organisation’s member shall access external
services, for example, because a service, such as email, has
been outsourced to a third party provider, or when members of
several organisations shall work together on a common project,
such as a research project, which involves multiple universities
and external partners. Existing solutions for authentication
and authorisation infrastructures (AAI) are either based on
the accept-all-comers concept of OpenID without any formal
trust or the rigid bilateral trust model of Security Assertion
Markup Language (SAML). Different implementations, like
Shibboleth and Identity Federation Framework of the Liberty
Alliance, are based on SAML. While many national research
and education networks (NRENs) operate large infrastructures
for authentication and authorisation based on SAML, many
federations in the industrial sectors consist of only very few
members. NRENs’ AAIs differentiate between organisations
providing services for users, i. e., Service Providers (SPs),
and home organisations, so called Identity Providers (IDPs).
While geographic and industrial-sector-speciﬁc borders for
federations are not imposed by Federated Identity Management
(FIM) technology itself, they have become a reality due
to the historic evolution and growth of FIM’s use in both
industry and higher education institutions. Most sectors and
countries run their own federation. For instance, the DFN-
AAI [1] interconnects universities and research institutes in
Germany. Since research collaborations are not limited to
national borders and researchers are professionally mobile,
the problem of international and cross-sector collaboration
is exacerbated. Neither a researcher from country A nor an
employee of an industry partner from country B can access
an ICT service operated by a university in country C based
on existing national AAIs.
Different ad-hoc approaches exist to handle this problem.
Either local user accounts are created for all project partici-
pants at each service, which obviously does not scale well
for larger projects; or a new federation is set up speciﬁc for
the given project or community. Either solution increases the
overall complexity for IDP and SP operators and their manual
working tasks. Also, this compromises user convenience and
efﬁciency because of longer account set-up waiting times and
the need to handle separate credentials for each service. There-
fore, Inter-FIM is the next evolutionary step and, currently, a
still young research discipline. Most conceptual, technical and
organisational issues result from two main characteristics of
today’s federation solutions:
•
An organisation’s membership in a federation usually
requires contracts, e. g., either with all other federation
members in an ad-hoc federation or federations with a
central operator, which can be either a large company
in an hub-and-spoke federation or an independent
entity as it can be seen in identity networks. The IDP
must, for example, provide high quality user data to
avoid SP misuse based on fake accounts, while the
SPs must commit themselves to obey privacy and data
protection principles.
•
Federations must be built on common technical
grounds, i. e., besides the same federation technology,
e. g., SAML, the data format used by all IDPs and
SPs must be harmonized, resulting in the so-called
federation schema. This schema deﬁnes the syntax and
semantics of information provided by the IDPs about
their users. These attributes typically include name,
email address and language preferences of the users.
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

One big, world-wide federation is an utopia, because
common technology, common membership criteria and one
single user data format could not be achieved with thou-
sands of organisations [2]. Instead, existing federations are
often integrated into a higher-level umbrella inter-federation.
eduGAIN [3] is a successful attempt to span the NRENs’
country-speciﬁc AAIs across the pan-European research net-
work G´EANT and beyond, including already more than 20
federations. eduGAIN provides the communication endpoints
information, which are used to identify and technically trust
an entity, i. e., SP or IDP. These so called metadata entries
include X.509v3 certiﬁcates and other relevant information in
Extensible Markup Language (XML) ﬁles. Aggregating the
metadata of several federations with a Metadata Distribution
Service (MDS) [4] results in a huge, in eduGAIN currently
around 30.000 lines of code, inter-federation XML metadata
ﬁle, which signiﬁcantly slows down processing the metadata at
each IDP and SP in practice. Either the slowed down process-
ing must be compensated through new hardware investments
or it leads to signiﬁcantly reduced usability of the end users.
Entities establish static bilateral trust relationships, while the
Interoperable SAML Proﬁle [5] addresses the exchange of
SAML messages. As described above, putting federations un-
der the umbrella of an inter-federation leads to inter-federation
data schemas that are the common denominator of all involved
federations. In turn SPs, which require certain user attributes
not included in the inter-federation data schema, cannot be
used with their full functionality. Furthermore, the additional
contracts required between federations and their members
make the overall inter-federation more complex and cumber-
some to manage. With the growth of the inter-federation, the
minimalistic data schema, the signiﬁcant technical effort for
each participating organization, and the additional contractual
complexity limit the advantages of the concept.
Our new approach, named G´eant-TrustBroker (GNTB), is
developed as a part of the EC-funded G´eant GN3plus research
project and shifts from a static, manual model to a more
dynamic, fully automated fashion based on SAML, which is
used in the research and education communities and is easier to
extend. The new, on-demand establishment of trust by dynamic
exchange of metadata is more scalable than current approaches.
GNTB therefore creates dynamic, virtual federations that
overcome many organisational and technical issues of other
Inter-FIM approaches. The prototype will be developed based
on Shibboleth, the most common implementation of SAML.
In Section II, we present the current state of the art and
contrast it with the G´eant-TrustBroker service described in
Section III. Section IV then details GNTB’s internally used
data model, API calls, and technical details on the conversion
rule repository. The paper is concluded by an outlook to how
eduGAIN and GNTB will collude and a summary of the results
achieved so far.
II.
RELATED WORK
As huge metadata ﬁles affect performance of the inter-
federation, Dynamic SAML [6] simpliﬁes the discovery of
other entities. For initial trust establishment, the metadata
consumer validates the signature using a root certiﬁcate and
establishes the trust, though trust continues to lie in pre-
established contractual arrangements. Despite the dynamic
character, the entities have to manually convert the user
information, which are exchanged, or use a data schema that
is the common denominator.
The Metadata Query Protocol by Young, currently sub-
mitted as Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Draft [7],
suggests how to retrieve metadata from entities using simple
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) GET requests. Therefore
it solves the problem of huge aggregated metadata ﬁles, but
otherwise has the same drawbacks as Dynamic SAML: manual
work for attribute conversion, attribute ﬁlter, and the initial
trust establishment. The Metadata Query Protocol is one piece
of the Metadata Exchange Protocol (MDX), where entities pick
a registrar for their metadata and receive attributes from partner
entities from one or more aggregators. In analogy to the DNS
protocol, the aggregators and registrars are linked in order to
exchange metadata with each other. Similar to MDX, the Pub-
lic Endpoint Entities Registry (PEER) project [8] implemented
a public endpoint entities registry supporting both SAML
and non-SAML protocols. Though PEER moves from a huge
metadata aggregator to a central system, where administrators
can register their domain, many manual steps are needed, for
example, to generate an attribute ﬁlter adjusted to the IDP. The
generic framework of Dynamic Identity Management and Dis-
covery System (DIMDS) [9] has the purpose to achieve minor
user involvement in the identity management by creating a new
DIMDS account. All user attributes are stored unencrypted
in a central system, which can affect the privacy of users.
Furthermore, DIMDS does not distinguish between IDPs and
SPs, though not all IDPs are SPs as well and vice versa. The
same problem appears in Federated Attribute Management und
Trust Negotiation (FAMTN) [10], where it is assumed that
each SP in the federation can act as an IDP. Internal users
of the FAMTN system are supposed to perform negotiations
by exploiting their single sign-on (SSO) ID without repeating
identity veriﬁcations, though the SSO ID can be misused for
attacks. It might appear that a provider needs less or more
attributes, leading to violations of data minimalization or fur-
ther negotiations between providers. IdMRep [11] shifts from
pre-conﬁgured cooperations to dynamic trust establishment
by a distributed reputation-based mechanism based on local
Dynamic Trust Lists (DTLs) [12] and external reputation data.
DTLs can, e. g., receive recommendations from other entities,
but this mechanism does not work for an entity, which is
new in a federation or inter-federation. Because of the amount
of data processing required for all external and internal trust
information especially in inter-federations, this results in yet
another bottleneck in practice. Furthermore, the problem of
different attributes, syntax, and semantics is not considered. In
contrast, the proposed solution of the Credential Conversion
Service for eduGAIN (eCCS) [13] focuses on the conver-
sion of credentials. eCCS makes use of a special credential
conversion service, which translates source credentials into
target credentials, based on attributes from the SChema for
Academia (SCHAC) [14] and eduPerson [15] schemas, which
are described in the DAMe project. Though conversion rules
within the inter-federation eduGAIN are concurrently writ-
ten manually, the proposal concentrates on the two schemas
SCHAC and eduPerson. The solution is not scalable for more
schemas and other attributes, which are needed within certain
research communities, like Distributed European Infrastructure
for Supercomputing Applications (DEISA) and Partnership for
Advanced Computing in Europe (PRACE), and several other
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

inter-organizational projects.
III.
G´EANT-TRUSTBROKER
Put simply, G´eant-TrustBroker is an on-demand repository
for SP and IDP metadata and conversion rules, which can be
re-used by IDPs to fulﬁll attribute requirements for using a ser-
vice. GNTB therefore simpliﬁes the discovery of other entities
and the establishment of technical trust, while it improves the
scalability of metadata release. Furthermore, GNTB provides
different means for the creation of dynamic virtual federations.
GNTB is currently tailored for SAML, the widespread FIM
standard used in R&E federations, but could be extended to
support other FIM protocols as well. The GNTB core service
enables the exchange of user information across federation
borders with the following main characteristics:
•
GNTB provides SP and IDP metadata on-demand.
As opposed to distributing the complete aggregated
metadata of all SPs and IDPs participating in an inter-
federation, e. g., eduGAIN, GNTB supplies IDPs only
with the metadata of SPs, which are used by at least
one of their users and vice versa.
•
GNTB automates the technical conﬁguration steps to
integrate new metadata when an IDP’s user requests
a service for the ﬁrst time.
•
Additionally, GNTB enables the re-use of data con-
version rules. Instead of supporting only a small
common subset of user attributes, the exchange of data
conversion rules enables more complex and project-
speciﬁc data schemas.
Especially the last two characteristics eliminate the previously
manual workload for SP and IDP administrators and avoid
long waiting times for the end users before they can use the
service of a new SP. In general, two different workﬂow types
have to be differentiated:
•
The core workﬂow establishes the technical trust rela-
tionship between two entities, i. e., a SP and an IDP,
triggered by the users themselves. The workﬂow is
close to the regular SAML workﬂow in order to seem-
lessly integrate GNTB in current implementations and
federations.
•
Management workﬂows, which allow SPs and IDPs to
register, update, and delete their metadata as well as
conversion rules. To simplify the design of the core
workﬂow, the metadata registration step is required
before the GNTB core service can be used. However,
metadata registration could also be integrated in the
core workﬂow in the future.
To explain the GNTB core workﬂow in further detail, assume
that user Alice from IDP I in federation f1 wants to make use
of a web-based application service from SP S in federation
f2 as depicted in Figure 1. The authentication form at S
presents Alice, as often seen in a FIM scenario, a list of
already trusted IDPs. As I and S have no bilateral relationship
established yet, Alice cannot choose I from this list directly,
but because S is registered at GNTB, Alice can trigger the
GNTB core workﬂow. Using standard SAML mechanisms,
Alice is redirected to the GNTB website automatically. From
Figure 1.
GNTB‘s core workﬂow.
the list of already registered IDPs, Alice has to pick the
one she wants to use. GNTB passes the information about
the chosen IDP back to S to determine whether an user
from IDP I is considered acceptable. If Alice inadvertently,
e. g., because she missed it on the list, has chosen an IDP,
which S already trusts, a regular FIM authentication workﬂow
is instanced without any further involvement of GNTB. S
then sends the initial SAML user authentication request to
GNTB, which temporarily stores it. This intermediate step is
necessary to authenticate Alice in order to prevent malicious
users to add arbitrary IDPs’ metadata to any SP and vice
versa. GNTB then redirects Alice automatically to her chosen
IDP I for authentication. During this step GNTB acts like
an SP towards I. Assuming that S is acceptable and Alice
has been authenticated successfully, I fetches the metadata
for S from GNTB. Based on this kind of information, I can
automatically update its metadata conﬁguration, reducing the
former manual workload. Because the providers S and I do
not belong to the same federation, they usually use different
schemas, which requires appropriate attribute conversion. I has
to check whether suitable rules are available at GNTB. Based
on such rules, I‘s local attribute resolver conﬁguration has
been updated automatically and enables the creation of appro-
priate attribute ﬁlters, i. e., deﬁnitions, which user attributes
it will sent to S on request; this primarily ensures privacy
protection. In the next step, Alice is redirected to GNTB and
afterwards back to I to respond to the temporarily stored
authentication request of S. Since Alice has already been
authenticated, I can immediately send a SAML authentication
assertion and Alice’s browser is redirected back to S. Because
SAML assertions usually have to be signed by the sending
entity, S requires and fetches Is metadata from GNTB, which
includes the public key(s) in order to verify the signature. For
further authentication requests S stores Is metadata to its local
conﬁguration. In the last step, S requests a SAML attribute
assertion that provides detailed, but ﬁltered user information.
After the technical trust establishment, GNTB is not involved
anymore and therefore does not interfere with existing entity
conﬁguration using other add-ons. However, GNTB supports
retrieving updated metadata automatically.
IV.
BROKERED TECHNICAL TRUST IN DYNAMIC
FEDERATIONS
The G´eant-TrustBroker service is the central part of our
approach and important for establishing technical trust between
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

two entities and reusing conversion rules. The data model
includes a multi-federation namespace that is the basis for
registering the list of user attributes required for using the
service, while a data access layer facilitates the registration
of entities, users, or uploading conversion rules.
A. G´eant-TrustBrokers internal data model
As a central point of any Inter-FIM environment, metadata
enables exchanging information about the communication end-
points and to ensure the authenticity of the sender. Therefore,
this kind of information needs to be stored centrally at GNTB.
A technical implementation imposes particular requirements
on an interface for up- and downloading signed metadata ﬁles,
the possibility to extract information from these ﬁles, and some
kind of version control. We investigated other resource registry
solutions for federations different approaches exist, e. g., the
•
SwitchAAI Resource Registry tool, which makes use
of a relational database management system;
•
DFN-AAI, which stores the metadata ﬁles directly
in the ﬁlesystem using PHP- and XSLT processing
afterwards; and
•
PEER project, which integrated a version control
system.
Alternatively, a high-performance XML database, e. g., eXist
would be an option. As GNTB should provide its service to
different federations and communities, the metadata content
varies, making the sole usage of a relational or XML database
too complicated for reproducing metadata in a simple, efﬁcient
way. On the other hand, a version control system adds addi-
tional value to the service. Thus, we combine both approaches
– a relational database and a versioning ﬁle system – because
GNTB needs further information about an entity, e. g., to
which organization a provider entity belongs to, in which
repository container its metadata ﬁle is stored, or to record its
current status. Additionally, to ensure that only authenticated
and authorized administrators can manage their metadata or
uploaded conversion rules, a simple GNTB user management
is implemented. The database schema consists of the following
information:
•
Organizations: Each organization consists of one or
more IDP or SP entities.
•
Providers: Besides its unique name (entity ID), en-
tity type (i. e., IDP, SP) and its current status (e. g.,
valid, invalid, deactivated) information about the last
attribute change and the location of the metadata ﬁle
are stored.
•
Users: Information about the authorized users, like
username, hashed password, given name, surname,
and email address of the contact person and their
technical role.
•
Conversion rules: Metadata about conversion rules,
like description, its owner (e. g., the IDP, which up-
loads the rule), timestamp of the last change, status,
and location of the rule ﬁle.
•
Groups: Communities and federations, which can be
the target or source group for conversion rules. Target
means that the conversion rule can be re-used by one
or several groups of IDPs or, respectively, one single
IDP. Source is the opposite: the conversion rule was
written for the needs of one speciﬁc SP or group
of SPs, which all require identical attributes. One
entity could be member of several groups, e. g., one
federation, one inter-federation, and several projects.
•
Relationships between a) IDPs and SPs, b) IDPs and
conversion rules, c) rules and groups. The relationship
between an IDP and an SP indicates a successful
technical trust establishment using the GNTB core
workﬂow described above and has to be stored at
GNTBs database. This and analogous the information
about the IDP and conversion rule relationship en-
able to notify administrators about metadata or rule
changes. The last table contains information about
a speciﬁc rule and by which target (single entity or
group of entities) it is re-used. Thus we have to store
only one copy of a conversion rule in the repository.
B. G´eant-TrustBroker’s data access layer
The database tables are ﬁlled up by different application
programming interface (API) functions provided by GNTB
data access layer (GNTB API). These functions can be split
into three categories: account handling, provider entity han-
dling, and conversion rule handling.
1) Account handling: As GNTB requires authentication of
users as a precondition before any metadata or rule related
conﬁguration is possible, to prevent successful malicious intent
of the user, some kind of user management is essential.
For G´eant-TrustBroker a basic access authentication (HTTP
authentication) based on username and password, as often seen
in FIM scenarios, is acceptable from a security perspective. But
to avoid plain-text credentials in IDP- or SP-located scripts,
a certiﬁcate based authentication method can also be used.
User management provides the required functions to support
the generally known lifecycle phases (e. g., creation, update,
and deletion) of a GNTB account. API functions can be used
to add, update, or delete the username, password (i. e., its
hash value) and the optionally stored given Name, surname
and emailaddress entries of the entity administrator to the
database.
2) Provider entity handling: At the ﬁrst time contact be-
tween an entity and GNTB, metadata information is usually
not yet registered, except if it has been automatically taken
over from a federation or inter-federation, e. g., by a central
Metadata Distribution Service, as it could be an option in
the inter-federation eduGAIN. The registration procedure is
possible either Uniform Resource Locator (URL) or ﬁle-based.
In the ﬁrst case, an entity is registered by providing a meta-
dataURL to fetch a metadata XML ﬁle from there; otherwise,
an entity provider uploads this ﬁle manually. The uploaded
metadata is validated by speciﬁc XML Schema Deﬁnition
(XSD) ﬁles, which validates the structure of the XML ﬁle. The
ownership can be conﬁrmed by HTTP validation, i. e., creating
a resource in the root of the HTTP service for the domain
with the name of a random parameter string given by GNTB,
certiﬁcate validation of the uploaded metadata or by simply
verifying educational domain names by email. As described
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

in the core workﬂow above, a SP typically checks its trust
relationship to the IDP chosen by the user. The API provides
an appropriate gntb Ent CheckTrustToIdp(Entity ID[SP], En-
tity ID[IDP]) function for this purpose. If an IDP is con-
sidered acceptable, the core workﬂow continues to es-
tablish the technical trust by invoking the API function
gntb Ent EstabTrust(Entity ID[SP, Entity ID[IDP]). The ad-
ministrators can set up further options, like notiﬁcation of
changed metadata and certiﬁcate expiration, update its meta-
data and delete technical trust relationships.
3) Conversion rule handling: Service providers may expect
attributes, which may not be part of the IDP’s schema, i. e., the
IDP cannot provide these attributes out of the box. In order to
send them, IDP administrators utilize so called user attribute
data conversion rules, which will be used to extend the local
attribute-resolver.xml deﬁnition. In the ﬁrst step, raw attributes
are pulled by a DataConnector from an IDP-internal data store,
e. g., LDAP server or user management database, and then
prepared for release in an attribute deﬁnition consisting of the
deﬁnition of the attribute itself and the so called conversion
rules. Typical attribute conversions encompass
•
renaming: the attribute is used with the same format,
but another name. A simple example of renaming a
source attribute gecos to a new displayName attribute
would look like this:
1 <resolver:AttributeDefinition id="displayName"
xsi:type="Simple" xmlns="urn:mace:[...]"
sourceAttributeID="gecos">
2 <resolver:AttributeEncoder [...]
name="urn:mace:dir::displayName" />
3 <resolver:AttributeEncoder [...]
name="urn:oid:2.16.840.1.113730.3.1.241"
friendlyName="displayName" />
4 </resolver:AttributeDefinition>
•
transforming: this is typically used for timestamps or
dates, if the internally format is different from that of
the SP;
•
splitting: regular expression can be used to extract
partial information from an attribute;
•
merging: inter-connects two source attributes, e. g.,
givenName and surname, into a new one, e. g., com-
monName.
These conversion functions can be cascaded, i. e., one rule
to prepare the attribute for internal use, then another one ref-
erencing the internal rule for the federational or communities
schema, which can afterwards have a dependency to another
schema. Administrators can re-use those conversion rules by
utilizing the GNTB conversion rule repository. These XML
ﬁles can be uploaded and should be searchable as well as re-
usable by other IDPs. The data access layer provides the func-
tion gntb Conv FetchRule(Name) to download an appropriate
conversion rule. The deﬁnitions within the rule are added to
the local conﬁguration (metadata-resolver.xml) by scripts. Due
to the fact that XML include tags would not work according
to [16], as XInclude requires schema support in the original
schema to mark where things can be included, and we want to
reduce the manual work for administrators, local assembling
of conﬁguration ﬁles is reasonable. We deﬁne source groups,
which is one SP or a group of SPs needing speciﬁc attributes.
The target group is one IDP or a group of IDPs, that can use
this conversion rule. As mentioned above, conversion rules
can be applied to different sources and targets, if a rule is
applicable for different groups, i. e., federations, communities
or project partners as well. For example, one conversion rule
named 01203 2.xml was written from an IDP I belonging to
the federation DFN − AAI, which is an example for a target
group. If the source of this rule was SP B in the federation
SWITCH − AAI, an IDP C in the Austrian federation
ACOnet, noticing that the rule 01203 2.xml can be used
for their federation as well, can fetch the rule, updated its
conﬁguration and therefore this Austrian IDP C applies rule
01203 2.xml for the Austrian federation.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
G´eant-TrustBroker enables the on-demand, user-triggered
exchange of metadata and user attribute data conversion rules
across identity federations’ borders. Concurrently the scal-
ability of the metadata exchange in federations and inter-
federations is improved. GNTB supports the fully automated
technical setup of FIM-based AuthNZ data exchange and
therefore increases the automation of the former manual imple-
mentation efforts required by administrators of SPs and IDPs.
Consequently, users can immediately start using a new service
outside of their federation and have no waiting time until the
administrators have ﬁnished the manual setup process.
The G´eant-TrustBroker core workﬂow, which is based on the
IDP Discovery Protocol and Proﬁle [17], will be formally
speciﬁed as an IETF Internet-Draft and submitted for stan-
dardisation as IETF Request for Comments (RFC). The GNTB
prototype and implementation of the workﬂows for the FIM
software package Shibboleth will be made availabe as open
source and used for pilot operations in 2016.
Further research questions relate to the combination of tech-
nical and behavioural trust for the establishment of dynamic
virtual federations as well as to quality assurance, i. e., measure
for Level of Assurance (LoA) guarantees, of entities in the
dynamic virtual federations, which will be focused in 2015
during GN4 phase 1.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Communitys Seventh Framework Pro-
gramme under grant agreement no 605243 (Multi-gigabit
European Research and Education Network and Associated
Services - G´EANT).
The authors wish to thank the members of the Munich Network
Management (MNM) Team for helpful comments on previous
versions of this paper. The MNM-Team, directed by Prof.
Dr. Dieter Kranzlm¨uller and Prof. Dr. Heinz-Gerd Hegering,
is a group of researchers at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitt
M¨unchen, Technische Universitt M¨unchen, the University of
the Federal Armed Forces, and the Leibniz Supercomputing
Centre of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities.
REFERENCES
[1]
“DFN-AAI – Authentication and authorization infrastructure,” 2014,
URL: https://www.aai.dfn.de/en/ [accessed: 2014-03-04].
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

[2]
“Interfederation
and
Metadata
Exchange:
Concepts
and
Meth-
ods,”
2009,
URL:
http://iay.org.uk/blog/2009/05/concepts-v1.10.pdf
[accessed: 2014-03-04].
[3]
“G´eant: eduGAIN Homepage,” 2014, URL: http://www.geant.net/
service/eduGAIN/Pages/home.aspx [accessed: 2014-03-04].
[4]
“mds.edugain.org,”
2014,
URL:
http://mds.edugain.org/
[accessed:
2014-03-04].
[5]
“Interoperable SAML 2.0 Web Browser SSO Deployment Proﬁle,”
2009, URL: http://saml2int.org/proﬁle/current [accessed: 2014-03-05].
[6]
P. Harding, L. Johansson, and N. Klingenstein, Dynamic Security
Assertion Markup Language.
IEEE, 2008.
[7]
“Metadata Query Protocol - draft-young-md-query-01,” 2013, URL:
http://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-young-md-query/?include text=1
[accessed: 2014-03-05].
[8]
“PEER 0.11.0: Python Package Index,” 2013, URL: https://pypi.python.
org/pypi/peer/0.11.0 [accessed: 2014-03-05].
[9]
K. Lampropoulos and S. Denazis, “DIMDS: A Dynamic Identity Man-
agement and Discovery System,” in Proceedings of the INFOCOMP
Workshop 2009, IEEE, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–2,
ISBN: 978-1-4244-3968-3.
[10]
A. Bhargav-Spantzel, A. C. Squicciarini, and E. Bertino, “Trust
Negotiation in Identity Management,” IEEE Security and Privacy,
vol. 5, no. 2, Mar. 2007, pp. 55–63. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/MSP.2007.46
[11]
P. AriasCabarcos, F. Almen´arez, F. G´omezM´armol, and A. Mar´ın,
“To Federate or Not To Federate: A Reputation-Based Mechanism to
Dynamize Cooperation in Identity Management,” Wireless Personal
Communications, 2013, pp. 1–18. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1007/s11277-013-1338-y
[12]
F. Almen´arez, P. Arias, A. Mar´ın, and D. D´ıaz, “Towards Dynamic
Trust Establishment for Identity Federation,” in Proceedings of the
2009 Euro American Conference on Telematics and Information
Systems: New Opportunities to Increase Digital Citizenship, ser.
EATIS
’09.
ACM,
2009,
pp.
25:1–25:4.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1551722.1551747
[13]
G. L´opez, O. C´anovas, D. Lopez, and A. G´omez-Skarmeta, “Extending
the Common Services of eduGAIN with a Credential Conversion
Service,” in Computer Security – ESORICS 2007, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007,
vol. 4734, pp. 501–514. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-540-74835-9 33
[14]
“Download SCHAC Releases,” 2011, URL: http://www.terena.org/
activities/tf-emc2/schacreleases.html [accessed: 2014-03-05].
[15]
“LDIFs - MACE-Dir: eduPerson/eduOrg LDIFs,” 2012, URL: https:
//spaces.internet2.edu/display/macedir/LDIFs [accessed: 2014-03-05].
[16]
“Shibboleth
–
Users
–
include
ﬁles
for
xml
conﬁg,”
2011,
URL:
http://shibboleth.1660669.n2.nabble.com/
include-ﬁles-for-xml-conﬁg-td6206245.html
[accessed:
2014-03-
13].
[17]
“Identity Provider Discovery Service Protocol and Proﬁle - Committee
Speciﬁcation 01,” 2008, URL: http://docs.oasis-open.org/security/saml/
Post2.0/sstc-saml-idp-discovery.pdf [accessed: 2014-05-08].
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-365-0
INFOCOMP 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

