Model Reduction in the Design of Alkaline Methanol Fuel Cells
Tanja Clees(1,2), Bernhard Klaassen(2), Igor Nikitin(2), Lialia Nikitina(2), Sabine Pott(2),
Ulrike Krewer(3), Theresa Haisch(3)
(1) University of Applied Sciences Bonn-Rhein-Sieg, Sankt Augustin, Germany
(2) Fraunhofer Institute for Algorithms and Scientiﬁc Computing, Sankt Augustin, Germany
Email: Name.Surname@scai.fraunhofer.de
(3) Institute of Energy and Process Systems Engineering, Technical University, Braunschweig, Germany
Email: {u.krewer, t.haisch}@tu-braunschweig.de
Abstract—In this paper, it is shown that the electrochemical
kinetics of alkaline methanol oxidation can be reduced by setting
certain fast reactions contained in it to a steady state. As a
result, the underlying system of Ordinary Differential Equations
(ODE) is transformed into a system of Differential-Algebraic
Equations (DAE). We measure the precision characteristics of
such transformation and discuss the consequences of the obtained
model reduction.
Keywords–modeling of complex systems; observational data and
simulations; advanced applications; mathematical chemistry.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this short paper, we continue our research [1] on math-
ematical modeling of alkaline methanol oxidation, a process
relevant for the design of efﬁcient fuel cells. The considered
reaction network is shown in Figure 1 left. It connects 6
reagents θi by 12 reactions rj. The kinetics is described by
the system of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE):
αidθi/dt = Fi = P
j Cijrj,
(1)
where αi are constant coefﬁcients, for the case of ODE set to
αi = 1; θi ∈ [0, 1] are surface coverages for the reagents; Cij
is a structural matrix relating production rates Fi and reaction
rates rj. The reaction rates are polynomial functions of θi,
whose coefﬁcients depend on the applied voltage η(t). The
voltage is a function of time, set in these experiments to a saw-
like proﬁle. The explicit form of all functions can be found in
[1]. Here, only the structure of this system is important. Note
that some reactions in Figure 1 are deselected (grayed out) by
setting the corresponding matrix entries to zero. We have also
reassigned normalization factors between Fi and rj, so that
both are measured in the same units (s−1).
The experimental measurements are performed using the
technique of Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) [2]), in a setup shown
in Figure 1 right. The measured quantity is a cell current, in
the model given by the expression:
Icell = FACactF7, F7 = P
j C7jrj,
(2)
where F – Faraday constant, A – geometric electrode area,
Cact – a surface concentration of Pt catalyst. Here, we add the
7th row in the structural matrix and omit the practically van-
ishing capacitance term Cdldη/dt. The described mathematical
model ﬁts the experimental data well, as shown in Figure 3 left.
Further improvements of the method are described in Section II
and the results are discussed in Section III.
II.
IMPROVEMENTS OF THE METHOD
In this paper, we draw attention to Figure 2, which depicts
the evolution of production and reaction rates. It is visible that
some rj compensate each other, resulting in almost zero Fi.
This common property, also noted in [3], means that some of
the reactions proceed so fast that they are almost permanently
in equilibrium. One production rate is not in equilibrium. It is
also characterized by the presence of only one reaction: F6 =
r12. Thus, in the equations, one can switch off the dynamic
terms for all reagents except for the 6th, so that αi = δi6. As
a result, the ODE system is replaced by an equivalent system
of Differential-Algebraic Equations (DAE). Mathematica v11
can be used to solve DAE systems with the same efﬁciency as
ODE.
III.
DISCUSSION
After the replacement by DAE, the CV plot in Figure 3
left changes slightly, as well as the detailed evolution of
θi, shown in Figure 3 center. An interesting property that
immediately catches the eye is the temporal asymmetry of the
proﬁles for some reagents. Since the voltage is an even periodic
function, if all reactions were in equilibrium, all θi would be
even periodic. They would behave like red or black lines,
corresponding to OHad and free Pt in Figure 3. Deviation
from this behavior for magenta and brown, that is, COOHad
and PtO, is a purely dynamic effect. The consequence of this
effect is the observed mismatch (hysteresis) for the increasing
and decreasing branches of the CV plot. In line with this work,
it is important that DAE provides the same proﬁles as ODE.
Figure 3 right measures the deviation between the DAE and
ODE, for θi, in the same colors, as well as the deviation of
Icell relative to its maximum, shown in gray. As a result, the
transition from ODE to DAE results in 0.8% maximal variation
for θi and 2.5% for Icell, proving a good accuracy of the DAE
representation.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The advantage of the DAE formulation obtained in this
paper is that only one degree of freedom θ6 remains in the
system, to which the evolution of other reagents is strictly
coupled. The model is reduced and still describes the same
effects as the complete system. In particular, it explains the
dynamic hysteresis of volt-ampere characteristics of the cell.
V.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work has been partially supported by the German
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy, grant
BMWI-0324019A, project MathEnergy and by the German
Bundesland North Rhine-Westphalia, the European Regional
Development Fund, grant Nr. EFRE-0800063, project ES-
FLEX-INFRA.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-732-0
INFOCOMP 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 1. On the left: the chemical reactions network, the orange boxes show the reactions potentially responsible for the hysteresis effect on the CV plot. On
the right: the experimental setup, consisting of a teﬂon cell (1) under deep vacuum, the rotating working electrode (2), the counter electrode (3), the reference
electrode (4), the temperature sensor (5) and argon blow supply (6).
Figure 2. The plots of production rates Fi and reaction rates ri. All production rates except F6 show an approach to equilibrium. The horizontal axes show the
time in seconds, the vertical axes: Fi and ri in s−1.
Figure 3. On the left: CV plot, blue points with error bars – the experiment, red line – the model. In the center: evolution of surface coverages, the colors (red,
green, blue, cyan, magenta, brown) encode sequential θi, black shows the free Pt surface. On the right: ODE→DAE variations for θi (the same colors), relative
variation for Icell (in gray).
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Clees, I. Nikitin, L. Nikitina, S. Pott, U. Krewer, and T. Haisch,
“Parameter Identiﬁcation in Cyclic Voltammetry of Alkaline Methanol
Oxidation”, in Proc. SIMULTECH 2018, July 29-31, 2018, Porto,
Portugal, pp. 279-288, ISBN: 978-989-758-323-0.
[2]
A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals
and Applications, Wiley 2000, ISBN: 978-0-471-04372-0.
[3]
A. N. Gorban, “Model reduction in chemical dynamics: slow invariant
manifolds, singular perturbations, thermodynamic estimates, and anal-
ysis of reaction graph”, Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering, vol.
21, 2018, pp. 48-59, DOI: 10.1016/j.coche.2018.02.009.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-732-0
INFOCOMP 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

