A DRM Solution for Online Content Using Blockchain - A Music Perspective
Ahmed Gomaa
Operations and Information Management Department,
University of Scranton
Scranton, USA
email: ahmed.gomaa@scranton.edu
Abstract—The amount of piracy in the streaming and static
digital content in general and the music industry specifically is
posing a challenge to digital content owners. This paper
proposes a Digital Rights Management (DRM) framework to
monetize, track, and control online content across platforms.
The system addresses the need to lower the barriers of entry
for music bands, content reconciliation for royalty payments,
and control the content after dissemination. The paper benefits
from the current advances in Blockchain and cryptocurrencies.
Specifically, the paper presents a digital currency (Asset
Assertion (AA) token) on a permission-based Blockchain to
enable the secure dissemination and tracking of the digital
content. The proposed framework provides the content owner
the ability to control the flow of information even after he/she
releases it, by creating a secure, self-installed, cross-platform
reader located on the digital content file header.
Keywords-Blockchain; Cryptocurrency; Digital Rights
Management; Public Key; Private Key.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Online music streaming in the United States has been
increasing in the past several years. It currently accounts for
65% of the online music market share [1]. This multibillion-
dollar industry is continuously faced with intellectual rights
infringement. For instance, in January 2018, Wixen Music
Publishing Inc. sued Spotify, a music streaming company,
for allegedly using thousands of songs, without a license
and compensation to the music publisher [2].
There are two main music royalty-collecting societies in
the USA: the American Society of Composers, Authors, and
Publishers (ASCAP) and, Broadcast Music Inc. (BMI), with
hundreds of thousands of members each. If two artists
collaborated on the same music album, but are members of
different royalty collecting societies, they will receive
different royalties, a fact that shows the discrepancy in how
different organizations counts played streams. As of 2016,
ASCAP and BMI alone collect and disburse payments in the
range of $1.8 billion annually on behalf of hundreds of
thousands of musicians for royalties around the world. It is
not the actual value of the market [3] [4]. According to the
Institute for Policy Innovation (IPI) 2007 report [5], it costs
the US economy more than $12 Billion US dollars due to
sound recording piracy in the US. In 2017, ASCAP and
BMI announced the creation of a new comprehensive
musical works database to increase ownership transparency
in performing rights licensing that is expected to roll out at
the end of 2018 [6].
The
problem
becomes
more
challenging
when
considering the online radios and the Disk Jockeys (DJs)
who are mixing music live and streaming it online with an
audience
listening
around
the
world.
The
sale
and
distribution of media content using a digital medium
provides
flexible
and
straightforward
production,
consumption, and transmission of such content. However, it
also reduces the efforts needed for unauthorized usage of
this data. Thus, digital media content is more easily copied,
distributed, or used in a manner not allowed by law or
license agreement.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the
paper presents an overview of the current solutions and their
problems. Section 3 presents the problem statement. Section
4 presents the proposed solution overview, and Section 5
presents the conclusion and future work.
II.
CURRENT SOLUTIONS AND THEIR PROBLEMS
Lawmakers recognized the growing need to protect
digital
media
and
enact
the
US
Digital
Millennium
Copyright Act (DMCA) to protect property rights. One
approach to curbing the proliferation of illegal activity
surrounding digital media content is to incorporate a form of
Digital Rights Management (DRM) into the digital content.
Traditionally, the business model has the content owner,
licensing its content to several distributors. The distributors
package the content to distribute on satellite or cable to
different channels and sell those channels or pay per view-
for the popular event- to the content viewers.
The barriers to entry for content owners, as well as
distributors and channels, are high as the cost to running a
channel that is capable of creating its programming and
Electronic Programming Guide (EPG) and program it to
potential customers is not very trivial. Companies combine
content to sell channel subscriptions and optimize their
profitability. For instance, one may find the same song
presented on several different radio stations, where each
distribution channel is trying to maximize its audience
numbers. Currently, from the content owners' perspective,
they are interested in one aspect: monetizing content
consumptions. The major content owners are faced with the
challenge of the content streamed online, without any
compensation, on shady platforms. The small content
creators need aggregators and distribution partners to be able
to
monetize
their
content.
From
the
content
viewer
perspective, they are forced to subscribe to channel bundles
and deal with the distribution channels such as online radio
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-732-0
INFOCOMP 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

stations, where they only need to listen/watch a subset of
streams that is relevant to them.
Current research attempts to use Blockchain to facilitate
the compensation of the content creators using different
techniques. In [7], the author uses the Blockchain and Web
crawling to help the content owners to identify their online
work and use the Blockchain as a proof of ownership.
More similar to this paper concept is [8], where the
authors encode the software to be activated based on the
Blockchain information in a system that addresses the
software license. On the same school of thoughts is [9],
which introduces the notion of including verification
information with the file metadata to enforce the digital
rights within a 4k video on a multilayer Blockchain
solution.
In addition to the research efforts in the area of
Blockchain
and
DRM,
several
start-ups
turned
to
Blockchain in an attempt to address this need, to assert their
rights, and to prevent unauthorized usage. For instance,
Swarm, an Ethereum layer for distributed storage, along
with Livepeer, are infrastructures for distributed transcoding
of live video. Tokit is a crowdfunding platform where artists
can issue tokens and share revenues with fans, while JAAK
is a framework for decentralized content licensing and
metadata handling. Furthermore, SOUNDAC, previously
known as Muse, is the technology behind peerTracks, a
platform that allows monetizing music when distributed
across predefined distribution channels using Blockchain
technology. Also, Sony published a recent patent [10] where
each user claims their rights on the Blockchain. Those
solutions benefit from the Blockchain technology to provide
monetization tools for content creators as well as possible
privacy solutions to support anonymity.
There are three distinct issues this paper addresses,
namely the monetization of the content, the tracking of the
content, and the protection of the content. In contrast with
the current literature, this paper argues that without having a
solution that takes into account those three dimensions, the
solution will not be complete. Hence, the paper promotes
encoding with the streamed content, an embedded payment
gateway and player that is activated based on validation from
the Blockchain. This format would enforce digital rights,
track the usage, and monetize the content.
Figure 1 shows a stream that is encoded in as an Asset
Assertion (AA) format, which includes the stream content
player, the payment gateway, and the content itself in a
secure AA file format.
Figure 1: AA file Architecture
Figure 1. AA File Architecture
In this paper, an integral part of the framework is to have
with each content its player to enforce the digital rights,
even after disseminating the content, which is different from
the proposition in [10], where the content owner is the
cornerstone of the Blockchain DRM solution. Besides, the
paper fulfills the required future work mentioned in [9]
where a discussion of the business model is included by
compensating the listeners.
The paper presents a framework that embeds the access
control policy within the file header. The access control
policy
validates
the
credentials,
after
checking
the
Blockchain
posted
information.
When
validated,
the
embedded player retrieves the file required codec to render
the content from a separate file system, tracks and posts the
usage to the Blockchain and compensates the content
constituents
accordingly.
This
process
prevents
the
information silo and reconciliation issue existing in the
industry since all constituents’ exchange tokens and the
transactions are recorded on the Blockchain. Furthermore,
the framework presented has the ability to eliminate the
content, if needed, after dissemination.
III.
PROBLEM STATEMENT
Given the current state of piracy in the online music
industry
and
the
current
advancement
in
Blockchain
platforms, this paper proposes a DRM framework for the
stated
problems
using
Blockchain
and
cryptocurrency
technology. The incentive to use Blockchain in DRM is to
address three specific challenges in the current systems,
namely, barriers of entry, reconciliation, and content control
after dissemination.
A.
Barriers of Entry
The framework should lower the barriers of entry for
digital content owners, where compensation should be an
option even for unpopular items, in contrast to the most
widely used advertising compensation system, such as
YouTube where content owners start to be compensated
when the masses view their content.
B.
Reconciliation
The framework should enable automatic reconciliation
of content consumption. This is very hard to achieve with
the
current
tracking
frameworks
since
each
tracking
mechanism is working in a silo from each other. The
framework should allow all constituents to view the same
truth. To achieve this, all constituents (fans, radio stations,
and content owners) should be involved in the same
transaction. Using Blockchain and cryptocurrencies, the
system is providing a reward mechanism to the fans to
participate in the proposed eco-system to close the loop of
discrepancy and to enable the additional system objective of
simple reconciliation. It is worth noting that this paper uses
the Blockchain after adjusting the supply chain within the
content
dissemination
and
compensates
the
content
consumer to prevent tracking issues of content usage,
especially when aggregators are introduced into the business
model.
AA Payment
Gateway
Traditional:
Credit Card, PayPal
Crypto:
AA, Bitcoin, Ether
AA Stream
Content Player
Content in
AA Format
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-732-0
INFOCOMP 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

C.
Content Control after Dissemination
The framework should allow content owners to control
the access to their files even after dissemination. Content
usage for a particular time is challenging to control after
dissemination. A mechanism to control content usage after
dissemination would address this challenge.
IV.
PROPOSED SOLUTION OVERVIEW
In the proposed framework, after receiving AA tokens
from the content owner to encode the original content in the
AA file format and embed the content with a player and a
payment gateway, the file header includes the digital rights
possible as the access control policy. When a content
consumer satisfies the access control policy constraints,
usually by paying AA tokens, as depicted on the content
smart contract, the content player uses the content consumer
digital wallet tokens. All framework constituents exchange
tokens when creating sending, retrieving, and consuming
content.
All
token
exchanges
are
recorded
on
the
Blockchain, creating a single source of truth about the
content. In contrast to the Sony patent [10], the Blockchain
stores information from the content perspective, rather than
the content creator perspective. This allows for a more
straightforward reconciliation process when payments are
distributed between multiple constituents.
In contrast with [9], our solution uses smart contracts to
distribute the royalties, instead of using the public key
encryption. One of the advantages of using smart contracts
is the ability to have multiple constituents' requirements
satisfied instead of having only two involved parties. This
accommodates a
more complex business
model. The
framework
constituents
send
all
transactions
to
the
Blockchain nodes, that is, a decentralized peer-to-peer
network. When the nodes reach a consensus, the transaction
is then added to the Blockchain.
Figure 2. AA Framework
Figure 2 shows that the relation can be direct between the
viewer and the content creator with the help of the AA
platform in converting the content into AA format and make
the file accepting payment as an independent object while
ensuring the content owner’s digital rights. If the viewers or
the content creators would like to gain insights about the
interactions with the object, they can do this with the AA
platform for analytics. The framework might reward the
viewers if they opted to share their interaction information
with other interested parties. The usage of Blockchain allows
for having a variation of the business model, including SaaS
providers, Enterprise partners, independent content vendors,
or disseminators.
A.
Use Case: Buying Digital Content Rights Using the
Blockchain
The permission-based Blockchain provides an open
ledger solution to address the discrepancy in monetizing,
tracking, and controlling online streams. It is a change in the
music industry. It provides music professionals with an
environment where they release their music with the
confidence that their high-quality original content will be
traced all the time. The transaction, once validated using the
Blockchain
consensus
mechanism,
is
recorded
to
the
Blockchain and there is no longer any confusion or debate as
to the transaction and reconciliation.
The
proposed
Blockchain,
in
its
purest
form,
is
effectively
a
white
list
of
legitimate
online
music
disseminators and retailers. The smart contract assesses if the
song is played on a domain as validated by its record on the
Blockchain. Once the played stream is validated, the smart
contract clears the transaction, and the AA token passes from
the content disseminator to the content wallet, which is
controlled by the content owner. If the played stream cannot
be validated, it is presumed that the played stream is invalid
and the AA token does not move. The outcome is recorded
and provable and any potential debate over reconciliation
disappears
between
content
owners
and
content
disseminators. Since transactions are validated in a short
period of time, the Blockchain creates another change for the
music industry. Payment cycles can be shortened to the time
it takes the smart contract to complete. If both parties desire
that, payment is nearly instantaneous. The option of reducing
payment cycles from a few months to minutes is possible.
The tracking agency collects a royalty, payable in AA
tokens, on these transactions. These commissions
are
charged as a percentage of the transaction value.
B.
Use Case: Blockchain to Compensate Listeners
Listeners of songs are drawn to pirated content to save
money. The system can compensate them if they are
enjoying a higher quality song from their preferred bands.
The Blockchain gives the content consumer ownership on
how to use their tracked information, if any. The Blockchain
lets the listeners receive compensation. Upon consuming a
digital asset, listeners receive AA tokens as a reward. These
tokens can be used for many purposes within the ecosystem
ranging from free ad blocking to promotional offers from
similar bands.
When
the
transaction
related
to
the
digital
asset
consumption engages all involved parties in the same
permission-based ledger, the value circle is closed. This
allows for a single point of truth; hence, all engaged parties
save on transaction reconciliation, costs and allows for new
business models.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-732-0
INFOCOMP 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

V.
CONCLUSION
In summary, the paper presents a DRM framework
focusing on the secure delivery of digital assets. The
framework allows for generating, monetizing, tracking, and
controlling
access
to
copy-protected
media
files after
dissemination. The system is allowing content owners,
content distributors and content consumers, the freedom to
pursue new business models, by making the digital content
the focal point that connects all system constituents using a
typical traceable transaction located on the Blockchain. This
creates a single truth, rather than having information silos.
Future work includes more elaboration on the AA token,
the content player, and the file format, in addition to
presenting the model notation and information schematic on
the information flow. Also, tracking subsections used in
streamed online content and how to create a valuation model
for the content disseminated and the fans using their
information
and
influential
relationships
within
the
ecosystem are needed.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Micames, "Sprotify hit with $1.6 billion
copyright infringement lawsuit," 18 April 21018.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ipbrief.net/2018/04/18/spotify-hit-with-
1-6-billion-copyright-infringement-lawsuit/.
[Accessed June 2019].
[2]
L. I. C. Nevins and L. Fischer, "ASCAP & BMI
Announce Creation Of A New Comprehensive
Musical Works Database To Increase Ownership
Transparency In Performing Rights Licensing,"
ASCAP,
26
07
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ascap.com/press/2017/07-26-ascap-
bmi-database. [Accessed June 2019].
[3]
E. Christman, "BMI Again Tops $1 Billion in
Collections,
Breaks
Record
for
Royalty
Distributions," Billboard.com, Septemeber 2016.
[4]
The American Society of Composers, Authors
and Publishers (ASCAP), "2016 Annual Report,"
ASCAP, New York, 2016.
[5]
S. E. Siwek, "The true cost of sound recording
piracy to the US economy," IPI, 2007.
[6]
A. Gomaa, "The Creation of a Cryptocurrency
to
Support
Disintermediation,"
Operations
Management Education Review, vol. 12, pp. 63-
100, 2018.
[7]
M. McConaghy, G. McMullen, G. Parry, T.
McConaghy and D. Holtzman, "Visibility and
digital art: Blockchain as an ownership layer on the
Internet," Strategic Change, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 461-
470, 2017.
[8]
A.
Litchfield
and
J.
Herbert,
"ReSOLV:
Applying Cryptocurrency Blockchain Methods to
Enable Global Cross-Platform Software License
Validation," Cryptography, vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 1-24,
2018.
[9]
J. Kishigami, F. Shigeru, W. Hiroki, N. Atsushi
and A. Akihiko, "The blockchain-based digital
content
distribution
system,"
in
IEEE
Fifth
International Conference on Big Data and Cloud
Computing, 2015.
[10]
E.
Diehl,
"Blockchain-based
digital
rights
management". US Patent 15/458,807, 26 April
2018.
[11]
Paratii, "The State of Decentralised Video Q4
2017: Tubes and Flixes will never be the same.
Here’s
why.,"
18
December
2017.
[Online].
Available:
https://medium.com/paratii/the-state-of-
decentralised-video-q4-2017-42663ff94b28.
[Accessed June 2019].
[12]
G. Muthoni, "How Blockchain Impacts the
Music
Industry,"
Sepember
2018.
[Online].
Available: https://blocktelegraph.io/soundac-using-
blockchain-solve-major-problem-music-industry/.
[Accessed June 2019].
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-732-0
INFOCOMP 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

