Computation and Knowledge Mapping for Data Entities
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU),
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover,
North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN), Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents the research and results from
developing resources and knowledge based methods for the
creation
of
new
context
for
objects
and
entities,
based
on
the
methodology
of
knowledge
mapping.
The
results
are an architecture allowing advanced knowledge mapping
including ﬂexible deployment of computational sequences and
an implementation of resources and application components.
The knowledge mapping enables to put knowledge objects
in new context, which can be used in arbitrary scenarios,
e.g., with knowledge mining and decision making. The paper
shows the importance of facilities for different implementations
and presents a resulting architecture and case studies of two
different implementations for a task. The implementation cases
are based on a computational case of spatial visualisation. For
demonstration, a publicly available central data object was used
for data entity analysis. The paper presents practical examples
and discusses the high level views of implementations and case
study. The main goal of this research is to create a functional
architecture based on sustainable long-term multi-disciplinary
knowledge resources, which can provide a wide range of ﬂexibility
for knowledge mapping and different computational solutions.
Keywords–Knowledge Mining and Mapping; Computational
Procedures; Context Creation; Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation;
Advanced Data-centric Computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Resources of knowledge are steadily increasing and so is the
complexity and heterogeneity of the associated knowledge. In
most cases, it is not possible to ﬁnd satisfying results even
though the basis of data is rapidly growing. New approaches
are needed in order to ﬁnd answers to challenging knowledge
mining requests.
Concepts used in the past mostly provided non consistent
and insufﬁcient approaches when dealing with the complex-
ity of knowledge. In most cases, those concepts basically
consider dealing with ‘data’ and claim to result in ‘knowl-
edge’ or even ‘wisdom’ of some kind [1]. For example,
the Data-Information-Knowledge-Wisdom (DIKW) approach
widely used in Data Mining (DM) lacks an understanding of
data being only one aspect of knowledge [2].
Implementations are mostly neglecting the knowledge asso-
ciated with originary resources and referred knowledge and
therefore deal with the applications and isolated technical
features, which are neither able to be integrated for improving
results nor do they provide reasonable freedom of solutions.
Concepts like DIKW are lacking a profound relation of data
and information [3]. Terms like “knowledge hierarchy” and
“information hierarchy” are more misleading than constructive,
especially when we have to deal with complex and long-term
resources. Approaches used with data warehousing [4] on that
basis, e.g., Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) and Extract, Load,
Transform (ELT) for integrating data newly also resulted in
requiring hybrid approaches but have not been based on a
profound understanding of knowledge.
The described deﬁcits are a major motivation for this long-
term research. The fundaments of terminology and of under-
standing knowledge are layed out by Aristotle [5][6], being
an essential part of ‘Ethics’ [7]. Information sciences can very
much beneﬁt from Aristotle’s fundaments and a knowledge-
centric approach [8] but for building holistic and sustainable
solutions they need to go beyond the available technology-
based approaches and hypothesis [9] as analysed in Platons’
Phaidon. Making a distinction and creating interfaces between
methods and applications [10], the principles are based on the
methodology of knowledge mapping [11], which fundaments
are not outlayed here again. The implementation can make use
of objects and conceptual knowledge [12] and shows being
able to build a base for applications scenarios like associative
processing [13] and advanced knowledge discovery [14].
Considering this state-of-the-art, the methodology deployed
in this research and the accompanying implementation of
methods consequently focusses on the complex knowledge
basis, which allows to integrate the different aspects of knowl-
edge and the complexity of knowledge context. In result,
the methodology allows to create methods focussing on al-
ternative contexts based on a wide range of criteria and
solutions provided by knowledge context. Implementations are
considered knowledge-centric, with data being one comple-
mentary facet of knowledge. Therefore, the methodology and,
in consequence, the method implementations based on this
methodology, are vastly scalable. Scalability support ranges
from ﬁxed associations to arbitrarily fuzzy understanding.
This paper is organised as follows. Section II introduces
to the state-of-the-art, architecture, and frame of universal
knowledge. Section III presents an exemplary case study with
different implementations. Section IV discusses the results of
the case study, evaluates them based on the sequences and
architecture and delivers a computational footprint in context
with referred knowledge. Section V summarises the results and
lessons learned, conclusions, and future work.
II.
ARCHITECTURE AND UNIVERSAL KNOWLEDGE
An understanding of the essence and complexity of uni-
versal, multi-disciplinary knowledge can be achieved by tak-
ing a closer look on classiﬁcation. The state-of-the-art of
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

classifying ‘universal knowledge’ is the Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC) and its solid background and long history.
The LX knowledge resources’ structure and the classiﬁcation
references [15] based on UDC [16] are essential means for
the processing workﬂows and evaluation of the knowledge
objects and containers. Both provide strong multi-disciplinary
and multi-lingual support. For the research, all small un-
sorted excerpts of the knowledge resources objects only refer
to main UDC-based classes, which for this publication are
taken from the Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation
Summary (UDCC Publication No. 088) [17] released by the
UDC Consortium under the Creative Commons Attribution
Share Alike 3.0 license [18] (ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent
update 2012). Nevertheless, the research conducted here in
deploying knowledge provides a new solution not precedented
by comparable approaches, from the view of methodology and
implemented methods.
A. Architecture
The implementation architecture is shown in Figure 1.
Originary
Applications
and
Referenced Resources
Integrated Resources
Containers
Resources
Resources
Sources,
and
Components
Comparative Mapping
Spatial Mapping
Spatial Visualisation
Object
Collections
Knowledge Resources
Spatial Visualisation Media Generator
Conceptual Mapping
is_in_country
country_codes
affiliation_desc
is_affiliation
affiliation_georef
spatial_vis_poi
spatial_vis_poly_cc
country_codes_desc
Sources
Data
Data Object
(unstructured or structured)
Check Module
Configuration
Get Object Entity
Data Object Entity
(unstructured or structured)
Configuration
Get Module
Object Data Resources
(c) Rückemann 2017
Data Join Module
Configuration
pre−filters
post−filters
Resolver Module
Configuration
Conceptual Module
Configuration
Spatial Module
Configuration
Vis. Module
Configuration
Object
Object Entity Context Creation
Object Entity Mapping
Object Entity Analysis
New Object Context Environment
Figure 1. Architecture for mapping arbitrary objects / entities to new context
environments, allowing different methods (yellow/red) for implementations.
The illustration of the architecture for knowledge mapping
of arbitrary objects and entities to new object context environ-
ments also takes into account that the context of objects and
their entities can contain many different facets and references
from different origin. The target for the case studies is a
knowledge mapping providing two different mapping views.
The spatial visualisation is an illustrative step, providing
insights on new context. Data and modules are provided by
Knowledge Resources, originary resources, and application
resources and components. The architecture is also aware of
allowing different methods (e.g., highlighted in yellow/red) for
implementations regarding the same resources and target.
The core of the knowledge mapping in this case consists
of comparative mapping, conceptual mapping, and spatial
mapping. All the examples in the case studies are based on
the methodology of knowledge mapping [11]. The integration
of originary sources provides a generic view for terms like
‘knowledge integration’ and ‘knowledge representation’ as
such might be used in less generic approaches.
Here, in the mapping and the consecutive steps (here, a
visualisation for illustration purposes), we do have the major
differences of different methods for implementing alternative
ways for the same resources and target.
The following case study demonstrates the different char-
acteristics of implementations based on the same universal
knowledge. From a multitude of applications scenarios, a term
to location association providing ways of knowledge mapping
of textual context to space and place were choosen for case
studies.
B. Data and Universal Knowledge
The next passages show some major steps for creating
spatially linked context from plain text, which were used in
the workﬂows required for the cases. The single data object
in this case study implementation (Figure 2) contains mostly
unstructured text [19] markup, and formatting instructions.
1
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" ... <title>
GEOProcessing 2018 ...</title>
2
..., Leibniz Universit&auml;t Hannover / Westf&auml;lische
Wilhelms-Universit&auml;t M&uuml;nster / North-German Supercomputing Alliance
(HLRN), Germany ...
3
..., Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa,
Israel<br />
4
..., Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Genova,
Italy <br />
5
..., Centre for Research in Geomatics - Laval University,
Quebec, Canada <
br />
6
..., Curtin University, Australia <br />
7
..., Lomonosov Moscow State University, Russia&nbsp; <br />
8
..., FH Aachen, Germany</p> ...
9
<p>..., Universiti Tun Hussein Onm Malaysia, Malaysia<br />
10
..., Cardiff University, Wales, UK<br />
11
..., Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande, Brazil<br />
12
..., GIS unit Kuwait Oil
Company, Kuwait<br />
13
..., Middle East Technical
University, Turkey<br />
14
..., University of
Sharjah, UAE<br />
15
..., Georgia State University, USA<br />
16
..., Centre for Research
in Geomatics - Laval University, Quebec,
Canada<br />
17
..., Environmental Systems
Research Institute (ESRI), USA<br />
18
..., ORT University -
Montevideo, Uruguay<br /> ...
Figure 2. Mapping target: Single object, unstructured text (excerpt).
The sample object is the committees’ page of the GEOProcess-
ing 2018 conference in Rome [19]. Passages not relevant for
demonstration were reduced to ellipses. The spatial visualisa-
tion can result from identifying and mapping entities in the text
of an object to various knowledge context. The identiﬁcation
of entities is resulting from automated analysis.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

Figure 3 shows the object content after automatically
integrated with the Knowledge Resources via a join module.
The Object Entity Mapping facilitates to associate relevant
objects, e.g., via conceptual knowledge and comparative
methods. The objects and their entities can contain any
knowledge, e.g., factual and conceptual knowledge.
1
GEOProcessing 2018 [...]: ...
2
..., Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover / Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster
/ North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN), Germany ...
3
..., Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
4
..., Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche - Genova, Italy
5
..., Centre for Research in Geomatics - Laval University, Quebec, Canada
6
..., Curtin University, Australia
7
..., Lomonosov Moscow State University, Russia
8
..., FH Aachen, Germany ...
9
..., Universiti Tun Hussein Onm Malaysia, Malaysia
10
..., Cardiff University, Wales, UK
11
..., Universidade
Federal do Rio Grande, Brazil
12
..., GIS unit Kuwait Oil
Company, Kuwait
13
..., Middle East Technical
University, Turkey
14
..., University of
Sharjah, UAE
15
..., Georgia State University, USA
16
..., Centre for Research
in Geomatics - Laval University, Quebec, Canada
17
..., Environmental Systems
Research Institute (ESRI), USA
18
..., ORT University -
Montevideo, Uruguay ...
Figure 3. Object instance representation after integration (excerpt).
In this case, dealing with space and place data, the references,
e.g., referred conceptual knowledge, carried in objects are most
relevant. The complement knowledge used with the mapping
contains multi-disciplinary and multi-lingual knowledge, it can
contain names and synonyms in different languages, dynami-
cally usable geocoordinates, geoclassiﬁcation, and so on.
Example excerpts of possibly relevant main classiﬁcation
codes of the UDC references are shown in Table I.
TABLE I. UDC CODES OF SPATIAL FEATURES AND PLACE: MAIN
CLASSIFICATION CODES USED FOR CONCEPTUAL MAPPING (EXCERPT).
UDC Code
Description
UDC:(1)
Place and space in general. Localization. Orientation
UDC:(2)
Physiographic designation
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
The references, e.g., classiﬁcation, facets, concordances, and
textual description, are usable in all the procedures and steps
and allow to consider and implement arbitrary ﬂexibility of
fuzziness. During the research, two computational sequences
were implemented for illustration. These sequences show dif-
ferent characteristics in content and context, as well as different
characteristics in architecture and computational requirements.
III.
IMPLEMENTATION: MULTIPLE WAYS TO SPACE
The following case study presents two different methods
for implementing object/entity knowledge mapping to space
and place targets and discusses major insights. Computa-
tional knowledge mapping procedures are presented for both
methods, as well as the visualisation of the results. The
computational application components are part of the available
resources. The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) [20] suite
application components were used for handling the spatial
data, applying related criteria, and for the visualisation. All
provided spatial presentations are using the same Mercator
projection (region: -180/180/-60/84) in order to provide a
common base for the comparison.
A. Space and place: Afﬁliation based knowledge mapping
This method implements the knowledge mapping based on
afﬁliations. Table II gives the computational sequence of the
core computational procedures.
TABLE II. AFFILIATION BASED MAPPING: COMPUTATIONAL SEQUENCE OF
CORE COMPUTATIONAL PROCEDURES AND REFERRED MODULES.
Procedure
Module
Comparative Mapping
is_affiliation
Conﬁguration
Conceptual Mapping
affiliation_desc
Conﬁguration
Spatial Mapping
affiliation_georef
Conﬁguration
The means, regarding space and place: Afﬁliation mapping,
afﬁliation association via conceptual knowledge and textual
description, and afﬁliation georeferencing.
Figure 4 shows an excerpt of afﬁliation references from the
Knowledge Resources as associated with the comparison.
1
...
2
9.7196989 52.3829641 Leibniz Universitaet Hannover, Germany
3
...
4
7.6131826 51.9635705 Westfaelische Wilhelms-Universitaet Muenster
5
...
6
-61.5289325 16.2242724 Universite des Antilles - LAMIA, France, Guadeloupe
7
...
Figure 4. Knowledge Resources: Afﬁliation references used in
comparative mapping (excerpt).
In practice, the number of such place references can be very
large. In case of this study, the numbers are in the range of
millions of places. The visualisation of the results (red bullets)
from the afﬁliation based procedures was done on a spatial map
(Figure 5).
Figure 5. Visualisation of the result of afﬁliation based knowledge mapping:
Geo-referenced place association.
The computing task can be parallelised for objects and
entities. For demanding application scenarios, e.g., dynami-
cal implementations, this implementation beneﬁts to a small
extend from parallelisation.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

B. Space and place: Country code based knowledge mapping
This method implements the knowledge mapping based on
country codes. Table III gives the computational sequence of
the core computational procedures.
TABLE III. COUNTRY CODE BASED MAPPING: COMPUTATIONAL
SEQUENCE OF CORE COMPUTATIONAL PROCEDURES AND REF. MODULES.
Procedure
Module
Comparative Mapping
is_in_country
Conﬁguration
Conceptual Mapping
country_codes_desc
Conﬁguration
Spatial Mapping
country_codes
Conﬁguration
That means, regarding space and place: Country mapping,
association of country codes via codes description, and evalu-
ation of country codes and visualisation.
Figure 6 shows an excerpt of country code references from
the Knowledge Resources as associated with the comparison.
1
...
2
"Germany|Deutschland" lxcoco-DE
3
"Ghana"
lxcoco-GH
4
"Gibraltar" lxcoco-GI
5
"Greece" lxcoco-GR
6
"Greenland|Grønland" lxcoco-GL
7
"Grenada" lxcoco-GD
8
"Guadeloupe" lxcoco-GP
9
...
Figure 6. Knowledge Resources: Country Codes used for comparative
mapping (excerpt).
In practice, the number of such country code references have
several hundred pattern-code entities for a certain year or
era. In case of this study, the numbers are in the range of
about 300 pattern rules per language. Resolving can be done
automatically via geo-referencing and visualisation application
components.
The visualisation of the results (yellow country colourisa-
tion) from the country code based procedures was done on a
spatial map (Figure 7). The country codes are based on the
standard of the International Standards Organisation (ISO).
Figure 7. Visualisation of the result of country code based knowledge mapping:
ISO referenced state association.
The computing task can be parallelised for objects and
entities. For demanding application scenarios, e.g., dynamical
implementations, this implementation widely beneﬁts from
parallelisation.
IV.
DISCUSSION
Implementations can range from generic to specialised, as
granted by the methodology, all the components and the illus-
trated architecture. A reason for illustrating the methodology
with a well deﬁned implementation is that from many expe-
riences made from working with methodologies, specialised
implementations tend to be better comprehensible by the
majority of researchers in various disciplines.
The methodology of knowledge mapping, as illustrated
via implementation of two methods discussed here, allows a
versatile number of methods to be created for a purpose, based
the same knowledge and data.
A. Comparison and discussion of results
The two sequences show different characteristics
•
in content and context, as well as
•
in architecture and computational requirements.
Country code based and afﬁliation based solutions result
in visualisation of different distribution patterns. While an
afﬁliation based solution can have a higher granularity it can
be more precise in detail. In that context, a country code based
solution is associated with more dependencies in the results –
border lines, different country context, especially for handling
and visualising long-term intervals. For example, considering
the same data, on the one hand geo-references of a place do
not really change much over time, on the other hand border
lines of states change much faster on a global scale.
For a visual comparison, the results from both the afﬁliation
based and country code based sequences were placed on the
same spatial map (Figure 8).
Figure 8. Comparison of both afﬁliation and country code based knowledge
mapping: Geo-referenced place and ISO referenced state results.
There are more differences in detail, which can inﬂuence
decisions on applicability and implementation. In general,
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

there are arbitrary ways of implementing a knowledge mapping
target based on the same Knowledge Resources. An imple-
mentation will in most cases be triggered by a combination
of items, e.g., purpose, implementation efﬁciency, and com-
putational performance. The characteristics and resolvability
achieved via different knowledge mapping may be different.
The number of countries is much more limited and the identiﬁ-
cation can be much more standardised than for geo-references
places. The distribution of afﬁliation associated places can
create a different impression than a visualisation based on
country data. The sizes of mapped country areas can create
a different impression than a visualisation based on country
data. Associations based on both results can be signiﬁcantly
different, leading to further different knowledge context.
A further signiﬁcant difference of the two case study imple-
mentations is the fact that the computational requirements are
much more complex for afﬁliation mapping than for country
code mapping. Depending on the objects and entities and the
selected knowledge resources the factor of complexity can go
up by millions. This is foremost relevant for the computation of
comparative modules and analysis and visualisation of results.
B. Knowledge and its computational footprint
Based on the case studies, the characteristics of both solu-
tions result in different computational requirements. Table IV
compares the solutions regarding the numbers of computa-
tional checks required, done for the same object and entities.
TABLE IV. CORE PROCEDURES AND OBJECTS: COMPARISON OF COUNTRY
CODE AND AFFILIATION BASED MAPPING.
Procedure
Country Code
Afﬁliation
Comparative Mapping
pre-ﬁlter Checks
5,500
72,000
Knowledge Mapping Checks
40,000
570,000
post-ﬁlter Checks
7,000
75,000
Conceptual Mapping
Checks UDC
300
5,000,000
Checks, other references
300
500,000
Spatial Mapping
Results
> 50 Polygons
>50 Points
Context, object level
> 120 Polygons
0 Polygons
Context, basic
1 Basemap
1 Basemap
Different implementations involve different knowledge. As
can be reasoned from the comparison, the case of afﬁliation
based knowledge mapping might be a challenge for certain
architectures, e.g., a distributed service implementation.
On the opposite, country code mapping can mean higher
requirements for supportive data and higher load on spatial
mapping application components, e.g., polygons provided by
additional data, requests, application bound features, and vi-
sualisation. The supportive data can easily get into the range
of millions of entities and Giga Bytes of data size per single
request. If considering that country shapes will differ for a
certain year or era, then multiple supportive data set might
be needed. Therefore, load distribution is very much different
for the implementations due to the nature of the different
methodologies. The core sequences required for the knowledge
mapping result in signiﬁcant computational loads, especially at
two steps: Comparisons and visualisation. These result in both
comparative mapping load and supportive application load.
Conﬁguration of resources and modules can help to scale the
computational load, nevertheless, any different conﬁgurations
will have additional impact on the associated knowledge
involved, which can be a signiﬁcant reason for decision:
For most component implementations and investments it does
make a difference if a computational step takes two seconds or
two days and if the required knowledge and data are involved
or not. In addition to different knowledge being associated
during the sequences, there is another difference: Most of
the procedures are not bidirectional. If the afﬁliation based
knowledge mapping is used in order to compute a consecutive
country code based knowledge mapping and even if the result
would be identical to the plain country code mapping this does
not indicate that the country code mapping could also provide
a consecutive afﬁliation mapping in the same manner.
V.
CONCLUSION
The paper presented the research and results based on the
developments of resources and advanced knowledge based
methods. The methodology of knowledge mapping is deployed
for the creation of new context for objects and entities as
successfully demonstrated via two different methods.
The result of this research is a functional architecture,
which proved to provide most ﬂexible facilities for creating
knowledge mapping and different and very scalable computa-
tional solutions. In consequence, the further development of
resources and methods allows to consider different constraints
when implementing solutions for a certain task. It was shown
that the architecture allows to efﬁciently create implementa-
tions with signiﬁcantly different characteristics.
The knowledge resources and the knowledge based solutions
provide comprise universal knowledge and are not limited to
a certain discipline or task. Nevertheless, examples limited
to a deﬁned task had to be taken for demonstration. The
presented case studies illustrated how the knowledge mapping
is applied for different solutions, namely country code based
knowledge mapping and afﬁliation based knowledge mapping.
The knowledge objects involved for these solutions however
were not limited to a single discipline and task and are truly
multi-disciplinary and multi-lingual as are all the components
and referenced knowledge involved in the scenarios. Both
solutions are very much visualisations of object entities. Re-
gardless of that fact, both workﬂows are signiﬁcantly different
in steps, methods, algorithms, details of involved knowledge,
and computational characteristics.
The facts, which become visible when the case study exam-
ples are discussed as an example of general abstraction, while
still accessing the same resources: The large range of ﬂexibility
from knowledge, algorithmic, and computational perspectives.
The complements of possibly required solutions share the com-
plementary knowledge. Here, results comparable to the country
code solution can be created with geo-referenced place data. In
contrast, from the data involved with the country code solution
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

it is not possible to create a geo-referenced view based on
the associated data. Therefore, besides the individual context
and results delivered by different implementations, it holds
“The journey is the reward”. The methodology of knowledge
mapping as described can be used for any knowledge and
context. The conducted case study is using terms in arbitrary
text on the one hand, which can be associated with geo-
referencing on the other hand. A different application scenario
can be regional ﬂoras and faunas being mapped to an biological
context, in which case even no geo-referencing or cartographic
visualisation needs to be involved. Instead, the results can show
the level of complexity for certain cases.
In conclusion, one can choose solutions under different
constraints of application scenarios, e.g., knowledge involved,
ﬂexibility of sequences, and computational requirements. That
way, it is possible to create scalable solutions considering the
implementation of required procedures and methodologies, as
well as the implementation of required infrastructures. Future
research will be spent on extending the dimensional extent of
knowledge resources and on the creation of advanced method-
ologies for deploying the complements of knowledge, further
improving knowledge mapping, integration, and handling.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the “Knowledge in Motion” (KiM)
long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for partially funding this
implementation, case study, and publication under grants
D2016F1P04683, D2017F1P04708, D2017F1P04812 and to
its senior scientiﬁc members, especially to Dr. Friedrich H¨uls-
mann, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB) Han-
nover, to Dipl.-Biol. Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Uni-
versit¨at Hannover, to Dipl.-Ing. Martin Hofmeister, Hannover,
and to Olaf Lau, Hannover, Germany, for fruitful discussion,
inspiration, practical multi-disciplinary case studies, and the
analysis of advanced concepts. We are grateful to Dipl.-Ing.
Hans-G¨unther M¨uller, Cray, Germany, for his work and support
providing practical private cloud and storage solutions and
excellent technical support. We are grateful to all national and
international partners in the Geo Exploration and Information
cooperations for their constructive and trans-disciplinary sup-
port. We thank the Science and High Performance Supercom-
puting Centre (SHPSC) for long-term support of collaborative
research since 1997, including the GEXI developments and
case studies and The International ARS Science and History
Network for providing multi-disciplinary reference data.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. L. Ackoff, “From data to wisdom,” Journal of Applied Systems
Analysis, vol. 16, 1989, pp. 3–9, ISSN: 0308-9541.
[2]
M. Frick´e, “The knowledge pyramid: a critique of the DIKW hierarchy,”
Journal of Information Science, vol. 35, no. 2, 2009, pp. 131–142,
SAGE, DOI: 10.1177/0165551508094050.
[3]
J. Rowley, “The wisdom hierarchy: representations of the DIKW
hierarchy,” Journal of Information Science, vol. 33, no. 2, 2007, pp.
163–180, SAGE, DOI: 10.1177/0165551506070706.
[4]
A. Bauer and H. G¨unzel, Eds., Data-Warehouse-Systeme - Architektur,
Entwicklung, Anwendung.
dpunkt, 2013, ISBN: 3-89864-785-4.
[5]
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, 2008, (Written 350 B.C.E.), Translated
by W. D. Ross, Provided by The Internet Classics Archive, URL: http:
//classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/nicomachaen.html [accessed: 2018-05-12].
[6]
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, Volume 1, 2009, Project Gutenberg,
eBook, EBook-No.: 28626, Release Date: April 27, 2009, Digitised
Version of the Original Publication, Produced by Sophia Canoni, Book
provided by Iason Konstantinidis, Translator: Kyriakos Zambas, URL:
http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/12699 [accessed: 2018-05-12].
[7]
Aristotle, The Ethics of Aristotle, 2005, Project Gutenberg, eBook,
EBook-No.: 8438, Release Date: July, 2005, Digitised Version of the
Original Publication, Produced by Ted Garvin, David Widger, and
the DP Team, Edition 10, URL: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8438
[accessed: 2018-01-01].
[8]
L. W. Anderson and D. R. Krathwohl, Eds., A Taxonomy for Learning,
Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educa-
tional Objectives.
Allyn & Bacon, Boston, MA (Pearson Education
Group), USA, 2001, ISBN-13: 978-0801319037.
[9]
Plato, Phaedo, 2008, (Written 360 B.C.E.), Translated by Benjamin
Jowett, Provided by The Internet Classics Archive, URL: http://classics.
mit.edu/Plato/phaedo.html [accessed: 2018-05-12].
[10]
C.-P. R¨uckemann and F. H¨ulsmann, “Signiﬁcant Differences: Method-
ologies and Applications,” KiMrise, Knowledge in Motion Meeting,
November 27, 2017, Knowledge in Motion, Hannover, Germany, 2017.
[11]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Methodology of Knowledge Mapping for Arbitrary
Objects and Entities: Knowledge Mining and Spatial Representations
– Objects in Multi-dimensional Context,” in Proceedings of The
Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information
Systems, Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2018), March
25 – 29, 2018, Rome, Italy.
XPS Press, Wilmington, Delaware,
USA, 2018, pp. 40–45, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-617-
0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
geoprocessing 2018 3 20 30078 [accessed: 2018-05-12].
[12]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Creation of Objects and Concordances for Knowl-
edge Processing and Advanced Computing,” in Proceedings of The
Fifth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Com-
putation (INFOCOMP 2015), June 21–26, 2015, Brussels, Belgium.
XPS Press, 2015, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-416-
9, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
infocomp 2015 4 30 60038 [accessed: 2018-05-12].
[13]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Advanced Association Processing and Computation
Facilities for Geoscientiﬁc and Archaeological Knowledge Resources
Components,” in Proceedings of The Eighth International Conference on
Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services
(GEOProcessing 2016), April 24 – 28, 2016, Venice, Italy. XPS Press,
2016, pages 69–75, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-469-5.
[14]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Advanced Knowledge Discovery and Computing
based on Knowledge Resources, Concordances, and Classiﬁcation,”
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 9, no.
1&2, 2016, pp. 27–40, ISSN: 1942-2679.
[15]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Enabling Dynamical Use of Integrated Systems and
Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources for Archaeological Information
Systems,” in Proc. INFOCOMP 2012, Oct. 21–26, 2012, Venice, Italy,
2012, pp. 36–41, ISBN: 978-1-61208-226-4.
[16]
“UDC Online,” 2018, URL: http://www.udc-hub.com [ac.: 2018-05-12].
[17]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2018-05-12].
[18]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2018-05-02].
[19]
“GEOProcessing
2018:
Committees,”
2018,
the
Tenth
Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems,
Applications, and Services (GEOProcessing 2018) March 25–29,
2018 – Rome, Italy, URL: https://www.iaria.org/conferences2018/
ComGEOProcessing18.html [accessed: 2018-03-04].
[20]
“GMT - Generic Mapping Tools,” 2018, URL: http://imina.soest.hawaii.
edu/gmt [accessed: 2018-05-12].
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-655-2
INFOCOMP 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

