Generating Domain-Restricted Resources for Web Interaction in Several 
Languages: Hindi, English and Spanish 
Marta Gatius, Piyush Paliwal 
  Department of Computer Science 
 Technical University of Catalonia  
 Barcelona, Spain 
 e-mail:gatius@lsi.upc.edu, piyushpaliwal90@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract—The aim of our research is to develop domain-
restricted resources for web interaction supporting different 
languages: English, Hindi and Spanish. Many practical natural 
language systems use linguistic resources adapted to a specific 
domain because the processing is faster and more robust 
against errors.  Besides, those grammars can be adapted to the 
language used by different types of users. To facilitate the 
process of generating linguistic resources for each domain and 
language, we use ontologies representing the entities and 
relations in a specific domain. The use of domain ontologies 
also favors the integration of knowledge from several web sites.  
For developing the grammar rules for each domain and 
language, we use Grammar Framework, a powerful tool for 
writing 
multilingual 
grammars 
that 
supports 
several 
alphabets.  Our work is focused on the generation of assisting 
the user when accessing the web in two different scenarios: 
searching for information on cultural events and searching for 
a new medical specialist. 
Keywords-multilingual web interfaces; domain ontologies; 
semantic grammars.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As web is becoming more central to our daily activities, 
the need of web assistants adaptable to different types of 
users (different languages, ages, skills, and cultural 
sensitivity) increases. In this context, conversational systems 
guiding the user to access web information are becoming a 
good opportunity to enhance web usability. 
The main challenge in conversational systems consists of 
understanding correctly the user's needs. To solve this 
problem, most practical conversational systems are adapted 
to 
a 
particular 
domain, 
thus 
limiting 
possible 
misunderstandings and errors. However, the cost of building 
the domain-restricted linguistic resources needed for 
processing the user interventions is high and they are 
difficult to adapt to a new domain. There are different 
approaches to face this problem, all requiring human 
intervention. Statistical techniques require big corpus, 
manually 
tagged. 
In 
knowledge-based 
approaches, 
conceptual and linguistic resources have to be developed by 
skilled professionals.  Although several of the works on 
domain adaptation use in-domain training data to reduce the 
adaptation cost, most of these works are based on the use of 
domain conceptual models. 
There are complex research communication systems that 
use general grammars to syntactically analyze user 
interventions and, from the results obtained perform 
semantic analysis, using conceptual domain-restricted 
knowledge. However, most practical conversational systems 
use semantic grammars adapted to a specific domain that 
perform syntactic and semantic analysis in parallel.  The 
reason is that rules in semantic grammars correspond directly 
to the domain entities and relations, resulting in faster 
processing and more robust against errors. Besides, domain-
restricted 
grammars 
are 
especially 
appropriate 
for 
multilingual systems because similar processing can be done 
for each language supported. Although domain-restricted 
grammars are easier to write and maintain than general 
grammars, they have to be build for each approach. The use 
of semantic-domain models may also be used to facilitate 
this task. 
The use of a semantic model representing domain entities 
facilitates the obtaining of the domain-restricted resources 
needed for interpreting users needs. Furthermore, the 
semantic models in multilingual (and multimodal) systems 
provide a common semantic interpretation for different 
languages (and modes of interaction).   
Domain knowledge can be represented in several 
semantic formalisms. Most used formalism to represent 
domain entities are database models, frames and ontologies. 
Database models are useful in applications using databases 
or web services and have been used in relevant works, such 
as the dialogue systems described by Polifroni et al. [1] and 
D’Haro et al. [2]. Frames and ontologies provide a more 
flexible way of representing domain concepts and have also 
been used in many interaction systems.  
In ontologies, relations and preconditions between 
entities are defined, thus providing a richer conceptual 
representation. For this reason, they are very appropriate for 
complex systems, providing consistent generic processes, 
reusable for several domains, such as those described by 
Nesselrath and Porta [3] and Dzikovska et al. [4]. 
    The use of ontologies also favours integration of 
knowledge sources of different types. Thus, ontologies are 
especially 
appropriate 
for 
communication 
systems 
integrating different types of knowledge, such as the 
dialogue system Smartweb (described by Sonntag et al. [5]), 
supporting several languages and modes of interaction and 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

the web assistant Active (described by Guzzoni et al. [6]), 
integrating language and active learning technologies.  
Additionally, 
the 
organization 
of 
knowledge 
in 
ontologies in classes/subclasse helps with under/over 
specification phenomena and other simple inferences that 
may appear in communication in complex domains, such as 
the medical domain (as explained by Milward and M. 
Beveridge [7]). 
 In this paper, we present our work on the use of 
ontologies to generate the domain-restricted grammars 
needed for a web interface system supporting different 
languages: English, Hindi and Spanish. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces 
our approach and Section III describes its application to two 
different scenarios: searching for cultural events and 
searching for a medical specialist. Conclusions and future 
work are given in the last section. 
II. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
The work described in this article is related to previous 
work on a dialogue system guiding the user when accessing 
web services, described in [8]. For that system, messages 
were generated using a general method, defined by J.A. 
Bateman et al. [9], based on a sintactico-semantic taxonomy 
that relates concepts and attributes in conceptual ontologies 
to the linguistic structures needed for their expression in 
several languages (Spanish, English and Catalan).  Using this 
taxonomy grammars and sentences expressing queries and 
answers about the values of the conceptual attributes can be 
automatically generated, although they have to be manually 
supervised. The resulting sentences have been incorporated 
in the dialogue system with minor changes, however, the 
resulting grammars have not, because those grammars only 
recognized correctly a few sentences.  
Manually defined grammars can support many more 
different forms of expressing domain terms, including 
abbreviations, mistakes, informal expressions, new terms and 
other forms difficult to represent in a formally. Besides, they 
can be adapted considering different types of users, different 
ages and different expertise levels. 
Our current work is focused on the study of an 
appropriate representation of the conceptual and linguistic 
knowledge involved in communication to facilitate the 
manually creation of semantic grammars for new domains, 
new languages and new types of users. As in several of the 
works mentioned, we represent the general knowledge 
involved in several domains in reusable representation bases 
and the specific knowledge for each domain is incorporated 
manually. In our proposal, concepts appearing in several 
domains are represented in general ontologies and the 
linguistic knowledge associated with it in general grammar 
rules.  Then, adapting the system to a new domain requires 
building the domain ontologies as well as the grammars rules 
related to this domain knowledge for each language.  
Similar approaches have been followed in complex 
research dialogue systems supporting rich communication in 
different types of applications. The main difference is that 
our work was focused on assisting the user when accessing 
the web. The language supported by our system is limited to 
that used by the user when asking for information. Thus, the 
effort of generating the semantic grammar can be limited if 
first the user needs and expressions in the particular scenario 
are studied. Additionally, we have used a multilingual 
grammar environment, Grammatical Framework (GF), [10] 
specially appropriate for our approach. In GF grammars are 
represented in two separated modules: conceptual (abstract 
grammar) and syntactic (concrete grammar). The abstract 
grammar captures the semantics to be communicated and can 
be the same for all languages supported in a particular 
application. The concrete grammar component relates the 
abstract syntax to the linear strings representations and it is 
different for each language. This separation of grammars in 
two components therefore helps the human experts ease the 
generation of rules in each of the languages.  
Following our proposal, the abstract grammars are 
defined considering the concepts in the domain ontologies. 
Then, the related rules in each concrete grammar are defined 
by the language experts. 
The integration of the Hindi language with other 
languages is also an important difference from previous 
works 
on 
communication 
systems. 
Our 
proposed 
organization of knowledge in separated conceptual and 
linguistic knowledge and general and domain-specific has 
also facilitated work with language with a different 
organization and a different alphabet. 
III. 
GENERATING DOMAIN-RESTRICTED GRAMMARS 
 
Domain ontologies provide a formal organization of the 
conceptual knowledge appearing in user intervention when 
accessing web information in a particular domain. Thus, it 
can facilitate the integration of domain knowledge that 
appears in several web sites in different formats and 
languages. This formal representation of the domain 
knowledge facilitates the generation of linguistic resources 
needed for processing the user interventions and generating 
the system responses.  This section describes the use of 
domain ontologies to generate semantic grammars needed 
for web interaction in English, Hindi and Spanish. Our 
proposal is based on a clear separation of general and 
domain-specific knowledge. General entities common to 
several domains (such as those related to time and space) are 
defined in an upper ontology.   Grammars rules and 
vocabulary supporting the expressions related to those 
general conceptual entities are represented in a general 
grammar. General grammar also includes rules supporting 
expressions common to all scenarios (such as those 
expressing misunderstandings).  
For each new scenario, we first study the user needs and 
the corpus of user’s questions, if available. Then, the domain 
specific entities are described and related to those general 
entities in the upper ontology. Existing domain ontologies 
could also be integrated, when needed. For example, in the 
scenario the user is looking for a specialist an existing 
ontology describing parts of the body would be incorporated. 
In the final step, grammars supporting question and 
descriptions of the concepts in the domain ontologies are 
developed. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

We had studied our proposal in two different scenarios 
where the user searches for practical information on the web. 
The first scenario we have studied is that of a user looking 
for a cultural event in the city. We selected this scenario 
because we already had previously collected a corpus of user 
interventions asking for information on cultural events. The 
second scenario we studied is that of a user searching for a 
specialist and we did not collect any corpus related to it. 
Next subsections describe the ontologies and grammars 
generated for two different scenarios. 
 
A. Building the Domain Ontologies 
In the first scenario we studied, the user wants to consult 
information on the cultural events that take place in the city.  
We consider the user may ask for information for a specific 
event (giving its name) or, alternatively, may ask for the 
events satisfying a specific description.  There are many web 
sites giving information on cultural events. The central 
concept in those web sites is the same: a cultural event 
described by a set of attributes. Several of those attributes are 
the same in most web sites: title, venue, date and time. In 
some of those web sites additional information could also be 
given such us participants, price, age. 
Figure 1 shows the description of the two entities involve 
in this scenario: Event and Event-venue. As can be seen, the 
concept Event is described by the attributes: name, genre, 
at-venue, at_day and at_hour.  The concept Event_venue 
is described by two attributes: venue and venue_zone. These 
two domain concepts are related to the general concepts 
Zone and Unit_Of_Time.  
In order to support most common user's questions in this 
domain we have defined the grammar rules supporting the 
consulting of the attribute values of the two concepts Event 
and Event_venue.  
 
Figure 1.  Conceptual knowledge in the Cultural Events domain. 
We have considered a second scenario in a different 
domain: the health domain. In particular, we have considered 
the scenario in which the user accesses the web for searching 
information about a new medical specialist. In this scenario, 
most common user interventions will consist of giving 
information about his/her disease and asking for information 
about specialists. 
There are different web sites containing practical 
information about medical specialists (i.e., the place where 
they visit and their schedule). In most of these web sites 
medical specializations and diseases are described using 
medical terms that could prove difficult for not experts. To 
solve this problem we have developed the semantic grammar 
needed for processing the questions asked by general public 
using non medical terms.  
Figure 2 shows the concepts involved in the scenario of 
searching for a specialist. There are three top concepts: 
Disease, Body_Parts and Medical_Resources.Medical 
Resources is subclassified in three concepts: Doctor, 
Equipment, and Others. The main concept, Doctor, is 
described by a set of attributes: name, specialist_type 
treat_of_body_part, 
visit_at_equipment, 
visit_at_day, 
visit_at_hour. The concept Body_Parts has been included 
because one common way to ask for a specialist consists of 
giving the common name of the body part where a problem 
has been detected, as in the example “I have stomachache, 
and I need a doctor”. As shown in the Figure 2, the concepts 
in this domain have also been related to the general concepts  
Zone and Unit_of_Time. From this domain ontology, the 
abstract grammar is generated. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Conceptual knowledge in the health domain. 
We have used Protégé, a knowledge-based framework to 
develop the ontologies. 
 
B. Building the Grammars 
As we mentioned in the introduction, we have used GF, 
an open-source environment for writing grammars in 
different languages. The main reason for using GF is that it 
supports languages using different alphabets, including 
Devanagari. However, because not all computers are 
configured to support Devanagari, we have also transliterated 
Hindi grammars to the Latin alphabet. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

 
Figure 3.  The abstract grammar for the event domain. 
 
Figure 4.  The English concrete grammar for the  event domain 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Hindi concrete grammar for event domain 
The use of GF also facilitates multilingual applications 
because all grammars are divided in two components: the 
abstract syntax component, a tree-like representation that 
captures the domain knowledge and the concrete syntax that 
relates the domain knowledge to the corresponding linear 
strings. We have defined the abstract syntax component (the 
same for all languages) using the domain representation in 
the ontology. Additional information obtained from the 
collected examples of sentences can also be included. Then, 
the concrete syntax for each language is obtained from the 
abstract syntax.  
The general mechanism to define the abstract grammar 
from the ontology consists of representing ontology concepts 
and attributes appearing in the conversation as categories in 
the grammar (cat) and as the right part of one or more rules 
(fun). There are two types of rules: syntactical rules (if the 
right side of the rule has more than one category), and lexical 
rules (if the right side of the rule has only one category). 
Instances and values of conceptual attributes were 
represented as lexical rules while syntact rules represent the 
combination of concepts appearing in user's interventions. 
Figure 3 shows a fragment of the abstract grammar 
obtained from the ontology representing the cultural events 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

entities. Fragments of the concrete grammars for English and 
Hindi are represented in Figure 4 and Figure 5, respectively.  
Notice that, even when the two languages are very different, 
the concrete grammars in both languages have the same 
organization because the abstract grammar is the same. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.      The system guides the user when building the query. 
 
The GF environment supports another interesting 
functionality for assisting the user where building the query 
by presenting the next acceptable options on the screen when 
writing. When using this functionality, the errors when 
processing user interventions are minimized, resulting in a 
friendlier communication. Figure 6 shows how this 
functionality has been used to guide the user when using the 
grammars we have developed. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we describe the generation of domain-
restricted grammars for a web interface supporting different 
languages: English, Hindi and Spanish. To facilitate the 
process of writing the grammars for different languages, we 
use domain ontologies. Grammars have been implemented in 
GF, 
an 
open-source 
environment 
for 
multilingual 
applications. Our work has focused on the language involved 
when assisting the user when accessing the web in two 
different scenarios: searching for cultural events and 
searching for a medical specialist. 
The main goal of our work has been to find a general 
method to facilitate the generation of grammars that are easy 
to adapt to new languages, new domains and even new users 
(i.e. young people using informal languages including new 
words and mistakes).  
We have tested the grammars developed by building a 
toy prototype integrating them, a set of canned system’s 
responses and a small set of databases. Our goal has not been 
to construct a complete grammar. For this reason, evaluation 
to study how many sentences can be supported by the 
grammars has not been done. Instead, we have measured the 
reusability of grammar components (abstract and concrete 
rules) across domains and languages, finding high rates of 
reusability.  
Our proposal also includes the semi-automatic generation 
of system responses by using a syntactic-semantic taxonomy. 
We have also started working on the adaptation of this 
taxonomy to the Hindi language, finding it simpler of what 
we expected. Future work will also include the definition of 
different types of users for the scenarios considered and the 
presentation of the results obtained in the most appropriate 
form for each type of user. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  J. Polifroni, G. Chung and S. Seneff, “Towars the Automatic 
Generation of Mixed-Initiave Dialogue Systems from Web 
Contents,” Proc.  EUROSPEECH, 2003, pp. 193-195.  
[2] L.F. D’Haro,  R. Córdoba, J. M. Lucas, R. Barra-Chicote, and 
R. San-Segundo, “Speeding Up the Design of Dialogue 
Applications by Using Database Contents and Structure 
Information,” Proc. SIGdial, 2009,  pp. 160-169. 
[3] R. Nesselrath and D. Porta, “Rapid Development of 
Multimodal Applications with Semantic Models,” Proc. 
IJCAI Workshop on Knowledge and Reasoning in Practical 
Dialogue Systems, July, 2011, pp. 37-47. 
[4] M. Dzikovska, J. F. Allen, and M. Swift, “Finding the balance 
between generic and domain-specific knowledge: a parser 
customization strategy,” Proc. Workshop on Knowledge and 
Reasoning in Practical Dialogue Systems, 2003.  
[5] D. Sonntag, R. Engel, G. Herzog, A. Pfalzgraf, N. Pfleger, M. 
Romanelli, and N. Reithinger. “SmartWeb handheld –
multimodal interaction with ontological knowledge bases and 
semantic web services,” AI for Human Computing, 
T.S.Huang et al. (Eds.): LNAI 4451, Springer, 2007, pp. 227-
295.  
[6] D. Guzzoni, C. Baur, and A. Cheyer, “Active: A unified 
platform for building intelligent web interaction assistants,” 
Proc.  IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web 
Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology, 2006, pp. 417-
420. 
[7] D. Milward and M. Beveridge, “Ontology-Based Dialogue 
Systems,” Proc. Knowledge and Reasoning in Practical 
Dialogue Systems,  2003, pp. 9-18.  
[8] M. Gatius and M. Gonzalez,“Using Domain Ontologies for 
Improving the Adaptability and Collaborative Ability of a 
Web Dialogue System,” International Journal of Computer 
Information 
Systems 
and 
Industrial 
Management 
Applications, V5, 2012, pp. 185-194. 
[9] J.A. Bateman, B. Magnini, and F. Rinaldi, “The Generalized 
{Italian, German, English} Upper Model,” Proc. ECAI 
Workshop on Implemented Ontologies, 1994. 
[10] A. Ranta, Grammatical Framework: Programming with 
Multilingual Grammars, CSLI Publications, Stanford, 2011.
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-310-0
INFOCOMP 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation

