A Study on Support of Project Planning Competency for Small & Mid-sized 
Enterprises Using National Science & Technology Data 
 
Sunghee Lee, Wonkyun Joo, Myungseok Yang, Eunji Yu, Kiseok Choi 
NTIS Center 
Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
e-mail : {sunghee.lee, joo, msyang, eunjiyu08, choi}@kisti.re.kr 
 
Abstract— There have been a lot of policies to support small 
and mid-sized enterprises (SMSEs), which have recently 
emerged as leading figures in technology innovation. The 
National Science and Technology Information Service (NTIS), 
which has provided national R&D data also launched a 
business support service in late 2015 and has helped the 
SMSEs build project planning capability since then. This study 
attempted to review the NTIS’ business support service system 
and examine its improvement and development plan.  
Keywords- National R&D; R&D information; SMSEs; small 
and mid-sized enterprises; business support service; NTIS. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Among the profit-making businesses in the Republic of 
Korea, the percentage of small and mid-sized enterprises 
(SMSEs) is as large as 99.9%, having a considerable effect 
on national economy [1]. Even though they have emerged as 
key players for technology innovation, they are still short of 
funds, technology, knowledge and manpower, compared to 
big businesses [2][3]. In particular, approximately 70% of 
them are incapable of implementing R&Ds due to difficulty 
in securing R&D staff and turnover of current R&D 
personnel [4]. Considering these obstacles, the National 
Science & Technology Information Service (NTIS) has 
provided special services for the SMSEs to help them build 
project planning capability, which is needed to create new 
programs.  
The NTIS is a national R&D data knowledge portal 
which provides information on government-funded R&D 
programs, such as national R&D programs and projects, 
personnel, research outcome and R&D equipment and 
facilities [5]. In connection with 17 government offices and 
bureaus, it collects standard national R&D data under 422 
different categories and has opened 295 items to the public 
through the related services such as integrated search. The 
government-led portal has nearly 150,000 members. Among 
them, government bureaus and project management institutes 
account for 6% while businesses and colleges & 
government-funded research institutes are 34% and 44.6% 
respectively. In average, it records 2.11 million page views 
per month.  
The NTIS developed a dedicated webpage for business 
users in late 2015 and has provided support since then to 
encourage them to actively use national R&D data for 
diverse purposes such as project proposal and data analysis. 
This study investigates the NTIS’ business support 
service in Section II and proposes a development and 
improvement direction to support SMSEs’ R&D activities in 
Section III. 
II. 
CURRENT SERVICES  
In terms of SMSEs’ needs derived through a demand 
survey, the followings were found: research trend and 
technical trend data on key technology, experts for 
collaboration and new national R&D projects. In addition, 
there was a necessity for linkage with experts who can back 
up analytical ability. Therefore, NTIS’s business support 
service consists of two parts: providing customized 
information and supporting expert analysis based on users’ 
demand.  
A. Customized Information service 
SMSEs are in high demand for research trends, 
collaboration partner and national R&D project information 
to apply for government R&D funds. For this need, NTIS 
provides such information through customized information 
service. As shown in Figure 1, a business user enters 
keywords and requirements of interest, and the NTIS 
manager extracts the projects in which the user-entered 
keywords are matched with the keywords on the national 
R&D program and project database. Then, they are provided 
with linkage information to allow users to check the projects 
in detail. In addition, the system supports the search of expert 
information which requires collaboration by providing major 
research outcome along with the information of chief 
researchers who implemented the projects (e.g., name, 
institute name, number of the related projects implemented, 
total project budget).  
 
 
Figure 1.  Customized Information Service 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

B. Expert Analysis service 
If SMSEs need analysis information and experts’ 
opinions on the interested fields, NTIS provides such 
information through expert analysis service. As shown in 
Figure 2, SMSEs enter keywords and requests and ask for 
expert analysis. In connection with experts on the Global 
Network of Korean Scientists and Engineers (KOSEN), the 
NTIS provides text summary and expert opinions to the users 
who want text analysis and related data and experts’ opinions 
to those who need national R&D results. The NTIS pays all 
the costs needed for the expert support service so that 
businesses are able to use it free of charge.  
The business support service may be of some help to 
SMSEs which have found it hard to invest their manpower 
and time in data acquisition and analysis. In particular, data 
search time was significantly reduced, allowing users to find 
the information they want in a quick and easy fashion. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Expert Analysis Service 
C. Service Status 
Business support has been in service since Dec. 2015, 
and Figure 3 shows the business support service page 
currently being offered. 162 cases of customized information 
and 18 cases of expert analysis information are provided. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Business Support Service Web Page in NTIS 
III. 
IMPROVEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT DIRECTION 
The customized information service which is currently 
available is a one-time service, which provides analysis 
results to business users. Under this service, a report file is 
provided within three days from the date of request. For 
active business support, a smart push service which creates 
customized information regularly based on profile data and 
makes it available readily is needed. For this, there should be 
a system which can register profile information needed for 
analyzing data, such as keywords and interested products, 
and automatically extract and analyze related information.  
With rapid technology development, R&D cooperation 
has become more important. Under these circumstances, it is 
required to establish a core competency-based collaboration 
system to implement national R&D programs. Even if 
SMSEs need to know who has the knowledge they want 
(‘know-who’) and where it is (‘know-where’), they have 
found it hard to approach ‘know-who’ and ‘know-where’ 
with a poor personnel network [6]. In Europe, collaboration 
partner services are provided via CORDIS. It supports an 
expert-centric collaboration system by connecting projects 
with institutes and/or businesses.  
The NTIS which provides national R&D data in an 
integrated manner can also offer SMSEs that are competent 
in academia-industry-research collaboration-based R&D 
projects an opportunity to participate by providing a 
collaboration partner service for the purpose of establishing a 
transparent and effective collaboration system. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This study investigated the NTIS’ business support 
service which helps the SMSEs that have no room for 
spending time and manpower in data acquisition and analysis 
build project planning capability. To upgrade the current 
business support service to an active and effective one, i) 
business profile information-based smart push service and ii) 
academia-industry-research 
collaboration-based 
R&D 
collaboration system support service are needed. The NTIS 
plans to keep moving forward to eliminate the obstacles of 
the SMSEs by analyzing their needs. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Maximize the Value of 
National 
Science 
and 
Technology 
by 
Strengthen 
Sharing/Collaboration of National R&D Information funded 
by the Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Information (KISTI). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 2014 SMSE’s Status Indicators, Small Medium Business 
Administration (SMBA). 
[2] D. Ahn, “Some Theses for the Promotion of Technological 
Innovation of Small and Medium Firms-based on the survey 
materials about the innovation hindrances”, Koreanstudies 
Information Service System, Vol.22, pp.25-50, 2004. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

[3] Y. Lee, J. Shin, J. Shin and J. Yoo, “A Study on Direction of 
Support on Domestic Small & Mid-sized Enterprises under 
Open Innovation Environment” , Korean Institute of 
Industrial Engineers,  pp.46-50, 2010 
[4] C. Lee, M. Park, P. Kim and H. Shim, “A Study of the 
Improvement of Partner System Efficiency to Strengthen 
Government-funded Research Institutes’ Support on Small 
and Mid-sized Enterprises”, Korea Technology Innovation 
Society,  pp.47-58, 2014 
[5] http://www.ntis.go.kr[retrieved: 5, 2017] 
[6] Y. Lee, “The Open Innovation Value and Policy Implications 
of Small and Mid-sized Enterprises’ ICT R&D”, Information 
& Communications Policy, Vol.25, No.22, pp.22~46, 2013 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

