Broadband as a Public Good 
The Pros and Cons 
 
Karikoga Gorejena 
Information Systems. North West University 
NWU 
Mafikeng, South Africa 
Email: kogagorejena@gmail.com 
Olebogeng H. Nojila 
Computer Science. University of Limpopo 
UL 
Limpopo, South Africa 
Email: olebogenghellennojila@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— from its inception in the 90’s broadband has 
continued to capture and influence economic and social 
variables globally at astronomic rate. In making a case for 
public policy on broadband, many studies have sought to 
identify and measure broadband economic benefits. The 
everyday benefits of broadband include the medical fraternity 
remote and complex surgical operations carried out by robots 
via satellites, executives are empowered to make decisions and 
access new opportunities through online information and the 
list is endless. In an increasingly integrated global economy, 
broadband is central in providing economic growth and 
competitiveness to any organization, country or region. Few 
studies however have focused on the complexities and inherent 
repercussions associated with the deployment of broadband. 
Much few scholars have zoomed in at broadband as a socially 
constructed artefact, exuding its relationship and sharing space 
with societal norms and values. This paper displays the tenets 
of broadband as a public good, highlighting its value, 
complexities, demystifying its benefits and applications, 
attributes, and activities it enables. Finally, the data gathered 
from thirteen nations of the Sub-Saharan Africa, the Southern 
African Development Community (SADC) was analyzed in 
relation to inherent repercussion associated with broadband 
deployment 
and 
its 
social 
construction. 
Some 
policy 
suggestions to curb the challenges that come with broadband 
access are deduced from data including those for the socio-
technical relationships. 
Keywords-broadband; 
public 
good; 
deployment; 
complexities. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The context and scope of this research is SADC, which 
comprise thirteen countries at the time of the research. 
Therefore, primary data was gathered from these countries.  
According to [18], mobile penetration in Africa by 2013 
was at 63%, leaving broadband as a private good for the 
select few. There are number of factors that affect 
broadband penetration and part of them are the inherent 
attributes and repercussions of cyber space itself [19]. 
Education, both generically and in matters concerning cyber 
space is among the main causes of low broadband uptake 
[2]. Hence, the focus of this paper is to explain the 
ramifications, intricacies and value of broadband. The 
question of what determines the other between society and 
technology in the context of broadband was explored. This 
aspect was necessary to address the possibility of conflict 
between cultural beliefs and technology, which could pose a 
factor of broadband penetration. The primary research 
question of this paper is how to provide broadband as a 
public good? The secondary questions are; what are the 
values, complexities and ramifications of broadband, how 
can they be ameliorated and how does broadband relate with 
society? 
  In section II the sample size, data gathering methods, scope 
of research and the tools that were used to analyze data are 
discussed. In section III, the concept of broadband was 
introduced. Its values, complexities, benefits, application 
and attributes are differentiated. In section IV, the 
repercussions 
of 
a 
socio-technical 
environment 
are 
highlighted and the results 
with regard to these 
repercussions are discussed. Policy interventions as a means 
to mitigate the repercussions discussed in section IV are 
discussed in sections IV (A) and the results concerning these 
interventions are tabled in the same section. Section V looks 
at the relationship that ought to exist between society and 
technology in light of what the participants suggested. 
Finally, section VI gives conclusions and recommendations 
for future work.  
II. 
SAMPLE SIZE AND DATA GATHERING 
This research used a survey questionnaire and interviews 
to gather data. The survey questionnaire used consisted of 
two sections. The first section comprised close-ended 
questions designed according to [1] reliability standards that 
enables it to elicit consistent responses. The second section 
was open-ended question allowing for more insights that are 
detailed. University students from thirteen SADC countries 
were used to answer the questionnaires and seven experts 
were interviewed for completeness of in-depth knowledge 
on the subject. More than 550 participants responded to the 
survey questionnaires. This data was collected in 2017. 
Figure 1 below shows the distribution of participants by 
country.  
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Fig 1. Participation by country 
 
Analysis of the qualitative part from Atlas.ti is not shown 
in this paper. However, the results shown in Table 1 and 
Table 2 incorporate those from Atlas.ti. This paper is part of 
a bigger research that used mixed method approach. The 
quantitative part of the survey was analyzed using Analysis 
of a Moment Structures (AMOS) in Software Package for 
the Social Sciences (SPSS) and that part is not covered in 
this paper. Only a part of this big research is presented in 
this paper. 
The following section defines broadband and introduces it 
as a public good. 
III. 
BROADBAND 
This research uses as a working definition of broadband 
as “the provision of telecommunications infrastructure that 
enables 
information 
traffic 
in 
a 
continuous 
and 
uninterrupted manner, with sufficient capacity to provide 
access to data, voice and video applications that are 
common or locially relevant to users as determined by the” 
SADC “from time to time” [2]. 
The following section looks at attributes of broadband in 
terms of its value, complexities and some of its areas of 
applications. 
A. Broadband as a public good 
In some developed and developing nations, the 
government runs broadband or state controlled agencies 
until late 20th century [3]. In congruent with these two, the 
move to have telecommunication controlled by the state was 
necessitated among other things by the need to protect those 
aspects of telecommunications that are of public interest. 
Today, even though many telecommunications markets have 
been privatized and liberalized, government regulatory 
agencies are still responsible for ensuring that public good 
issues are provided for. These issues are security, prevention 
of interference while transmitting and client safety. Two 
things distinguish public goods from all others and these 
things are: Non-excludability, which means any member 
consuming a public good cannot be denied it by another 
member enjoying the same public good [3]. The second 
characteristic is that a public good is non-rivalry in 
consumption [3]. This means therefore that the government 
to guarantee non-rivalry in the market should provide for 
public goods. In some developed countries, broadband 
forms part of Universal Service Obligation (USO), meaning 
that it is the citizens’ right, to have access to it and 
governments should provide for it. In most countries, 
however telecommunications is just a universal service and 
not necessarily an obligation on the part of government.  It 
is in the potential benefits of broadband and a common 
thrust to bridge the digital divide which gives broadband its 
public good character.  
 
B. Value and complexities of broadband 
According to [4], broadband is a tool for the 
development of economies that are based on knowledge. 
Many studies corroborate that enhanced broadband 
penetration has desirable effects on the growth of any 
economy, improved access and delivery of social services 
apart from bridging the digital divide. All these impacts of 
broadband result in high quality way of living and economic 
index of countries. According to [5], broadband is at the 
center of organizations’ improved efficiency, faster 
connectivity, and access to operation-specific applications 
which usher in new ways of doing business and give birth to 
new business models.  
In considering the value of broadband, research has 
concentrated on benefits of it singly without taking into 
account the problems that inherently comes with these 
benefits. There are quite some complex issues that tend to 
hinder proper of the benefits of broadband. One such issue 
is the confusion that literature has had between benefits of 
broadband and its applications, attributes of broadband and 
the activities that these attributes enable. “Applications 
include video on demand, gaming, streamed video, and 
voice over the internet. Attributes include greater speed, 
always on and the capacity for Local Area Networks 
(LANs). The activities that these attributes enable include 
teleworking, e-gaming, e-gambling, e-learning, e-health, e-
commerce, and e-government” [6]. Publications of repute 
and which have contributed immensely to broadband 
research but which made this ontological error include 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) on their 
briefing paper on broadband promotion according to [7].   
The other one is that confusing benefits with activities 
gives the notion that it is gross outcome rather net that 
counts. In so much as  broadband-enabled activities bring 
benefits, they also have negative outcomes which include 
increased worker isolation and less mentoring in the case of 
teleworking, 
financial 
problems 
(e-gambling), 
and 
displacement of conventional social contacts in general [8].   
Another complexity is that of cost, if the cost of broadband 
excludes multiple voices in favor of a monopoly then there 
is need for constitutional and social considerations [5]. 
From the above given arguments, it is clear that a high 
broadband penetration does not equally mean high 
broadband 
benefits. 
Furthermore 
according 
to 
[9], 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

calculated revenues expected to be coming from broadband 
related enterprises do not reflect an adequate measure of 
benefits of broadband. Lastly, owing to poor planning and 
veiled understanding of broadband scenarios, the ways by 
which governments sometimes attempt to use to grow 
broadband may disrupt the economic and social dynamics 
[10]. 
Notwithstanding the highlighted complexities associated 
with accurately identifying the benefits and hence the value 
of broadband, the following section explains the broadband 
benefits in five main areas:   
 
1) Edducation: According to [5], where e-learning is 
asynchronous, meaning where there is no need for real time 
interaction between student and instructor, narrowband is 
sufficient. However when synchronous and collaborative 
learning in real time takes place, broadband is needed. 
Where multiple students access the web simultaneously, 
even for asynchronous e-learning, broadband is needed.  
Broadband therefore has the ability to provide educational 
platform which transcends geographical and financial 
challenges [4] 
2) Health: Broadband applications that are health 
specific and services are significantly improving health and 
medical outcomes around the world, particularly for patients 
in remote areas and those with limited mobility, through e-
health and m-health initiatives [11]. In view of the fact that 
in 2012 there were “fewer than 27 million doctors and 
nurses for the more than 6 billion people in the world and 
only 1.2 million doctors and nurses in the lowest-income 
countries”, using mobile technologies is a valuable tool for 
enabling health care practitioners to reach patients [12]. In 
spite of the fact that voice and data connections can be 
useful in improving medical care, broadband connectivity is 
necessary if full potential of e-health services that include 
telemedicine, which enables real-time audio and video 
communications between patients and doctors as well as 
between health care providers, broadband connection is 
required. Online medical procedures need high processing 
power, huge storage capacity, much bandwidth and 
protection of personal data of patients [13].. 
3) E-Governance: E-government refers to a wide range 
of applications that transform government processes and the 
ways in which governments connect and interact with 
businesses and citizens. This facilitates citizens participation 
in national issues and society, improves accountability, 
effectiveness and efficiency in governments’ day today 
business. Broadband is an essential component of e-
government, since it provides the foundation for public 
administration networks that allow smooth flow of 
processes. E-government can in return be a catalyst for 
increased demand for broadband as basic services are made 
available online, consultations with citizens on issues of 
policy and online multimedia as two way exchange 
technology. Tax returns, debate forums, applications and 
registrations are all made easily available by e-government 
as enabled by broadband. Republic of Korea, the United 
States, and Canada are in the top three places with regard to 
the number of online government services available. 
However, countries have made significant progress over the 
last two years, including Bahrain, Chile, Colombia, and 
Singapore. In addition, the use of mobile phones for e-
government services, such as alert messages, applications, 
and fee payments, is almost as popular in developing 
countries as it is in developed countries [14]. 
4) Gross Domestic Product: A study by the World Bank 
cited by many researchers found out that for low to middle 
income countries “about a 1.38 percentage point increase in 
GDP for each 10 percent increase in broadband penetration” 
between the years 2000 and 2006 [15]. The same study 
further revealed that broadband impact was more in 
developing economies than in developed countries which 
“enjoyed a 1.21 percentage point increase in per capita 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth” for each 10 percent 
increase in broadband penetration. This study also 
evidenced that broadband has a potentially larger growth 
effect than other Information Communication Technologie 
(ICTs), including wireline telephony, mobile telephony, and 
the Internet. There are other studies that confirm the 
findings of the World Bank such as Management consulting 
firm McKinsey and Company which estimated that “a 10 
percent increase in broadband household penetration 
delivers a boost to a country’s GDP that ranges from 0.1 
percent to 1.4 percent” [16]. It therefore, follows that 
broadband can increase the economy of a country by e-
commerce, creating new jobs, developing and attracting new 
industries and by providing access to local, regional and 
global markets. 
5) Cloud Computing: Cloud computing generally allows 
storage, processing and instant access to applications and 
data remotely via broadband connectivity [17]. This 
translates into reduced costs of IT infrastructure including 
hardware, software and technical support. The point to note 
here is that the benefits of cloud computing are directly the 
benefits of broadband because without broadband cloud 
computing as we know it today would not be possible. 
According to [17], cloud computing has the following other 
potential benefits: reduced need for up-front investment, 
since cloud computing is typically based on a pay-as-you-go 
pricing model, lower operating costs, since the service 
provider does not need the provision capacities according to 
the peak load, easy access through a variety of broadband-
enabled devices and lower business risks and maintenance 
expenses, since business risks (such as hardware failures) 
and maintenance costs are shifted to infrastructure 
providers, which often have better expertise and are better 
equipped to manage these risks. There are many other 
benefits of broadband such as leisure, entertainment, social 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

relations, gaming, green computing, aviation and much 
more. Governments across the globe have set out ambitious 
targets for broadband growth and penetration due to the 
unquestionable value of broadband as discussed above. 
Notwithstanding the benefits of broadband, these come with 
some side effects. The following section discusses the 
challenges 
associated 
with 
broadband 
growth 
and 
penetration. 
IV. 
THE RAMIFICATIONS OF BROADBAND 
A question was posed to participants to the effect of 
identifying the repercussions that are caused by broadband 
penetration. The chart below gives the most significant 
phrases in answering this question:  
Digitization and computerization of services has social 
repercussion among workers and customers. Which are 
some of these repercussions in your opinion? The responses 
to this question are illustrated in Figure 2. In the figure, the 
size of the shapes indicates the percentage of participants 
that gave similar answers. This question’s responses were 
integrated with responses from experts to reach a more 
robust conclusion in answering the objective of social 
repercussions. Figure 2 was further refined and integrated 
with expert responses resulting in the following Table 1. 
 
Fig 2. Cyber space ramifications 
 
 
 
         TABLE I. BROADBAND REPERCUSSIONS 
 
 
A. Policy intervations 
The following quotations are extracted from the primary 
documents of responses given by some experts to various 
interview questions. In response to the question of negative 
social effects of broadband and the possible solution to that, 
the expert said the following: 
“There are supposed to be rules in using technology. 
Some use ICT do illegal or immoral things like online 
divorce, cyber bullying, isolation, kids and parents don’t 
know each other anymore. Educate people also about the bad 
side of technology.” 
In this response, the expert called for a balance between 
the implementation of broadband and an equally important 
implementation of the educational programs on correct and 
incorrect use of it. Here, the experts indicate that the gains 
intended to be achieved by such technological developments 
can be reversed by lack of education about the same 
development. Education has been the preeminent solution to 
many attributes. Targeted education to address the ills of 
misuse of broadband is needed from the expert’s point of 
view. Table 2 below summarizes some of the policy 
solutions given by experts with regarding the broadband 
ramifications. Given below is just a subset of all the 
responses. 
 
TABLE II. POLICY INTERVENTIONS 
Social Repercussions 
Data 
integrity 
Anti-social 
behavior 
Unproductivity 
Identity 
theft 
Policies for social repercussions 
Encryption 
Education 
Targets 
Secure 
networks 
White 
hat 
hackers 
Mentorship 
Incentives  
Best 
practices 
 
Team work 
Performance 
management  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

The interventions highlighted by the experts manifest 
themselves in various ways but their themes remain the 
same. These results are useful to decision makers at different 
levels of management in curbing the negative effect of cyber 
space. The following section deals with question of the 
relationship that should exist between technology such as 
broadband and the society in which it is used. 
 
V. 
SOCIETY AND TECHNOLOGY 
On the question of reciprocal shaping between technology 
and society, one expert had this to say: 
“I don’t know if I agree with reciprocal shaping. 
According to me, society balances itself out. Unsuitable 
inventions or technology will naturally be damped. To policy 
that can be counter development. Regulation should be after 
the fact to guard fundamental human rights.” 
According to this expert, there need not be any regulation 
on technological development beforehand but rather after the 
event. Regulation of inventions before they are done is 
counterproductive, the expert said. This is a remarkable 
contribution by this expert. The researcher concludes that 
even regulation that is done after the event will still affect 
new events therefore the effect is the same expect in areas 
where 
regulation 
does 
not 
yet 
exist. 
 
             Fig 3. Socio-technical relationship 
 
On the same question of relationship between technology 
and society, another researcher had the following to say: 
“It depends on the type of technology. Society has 
requirements and manufacturers tend to take these 
requirements in their products. Manufacturers do their 
research and do production without consulting but society 
accepts it. Others can be refuted due to societal beliefs and 
values eg, abortion, genetic manipulation, human being 
cloning. There is no one way fits all. The two need to be in a 
reciprocal shaping because technology is meant to serve 
people and not people technology, to maintain a balance of 
values.” 
The researcher acknowledges the above response as 
striking as it gives balance between control and liberalism. 
Indeed not all technologies are the same and broadband 
based technologies are vast and different. Steve Jobs once 
said “A lot of times, people don’t know what they want until 
it is shown to them.” This concurs with the expert’s response 
on society accepting new products made without market 
research. At the same time, the expert is acknowledging the 
need for consultation pointing that it depends on the type of 
technology involved. The pivotal point the expert makes is 
that technology should serve people and not the other way 
round. The two should be in reciprocal shaping relationship.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 “Technology should not be a garget but a solution to a 
problem. That is the solution. Therefore, any piece of 
technology that does not answer to problems of society at 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

hand then it’s not useful. Therefore society should come first 
in every case. Technology should come to fill a gap but at 
the end, the solution should benefit society. Eg etolls in SA, 
it’s a good  
Technology but it’s not filling the gap. Society does not need 
it. There should be another model.” 
The above quote emphasizes reciprocal shaping of the 
two with special reference to values. This points to culture. 
The experts gave pre-eminence to human values. The 
researcher interprets to mean the need of consultations or 
market research before implementing some technologies. 
The expert quoted above focuses on the ultimate end and 
that is in the final analysis, any technology should fill a gap 
in society otherwise it is irrelevant. In terms of how 
technology can fill the gaps without compromising existent 
societal norms and values, there are trade-offs that can be 
done, hence the need for consultations. 
Figure 2 attempts to summarize the responses on this 
question On technology-society relationship, the result 
reveals that the majority of respondents are of the opinion 
that society should take credence over technology. The 
researcher therefore has reason to accept that in SADC 
society takes precedence over technology 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
In conclusion, it has been evidenced that a socio-
technical environment like broadband has inherent, negative 
unintended 
ramifications 
that 
come 
with 
it. 
Such 
ramifications can be provided for by enacting policies aimed 
at reducing their effects. These two variables have been 
explored within the context of SADC where broadband is 
provided for as a public good. Lastly, the relationship 
between technology and society has been interrogated and as 
much as some participants suggest one of reciprocal shaping, 
most of them concur that society should take preeminence 
over technology. It is recommended that further research can 
done on each of the aspects of the research questions 
separately and concrete results for each be discussed 
separately. A times series research of the same phenomenon 
is also recommended to establish if the socio-technical 
environment of broadband changes significantly with time.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  L. A. Suskie, Questionnaire Survey Research: What Works 
Paperback, 
[retrieved: 
October, 
2019 
from 
http://www.amazon.com/Questionnaire-Survey-Research-
WhatWorks/dp/1882393058 
[2] World Bank Group, Broadband Strategies Toolkit, [retrieved: 
12 September 2019], from http://broadbandtoolkit.org/0. 
[3] A. Picot, and, C. Wemick, “The role of government in 
broadband access”, Telecommunications Policy, Volume 31, 
Issues 10–11, pp. 660-674,  November–December 2007. 
[4] S. Khan, “South Africa Connect”, ITU broadband Policy, 
[retrieved 
October 
2019], 
from 
https://researchictafrica.net/presentations/Presentations/2015%
20Khan_Safia_ITU%20Broadband%20Policy%20Presentation
.pdf 
[5]  C. A. Firth, and D. Mellor, “Broadband: benefits and 
problems”, volume 29, Issues 2–3, pp. 223-236, March–April 
2005. 
[6]  K.Junghyun and P. M. Haridakis, “The Role of Internet User 
Characteristics and Motives in Explaining Three Dimensions 
of Internet Addiction”, Journal of Computer-mediated 
Communication, Volume 14, Issue 4, pp. 988–1015  July 
2009,. 
[7]  T. Reynolds, “Broadband Promotion”, ITU, [retrieved: 
October 
2019], 
from  
https://www.itu.int/osg/spu/ni/promotebroadband/presentations
/01-reynolds.pdf 
[8] J.E. Katz and R.E. Rice, “Public views of mobile medical 
devices and services: a US national survey of consumer 
sentiments towards RFID healthcare technology.”, [retrieved: 
October 
2019], 
from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18619897. 
[9]  R. Crandal, W. Lehr, and R. Litan, “The Effects of Broadband 
Deployment on Output and Employment: A Cross-sectional 
Analysis of U.S. Data” ITU, [retrieved: September 2019], 
from, 
https://www.brookings.edu/research/the-effects-of-
broadband-deployment-on-output-and-employment-a-cross-
sectional-analysis-of-u-s-data/ 
[10] T. Kelly and S. Raja, “Building Broadband: Strategies and 
Policies for the Development. Global Information and 
Communication Technologies Department of World Bank”, 
[retrieved: 
September 
2019], 
from, 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/extinformationandcommuni
cationandtechnologies/Resources/282822-
1208273252769/Building_broadband.pdfS. 
[11]  WHO, “Make every mother and child count”, World health 
organization report 2005, [retrieved: October 2019], form 
https://www.who.int/whr/2005/whr2005_en.pdf 
[12] World Bank Group, “Broadband Strategies Toolkit”, [retrieve: 
12 September 2019], from http://broadbandtoolkit.org/0 
[13] ITU, New global broadband study: national plans and 
competitive markets are crucial, [retrieved: August 2019], 
from 
http://www.itu.int/net/pressoffice/press_releases/2013/27.aspx
#.U5DphvmSx1Y 
[14] UN, E-Government Survey 2010, [retrieved: September 2019], 
from 
https://publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/Portals/egovkb/Doc
uments/un/2010-Survey/unpan038851.pdf 
[15] T. Kelly and S. Raja, Building Broadband: Strategies and 
Policies for the Development. Global Information and 
Communication Technologies Department of World Bank, 
[retrieved: 
September 
2019], 
from 
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/extinformationandcommuni
cationandtechnologies/Resources/282822-
1208273252769/Building_broadband.pdfS. 
[16] T. Kelly and M. Rossotto, Broadband strategies handbook, 
[retrieved: 
August 
2019], 
from 
https://books.google.co.za/books?id=4xru2lluqzyc&pg=pa5&d
q=buttkereit+et+al.+2009&hl=en&sa=x&ved=0ahukewixhvnk
k9plahvoqxuihamabccq6aeimdab#v=onepage&q=buttkereit%
20et%20al.%202009&f=false 
[17] Q. Zhang, L. Cheng, and R. Boutaba, “Cloud computing: state-
of-the-art and research challenges”, [retrieved: September 
2019], 
from 
https://u.cs.biu.ac.il/~ariel/download/ds590/resources/cloud/cl
oud_sota.pdf 
[18] B. Sanou, “ICT facts and figures”, [retrieved: August 2019], 
from 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2013-e.pdf 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

[19]  G. B Mugeni1, G. W. Wanyembi, and J. M. Wafula, 
“Evaluating factors affecting broadband intensity in Kenya”, 
[retieved: 
September 
2019], 
from 
https://www.academia.edu/5066315/Evaluating_Factors_Affec
ting_Broadband_Intensity_in_Kenya 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

