Practical Study of the Temperature Effect in Soil Moisture Measurements 
 
José Luis García-Navas1, Mar Parra1, Lorena Parra1, Javier Rocher1, Sandra Sendra1,2, Jaime Lloret1 
1 Instituto de Investigación para la Gestión Integrada de zonas Costeras. 
Universitat Politècnica de València Valencia, Spain 
2Dept. of Signal Theory, Telematics and Communications Department (TSTC).  
Universidad de Granada, Granada, Spain 
Email: jogarna3@teleco.upv.es, marparbo@hotmail.es, loparbo@doctor.upv.es, jarocmo@doctor.upv.es, ssendra@ugr.es, 
jlloret@dcom.upv.es 
 
Abstract—Precision agriculture is a current tendency whose 
goal is to increase the crop production while reducing the 
water and fertilization use. The use of low cost sensors and 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are frequently used to 
implement complex systems to control the irrigation process in 
crops. Taking into account the importance of developing these 
low cost systems, in this paper we present a practical study that 
compares a commercial soil moisture sensor with the prototype 
of our inductive soil moisture sensor, which is based on two 
solenoid coils. Additionally, we measure its performance as a 
function of the soil temperature to quantify the effect of this 
parameter in the sensor measurements. The results show that 
the temperature greatly affects the sensors measurements and, 
although our sensor could be used to measure the soil moisture 
as a function of the temperature, the configuration of two 
solenoids is not the most suitable to perform this kind of 
measurements. 
Keywords-Inductive sensor; temperature; moisture sensor; 
wireless sensor networks (WSNs); inductive sensors; water 
consumption saving. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the last years, the use of sensors in agriculture has 
experienced a very important growth. Its use has allowed to 
develop more efficient and precise methods of cultivating. 
Precision Agriculture is related to the use of technologies 
(remote sensing, sensors, irrigation strategies, etc.) to 
enhance the production of the crops and reduce the use of 
water and fertilizers [1]. 
The reduction of water usage in agriculture is an 
important challenge to ensure food security and water 
resource in the future. Currently, it is estimated that 70% of 
the water extracted in the world is intended for agriculture. 
Nowadays, there are different investigations related to the 
development of water saving techniques since it is 
foreseeable that the Global Warming will reduce the 
available water. For this reason, future irrigation systems 
should be based on the use of moisture sensors and the 
development of new and more efficient irrigation strategies. 
Irrigation strategies consist of an improvement in irrigation 
systems, i.e., the use of drip irrigation instead of flood or 
sprinkler. It is also interesting to reduce the amount of water 
in the soil to avoid percolation losses. These are not unique. 
Any technique and method to control the use of water will 
help to increase the production of crops. An example of 
applying new irrigation techniques can be found in the 
strawberry crop where the application of an irrigation 
threshold of about -10 kPa, inside the range from -8 kPa to -
35 kPa seems to have better results in production and 
benefits while reducing the water usage [2]. 
The irrigation strategies are complemented by using 
different sensors. Many authors propose the use of moisture 
sensors for controlling the irrigation. An interesting idea to 
combat the problems in irrigation is to combine the values of 
soil moisture with environmental parameters such as rain, 
wind, light or photographic analysis, among others, for 
calculating the evapotranspiration or detecting disease in 
plants. For example, Parra et al. [3] propose the use of 
sensors to monitor water quality, soil moisture, and 
meteorology. Their system estimates the irrigation needs of 
citrus plots considering the status of soil and the historic data 
of measurements.  
In regards to soil moisture sensors, we can mainly find 
two different models, i.e., sensors based on Capacity, 
Frequency Domain Reflectometry (FDR) and Time Domain 
Reflectometry (TDR). FDR sensors are based on the 
measurement of the working frequency of an oscillating 
circuit. TDR sensors are based on the echo measurement of 
an electrical signal sent through a material with water. FDR 
sensors are cheaper than TDR sensors. However, TDRs do 
not need new calibrations for different soils and it is more 
precise. 
Another method to measure the soil moisture is the use of 
inductive sensors [4], which have the advantage of not being 
in contact with the soil, compared to the traditional ones, 
such as FDR and TDR sensors that must be completely in 
contact with the ground. The contact of metallic parts of 
sensors with the ground usually generates problems of 
corrosion and wrong reading of sensor measurements. The 
inductive sensors are based on a primary coil that generates a 
magnetic field which induces a current in the secondary coil. 
One of the main gaps of this type of sensor is that they are 
not widely developed. The effects of the temperature, the 
type of salts or other parameters have not been studied.  
This paper presents a practical study to quantify the 
effect of the temperature in the inductive sensors for 
monitoring the soil moisture. We test your own prototype 
based on two coils compared to a commercial sensor. To 
measure the soil moisture, we measure the induced current 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

which depends on the environment where it is. Finally, the 
results are related to the soil temperature. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
shows different papers related to our work.  The proposed 
system is detailed in Section 3. Section 4 describes the 
communication protocol used to transmit the data between 
nodes and the algorithm that controls the message 
exchanges. The obtained results are presented in Section 6. 
Finally, Section 7 summarizes the conclusion and future 
work. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
This section analyzes different papers related to the use 
of moisture sensors for irrigation crops and gardens. 
Haley and Dukes [5] study the water usage in controllers 
of gardens in four different scenarios, i.e., (1) soil moisture 
sensor with an automatic controller that does not initiate the 
irrigation if the volume of water in the soil is over 10%, (2) 
rain sensor and educational materials with an automatic 
timer, (3) rain sensor with automatic timer, which stops the 
system after 6 mm of rainfall, and (4) automatic timer only, 
which is typical for the region under study. Their results 
show that the system that reduces the water usage is the 
moisture sensor with the automatic timer irrigation (scenario 
1). In addition, the use of education material (scenario 3) 
initially reduces the use of water. However, the water 
consumption increases as a function of the time. 
Buttaro et al. [6] study the effect of the irrigation in 
tomatoes and cucumbers in the cycles of fall-winter and 
spring-summer. Author use tensiometers to assign the values 
of water in the soil and analyze two set points, tomatoes in -
100 hPa and -400 hPa and Cucumber in -100 hPa and -300 
hPa. In the fall-winter cycle, the tomatoes are not affected by 
the low irrigation while cucumber present a reduction of 8% 
in the production. In the spring-summer cycle, the 
cucumbers do not present difference between the two points. 
However, the tomatoes present a reduction of 40% of 
production. So, the use of tensiometers with the knowledge 
of the effect of poor irrigation could be used to reduce the 
use of water without affecting production. 
Kizito et al. [7] study the use of capacity sensors for 
measuring the moisture and electrical conductivity of soil. 
To perform the experiments, authors use the ECH2O sensor 
in the working frequency range from 5 MHz to 150 MHz. 
Results show that the sensor, working at 70 MHz, could be 
used in different mineral soils independently to the soil 
conductivity. However, it is required a specific calibration to 
measure the conductivity while temperature has low effect 
on the values of conductivity and moisture thanks to the 
internal sensor compensation.  
Nevertheless, Varble and Chávez [8] compare three 
sensors (CS616/625, TDT, and 5TE) to measure the 
permeability of an environment for monitoring the water 
content. The results show big fluctuations due to 
temperature, soil texture and conductivity. Moreover, 
Mittelbach et al. [9] compare three low cost moisture sensors 
(two of them based on FDR sensors and a capacitive sensor) 
and a high-accuracy moisture sensor (based on TDR sensor) 
to see the effect of temperature and the drift over the 
measurements. The results show that the low cost sensors 
require a correction to compensate the temperature effect and 
specific calibration that the TDR sensor does not need.  
Nolz et al. [10] compare the use of moisture soil sensor 
with the soil matrix potential sensors in a vineyard. 
According to the authors’ conclusions, the moisture soil 
sensor presents faster response to the water evolution and it 
does not require calibration. Meanwhile, the matrix potential 
sensor shows the contrary behavior. However, the matrix 
potential sensors present absolute values. Authors propose 
the use of the two sensors for obtaining better results during 
the irrigation monitoring.  
Cardell-Oliver et al. [11] describe a wireless sensor 
network for measuring the soil moisture with a reactive and 
more robust network. They used Decagon Echo-20 dielectric 
sensors to measure the soil moisture and a Decagon Echo 
rain to detect the rain. The objective of this paper is to 
calculate the evolution of soil moisture. For this reason, the 
time between measurements changes according to the 
detected rainfall by the rain sensor. In dry weather, the 
evolution of water in the soil does not present big variation. 
With this system, the hydraulic recharge of aquifers and 
water transport in a field can be estimated the hydraulic 
recharge of aquifers and water transport in a field 
Now, the moisture sensors have an important paper in the 
reduction of water use in agriculture. The sensors based on 
capacitive or FDR are the less expensive devices than the 
TDR ones. Nonetheless, capacitive and FDR sensors are 
affected by temperature. Therefore, they need to be corrected 
with a temperature sensor for the correct monitoring of soil 
moisture. Moreover, they need to be calibrated for the 
different sort of soil. On the other hand, the TDR are more 
robust and do not need specific calibration. However, TDR is 
more expensive than FDR and capacitive sensors. The matrix 
water sensors are another alternative. However, this type of 
sensor has high costs and do not provide a rapid response to 
changes in soil moisture. The sensor presented in this work is 
cheap and the effect of temperature in the measures is low. 
This allows the reduction of costs in the deployment of the 
system in great extensions.  
III. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTIONS 
This section presents the scenario and the architecture 
proposed in this work. This work is developed in a natural 
environment where elements like vegetation and orography 
can influence communications between sensors and all nodes 
included in the architecture. This architecture will combine 
sensing devices, communication nodes, and a gateway. 
The architecture must be able to collect all data provided 
by the sensors, to communicate it in a reliable way and to 
connect to the Internet. Data must be sent from the different 
sensing devices along the network to reach a Base Station 
(BS) that works as a Gateway and will be connected to the 
internet via Ethernet. The Base Station will upload all the 
data received to a database located on the Internet. The 
information stored on the Data Base (DB) will be studied 
and used to extract conclusions about the use of this type of 
sensors. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Figure 1 shows the architecture of the proposal. It is a 
Wi-Fi network composed of different Internet of Things 
(IoT) networks, each one connected to a single BS. On each 
IoT Network several sensing devices will communicate all 
his information to a Network Head (NH) that will 
communicate with the BS. The BS will upload the 
information to a DB located on the Internet. The information 
will be uploaded to the DB depending on where the 
information arrived from. 
The sensor modules are divided into two parts, the 
humidity sensor and the communication module. The 
humidity sensor is underground, and the communication 
module is outdoors. Both parts are connected by a wire in 
order to send the information from the sensor to de 
communication module. The communication module is an 
Arduino Wi-Fi module. This module will be programmed in 
order to read the sensor value and send it to the NH with an 
Id that relates the sensor value with the sensor that took the 
value. That Id will permit separate the information to upload 
it to the DB. Figure 2 is an example of how the sensor is 
used. 
As explained before, sensing devices communicate with 
an NH and it communicates with the BS. This organization 
results in a star network where the hub is the BS-Gateway. 
Using this type of network has the advantage that if some 
Wi-Fi module stops working it will not affect the entire 
network. All the information will pass across the BS so it 
must be enough robust to not stop working. The entire 
network depends on it. Arduino Wi-Fi modules are 
programmed to establish a Wi-Fi communication with the 
nearest NH. Once communication is established, the module 
will be responsible for generating a package for each value 
that arrives from the sensor. The package will contain a 
sensor ID, the sensor value and a time stamp. The time stamp 
is not going to be used in our study but will help to find out 
if the sensor stopped working at some point. Each package 
will be sent to the NH. 
The Network Head will be located strategically to take 
advantage of the low Wi-Fi range. NH will be as near as 
possible to each sensor and also to the BS to ensure good 
communication. In cases where the distance or the orography 
can affect to the Wi-Fi range communication, could be 
possible the necessity to add one more hop to reach the BS. 
Talking about the function of HN, it only has to receive 
every package and transmit them. In this proposal, there are 
not priorities and the most important aspect is not to lose 
packages so NH will have enough memory to store a large 
number of packages queued to be sent. 
As shown in Figure 3, the proposal implements the BS 
by using a Raspberry Pi module gateway. The Raspberry Pi 
must support Wi-Fi and Ethernet. The BS must be able to 
receive all the information from different NH using Wi-Fi 
communication. Once the BS has received the information, it 
must read it and obtain which sensor the information belongs 
and depending on that the BS will upload the data on the 
corresponding table of the DB located on the Internet. The 
Raspberry Pi will be programmed using SQL sentences in 
order to upload the DB. 
In order to obtain enough and different data to be 
compared and to extract conclusions about how useful our 
prototype is, different types of sensors will be used in this 
architecture, the sensor prototype presented in this paper and 
also different commercial sensors. In addition, they will be 
located in different types of soil. This variety of sensors and 
locations where sensors will be makes the amount of data 
uncertain. It is also possible that the time between 
measurements could change from each sensor to others 
depending on the placement of the sensor.  
For all these reasons, the BS must be programmed to be 
able to process a great amount of data. Moreover, in cases 
when the BS cannot process all the information and upload it 
to the Internet, it must have an algorithm that when there is 
an overflow of information not to lose always the 
information of the same sensors. That will permit to obtain a 
regular amount of data of all the sensors. 
In order to ensure that no information is lost in wired 
communication, the data will be sent using the TCP protocol. 
The ACK confirmation will permit to resend lost packets. 
The database, which has been mentioned throughout the 
document, will store all the data obtained for each detection 
device. For each sensor, there will be a different table on the 
DB in order to save the information separately and to have it 
easily accessible. The information stored in that DB will be 
used in next section to analyze it.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Proposed architecture. 
Figure 2.  Sensor and Arduino Wi-Fi module 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Figure 3.  Base Station as Gateway supporting Wi-Fi and Ethernet 
 
 
IV. 
PROTOCOL DESCRIPTION 
When a new sensor joins the network, it sends a Hello 
message informing that he wants to join the network. Due to 
the importance of knowing which sensor is sending the 
information, all sensors will be programmed with a different 
ID from the rest, before joining the network. The sensor will 
include its own ID in the Hello message. 
All Network Heads who receive this message will 
forward it to the BS. When BS receives this message, it will 
verify if it is the first time this sensor joins the network and, 
in that case, the BS will create an entry in the DB. BS will 
respond to the NH with a Hello ACK and the NH will 
forward it to the sensor.  
BS will respond all received Hello messages, even if they 
are not the first (only one DB entry will be created) due to 
the possibility of different communication channels. It is the 
sensor who will finally set the path. The sensor will only 
accept the first Hello ACK received, learning what NH 
should communicate. The sensor will send a keep-alive 
message to this NH and it will forward it to the BS. Now BS 
also knows what path the sensor will use. The sensor will 
discard the rest of Hello ACK messages. Once the 
communication is established, the information exchange is 
only from sensor to BS. For each data received, the BS 
updates the DB on the Internet. Figure 4 illustrates how the 
protocol works. 
After the first keepalive message, every data message 
will also actuate as a keepalive message. In case no data is 
received in BS for a long time, BS will delete information 
about path, but not DB information. Because DB information 
is not deleted, when a sensor wants to join the network for 
the second time, BS could check that this sensor has already 
an entry in the DB. 
V. 
ALGORITHM 
When sensing devices join the network, they send a 
Hello Message in order to initiate the connection with the 
BS. Once the path is set, they begin sending messages. In 
case of NH, their operation mode consists of forwarding 
packets between sensing devices and BS, and vice versa. 
Finally, BS-Gateway operation mode is more complex than 
other entities operation mode. In this section, we are going to 
explain the operation algorithm applied in the BS.  
After the system starts, it will be receiving messages all 
the time. Messages can be Hello messages or Data messages. 
Depending on the type of received message, the BS will 
actuate in a different way.  
When the BS receives a Hello message, it will look at the 
DB in order to know if it is the first time that the incoming 
Sensing Device joins the network. The BS will check if this 
Sensing Device has an entry on the DB. In case of not having 
an entry, it means that it is the first time that the sensor joins 
the network, and the BS will create a new table on the DB to 
store the information of this sensor. BS will always respond 
to a Hello Message sending a Hello ACK to the sensor 
through the same path that it arrived from. 
In case BS receives a Data Message it will carry out an 
overflow prevention protocol. Overflow emergency will start 
with 85% of store occupation. BS keeps track of the number 
of messages of each sensor that are waiting to be processed. 
Based on the number of messages the base station will 
organize the sensors from high to low number of messages 
waiting to be processed. 
In case of an overflow emergency, if the message arrives 
from a sensor that belongs to the half of the sensors that have 
more packets waiting, the message will be discarded. If there 
is no overflow emergency or the message arrives from a 
sensor that belongs to the half of the sensors that have less 
packets waiting, BS will put the message in the buffer and 
will update the count of the number of messages coming 
from that sensor. 
Figure 5 shows the operation algorithm applied when a 
message arrives to the BS. Once there are packets to be 
processed, the BS takes the message that first arrived. BS 
will obtain the Sensor ID from the message and will upload 
the sensor value to the corresponding table of the DB. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
In this section, the results of the aforementioned tests are 
presented. In order to better understand them, this section is 
divided into two subsections. The first deals with the results 
from the first type of soil, the one with 95 % of sand. The 
results from the soil with 90 % of sand are presented in the 
second subsection. 
A. Results from the first soil 
After cooling the soil, with the sensors inside, it reached 
1.2 ºC. The soil absorbs heat slower than the air, therefore 
that temperature is highly probable during the coldest 
months of the year. Data was collected every 0.1 ºC until the 
temperature of the soil reached 20 ºC. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Figure 4.  Communication protocol 
  
Figure 5.  Operation algorithm applied in the BS when a message arrival 
 
 
Figure 6.  Vout of both sensors for the first soil form 1.2 ºC to 20 ºC. 
Figure 7.  Vout of both sensors for the second soil form 1.2 ºC to 20 ºC. 
 
The first soil is composed mostly of sand (95%) and has 
about 45% of soil moisture. For our prototype, the frequency 
used to measure the Vout is 770 kHz, which is close to the 
peak frequency. We compare it to the Vout of the 
commercial sensor. 
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
10.3
10.4
10.5
10.6
10.7
10.8
10.9
11
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Vout for the commercial sensor
Vout for our prototype
Tempearture (ºC)
Our prototype
Commercial sensor
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
8.6
8.7
8.8
8.9
9
9.1
9.2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Vout for the commercial sensor
Vout for our prototype
Tempearture (ºC)
Our prototype
Commercial sensor
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

The results from both can be seen in Figure 6. In order to 
compare the variation of each sensor, two axes have been 
developed. Both of them are divided every 0.1 V in their 
correspondent Vout range. 
As we can see in Figure 6, the difference between the 
readings of our prototype is 0.1 V and the value of 10.6 is 
almost constant through all the heating process. The 
amplitude of the data ranges from 10.7 V to 10.5 V, 
changing barely 0.2 V. Moreover, most of the readings are 
the same, 10.6 V. The sensitivity of the device used to 
measure the Vout, in this case, is 0.1 V, thus explaining the 
variation between the data. Nevertheless, we can affirm that 
our prototype gives consistent outputs. 
When analyzing the data from the commercial sensor it is 
obvious that the Vout decreases as the temperature increases. 
We observe that the changes between each temperature are 
not as extreme as the ones from our prototype, as seen in 
Figure 6. Nevertheless, this is probably due to the sensibility 
of the oscilloscope, as mentioned in the previous paragraph. 
The amplitude of the data goes from 1.9 V to 1.41 V, 
changing almost 0.5 V. This variation, as well as the 
inconsistency of the readings makes, the commercial sensors 
a poor choice for cultures exposed to temperature changes. 
First, the readings from the commercial sensor increase and 
decrease with changes of 0.01 V. Later on, when the 
temperature of the pot reaches 15 ºC, the changes get bigger 
and they start to increase and decrease with more frequency 
than they did before. 
Seeing the readings from this type of soil, the 
commercial sensor is not very promising. The changes from 
the temperature could very easily interfere with the changes 
from soil moisture and give false readings. On the contrary, 
our prototype shows a constant value for the Vout, which 
only changes 0.1 V on some occasions. Depending on the 
calibration of the sensor this variation could affect in a 
greater or smaller way. Nevertheless, most of the readings, 
including both extremes, gave the same output. A total of 
139 out of 188 readings gave as Vout 10.6, which is a 73.94 
% of the readings. 
B. Results from the second soil 
As in the experiment done on the first soil, the lowest 
temperature achieved for this soil was 1.2 ºC. Moreover, it 
was heated up to 20 ºC as well. This soil, as the first one, is 
composed mostly of sand. Nevertheless, the percentage of 
soil composed by said component is 90 %, different from the 
95 % of the first soil. It presents a 47% soil moisture, slightly 
higher than the first soil. The frequency chosen for our 
prototype is 755 kHz, close to the peak frequency. The 
readings from our prototype are compared to the readings of 
the commercial sensor in Figure 7. 
We can observe the data represented with a double axis. 
The axis on the left is for the Vout of the commercial sensor 
whereas the axis on the right is for the Vout of our prototype. 
Both show divisions of 0.1 V in the range of each sensor. 
Our prototype presents bigger differences for this soil. The 
highest Vout is 9.04 V and the lowest is 8.72 V. The change 
is of 0.32 V, too big to consider our prototype to be 
unaffected by the temperature. Moreover, the data shows no 
consistency in the Vout readings. Both 8.72 V and 8.80 V 
are the most frequent data with 82 and 52 readings each. 
They account for 43.61 % and 27.66 % of the readings 
respectively. Nevertheless, the last data suggest another 
increase, as seen in Figure 7. 
The data from the commercial prototype can be seen in 
Figure 7. It shows a decrease in the Vout as the temperature 
increases. Unlike the behavior showed for the first soil, the 
changes do not get bigger and more frequent after 15 ºC. 
They do, however, start increasing after 16.5 ºC. At 19.4 ºC 
the data decreases drastically and starts increasing again. The 
highest Vout reading for this sensor is 1.97 V and the lowest 
is 1.64 V. The difference between these readings is of 0.33 
V, only 0.01 V bigger than the difference for our sensor. The 
irregular behavior at higher temperatures makes impossible 
the modeling of and adjusting equation for the Vout based on 
the temperature. It is also noted that the sensitivity of the 
oscilloscope used to measure the Vout of our sensors is of 
0.08 V for Vout readings between 1 V and 10 V, which 
explain the differences between the readings. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Water consumption for agriculture must be efficiently 
controlled to avoid wasting without reducing the productivity 
of a crop. To do this, researchers usually use soil moisture 
sensors. However, their measurements are sometimes 
affected due to the effect of temperature. Therefore, in this 
paper, we have performed a practical study to quantify the 
effect of temperature on soil moisture measurements with 
inductive sensors. The results have shown that the 
temperature effect over the soil moisture measurements is 
quite important and taking into account this data, none of the 
sensors used for this experiment would be the ideal model 
for this kind of soil. Nevertheless, it should be noted that a 
difference of 0.3 V on readings around 9 V is not the same as 
a difference of 0.3 V on readings around 1.8 V. This change 
would affect in a greater manner the readings from the 
commercial sensor. 
As future work, we will extend our research by adding 
group of sensors mechanisms [12] or using clustering 
techniques [13]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially supported by the European 
Union through the ERANETMED (Euromediterranean 
Cooperation through ERANET joint activities and beyond) 
project 
ERANETMED3-227 
SMARTWATIR 
by 
the 
“Ministerio de Educación, Cultura y Deporte”, through the 
“Ayudas para contratacion predoctoral de Formación del 
Profesorado Universitario FPU (Convocatoria 2016)”. Grant 
number FPU16/05540. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Gebbers and V. I. Adamchuk, “Precision Agriculture and 
Food Security,” Science, vol. 327, no. 5967, pp. 828–831, 
2010. 
[2] L. Gendron et al., “Real-time irrigation: Cost-effectiveness 
and benefits for water use and productivity of strawberries,” 
Scientia Horticulturae, vol. 240, pp. 468–477, 2018. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

[3] L. Parra et al., “Design of a WSN for smart irrigation in citrus 
plots with fault-tolerance and energy-saving algorithms,” 
Network Protocols and Algorithms, vol. 10, no. 2, p. 95, 
2018. 
[4] N. I. Huth and P. L. Poulton, “An electromagnetic induction 
method for monitoring variation in soil moisture in 
agroforestry systems,” Soil Research, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 63, 
2007. 
[5] M. B. Haley and M. D. Dukes, “Validation of Landscape 
Irrigation Reduction with Soil Moisture Sensor Irrigation 
Controllers,” Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, 
vol. 138, no. 2, pp. 135–144, 2012. 
[6] D. Buttaro et al., “Irrigation Management of Greenhouse 
Tomato and Cucumber Using Tensiometer: Effects on Yield, 
Quality and Water Use,” Agriculture and Agricultural Science 
Procedia, vol. 4, pp. 440–444, 2015. 
[7] F. Kizito et al., “Frequency, electrical conductivity and 
temperature analysis of a low-cost capacitance soil moisture 
sensor,” Journal of Hydrology, vol. 352, no. 3–4, pp. 367–
378, 2008. 
[8] J. L. Varble and J. L. Chávez, “Performance evaluation and 
calibration of soil water content and potential sensors for 
agricultural soils in eastern Colorado,” Agricultural Water 
Management, vol. 101, no. 1, pp. 93–106, 2011. 
[9] H. Mittelbach, I. Lehner, and S. I. Seneviratne, “Comparison 
of four soil moisture sensor types under field conditions in 
Switzerland,” Journal of Hydrology, vol. 430–431, pp. 39–49, 
2012. 
[10] R. Nolz, P. Cepuder, J. Balas, and W. Loiskandl, “Soil water 
monitoring in a vineyard and assessment of unsaturated 
hydraulic 
parameters 
as 
thresholds 
for 
irrigation 
management,” Agricultural Water Management, vol. 164, pp. 
235–242, 2016. 
[11] R. Cardell-Oliver, M. Kranz, K. Smettem, and K. Mayer, “A 
Reactive Soil Moisture Sensor Network: Design and Field 
Evaluation,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor 
Networks, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 149–162, 2005. 
[12] J. Lloret, M. Garcia, J. Tomás, and F. Boronat, “GBP-
WAHSN: a group-based protocol for large wireless ad hoc 
and sensor networks,” Journal of Computer Science and 
Technology, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 461-480, 2008. 
[13] A. Mehmood, J. L. Mauri, M. Noman, and H. Song, 
“Improvement of the wireless sensor network lifetime using 
LEACH with vice-cluster head,” Ad Hoc & Sensor Wireless 
Networks, 
vol. 
28, 
no. 
1-2, 
pp. 
1-17, 
2015.
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

