 
 
Using Sensor Technology to Monitor and Report Vandalized Pipelines 
 
Mohammed Yusuf Agetegba 
College of Computer Science and Information Technology 
Sudan University of Science and Technology 
Khartoum, Sudan 
email: mylislan@yahoo.com 
Prof. Pascal Lorenz 
University of Haute Alsace 
34  rue du Grillenbreit, Colmar - France. 
email: pascal.lorenz@uha.fr
Abstract— Pipelines transporting gasoline, diesel, crude, and 
natural gas are periodically subjected to acts of vandalism 
and sabotage in Nigeria. Unfortunately, vandalized pipelines 
are not quickly detected; leading to major environmental 
degradation, and in case of gasoline, to explosion and 
attendant loss of lives and properties. Since it is nearly 
impossible for security operatives to monitor large sections 
of Nigerian national pipelines, it becomes imperative to 
propose smart solutions which allow monitoring of pipelines 
using wireless sensors. This paper proposes the use of 
wireless sensors to monitor acoustics, vibrations and lights 
emanating from or around targeted pipelines. Sound 
detection process automatically triggers verification, which 
involves turning on the sensor to detect pipeline vibration. A 
night-time mode allows the sensor to equally scan for bright 
lights which may connote a pipeline on fire. The paper 
strives to lay a solid foundation for full deployment of actual 
motes. We propose the use of linear clustering to ensure 
energy conservation. 
 
Keywords—Pipelines; Motes; Wireless; Sound; Acoustic. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Various environmental monitoring projects using 
wireless sensors successfully demonstrated the ability of 
sensors to monitor changes in their deployed environment 
(such as ambience, movement, and stress in concrete) and 
report findings [6][7][12]. While designing wireless 
sensors 
monitoring 
systems, 
it 
is 
imperative 
to 
painstakingly gather environmental data which forms the 
parameters on which the algorithm controlling each mote 
will operate. Parameters gathered for our pipeline 
monitoring project include: (1) pipeline - material (iron, 
steel etc.), (2) thickness, (3) diameter, (4) normal 
vibration while conveying crude, gasoline, diesel or 
liquefied gas, and (5) topography and settlement type 
through which the pipeline passes (swamp, rivers, forests, 
underground, villages, towns etc.). Each parameter 
directly affects the distance, vibration and acoustic 
velocity, which are important parameters in our proposed 
project.  
 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are made up of a 
great number of sensors. These sensors are called sensor 
nodes, whose main purpose more often than not are to 
sense, process, and transmit information about the 
deployed environment or surrounding [5][6][7]. These 
sensors are usually dispersed in an environment or 
different location for the purpose of information gathering 
[3][6]. The acquired information is transmitted to a central 
sink node so that users could have access remotely 
through a gateway. A sensor node comprises of either one 
or more sensors, a signal conditioning unit, an analog to 
digital conversion module (ADC), a central processing 
unit (CPU), Memory, a radio transceiver and  an energy  
power supply unit as depicted in Fig. 2 [5][12]. Subject to 
application or deployment environment, sensors are often 
protected to guard against physical, chemical, etc. 
damage. 
 
 
Figure 1. Wireless Sensor Node Architecture 
 
Sensors nodes can be obtained off-the-shelf in two 
forms: 1. Generic (general-purpose) nodes and 2. Gateway 
(bridge) nodes [4]. A generic (general-purpose): the 
function of this kind of sensor node is to obtain 
measurements from the environment being monitored [5]. 
It is often equipped with different mechanisms which are 
capable of measuring various elements or environmental 
traits such as light, temperature, humidity, barometric 
pressure, velocity, acceleration, acoustics, magnetic ﬁeld, 
etc. Gateway (bridge):  the function of this  type of node is 
to collect information from generic sensors and transmit 
to the base station. Gateway nodes are equipped with 
greater processing capability, stronger battery power, and 
a longer transmission (radio) range [3]. A mixture of 
generic and gateway nodes are usually set up to create a 
WSN [3][4]. 
Our proposed wireless sensor motes can function in 
two ways:  
• 
As full function device (FFD): The FFD is a midway 
router whose function is to relay data collected from 
other devices. It does not require large memory 
which makes it less expensive to develop. It can 
function in all WSN topologies and can operate as a 
coordinator. 
• 
As reduced function device (RFD): This device only 
transmit its host’s or environment’ physical 
attributes that is, it just transmits to the network 
coordinator only; it does not convey data from other 
devices. It in fact requires less memory than FFD 
(very little RAM and ROM, no flash); this makes it 
even cheaper to develop than an FFD. RFD is easier 
to implement on star topology.  
This paper proposes the use of wireless sensors to 
monitor pipelines by observing parameters such as 
pipeline acoustics, vibrations and ambience lights around 
pipelines. Our proposed project conserves energy by 
eliminating 
recording 
of 
detected 
acoustics 
and 
predictively control mote's wake up and radio usage 
functionalities. To further conserve energy, we adopted 
network 
segmentation 
through 
linear 
clustering 
[8][10][11][13]. Linear clustering was adopted based on 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
research work by Alnuem [13], who demonstrated higher 
energy consumption when nodes are widely spaced.  
Figure 2 below illustrates the diverse terrain (swamp, 
villages, towns, forests, roadside etc) through which 
Nigerian pipelines are deployed. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Nigerian Pipelines Network 
 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II discusses the state of the art which explores 
various methods used to monitor pipelines for vandalism, 
natural disaster, and leakages, while the proposed work, 
which comprises the system architecture, the mote 
configuration, the mote deployment, the mote security and 
the mote/Gateway messaging are discussed and illustrated 
in Section III. Section IV presents and discusses the 
simulation results. Finally, Section V concludes the paper 
and points out open research issues and further research 
works.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
Several methods have been devised in order to 
monitor and report pipeline status. The most common and 
popular ones includes Acoustic Sensors – this employs 
acoustic or vibration measurement for pipeline monitoring 
[2][17][18]. Vision based systems – this is based on PIG 
(Pipeline Inspection Gauge) which must be inserted into 
the pipe. It works like image processor or laser scanner 
which main function is to detect leakages [2][18]. Ground 
penetrating radar (GPR) based systems – this is best 
suitable for use on environment with dry soil, but is not 
good for large network of pipes monitoring [2][17][18]. 
Fiber optic Sensors - this is suitable for present day 
pipeline monitoring systems, it can handle most present 
day pipelines issues, some of its drawbacks is the 
probability for redundancy and some challenges with 
deployment [2][13]. Multi modal underground wireless 
system – this uses low power, as the name implies it is 
meant for an underground installation, it has the 
advantage of camouflaging, but one of the disadvantages 
is that it has to be buried underground, that is a trench has 
to be created [2][18]. Every single Sensor has a distinctive 
feature and typical operating condition. Choosing a sensor 
for pipeline monitoring to a large extent depends on the 
environment to be deployed and the deployment method.  
This research work recommends wireless motes from 
both  MICA series and IRIS (to monitor pipelines and 
report either ongoing attempts to vandalize sections of a 
pipeline or to quickly report ruptured pipelines.  
 
Ismail et al. [1] demonstrated the ability of IRIS and 
MICAz mote to detect and record sounds while 
eliminating ambient noise levels. Their paper allow a 
parent mote to assign recording tasks to motes within their 
cluster. 
 
Lou et al. [17] demonstrated the ability of MICAz to 
detect and record environmental acoustics using the 
Microphone on MTS310CA sensor boards. 
Kim et al. [18] also show the feasibility of using 
MICA based mobile wireless sensor with attached RFID 
in pipe line monitoring and maintenance. 
 
This paper differs from [1][17][18] in the following 
areas : (1) Detected sound is not recorded. (2) Only very 
loud sounds triggers verification of sound source. 
Verification of detected sound is necessary due to the 
likelihood that certain persistent ambient sounds can 
trigger sound detection, hence the project introduces 
additional layers of checks, such as checking for pipeline 
vibration, detecting temperature and measuring magnetic 
flow around the pipeline. Finally, a night-time mode of 
operation allows base station to activate light sensors on 
deployed FFD motes. This enable FFD motes to detect 
and report fire around the pipeline. (4) Motes are 
deployed using “Linear Clustering”.  Figure 3 below 
represents our proposed test environment. 
 
Figure 3. Proposed mote deployment (motes are magnetically attached to 
pipeline) 
III 
PROPOSED WORK 
This paper recommends using wireless motes to (1) 
sense ambient sounds, (2) confirm the type of sound by 
testing pipeline vibration and magnetic flow around 
monitored pipeline, (3) if operating under night-time 
mode; check for fire using both temperature and light 
sensors, (4) finally, the mote sends it's ID to designated 
base station or sink. MICAz and IRIS are compatible and 
can use similar sensor boards, since both are equipped 
with similar 51 pins sensor connector module. However, 
MEMSIC IRIS has better radio range and a larger 
memory capacity when compared with previous MICA 
motes [14].  
Figures 4, 5 and 6 below depict deferent kinds of 
motes for the proposed project. 
 
 
 
Figure.4. MICA2 
Figure 5. MICAz 
Figure 6. IRIS 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
Each mote has a 51 pin connector interface which 
allow MTS310CA sensor boards to connect to the mote. 
The sensing capabilities [14] of MTS310CA sensor board 
are (1) light detection (2) temperature detection (3) sound 
detection (4) acceleration and vibration sensing and (5) 
magnetic field detection [14]. 
 
A. Proposed Mote Configuration 
Two kinds of motes will be deployed to achieve 
proposed objectives, namely motes equipped with 
MTS310CA sensor boards (also known as full function 
devices or FFD), and those without the sensor board 
(known as Reduced Function Devices or RFD). 
 
B.  Sound Sensing 
Sound sensing triggers other sound verification events 
in quick succession. This process avoids false alarm and 
stabilizes system credibility. Hence sound sensing motes 
must be properly configured to detect sounds above 
topographical ambience levels. However, setting a high 
frequency level can force the device not to detect certain 
frequencies, for example, a large explosion has a 
frequency of between 20Hz to 50Hz, however, when 
explosions rips through metal, the frequency increases and 
can be detected by a sound sensing mote. Another 
interesting fact about sound is the fixed distance within 
which generated wavelength can propagate; depending on 
the velocity. Sound velocity is determined  either by 
environment (temperature) or the composition of the 
material through which the sound propagates (such as air, 
water, iron and steel). For example,  Given the following 
values, let us calculate the distance covered by a large 
explosion through an empty steel pipe: 
 
 
A knowledge of the distance covered by each sound 
wavelength influences placement of sound sensing motes. 
The Table.1 lists the various ambient sounds common 
along the route of Nigerian pipelines: 
 
TABLE 1.   AMBIENT SOUNDS COMMON ALONG THE ROUTE 
OF NIGERIAN PIPELINES 
Source 
Decibel 
Frequency 
(Hz) 
Chain Saw 
100 db 
2000 Hz 
Chirping Bird 
5 db 
7000 Hz 
Rustling Leaves 
>2 db 
1500 Hz 
Gunshot 
>120 db 
2000 Hz 
Festive Band 
110 db 
800-1500 Hz 
Crying, talking, 
barking dog 
30 – 60 db 
250 – 700 Hz 
 
C.  Proposed Motes Deployment 
The proposed Motes are deployed in such a way that 
Full Function Devices are positioned to prevent 
simultaneous sensing of same sound (due to sound 
propagation) Figure 3 above. However, in the rare event 
that it does happen, operators will be able to locate the 
actual sound source by examining transmitted ID of motes 
that reported the sound within a linear cluster. 
“Linear Clustering” allow a group of Full and 
Reduced function devices to be either “linearly attached” 
to surface pipelines or to trees, rocks and other naturally 
occurring feature over an underground pipeline. Each 
group/cluster of FFDs and RFDs relay monitoring results 
to a base station as shown in Figures 7 and 8 below. 
 
 
Figure 7. Cluster of FF and RF Devices on a surface pipeline. Cluster 
will be repeated along total distance of surface pipeline 
 
 
Figure 8. Cluster of FF and RF Devices placed on trees along the path of 
underground pipeline. Cluster will be repeated along total distance of 
underground pipeline 
 
Distances between Full Function and Reduced 
Function Devices will be determined by both lowest 
acoustic worth detecting and the maximum range of 
wireless broadcast.  
Monitoring underground pipeline against vandalism is 
achieved through constant monitoring of ambience 
acoustics along underground pipeline deployment route. 
Emphasis is laid on monitoring attempts to excavate 
sections of top soil above underground pipelines. Motes 
saddled 
with 
monitoring 
these 
sections 
will 
be 
programmed to detect voices, excavating machinery, 
chainsaws etc.  
As stated earlier, both surface and underground 
pipelines adopt linear clustering to both enhance 
communication and minimize power consumption. 
However, a stolen or malfunction mote within a 
cluster will greatly affect transmission of verified attempts 
on a pipeline.  
 
D.  Mote Security 
Motes will be required to periodically send identifying 
information every 72 hours to the base station. Failure to 
receive such information enable operators to know what 
motes to replace (either lost to theft, drained batteries, or 
simply damaged). 
 
E.  Mote/Gateway Messaging 
Mote's ability to properly monitor pipelines can be 
jeopardized if sound sensing motes are not aware of 
changes in pipeline status. For example, is it empty or is it 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
crude, gasoline or diesel flowing through it? Therefore, 
operators need to inform motes wirelessly when crude is 
being pumped along pipelines. This enable sound sensing 
motes to adjust their sound sensing algorithm. We equally 
propose a night-time mode for FFD sensors, this mode is 
trigger via a message received from the base station. It 
allows sensors to include temperature and light sensing 
during each pipeline monitoring cycle. 
Base station operators remotely notify motes regarding 
both pipeline status and day time/night time status. 
Pipeline status notifies motes when liquid is being 
pumped through pipelines or when pipeline are empty. 
Such notifications enable motes to know what sensors to 
engage during each sampling process. 
Similarly, night time/day time status notification 
determines the various sensors a mote will utilize during 
each predetermined round of ambience sampling. 
 
Figure 9. Flow chart represents action to be taken during the day when 
nothing is being pumped through the pipeline. In TinyOS  0 or false is 1 
 
The process flowchart (above, Fig.9) represents 
actions to be taken by FFD motes during the day, when 
pipelines are empty (that is when nothing is being pumped 
through pipelines). The process flowchart eliminates false 
“alerts” caused by high frequency sounds such as the 
chirping of a bird by checking if detected sound lead to 
pipeline vibration.  
A detected pipeline vibration triggers the next action 
which involves turning on the radio and transmitting 
sensor's ID to the base station. Transmitted ID is used by 
base station operators to identify sensor's coordinate along 
the pipeline.  
The next process flowchart (Fig. 10) represents 
algorithm to execute during the day, when pipeline is in 
use (that is when crude or related products are being 
pumped through pipelines). 
 
Figure 10. The flow of crude oil or related product triggers slight 
vibration 
 
Finally, the next two process flow chart uses light and 
temperature sensors (in addition to acoustic and 
accelerometer, (Figures 11 and 12) during nighttime 
mode to detect acts of vandalism against the pipe. 
 
Figure 11. Night time mode operations use up more resources 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
The process flowchart above (Fig. 11) represents 
actions to be taken by FFD motes during the night, when 
pipelines are empty (that is when nothing is being pumped 
through them). The process flowchart also eliminates false 
“alerts” caused by high frequency sounds such as the 
chirping of a bird by checking if detected sound lead to 
pipeline vibration. Detecting pipeline vibrations triggers 
the next action which involves turning on the radio and 
transmitting sensor's ID to the base station. But this uses 
light and temperature sensors.  
 
 
Figure 12. Vibration algorithm will change once liquid is pumped 
through pipeline 
 
Figure 12 above represents algorithm to execute 
during the night, when pipeline is in use (that is when 
crude or related products are being pumped through 
pipelines). But this also uses light and temperature 
sensors. 
IV. SIMULATION RESULT 
The pipeline monitoring solution was developed using 
TinyOS 2.1.2 on Ubuntu 14.04 LTS. TinyOS Yeti2 plugin 
for Eclipse IDE  was installed to enable TinyOS software 
development under Eclipse 3.8. During the course of 
testing, it was discovered that TOSSIM [9] (TinyOS 
Simulator), cannot simulate certain hardware features 
(such as microphone). Hence, Berkley University's Avrora 
[10] (The AVR Simulator and Analysis Framework) was 
downloaded and installed from [16]. 
Another limitation discovered during the course of 
simulating the solution is the inability of available 
simulators to use hardware available on the host computer 
to emulate certain features of the mote. For example, the 
computer's microphone should be used during simulation 
when a call is made to use Micaz's acoustic microphone. 
To overcome this and other limitations, flashing of 
Micaz's led was used to simulate the turning on and off of 
microphones and other sensors.  
The solution does not seek to modify the behavior of 
B-MAC. Rather, it simply recommend keeping the radio 
on FFD turned off until needed.  
Project workability is the primary goal of using 
wireless sensors to monitor pipelines in Nigeria. 
Nonetheless, simulating energy dissipation rate of 
deployed motes goes a long way to guide future power 
pack design and deployment plans. 
The energy dissipation graphs of the simulation are 
shown below (Figures 13 and 14). Both solutions 
dissipate equal energy during FFD transmissions. 
However, our proposed solution (Figure 14) will dissipate 
less energy overtime since radio usage (that is turning the 
radio on and off) is predetermined by the presence of 
sound. 
Nonetheless, 
periodic 
turning 
on 
of 
mote’s 
microphone, accelerometer and temperature sensors will 
most likely negates intended energy gained from periodic 
usage of FFD’s radio. 
Our proposed solution reduced collusion and lost as a 
result of delays which can be attributed to the need to 
verify detected sound before reporting. 
 
Figure 13. Normal transmission energy dissipation graph using short 
delays. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
 
Figure 14. Energy transmission graph of our proposed solution 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has proposed the use of wireless sensors to 
monitor acoustics, vibrations and lights emanating from or 
around targeted pipelines. Motes are best positioned to 
achieve 24/7 surveillance of oil pipelines. However, this 
will only materialize through adequate planning and 
deployment strategy. Planning includes combination of 
hardware and software options, to boost performance and 
to ensure energy sufficiency.  
We believe adding imaging ability will further 
enhance the project. This involves using concealed 
cameras which can communicate with Micaz, Mica2 and 
IRIS motes by capturing and sending low quality images 
of areas which Base station operators wish to see. 
Moreover, additional work needs to be done on mote 
simulators. Especially in the area of emulating mote 
hardware by integrating into host's devices. For example, 
a call to a mote to turn on its microphone should equally 
turn on the microphone of the PC on which the mote is 
executing. Avrora simulator returns identical energy 
consumption values for yellow, green and blue LEDS 
during simulation, hence it was impossible to simulate 
light sensor using the three available LEDS. Finally, due 
to a tight budget, we could not deploy motes in a physical 
environment, we therefore, recommend that further 
research work on this experiment should be conducted 
using methods outlined in this project. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
M. F. F. Bin Ismail and Wai Yie “Acoustic Monitoring 
System Using Wireless Sensor Networks” International 
Symposium on Robotics and Intelligent Sensors, 2012, pp. 
2-7.  
[2] 
A. M. Sadeghion, N. Metje, D. N. Chapman, and C. J. 
Anthony “Smartpipes: Smart Wireless Sensor Networks 
for Leak Detection In Water Pipelines” Journal of Sensor 
and Actuator Networks,   February 2014, pp. 1-15. 
[3] 
O. Diallo, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues and M. Sene, “Real-time 
data Management on wireless sensor networks: A survey” 
Journal 
of 
Network 
and 
Computer 
Applications, 
www.elsevier.com/ locate/jnca   December 2011, pp.2 – 8. 
[4] 
 G. Han, X. Jiang, A. Qian, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, and L. 
Cheng, “A Wireless Comparative Study of Routing 
Protocols of Heterogeneous Sensor Networks”, Research 
Article, June 2014, pp. 1-3. 
[5] 
L. M. L. Oliveira, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, A. G. F. Elias and 
B. B. Zarpelão, “Ubiquitous monitoring solution for 
Wireless Sensor Networks with push notiﬁcations and 
end-to-end connectivity” 2014 pp. 1 - 2. 
[6] 
K. Lin, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, H. Ge, Naixue Xiong, and X. 
Liang “Energy Efﬁciency QoS Assurance Routing in 
Wireless   Multimedia Sensor Networks“, IEEE Systems 
Journal, Vol. 5, December 2011 pp.1-3.     
[7] 
V. N. G. J. Soares and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Cooperation 
in DTN-Based Network Architectures” V2-05, April 
2011, pp. 103 – 107. 
[8] 
M. Shilpa, Tamanna, and K. Mukesh “A Comparative 
Study of Power Aware Routing Protocols of Ad Hoc 
Network” International Journal of Computer Applications 
(IJCA), 2011,  pp. 1 – 5. 
[9] 
S. A. Ahlam, and A. Manal,” Medium Access Control 
Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks Classifications 
and Cross- Layering” Science Direct, Procedure Computer 
Science,  www.ScienceDirect.com, ICCMIT, 2015, pp. 2-
13.   
[10] N. Bhavana, S. Anuradha, K. Sanjay, and P. Vinod 
“Energy Efficient MAC Protocols for Wireless Sensor 
Networks: A Survey” Computer Science and Engineering 
Survey Vol.2, No. 3, August 2011, pp. 122-129.  
[11] E. Romero, A. Araujo, J. Blesa, and O. Nieto-Taladriz 
“Developing Cognitive Strategies for Reducing Energy 
Consumption in Wireless Sensor Networks” The Second 
International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio, 
COCORA 2012, pp. 64 – 65. 
[12]  L. M. L. Oliveira and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks: 
a 
Monitoring” 
Journal 
of 
Communications, April 2011, Vol. 6, No. 2, pp. 3-16.  
[13] M. Alnuem” Performance Analysis of Node Placement in 
Linear Wireless Sensor Networks” Journal of Emerging 
Trends in Computing and Information Sciences, January 
2014, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp.1 – 8.  
[14] Intrinsic 
Solutions: 
MEMSIC 
Wireless 
Modules 
http://www.intrinsic.in/Products/Memsic-
WirelessModules.aspx  
[15] Sound 
Frequency 
and 
Wavelength 
Calculator 
http://www.1728.org/freqwavf.htm  
[16] The AVR Simulator and Analysis Framework, Berkley 
University http://compilers.cs.ucla.edu/avrora/release.html  
[17] L. Luo, Q. Cao, C. Huang, T. Abdelzaher, John A. 
Stankovic, 
and 
M. 
Ward, 
“EnviroMic: 
Toward 
Cooperative Storage and Retrieval in Audio Sensor 
Networks”, 2009, pp. 1- 22 
[18] J. Kim, G. Sharma, N. Boudriga, and S. S. Iyengar 
“SPAMMS: 
A 
Sensor-based 
Pipeline 
Autonomous 
Monitoring and Maintenance System” IEEE Explore, 
2010, pp.2-11. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

