A Mobile Learning Combinative Application for Comparing Educational 
Techniques  
Kiriakos Patriarcheas 
School of Sciences and Technology, Computer Science  
Hellenic Open University  
Patras, Greece  
e-mail: k.patriac@eap.gr  
 
Abstract—This article focuses on the e-learning fora of with the 
purpose of comparing educational techniques widely used in 
the fields (such as Snowballing and Brainstorming) in a 
combined environment both via mobile and computer devices, 
in the framework of a training course in advanced technologies 
integration skills computer instructors. For the purpose of this 
study, modeling in formal language was used to classify the 
messages in the Moodle forum, as well as a respective system to 
automate this procedure. 
Keywords- 
e-learning; 
mobile 
learning; 
 
education 
;educational techniques; modelling; advanced technologies 
integration skills 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Over recent years, the rapid development of mobile 
devices has made possible the support of educational 
applications in e-learning to the extent that the term m-
learning (mobile learning) has now been established as a 
relatively autonomous field with distinct features as to the 
means used compared to e-learning in general. The main 
feature of e-learning is that there is physical distance 
between the trainee and the instructor. Therefore, 
communication is important for the success of an e-learning 
course. Extremely useful tools used by e-learning are the 
fora that provide the opportunity for asynchronous 
communication not only between the instructor and the 
trainees, but also between trainees themselves. During the 
past twenty years, a multitude of systems that offer the 
critical service of asynchronous fora for e-learning have 
been developed, such as: Manhattan Virtual Classroom 
(MVC), Moodle, Claronline, Online Learning and Training 
(OLAT), Cisco Networking Academy Management System 
(CNAMS), 
Pioneer 
(Microelectronics 
Educational 
Development - University of Paisley), AulaNet, etc. 
Furthermore, over the recent years, the development of 
mobile devices has made possible the support of educational 
applications (MSN Messenger, Gmail, etc.) to the extent 
that the term m-learning (mobile learning) is now a 
significant field of e-learning with distinct features as to the 
means used.  
Moreover, field researchers have been interested in a 
basic issue during these past twenty years: how they can 
have, at each given moment, an overall picture of the 
situation in a number of discussion threads in a e-learning 
forum, not just at a quantitative level of participation, but at 
the quality level of what is discussed and whether the 
desirable learning climate is achieved through the discussion 
in the fora. This paper presents a study that compares 
educational techniques (Snowballing and Brainstorming), in 
the asynchronous forum Moodle through the use of a 
combined environment, both via computer and mobile 
devices in a training course in in advanced technologies 
integration skills computer instructors. It is worthy to note 
here that, for this study, the previous practical and research 
experience was utilized within the framework of Hellenic 
Open University (HOU) and concerns, among other things, 
previous projects related to the attitude of HOU students 
[1][2], as well as fora modeling as a methodology for the 
interpretation of messages [3]. 
The structure of this article is the following: Section II, 
where a brief literature review is presented. In section III, the 
study methodology is presented. In section IV, the data 
analysis is presented. In section V, the respective discussion 
takes place and the results are presented, which are combined 
with the conclusions of relative studies and finally section 
VII, where the major conclusions and the future goals are 
presented. 
II. 
LITERATURE  REVIEW 
There are a number of studies about the use of mobile 
devices in e-learning. Indicatively, Nonyongo, Mabusela, & 
Monene [4] studied the reliability and effectiveness of 
communication through messages, as a complementary form 
of communication for the students of the distance education 
University of South Africa (UNISA), as an opportunity in 
communicating and providing support for their students 
who in their majority live in rural areas and informal 
settlements with limited infrastructure, while Nakahara et al. 
[5] study the encouragement provided to collaborative 
learning environments through mobile technology. Gerosa 
et al. [6] focused on the improvement of  coordination 
support in educational forums using mobile devices through 
patterns in discussion groups, while Wang et al. [7] 
researched the impact of mobile learning on students' 
learning behaviours and performance. Rekkedal & Dye [8] 
present an in depth presentation of the pedagogical 
dimension of mobile distance learning, while Kukulska-
Hulme [9] studied mobile usability in educational 
environments and discovered that it is dependent on human 
factors. These indicative studies show the ever growing 
importance of mobile learning and demarcate a distinct role 
in the broader framework of e-learning. Gikas & Grant [10] 
focus on exploring teaching and learning when mobile 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

computing 
devices, 
such 
as 
mobile 
phones 
and 
smartphones, have been applied to higher education. Lai et 
al. [11] investigates the differences between mobile 
learning environmental preferences of high school teachers 
and students. Bannan, Cook, & Pachler [12] examine how 
the intersection of mobile learning and design research, 
prompts the reconceptualization of research and design 
individually as well as their integration appropriate for 
current, complex learning environments. 
In the field of fora in e-leraning, a subject researchers 
have been focusing on in the past years (as well as 
coordinators and tutors) is how we can have, at any given 
moment, an overall picture of the situation in a number of 
threads about what is being discussed and whether the 
creation of the desirable learning climate is achieved 
through discussion in the fora [13]–[16]. Dringus & Elis 
[17] seek to intersect the information an instructor may wish 
to extract from the forum, with viewable and useful 
information that the system could produce from the 
instructor's query. Romero, Ventura & Garcia [18] describes 
the full process for mining e-learning data, as well as, how 
to apply the main data mining techniques used, such as 
statistics, 
visualization, 
classification, 
clustering 
and 
association rule mining of Moodle data. Furthermore, 
Romero & Ventura [19] describes the different groups of 
user, types of educational environments, and the data they 
provide, as well as, the most typical/common tasks in the 
educational environment, that have been resolved through 
data-mining techniques. 
There are numerous studies on educational techniques 
used in e-learning fora some of which concern educational 
techniques such as Snowballing and Brainstorming. 
Indicatively, 
concerning 
Brainstorming 
technique 
Pinsonnealt et al. [20] adopt the term Electronic 
Brainstorming (EBS) addressing that “it has been proposed 
as a superior approach to both nominal Brainstorming 
(working alone) and face-to-face Brainstorming (verbal)”. 
There are studies that try to particularise in subcategories 
the Brainstorming technique, namely Camacho & Paulus 
[21], refer to solitary Brainstorming, while Helquist et al. 
[22] to “very large groups” of Brainstorming, and studies 
which examine the creativity [23] or the productivity [24] in 
a 
web-based 
context 
of 
asynchronous 
electronic 
Brainstorming groups. Offner et al. [25] explored the 
unblocking 
Brainstorming. 
Finally, 
Dugosh 
et 
al. 
[26] examine the potential of cognitive stimulation in 
Brainstorming technique.  
With regard to the Snowballing technique Thomas & 
Carswell [27] use it in their effort to assess the role of 
collaborative 
learning 
in 
a 
distributed 
education 
environment within the framework of a relative research of 
the Open University of London, highlighting that it offers 
essential support for students studying at a distance. Kember 
& Gow [28] also evaluate it when studying the action 
research as a form of staff development in higher education, 
in attempting to improve their own teaching through cycles 
of planning, acting, observing and reflecting.  
In summary, it is concluded that despite the fact that 
there is a multitude of studies on the mobile dimension of e-
learning, and other studies referring to educational 
techniques, such as Snowballing and Brainstorming that are 
widely used in e-learning fora, a void is detected however in 
the comparison of educational techniques through processes 
that use a combined environment with a computer and 
mobile devices. 
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
A. Sample 
This research was conducted from October 2016 to 
February 2017, in 8 training computer instructors’ centers of 
Greece. The sample consisted of 144 instructors-trainees’, at 
the areas of Attica (3 Centers), Central Greece, Thessaly, 
Western Greece, Peloponnesus and Crete within the 
framework of a training course in advanced technologies 
integration skills computer instructors. All trainees were of 
the same level of knowledge. Evaluated were the discussion 
threads on forum (in all 2498 messages).  
B. Method 
The trainees were grouped in 8 groups of 18 people; 
there was an effort to form all groups absolutely uniform as 
far as the members’ education profile was concerned (age, 
sex, experience, etc.) Supporting material with the concepts 
to be presented, as well as a manual with the commands of 
the 5 modules of the course (IHMC Cmap tools, Edison for 
the creation of electrical circuits, Java Virtual Machine,  
Scratch and Java applets for Ph.E.T.) were available via 
Internet before the beginning of the course. Training was 
based upon the Moodle forum, with the use of a combined 
environment via internet and mobile devices. Furthermore, 
after the end of each of the 5 modules of the course, a self-
evaluation test was completed by the trainees. The 
aforementioned educational procedure is mainly applied by 
HOU in Greece. 
At this point, it should be noted that the standard 
instructions for designing applications for Mobile devices 
were followed, as described in the mobile best web practice 
document of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). 
C. Activities 
The lesson plans distributed to the trained to be 
developed, should comprise: a) title for the hourly module b) 
the goals of the course (as for knowledge, skills, attitudes), c) 
sub-units, (parts into which teaching shall be divided) and 
time used for each one, d) educational techniques and 
teaching aids to be used for each sub-unit and e) justification 
of the above choices. The lesson plans concerned the 
creation of 5 exercises of each object IHMC Cmap tools, 
Edison for the creation of electrical circuits, Java Virtual 
Machine,  Scratch and Java applets for Ph.E.T). 
D. Procedure 
During the asynchronous discussion on the forum it was 
decided to use the educational techniques of Snowballing 
and Brainstorming. More specifically the Snowballing 
technique was used in four groups while the Brainstorming 
was used in the other four.  
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

In the case of the Snowballing technique, it was chosen 
so that views were exchanged in order to advance and 
expand the trainees' consideration as far as the advanced 
technologies integration skills is concerned. In particular, 
the procedure which took place exclusively through the 
Moodle forum and was repeated in each course of the 
program was the following: a) The trainees had the 
opportunity to comment on the issues of the concepts’ 
teaching approach in advanced technologies integration 
skills they faced b) Then each trained person compared their 
comments to another (by creating threads of 3 people) c) 
The same procedure was repeated in groups of six and d) At 
the end of the procedure all the trainees of the group 
participated (18) presenting all the views in a plenary 
session and they tried to compose their views and to reach 
conclusions, as they did in Brainstorming technique. At this 
point it is advisable to present the modeling used.  
As for the Brainstorming, the procedure intended to the 
exposure of numerous sides of the issue of advanced 
technologies integration skills, the knowledge enrichment of 
the trained and finally the consolidation or change of their 
opinions. In particular, the procedure which took place 
exclusively through the Moodle forum and was repeated in 
each course of the program was the following: a) They all 
participated in the same thread and each one was stimulated 
to express her/his own ideas in a spontaneous way even if 
their ideas seemed unrealistic at a first level without being 
necessary (at this phase) to explain them and without 
criticizing any of them b) The tutor codified all ideas and 
presented them in a uniform manner c) Each trainee was 
asked to explain or even modify (if they wanted) their initial 
placement d) At the end of the procedure, it was stimulated 
to compose the opinions and to reach conclusions as for the 
compilation of lesson plans. 
E. Modelling 
Based on observations at the HOU fora, the following 
became 
evident: 
a) 
There 
are 
two categories of 
communication actors: Tutors and Students. For brevity, 
tutors will be symbolised with a T and students with an S b) 
As regards message types, these are distinguished into 
questions and answers. Hereinafter, symbolised with q and a 
respectively c) As to their content, messages are 
distinguished into those relating to (the respective symbols 
are given in brackets): i) study of educational material (M), 
ii) questions/answers for exercises – assignments (X), iii) 
presentation of sample assignments by tutors (P), iv) 
instructions (I), v) assignment comments, corrections (C), 
vi) student comments on assignments (D), vii) sending – 
receiving assignments (J), viii) sending - receiving grade 
marks (G), ix) notification of advisory meeting (V) and x) 
pointless message (L). 
Finally, the order in which the above symbols will be 
written is: a) message carrier b) message type and c) the 
content of the category to which the message belongs. A 
message concerning a student’s question for an assignment is 
represented as: SqX (where S for student, q for question and 
X for the fact that this message is about an assignment). An 
indicative example is presented that contains a series of 
messages 
represented 
by 
the 
sequence 
SqVMTaVMSqMXSaXM, which represent a discussion thread 
as follows: in the beginning is a message whose sender is 
student S who is asking a question q referring to forthcoming 
advisory meeting V and also concerning the study of 
educational material M. This message is replied to by tutor T 
who is answering a referring to forthcoming advisory 
meeting V and also about the study of educational material 
M. This message is replied to by student S who is asking a 
question q concerning the study of educational material M 
and also about the forthcoming assignment X. This message 
is replied to by another student S who is answering a about 
the forthcoming assignment X and also about the study of 
educational material M. As it is obvious this modeling uses a 
formal language. Additionally, it should be noted that for this 
Language syntax check algorithm was used, as well as a 
respective system to automate this procedure by inserting 
threads from discussion fora and exporting the respective 
strings.  
According to this approach, a system of automatic 
classification [29]-[33] was used, which comprised the 
following steps: Data filtering, Storage of roots files and 
Strings’ production. In data filtering process, an algorithm 
was used, that would input a file containing one or more 
discussion threads in their original form and output a file of 
documents containing the following information (User name, 
date, message content). In the second stage (Storage of roots 
files) an algorithm of roots export of words was used, that 
produces the result with one parsing and removes the 
endings based on the Quick Fitting (QF) principle. In 
Strings’ production stage, was used a process that inputs: a) 
the records file containing useful information (User name, 
date, message content); b) the file containing pairs of 
word/phrase roots or symbols and terminal symbols relating 
to the type of message; and c) the file containing the pairs of 
words/phrases and terminal symbols referring to the content 
category of the message. This system was tested 
experimentally using a combination of algorithms, such as:  
AdaBoost, Naive Bayes, 1-Nearest, and WINNOW.   
Subsequently, was followed a calibration process of repeated 
readjustment, and the results was deemed satisfactory 
(98.92% correct message interpretation in present case). 
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
In groups 1, 2, 3 and 4, where the Snowballing technique 
was used, we received 1119 messages; 81 from the 
instructors and 1038 from trainees while, as far as content 
categories are concerned we had 1685 appearances in all. In 
groups 5, 6, 7 and 8, where the Brainstorming technique was 
utilized, we received 1379 messages; 115 were from the 
instructors and 1264 from the trainees. Given that, according 
to the above modeling, more than one category of content 
may be included in each message (e.g. the same message 
may be a question on the study of educational material as 
well as a project too), 2788 such questions were confirmed. 
The above information is presented in Table I. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

TABLE I.  
ΑPPEARANCES NUMBER (AN) PER MESSAGE CONTENT 
CATEGORY (CC)  
Content 
Category 
Groups  1, 2, 3 and 4 
(Snowballing) 
Groups 5, 6 , 7 and 8  
(Brainstorming) 
M 
288 
652 
X 
356 
781 
P 
44 
47 
I 
41 
59 
C 
201 
272 
D 
256 
380 
J 
357 
360 
G 
37 
36 
V 
33 
32 
L 
72 
169 
Total 
1685 
2788 
 
It is obvious “Figure 1” that there is a respective uniformity 
per message content category but with a different intension. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
M
X
P
I
C
D
J
G
V
L
Groups  1, 2, 3 and 4 (Snowballing)
Groups 5, 6 , 7 and 8  (Brainstorming)
 
Figure 1.  Graphic representation of Snowballing and  Brainstorming 
techniques. 
If we take into account only interventions of trainees, then 
we have 879 appearances for Snowballing groups. This arises 
from the deduction the tutor’s interventions and the said 
“service type” of interventions, i.e. the categories presentation 
of sample assignments by tutors (P), assignment comments, 
corrections (C), sending – receiving assignments (J), sending - 
receiving grade marks (G), notification of advisory meeting (V) 
which function as separate variables according to the initial 
plan, as well as the tutor’s interventions appearing on the 
remaining content categories.  The respective numbers of 
appearances for Brainstorming groups are 1889. The above 
information is presented in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
APPEARANCES NUMBER (AN) PER MESSAGE CONTENT 
CATEGORY (CC) WITHOUT THE TUTOR’S INTERVENTIONS  
Content 
Category 
Groups  1, 2, 3 and 4 
(Snowballing) 
Groups 5, 6 , 7 and 8  
(Brainstorming) 
M 
241 
605 
X 
311 
735 
D 
255 
380 
L 
72 
169 
Total 
879 
1889 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
M
X
D
L
Groups  1, 2, 3 and 4 (Snowballing)
Groups 5, 6 , 7 and 8  (Brainstorming)
 
Figure 2.  Graphic representation of the distributions of Snowballing and 
Brainstorming techniques containing only the trainees interventions. 
It is obvious “Figure 2” that the difference in 
participation increases when the tutor’s intervention 
reduces. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
According to the data analysis, in groups where 
Brainstorming was used, higher participation at forum is 
noted, compared to Snowballing in both as for messages 
(1379 against 1119) and range of content categories (2788 
against 1685). Furthermore, if from this number the content 
categories P, J, G, V are deducted, as well as the tutor’s 
interventions, which in our case constitute separate 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

variables, then the discrepancy (respectively) increases even 
more (1889 against 879). Moreover, even if we deduct the 
needless messages (L), then the discrepancy of participation 
(in educationally substantial categories) is 1720 against 807. 
In the case of the Brainstorming in relation to the 
Snowballing, enforcement of the creativity and the 
participants' experiences is noted; this finding arises from 
practical experience and messages’ texts analysis as well as 
from the fact that we have 605 against 241 and 735 against 
311 for the categories: study of educational material (Μ) 
and questions/answers for exercises assignments (Χ) 
respectively. In addition, improvement of critical thinking is 
noted (category: student comments on assignments (D): 380 
against 255).  
On the other hand, in Brainstorming technique the 
phenomenon of more needless messages arises, i.e., off 
topic interventions (169 against 72). Despite the fact that it 
can be quantitatively proven, meanwhile the observation 
and study of messages’ contents offers (in a quite small 
extent) a show of imagination by a smaller percentage of 
participants in Brainstorming technique, in contradiction to 
Snowballing technique. This may be explained given the 
fact the Snowballing technique is more “disciplined”. 
 As it can also be seen in Tables I and II, a slightly 
uniform distribution to both techniques is noted, as far as 
where the attention is during the forum discussions, both 
throughout all the messages and also to those remaining if 
we deduct the messages functioning as separate variables. It 
becomes thus obvious that (X) category: questions/answers 
for exercises – assignments comes first (781 and 735 against 
356 and 311), followed by the (M) category: study of 
educational material (652 and 605 against 288 and 241). 
Even though, as mentioned above, there is a void 
regarding the comparison of the educational techniques of 
Snowballing and Brainstorming through processes that use a 
combined environment with computer and mobile devices 
for e-learning, yet there are relevant studies referring to 
these techniques individually. When studying the results of 
this study, we had in mind that the educational practices are 
regarded as social practices to be changed through 
collaborative action [28]. On the high percentage of 
participation in Brainstorming, despite seeming presumable, 
at first it is not always so, given that “a poorly crafted 
Brainstorming input creates a cognitive load that consumes 
attention resources and may stifle the Brainstorming 
process” [22], while according to Michinov and Primois 
[23] participation is encouraged “only when participants 
have access to a shared table facilitating the comparison 
among group members”. As for the ascertainment of 
educational participation of Brainstorming in this study, it is 
at first, in contrast to a respective study [20] where it is 
highlighted that “the prevailing popularity of group 
Brainstorming (verbal or electronic) in organizations may be 
explained by the perceived productivity” and that “these 
perceptions, which are at odds with reality, create the 
illusion of productivity”; but Camacho & Paulus [21], who, 
despite ascertaining the same, however explain that “part of 
the productivity loss observed in interactive Brainstorming 
groups may be due to the inhibited performance of 
individuals who are uncomfortable with group interaction”; 
Michinov and Primois [23] are of similar opinion. This 
conclusion is also reached by a respective study [26] where 
it is noted that “the attentional set of the participant and the 
content of the exposure manipulation (number of ideas, 
presence 
of 
irrelevant 
information) 
affected 
its 
effectiveness”.  To the above, we must add that similar 
results 
regarding 
the 
increased 
participation 
of 
Brainstorming compared to Snowballing appear in a 
relevant study on training of programming didactics for 
informatics high schools teachers [34]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION & FUTURE GOALS 
The development of a plethora of systems that provide 
the service of asynchronous e-learning fora the development 
of mobile devices and their use in education creates a new 
landscape the recent years in education, which needs to be 
studied from many aspects.  This paper focuses on the 
comparison of educational techniques that are widely used 
in the e-learning fora (such as Brainstorming and 
Snowballing) through a combined environment via 
computer and mobile devices, in the framework of a training 
course in the advanced technologies integration skills of 
computer instructors. As is deduced, both from data 
analysis, as well as from the study of the text messages in 
the Moodle forum, the groups where Brainstorming 
technique was utilized show higher participation at the 
forum than those utilizing the Snowballing technique. 
Additionally, a better enforcement of the participants' 
critical thinking is noted. On the other hand, in Snowballing 
technique it is noted that quite less time is spent and there 
are no off topic interventions in relation to Brainstorming.  
Among other things, future goals are the comparison of 
the remaining educational techniques that are used in e-
learning as well as the study of dimensions that affect the 
effectiveness of asynchronous fora, such as the size of the 
group of participants through relevant environments.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Xenos, C. Pierrakeas, and P. Pintelas, “A Survey on Student 
Dropout Rates and Dropout Causes Concerning the Students in the 
Course of Informatics of the Hellenic Open University”, Computers 
& Education, vol. 39, pp. 361-377, Dec. 2002.  
[2] M. Xenos, “Prediction and Assessment of Student Behaviour in Open 
and Distance Education in Computers using Bayesian Networks”, 
Computers & Education, vol. 43, pp. 345-359, Dec. 2004.   
[3] K. Patriarcheas and M. Xenos, “Modelling of distance education 
forum: Formal languages as interpretation methodology of messages 
in asynchronous text-based discussion”, Computers & Education, vol. 
52, pp. 438-448, Feb. 2009. 
[4] E. Nonyongo, K. Mabusela, and V. Monene, “Effectiveness of SMS 
communication between university and students”  The 4th World 
Conference on  Mobile Learning (M-Learn), Cape Town, 2005. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://iamlearn.org/mlearn-
archive/mlearn2005/CD/papers/Nonyongo%26%20Mabusela.pdf 
[5] J. Nakahara, Y. Kazaru, H. Shinichi, and Y. Yamauchi, “iTree: Does 
the mobile phone encourage learners to be more involved in 
collaborative learning?” In T. Koschmann, T. Chan, D. Suthers (Eds), 
Proc. CSCL 2005, pp. 470–478, LEA editions, USA.  
[6] M. A. Gerosa, D. Filippo, M. Pimentel, H. Fuks, and C. J. P. Lucena, 
“Is the unfolding of the group discussion off-pattern? Improving 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

coordination support in educational forums using mobile devices”, 
Computers & Education, vol. 54, pp. 528-544, Feb. 2010. 
[7] M. J. Wang, R.M. Shen, D. Novak, and X. Y. Pan, “The Impact of 
Mobile Learning on Learning Behaviors and Performance: Report 
from a Large Blended Classroom”, British Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 38, pp. 294-311, Mar. 2007. 
[8] T. Rekkedal and A. Dye, “Mobile Distance Learning with PDAs: 
Development and Testing of Pedagogical and System Solutions 
Supporting Mobile Distance Learners”, International Review of 
Research in Open and Distance Learning, , vol. 8, pp. 1-21, Jun. 
2007.  
[9] A. Kukulska-Hulme, “Mobile Usability in Educational Contexts: 
What Have We Learnt?” The International Review of Research in 
Open and Distance Learning, vol. 8, p. 1-16, Jun. 2007.  
[10] J. Gikas and M. M. Grant (2013). “Mobile computing devices in 
higher education: Student perspectives on learning with cellphones, 
smartphones & social media”, The Internet and Higher Education, 
vol. 19, pp. 18-26,  Oct. 2013. 
[11] C. L. Lai, G. J. Hwang, J. C. Liang, and C. C. Tsai, “Differences 
between mobile learning environmental preferences of high school 
teachers and students in Taiwan: a structural equation model 
analysis”, Educational Technology Research & Development, vol. 64, 
pp. 533-554, Jun. 2016. 
[12] B. Bannan, J. Cook, and N. Pachler, “Reconceptualizing design 
research in the age of mobile learning,”, Interactive Learning 
Environments, vol. 24, pp. 938–953, Jul. 2016. 
[13] L. M. Harasim, Global Networks: Computers and International 
Communication. Cambridge, MA:MIT Press, 1993. 
[14] R. Benbunan-Fich and S. R. Hiltz, “Impacts of asynchronous learning 
networks on individual and group problem solving: A Weld 
experiment”, Group Decision and Negotiation, vol. 8, pp.  409–426, 
Sep. 1999. 
[15] J. Hewitt, “How habitual online practices affect the development of 
asynchronous discussion threads”, Journal of Educational Computing 
Research, vol. 28, pp.  31–45, Jan.  2003. 
[16] R. M. Marra, J. L. Moore, and A. K. Klimczak, “Content analysis of 
online discussion forums: a comparative analysis of protocols”, 
Education Technology Research and Development, vol. 52, pp.  23–
40, Jun. 2004.  
[17] L. P. Dringus and T. Ellis, “Using data mining as a strategy for 
assessing asynchronous discussion forums”, Computers & Education,  
vol. 45, pp. 141-160, Aug. 2005.  
[18] C.  Romero and  S. Ventura, and E. Garcia, “Data mining in course 
management systems: Moodle case study and tutorial”, Computers & 
Education, vol. 51, pp. 368-384, Aug. 2008. 
[19] C. Romero and S. Ventura, “Educational Data Mining: A Review of 
the State of the Art”, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), vol. 40, pp. 601-618, 
Nov. 2010. 
[20] A. Pinsonnealt, H. Barki, R. B. Gallupe, and N. Hoppen, “Electronic 
Brainstorming: The Illusion of Productivity”, Information Systems 
Research, vol. 10, pp. 110-133, Feb. 1999. 
[21] L.M. Camacho and P. B. Paulus, “The role of social anxiousness in gr 
oup brainstorming”, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
vol. 68, pp. 1071-1080, Jun. 1995.  
[22] J. H. Helquist, J. Kruse, and M. Adkins, “Group support systems for 
very large groups: A peer review process to filter brainstorming 
input”, in 12th Americas Conference on Information Systems, 
Association for Information Systems, Atlanta., 2006. 
[23] N. Michinov and C. Primois, “Improving productivity and creativity 
in online groups through social comparison process: new evidence for 
asynchronous electronic brainstorming”, Computers in Human 
Behavior, vol. 21, pp.  11-28, Jan. 2005.  
[24] B. Mullen, C. Johnson, and E. Salas, “Productivity loss in 
brainstorming groups: a meta-analytic integration”, Basic and 
Applied Social Psychology, vol. 12, pp. 3-23, 1991.  
[25] A. K. Offner, T. J. Kramer, and J. P. Winter, “The effects of 
facilitation, recording, and pauses on group brainstorming”, Small 
Group Research, vol. 27, pp. 283-298, Apr. 1996. 
[26] K. L. Dugosh, P. B. Paulus, E. J. Roland, and H. Yang, “Cognitive 
stimulation in brainstorming”, Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, vol. 79, pp.  722-735, Nov. 2000.  
[27] P. Thomas and L. Carswell, “Learning through collaboration in a 
distributed education environment”, Educational Technology and 
Society, vol.  3,  pp.373-382, 2000. 
[28] D. Kember and L. Gow, “Action research as a form of staff 
development in higher education”, Higher Education, vol. 23, pp. 
297-310, Apr. 1992. 
[29] K. Patriarcheas, S. Papaloukas, and M. Xenos, “Analyzing the fora: 
An algorithms combination for the representation of messages”, Proc. 
of the 15th Panhellenic Conference on Informatics with international 
participation (PCI 2011), IEEE Computer Society Press, Oct. 2011, 
pp. 353-357, ISBN: 978-1-61284-962-1, doi: 10.1109/PCI.2011.1.  
[30] K. Patriarcheas and M. Xenos, “Integration of a System for 
Discussions 
Study 
in 
Text-Based 
Computer-Mediated 
Communication”, Proc. of the 16th Panhellenic Conference on 
Informatics with international participation (PCI 2012), IEEE 
Computer Society Press, Oct. 2012, pp. 381-386, ISBN: 978-1-4673-
2720-6, doi: 10.1109/PCi.2012.44 
[31] K. Patriarcheas and M. Xenos, “Fora for Distance Education: Another 
Way for Analysis of Discussions”, The Second International 
Conference on Social Eco-Informatics (SOTICS 2012), IARIA, Oct. 
2012, pp. 70-75, ISBN: 978-1-61208-228-8. 
[32] K. Patriarcheas, S. Papaloukas, and M. Xenos, “The Text-Based 
Computer-Mediated Communication in Distance Education Fora: A 
Modelling Approach Based on Formal Languages”, in T. Daradoumis 
et al. (Ed.): Intelligent Adaptation and Personalization Techniques in 
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, Series "Studies in 
Computational Intelligence" (SCI), Springer, vol. 408, pp.239-266, 
2012. 
[33] K. Patriarcheas and M. Xenos, “The complexity of text-based 
computer mediated communication: a system for automated 
representation of discussion threads' messages in asynchronous 
distance education fora”, International Journal of Innovation and 
Regional Development, vol. 6, pp. 285-309, 2015. 
[34] K. Patriarcheas and M. Xenos, “Asynchronous Distance Education 
Forum - Brainstorming vs. Snowballing: A Case Study for Teaching 
in Programming Didactics”, Proc. 8th International Conference on 
Web-based Learning  (ICWL 09), LNCS Springer, Aug. 2009, pp.  
322-331. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

