A Study of Information Server over Seamless Service Continuity during Network 
Handover  
Rajina Raj Mohamed 
Wireless Communication Cluster 
MIMOS Berhad 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
 e-mail: jina@mimos.my
 
Abstract—Mobile devices become more popular nowadays and 
as they are portable, roaming between heterogeneous networks 
is essential. With roaming technology, mobile device can 
perform handover from one network to another network 
seamlessly. Hence, users may enjoy service on mobile 
continuously. There are a few approaches discussed among 
researchers to perform handover for mobile device across 
heterogeneous network. Most of those existing experiments test 
bed were built according to the IEEE 802.21 Media 
Independent Handover standard that is to facilitate a seamless 
mobility in a heterogeneous network. Information Services (IS) 
is one of the functionalities in IEEE 802.21 standard for the 
handover purpose. In this paper, we proposed an experimental 
test bed setup for seamless video streaming with Information 
Server in a wireless overlay of 802.11 WLAN. Information 
Server framework was developed and applied to video 
streaming application to see the impact of IS over service 
continuity handover. Results show seamless video streaming 
service while handoff between two networks and achieved the 
objective of the study.  
Keywords-IEEE 
802.21; 
Information 
Server; 
network 
handover; heterogenous network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With the proliferation of mobile device, roaming between 
heterogeneous networks is necessity nowadays. With 
roaming technology, mobile users can always connected to 
network services and internet when moving across different 
access technologies during an ongoing session.  Roaming 
technology can be realized through IEEE 802.21 standard 
framework that 
provides Media-Independent-Handover 
(MIH) [1] to facilitate handover between different networks 
and different mobile devices.  
In IEEE 802.21 standard [2], there is a functionality 
called media-independent information services which uses 
Information Database or Information Service (IS) [2] to 
provide 
information 
about 
neighboring 
networks 
surrounding a mobile device. This network information is a 
combination of several information elements such as 
Service Set Identifier (SSID), Received Signal Strength 
Indication (RSSI), Operator Name, 
Network Type, 
Encryption Method, Media Access Control (MAC) 
addresses, etc. Moreover, this network information is 
structured in such a way that a query/response mechanism 
can be used to convey the information elements to mobile 
devices. These information elements are essential for mobile 
devices to refer to, in the event of performing seamless 
handover between heterogeneous networks.  Fig. 1 shows an 
example of handover scenario between WIMAX and Wi-Fi 
that uses IS applied in network handover.  It shows the 
implementation of IS named media-independent handover 
function (MIHF) that responsible to assist in handover 
decision making.  It provides detail characteristics and 
services required by Mobility management entity for mobile 
phone to handoff from WIMAX to Wi-Fi.  
Literature studies proven that by applying IEEE 802.21 
approach will assist in handover across heterogeneous 
networks; but, the key issues are service continuity while 
handing over between heterogeneous access technologies. 
Most of the existing works were tackling on the network 
layer to trigger a handover from one network to other 
network. However, they were not considering the handover 
process from application layer to support seamless service 
continuity during network handover. As such, we developed 
an IS on application layer to see the impact on seamless 
video streaming during network handover. The network 
handover decision is done on application layer and controlled 
by end users. An IS framework created was applied to video 
streaming in a wireless overlay of 802.11 WLAN [3]. The 
end target of the experiment is to see the seamless service 
continuity of video streaming on mobile phone during 
handover from one network to another network facilitated by 
IS. A performance study also was conducted to examine that 
the objective is achieved. This is a preliminary study and 
application developed as a proof-of-concept for further 
research on IS in network handover.    
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 describes reviews on several existing IS 
technologies.  Section 3 describes on the system scenario and 
architecture, experiment setup as well as test results. Finally, 
in Section 4, the paper is concluded. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH WORKS 
There are many research works done for network 
handover that based on IEEE 802.21 standard. Here, we 
briefly describe some of the existing methods, which are 
quite relevant to our study. Dutta et al. [4] manipulate service 
and functionalities in IEEE 802.21 to perform handover 
between heterogeneous access networks, such as 802.11 [5], 
802.16 [6], Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA) [7] and 
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) [8]. Experiment result 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
shows that disconnection time and packet loss during 
handover can be reduced by applied 802.21-based approach. 
Usman and Tinku [9] have proposed an extended model for 
IEEE 802.21 MIH that offers seamless experience to 
heterogeneous handover in single and multi-hop network 
scenarios. Research by San-Jo Yoo et al. [10] have proposed 
a cross-layer based predictive handover architecture and 
mechanisms that are implemented in IEEE 802.21 media 
independent handover architecture. Experiment result 
demonstrated that the proposed method achieved seamless 
and proactive mobility for various network environments. 
Mussabir et al. [11] exploited 802.21 Information Services to 
optimize the Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6 (FMIPv6) [12]. 
The proposed mechanism increase the probability of 
  
 
Figure 1.  Example of  scenario of network handover [3]. 
predictive mode; so, it reduces the overall expected 
handover latency in FMIPv6 [12]. Moving-Information-
Server (MIS) was proposed by Yaqub [13]. It was 
implementing in a moving network (e.g. NEMO), where 
MIS acts both as Reporting Agent (RA) and Information 
Server (IS). Instead of populating IS repeatedly with 
redundant network elements, MIS will only store new 
network elements of available networks. Furthermore, MIS 
also maintains the updated lists of the known networks 
mapped with the location information. By using MIS 
approach, mobile node is capable to know information about 
the available networks in the geographical domain ahead of 
time. 
 
III. 
FRAMEWORK IMPLEMENTATION 
A. Framework Scenario 
     In Fig. 2, we assume that the scenario has taken place in 
an environment where Bob’s mobile device will run a video 
application and will be attached to one access point or in our 
case WiFi AP 1. A continuous streaming video will stream 
from Streaming Server through the Internet cloud to WiFi 
AP 1 before finally reaching Bob’s mobile device. As Bob 
moves to different office departments, WiFi AP 1 strength 
will become weak; therefore; Bob will experience distortion 
on his video application. In order to cater this issue, IS is 
introduced to assist mobile device in performing a seamless 
handover. This could be achieved by allowing Bob’s mobile 
device to query the IS for other available network, which 
might currently surrounding it. The query could be 
performed as soon as Bob’s mobile device enters the 
overlapping zone between WiFi AP 1 and WiFi AP 2. When 
Bob’s mobile device receives a response from the IS, it then 
perform an auto-connect to WIFI AP 2. As a result, the 
streaming video will remain in a good quality and Bob will 
not even notice that his mobile device is already connected 
to a different AP.  
 
Figure 2.  Framework Scenario. 
B. Framework Testbed 
 
The testbed used for carrying out our proposed 
framework is shown by Fig. 3. Testbed component are: 
streaming server equipped with VLC Media Player as a 
content server to continuously stream videos; a desktop as 
IS, one network switch for Internet connection, two access 
points, and one laptop, as a mobile device. All devices are 
connected together through network switch.  The two APs 
are used in order to stimulate seamless handover from one 
network to another.  Mobile device is connected to these APs 
to perform a handover from AP 1 to AP 2. Streaming server 
and Bob’s mobile device are installed with Ubuntu 9.0 while 
IS is installed with Windows Vista and equipped with 
MySQL [14]. IS with response and receive message to 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
device is developed in Java program and interact with 
MySQL server. The experiment was implemented by 
streaming server streams the video to Bob mobile device.  
Fig. 4 shows the flowchart of our experiment. It starts 
with Bob watched video on his mobile phone. At certain 
time, Bob pressed a key on his mobile device to perform 
handover. Upon key pressing, a message was sent to IS 
contain query such as; the lists of names of the nearest access 
points to Bob, their signal strength, the security involved in 
order to attached to the AP, the AP type (i.e., wireless AP, 
WIMAX), the operators offering the APs, the access 
availability (with some charging rate), and finally, their 
distances from Bob’s mobile phone. 
Figure 3.  Framework Testbed Setup. 
     IS will do a searching and checking and provide Bob with 
a list of information required. For example, the sorting could 
be based on the APs signal strength and it’s distances from 
Bob’s mobile phone. Consequently, Bob will select an AP 
with the highest signal strength and nearest distance to him.    
In this test experiment, AP 2 is the most eligible 
candidate. Therefore, Bob will switch his mobile device 
connection from AP 1 to AP 2 and the video service streams 
continuously to Bob’s mobile phone, without Bob realizes 
the network handoff by his mobile device. 
 
C. Testing Methodology and Result 
As mentioned earlier, the objective of this experiment is 
to see the impact of IS in service continuity during network 
handover. As such, in this experiment, we measure the 
performance of network handover process from AP 1 to AP 
2.  According to [2], characteristics of service continuity and 
seamless are considered by two performance metrics: 
 
The handover latency should be no more than a few 
hundred milliseconds 
 
The QoS provided by the source and target systems 
should be nearly identical or should not aware the 
changes to his communication during and after 
handover.   
The process of handover starts from the key pressed on 
Bob’s mobile phone until the mobile is connected to AP 2 
and video packet is sent to Bob’s mobile phone by AP 2, as 
shown by t in Fig. 5. Thus, handover time (t) is measured 
when a key is pressed on Bob’s mobile phone.  
Figure 4.  Flowchart of IS Framework. 
     Wireshark tool was used to gather and evaluate the data. 
The number of handover attempted was 20 times to tackle 
deviation issues. Figure 6 depicts the time taken (in seconds) 
for seamless network handover from AP 1 to WiFi AP 2 
when Bob’s mobile device pressed the switching key. 
Seamless handover took time between 0.017 seconds at 
attempt number 4 and 14, and up to 0.211 seconds at 
attempts number 7. A little bit delay at attempts number 7; 
0.211 seconds. Allover, the average time taken for all 20 
network handover is 0.135 seconds, which can be considered 
as seamless since the time is very minimum. Moreover, 
while the experiment was conducted, users did not 
experience any video distortion; video lagging and also did 
not even notice/aware that the wireless connection had 
moved from WiFi AP 1 to WiFi AP 2.  
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
Figure 5.  Framework message flow and timing handover. 
I. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented reviews of several different approaches 
and implementation method of Information Services (IS) 
based on IEEE 802.21 standard. As explained in the 
introduction, IS is one of the functionalities in IEEE 802.21 
standard for handover purpose. Information provided by IS 
will facilitates the handover process between different 
networks. We developed an IS framework as a preliminary 
study and applied to video streaming in a wireless overlay of 
802.11 WLAN to examine the impact of IS over service 
continuity during handover. The results obtained from 
performance evaluation show that the streaming video 
service is seamless while handoff between two networks thus 
achieved the objective of the experiment. Since it is still in 
the preliminary study, there is still missing point that should 
be considered in future research. The point that should be 
considered in future research are error handling code and 
also to be implemented across heterogeneous network. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[1] “IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks – Part 21: 
Media Independent Handover Services”, 21st January 2009J. Clerk 
Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, 3rd ed., vol. 2. 
Oxford: Clarendon, 1892, pp. 68–73. 
[2] Media Independent Handover for Seamless Service Provision in 
Heterogenous Networks, George Lampropoulus et al., IEEE Magazine 
of Mobile Internet Technologies and Application, January 2008, pp. 61-
71. 
[3] K. Taniuchi, Y. Ohba, S. Das, M. Tauil, Y-N Cheng, A. Dutta, D. 
Baker, M. Yajnik, and D. Famolari, “IEEE 802.21: Media Independent 
Handover: Features, Applicability and  realization”, IEEE, vol. 7, 2009, 
pp. 112-120,doi: 10-1109/MCOM.2009.4752687. 
[4] A. Dutta, S. Das, D. Famolari, Y. Ohba, K. Taniuchi, T. Kodaman, and 
H. Schulzrinne, “Seamless Handover across Heterogeneous – An 
IEEE802.21 
Centric 
Approach”, 
http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~dutta/research/wpmc-final.pdf [Retrieved: 
August 2012] 
[5]  “802.11-2012- 
IEEE 
Standard 
for 
Information 
Technology- 
Telecommunications and Information Exchange between Systems Local 
and 
Metropolitan 
Area 
Networks”, 
http://standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/802.11-2012.html [Retrieved: 
August, 2012] 
[6] “IEEE 802.16™: Broadband Wireless Metropolitan Area Networks 
(MANs), 
http://standards.ieee.org/about/get/802/802.16.html 
[Retrieved: August 2012] 
[7] “CDMA Technology” 
 http://www.cdg.org/technology/cdmatechnology.asp 
[Retrieved: 
August, 2012] 
[8] “GPRS”, 
http://www.gsma.com/aboutus/gsm-technology/gprs 
[Retrieved: August, 2012] 
[9] Usman Javaid and Tinku Rasheed, “Media Independent Handover in 
heterogenous Multi-hop Mobile Networks”, Proc. IEEE The 20th 
Annual IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile 
Radio Communications(PIMRC09), IEEE Press, Sept. 2009, pp. 588-
592. 
[10] San-jo Yoo, David Cyper, and Nada Golmie, “Timely Effective 
handover Mechanism in  Heterogenous wireless Network”,  Wireless 
Personal Communication,  February 2010, pp. 449-475, doi: 
10.1007/s11277-008-9633-8 
[11] Qazi Bouland Mussabir and Wenbing Yao, “Optimized FMIPv6 
Handover using IEEE802.21 MIH Services”, Proc. IEEE MobiArch 
’06, IEEE Press, 2006, pp. 43-48, doi: 10.1145/1186699.1186713 
[12] FMIPv6, http://fmipv6.org/ [Retrieved: August 2012] 
[13] Raziq Yaqub, “Network Discovery Through Moving Networks-
Information-Server”, Proc. IEEE Communications and Networking in 
China, 2006, pp. 1-4. 
[14] MySQL , www.mysql.com. [Retrieved: August, 2012] 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Result of Handover Time 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

