The Typology and the Current Perspectives of Network Organizations 
 
Karolína Kolerová, Tereza Otčenášková 
Faculty of Informatics and Management 
University of Hradec Králové 
Hradec Králové, Czech Republic 
e-mail: karolina.kolerova@uhk.cz, tereza.otcenaskova@uhk.cz 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The competitiveness within as well as among 
organizations represents a topical and challenging issue. 
Therefore, network organizations should pay considerable 
attention to both researchers and practitioners in order to gain 
various 
advantages. 
Particular 
models 
of 
network 
organizations 
are 
introduced 
and 
their 
implications 
for potential improvements are discussed.  
Keywords-communication 
mechanism; 
coordination 
mechanism; organizational model; network organization; 
typology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A lot of current organizations might be considered 
as network organizations, at least to a certain extent. 
A network 
organization 
can 
be 
defined 
as 
any 
collection of actors (N ≥ 2) that pursue repeated, enduring 
exchange relations with one another and, at the same 
time, lack a legitimate organizational authority to arbitrate 
and resolve disputes that may arise during the exchange [1]. 
The basic features include the presence of independent 
teams and 
departments 
sharing 
common 
values, 
interconnected projects supporting each other, links among 
projects 
through 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology 
and the presence 
of 
the 
role 
of 
key 
coordinator for communication and coordination managing 
the units [2]. 
The necessity and the pursuit of the employment 
of the network 
principles 
might 
be 
beneficial 
for 
the purposes of the communication and coordination 
enhancement. Nevertheless, the organizations do not realize 
and utilize the potential of such structures. The main benefit 
of this work in progress is the initial introduction 
of the network 
organizations 
and 
their 
implications. 
The models of the network organizations are reviewed 
and the practical advice is outlined. The paper also aims 
to serve 
as 
an inspiration 
for 
the 
development 
of 
the organizations aiming to enhance their competitive 
advantage 
This paper firstly describes the methodology. Secondly, 
the basic concepts of network organizations are introduced 
in Section III. Partners within models of networks and 
the significant aspects of coordination and communication 
are identified. Furthermore, advantages and disadvantages 
are outlined and theoretical assumptions are discussed. 
Various models, including their description, are introduced 
in Section IV. Finally, the most important issues are 
concluded, the paper limitations are outlined and significant 
areas for further research are mentioned in Section V.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The methodology is mainly based on the literature 
review. 
Various 
resources 
are 
examined, 
analyzed 
and compared. These provide an initial overview of the 
potential models which can be subsequently employed 
within various organizations. The variety of resources 
includes journal paper, web resources and books. Moreover, 
the effort to use relevant experts and their opinions was 
pursued. For instance Jashapara, Desouza or Prusak are 
encompassed.   
Moreover, the practical perspective is included through 
the observation of and experience with specific organizations 
with a network structure. Mostly, clusters were analyzed. 
Currently, only the practices of companies from the Czech 
Republic were observed. Nevertheless, this was sufficient 
from the perspective of this paper. 
III. 
MODELS OF NETWORKS – IDENTIFICATION AND 
CHARACTERIZATION  
A network can be characterized as a set of linkages 
among a defined set of people in which the character of the 
linkages is specified [3].  
A. Partners within Models 
Two crucial components - organization and infrastructure 
- are the most important for networks to be effective. 
Moreover, reliable partners in a network should be identified 
and involved to ensure the continuous improvement and 
innovation. Dedina and Odchazel [4] define three main roles 
of partners within various models. These encompass 
the following:  
 
Trading partners (distributors, producers, service 
providers). 
 
Nominal trading partners (these partners ensure 
mainly 
physical 
distribution 
represented 
by transportation 
providers, 
bank 
institutions, 
the Internet providers).  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-315-5
INNOV 2013 : The Second International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Organizers with key activities including, among 
other things, the future development prediction, 
the network support and assistance, recruitment 
of new partners or development management. 
Moreover, Desouza and Awazu [5] emphasize the role 
of so called gatekeepers - people who, especially within 
larger teams and networks, screen and select relevant 
information before making it available to the group. This 
eliminates the distraction of the group with useless, 
irrelevant and low-quality knowledge.  
Nevertheless, such important role is usually neglected, 
because all the potential candidates with relevant experience 
and optimal involvement sometimes lack time, are not 
willing to provide their know-how or face various obstacles 
that prevent them from participating in these activities. 
Another model of partnership stressing the continuous 
improvement and innovation network was introduced Clark 
et al. [6]. Continuous improvement and innovation requires 
people willing to share knowledge and ideas and utilize 
specialized knowledge, skills and support. Fig. 1 indicates 
categories of people that may be targeted to form a 
sustainable partnership and network.  
B. Aspects of Coordination and Communication  
One advantage of network organizations is the 
improvement 
in 
cooperation 
and 
communication 
improvements leading to better flow of information and 
knowledge [7]. Support of coordination and communication 
in organizations [8] is represented mainly by the following 
attributes: 
 
Events: enhancements of the sense of purpose. 
 
Leadership: role of community coordinators. 
 
Connectivity: enhancement of dialogues, trust and 
relationships. 
 
Membership: optimal amount of members. 
 
Learning projects: learning agenda. 
 
Artifacts: documents, tools, stories, symbols, 
websites. 
 
 
Figure 1.  A diagram of potential partners in a continuous improvement 
and innovation network (Adapted according to [6]). 
Apparently, every organization varies in the extent 
and inclusion of the mentioned components. These differ 
on the basis of the demands and needs of the internal 
and external context of the given subject. Nevertheless, 
Jashapara [8] claims that it is really crucial to find the ideal 
extent 
of cooperation 
and 
competition 
within 
the coordination mechanisms to support the optimal “zone” 
which results in knowledge creation, better performance and 
better results.  
C. Advantages and Disadvantages  
The advantages and disadvantage of both the individual 
organizations within the networks, and performance of such 
organizations are strongly interconnected. These sometimes 
influence each other significantly and therefore these will 
be discussed together. As discussed in Dedina and Odchazel 
[4], the benefits include income increase, costs decrease, 
higher flexibility and efficiency, higher innovation potential 
together with more prompt, efficient and desirable ways 
of knowledge and skills spread and transfer. The flexible and 
organic structure might also cause some problems. 
Struggles with the determinations of clear responsibilities or 
unstable organizational structure linked with this approach 
can serve as an example. Furthermore, the transactional costs 
should not be omitted in the budget planning. These include 
for example necessarily needed costs for the communication 
among the member organizations. 
Nevertheless, the extent of informal connections and trust 
among members remain important. Some organizations 
promote familiar environment and personal relations. On the 
other hand, within other companies only strict and formal 
relations among employees occur. Both extremes are 
perceived as not very worthy especially from the long term 
perspective. To find the right balance of the supportive 
initiatives is relatively hard task. 
The advantages of the network organizations support 
their importance as well as the usability of such 
organizational structure. In comparison with hierarchical and 
market forms of organization, the network structure possess 
particular 
advantages 
(more 
details 
in 
Table 
1). 
The relational nature of the membership and the way 
of communication evokes the emphasis on reputation among 
member organizations as well as with the external 
institutions. 
Moreover, 
these 
ensure 
usually 
higher 
commitment and more open climate enabling better 
cooperation and results. The stress on mutual benefits among 
member organization is promoted strongly and therefore 
the complementary strengths are present. These can provide 
the competitive advantage and enhance the efficiency 
of the network as a whole. Nevertheless, these are 
not as flexible as hierarchal structures. The reason is in 
reaching consensus through the communication with all the 
members [9].  
IV. 
MODELS OF NETWORKS 
There are many diverse models available in the literature 
[9].   Some of them are completely different. However, 
similar aspects are sometimes found when comparing two 
or more models.  
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-315-5
INNOV 2013 : The Second International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF VARIOUS FORMS OF ORGANIZATIONS 
(ADAPTED ACCORDING TO [9]) 
Key Features 
Forms 
Market 
Hierarchy 
Network 
Normative 
Basis 
Contract 
Employment 
relationship 
Complementary 
strengths 
Means               
of 
Communication 
Prices 
Routineso  
Relational 
Methods of 
Conflict 
Resolution 
Haggling 
Administrative 
fiat - 
supervision 
Norm of 
reciprocity - 
reputational 
concerns 
Degree of 
Flexibility 
High 
Low 
Medium 
Amount           
of Commitment 
among Parties 
Low 
Medium to 
high 
Medium to 
high 
Tone of Climate 
Precision 
and/or 
suspicion 
Formal, 
bureaucratic 
Open-ended, 
mutual benefits 
Actor 
Preferences  
or Choices 
Independent 
Dependent 
Interdependent 
 
The network and the social network analyses are needed 
for identifying roles and experts for particular areas and 
specifying the organizational flow ([5] and [10]). This also 
helps to determine the employed network model. A more 
appropriate model can possibly be revealed and considered 
for further use. 
A. Fundamental Typology  
Fundamental typology [4] can be used in many cases, 
even for the models of networks. This way, models can be 
differentiated based on production, distribution and industry.  
There are three most typical models: 
 
Vertical networks represented by independent 
specialized companies.  
 
Cross-sectorial networks. 
 
Opportunity networks. 
B. Typology according to the Dominance  
This typology [4] distinguishes two models. The first one 
is a network with one dominant partner who communicates 
with all other partners in the network. Nevertheless, 
individual partners do not have to communicate with each 
other. The other one is a network in which all partners 
are equal. None of individual partners has power to change 
regulations and activities of the whole network. They have 
a limited authority and responsibility. The decision-making 
power is delegated and changes constantly.  
C. Layered Model of Networks Based on Five Perspectives  
The layered model as an example of a conceptual model 
of networking is based on the following five interdependent 
perspectives:  
 
Use of technology (mobile phones, voice recorders, 
camcorders, cameras, email, instant messaging, 
NAS servers, cloud computing). 
 
The nature of the work process. 
 
Organizational functions. 
 
Associational perspective. 
 
Societal perspectives. 
The interdependency among all of the components is 
depicted in Fig. 2.  
Obviously, the network organizations seem to penetrate 
to various areas of business. Nevertheless, not all 
organizations realize that they can be perceived as part of the 
network. The principles of networks should be emphasised 
and promoted by the idea of sharing and supported by the 
use of technology. There is a variety of technologies and 
platforms possibly beneficial for the communication and 
coordination of network organizations. Some examples 
include Microsoft SharePoint, Dropbox, IBM Connections or 
Microsoft SkyDrive. Nonetheless, these are mostly very 
robust or useless especially for the purposes of small- and 
medium-sized or non-profit organizations. Hence, the basic 
principles and approaches are introduced in this paper to 
cover the mentioned issues at a general level.  
D. Structure Model of Networks 
The structure model of networks as in Qureshi [11] 
differentiates two approaches – a relational approach focused 
on relations among actors (both individual and social actors) 
and a positional approach focused on their attributes 
(attributes such as relationships, people characteristics and 
behaviors). The main differences of these two types of 
models are represented in Fig. 3. 
V. 
RESULTS, LIMITATIONS, AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
Considering the appropriate utilization of the introduced 
typology and the general concept of the network 
organizations, the provided assumptions should be verified 
in practice. Moreover, the discussion with professionals from 
the network-based organization as well as from these not 
aware about this concept might be useful to reveal the point 
of view of the current and prospective end users. This would 
also provide the scope for the comparison and adjustment of 
the discussed models and issues for various purposes and 
types of organizations (based on their size, sector, financial 
means, technological readiness and the like).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Layered model based on five perspectives [11]. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-315-5
INNOV 2013 : The Second International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Figure 3.  Structure model of networks (adapted according to [11]) 
Nevertheless, there are specific problems connected with 
networks. These can be exemplified by the lack of trust, 
weak engagement and willingness of all involved parties 
to participate, insufficient or unreliable technical equipment 
negatively influencing the successfulness and the benefits 
of the networks. This paper does not aim to cover 
these issues, because these should be addressed more 
in detail during the organizational processes at the 
operational level. 
Furthermore, the general model may be created 
on the basis of the discussed ones. This should be more 
complex and flexible for the use under different conditions. 
As mentioned above, the proper testing should follow 
in pursuit to increase the relevancy and extent of practical 
implications. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
Network organizations represent a way to utilize 
advantageous practices within and among organizations. The 
employment 
of 
the 
suggested 
communication 
and 
coordination mechanisms and network principles might be 
beneficial from the internal as well as external environment 
of the organization. Therefore, particular suggestions which 
should be verified in practice are provided. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This 
paper 
is 
supported 
by 
the 
project 
No. CZ.1.07/2.2.00/28.0327 
Innovation 
and 
support 
of doctoral study program (INDOP) financed from EU and 
Czech Republic funds. It is also written with the support 
of the specific research project 2/2013 “Cooperation 
mechanisms 
of 
network 
organizations” 
funded 
by 
the University of Hradec Králové, Czech Republic. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. M. Podolny and K. L. Page, „Network forms of 
organization,“ in Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 24, no. 1, 
pp. 57-76, 1998. 
[2] D. Parrish, “Ideas and tools – the network organisation,” 
2013. 
http://www.d.parrish.dial.pipex.com/network.html. 
[retrieved: 6, 2013] 
[3] M. Hahn, ”Characteristics of the network organization,” in 
Article 
Gratuits. 
2007. 
http://en.articlesgratuits.com/characteristics-of-the-network-
organization-id1486.php. [retrieved: 6, 2013] 
[4] J. Dědina and J. Odcházel, “Management a moderní 
organizování firmy,” 1st ed. Grada Puublishing, Prague, 2007.  
[5] K. C. Desouza and Y. Awazu, “Engaged knowledge 
management - engagement with new realities,” Palgrave 
Macmillan, New York, 2005. 
[6] R. Clark, J. Timms, A. MacCartney, K. Egerton-Warburton, 
N. O’Dempsey, and B. Radokovich, “Achieving and enabling 
continuous improvement and innovation,” 10th Australian 
Agronomy Conference, pp. 501-508, 2001. 
[7] K. Kolerová and T. Otčenášková, “The purpose and potential 
of clusters: theoretical background and a case study,” in 3rd 
World Conference on Information Technology, Barcelona, 
Spain, 14-16 Nov, 2012. 
[8] A. Jashapara, “Kowledge management - an integrated 
approach,” 2nd ed. Prentice Hall, Pearson Education Limited, 
London, 2011. 
[9] W. W. Powell, “Neither market nor hierarchy: network forms 
of organization,” in Research in Organizational Behavior, vol. 
12. JAI Press Inc., pp. 295-336, 1990.  
[10] L. Prusak and E. Matson, “Knowledge management and 
organisational learning,” Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
2006. 
[11] S. S. Qureshi, “Organisations and networks: theoretical 
considerations and a case study of networking across 
organisations,”. Doctoral Thesis, Univesity of London, 1995. 
http://is2.lse.ac.uk/research/theses/qureshi.pdf. [retrieved: 7, 
2013] 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-315-5
INNOV 2013 : The Second International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

