The Future Contact Center 
 
Amit Kumar Agarwala  
HCL Technologies LTD 
Noida, India  
email: amitkumar.a@hcl.com 
 
Abstract— Contact Centers are at a crossroad today.  While 
they are the first and foremost point of contact for customers, 
expectations of customers are rapidly growing.  Numerous 
studies have shown that majority of customers will move their 
business to a competitor after just a couple of average or 
negative experiences.  Thus, enterprises face a difficult 
challenge –how can they delight and retain the loyalty of their 
customers through multiple customer experience cycles while 
managing costs?  In the evolving customer care minefield, what 
next generation ideas can enterprises utilize to restore 
Customer Care in a continuing equilibrium?  In this paper we 
focus on the various customer-focused services available today 
to help Contact Center Managers achieve lowest costs and the 
best outcome for customers and the Contact Center alike. 
 
Keywords-customer 
experience;customer 
care;contact 
center;self-service;future contact center. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Contact Centers play a pivotal role in customer service 
and are the first line of communication between businesses 
and its customers. Companies all over the world over rely 
on their Contact Centers for providing a range of services to 
callers, for instance providing information, solving issues, 
assisting sales, capturing data and researching innovative 
ways to better serve new and existing customers. The 
Contact Center therefore influences the customer experience 
in a big way and in fact provides a “moment of truth” to any 
customer interacting with the business. Hence, if the 
Contact Center is unable to meet customer expectations or 
meet their ever-changing needs, it can impact customer 
loyalty and ultimately the enterprise’s business interests.  
While the principles of customer service are unchanging, 
the same cannot be said about customer expectations. With 
the rapid growth of digital technologies, customer behavior 
and expectations are evolving rapidly. This paper aims to 
identify how these changes impact Contact Centers and 
provides recommendations for Future Contact Center 
technology and design considerations while providing 
optimal services at manageable costs. 
Led by innovations and improvements in telecom 
technologies and discovery of newer media for the Contact 
Centers, the performance of individual services has been 
continuously improving by leaps and bounds each year.  
Research outcomes till now attests only to this fact [5], so 
also on customer experience [2][8] and omni-channel 
operations [3], etc.   
On the other hand, we have researched the set of new age 
services available for Contact Centers today.  Further we 
have identified those services that make the Contact Center 
much more valuable to the customer, the enterprise, and the 
managers thus achieving the lowest average cost per 
transaction with the customer yet delivering the highest 
problem resolution rate for the enterprise.  We recognize 
that Contact Center performance is based on two sets of 
services for customers: (1) self-services on the one hand and 
(2) access to CSRs on the other.  Self-services, as the name 
implies, presents methods for customers to interact with an 
enterprise’s 
information 
systems 
directly, 
accessing 
information and logging their service requests among 
others. Interactive Voice Response (IVR) systems are the 
age-old and predominant tool for doing this.  On the other 
hand, access to CSRs has been considered as the most 
effective tool for customers to resolve their queries, and 
problems.  This is based on the belief that all problems are 
the same, and all problems require the same solution.  When 
one digs deep however, a customer asking for the validity of 
his /her maintenance contract is simple, where as a customer 
who received a faulty product is more complex.  Through 
new-age solutions, the first set of problems can be addressed 
by low-cost ChatBOTs, but the second probably requires 
connect with a CSR.  This is not a one size fits all problem, 
and we have acted upon these differences in our paper.  
Thus our conclusions make Contact Centers more usable for 
the readers than the previous and pre-existing research. 
Section II discusses the ways in which customers are 
demanding superior service now more than ever.  Section III 
introduces customer experiences, the challenges for an 
enterprise, and how every customer is now demanding a 
perfect experience.  Section III also touches upon a fact that 
is becoming increasingly evident, that empowered Customer 
Service Representatives, also called agents (CSRs) deliver a 
better experience to customers.  Section IV introduces the 
next generation contact center (we call it the Future Contact 
Center), and the services that are missing in Contact Centers 
today.  Finally, it is important to manage operational costs 
while providing great experience to customers.  Section IV 
presents ideas for this.  In conclusion, enterprises must 
recognize that the age of dictating to customers is long gone.  
In the current market scenario, customers are more likely to 
buy from the company with the best product, the cheapest 
price and the best interaction with him / her at that magic 
moment of purchase.   
 
II. 
EVOLVING CUSTOMER EXPECTATIONS 
The rise of Internet technologies, Wi-Fi, social media, 
smart phones, E-commerce and ubiquitous Internet access 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

has created a hyper connected world which has 
ramifications on how customers connect with businesses, 
react to service failures and how they access information on 
products and services. The key changes in customer 
expectations can be summarized as follows: 
1. Access to competing products / services is growing.   
With most businesses investing heavily in e-commerce 
and digital marketing, customers have enormous 
opportunities to review, research and move to alternate 
products / services.  
2. Speed of Service.  In today’s world, people spend 
roughly 20-25 hours of their time online per week for 
various needs and are constantly being bombarded with 
information, live updates, news and social messages. 
People expect speedy responses to queries and service 
requests and surveys estimate that 66% customers today 
expect a response to their query on the same day, and 
over 40% expect a reply within the hour. Further, 
customers expect 24x7 service. 
3. Multiple communication channels. In today’s connected 
world, different communication channels jostle for the 
customer’s attention via email, SMS, Whatsapp, social 
media portals, Chat, Applications on Smartphone 
(Apps) etc. The customer’s preference is purely 
personal choice and – hence, customers today expect an 
omnichannel experience. 
4. Customers are empowered.  With the rise of social 
media, it is very easy to share views with a large 
audience quickly. Everyone feels a sense of empowered 
to have a voice and as they articulate their views, their 
friends and family form opinions about a product or 
service of a business.  Without even realizing it, the 
brand quality of a business can be damaged in no time.  
A customer therefore expects to be viewed as an 
individual and anticipates that businesses constantly 
monitor all available media for any mentions and 
respond to them.  
5. Personalized service.  The advancement of analytics 
(the 
processing, 
power, 
storage 
capacities 
and 
algorithms) has given rise to increasing personalization 
and customer service needs to cater to this by mining all 
available 
customer 
data 
and 
identifying 
their 
preferences [7].  
6. Self-Services are growing.  Today’s customers are more 
than willing to solve their problems themselves. Self 
Service options are also beneficial to a business as they 
help in reducing and optimising time spent by a 
Customer Service Representative (CSR). 
It is evident that given the changing techno social 
environment, customer service has moved from being an 
event at a point in time to being a complete experience. 
‘Customer Experience (CX)’ [8] is the term coined to define 
the outcome of the customer’s interaction with the 
enterprise over the duration of their relationship. The term 
encompasses all touchpoints the customer has with the 
business right from the point of being a potential customer 
to becoming one and continuing to be loyal to the brand. 
Since in all likelihood the Contact Center is the only point 
of contact for the customer to the enterprise, Contact 
Centers therefore have an important role to play in 
contributing to customer experience and hence, by design 
itself, a Contact Center must be able to deliver a perfect 
experience.  Another term, User Experience (UX) is also 
commonly used to describe experiences of customers and 
prospects with the enterprise.  UX is the set of experiences 
that a customer has with the digital products of an 
enterprise, for instance the web portal [9].  However, CX 
and UX are incomplete by themselves without considering 
Agent’s 
Experience 
(AX) 
in 
the 
Contact 
Center. 
Empowering CSRs in meeting customer expectations helps 
them service them in a holistic manner.  AX is therefore the 
outcome of the CSR’s experience with the Contact Center 
design and technology in this context. A Contact Center, 
which empowers a CSR with access to enterprise 
information systems, easy analytics of customer behavior 
and past interactions, and corporate knowledge reserves to 
troubleshoot issues serves to provide a superior experience 
which in turn impacts customer’s experience in a positive 
way.  It is then that the journey of the customer is made 
satisfactory. 
 
In well-designed Contact Centers, good quality agent 
desktop software / systems provides CSRs access to 
multiple enterprise information systems of the enterprise.  
While access is provided, ease of use is often missing.  In 
large Contact Centers, there may well be over a hundred 
separate enterprise information applications that CSRs need 
to navigate individually to locate answers to customer 
queries.  This causes frustration, and depletes the CSR’s 
ability to effectively engage with the customer.   
 
Statistics in a Contact Center provides methods to gauge 
the overall performance and experience provided to the 
customer.  
First generation linear Contact Center 
performance statistics included simple items like successful 
calls, averaged call length, average call holding time.  Then 
came along complex first generation statistics that measured 
first call problem resolution (FCR).  Today’s highly 
competitive market scenario has made it necessary for 
companies to adopt a more holistic approach to weed out 
inefficiencies in their Contact Centers.  Many touchpoints 
are used in a Contact Center to gather usage statistics, and 
the data thus generated has increased exponentially.  Thus, 
by choosing from a variety of analytics tool, each for 
specific touchpoint, the managers have an opportunity to 
provide superior experiences to customers (e.g., Journey 
Analytics for overall customer experience, Self-service 
Analytics helps optimized efficiency of self-services, 
desktop analytics to understand experience of CSRs on 
phone and so on).  Under the old way of measuring, many 
opportunities for improvement would be lost.  Version 2 of 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Contact Center statistics presents an Analytics based 
approach [10]. 
 
III. 
THE FUTURE CONTACT CENTER 
The Future Contact Center aims to deliver a superior 
customer experience and keep up with growing customer 
expectations. Contact Centers today fall short when it comes 
to enhancing customer experience as they rely on archaic 
customer service principles and are based on options set in 
place many years previously. In this section, we explore the 
changes that should be made in the future vis-à-vis the 
current.  
1. Self-services:  
Contact centers of today provide limited options 
consisting mainly of voice only Interactive Voice 
Response (IVR), with unchanged menus for a long 
time. Improved options for the future are discussed 
next:   
i. 
BOTs, chatBOTs, AutoBOTs - BOTs are computer 
programs with or without artificial intelligence that 
engage with a customer through text (chat) or audio 
(voice call) [1].  A session with a chatBOT is 
started on request by the end customer.  Normally 
the customer is unaware that they are engaging 
with an automated entity rather than a human, but 
that is fine since the customers only want an 
acceptable experience.  a single instance of a BOT 
program can engage with hundreds, even thousands 
of 
customers 
simultaneously 
without 
compromising security or context of any.  The 
performance of newer BOTs is quite lifelike today 
and early adopters in more and more industries are 
relying on them as the first line service to their 
customers.  It has been found that chatBOTs save 
30-40% in costs in attending to and resolving Level 
1 (L1) issues in a Contact Center. 
ii. 
Speech recognition: Callers do not need to take 
their phone off-ear to type digits in an IVR call 
anymore.  Rather, callers can simply speak their 
options, from numbers to words to phrases to 
natural language sentences.  The computer program 
or service processing their call converts the voice 
of the caller to numbers and text to take it further. 
iii. 
Secure 
transactions 
with 
Biometrics: 
As 
automation grows, customers get further and 
further away from human-to-human interactions.  
Verification of customer’s identity has become 
important for prevention of fraudulent transactions.  
Usually this is done through multiple menus in the 
IVR, 
or 
through 
text 
based 
multi-factor 
authentication [11], where callers / customers are 
prompted to dial or enter a bunch of digits to 
confirm their identity.  With enablement of Voice 
Biometrics, a caller only speaks a voice based 
passphrase that they set earlier. With surprising 
accuracy, identity is now secured in a few seconds 
compared to much longer before.   
iv. 
Apps for the smartphone.  The exciting next 
generation automated service option, where the 
customer downloads an app / program on their 
smartphone to access their account or use services 
offered by the business.  Further enhancement 
could be apps v2.0 that enable customers to contact 
CSRs through a voice, video and chat / call over 
the Internet in a cheap and reliable manner through 
the app itself.  All communication is over the cheap 
IP / VoIP-SIP link. 
2. Omni Channel Access.  Most Contact Centers today 
operate on voice / email / chat options for contacting a 
CSR and do not incorporate new age channels for 
customer contact.  As shown in Figure 1, the media 
options preferred by callers are evolving.  Almost a 
quarter now represent next generation media options, 
including video, web chat and smartphone apps.  Usage 
of individual next generation services is small today, 
but is growing rapidly [5], while reliance on plain voice 
calls and IVR is progressively reducing. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Media Options Preferred by Customers 
 
To cater to this change, Contact Centers of the future 
can provide:  
1. Omni-channel Access:  Access to CSRs transcended 
from voice-only option and now includes multiple 
media options like text-chats, video calls or even a 
unified multimedia call with voice, chat and video 
options.  WebRTC is the leading browser based 
technology that makes this happen. 
2. Virtual Queue is the option that offers to call a 
customer back when an CSR is available rather than 
making the customer wait on hold for tens of minutes. 
3. Personalization: IVR menus today offer standard menus 
for all callers. Future Contact Centers should record 
preferences of individual customers and use it to 
customize service offerings for them.  Personalizing the 
call queue for customers using web-based editors 
makes it easy to set up menus, queue priorities, 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

different announcements and music based upon number 
dialled or the person who is calling.  
4. Intelligent Systems.  While enterprises are a treasure 
trove of information for problem resolution, CSRs 
generally do not have the requisite access to the 
Information Technology (IT) systems therein. Access to 
the enterprise’s overall knowledge base enables CSRs 
provide the best help to customers [4].  Also, Contact 
Center software of most Contact Centers today lacks 
integration 
with 
customer 
information 
through 
Customer Relationship Management (CRM) systems, 
analytics on customer behavior or access to a smart 
knowledge base.  
To empower the CSR with complete caller information, 
future Contact Centers must adopt: 
a. 
Integrated CRM with screen software on CSR 
desktops, laptops, tablets and smartphones to 
ensure that CSRs have caller’s history at their 
fingertips so they can demonstrate a keen 
understanding of the customer’s needs. Further 
CSRs can be provided with smart analytics on 
customer’s past behaviour and predictions of 
expectations so that they can anticipate and attend 
to their needs. 
b. Improved Contact Center Analytics: Reliance on 
just the Supervisor for manually sifting through 
logs to determine performance of the Contact 
Center is insufficient for there is too much data to 
manually 
look 
through. 
Sophisticated 
data 
analytics tools enable the Contact Center Managers 
to understand current performance in detail.  
Further, customer analytics can provide in-depth 
information about customer preferences, past 
behaviour and predict future needs. This is an early 
stage technology, and improvements are expected 
to follow.  As is indicated in [7] telecom call loads 
are massive, and only effective big data analytics 
can help analyse and summarize call SMS arrival 
patterns. 
c. 
Intelligent 
Call 
Routing. 
 
With intelligent 
call routing, contact Centers can route the call 
through to the CSR last spoken to or to the CSR 
who is handling their current query.  This helps 
retain context for the caller and provides accurate 
assistance to them. 
5. Consolidate 
Infrastructure. 
As 
operational 
cost 
increases, Contact Center Managers must review all 
areas to optimize cost.  The following methods can be 
adopted for addressing infrastructure optimization: 
a.  Cloud Adoption.  In the past, Contact Center 
infrastructure was premise based, making it 
difficult to manage and service availability across 
geographies.  Reliable public Cloud infrastructure 
is now available in a cost competitive manner, 
with near real-time provisioning options simpler 
than even before.  With this an “always available” 
and “access from anywhere” service Contact 
Center is now both affordable and valuable. 
b. Remote call agents / CSRs.  There has been a 
steady increase in the number of CSRs working 
remotely, from outside office.  There is a 
significant cost saving in terms of office seating 
space, flexible shift times and travel time saving.  
This option makes quite profitable for the 
enterprise – more agents in the same cost. Of 
course, 
extra 
security 
and 
access 
control 
infrastructure is needed to enable these CSRs, but 
that is a small cost compared to the benefits. 
Clearly all processes of a Future Contact Center must 
be finetuned for serving a customer in the best manner 
possible.  A set of libraries called the Information 
Technology Infrastructure Libraries (ITIL) have evolved to 
include functions and processes that a Future Contact Center 
needs to service customers in a productive manner [12]. 
 
IV. 
OPTIMIZING CONTACT CENTER COSTS 
Optimizing costs of Contact Center Operations has always 
remained one of the key objectives in Contact Center 
Management. The improved features in the future Contact 
Center support this objective as follows:  
1. Optimising CSR Headcount through Self Service 
A self-service call generally lasts 60sec, while calls 
with a CSR take 4 times longer, or about 250 sec. 
Hence, it is appropriate for a Contact Center to offer the 
best services to customers through self-service options, 
to save the extra 150sec spent with CSRs.   
From a Contact Center operation point of view of view, 
250 or more CSRs are needed to service just 20,000 
calls per day [Table 1].  As you browse through these 
calculations, do keep in mind the Erlang Ratio [6].   
An average customer calls a Contact Center once 
in every 60 days, therefore, 20,000 inbound calls into a 
Contact Center equates to about 120,000 total 
customers.  Even small businesses have more 
customers / subscribers, and this is what makes 
operations of a Contact Center difficult.   
At the same time, CSRs are expensive resources – 
almost 50% of the cost of a phone call to attend to one 
customer is spent on CSR compensation.   
This leads to the unsolved quagmire for businesses – 
“who to provide access to CSRs to”? 
Further, in an optimum Contact Center today, 60% 
calls are managed by self-service processes, leaving 
fewer calls for CSR. Based on this premise, in the 
above example, the required CSR count reduces to 100.  
In an ideal world, 90% or more calls are managed 
through self-services, leaving just 10% for CSRs 
requiring just 25 agents in the above example.  
 
2. Also, note that call arrival into the Contact Center is a 
stochastic or Poisson process, meaning that exact 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

arrival time of each call is unpredictable [6].  It is also 
memoryless, meaning that historical data for predicting 
call arrival can at-best provide estimates but no more.  
All calls may arrive at the same time, or arrive one after 
another in perfect synchronization.  Call load 
measurements and predictions are estimates, not exact.  
It is best to pessimistically estimate call load in line 
with 
business 
growth 
and 
with 
the 
above 
unpredictability. 
 
TABLE 1.  LOAD ESTIMATES IN A CONTACT CENTER 
 
Contact Center Entity 
Value 
Shift of a CSR (hours) 
[assumption] 
8  
Time spent by agent on a 
call (secs) 
250 secs 
Total time spent by a CSR 
answering calls 
 8 * (3,600 secs 
per hour)  
Number of daily inbound 
calls [assumption] 
20,000  
Number of CSRs needed 
[in this scenario] 
= 20,000* 250/ 
((0.7 
Erlang 
Ratio) *(60 min 
per hour) *(60 
sec per min) *(8 
hours per shift 
per CSR)) 
 
= 248 
 
3. Therefore, our recommendation is to provide the best 
possible experience to callers through self-services.  
And if the problem remains unresolved, then an even 
better experience when the CSR is online with the 
caller 
4. Using a part of CSR’s time with the customer to 
introduce / sell products & Services.  Traditionally, 
Contact Centers have been viewed as a service for 
customers to resolve their queries and problems. 
Contribution to the revenue of the enterprise has been 
indirect at best.  An alternate view is that a Contact 
Center should also be used to present products and 
services to the caller.   
It is time to evolve that view, and utilize customer 
care as another channel for selling as well as resolving 
queries.  For instance, a few seconds of time of a CSRs 
time in a call can be effectively utilized to introduce 
new products and services offered by the enterprise.   
5. Optimizing customer’s time.  Customers do not like 
repeating previous conversations they had in a Contact 
Center or with self-service for the same issue.  They 
consider it the Contact Center’s duty to remember and 
faithfully transfer the conversations they have had.  
Also, expect seamless integration with CRM, readily 
available analysis of historical data and data analytics 
of customer behavior to shall enable optimizing time 
used to present and decipher the issue while enhancing 
customer experience.  
6. Recycle Options:  Take down aging customer care 
options used by less than 5% of customer base reduces 
costs to maintain them. 
7. More interactions per unit time:  Voice and video calls 
are the only elements that lock down an agent to a 
single customer during an interaction.  The goal is to 
reduce that reliance on this expensive resource and aim 
for more customer interactions per unit time through 
other options e.g., BOTs, artificial intelligence. 
8. Outbound 
Services: 
The 
same 
Contact 
Center 
infrastructure 
can 
also 
be 
used 
for 
outbound 
communication with the customer to optimize use of 
infrastructure. There are many attractive use cases, and 
include proactive notification of impending service 
downtime, pending payment reminders, etc. 
9. Communication Costs can be a large portion of costs in 
servicing customers.  Much cheaper options are 
available today through the low-cost options offered by 
the Internet for backhaul.  Drastic reductions can be 
achieved to the cost of voice, email and SMS 
communications through Internet and Voice-over-
Internet (VoIP).   
We have witnessed some businesses (especially from 
the banking and financial services sectors) cautiously 
moving to newer next generation services like chatBOTs for 
aiding Customer Experience.  If successful on a large scale, 
this move would mark real progress in serving customers 
effectively. 
Business growth in this hyperactive customer oriented 
environment requires a renewed focus on delighting 
customers.  The age of dictating to customers is long gone; 
in this new age customers use what they like or take their 
business elsewhere.   
V. 
CONCLUSION 
It has been reported that the customer care industry 
spends upwards of US$300 billion annually to provide 
Contact Center services to customers.  Some of it is surely 
wasteful spending; some could be realigned for creation of 
newer service options as per recommendations herein for 
the consumers [5]. 
The exact moment when a customer triggers a purchase is 
unknown.  It may be from the comfort of his or her home, 
work place, from a restaurant, etc.  Further, the trigger could 
be from a smartphone, laptop, phone or one of many other 
devices.  But what is known is that the customer or prospect 
will choose to buy from the company with the best product, 
the cheapest price and the best interaction with him / her at 
that magic moment of purchase. 
Research is recommended in each service area (e.g., self-
services, time with CSR) for suggested improvements 
backed with experimental data. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. J. du Preez; M. Lall, and S. Sinha, “An intelligent web-
based voice chat bot”, IEEE EUROCON 2009, pp 386 – 391, 
URL: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5167660/, 
9/24/2018 
[2] iScoop, “The contact center: from call and contact to 
customer experience and engagement center” https://www.i-
scoop.eu/contact-center/, 9/24/2018  
[3] Customer Think, “How To Maximize Omnichannel for Your 
Call / Contact Center”, URL: https://customerthink.com/how-
to-maximize-omnichannel-for-your-call-contact-center/, 
9/24/2018 
[4] Mitel, “The 9 most important call center trends to watch in 
2018”, 
https://www.mitel.com/blog/the-9-most-important-
call-center-trends-to-watch-in-2018, 9/24/2018   
[5] J. Nascimento, “Global Contact Center Benchmarking Report 
2016”, APCC International Conference, Jun 2016, URL: 
http://www.conferenciaapcc.org/2016/pdf/JoaoNascimento_D
imensionData.pdf, 9/24/2018  
[6] S. Osaki, and T. Nakagawa “Bibliography for Reliability and 
Availability of Stochastic Systems”, IEEE Transactions on 
Reliability, vol. R-25, no. 4, pp. 284-287, Oct. 1976, URL: 
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=52
19999&isnumber=5219971, 9/24/2018 
[7] A.A. Nanavati; R. Singh; D. Chakraborty; K. Dasgupta; S. 
Mukherjea; G. Das; S. Gurumurthy, and A. Joshi, “Analyzing 
the Structure and Evolution of Massive Telecom Graphs”, 
IEEE Trans on Knowledge and Data Engineering vol. 20, 
issue 
5, 
May 
2008, 
pp 
703-718, 
URL: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/4407708/, 
9/24/2018  
[8] Sachin Ramesh Parandkar, and Doji Lokku, “Customer 
Experience Management”, Third International Conference on 
Services in Emerging Markets, Dec 2012, pp 44 – 49, URL: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6468178/, 9/24/2018 
[9] N. Hassan Basri, N. L M. Noor, W. A. W. Adnan. F. M. 
Saman, and A. H. A. Baharin, “Conceptualizing and 
understanding user experience”, 4th International Conference 
on User Science and Engineering (i-USEr), Aug 2016, pp 81-
84, 
URL 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7857938/, 
9/24/2018 
[10] B. Karakus, and G. Aydin, “Call center performance 
evaluation using big data analytics”, International Symposium 
on Networks, Computers and Communications (ISNCC), May 
2016, 
pp 
1-6; 
URL: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/7746116/ 
9/24/2018  
[11] S. H. Khan, and M. A. Akbar, “Multi-Factor Authentication 
on Cloud”, International Conference on Digital Image 
Computing: Techniques and Applications (DICTA), Nov 
2015, 
pp 
1-7; 
URL 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7371288/, 9/24/2018  
[12] X. Huang; B. Shen, and D. Chen “IT Service Support Process 
Meta-Modeling Based on ITIL”, Feb 2010, pp 127 – 131, 
URL: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/5452596/, 
9/24/2018 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

