Comparative Study of RIP, OSPF and EIGRP Protocols to Manage WSN-IoT 
Traffic vs IPTV Traffic Using Cisco Packet Tracer 
 
José Luis García-Navas, Laura Garcia, Oscar Romero, 
Jaime Lloret 
Instituto de Investigación para la Gestión Integrada de 
Zonas Costeras 
Universitat Politècnica de València 
Gandía, Valencia (Spain) 
email: jogarna3@teleco.upv.es, laugarg2@teleco.upv.es, 
oromero@dcom.upv.es, jlloret@dcom.upv.es 
Pascal Lorenz 
Network and Telecommunication Research Group 
University of Haute Alsace 
Colmar, France 
email: lorenz@ieee.org 
 
 
 
Abstract— Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) play a highly 
important role in current life. WSN implementation is 
constantly growing because of their wide range of applications, 
such as agriculture, health care, sport, etc. There is no doubt 
about the advantages of WSN, but there is a problem derived 
from the fact that the networks are not designed to managed 
and prioritize Internet of Things (IoT) and WSN traffic. 
Regarding to this problem, in this paper, a study of IoT data 
traffic through a traditional network is carried out using 
Packet Tracer tool. This research compares and analyzes 
Routing Information Protocol (RIP), Open Shortest Path First 
(OSPF) and Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol 
(EIGRP) routing protocols performance to manage IoT data 
traffic coming from two different agriculture WSN deployed in 
different subnetworks and directed to an IoT server. 
Moreover, IoT data Traffic is going to be analyzed in three 
different scenarios, transmitted without any other traffic 
through the network and two different scenarios with Internet 
Protocol Television (IPTV) traffic sent across the network. IoT 
update packets will be captured and Round Trip Time (RTT) 
data will be obtained and analyzed to compare routing 
protocols performance. 
Keywords- Wireless Sensor Network; Routing Protocol; RIP; 
OSPF; EIGRP; IoT traffic; Round Trip Time. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
WSN include several sensor nodes whose applications 
are widely different, such as agriculture, health care, sport, 
energy, traffic management, etc. As WSN can be used for 
monitoring, different applications through the Internet 
appears the concept Internet of Things (IoT) [1]. Moreover, 
WSN are playing a key role in the industry and in academic 
research. They make possible to offer solutions for a wide 
range of applications. To achieve the necessities and 
requirements of WSN and the applications used on them, to 
provide efficient network architectures and suitable 
telecommunication standard is mandatory [2]. 
IoT is an emerging field both for researchers and for end-
users who wants to benefit of it. IoT creates a world where 
all electronic devices are connected between them and 
communicate to monitor human life parameters in different 
fields. IoT’s goal is to create a better world for humans [3]. 
IoT technologies can be used for multiple reasons, such as 
Health Care, i.e., monitoring temperature and heartbeat for 
tracking patients’ health and using wireless devices to 
communicate data [4], or agriculture that is one of the areas 
on which IoT is widely implemented. A well, IoT can be 
useful to monitor different aspects, such as controlling 
production of fruit-bearing trees using image processing 
techniques [5]. 
IoT presents a massive ecosystem involving elements, 
applications, functions, services, and network traffic 
management. A possible problem derived from this type of 
ecosystem is that traditional networks are not designed to 
transmit IoT information, and IoT traffic management can be 
a challenge [6]. In fact, one of the main lines of investigation 
related to IoT traffic is focused on characterizing and 
classifying IoT traffic. The amount and variety of data will 
be useful to predict and improve traffic management. To 
obtain this type of information, it is important to collect and 
synthesize traffic traces in different scenarios with a diversity 
of IoT devices and in different periods of time. After 
collecting, traffic traces can be analyzed characterize 
statistical attributes and develop a classification method [7]. 
Regarding to data traffic analysis, Packet Tracer [8] is a 
virtual networking simulation software developed by Cisco 
that can be used to learn and understand concepts of 
networks. Cisco Packet Tracer offers a variety of network 
components that represent real devices as they look in reality 
and work the same way. Material offered by Packet Tracer is 
beneficial to simulate real network and gives the opportunity 
to interconnect and configure devices to create a network. By 
the same way, Packet Tracer includes IoT devices and 
implements IoT functionalities, such as smart devices, 
sensors, actuators, etc. Because of that, it is considered as a 
useful researching tool in the design and modernization of 
networks and in the educational process for the study of 
networks [8]. 
This paper presents a study of IoT data traffic through a 
traditional network. Two different WSNs are deployed in 
different subnets of the network. WSNs are composed of 
microcontrollers that monitors environmental parameters, 
such as temperature and humidity and send this information 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-900-3
INNOV 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

to an IoT server located in another subnet. IoT data are 
analyzed through the network and compared using different 
routing protocol, such as RIP, OSPF and EIGRP. These 
protocols have been selected for being the most used in 
traditional networks, they are easy to implement and to be 
computed. Moreover, IoT data are analyzed in a clear 
scenario referring to traffic as well as in a scenario on which 
IPTV traffic is managed by the network. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents some related work. The network structure 
and design carried out in this paper is detailed in Section III. 
Section IV describes how the simulation has been performed 
in this research. Simulation and results are summarized in 
Section V. Finally, Section VI describes conclusions 
obtained and future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section presents different works related with WSN, 
IoT traffic analysis and the network simulation tool Packet 
Tracer. 
García-Navas et al., [9] presented a practical study that 
shows an IoT prototype for WSN to measure soil moisture 
and compare it with a commercial soil moisture sensor. 
Rocher et al. [10] proposed a WSN solution based on ESP32 
board program with Arduino IDE and Wi-Fi technology to 
control sewerage. The system controls if it is raining or not 
and controls different scenarios inside the pipelines. Elkin et 
al. [11] discussed existing methods and algorithms for 
automated management of traffic flows, with the purpose of 
applying the Internet of Things technology to the 
organization of road infrastructure for the dynamic 
management of traffic flows. Their results showed that IoT 
technologies significantly reduce the waiting time for cars in 
the queue at intersections, the total travel time, save fuel, 
reduce harmful emissions into the atmosphere, reduce the 
travel time of emergency vehicles to their destination, solve 
the parking problem and still show many other positive 
effects. 
Some other authors have based their investigations on 
data traffic analysis, such as Hamid et al. [12] who presented 
a survey of emerging trends of network traffic classification 
in IoT and the utilization of traffic classification in its 
applications. The paper compared the legacy of traffic 
classification methods and presented an overview of 
traditional models. Moreover, it included a taxonomy of the 
current network traffic classification within the IoT context. 
In their paper, they tried to expose different issues raised in 
IoT that have been addressed with traffic classification. They 
concluded that traffic classification in the IoT domain is 
more challenging in comparison with non-IoT domain, 
because of the high heterogeneity in the IoT domain. Finally, 
they highlighted current challenges and possible future 
direction in IoT traffic network traffic classification. 
Charyyev et al. [13] demonstrated that an external observer 
passively sniffing the network traffic can infer IoT device 
activities, after classifying device events. They evaluated and 
compared ten machine learning algorithms to classify IoT 
device events, analyze the impact of different interaction 
modes with devices, on the performance of classifiers, 
determine the influence of Local Area Networks (LAN) vs 
Wide Area Networks (WAN) interaction with the device, 
and ascertain the effect of region from which the device is 
connected. 
Packet Tracer as a simulation tool can be used to analyze 
and predict network performance. Teshabaev et al. [14] 
analyzed, studied, simulated, and modelled a multiservice 
network on Packet Tracer, to determine the value of delays 
to increasing value size of Internet Control Message Protocol 
(ICMP) packet using OSPF protocol. They concluded that 
the longer the ping length, the more information passes per 
unit of time. Finally, they considered their research useful in 
the design and modernization of networks and in the 
educational process for the development and use of the 
Packet Tracer program for the study of path of various 
networks. Dumitrache et al. [15] focused their study on the 
comparative analysis of the routing protocols RIPv2, OSPF 
and EIGRP using the soft Cisco Packet Tracer. Their study is 
an example on how Packet Tracer can be used to analyze 
network performance and compare routing protocols. Packet 
Tracer allows designing and simulating virtual networks and 
strengthen the network security. 
As well as Packet Tracer can be used to analyze network 
traffic performance, thanks to the last Packet Tracer software 
versions IoT devices and IoT traffic can be analyzed. Ashok 
et al. in [16] worked with the basic idea that cisco packet 
tracer can be used to implement smart home. Cisco Packet 
Tracer offers a variety of network components that represent 
a real network and gives the opportunity to interconnect and 
configure devices to create a network. Moreover, it 
implements IoT functionalities (smart devices, sensors, 
actuators, etc.). Authors used the latest cisco packet tracer 
version to introduce smart home, using the home portal for 
home automation and record smart devices for monitoring 
them and Microcontroller (MCU-PT) to connect various 
sensors as well as Internet of Everything (IoE) devices. 
Gwangwava et al. main objective in [17] was to advance 
research in the development and implementation of IoT 
systems. The article bridges the gap on IoT development and 
deployment. It lays out a quick rollout strategy by using a 
digital platform that has inbuilt IoT objects and 
programming capabilities. The article reviewed literature on 
IoT at different levels and it is a case study of a fertilizer 
manufacturing plant. Their simulation was only focused on 
monitoring saturated steam temperature, converter head 
temperature, and neutralization temperature respectively. 
Finally, they explain that the model can be extended 
including key process parameters and adding more levels to 
the network. 
Regarding the related work shown above, it is noted that 
IoT and WSN are two highly studied topics due to their 
possible applications and their importance in the modern 
lifestyle. Furthermore, the analysis of network performance 
has been studied since the beginning of the use of networks. 
But it is not so common the study of the network 
performance managing IoT-WSN traffic. Because of that 
fact in this paper, we decided to analyze how the most used 
traditional network’s Routing Protocols (RIP, OSPF and 
EIGRP) manage to exchange IoT packets and how IoT data 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-900-3
INNOV 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

traffic vary depending on the routing protocol. To carry out 
this study we decided to use Packet Tracer tool to simulate 
the network performance. 
III. 
NETWORK DESIGN 
The aim of this paper is to analyze how IoT data traffic 
properties vary depending on the routing protocol used and 
the type of traffic that the network is managing. The scenario 
to be analyzed consists of a network divided on 4 subnets, 
two of them will be WSN and one of them will have an IoT 
server and an IPTV server. The Core Network will consist of 
several routers organized to allow multipath between 
subnets. To create a good scenario to carry out this analysis, 
some designing criteria have been stablished. 
A. Designing criteria 
In this section, the criteria to design the network analyzed 
in this paper is defined: 
• 
The network will have two different WSN. 
• 
Each WSN will consist of MCU (microcontroller) 
boards with one humidity sensor and one temperature 
sensor. 
• 
All MCU boards of each WSN will be connected to a 
Gateway, through which sensor data will be sent. 
• 
Apart from the two WSN, the network will have one 
subnetwork containing one IoT server and one IPTV 
server, and another subnetwork containing some 
computers. 
• 
The Core Network will consist of various routers 
interconnected 
allowing 
multiple 
paths 
between 
subnetworks. 
• 
Each 
subnetwork 
will 
have 
a 
Dynamic 
Host 
Configuration Protocol (DHCP) server to automatically 
assign IP address. 
Figure 1 shows the network designed in Packet Tracer. 
The network consists of 4 subnetworks interconnected by a 
Core Network that allows multipath between the WSN and 
servers. 
B. Network Performance 
Every microcontroller will be programmed to read 
temperature and humidity data from sensors and to send it to 
the IoT Server every second. MCUs will connect to the IoT 
server using an admin account, which can be used as well to 
remotely control sensors data. 
Once the network is totally operational and MCUs are 
connected to Gateways, paths between MCUs and IoT 
Server are created and MCUs stablish connection with the 
server. MCUs are programmed to connect both to their 
Gateway and to the IoT server. Gateways are configured to 
accept connections by password. Finally, the IoT server is 
configured to accept connections by creating accounts. As 
soon as the MCU is connected it starts to send information to 
the server. Information sent to the Server is updated every 
time a packet is received, so the server shows Real-Time 
temperature and humidity measured for each MCU. 
C. Routing protocols 
The main objective of the paper is to analyze IoT traffic 
management in different network scenarios. For that reasons, 
three different scenarios have been defined. Each scenario 
differs from the rest on the routing protocol used on the 
routers on the network. RIP, OSPF and EIGRP are the 
routing protocols selected to analyze how the IoT traffic 
management can vary. 
IV. 
SIMULATION DESIGN 
The simulation carried out in this paper is focused on 
obtaining data about IoT traffic on traditional networks. IoT 
traffic can be considered critical depending on his use and 
applications, because of that, it is important how this traffic 
is managed by the network and how different situations can 
affect to IoT Traffic. 
The data that is going to be captured is time since every 
MCU update sensor data until it receives an ACK message, 
that means RTT of update packets. This data is going to be 
captured in three different scenarios, using RIP, OSPF and 
EIGRP. After analyzing IoT traffic in scenarios on which no 
more information is exchanged through the network, this 
data is going to be captured when IPTV traffic is exchanged 
through the network. 
This simulation is carried out to analyze how routing 
protocols and traffic flows with high quality of service 
requirements, such as IPTV, can affect IoT traffic 
management. 
Regarding to the type of packets exchanged during the 
simulation, apart from the ones needed to update RIP, OSPF 
and EIGRP routing protocol tables, packets exchanged are 
IoT packets, Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) IoT 
packets, TCP packets and IPTV packets. 
• 
IoT packets transmit sensor data from temperature and 
humidity sensor to the MCU microcontrollers. 
• 
TCP IoT packets transmit temperature and humidity 
sensors data updates from the MCU microcontrollers to 
the IoT Server. 
• 
TCP packets transmit ACK packets from IoT server to 
MCU microcontrollers, to inform that the server has 
received the TCP IoT packet. 
• 
IPTV packets are packets generated by a server using 
the Traffic Generator tool provided by Packet Tracer. 
The IPTV service that is going to be used is High-
Definition Television (HDTV) with a bit rate of 8 Mb/s. 
For each one of the three scenarios proposed, RTT 
information of IoT traffic is going to be captured in three 
different data flows situations. First, IoT traffic is captured 
without any other flows through the network. Secondly, IoT 
traffic is captured whereas IPTV traffic is sent from the 
IPTV server to one PC on subnetwork on which no WSN is 
configured. Finally, IoT traffic is captured whereas three 
different IPTV flows are sent by the IPTV server, one for 
each subnetwork. 
All data will be captured and analyzed to obtain every 
significant information that can be used in future work to 
improve IoT traffic management. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-900-3
INNOV 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Figure 1. Network designed in Packet Tracer to analyze IoT traffic management 
V. 
SIMULATION AND RESULTS 
In this section, simulation results obtained by the 
research carried out are shown and analyzed. Routing 
protocols performance is compared on three different 
situations which vary on the type and amount of traffic 
managed by the network. 
Two different WSN have been designed and simulated so 
it is important to bear it in mind whereas analyzing data. The 
two different WSN are identified by Area 1 and Area 2, and 
MCU microcontroller are identified by Meteo X. Each data 
shown and analyzed in this paper is the mean of 5 different 
data measures. The network designed on packet tracer has 
been studied using packet tracer simulation mode, and 5 
consecutive RTT IoT packets have been captured for each 
one of the six MCU microcontrollers. 
Figure 2 shows RTT data of IoT traffic on A Situation on 
which no other traffic is managed by the network. As it is 
shown, the three routing protocols perform in similar ways, 
but EIGRP seems to be lower than RIP and OSPF. These 
other two protocols show similar results comparing theirs 
results between them. 
Figure 3 shows RTT data of IoT traffic on B Situation on 
which IPTV traffic is sent from the IPTV server to one PC 
on subnetwork on which no WSN is configured. Comparing 
Figure 2 and Figure 3 results, RIP protocol shows worst 
results when IPTV traffic is managed by the network, 
whereas OSPF and EIGRP routing protocols perform in the 
same way in both situations. 
Finally, Figure 4 shows RTT data of IoT traffic on C 
Situation on which three different IPTV flows are sent by the 
IPTV server, one for each subnetwork. While the variation 
on RTT between situation A and B is very soft and, in some 
cases, RTT decreases when IPTV traffic is managed, on 
situation C RTT shows a high increase. Moreover, it seems 
to be that EIGRP is the one that performs better than the 
others when high amount of IPTV traffic is managed by the 
network. 
Furthermore, protocols can be compared by analyzing 
them individually studying the three different situations (A, 
B, C) for each routing protocol. Table 1 shows the RTT data 
measured on A Situation, considered as a base situation, and 
the increase or decrease experienced by the RTT on B 
situation (△1) and C situation (△2). As can be seen, RIP 
protocol performs better when there is no other traffic, but if 
there is other type of traffic, IoT traffic suffers higher delays. 
OSPF and EIGRP routing protocols performs better on 
situations on which there is more traffic through the network. 
EIGRP is the best one to transmit IoT data traffic when IPTV 
traffic is managed by the network. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-900-3
INNOV 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Figure 2. RTT data of only IoT Traffic 
 
Figure 3. RTT data of IoT Traffic whereas IPTV traffic is sent to network 3 (network without WSN) 
 
Figure 4. RTT data of IoT Traffic whereas IPTV traffic is sent to the three subnetworks 
 
 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-900-3
INNOV 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

TABLE I.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN RTT IOT TRAFFIC WITHOUT ANY OTHER TRAFFIC AND WITH IPTV TRAFFIC 
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a study of how routing protocols (RIP, 
OSPF and EIGRP) and IPTV traffic can affect to WSN-IoT 
data traffic have been carried out using Packet Tracer. The 
routing protocols performance to manage IoT traffic has 
been studied through a network consisting of 4 subnetworks, 
on which two of them are WSN. Each one of the routing 
protocols has been tested on three different situations 
depending on how much IPTV traffic is managed by the 
network. In conclusion RIP routing protocol is the one that 
best manages IoT traffic when no IPTV traffic is needed to 
be sent. OSPF performs well in similar conditions whereas 
EIGRP is the worst. On the other hand, when IPVT traffic is 
managed by the network, EIGRP is the better option while 
RIP is worst. Finally, OSPF can be considered as a neutral 
option between RIP and EIGRP on managing WSN-IoT 
traffic vs IPTV traffic. 
In future works, another comparative study can be carried 
out using different types of traffic instead of IPTV traffic. In 
addition, this type of study can be implemented in real 
scenarios so real devices can be tested. Moreover, this type 
of research can help to create data bases of different types of 
traffic, to classify and prioritize. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Bera, S. Misra, S. K. Roy, and M. S. Obaidat, "Soft-WSN: 
Software-Defined WSN Management System for IoT 
Applications," IEEE Systems Journal, vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 
2074-2081, Sept. 2018. 
[2] R. Fantacci, T. Pecorella, R. Viti, and C. Carlini, "A network 
architecture solution for efficient IOT WSN backhauling: 
challenges 
and 
opportunities," 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Communications, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 113-119, August. 2014. 
[3] S. G. H. Soumyalatha, “Study of IoT: understanding IoT 
architecture, applications, issues and challenges,” In 1st 
International Conference on Innovations in Computing & 
Net-working (ICICN 16), CSE, RRCE. International Journal 
of Advanced Networking & Applications, May. 2016, No. 
478, pp. 477-482 
[4] D. S. R. Krishnan, S. C. Gupta, and T. Choudhury, "An IoT 
based Patient Health Monitoring System," 2018 International 
Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication 
Engineering (ICACCE), 2018, pp. 01-07. 
[5] L. Garcia, et al., “Quantifying the production of fruit-bearing 
trees using image processing techniques,” Proc. The Eighth 
International Conference on Communications, Computation, 
Networks and Technologies, IARIA, (INNOV 2019),  Nov. 
2019, pp. 14-19. 
[6] B. K. J. Al-Shammari, N. Al-Aboody, and H. S. Al-
Raweshidy, "IoT Traffic Management and Integration in the 
QoS Supported Network," IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 352-370, Feb. 2018. 
[7] A. Sivanathan et al., "Characterizing and classifying IoT 
traffic in smart cities and campuses," 2017 IEEE Conference 
on Computer Communications Workshops, IEEE (INFOCOM 
WKSHPS), 2017, pp. 559-564. 
[8] S. R. Javid, “Role of packet tracer in learning computer 
networks,” International Journal of Advanced Research in 
Computer and Communication Engineering, Vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 
6508-6511, May. 2014. 
[9] J.L. García-Navas, et al., “Practical Study of the Temperature 
Effect in SoilMoistureMeasurements,” Proc. The Eighth 
International Conference on Communications, Computation, 
Networks and Technologies, IARIA, (INNOV 2019), Nov. 
2019, pp. 7-13. 
[10] J. Rocher, J.L. García-Navas, O. Romero, and J. Lloret, “A 
WSN-based Monitoring System to Control Sewerage,” 2019 
Sixth International Conference on Internet of Things: 
Systems, Management and Security, IEEE (IOTSMS 2019), 
Oct. 2019, pp. 277-282. 
[11] D. Elkin, and V. Vyatkin, “IoT in Traffic Management: 
Review of Existing Methods of Road Traffic Regulation” In 
Applied Informatics and Cybernetics in Intelligent Systems. 
Proc. 9th Computer Science On-line Conference. (CSOC 
2020) 2020, Vol. 3, pp 536-551.  
[12] H. Tahaei, F. Afifi, A. Asemi, F. Zaki, and N. B. Anuar, "The 
rise of traffic classification in IoT networks: A survey," 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Vol. 154, 
Article. 102538, pp. 1-20, March. 2020. 
[13] B. Charyyev, and M. H. Gunes, "IoT Event Classification 
Based on Network Traffic," 2020 - IEEE Conference on 
Computer 
Communications 
Workshops 
(INFOCOM 
WKSHPS), 2020, pp. 854-859. 
[14] T. Z. Teshabaev, M. Z. Yakubova, and O. A. Manankova, 
"Analysis, research and simulation of a multiservice network 
based on the Packet Tracer software package to determine the 
value of delays to increasing value size of ICMP packet," 
2020 International Conference on Information Science and 
Communications Technologies (ICISCT 2020), 2020, pp. 1-4. 
[15] C. G. Dumitrache, G. Predusca, L. D. Circiumarescu, N. 
Angelescu, and D. C. Puchianu, "Comparative study of RIP, 
OSPF and EIGRP protocols using Cisco Packet Tracer," 2017 
5th International Symposium on Electrical and Electronics 
Engineering (ISEEE), 2017, pp. 1-6. 
[16] G. Ashok, P. Akram, M. Neelima, J. Nagasaikumar, and A. 
Vamshi, “Implementation of smart home by using Packet 
Tracer,” International Journal of Scienfic & Technoloy 
Research, Vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 678-685, 2020. 
[17] N. Gwangwava, and T. Mubvirwi, “Design and Simulation of 
IoT Systems Using the Cisco Packet Tracer,” Advances in 
Internet of Things, Vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 59-76, 2021. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-900-3
INNOV 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

