Internet of Underground Things ESP8266 WiFi Coverage Study  
 
Laura García, Lorena Parra, Jose M. Jimenez, Jaime 
Lloret 
Integrated Management Coastal Research Institute 
Universitat Politècnica de València 
Valencia, Spain 
email: laugarg2@teleco.upv.es, loparbo@doctor.upv.es, 
jojiher@dcom.upv.es, jlloret@dcom.upv.es 
Abdelhafid Abouaissa, Pascal Lorenz 
Network and Telecommunication Research Group 
University of Haute Alsace 
Colmar, France 
email: abdelhafid.abouaissa@uha.fr, lorenz@ieee.org
 
 
Abstract— The Internet of Underground Things (IoUT) is a 
novel concept regarding Internet of Things (IoT). It could have 
countless applications, particularly in agriculture as buried 
devices do not interfere with the machinery. Furthermore, 
wireless communication among buried and above ground 
devices would allow a significant cost reduction as wires would 
not need to be deployed and wires would not be destroyed by 
machinery or impede the correct performance of the activities 
performed by the workers of the field. In this paper, we 
perform a WiFi coverage study of ESP8266 nodes placed both 
underground and above ground so as to assess the current lack 
of knowledge in IoUT and the performance of low-cost 
controller boards for IoUT applications. Tests were performed 
with ESP8266 nodes buried at depths of 10 cm, 20 cm, 30 cm 
and 40 cm in a field located in an area of citrus fields. A node 
programmed as an AP (Access Point) was placed at several 
distances at a height of 50 cm. Results showed that the 
coverage was better for the node buried at a depth of 20 cm. 
Keywords- IoUT; WiFi; coverage; ESP8266; agriculture 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The forecasts of the increase of the population of the 
world [1] leads to taking new and better solutions in 
agriculture. In these forecasts, it is estimated that 70% more 
food than the food produced nowadays will have to be 
cultivated and manufactured by 2050. This makes agriculture 
become one of the key sectors of the global economy. It is 
necessary to achieve greater efficiency, in order to be able to 
supply the entire population and optimize the consumption 
of resources, such as irrigation water, fertilizers or pesticides. 
A greater efficiency can be achieved by applying new 
technologies in crops. Using sensors, farmers obtain 
information on different parameters related to their crops and 
help them in making decisions [2]. The application of these 
new technologies in crops brings with it a significant 
reduction in production costs and an increase in the quality 
of the products. In addition, farmers may need to spend less 
time physically present in the crop fields, being able to 
obtain the crucial information that will allow them to 
perform data analysis in real time. This will ultimately 
improve the quality of life of people and the productivity of 
their businesses. Initially, the tendency is that, due to the 
need for a return on investment, the products that reach a 
higher price in the market will be the ones that will be 
subject to a greater investment in technology. 
The IoT technology has a fundamental role. Its 
application in multiple areas makes it possible to adopt the 
most appropriate solutions to different problems. There are a 
lot of studies on the application of IoT in different 
environments. For example, the authors [3] presented a study 
of the most used IoT technologies in Smart Cities. 
Agriculture is one of the areas in which this technology is 
increasingly implemented. For example, if environmental 
and crop health parameters are controlled, the use of both 
water resources and pesticides can be avoided, which will 
reduce the impact on the environment. This is what we 
usually call precision agriculture. 
The transmission of the data obtained by the sensors 
located in the crop fields, is usually done using wireless 
technologies, such as IEEE 802.11, Bluetooth, ZigBee, 
LoRa, 3G, 4G or 5G. Devices usually have a low energy 
consumption which usually has as a characteristic a low 
transmission range associated with it. That is partially due to 
the difficulty in being able to provide a constant energy 
supply, except if it is done by battery systems that are usually 
recharged by means of green technologies, such as solar 
panels. 
In the space of IoT applied to agriculture, we can 
highlight for its novelty the studies presented in the IoUT. In 
this case, IoT devices are partially or totally buried for 
monitoring and detection in real time. In its application to 
agriculture, underground sensors are used, which control 
different systems, both irrigation and machinery, to help 
farmers and agronomists in making decisions. By using 
buried sensors, we can control crop parameters, such as soil 
temperature and humidity, more efficiently than with the 
parameters that are only estimated on surface. Furthermore, 
due to the underground location of the nodes, there are major 
problems 
when 
working 
with 
machinery 
in 
their 
environment, because they can be unused or destroyed. 
Our proposal presents the study of the transmission 
between underground and above ground ESP8622 nodes. 
The study is carried out due to the lack of previous studies 
related to IoUT regarding its location in crops. We have 
studied the signal in a low-vegetation area surrounded by 
citrus fields. We have buried several nodes at different 
depths, and we have observed the degradation of the signal 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

as a function of the separation of the emitting and receiving 
nodes, both in distance and in depth. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
presents the related work. The proposed architecture is 
presented in Section 3. The testbed description is depicted in 
Section 4. The results are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 
depicts the mathematical model. Finally, the conclusion and 
future work is presented in Section 7. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The IoUT is quite the recent concept, thus few papers 
exist on this topic. Several of them are surveys, such as the 
survey on the state of the art on the Internet of Underground 
Things performed by Vuran et al. [4]. The authors 
determined the different components of an IoUT architecture 
as Underground Things for sensors and embedded systems 
deployed underground, mobile sinks that gather the data 
from underground things, base stations that act as a gateway 
and cloud services that provide storage and data processing. 
The communication among the elements of a IoUT 
architecture can be between underground things or between 
underground and above ground things. Soil moisture and 
texture and variations in distance and depth influence on the 
quality of the communications. Furthermore, Leles et al. [5] 
presented a summary of the challenges of IoUT for railways 
networks. The authors performed a coverage test in a tunnel 
where signal intensities of -55 dB were reached for 100 m of 
distance. The considered challenges are the environmental 
requirements, such as power supply, electromagnetic 
compatibility, and the mechanical and thermal requirements, 
the mobility, the use of an independent frequency network 
that should provide enough bandwidth for the transmitted 
data, the QoS, the safety of the network and the energy 
efficiency. 
Salam et al. [6] performed several studies were different 
depths and soil types were considered. The effects of soil 
type and moisture on the multi-carrier modulation were 
analyzed. The authors analyzed the channel frequency 
response and the empirical antenna return loss for sandy soil, 
silt loam and silty clay loam with varied moisture levels. 
Results showed that for distances up to 12m, 124 Mbps were 
reached. Furthermore, 362 Mbps were reached for shorter 
distances and low moisture. Moreover, the authors concluded 
that capacity gains between 56% and 136% were reached 
with sub-carrier bandwidth adaptation based on the type and 
moisture of the soil. Moreover, a real-time permittivity and 
soil 
moisture 
monitoring 
for 
wireless 
underground 
communication called Di-Sense was presented in [7]. In 
order to do so, the propagation path loss and the velocity of 
wave 
propagation 
were 
utilized. 
Experiments 
were 
performed in a greenhouse with burial depths of 10, 20, 30 
and 40 cm, a frequency ranges between 100 and 500 MHz 
and slit loam, silty clay loam and sandy soils. Results 
showed high accuracy for depths up to 40 cm and distances 
ranging from 1 to 15 meters. Lastly, a study on the 
performance of varied modulation schemes in underground 
communications was performed in [8]. Multiple antennas 
were utilized to exploit the direct, lateral and reflected 
components of the wireless underground channel. Results 
showed bit errors rates (BER) of 10-3 for delay spreads below 
0.05. Results showed that equalization impacts the 
performance of the IoUT communication with the 8-Tap 
Decision-Feedback Equalizer as the best one. Furthermore, 
DBPSK and DPSK presented better performance for 
channels without adaptive equalizations. Lastly, the authors 
presented 
two 
new 
receiver 
designs 
for 
IoUT 
communications named Lateral-Direct-Reflected and 3W-
Rake. The three antenna LDR design achieved a BER of 10-
5. 
Magnetic induction has been considered as well to 
perform wireless underground communication. Saeed et al. 
[9] presented a study on the localization in magnetic 
induction for IoUT for gas and oil reservoirs. The authors 
propose a three-dimensional MI-based location procedure 
based on the Cramer Rao Lower Bound (CRLB) that 
considers channel parameters. The considered depth is 1.8 
Km. Simulation results showed that the accuracy of the 
localization procedure is affected by the noise variance, the 
frequency, the number of anchors and the number of 
underground things. 
Considering the need of more extensive studies of the 
underground 
environment 
for 
IoT 
communications, 
especially for agricultural environments, in this paper we 
perform a coverage study for IoUT wireless communication 
performed by ESP 8266 IoT nodes. 
III. 
ARCHITECTURE 
In this section, we present the proposed architecture for 
an IoUT solution for agriculture. Figure 1 shows the 
different levels of the proposed architecture. It is formed by 
four levels: Nodes and Sensors, Wireless Network, Internet, 
Data Center and Artificial Intelligence. 
Wireless 
Network
Nodes and 
Sensors
Internet
Data Center
Artificial Intelligence
 
Figure 1.  Proposed architecture 
 
The nodes are located in the lower level with the sensors 
connected to them. These sensors will obtain all the 
necessary information of the crops for a later decision-
making process, in which Artificial Intelligence is used in 
order to perform smart agriculture. The level above the first 
one is the level of the wireless network. At this level, the 
transmission of data, obtained in the fields of agriculture 
through the sensors by using a wireless network, is 
performed. At this level, the access points (AP) are located, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

which collect the signals sent by the nodes and transmit them 
until they reach a gateway device. The gateway allows the 
connection through the Internet to a remote location. The 
next level is the Internet, where the obtained data is 
transmitted using an Internet Provider connection to the 
location where they are stored. This connection can be 
achieved using different technologies, such as DSL, wireless 
technology and 3G / 4G mobile data. We select the one that 
fits our requirements with the lowest costs depending on the 
location of the crops. Finally, in the upper layer, we locate 
our Data Processing Center that employs Artificial 
Intelligence. At this level, the information storage and 
treatment systems are located. In this location, the data will 
be stored so that it can be retrieved at any time and then be 
processed. With this data, the farmers and engineers can 
obtain relevant information for decision making. 
IV. 
TESTBED DESCRIPTION 
In this section, the design of the testbed is going to be 
described. 
To perform this test, four nodes were programmed to 
measure the Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) and 
one node was programmed as an AP. The utilized node was 
the Mini D1 ESP 8266 node for both the AP and the RSSI-
meter. The Mini D1 presents 11 digital input/output pins and 
has an operating voltage of 3.3 V. The specifications of the 
ESP8266 chip and the antenna can be found in [10].  
The nodes that measured the RSSI were placed on 
80x80x36 mm sized protective boxes and the AP node was 
placed inside a 155X105X62 mm protective box that 
included the power supply. The power supply was a DC 5V-
1000mA power bank with a capacity of 2000mAh. The 
ESP8266 nodes were placed inside the box with the antenna 
placed upwards. The nodes were taped in order to avoid any 
movement of the node inside the box at the time they were 
buried. A cable that connected the node to a laptop went 
through a hole of the box that was sealed afterwards so as to 
avoid the soil getting to the node. The data on the RSSI was 
gathered through the serial port of the node using the 
Arduino IDE. 
As Vuran [4] described, IoUT may be comprised of 
underground and above ground elements. In this study, we 
test the signal strength between an underground and an 
above ground ESP 8266 node so as to determine the possible 
use of low-cost Wi-Fi nodes for IoUT purposes. As it can be 
seen in Figure 2, four RSSI-meter nodes were buried 
underground at distances 10 cm, 20 cm, 30 cm and 40 cm 
deep into the ground. They were placed in the same hole one 
on top of the other and adding the necessary soil between 
each protective box so as to reach the required depth. Then, 
the AP was placed at a height of 50 cm for each of the 
measures. The starting point for the measures was 1 meter. 
Each measure is then performed in increments of 1 meter 
until the connection is lost. The orientation of the antennas 
and the position of the nodes was always the same  
for all the measures. The images of how the nodes were 
placed on the field are presented in Figure 3. When the 
RSSI-meter nodes were buried, the soil was slightly
 
compacted, and the soil of the surrounding areas was not 
disrupted. 
The test was performed in a Mediterranean area in a field 
were a citrus plot used to be. The satellite image of the field 
can be seen in Figure 4. As it can be seen, the area is used 
for agriculture and several citrus fields surround the field 
were the tests were performed. That area of the field was 
selected due to the lack of thicker and other types of 
vegetation. The soil was a predominantly sandy soil and has 
the appropriate qualities for citrus plantations. There is no 
presence of housing in the area and the use of IoT systems 
for agriculture was unknown. Therefore, a preliminary test 
was performed to confirm the absence of any other signal 
from other networks in the area. 
V. 
RESULTS 
This section presents the results of the experiment. We 
show the gathered RSSI at different distances. Then, the 
attenuation effect of the soil is described. 
First, the values of RSSI are presented for each set of 
data (10, 20, 30 and 40 cm of buried depth.). The mean, 
maximum, and minimum of the RSSI gathered at different 
distances are shown. This step is necessary in order to 
evaluate the variance of the data. Figure 5 presents the data 
of the RSSI gathered by the node buried at 10cm. Even 
though we can expect to have a uniform decrease in the 
signal as no vegetation or building are in the studied area, the 
soil itself can cause multipath effect. The soil is not uniform 
and it can have different densities in different points which 
can cause those constructive and destructive interferences. In 
the first measured point, at 1m of the node in horizontal 
distance, the mean RSSI was -66dBm. The RSSI decreased 
quickly and uniformly to -84 when the node was placed at 3  
m from the AP. This signal is considered as a poor or 
unstable signal, and the communication between both 
devices might have further problems. From this point, 3m,  
 
Fig. 2.  Description of the testbed. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
the signal is affected by multipath effect and the attenuation 
is not uniform. In some points, 4, 6 and 9 m the RSSI 
increases. It is important to note that some points as 1 or 4m 
have a big difference between the maximum and the 
minimum RSSI values, with a standard deviation higher than  
4 in both cases. The mean standard deviation of this set of 
data is 3.21. At distances 10 and 11m the connection 
between the node and the AP was lost.  
Figure 6 details the data gathered with the node buried at 
a depth of 20cm. In this case the signal attenuation is more 
uniform than in the previous case. The RSSI in the first 
measured point is -61dBm (with minimum of -62 and 
maximum of -60dBm). The last measured point where the 
node is connected to the AP is 8m with a RSSI of -90dBm. 
In this case, no clear evidences of multipath effect are found. 
We suspect that, as in the precious case, there where 
different densities in the soil which might cause it. 
Nonetheless, the data (mean, maximum and minimum) 
follows a uniform attenuation. The standard deviation of this 
data is 1.67. Apparently in this case, the standard deviation 
increases with the distance.  
The data of RSSI from the node burried at 30cm can be 
seen in Figure 7. In this case, the attenuation follows almost 
a lineal realtionship. There is one measured distance, 5m, 
where the RSSI increases, but in the rest of the cases it 
decreases with the distance. The mean RSSI at 1m is 71dBm 
(minimum and maximum are -68dBm and -74dBm). The last 
measured point where the node was connected to the AP was 
at 7m, with a mean RSSI of -95dBm. The mean standard 
deviation of this data is 1.75, which is simmilar to the 
standard deviation with the node buried at depth of 20 cm.  
Figure 8 presents the data gathered with the node buried 
at a depth of 40cm. The mean RSSI at 1m was -72dBm, the 
minimum was -73dBm and the maximum -71dBm. The 
RSSI indicates a signal attenuation with the distance 
following a uniform behavior. Besides, at 4m, the RSSI 
increases because a possible multipath effect could be 
causing a constructive interference. The signal of the AP was 
lost after 6m. The last measured RSSI was -92dBm. The 
standard deviation of the data gathered at a depth of 40cm 
was 1.57. This data has almost the same standard deviation 
as the data from the nodes buried at a depth of 20cm and 
30cm. 
Finally, we can use the data shown in Figures 5 to 8 to 
create a visual model by interpolating this data. The model 
can be seen in Figure 9. The points where the signal was lost 
are entered as -110dB to generate this model. Even though 
we can expect the best results with the shallowest node, the 
node buried at 20cm seems to have better signal in the first 
8m. Although, the node which has coverage at further 
distances is the node buried at 10cm, we must consider not 
only the link existence but also the coverage in terms of 
RSSI. The values of RSSI lower than -70dBm are considered 
as fair, lower than -80dBm are considered as unstable signal, 
and lower than 90 are considered as very unstable 
connection. Thus, although the node buried at 10cm has 
coverage until 9m, we should only consider the values higher 
than 90dBm. Therefore, the node which has higher coverage 
is the node buried at 20cm. The explanation is that, probably 
the signal of the node buried at 10 cm is highly affected by 
the air-soil interface.  
VI. MATHEMATICAL MODEL 
In this section, the mathematical model of the received 
power is presented. The received power is obtained utilizing 
the power balance formula [11-12] provided in (1). 
    (1) 
Where Prx is the received power expressed in dBm, Ptx-1m 
is the transmitted power at 1 meter in dBm which is -59,857 
dBm for the ESP8266 nodes, n is the attenuation variation 
index which is 2 for air, d is the distance between 
transmitter and receiver expressed in meters, Lhumidity is the 
losses due to humidity for the two main hydrometric areas 
of Spain, areas H and K, which is 0.0026 dB [13] and Lsoil 
are the losses due to the underground propagation of the  
 
Fig. 3.  Nodes placed on the field 
 
Fig. 4.  Satellite image of the field. 
-100
-95
-90
-85
-80
-75
-70
-65
-60
0
2
4
6
8
10
RSSI (dBm)
Horizontal distance (m)
Mean
Minimum
Maximum
 
Fig. 5. RSSI with node buried at a depth of 10 cm. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

signal. The theoretical received power at 1 meter is obtained 
with (2). 
   (2) 
Where c0 is 3*108 m/s and f is the operational frequency 
in Hz. Furthermore, the 100 mW power commonly used for 
WiFi transmissions should be considered. The losses due to 
soil, Lsoil, are presented in (3) [14]. 
                                (3) 
Where Lm is the attenuation caused by the variation in 
wavelengths and Lα corresponds to the losses due to the 
attenuation constant. Each of them is presented in (4) and 
(5) respectively. 
    (4) 
                               (5) 
The attenuation constant is given by (6).  
                               (6) 
Obtained from the expressions of penetration depth 
d=1/α and the expression simplified expression for mediums 
where 
μ=1 
as 
soil 
[15], 
expressed 
as 
). The real part of the permittivity 
for a sandy soil ε’ is 6.53 (TDR), the imaginary part of the 
permittivity ε’ is 1.88 (TDR) and the conductivity σ is 2.32 
(mS/m). 
The results of the model for a depth of 10 cm are 
presented in Figure 10. As it can be seen, the results are 
very similar to the real measures obtaining a determination 
coefficient r2 of 0.8256. The results of the model for a depth 
of 20 cm are presented in Figure 11. The r2 for this depth is 
0.8259. Figure 12 presents the results of the model for the 
depth of 30 cm. The obtained determination coefficient r2 
for this depth is 0.6084. Lastly, the results of the model for 
the depth of 40 cm are presented in Figure 13. The r2 of this 
depth is 0.0158. This is the depth were the model is the least 
approximated, however, it is still useful for an estimation. 
The heterogeneity of the soil and possible stones or other 
materials that change the dielectric characteristics of the soil 
may introduce further losses that do not affect the other 
depths. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In this study, we evaluate the effects in the connectivity 
of different nodes buried at different depths connected to an 
AP that was located at 0.5m over the soil. The RSSI was 
measured at each depth and the AP was moved from 1m to 
11m from the nodes. An Architecture for an IoUT system 
was proposed and a mathematical model to determine the 
received power between underground and above ground 
nodes was presented. 
As it is expected, the deeper the node, the lower the 
coverage. The coverage with the shallowest node reaches 
9m, while the coverage of the deepest mode only reaches 
5m. Nevertheless, if we consider the quality of the link as the 
value of RSSI, we can conclude that the coverage is better 
when the node is buried at 20cm. The standard deviation of 
the RSSI is maximum when the node is located closer to the  
surface, with a mean value of 3.21. Once the nodes are 
buried at higher depths, up to 20cm, the standard deviation 
decreases to 1.6 approximately. It might be caused by the air-
soil interface which affects the node buried at 10cm greatly. 
The future works will be aimed to evaluate the effect of 
the change the height of the AP and to evaluate the effect of 
having the AP on the soil and inside the soil. Moreover, we 
-100
-95
-90
-85
-80
-75
-70
-65
-60
0
2
4
6
8
10
RSSI (dBm)
Horizontal distance (m)
Mean
Minimum
Maximum
 
Fig. 6. RSSI with node buried at a depth of 20 cm. 
-100
-95
-90
-85
-80
-75
-70
-65
-60
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
RSSI (dBm)
Horizontal distance (m)
Mean
Minimum
Maximum
 
Fig. 7. RSSI with node buried at a depth of 30 cm 
-100
-95
-90
-85
-80
-75
-70
-65
-60
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
RSSI (dBm)
Horizontal distance (m)
Mean
Minimum
Maximum
 
Fig. 8. RSSI with node buried at a depth of 40 cm 
10
20
30
40
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Buried depth (cm)
Horizontal distance (m)
-110--100
-100--90
-90--80
-80--70
-70--60
No signal
 
Fig. 9. Visual model of the RSSI at different depths. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

want to repeat this test bench with other IoT devices and 
different types of soil. Furthermore, we will perform these 
tests with other wireless technologies, such as ZigBee and 
LoRa. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially supported by the European 
Union through the ERANETMED (Euromediterranean 
Cooperation through ERANET joint activities and beyond) 
project ERANETMED3-227 SMARTWATIR and by the 
European Union with the “Fondo Europeo Agrícola de 
Desarrollo Rural (FEADER) – Europa invierte en zonas 
rurales”, the MAPAMA, and Comunidad de Madrid with the 
IMIDRA, under the mark of the PDR-CM 2014-2020” 
project number PDR18-XEROCESPED. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Population Prospects 2017. UNITED NATIONS. DESA / 
POPULATION 
DIVISION. 
Available 
online: 
https://population.un.org/wpp/ (Last access October 25, 2019). 
[2] L. García, L. Parra, J. M. Jimenez, J. Lloret and P. Lorenz, “Practical 
Design of a WSN to Monitor the Crop and Its Irrigation System”, 
Network Protocols and Algorithms, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp. 35-52, 2018. 
[3] L. Garcia, J. M. Jimenez, M. T. Abdullah and J. Lloret, "Wireless 
Technologies for IoT in Smart Cities", Network Protocols and 
Algorithms. Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 23-64, 2018.  
[4] M. C. Vuran, A. Salam, R. Wong and S. Imark, “Internet of 
Underground Things: Sensing and Communications on the Field for 
Precision Agriculture”, IEEE 4th World Forum on the Internet of 
Things, Singapore, Singapore, 5-8 February 2018, pp. 586-591. 
[5] R. de C. D. Leles, J. J. P. C. Rodeigues, I. Woungang, R. A. L. 
Rabêlo and V. Furtado, “Railways Networks – Challenges for IoT 
Underground Wireless Communications”, IEEE 10th Latin-American 
Conference on Communications, Guadalajara, Mexico, 14-16 
November 2018, pp. 1-6. 
[6] A. Salam and M. C. Vuran, “Impacts of Soil Type and Moisture on 
the Capacity of Multi-Carrier Modulation in Internet of Underground 
Things”, 25th International Conference on Computer Communication 
and Networks, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 1-4 August 2016, pp. 1-9. 
[7] A. Salam, M. C. Vuran and S. Irmak, “Di-Sense: In situ real-time 
permittivity estimation and soil moisture sensing using wireless 
underground communications”, Computer Networks, Vol. 151, pp. 
31-41, 2019. 
[8] A. Salam and M. C. Vuran, “Wireless Underground Channel 
Diversity Reception With Multiple Antennas for Internet of 
Underground Things”, IEEE ICC 2017 Mobile and Wireless 
Networking, Paris, France, 21-25 May 2017, pp. 1-7. 
[9] N. Saeed, M. Alouini and T. Y. Al-Naffouri, “On Achievable 
Accuracy of Location in Magnetic Induction-Based Internet of 
Underground Things for Oil and Gas Reservoirs”, arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1901.09556, 2019. 
[10] Specifications 
of 
the 
ESP8266. 
Available 
online: 
https://www.elecrow.com/download/ESP-12F.pdf 
[Last 
access 
October 25 2019] 
[11] J. Lloret, I. Bosch, S. Sendra and A. Serrano, “A Wireless Sensor 
Network for Vineyard Monitoring That Uses Image Processing”, 
Sensors, Vol. 11, pp. 6165-6169, 2011. 
[12] J. Lloret, J. J. López, C. Turró and S. Flores, “A Fast Design Model 
for Indoor Radio Coverage in the 2.4 GHz Wireless LAN”, 1st -
international Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems, 
Mauritius, 20-22 September 2004, pp. 408-412. 
[13] Recommendation UIT-R PN.837-5. Characteristics of Precipitation 
for Propagation Modeling. Online: http://www.itu.int/md/R07-WP3J-
C-0014/en (Last access October 25, 2019) 
[14] L. Li, M. C. Vuran and I. F. Akyildiz, “Characteristics of 
Underground Channel for Wireless Underground Sensor Networks”, 
The sixth Annual Mediterranean Ad Hoc Networking Workshop, 
Corfu, Greece, 12-15 June 2007, 92-99. 
[15] A. M. Sadeghioon, D. N. Chapman, N. Metje and C. J. Anthony, “A 
New Approach to Estimating the Path Loss in Underground Wireless 
Sensor Networks”, Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, Vol. 6, 
No. 18, pp. 1-11, 2007. 
 
 
Fig. 10. Results for the model at a depth of 10 cm. 
 
Fig. 11. Results for the model at a depth of 20 cm. 
 
Fig. 12. Results for the model at a depth of 30 cm. 
 
Fig. 13. Results for the model at a depth of 40 cm. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-758-0
INNOV 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

