A Call Procedure Design for Underwater Celluar Networks  
Hee-won Kim, Junho Cho, Ho-Shin Cho 
School of Electronics Engineering 
Kyungpook National University 
Daegu, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {hwkim, jh_cho, hscho}@ee.knu.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we design a call procedure between 
underwater base station controller (UBSC) and underwater 
base station (UBS) in cellular-type underwater networks. For 
reliability and stability, the procedure is initiated by UBSC. 
Then, data is transferred in three distinctive modes so that 
data can be collected in more efficient way according to the 
application services. 
Keywords-underwater cellular networks; call procedure; 
initialization; medium access control. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, research on underwater wireless 
networks has been actively conducted for many applications, 
such as disaster prevention, tactical surveillance, and ocean 
exploration [1]. Since signals suffer from high propagation 
delay, severe multipath fading, and narrow bandwidth in the 
underwater channel, systematic resource management is 
highly required. Depending on the presence or absence of 
infrastructure, we can categorize the underwater wireless 
networks into two types: cellular networks and sensor 
networks, 
respectively. 
Although 
constructing 
the 
infrastructure in underwater is expensive, the cellular-type 
networks have very efficient resource management [2] 
compared to the sensor networks. In this paper, we design a 
call procedure between underwater base station controller 
(UBSC) and underwater base station (UBS) in underwater 
cellular networks. 
Figure 1 shows an architecture of underwater cellular 
network. On the seabed, UBSs are installed and 
communicate with a UBSC buoyed on the surface. The 
UBSC manages the UBSs by disseminating downlink (DL) 
data and gathers uplink (UL) data from the UBSs. Similarly, 
each UBS takes charge of multiple user equipment (UE) and 
delivers UL data from the UEs to the UBSC. 
In Sections 2 and 3, we explain the proposed call procedure 
between the UBSC and the UBSs and conclude the paper, 
respectively. 
II. 
CALL PROCEDURE  
The call procedure consists of initialization and data 
transfer phases as shown in Figure 2. The initialization phase 
is divided into two sub-phases—UBS search and system 
configuration. 
 
A. Initialization phase 
In the UBS search sub-phase, the UBSC broadcasts an 
echo request (ERQ) packet to search for UBSs, and the 
UBSs respond with an echo response (ERP) packet. Since 
the UBSs do not have their own dedicated UL frequency 
band, they send the ERP using a shared band. To prevent 
packet collision, each UBS defers the ERP transmission for a 
certain time. Through the ERQ–ERP exchange, the UBSC 
knows the number of available UBSs and distances from 
each of them. During the system configuration sub-phase, 
based on aforementioned knowledge, the UBSC allocates 
dedicated UL bands of the UBSs in such a way that a nearer 
UBS gets a higher frequency band and then notifies them of 
this information using a system parameter configure (SPC) 
packet in the next system configuration phase. Since the SPC 
contains system parameters, such as data transfer mode as 
well as the allocated UL band, the UBSs can configure the 
system for a subsequent data transfer phase. As a response to 
the SPC, the UBSs send a system parameter configure 
complete (SPCC) packet to the UBSC. The UBSs use their 
dedicated UL band from the moment they complete the 
system configuration. 
Note that both sub-phases are initiated by the UBSC 
while the UBSs wait for UBSC’s request packets such as 
ERQ and SPC. Additionally, only the successfully 
recognized UBSs by UBSC during the UBS search can 
transit to the system configuration phase. 
B. Data transfer phase 
In this phase, based on the previous system parameter 
setting, UL or DL data is exchanged between the UBSC and 
the UBSs. Once the network initialization is completed, the 
UBSC broadcasts a data transfer start (DTS) packet to 
announce the move to the data transfer phase. When the 
UBSC
UBS0
UBS1
UBS2
UBSn
. . .
. . .
Surface
Bottom
 
Figure 1.   Network structure. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

UBSs receive the DTS, they recognize transition to the data 
transfer phase and then respond with a data transfer start 
complete (DTSC) packet. As mentioned earlier, only the 
successfully recognized UBSs by the UBSC during the 
system configuration phase can transit to the data transfer 
phase. Therefore, even though a UBS sends a SPCC to the 
UBSC after system configuration, it may not join the data 
transfer phase if the SPCC is lost. 
The protocol has three different data transfer modes 1, 2, 
and 3. The modes 1 and 2 are normal mode but they are 
distinct from each other, depending on whether the UBSs 
sleep or not. On the other hand, the mode 3 is ad hoc mode 
where the UBSC establishes a direct link and communicates 
with a mobile UE (e.g., a diver). 
In modes 1 and 2, a session for UL or DL data comprises 
a 4-way or 2-way handshake, respectively, as shown in 
Figure 3. In the case of UL session, the UBS and the UBSC 
first exchange channel probe request (CPQ) and channel 
probe response (CPR) packets. On receiving the CPQ, the 
UBSC measures the UL channel quality and responds with 
the CPR that carries the most appropriate modulation and 
coding scheme (MCS) level for UL data. Then, the UBS 
sends the UL data using the corresponding MCS level and 
are acknowledged by the UBSC. A large amount of UL data 
can be transmitted with a chain of consecutive data packets 
(packet train) within a single UL session. Meanwhile, note 
that there is no CPQ–CPR handshake in DL data session, 
thus reducing the delay caused by channel quality estimation. 
Instead, since the DL data normally carry important control 
information, the lowest MCS level is applied by default. As 
an automatic repeat request (ARQ) method, the UL session 
employs the selective ARQ. When UL data are erroneous, 
the UBSC selectively requests retransmission of the 
erroneous data by sending a negative acknowledgment 
(NACK) packet to the UBS. Referring to this NACK, the 
UBS resends the corresponding packets only. On the other 
hand, the simple stop-and-wait ARQ is used in the DL 
session. 
Compared to the mode 2, the mode 1 additionally 
introduces UBS’s sleep for energy saving. The UBSC 
calculates the sleep time for each UBS at the end of every 
UL session and includes it in the ACK packet. Then, the 
UBS sleeps during the specified time, which means that no 
UL and DL sessions can be established until the sleeping 
ends. Depending on application type or traffic pattern, the 
sleep time can be fixed or variable. 
In the mode 3, the UBSC makes conversation directly 
with a UE, without passing through the UBSs. The UE does 
not have a dedicated UL band but borrows one of the UBS’s 
UL bands. Throughout the mode 3, all of the UBSs keep 
silence not to interfere with UE’s communication. This mode 
consists of three procedures: call setup, conversation, and 
call termination. To set up a call, the UBSC sends a call 
setup (CS) packet to the UE, which responds to this with a 
call setup complete (CSC) packet. After the CS–CSC 
exchange, the UBSC and the UE can talk to each other until 
the call is terminated. If the conversation is over, the UBSC 
requests call termination to the UE by sending a call 
terminate (CT) packet. When receiving the CT, the UE 
acknowledges with a call terminate complete (CTC) packet 
and disconnects the link. Note that the call setup and call 
termination procedures are also initiated by the UBSC. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a call procedure between the UBSC and the 
UBS of underwater cellular networks was proposed. The 
procedure is centralized by the UBSC to achieve reliability 
and stability. In addition, the data transfer phase has three 
distinctive modes so that the network can adaptively choose 
one according to the application. For further work, we will 
design a UBS–UE call procedure and then combine it with 
the UBSC–UBS call procedure. Additionally, we will 
conduct field experiments to verify the proposed procedure. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was a part of the project titled 
“Development of Distributed Underwater Monitoring & 
Control Networks,” funded by the Ministry of Oceans and 
Fisheries, Korea. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. F. Akyildiz, D. Pompili, and T. Melodia, “Underwater 
acoustic sensor networks: research challenges,” Ad Hoc 
Netw., 
vol. 
3, 
pp. 
257–279, 
May 
2005, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.adhoc.2005.01.004. 
[2] M. Stojanovic, “Design and Capacity Analysis of Cellular-
Type Underwater Acoustic Networks,” IEEE J. Oceanic. Eng., 
vol. 
33, 
pp. 
171–181, 
Oct. 
2008, 
doi: 
10.1109/JOE.2008.920210
 
time
UBSC
UBS
CPQ
UL data
CPR
ACK
 
(a) 
 
time
UBSC
UBS
DL data
ACK
 
(b) 
Figure 3.   Procedures of data transfer: (a) UL data, (b) DL data. 
Initialization
UBS search   System configuration
Data
transfer
time
Figure 2.   Call procedure between UBSC and UBS. 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

