What’s Happening: A Survey of Tweets Event Detection
Amina Madani
Blida 1 University
LRDSI Laboratory
Blida, Algeria
a_madani@esi.dz
Omar Boussaid
Lumière lyon 2 University
ERIC Laboratory
Lyon, France
Omar.Boussaid@univ-lyon2.fr 
Djamel Eddine Zegour
High School of Computer Science
LCSI Laboratory
Algiers, Algeria
d_zegour@esi.dz
Abstract—Twitter is now one of the main means for spread of 
ideas and information throughout the Web. Tweets discuss 
different trends, ideas, events, and so on. This gave rise to an 
increasing interest in analyzing tweets by the data mining 
community. Twitter is, in nature, a good resource for detecting 
events in real-time. In this survey paper, we are going to present 
four challenges of tweets event detection: health epidemics 
identification, natural events detection, trending topics detection, 
and sentiment analysis. These challenges are based mainly on 
clustering and classification. We review these approaches by 
providing a description of each one.
Keywords—tweets mining; tweets event detection; health 
epidemics identification; natural events detection; trending topics
detection; sentiment analysis
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, hundreds of millions of users participate in 
online social networks and forums, subscribe to microblogging 
services or maintain web diaries (blogs).
Twitter, in particular, is currently the major micro-blogging 
service. In January 2014, the total number of active registered 
users on Twitter was 645,750,000 [1]. In this system, 
participants post short status messages that are often available 
publicly, or semi-publicly (e.g., restricted to the user’s 
designated contacts). In January 2014, more than 58 millions of 
Twitter messages were sent every day through the world, with 
9,100 the number of tweets that happen every second [1].
Recently, the exponential growth of Twitter messages has 
started to draw the attention of researchers from various 
disciplines. Numerous works in the data mining field have 
examined Twitter. How to automatically understand, extract 
and summarize useful Twitter content to detect events has 
therefore become an important and emergent research topic.
Tweets event correspond to a lot of content generated on 
Twitter, which is opinions, reactions and information from 
users. Currently, the most promising events that exist on 
Twitter are: natural disasters such as earthquakes, health 
epidemics like influenza, trends such as world-cup and opinion 
about products, services or events like political election results.
The focus of this survey paper is to discuss research works 
done for four challenges of tweets event detection: health
epidemics identification, natural events detection, trending 
topics
detection, and sentiment analysis.
Tweets event 
detection helps understanding what the users are really 
discussing about in Twitter.
This paper is organized as follows: In the next section, we 
explain Twitter service and its characteristics. In Section 3, we 
review popular tweets event detection approaches by providing 
a description of each one. Section 4 discusses and highlights 
works studied above. Finally, we conclude the paper and 
further work is outlined.
II.
TWITTER, A POPULAR SAS
Twitter is a popular microblogging service, one of the main 
means for spread of ideas and information throughout the web.
Twitter enables its users to send and read short text-based 
messages of up to 140 characters about “what’s happening” 
(either one or two sentences), known as “tweets”. Users can 
tweet via the Twitter website, compatible external applications 
(such as for smartphones), or by Short Message Service (SMS) 
available in certain countries.
One of the main characteristics of Twitter is that its core 
functions represent a Social Awareness Stream model. The 
Social Awareness Streams (SAS) are typified by three factors 
distinguishing them from other communications [2]: 

The public (or personal-public) nature of the 
communication and conversation;

The brevity of posted content; and,

A highly connected social space, where most of the 
information consumption is enabled and driven by 
articulated online contact networks.
Twitter has users of the order of hundreds of millions
(Figure 1). A huge amount of content is generated every 
second, minute and hour of the day. Every tweet is associated 
with an explicit timestamp that declares the exact time it was 
generated. Important characteristic of Twitter is its real-time 
nature [3]. Tweets are data stream arriving in real-time. Data 
stream are data that arrive at high speed and its nature or 
distribution changes over time.
Figure 1. Top 20 countries in terms of Twitter accounts [4].
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Also, another property of tweets is the rich set of fields 
associated with the content, which is usually presented in the 
form of semi-structured documents. Figure 2 presents an 
example of a tweet. While the contents are ostensibly 140 
unstructured characters, the anatomy of a tweet reveals lots of 
metadata (e.g., location, location) and even the contents contain 
some structural information (e.g,. RT indicating re-tweet or 
#hashtags serving as topical metadata). Moreover, every user 
has a well-defined profile with personal information (name, 
location, biographical sketch).
Figure 2. An example of a tweet.
All these characteristics gave rise to an increasing interest 
in analyzing tweets by the data mining community. Exploiting 
these characteristics can be helpful for improving tweets event 
detection.
Tweets event correspond to a lot of content generated on 
Twitter, which is opinions, reactions and information from 
users.
III.
TWEETS EVENT DETECTION: STATE OF THE ART
In the knowledge discovery context, there are two 
fundamental data mining tasks that can be considered in 
conjunction with Twitter data [5]:

Graph mining based on analysis of the links amongst 
messages.

Text mining based on analysis of the messages content.
In our study, we are interested in the tweets content using 
text mining. Tweets content have become an important channel 
for reporting real-world events. We describe an event by four 
main dimensions: 

Event type: what is happening? 

Time: when an event is happening?

Location: where an event is happening?

Entities: who is involved in an even?
Health epidemics identification (e.g. influenza), natural 
events detection (e.g.  earthquakes), trending topics detection,
and sentiment analysis (e.g. political events) are four 
considerable challenges for tweets event detection presented in 
Figure 3. These challenges are based mainly on clustering and 
classification.
In this part, we are going to explain more specifically, these 
challenges and present several research efforts that have 
focused on them for identifying events on Twitter.
A. Health epidemics identification
In recent years, a new research area has been developed, 
namely “Infodemiology”. It can be defined as the “science of 
distribution and determinants of information in an electronic 
medium, specifically the Internet, or in a population, with the 
ultimate aim to inform public health and public policy” [6]. 
Twitter presents a promising new data source for Internet-
based surveillance because of message volume, frequency, and 
public availability. Recent studies have begun to use Twitter 
data to understand their applicability in the context of Health 
epidemics identification. Twitter can be a low cost alternative 
source for tracking health epidemics. Health epidemics 
identification is based on classification in order to predict some 
illnesses while analyzing textual content of tweets.
Figure 3. Challenges of tweets event detection.
Previous work in this area has focused specifically on 
influenza. Culotta [7] considers tweets as a valuable resource 
for tracking influenza for several reasons:

The high message posting frequency enables up-to-
the-minute analysis of an outbreak.

Twitter messages are longer, more descriptive, and 
publicly available.

Twitter profiles often contain semi-structured meta-
data (city, state, gender, age), enabling a detailed 
demographic analysis.

Despite the fact that Twitter appears targeted to a 
young demographic, it in fact has quite a diverse
set of users. 
The work of Culotta [7] explores the possibility of 
detecting influenza outbreaks by analyzing Twitter data. The
author uses a bag-of-words classifier in order to predict 
influenza-like illnesses (ILI) rates in a population, based on the 
frequency of messages containing certain keywords. He
compares rates with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) statistics.
A new method called Ailment Topic Aspect Model (ATAM) 
for extracting general public health information from millions 
of health related tweets is introduced by Paul and Dredze [8]. 
The approach discovers many different ailments (diseases),
such as flu, allergies, or cancer and learns symptom and 
treatment associations.  This model discovers a larger number 
of more coherent ailments than Latent Dirichlet Allocation
(LDA) [9]. It produces more detailed ailment information
“i got flu i 
got sore eyes, 
Doctor says i
have strep 
throat!”
Trending 
topics 
detection
Sentiment 
analysis
Health 
epidemics 
identification
Natural 
events 
detection
“there's a 
tropical storm
here in the Phils, 
its already raining 
hard!”
“this film 
3D was hella 
cool”
“20% of My
New Book is 
Available to Read -
This is My Life's 
Work”
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

(symptoms/treatments) and tracks disease rates consistent with 
published government statistics (influenza surveillance) despite 
the lack of supervised influenza training data.
B. Natural events detection (Disasters)
An important characteristic of Twitter service is their real-
time nature. Users write tweets several times in a single day.
Sakaki et al. [3] consider each Twitter user as a sensor and 
each tweet as sensory information. A sensor detects a target 
event and makes a report probabilistically. Each tweet is 
associated with a time and location, which is a set of latitude 
and longitude. These virtual sensors, which they call social 
sensors, are of a huge variety and have various characteristics.
Detecting a natural event in real time is reduced to detecting 
an object and its location by regarding a tweet that has both 
spatial and temporal regions.
Some researchers have shown how these social sensors
can be useful to describe the current situation during natural 
disasters. The objective is to mine tweets to detect natural 
disaster in real-time events such as earthquakes, floods or volcanic 
eruptions. 
The automatic detection of natural events from tweets 
consists in developing Business Intelligence (BI) tools to 
detect information before they appear in the agencies.
A method for automatic detection of disasters in real-time
is proposed by Rosoor et al. [10]. They develop a tool for 
journalists / librarians to detect the information before they 
appear in the agencies. The automatic detection method uses 
heterogeneous resources from the Web (blogs, tweets, RSS, 
etc.). This tool is based on a "salton" representation [11] of a 
corpus classified into different topics (flood, earthquake, and so 
forth). Each category is represented as a vector of words. The 
new text to be classified is compared to these vectors in order 
to identify the relevant category.
Sakaki et al. [3] investigate the real-time interaction of 
events, such as earthquakes in Twitter and propose an 
algorithm to monitor tweets and to detect a target event. To 
detect a target event, they devise a classifier of tweets using a 
support vector machine [12] based on features, such as the 
keywords in a tweet, the number of words, and their context. 
Subsequently, they produce a probabilistic spatiotemporal 
model for the target event that can find the center and the 
trajectory of the event location. They can detect an earthquake 
with high probability (96% of earthquakes of Japan 
Meteorological Agency (JMA) seismic intensity scale 3 or 
more are detected) merely by monitoring tweets. The system 
detects earthquakes promptly and sends e-mails to registered 
users. Notification is delivered much faster than the 
announcements that are broadcast by the JMA and possibly 
before an earthquake actually arrives at a certain location.
The work of Cheong and Cheong [13] performs analysis on 
tweets during Australian floods of 2011 to identify active 
players and their effectiveness in disseminating critical 
information. They identified the most prominent users among 
Australian floods to be: local authorities (Queensland Police 
Services), political personalities (Premier, Prime Minister, 
Opposition Leader and Member of Parliament), social media 
volunteers, traditional media reporters, and people from not-
for-profit, humanitarian, and community associations.
C. Trending topics detection
Twitter messages are being posted with vast amount of new 
information and changes continuously. They are a live stream that 
contains a great wealth of information where topics of 
discussion shift dynamically with time. However, it is not 
practical for us to browse tweets manually all the time for 
searching about the latest most discussed issues and thus 
revealing the emerging topics of our interest.
Analyze tweets to detect trending topics (trends) in real 
time is a big challenge. Trending topics detection has 
primarily involved analyzing the content of tweets. We define 
a trending topic as an emerging keyword which links to a very
recent event. This keyword is experiencing an increase in 
usage in Twitter messages. Trending topics are typically 
driven by emerging events, breaking news and general topics 
that attract the attention of a large fraction of Twitter users 
[14]. Unspecified trending topics of interest are typically 
driven by topics that attract the attention of a large number of 
users.
Twitter allows users to observe the top ten popular terms 
or topics of discussion at any given moment. But, we must 
browse related tweets manually all the time for viewing more 
detail about these trending topics. It is important to
automatically analyse, understand, extract and summarize 
useful tweets content.
Twitter is a new form of newspapers. Trending topics
detection in real-time is thus of high value to news reporters, 
analysts, and e-marketing specialists.
We present several approaches efforts that have focused 
on trending topics detection for identifying events on Twitter.
Cheong and Lee [15] analyze tweets to research the 
anatomy of trending topics. They split them into 3 categories: 
long-term, medium-term and short-term topics. Long-term 
topics occur infrequently, but over a long amount of time in 
the public time-line, while medium-term topics occur more 
frequently. However, the medium-term topics are limited to a 
time range of a few days. Short-term topics are heavily 
discussed topics, and often refer to current events. Also, they 
categorize the users into 3 major groups: “Personal”,
“Aggregator” and “Marketing”. The results show that mostly 
users who talk about their personal life contribute to emerging 
trending topics.
TwitterMonitor, a system that performs trend detection is 
proposed by Mathioudakis and Koudas [14]. The system 
identifies emerging topics (trends) on Twitter in real-time. A 
trend is identified as a set of bursty keywords that occur 
frequently together in tweets. TwitterMonitor provides 
meaningful analytics that synthesize an accurate description of 
each topic. It extracts additional information from the tweets 
that belong to the trend, aiming to discover interesting aspects 
of it. Users interact with the system by ordering the identified 
trends using different criteria and submitting their own 
description for each trend.
The main objective in the work of Naaman et al. [2] is to 
identify different types of user activity, specifically focusing on 
message content and its relationship to patterns of use. To 
characterize the type of messages posted on Twitter they use a 
grounded approach to thematize and code a sample of 200 
tweets. First, the three authors independently assigned 
categories to the downloaded messages. They then proceeded 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

to analyze the affinity of the emerging themes to create an 
initial set of coding categories. Next, they downloaded a 
second set of 200 posts, categorized them, then reflected on 
and adapted the initial categories based on the additional input.
Benhardus [16] outlines methodologies of detecting and 
identifying trending topics from streaming data. Term 
frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) analysis and 
relative normalized term frequency analysis are performed on 
the tweets to identify the trending topics. Relative normalized 
term frequency analysis identifies unigrams, bigrams, and 
trigrams as trending topics, while term frequency-inverse 
document frequency analysis identifies unigrams as trending 
topics.
Cataldi et al.'s approach [17] proposes a novel approach to 
detect in real-time emerging topics on Twitter. They extract the 
contents (set of terms) of the tweets and model the term life 
cycle according to a novel aging theory intended to mine terms 
that frequently occur in the specified time interval and they are 
relatively rare in the past. Moreover, considering that the 
importance of content also depends on its source, they studied 
the social relationships in the user network in order to 
determine the authority of the users. Finally, they formalized a 
keyword-based topic graph which connects the emerging terms 
with their co-occurrent ones, allowing the detection of 
emerging topics under user-specified time constraints.
Budak et al. [18] introduce new methods for identification 
of important topics that utilize the network topology. They 
propose two novel trend definitions called coordinated and 
uncoordinated trends that detect topics that are popular among 
highly clustered and distributed users, respectively. A novel 
information diffusion model called independent trend 
formation model
(ITFM) has also been introduced to 
distinguish viral diffusion of information from diffusion 
through external entities, such as news media, and to capture 
the diffusion of an arbitrary number of topics in a social 
network.
D. Sentiment analysis
With the rapid growth of Twitter messages, users are 
enabled to express
their opinions in terms of views,
sentiments, evaluations, attitudes, appraisals and emotions 
towards entities, events and their properties on almost 
anything. Opinions can be expressed by persons or by 
organizations.
In recent years, sentiment analysis (also known as opinion 
mining, sentiment detection or sentiment classification) has 
emerged as a new method to study user’s opinions (or 
feelings) in regard to some topic. Twitter sentiment analysis
focuses on analyzing tweets but it is difficult to extract 
opinions, read them, summarize them, and organize them into 
usable forms. Thus, automated Twitter sentiment analysis is 
needed. Sentiment analysis can be cast as a classification 
problem where the task is to classify messages into two 
categories depending on whether they convey positive or 
negative feelings [5].
A large number of tweets include opinions about products 
and services. It is interesting for companies interested in 
knowing how users feel about their products. Another stream 
of research focuses on the analysis of tweets as electronic 
Word Of Mouth (eWOM) in the area of product marketing. 
Word of mouth is the passing of information from person to 
person by oral communication.
Given its distinct communication characteristics, Twitter 
deserves serious attention as a form of online WOM (oWOM) 
or electronic WOM (eWOM). Tweets are underutilized as a 
source for evaluating customer sentiment. Sentiment analysis 
consists generally to classify an opinionated text as either 
positive or negative, according to the overall sentiment 
expressed by the author within it. A Tweet can contain 
polarity sentiments.  For example, the word “kill” has a 
negative polarity, and the word “love” has a positive one.
Jansen et al. [19] consider a tweet as eWOM. They have 
found that 19% of a random sample of tweets contained 
mentions of a brand or product and that an automated 
classification was able to extract statistically significant 
differences of customer sentiment (i.e., the attitude of a writer 
towards a brand).
Using sentiment detection, market 
researchers have a valuable tool to monitor how a product is 
accepted.
Twitter messages can also be used for political 
communication. It is important for political institutions to get a 
feel of prevalent sentiment and determine whether the public 
opinions are positive or negative.
The results of Tumasjan et al. [20] demonstrate that Twitter 
can also be considered as a valid real-time indicator of political 
sentiment. First, they examine Twitter messages. Their results 
indicate that people are finding interesting political information
on Twitter which they share with their network of followers. 
They found that Twitter is indeed used as a platform for 
political deliberation. Second, they analyze the political 
sentiment of tweets and found that tweets reflect the current 
offline political sentiment in a meaningful way. To extract the 
sentiment of these tweets automatically, they use Linguistic 
Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC2007) [21], a text analysis 
software developed to assess emotional, cognitive, and 
structural components of text samples using a psychometrically 
validated internal dictionary. Third, after analyzing whether the 
activity on Twitter, they find that Twitter is as a predictor of 
the election result and even comes close to traditional election 
polls.
Twitter was also used to monitor the U.S. presidential 
debate in 2008 [22]. Tweets tended to favour Obama over 
McCain, and Obama really won the election afterwards. This 
shows that Twitter can also be used to predict political election 
results.
IV.
COMPARISON AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we compare (Table 1) and discuss the 
approaches studied above. We begin by presenting a detailed 
description of the comparison criteria used:
a) Event challenge: is one of the fourth challenges of 
tweets event detection presented in section 3: Health epidemics 
identification, natural events
detection, trending topics 
detection, or sentiment analysis.
b) Event type: describe the event type for an event 
challenge, specifically “what happens?”. For example 
earthquakes, floods and volcanic eruptions are different event type 
for the event challenge natural events detection.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

TABLE I. 
COMPARISON OF TWEETS EVENT DETECTION APPROACHES
Approach
Event 
challenge
Event type
Representation
Technique
Algorithm
Structural 
content
Textual 
content
Semantic 
Culotta
2010
Health 
epidemics 
identification
Influenza
Bag-of-words
Linear 
regression
Supervised 
classifier
-
+
-
Paul and 
Dredze
2011
Diseases
SVM (Support 
Vector Machine)
Machine 
learning 
approach
Supervised
-
+
-
Rosoor et al.
2010
Natural 
events
detection 
Disasters
Salton 
representation 
Bag-of-words
Statistics 
approach
Supervised
Time
+
-
Sakaki et al.
2010
Earthquakes
SVM (Support 
Vector Machine)
Hybrid 
approach
Supervised
Time 
Retweets 
Location
+
+
Cheong and 
Cheong 
2011
Floods
Undefined
Hybrid 
approach
Supervised
Username
+
-
Cataldi et al.
2010
Trending 
topics 
detection
Unspecified
Vectors of terms
Hybrid 
approach
Supervised
Unsupervised
Time 
Username 
Retweets
+
+
Cheong and 
Lee 2009
Unspecified
Undefined
Statistics 
approach
Supervised
Username 
Time
+
-
Mathioudakis 
and Koudas
2010
Unspecified
Vectors of 
keyword
Statistics 
approach
Unsupervised
Time
+
-
Naaman et al.
2010
Unspecified
Undefined
Statistics 
approach
Supervised
Username
+
-
Benhardus
2010
Unspecified
Bag of words
Statistics 
approach
Unsupervised
Time
+
-
Budak et al.
2011
Unspecified
Undefined
Hybrid 
approach
Unsupervised
Username
+
+
Jansen et al.
2009
Sentiment 
analysis
Customer 
sentiment 
towards a 
brand
Undefined
Statistics 
approach
Unsupervised
-
+
+
Tumasjan et 
al. 2010
Political 
sentiment
Undefined
Linguistics 
approach
Unsupervised
Time
Username
Retweets
+
+
c) Representation: it is a transformation of a tweet in a 
format which is easier to understand. We present here the usual 
tweets representations.
d) Technique: four tweets mining techniques has been 
widely used for tweets:

Statistics Approach: in these methods, the statistical 
information of the words can be used for tweets 
mining. Statistical methods include word frequency, 
TF*IDF, word co-occurrence, etc.

Linguistics Approach: it uses the linguistic features of 
the words including the lexical analysis, syntactic 
analysis, discourse analysis and so on.

Machine Learning Approach: it employs the extracted 
keywords from training tweets to learn a model and 
applies the model to find keywords from new tweets. 
This approach includes Naïve Bayes, Support Vector 
Machine, etc.

Hybrid approach: that
combines the techniques
mentioned above.
e)
Algorithm: the major algorithms used for tweets 
event detection, are subdivided into supervised, unsupervised 
and hybrid algorithms. For each approach, we mention the 
direction of the algorithm used.
f)
Structural and Textual content: textual content of a 
tweet is 140 unstructured characters, the structural content 
reveals lots of metadata (e.g., time, re-tweet). Moreover, every 
user has a well-defined profile with personal information that 
represents the structural content (name, location, biographical 
sketch). When dealing with tweets, according to the prior 
information available on the collection, it may be relevant to 
consider textual content alone or to consider both structure and 
textual content.
g)
Semantic: Semantics is the study of meaning in 
language [23]. In tweets, semantic treatment (lexical not 
grammatical) has for goal to study the semantic relationships 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

between words. Hence, the problem is how to distinguish 
between many different senses that a word may have 
(polysemy) or between different words that can have the same 
significance (synonymy)… The objective is to exploit the 
semantic similarity of terms composing the textual content of 
tweets. The semantic treatment can use external semantic 
resources like ontologies, thesauruses and taxonomies. In our 
comparison, we study if the existing approaches take into 
account this aspect or not.
Since the size of tweets is small, most traditional data 
mining algorithms are not adapted for tweets. Twitter messages 
contain little informational value but the aggregation of 
millions of tweets can generate important knowledge.
Several supervised classification algorithms have been 
proposed for specified events, including for instance support 
vector machines [8], [3]. Most techniques are unsupervised and 
rely on clustering [14], [16].
The majority of approaches of tweets event detection work 
on tweets content. Structural information is less used. Twitter 
profiles often contain semi-structured metadata (city, state, 
gender, age), enabling a more detailed statistical analysis. For 
example, we can associate geographic information with each 
tweet in order to perform a more fine automatic detection of 
natural events. For health epidemics identification, we can 
include temporal and geospatial dynamics to track diseases 
across a population. Public health information can also be 
correlated with user location.
The majority of approaches ignore semantic of information 
inside tweets. Synonymy and polysemy can cause difficulties 
(different label that describe the same concept or a label 
denoting different concepts).
The major problem consists in determining, the information 
and the knowledge to extract from tweets to serve in different 
fields. Societies wish to detect some information from tweets 
before even their apparition in the press agencies of news. For 
example, automatic detection of natural events from tweets 
consists in developing Business Intelligence tools to detect 
information before it appears in the agencies.
Various studies have been focused for trending topics 
detection which is another considerable challenge for tweets 
event detection based mainly on clustering or classification. 
Analysing tweets content in real-time can help specialists 
(news reporters, analysts…) to understand what is happening, 
what emergent trends are exchanged between people.
Trend detection is also important for online marketing 
professionals and opinion tracking companies, as trends point 
to topics that capture the public’s attention. The requirement 
for real-time trend detection is only natural for a live stream 
where topics of discussion shift dynamically with time. Twitter 
content could become key applications in the attention 
economy. Given the ease of monitoring any brand’s sentiment, 
one can view tweets as a competitive intelligence source.
We think that looking at Twitter data in real-time can help 
people to understand what is happening, what people are 
thinking about brands, organisations and products, and more 
importantly, how they feel about them. 
Other works demonstrate that Twitter can also be 
considered as a valid real-time indicator of political sentiment. 
We note that mining public opinion from freely tweets could be 
a faster and less expensive alternative to traditional polls.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
These last years have been marked by the emergence of 
microblogs. Their rates of activity reached some levels without 
precedent. Hundreds of millions of users are registered in these 
microblogs as Twitter. They exchange and tell their last 
thoughts, moods or activities by tweets in some words. 
Tweets reveal useful event information for a variety of 
events. Approaches studied in this paper are interested in 
automatic extraction and detection of events from tweets. 
Although tweets are very exchanged on the web, we note that 
there are few works that are interested in tweets event 
detection, due in part to the fact that Twitter has only been in 
existence since 2006.
The major problem in this domain consists in determining, 
the event to extract from tweets to serve in different fields. For 
example societies wish to detect some information from tweets 
before even their apparition in the press agencies of news. 
In terms of perspectives, we will try to take advantage of 
the methods studied in this paper, to propose a new approach 
for detecting tweets event in real-world. As a tweet is often 
associated with spatial and temporal information, we want to 
detect when and where an event happens.
REFERENCES
[1]
Statistic 
brain, 
Twitter 
Statistics : Statistic 
Verification, 
http://www.statisticbrain.com/twitter-statistics/, 2014.
[2]
M. Naaman, J. Boase, and C. H. Lai, “Is it really about me?: message 
content in social awareness streams”, In CSCW ’10: Proceedings of the 
2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work, 
February 2010, pp. 189-192, Savannah, Georgia, USA.
[3]
T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuon, “Earthquake shakes Twitter 
users: real-time event detection by social sensors”, Proceedings of the 
19th international conference on World wide web (WWW), April 2010, 
pp. 851-860, New York, NY, USA.
[4]
Semiocast
study,
http://semiocast.com/fr/publications/2012_07_30 
_Twitter_ reaches_half_a_billion_accounts_140m_in_the_US, 2012.
[5]
A. Bifet and E. Frank, “Sentiment knowledge discovery in Twitter 
streaming data”, In Proc 13th International Conference on Discovery 
Science, October 2010, pp. 1-15, Springer, Canberra, Australia.
[6]
G. Eysenbach, “Infodemiology and Infoveillance: Framework for an 
Emerging Set of Public Health Informatics Methods to Analyze Search”, 
Communication and Publication Behavior on the Internet . J Med 
Internet Res, Vol. 11(1):e11, 2009. 
[7]
A. Culotta, “Towards detecting influenza epidemics by analyzing twitter 
messages”, In KDD Workshop on Social Media Analytics, July 2010, 
pp. 115–122.
[8]
J.M. Paul and M. Dredze, “A Model for Mining Public Health Topics 
from Twitter”, Technical Report. Johns Hopkins University. 2011.
[9]
D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan”, Latent dirichlet allocation”, 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 3, January 2003, pp. 993-
1022.
[10] B. Rosoor, L. Sebag, S. Bringay, P. Poncelet, and M. Roche, “When a 
tweet detect a natural event... ”, Actes du colloque Veille Stratégique 
Scientifique et Technologique VSST'2010, Septembre 2010, Toulouse 
(France).
[11] G. Salton and C. Buckley,”Term-weighting approaches in automatic text 
retrieval”, Inf. Process. Manage., Vol. 24(5), January 1988, pp. 513-523.
[12] T. Joachims, “Text categorization with support vector machines”, In 
Proc. ECML’98, April 1998, pp. 137-142.
[13] F. Cheong and C. Cheong, “Social media data mining: A social network 
analysis of tweets during the 2010-2011 australian floods”, In PACIS, 
July 2011, pp. 1-16.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

[14] M. Mathioudakis
and N. Koudas, “TWITTERMONITOR: trend 
detection over the twitter Stream”, Proceedings of SIGMOD 
Conference, June 2010, pp.1155-1158.
[15] M. Cheong and V. Lee, “Integrating web-based intelligence retrievaland 
decision-making from the twitter trends knowledge base”, InSWSM '09: 
Proceeding of the 2nd ACM workshop on Social web search and 
mining, November 2009, pp. 1-8, New York, NY, USA.
[16] J. Benhardus, “Streaming Trend Detection in Twitter”, 2010 UCCS Reu 
for Artificial Intelligence, Natural Language Processing and Information 
Retrieval, Final report 1, 2010.
[17] M. Cataldi, L. D. Caro, and C. Schifanella, “Emerging Topic Detection 
on Twitter based on Temporal and Social Terms Evaluation”, 
MDMKDD’10, July 2010, pp. 4-13.
[18] C. Budak, D. Agrawal, and A. El Abbadi, “Structural trend analysis for 
online social networks”. Technical Report UCSB/CS-2011-04, UCSB, 
2011.
[19] B. J. Jansen, M. Zhang, K. Sobel, and A. Chowdury, “Twitter power: 
Tweets as electronic word of mouth”, Journal of the American Society 
for Information Science and Technology, Vol. 60, November 2009, pp. 
1-20.
[20] A. Tumasjan, T.O. Sprenger, P.G. Sandner, and I.M. Welpe, “Predicting 
elections with Twitter: What 140 characters reveal about political 
sentiment”, In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on 
Weblogs and Social Media, May 2010, pp. 178-471.
[21] J. Pennebaker, C. Chung, and M. Ireland, “The development and 
psychometric properties of LIWC2007”, Austin, TX, 2007.
[22] N.A. Diakopoulos and D.A. Shamma, “Characterizing debate 
performance via aggregated twitter sentiment”. CHI 2010 Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing System, 
ACM, Atlanta Georgia, April 2010, pp. 1195-1198.
[23] J. R. Hurford, “Semantics : a coursebook”, Cambridge University Press, 
1983.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

