Design of HACCP Communication Protocol 
 
 
Sungyong Hyun, Seongwook Yoon, Kyung-Ae Cha, Won-Kee Hong 
Dept. of Information and Communication Eng. 
Daegu University 
Gyeongsan, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: Gustjddyd90@naver.com, ysw1859@gmail.com, chaka@daegu.ac.kr, wkhong@daegu.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) is 
a systematic preventive regulation to prevent several hazards 
in food manufacture and treatment processes. We proposed an 
intelligent HACCP system to put several check points into 
digital data in order to improve management of food sanitation.  
In this paper, application level network protocol is introduced 
for the server to control devices in the working field and for a 
lightweight device to transfer its check point results to a server. 
Keywords-HACCP; intelligent HACCP system; application 
level network protocol; food sanitation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The intelligent Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (i-
HACCP) system is a wirelessly connected client-server 
system for food sanitation management to minimize food 
safety accident and track the cause of outbreak [1]. Basically, 
it provides two kinds of lightweight computing devices, 
which are locked-up type and portable type, to gather several 
hazards occurred in food processing course. It guides 
nutritionists in workplace to check Critical Control Point 
(CCP) every day and record its results online in their tracks. 
Consequently, the computer-assisted management, such as 
record, collection and documentation of data inspecting 
CCPs would make the HACCP help decreasing the food 
safety accidents effectively. 
In this paper, an application level communication 
protocol is proposed to support efficient information 
exchange between devices and server in the i-HACCP 
system. Check items at each CCP step, which nutritionists 
should inspect and transfer to the server are defined. Encode 
tables for menus and gradients are maintained between 
server and devices to minimize network traffic. Some entries 
in the encode table could be changed by server when a new 
menu or gradient is introduced. Table management protocol 
is also designed to inform devices to keep tables updated. 
The contribution of this paper is that it is the first approach to 
apply information technology to HACCP in order to enhance 
its effect on the food sanitation. 
Section 2 introduces the i-HACCP System. The HACCP 
protocol is described in Section 3 and conclusion is made in 
Section 4. 
II. 
I-HACCP SYSTEM 
The i-HACCP system targets a school cafeteria where 
spaces for pretreatment, cook and food distribution are 
separated. The overall organization of the i-HACCP system 
is shown in Figure 1. There are two kinds of terminal 
devices deployed in the work place. One is a lockup device, 
which is anchored to a specific place, to get inputs of the 
examination results for CCP4, CP5, CCP6 and CCP7 by 
workers on the spot. It can be powered by a permanent and 
stable electric supplier or operated by a battery. The other 
one is a portable device with various sensors, such as 
thermal sensor, chlorine level sensor, iodine level sensor. It 
is used for recording the examination results for CCP4, CP5, 
CCP6, and CCP7. This system allows the inspection results 
to be gathered promptly. It results in increasing the 
reliability of the HACCP archives, since it minimizes the 
time interval between the inspection and the record. 
  
 
Figure 1. Organization of i-HACCP System. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

The terminal device is constructed with a light weight 
processor, which requires low power and low to medium 
level processing power. In general, it will be 8 to 32 bit 
System On Chip (SOC) type microprocessors like ARM’s 
Cortex-M3 or Atmel’s ATmega series. The lockup device 
will use touch panel as an input device, while traditional 
input buttons will be carried with the portable device. They 
have 4.3” and 2.5” Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) panel 
respectively. The devices will use ZigBee Radio Frequency 
(RF) modem for low power and low data rate wireless 
communication.  
Figure 2. The Network Architecture for i-HACCP system. 
Figure 2 shows the network architecture for i-HACCP 
system. The lockup device plays a role not only as an input 
terminal but also as a router to transmit data to the 
neighboring terminal. Basically, the network for i-HACCP 
system supports a multi-hop network routing protocol to 
find a path from a terminal device to the HACCP 
management server. It can be done statically with 
predefined routing table or dynamically with searching for a 
proper transmitter at every transfer. Ad-Hoc On-demand 
Distance Vector (AODV) protocol [12] is usually used for 
dynamic ad-hoc routing. Basically, the portable device 
selects one among neighboring lockup devices within its 
communication range for a transmitter based on signal 
strength. 
III. 
HACCP PROTOCOL 
Based on analysis of HACCP regulation, messages 
communicated between server and devices are classified into 
three types, such as request (REQ), response (RSP) and 
acknowledge (ACK) messages. REQ message are used when 
a device needs to ask server to register itself or send 
information, such as current time or today’s menu. RSP 
message are sent only by server when a device sends REQ 
for current time or today’s menu. ACK message indicates 
that receiver performs its duty to the corresponding REQ or 
RSP completely. Figure 3 shows flow of messages between 
client and server for various requests. 
 
Figure 3. HACCP Communication Protocol. 
TABLE I.  
MESSAGE FORMAT 
 
The message format for the three types of messages is 
designed as shown in Table I. MSG type field contain 
message profile that identifies its meaning, as well as 
message type. Message types are subdivided into five types, 
such as D2S_REQ, S2D_REQ, D2S_ACK, S2D_RSP, 
S2D_ACK according to the transfer direction, i.e., 
D2S_REQ means a REQ message from device to server.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The i-HACCP system collects data written in by 
nutritionists on the spot in a computerized way and builds 
HACCP archives automatically to enhance effectiveness of 
HACCP for a school cafeteria. The i-HACCP system is a 
multi-hop network architecture that connects several lockup 
devices and portable devices posted at a suitable place with a 
wireless modem. In this paper, we proposed a network 
protocol for i-HACCP system.  
For future work, we will focus on the evaluation to 
measure the impacts of the encode tables, which are shared 
Field 
Description 
STX 
Start of message (0xAB1) 
MSG Type 
Message type (REQ, RSP, ACK) 
IEEE Addr 
IEEE address of device registered in Server 
CCP/CP 
Device’s CCP/CP step and type 
Payload Length 
Length of payload transmitted 
Payload 
Data transmitted between client and server 
SUM 
Byte basis sum from IEEE field to Payload field 
ETX 
End of message (0xCD34) 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

between server and client devices and used to reduce the load 
of network traffic. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was financially supported by the Ministry 
of Education (MOE) and National Research Foundation of 
Korea (NRF) through the Human Resource Training Project 
for Regional Innovation (No.2013028405). 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] W. -K. Hong, D. Lee, S. Yoon, and J. T. Ryu, “Intelligent 
HACCP System for School Foddservices,” 2014 IIISC, Jan. 
2014, pp. 164–166. 
[2] W. H. Sperber and R. F. Stier, “Happy 50th Birthday to 
HACCP: 
Retrospective 
and 
Prospective,” 
FoodSafety 
mgazine, Jan. 2010, pp. 44-46. 
[3] FAO/WHO, “FAO/WHO guidance to governments on the 
application of HACCP in small and/or less-developed food 
businesses,” Retrieved 14, Oct. 2007. 
[4] D. McSwane and R. Linton, “Issue and concerns in HACCP 
development and implementation for retail food operations,” 
Journal of Environmental health, Vol. 62, No.6, Jan./Feb. 
2000, pp. 15-18. 
[5] S. Y. Lee, Y. S. Jang, and H. J. Choe, “Current Status and 
Further 
Prospect 
on 
HACCP 
Implementation 
in 
Korea(Specially on Catering),” Food industry and nutrition, 
Vol. 4, No. 3, 1999, pp.14-26. 
[6] J. M. Soriano, H. Rico, J. C. Molto, and J. Manes, “Effect of 
introduction HACCP on the microbiological quality of some 
restaurant meals,” Food Control, Vol. 13, 2002, pp.253-261. 
[7] S. Youn and J. Sneed, “Implementation of HACCP and 
prerequisite programs in school foodservice,” Journal of the 
American Dietetic Association, Vol. 103, 2002, pp.55-60. 
[8] Korean Ministry of Education, “Sanitation Management 
Guide 
for 
School 
Foodservice,” 
Korean 
government 
publications 11-1340000-000185-14, 2010. 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

