On V2X Network Slicing: Using Context Information to Improve Mobility 
Management  
 
Panagiotis Spapis, Chan Zhou 
Huawei German Research Center 
Munich, Germany 
email: panagiotis.spapis@huawei.com 
chan.zhou@huawei.com 
Alexandros Kaloxylos 
Department of Informatics and Telecommunications 
University of Peloponnese 
Tripoli, Greece 
email: kaloxyl@uop.gr
 
 
Abstract— Network slicing in for 5th Generation (5G) networks 
enables the support of multiple logical networks, tailor-cut to 
the requirements of specific services. Initial specifications have 
already been produced by the 3rd Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP) that describe the operation of slicing. However, 
the existing specifications lack specific details on how the 
network functions can be fine-tuned to fully optimize the 
network performance for specific use cases. This paper provides 
a comprehensive overview related to the latest status of the 
3GPP standardization process related to slicing. Also, it 
proposes a new mobility management scheme, called Context 
Enhanced MOBility management (CEMOB), that is tailor-cut 
for communicating vehicles. The point we make is that by taking 
advantage of contextual information, in this case for vehicle-to-
everything (V2X) communications, the performance of network 
control functions such as mobility management can be 
significantly improved. Slicing and the overall 5G architecture, 
support a simple introduction of contextual information into the 
network functions of a slice. 
Keywords-network slicing, mobility management, V2X 
communications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
5G networks target, apart from the support of the 
telecommunications sector, also the “vertical industries” like 
autonomous driving, smart factories, new health services, etc. 
An extensive list of 5G use cases can be found in [1] [2]. A 
thorough examination of the verticals has identified that these 
sectors have diverse requirements. These requirements are 
mapped to different network Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs). These KPIs indicatively include throughput, 
transmission reliability, latency, energy consumption, 
blocking probability, etc. Since every vertical has a different 
operation environment in terms of the density and mobility of 
the users, the arrival rate and the duration of different 
application and services, it is evident that no single network 
can support efficiently all these different use cases. 
Thus, it appears that the deployment of parallel logical 
networks over the same network infrastructure is a necessity. 
These logical networks may have network functions (NFs) 
configured differently or even introduce new network 
functions both in the Radio Access Network (RAN) [3] as 
well as the Core Network (CN) [4]. 
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) has defined 
a network slice to be “ A logical network that provides 
specific network capabilities and network characteristics” [5]. 
A “Network Slice” is implemented by a “slice instance” that 
in its turn is created by a “network slice template”. The latter 
is a template that defines a complete logical network including 
the NFs, their interfaces and their corresponding resources.  
 
Network slicing has been intensively investigated during 
the past years both by industry and academia. There are 
several research proposals that target full flexibility in terms 
of selecting, organizing and deploying NFs [6]. At the same 
time, 3GPP is currently working on the phase one 
specifications for 5G networks that include also the support 
for slicing. The standardization activities follow a more 
cautious path and attempt to re-use existing NFs or share NFs 
across different slices as much as possible. Note that although 
the use cases to be supported, as well as their requirements, 
have been thoroughly studied [7], current specifications do not 
provide fully tailor-cut solutions for them. In order to do this, 
it is needed to work really close with the representatives of the 
so called “vertical industries” (e.g., transportation, health, 
factories, energy). This is needed to understand not only the 
requirements and the operational environment, but also the 
contextual information produced and how these can be used 
to optimize network functions. For example, the newly 
founded 5G Automotive Association 5GAA [8] is working 
towards such a direction. Still, the activities towards the 
proposal of mechanisms driven by these organizations in the 
standardization are in primitive steps.  
In the current paper, we present the latest status of the 
standardization activities related to network slicing. We also 
provide a new mobility management mechanism for 
autonomous driven vehicles that takes advantage of 
contextual information and we demonstrate how this 
information can be used by the standardized 5G NFs to bring 
significant benefits in a control operation such mobility 
management. This is an exemplary scheme to highlight that 
different requirements need very different solutions and the 
network shall support these solutions. 
The rest of the section is organized as follows. In Section 
II we provide the latest status of 3GPP in relation to slicing. 
Section III discusses how mobility management is planned to 
be supported in the technical specifications and why we 
consider this not to be applicable for moving vehicles. In 
Section IV, we provide the details of our scheme design to use 
the 5G network functions. In Section V we present 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

quantitative results that illustrate the benefits of our scheme. 
Finally, Section VI concludes the paper and describes future 
directions. 
II. 
SLICE SUPPORT IN 3GPP 
3GPP has decided to treat 5G specifications in two phases. 
The first one is to be completed by September 2018 (Release 
15). This phase addresses a more urgent subset of the 
commercial needs. Phase 2 is to be completed by March 2020 
(Release 16) for the IMT 2020 submission, having addressed 
all identified use cases & requirements. In relation to slicing, 
several working groups are currently progressing on the key 
elements and procedures that have to be specified. 
In [5] and [9], the 5G network architecture is presented. 
There, a list of technical key issues, as well as potential 
solutions for slicing is presented. For example, in these 
documents the issues of slice selection, slice isolation, sharing 
of NFs, multi-slice connectivity, management of slices, etc. 
are being addressed. 
Although several issues remain open, it seems that there is 
convergence in several principles. The first principle is that 
NFs, previously incorporated in monolithic network 
components, are now decomposed to smaller modules. The 
target is to allow a synthesis and configuration of the NFs on 
a per slice type basis. A second principle is the further splitting 
of user and control plane functions to facilitate a more flexible 
evolution of NFs. A third key principle is the exposure of NFs 
to service through appropriate APIs. This is expected to allow 
a better collaboration among network operators and service 
providers. 
Figure 1 presents a summary of the supported NFs. The 
CP function in the CN are considered to be the following: 
- Unified Data Management (UDM): supports the 
Authentication Credential Repository and Processing 
Function (ARPF).  
- 
Authentication Server Function (AUSF): supports 
the Authentication Server Function (AUSF) 
- 
Policy Control function (PCF): supports unified 
policy framework to govern network behaviour, 
provides policy rules to control plane functions  
- 
Core Access and Mobility Management Function 
(AMF): supports mobility management, access 
authentication and authorization, security anchor 
functions and context management 
- 
Session Management Function (SMF). supports 
session management, selection and control of UP 
functions, downlink data notification and roaming  
- 
User Plane Function (UPF): is the anchor point for 
inter/intra RAT mobility and the external PDU session 
point of interconnection, supports packet routing and 
forwarding, QoS handling for user plane, packet 
inspection and policy rule enforcement 
- 
Network Exposure Function (NEF): provides a 
means to securely exchange information between 
services and 3GPP NFs.  
- 
NF Repository Function (NRF): maintains the 
deployed 
NF 
Instance 
information 
when 
deploying/updating/removing NF instances 
-   Network Slice Selection Function (NSSF): supports 
the functionality to bind a UE with a specific slice 
 
 
Figure 1: 5G service based architecture (adapted from [5]) 
Note that some of these functions are common for all 
slices while others can be dedicated for different slices. A UE 
may access multiple slices concurrently via a single RAN. 
For such cases, it is assumed that the involved slices should 
share some control plane functions, like the AMF. The 
abovementioned logical network allows the support of 
Application Functions (AF) and provides connectivity to 
typical external data networks. 
Interestingly enough the question whether RAN is sliced 
or not still remains open. However, it has been agreed that 
RAN will be slice-aware so as to treat slice traffic according 
to the customer needs. Also, RAN shall support resource 
isolation among slices so as to avoid shortage of shared 
resources in one slice to break the service level agreement on 
another [6].  
However, detailed alternative solutions have been 
proposed on how RAN is involved in slice selection by 
passing an appropriate identifier to the core network 
elements. Currently slicing for RAN essentially focuses on 
different scheduling schemes for different slices and also by 
providing different L1/L2 configurations. Moreover, it is 
considered that even if a User Equipment (UE) is connected 
to multiple slices a single Radio Resource and Control (RRC) 
entity will be used were as different protocols (i.e., Packet 
Data Convergence Protocol – PDCP and Radio Link Control 
- RLC) can be used. 
Every slice is identified by a Single Network Slice 
Selection Assistance information (S-NSSAI) identifier. This 
identifier consists of a Slice/Service type (SST) and a slice 
Differentiator (SD) which optional information used to 
differentiate among different slices of the same type. 
Currently only 3 SST values have been agreed to be 
supported. These are a) enhanced Mobile Broadband 
(eMBB), b) Massive Internet of Things (MIoT), and c) Ultra 
Reliable Low Latency Communications (URLLC) [5]. This 
information is exchanged as part of Non-access stratum 
signalling through the RAN.  
In [11], the lifecycle of a network slice is described by the 
following phases: a) Preparation phase, b) Instantiation, 
UE
NG-RAN
NG-UP
Data 
network
NG-3
NG-6
NRF
PCF
UDM
AUSF
AMF
SMF
NG-CP
NG-1
NG-2
NG-4
NEF
NSSF
AF
NG-5
Common functions
Slice dedicated 
functions
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Configuration and Activation phase, c) Run-time phase and d) 
Decommissioning phase.  
III. 
CURRENT STATUS FOR MOBILITY MANAGEMENT IN 5G 
NETWORKS 
Mobility management for legacy systems was performed 
as follows. The network was divided into non-overlapping 
regions called Tracking Areas (TAs). Idle UEs would have to 
inform the network each time they cross the border of such 
areas or when a timer, typically set at 54 minutes) expires. 
However, this design was initially static and the cost for re-
arranging the coverage areas of TAs was quite high. 
Moreover, a problem appeared from excessive Tracking Area 
Update (TAU) messages due to the movement of the users 
near the Tracking Area boarders. That’s why the notion of 
Tracking Area Lists (TAL) was introduced. TALs were 
assigned per UE and allowed the overlapping of TAs. The 
algorithm to define the TAL is proprietary and the operator 
according to his strategy decides whether to allocate large or 
short TALs. Whenever a UE has to be discovered for 
delivering data to it or in case of an incoming call, paging is 
executed in a subset or all the cells in the TAL according to 
the operator strategy [12]. If a subset of the cells of the TAL 
is paged there is a risk of increased delay due to page misses 
or but if all the cells are pages there is increased signalling 
cost. Also the size of the TAL relates to a signalling tradeoff 
since small TALs have reduced paging signalling cost but 
require frequent TAU and large TALs vice versa. 
Even with these improvements, it has been noticed that for 
idle UEs that had to switch to connected mode, signalling had 
again to be exchanged up to the core network and more 
specifically the Mobility Management Entity (MME) where 
contextual information (such as security credentials) were 
kept. Considering that smartphones have a number of 
applications (e.g., facebook, skype, instant messaging) that 
have to wake up asynchronously and exchange small amount 
of information, this created in practise significant signalling 
load. 
This is why for the 5G systems, mobility for idle terminals 
had to be redefined [10]. In the latest specifications, the RAN-
based Notification Area (RNA) has been defined. This can be 
considered as a smaller subset of a TAL where a UE can move 
within without informing the network about its exact location. 
Also, a new state called RRC_INACTIVE is introduced 
where the context information of a UE is kept locally so as to 
avoid contacting the CN entities (i.e., AMF) when the UE 
switches again to the connected mode. This addresses the 
problem of frequent waking-up of devices (e.g., smartphones) 
and minimizes that signalling load towards the CN. In terms 
of mobility management, the UE context is kept in the last 
serving base station, called gNB in 5G systems. If the UE 
wakes up and becomes connected under a new gNB inside the 
same RNA then it uses the RRCConnectionResume messages 
to force the new gNB retrieve its context from the last serving 
gNB. The new gNB may also trigger a path switch by 
communicating with the AMF. Paging a UE takes place from 
the last serving gNB to all gNBs that are member of the RNA.  
These procedures are illustrated in Figure 2. On top of these 
messages, note that whenever a UE crosses the border 
between RNAs it needs to receive the gNBs identifiers that are 
members of the new RNA. 
 
Figure 2: RAN based mobility management (adapted from [10]) 
This mechanism treats indeed several of the inefficiencies 
present in existing cellular systems. However, as explained in 
[13], the RAN based mobility management scheme suffers 
from excessive load for high moving UEs. This is why Hailu 
and Säily suggest a hybrid scheme where a typical CN 
mobility management takes places for high moving UEs, 
while RAN based mobility management is executed for UEs 
of lower mobility. To do this the UEs have to report the 
mobility to the CN at some intervals (e.g., during location 
update). Moreover, the authors also indicate potential delay 
issues that may arise if there is no direct interface between the 
last serving gNB and the new one. In such a case signalling 
has to travel essentially through the CN. The lack of a direct 
link between base stations is not uncommon in deployed and 
operating mobile networks. Note that in the current standard 
specification both the typical CN mobility management as 
well as the RAN based are supported. 
The adoption of RAN based mobility management scheme 
will be beneficial for some of the 5G use cases but totally 
inefficient for others. A not applicable use case is the one of 
the autonomously driving vehicles because of the high 
mobility. To optimize a control procedure like mobility 
management, one has to take advantage of contextual 
information that will be available to operator as we discuss in 
the next section. 
IV. 
CEMOB: CONTEXT ENHANCED MOBILITY 
MANAGEMENT 
Autonomous driving is one of the key targets of the 
industry for the next decade. 3GPP has already specified an 
architecture and mechanisms to support inter-vehicle 
communication and access to service specific servers (i.e., 
V2X application server - [14]). The support of such services 
introduces additional contextual information that if used can 
greatly improve even control operations for a mobile network. 
More specifically, it is expected that in order to form a route, 
a vehicle will communicate with a server to receive the path 
to be followed. These servers can also estimate the time a 
vehicle will need to be at a certain position in the path. Such 
functionality exists even today with well-established 
UE
gNB
Last Serving gNB
AMF
RRC_INACTIVE
RRCConnectionResumeRequest
RETRIEVE UE CONTEXT REQUEST
RETRIEVE UE CONTEXT RESPONSE
RRCConnectionResume
RRC_CONNECTED
PATH SWITCH REQUEST
PATH SWITCH RESPONSE
UE CONTEXT RELEASE
PAGING TRIGGER
RAN PAGING
PAGING TRIGGER
RESUME FROM RRC_INACTIVE
RAN based location update
Paging
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

applications like Google maps or any other GPS navigators. 
Obviously, these applications do not and they should not 
know any information about the deployed base stations of an 
operator. However, by passing the information of a route to an 
operator, it is an easy task to perform a translation of path 
coordinates to predicted serving gNBs. Furthermore, the 
specific geography of the roads can significantly assist in 
determining the exact cells a vehicle is going to pass through. 
Such information can be used to really optimize mobility 
management operation by optimizing the TALs allocation, 
and at the same time optimizing the paging strategy. 
Additionally, the functions modularization in 5G facilitates 
the optimum functionality placement in the network which for 
the mobility management functionality in certain use cases 
(like the V2X ones) would make sense to be split between the 
RAN and the Core. Moreover, 5G networks will allow, 
through secure APIs, for services to communicate with 
network components and exchange information. 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Mobility management for vehicles in 5G networks  
In Figure 3, we present how a new mobility management 
scheme for vehicles operating in 5G networks can be 
implemented. Whenever a UE/vehicle wants to reach a 
specific destination, it will communicate with a V2X 
application server and it will receive the path so as the 
computer inside the car to start the autonomous driving 
functions. Upon calculation of such a path by the server the 
information in terms of coordinates and timestamps (time 
when the vehicle will be at a specific point) can be 
communicated to the mobile operator. This will take place 
through message exchange with the NEF. The NEF can also 
translate the coordinates into specific gNBs and forward 
further this information to the involved AMFs. These entities 
on their turn can transfer the UE context to the involved gNBs. 
Moreover, they will communicate with the corresponding 
SMFs so as to pre-configure the data path for the vehicles. 
Note that this pre-configuration does not imply that resources 
will be allocated for large period of times but rather only for a 
short time for which a vehicle is expected to be in a certain 
area. Obviously, a vehicle (or the respective server) may need 
to re-calculate a path, but this again will take place through 
the same communication with the V2X application server, so 
the same process will be repeated. The communication of a 
UE with an application server, especially if located inside the 
domain of the mobile operator can be in terms of a few tenths 
of millisecond [15], thus any updating of network components 
is not expected to affect the location management process, 
since even high moving vehicles will not have change their 
position more than a few meters. 
 
When a UE wants to communicate with a neighbouring 
one, the request will stop in the gNB and the gNB mobility 
management function will perform the paging to this cell and 
the neighbouring ones, since there is no need to communicate 
with the core for transferring the UE context in the RAN 
because it already resides there and the actual location of the 
UE is well known with quite good accuracy. 
 
The benefits of such scheme are manifold. Firstly, the 
mechanism is fully optimized for moving UEs no matter their 
speed. Thus, it is not necessary to revert to the typical CN 
mobility management scheme if their speed is high and reach 
high paging load. Secondly, there is no need to exchange 
control messages for UE location updates over the wireless 
interface which is the bottleneck for any wireless system. 
Furthermore, delay for transferring the context information of 
a UE from a serving to a new gNB is zero, since this 
information is in place before hand. This delay in the RAN 
based scheme can be significant as we have already explained 
in the cases where the gNBs have no direct interface and their 
communication takes place through the CN. Finally, the 
paging cost is significantly lower than the CN based scheme 
and as well better than the RAN based one since the known 
geography of the streets can minimize the number of involved 
cells only to very few ones. All these benefits are possible 
because the proposed scheme takes advantage of contextual 
information that can be available to the NFs of the mobile 
operator through the modularized architecture that allows 
different NFs to be used for different logical networks (i.e., 
slices). 
 
In the next section, we quantify the aforementioned gains 
of the proposed scheme. 
V. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
To evaluate the performance of CEMOB we compare it 
with the CN and RAN based mobility management schemes. 
Firstly, in order to calculate the signalling cost during paging 
we follow the analysis in [13]. Let M be the number of cells 
and N the number of gNBs. As an exemplary analysis we also 
consider 3 cells are supported by a single gNB. The RAN 
based scheme requires M messages over the radio plus N-1 
messages (from the last serving gNB to the neighbouring 
gNBs inside the RNA). As for the CN based mobility 
management scheme, M messages over the radio plus N 
messages from the CN to the gNBs of an area (considered in 
this analysis of having the same size like the RAN based 
scheme), plus 6 additional messages that are needed to inform 
the CN NFs that the UE is in RRC_INACTIVE state. 
Concerning CEMOB, the knowledge of the position of a UE 
with a high accuracy even under some time coarse time period 
UE
gNB
NG-UP
AMF
SMF
NG-CP
NEF
V2X Application Server
1. Destination/Path
2. Provide Path (coordinates, timestamps)
3. Provide Path (involved gNBs, timestamps)
4. Context transfer (UE, timestamps)
5. Pre configure tunnel (UE, timestamps)
6. Pre configure tunnel (UE, timestamps)
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

require to page only the gNB where the vehicle is camped 
under. Also knowing the topology of the streets and the 
direction of the vehicle, it is easy to make sure that there will 
be no page miss by also paging the previous and the following 
gNBs. Considering an inter site distance (ISD) of even 500m, 
the vehicle is paged in an area of 1,5 Km that makes the 
probability of success rather high. As shown in Figure 4, as 
long as the number of gNBs increases the benefits of the 
RAN-based scheme, compared to CN based is rather low. On 
the other hand, CEMOB outperforms these two schemes 
considerably since we take advantage of the accurate 
information about the location of the UE/vehicle.  
 
 
Figure 4: Paging cost CEMOB vs. RAN baseb vs CN based  
To estimate the number of messages to be exchanged 
during a location update we perform the following analysis. 
As shown in Figure 2, for the RAN based scheme 7 messages 
need to be exchanged every time a UE crosses the border of 
an RNA or when it resumes an RRC connection in a gNB 
different from the last serving gNB. A similar number of 
messages is needed for the CN based scheme, but this time the 
communication takes places between a gNB and AMF instead 
of the last serving gNB. For the CEMOB case, context needs 
to be transferred to all gNBs of an area before the UE enters 
into it. Also, in case a UE selects with a probability p, a 
different path for any reason, then it will communicate again 
with the V2X application server and the context will have to 
be updated to all the gNBs of an area. 
To perform an evaluation of CEMOB for the signalling 
load we consider an area of 15 gNBs divided into 3 RNAs. 
We also consider that a street has two lanes. According to 
[16], vehicle traffic flow with measurement at a point is “the 
number of vehicles that pass a point on a highway or a given 
lane or direction of a highway during a specific time interval”. 
Traffic flow q is expressed in vehicles/hour is given by: 
 
𝑞 =
#$
%  
(1) 
Related to the flow of vehicles the space headway 
parameter can also be used. It is defined as the distance 
measured between the front ends of two successive vehicles 
(as the sum of the vehicles’ in-between space and a vehicle’s 
length). Based on this parameter the traffic flow can be 
calculated as: 
 
𝑞 =  
'
() 
(2) 
where the flow q is calculated as the average speed of the 
vehicles divided by their average space headway. Based on 
this we are able to calculate the traffic flow of vehicles passing 
through the 3 RNAs border areas per hour. Our assumption is 
also that for the baseline, a UE will resume its connection once 
every 5 cells. Having also a fixed road topology and assuming 
a uniform distribution of vehicles with fixed space headway 
distance among them, it is easy to calculate the number of 
vehicles in this area. Using this number, we can select a 
probability that some of the vehicles will change their path, so 
CEMOB will have to update all the gNBs of an RNA. Figure 
5 presents the results for different vehicle speeds (from 20 to 
60km/h) and different space headways (from 4.5 to 22.5 
meters). For this experiment , we consider that every 30 sec 
the 20% of the vehicles will request a path update. 
 
 
Figure 5: Signaling comparison between CEMOB and baseline scheme  
As seen from the figure, CEMOB significantly 
outperforms the baseline scheme. The reason is that the on 
demand context transfer requires a lot of signalling even if this 
requested from one gNB to another. In this case the CN has to 
be notified so that path switching is performed. On the other 
hand, CEMOB has to notify the gNBs once and pre-configure 
the RAN-CN path at the same time. For a small number of 
cells like this discussed example topology, this means a 
considerable reduction. Also note that although CEMOB 
needs to update the gNBs every time a UE changes its path 
this is cost is at the end related only to the number of gNBs. 
In the case of the baseline, the cost is heavily affected by a 
complex process that may take place every time a UE is paged 
or resumes a connection to transmit data. 
Obviously the penalty for CEMOB is the transfer of 
context information much more gNBs (all the gNBs inside an 
RNA) compared to the baseline where this is transferred only 
from one gNB to another. According to [17], the security 
information that needs to be transferred consists of a) K-
ASME key (256 bits), b) K-eNB key (256 bits) and c) 
NONCE (32 bits). Also the Globally Unique Temporary UE 
Identity GUTI (80 bits) needs to be transferred to be 
associated with the abovementioned values. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
Signaling Reduction gain %
Number of gNBs
Paging cost
RAN vs CN
CEMOB vs CN
CEMOB vs RAN
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
700000
4.5
9
13.5
18
22.5
# of signals
Space headway 
Less signals needed for CEMOB (per hour)
20Km/h 
30Km/h 
45Km/h 
60Km/h 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Figure 6: Additional data transfer needed for CEMOB  
In Figure 6, we present the additional information needed 
to be transferred for CEMOB when compared to the baseline 
in terms of MB/h. The settings of this experiment were the 
same with the previous one (e.g., number of gNBs, size of an 
RNA, probability of changing path, etc.). As expected 
CEMOB always underperforms compared to the baseline, 
although the amount of information over wireline CN-RAN 
link seems to be rather manageable from today’s networks. 
This would be the case additional context information is 
needed. For example, for the worse case of our experiment 
where vehicles are moving with 60Km/h and the 5000 bits 
need to be transfered per context transfer, then the overall 
traffic between CN-RAN would be 225MB/h. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper makes the case that although the specification 
of 5G networks is well underway and slicing is gradually 
reaching a mature status several inefficiencies still exist. 
Standardization 
activities 
have 
sensibly 
focused 
on 
introducing new principles like NF modularization and the 
support of different numerologies in RAN and ported existing 
functionalities into the new principles. 
What is still missing though are further optimizations, that 
can be realized if use case specific context information is 
taken into account. In this paper we have presented a new 
mobility management scheme that outperforms the baseline 
for the case of high moving UEs, like the autonomous driven 
vehicles. By taking advantage of the knowledge of the path 
that a vehicle will follow and by tailoring cut the involved 
network functions (e.g., AMF, NEF) appropriately, then 
significant benefits can be achieved in terms of signalling load 
with a manageable penalty of additional information being 
moved inside the network. As a next step of the current work, 
we will evaluate the proposed scheme using event driven 
simulations.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
NGMN Alliance, 5G white paper, v 1.0, 2016 available from: 
https://www.ngmn.org/uploads/media/NGMN_5G_White_Paper_V1
_0.pdf, access date 12-09-2017. 
[2] 
SE Elayoubi, M. Fallgren, P. Spapis et al., “5G service requirements 
and operational use cases”, European Conference on Networks and 
Communications 
- 
EuCNC 
2016, 
DOI: 
10.1109/EuCNC.2016.7561024. 
[3] 
P. Marsch et. al., “5G Radio Access Network Architecture: Design 
Guidelines and Key Considerations”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine,  vol. 54, issue 11, pp 24-32, November 2016. 
[4] 
X. An, et. al., “Architecture Modularisation for Next Generation 
Mobile Networks”, European Conference on Networks and 
Communications 
- 
EuCNC 
2017, 
DOI: 
10.1109/EuCNC.2017.7980664. 
[5] 
3GPP, TS 23.501 “System Architecture for the 5G System; Stage 2 
(Release 15)”, Version 1.2.0, July 2017. 
[6] 
5G-PPP Architecture Working Group, “View on 5G Architecture 
(Version 2.0), July 2017, available at: https://5g-ppp.eu/5g-ppp-
revised-architecture-paper-for-public-consultation/, access date 12-09-
2017. 
[7] 
3GPP, TS 22.261, “Service Requirements for the 5G System”, 
V16.0.0, June 2017. 
[8] 
5G Automotive Association -5GAA, “The case for Cellular V2X for 
Safety 
and 
Cooperative 
Driving”, 
available 
at: 
http://5gaa.org/pdfs/5GAA-whitepaper-23-Nov-2016.pdf, access date 
12-09-2017. 
[9] 
3GPP, TS 23.502, “Procedures for the 5G System”, Stage 2 (Release 
15), Version 0.6.0, August 2017. 
[10] 3GPP, TS 38.300, “NR and NG-RAN Overall Description”, Stage 2 
(Release 15), September 2017. 
[11] 3GPP TR 28.801, “Study on management and orchestration of network 
slicing for next generation networks”, Release 15, Version 1.2.0, May 
2017. 
[12] K. Chatzikokolakis, A. Kaloxylos, P. Spapis, N. Alonistioti, and C. 
Zhou, “A survey of location management mechanisms and an 
evaluation of their applicability for 5G cellular networks”, Recent 
advances in Communications and Networking Technologies, vol. 3, 
no. 2, 2014. 
[13] S. Hailu and M. Säily, “Hybrid paging and location tracking scheme 
for inactive 5G UEs”, European Conference on Networks and 
Communications 
- 
EuCNC 
2017, 
DOI: 
10.1109/EuCNC.2017.7980730. 
[14] 3GPP TS 23.285, “Architecture enhancements for V2X services”, 
Release 14, March 2017. 
[15] R. Trivisonno, R. Guerzoni, I. Vaishnavi, and D. Soldani, “Towards 
zero latency software defined 5G networks,” in IEEE International 
Conference on Communication Workshop (ICCW), June 2015, pp. 
2566–2571.  
[16] T. V. Mathew and K. V. Krishna Rao, “Introduction to Tranportation 
Engineering”, Chapter 30, Fundemental parameters of traffic flow, 
May 
2007, 
available 
at: 
http://nptel.ac.in/courses/105101087/downloads/Lec-30.pdf, 
access 
date 12-09-2017. 
[17] 3GPP, TS 33.401, “Security Architecture”, Release 15, Version 15.0.0 
June 2017. 
 
 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
4.5
9
13.5
18
22.5
MB\h
Space Headway
Additional CN-RAN data for CEMOB (MB/h)
20Km/h 
30Km/h 
45Km/h 
60Km/h 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

