Security Threats in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks  
 
 
Hande Bakiler, Aysel Şafak 
Department of Electrical & Electronics Engineering 
Baskent University 
Ankara, Turkey 
21020013@baskent.edu.tr, asafak@baskent.edu.tr 
Ilgın Şafak 
Progress R&D Center 
Provus Information Technologies 
Sisli, Istanbul, Turkey 
ilgin.safak@provus.com.tr
 
 
Abstract—Mobile 
Ad 
Hoc 
Networks 
(MANET) 
are 
continuously self-organizing wireless networks with no fixed 
infrastructure, where network communication is established 
without a centralized administration. Security is an important 
issue for mobile ad hoc networks, due to the vulnerable nature 
of MANETs. This paper describes the effects of Pulse Jammer 
attack, Misbehavior Node attack and Byzantine attacks on the 
network performance under different traffic loads using 
Geographic Routing Protocol (GRP), Proactive Routing 
Protocol such as Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) 
Protocol and Reactive Routing Protocols such as Ad Hoc On 
Demand Distance Vector (AODV) Routing Protocol and 
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) Protocol. The impact of 
security attacks on MANET performance is evaluated by 
investigating which attack is more harmful to the network. 
IEEE 802.11b and 802.11g standards are compared with 
respect to the  Pulse Jammer attack, Misbehavior Node attack 
and Byzantine attack for AODV Routing Protocol. Simulation 
results using OPNET simulator show that the efficient 
utilization of the network reduces considerably in the presence 
of the mentioned attacks. 
 
Keywords- mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs); routing 
attacks; network security; OPNET 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Next generation wireless communication systems will 
require a rapid deployment of independent mobile users. An 
emerging wireless technology, mobile ad hoc networks 
(MANETs), are efficient, effective, quick, and easy to 
deploy in networks with changing topologies. Each mobile 
node acts as a host, and also acts as a router. Nodes 
communicate with each other without the intervention of 
access points or base stations [1]. Ad-hoc networks are 
suitable for applications where it is not possible to set up a 
fixed infrastructure and have a dynamic topology so that 
nodes can easily join or leave the network at any time. 
Possible MANET scenarios include communications in 
military and rescue missions in connecting soldiers on the 
battlefield or establishing new networks where a network 
has collapsed after a disaster like an earthquake [2]. Nodes 
cooperate by forwarding data packets to other nodes in the 
network to find a path to the destination node using routing 
protocols. However, due to security vulnerabilities of the 
routing protocols, wireless ad-hoc networks are unprotected 
to attacks of the malicious nodes. These nodes destroy the 
network, thereby degrading the network performance. 
The effects of Pulse Jammer attack and Misbehavior 
nodes using Optimized Link State Routing Protocol 
(OLSR), Reactive routing protocol, Ad Hoc On Demand 
Distance Vector (AODV) and Geographical are studied in 
[3], where the impact of attack on MANET performance is 
evaluated in finding out which protocol is more vulnerable 
to these attacks. No single protocol that was studied had an 
overall better performance under Pulse Jammer attack and 
Misbehavior nodes security threats. 
Various protocol aware jamming attacks that can be 
launched in an access point based 802.11b network are 
studied in [4]. It is shown that misbehaving nodes that do 
not adhere to the underlying MAC protocol significantly 
degrade the network throughput. Several hybrid attacks that 
increase the effectiveness of the attack or the decrease the 
probability of detection of the attack are also presented in 
the paper. 
In this paper, the effects of Pulse Jammer Attack, 
Misbehavior Node attack and Byzantine security attacks on 
MANET network topology are studied using different 
routing protocols. The purpose of this work is access 
security attacks on MANETs that lead to a reduced network 
performance, reliability and availability. Additionally, 
several security routing protocols are investigated for 
MANET. For each scenario, normal network traffic is 
compared to the network traffic with five disruptive nodes 
that are placed in the network separately. 
The main contribution of this work is providing insight 
about network security challenges and potential harmful 
attacks in MANET security under different traffic loads 
using various routing protocols. In this work, wlan_wkstn 
(Wireless LAN Workstation) mobile nodes are used, so the 
network traffic loads, i.e., http, ftp, email, voice and video 
conferencing can be enabled on these mobile nodes in the 
network. Performance metrics are provided for different 
network applications in addition to the whole network 
performance using different routing protocols. The IEEE 
802.11b and 802.11g standards are compared for the normal 
network with and without network attackers. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, an 
overview of the OLSR, GRP, DSR and AODV routing 
protocols are provided. In Section III, Pulse Jammer attack 
is described.  In Section IV, Misbehavior Node attack is 
described and in Section V, Byzantine attack is described. 
Performance metrics which are used in the simulations are 
presented and described in Section VI. Simulation results 
are given in Section VII, followed by the conclusion in 
Section VIII. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF CURRENT ROUTING PROTOCOLS  
In this section, various existing routing protocols are 
described. 
A. The Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) Protocol 
DSR [5] is a reactive unicast routing protocol that 
utilizes source routing algorithm. The sender knows the 
complete hop-by-hop route to the destination, where the 
routes are stored in a route cache. When a node in the ad 
hoc network attempts to send a data packet to a destination 
for which it does not know the route, it uses a route 
discovery process to dynamically determine one. Route 
discovery works by flooding the network with route request 
(RREQ) packets. A route reply is generated when the route 
request reaches either the destination itself, or an 
intermediate node which contains in its route cache an 
unexpired route to the destination. By the time the packet 
reaches the destination or an intermediate node, it contains a 
route record yielding the sequence of hops taken. 
B. The Ad Hoc On-demand Distance Vector (AODV) 
Routing Protocol 
AODV routing protocol [1] is a reactive unicast routing 
protocol for mobile ad hoc networks which only needs to 
maintain the routing information about the active paths. In 
AODV, routing information is maintained in routing tables 
at nodes. Every mobile node keeps a next-hop routing table, 
which contains the destinations to which it currently has a 
route to. A routing table entry expires if it has not been used 
or reactivated for a pre-specified expiration time.  
C. Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) Protocol 
OLSR protocol, as defined in [6], is a proactive routing 
protocol based on the periodic exchange of topology 
information. Generally, three types of control messages are 
used in the OLSR protocol, namely, a HELLO message, a 
TC (Topology Control) message and a MID (Multiple 
Interface Declaration) message. The HELLO message is 
transmitted for sensing neighbors and for Multi-Point 
Distribution Relays (MPRs) calculation. Topology control is 
link state signaling that is performed by OLSR. MPRs are 
used to optimize the messaging process. MID messages 
contains the list of all IP addresses used by any node in the 
network. OLSR exchanges the topology information always 
with other nodes. Nodes maintain information of neighbors 
and MPRs by sending and receiving HELLO messages from 
its neighbors.  
D. Geographic Routing Protocol (GRP) 
GRP [7][8] is a well researched approach for ad hoc 
routing where nodes are aware of their own geographic 
locations and also of its immediate neighbors and source 
node are aware of the destination’s position. The data 
packets are routed through the network using the geographic 
location of the destination and not the network address. 
GRP operates without routing tables and routing to 
destination depends upon the information each node has 
about its neighbors. Geographic routing is simple and 
efficient.  
III. PULSE JAMMER ATTACK 
The most trivial way of disrupting a wireless network is 
by generating a continuous high power noise across the 
entire bandwidth near the transmitting and/or receiving 
nodes. The device that generates such a noise is called a 
jammer and the process is called jamming [4]. The reason to 
call jammer as intelligent is because its pulse off time and 
pulse on time are the main parameters which act on jammer 
to behave on and off at certain time as define to generate the 
transmission [3]. 
IV.  MISBEHAVIOR NODES ATTACK 
The purpose of misbehaving nodes [9] is not to function 
properly in the network and they achieve their goal by 
acting maliciously. They stop forwarding packets to the 
other nodes by simply start dropping the packets, or 
consume the bandwidth of the network by broadcasting 
route when it is not necessary. The misbehavior nodes stop 
performing the basic task; as a result, the network becomes 
congested and the traffic on the network leads to delay of 
data and degrade the performances of the network. 
V. BYZANTINE ATTACK 
In Byzantine attacks, a compromised intermediate node 
or a set of compromised intermediate nodes collectively 
carries out attacks such as creating routing loops, routing 
packets on non-optimal paths and selectively dropping 
packets [10]. Byzantine attack drops, modifies and 
misroutes the forwarding packets in an attempt to disrupt the 
routing service [11]. 
VI. PERFORMANCE METRICS 
The performance of the whole network under different 
routing protocols is analyzed by four metrics: throughput, 
network load, delay and data dropped. 
A. Throughput (bits/sec) 
The average rate at which the data packet is delivered 
successfully 
from 
one 
node 
to 
another 
over 
a 
communication network is known as throughput. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

B. Network Load (bits/sec) 
Network load is the total packet sent and received across 
the whole network at a particular time. 
C. Delay (sec) 
The packet end to end delay is the average time of the 
packet passing through inside the network. 
D. Data Dropped (bits/sec) 
Data dropped shows that how many packets are 
successfully sent and received across the whole network. 
VII. 
SIMULATION RESULT  AND ANALYSIS 
The simulation is performed in analyzing the effects of 
Pulse Jammer attack, Misbehavior Node attack and 
Byzantine attack on the network performance under 
different traffic loads. Simulation parameters used are 
depicted in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETER 
Simulation Parameter 
Value 
Simulator 
OPNET 14.5 
Area 
800x800 (m) 
Number of Nodes 
30 Nodes 
Operation Mode 
802.11b, 802.11g 
Data Rate of Each Node 
11 Mbps, 54 Mbps 
Routing Protocols 
DSR, AODV, OLSR, GRP 
Mobility Model 
Random Waypoint 
Traffic Type 
HTTP, FTP, Email, Voice, Video 
Conferencing 
Simulation Time 
300 sec. 
Packet Reception Power Threshold 
-95 dBm 
 
A. Performance of DSR under Pulse Jammer Attack, under 
Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine Attack 
for Voice Application 
In the simulation enviroment, five jamming nodes, five 
misbehaving nodes and five Byzantine nodes were placed 
separately in the normal network with different scenarios. 
Then, packet end-to-end delay statistics are represented for 
voice application in the same graph.  
Figure 1 represents the packet end-to-end delay statistics 
for voice application on the normal network traffic with the 
average value of 7.667 seconds. It shows the “packet end-to-
end delay” with jamming nodes in the network as 10.864 
seconds, with misbehaving nodes as 9.748 seconds and with 
Byzantine nodes in the network as 9.235 seconds with 
respect to the DSR. 
The delay increases in presence of the network attacks 
on the network when it is compared to the normal network. 
Jamming nodes deny the network transmission services 
to authorized users by generating noise on the wireless 
medium in order to block the access for authorized nodes. 
Misbehaving nodes consume a lot of bandwidth and do not 
collaborate with the other nodes in the network. Byzantine 
nodes drop the packets in the network which degrades the 
network routing services. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Packet end-to-end delay results of the normal network’s voice 
application with and without network attacks for DSR 
B. Performance of AODV under Pulse Jammer Attack, 
under Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine 
Attack  for Voice Application 
In this section, the performance of AODV routing 
protocol under jamming nodes, misbehaving nodes and 
Byzantine nodes are compared. First, normal traffic is 
generated under AODV, and then the scenario was 
duplicated with a jitter parameter for different attacks. For 
each network attack scenario, five malicious nodes are 
placed in the normal network. Jitter [12] is the ratio of 
transmission delay of the current packet and the 
transmission delay of the previous packet.  
In Figure 2, jitter statistics are represented for voice 
application in the same graph.   
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Jitter results of the normal network’s voice application with and 
without network attacks for AODV routing protocol 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

In the graph above, it is clearly seen that jitter increases 
in the beginning of the simulation up to a certain point and 
from that point onwards it degrades rapidly. This is due to 
the fact that the utilization of the network reaches a steady 
state after some time. 
Figure 2 shows that the average value of the normal 
network traffic jitter in voice applications is 0.0043 seconds. 
On the other hand, the network with jammer nodes shows 
the jitter with the average value of 0.0057 seconds; with 
Byzantine nodes the value it is noted as 0.0044 seconds and 
with misbehaving nodes it is recorded as 0.004 seconds with 
respect to the AODV routing protocol.  
The results show significant changes in jitter for voice 
application, especially for the network with jamming nodes 
and with Byzantine nodes.  Due to malicious activities of 
the jamming nodes and Byzantine nodes, the jitter increment 
is more than the normal network for AODV routing 
protocol. Also for the network with misbehaving nodes, the 
jitter increment is more than the normal network in general. 
However, it reduces at some certain points. The reason of 
this reduction could be that misbehaving nodes start 
dropping the packets and do not forward the packets to the 
other nodes on the network, then the misbehaving nodes 
start sending the packets and forwarding packets faster than 
the normal nodes. As a result, normal nodes are not able to 
process the packets. 
C. Performance of OLSR under Pulse Jammer Attack, 
under Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine 
Attack  for Email Application 
In this section, the performance of OLSR protocol under 
jamming nodes, misbehaving nodes and Byzantine nodes 
are compared. For each network attack scenario, five 
malicious nodes are placed in the normal network. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Traffic received results of the normal network’s email 
application with and without network attacks for OLSR protocol 
In Figure 3, the traffic received statistics for email 
application on the normal network traffic with and without 
malicious nodes are analyzed. The normal network’s traffic 
received statistics is recorded as 153.9 bytes/sec. Then, it is 
noted as 140.5 bytes/sec with jammer nodes in the network. 
The traffic received statistics average value is 127.1 
bytes/sec with misbehaving nodes and with Byzantine nodes 
in the network its value is noted as 100.32 bytes/sec with 
respect to the OLSR. 
When placing the malicious nodes in the network, the 
MANET traffic received is recorded lower than the normal 
network traffic. There is significant traffic destruction of the 
packets transmission on the network when applying network 
attacks. 
D. Performance of GRP under Pulse Jammer Attack, under 
Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine Attack  
for Video Conferencing Application 
To implement the network attacks on MANET nodes 
network, five jamming nodes, five misbehaving nodes and 
five Byzantine nodes are deployed separately in the network 
for GRP with different scenarios.   
The packet end-to-end delay statistics for voice 
application of the normal network is noted as 0.269 seconds 
at the duration time of simulation 300 seconds in Figure 4. 
After implementing the five jamming nodes, it increases to 
0.928 seconds. The reason for this is because pulse jammer 
nodes generate a noise on radio frequency in pulse time 
which increases the packet end-to-end delay statistics on the 
network for GRP. The graph represents the packet end-to-
end delay statistics of voice application as 0.40 seconds for 
the network with misbehaving nodes. Due to the 
misbehaving nodes, the network becomes congested. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Packet end-to-end delay results of the normal network’s video 
conferencing with and without network attacks for GRP 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Figure 4 shows the packet end-to-end delay with 
Byzantine nodes in the network as 0.325 seconds with 
respect to the GRP. The Byzantine attack has a negative 
impact on the transmission and network traffic. 
E. Performance of DSR under Pulse Jammer Attack, under 
Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine Attack  
for the Network with respect to “Throughput” Statistics 
In this section, five jamming nodes, five misbehaving 
nodes and five Byzantine nodes were placed separately in 
the normal network with different scenarios. The throughput 
statistics are represented for the whole network in the same 
graph in Figure 5. 
The throughput of the network nodes with normal traffic 
is noted as 741,085 bits/sec, whereas the throughput with 
jamming nodes is noted as 544,661 bits/sec, both for a 
simulation of 300 seconds duration. As seen in Figure 5, the 
throughput of the network with Byzantine nodes is recorded 
as 699,863 bits/sec and with misbehaving nodes as 715,089 
bits/sec. The largest reduction of the network throughput 
statistic is represented for the network with jamming nodes 
and the least reduction is indicated for the network with 
misbehaving nodes with respect to the DSR protocol. 
F.  Performance of AODV under Pulse Jammer Attack, 
under Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine 
Attack  for the Network with respect to “Network Load” 
Statistics 
In this section, different network attack scenarios were 
designed separately to examine the AODV routing protocol 
under five Byzantine nodes, five misbehaving nodes and 
five jamming nodes.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Throughput results of the normal network with and without 
network attacks for DSR protocol 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Network load results of the normal network with and without 
network attacks for AODV routing protocol 
 
The network scenarios for different attacks are depicted 
in Figure 6. The network load of the normal network has the 
average value of 752,620 bits/sec and with the jamming 
nodes in the network it is noted as 505,130 bits/sec. For the 
network with misbehaving nodes, its average value is 
690,004 bits/sec and the network load statistics according to 
the network with Byzantine nodes is recorded as 718,929 
bits/sec. The largest reduction of the network load statistic is 
represented for the network with jamming nodes and the 
least reduction is represented for the network with 
Byzantine nodes with respect to AODV routing protocol. 
According to Figure 6, AODV routing protocol is more 
vulnerable to jamming nodes. Jamming nodes deny service 
by generating noise and causes protocol packets lost. 
Jamming nodes block the access for authorized users. 
As a result, the network traffic effected negatively when 
malicious nodes are placed in the normal network and they 
start dropping the forwarding packets to the other the nodes 
on the network. 
G. Performance of GRP under Pulse Jammer Attack, under 
Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine Attack  
for the Network with respect to “Delay” Statistics 
Five jamming nodes, five misbehaving nodes and five 
Byzantine nodes were placed separately in the normal 
network with different scenarios. 
Different network scenarios for the mentioned network 
attacks are represented in Figure 7 according to GRP 
protocol. 
Figure 7 represents that the normal network traffic delay 
average value is 3.27 seconds. On the other hand, the 
network with jammer nodes shows the delay with the 
average value of 4.42 seconds, with Byzantine nodes the 
value it is recorded as 3.92 seconds and with misbehaving 
nodes it is noted as 3.51 seconds with respect to the GRP.    
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
Figure 7.  Delay results of the normal network with and without network 
attacks for GRP 
 
The largest increment of the delay statistic is depicted 
for the network with jamming nodes and the least increment 
is represented for the network with misbehaving nodes with 
respect to GRP. The jamming node attack on GRP shows a 
significant result. The jamming nodes stop performing the 
basic task of the network; as a result, the network becomes 
congested and the traffic on the network leads to delay of 
the data and degrading of the performances of the network. 
H. Performance of OLSR under Pulse Jammer Attack, 
under Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine 
Attack  for the Network with respect to “Data Dropped” 
Statistics 
In this section, five jamming nodes, five misbehaving 
nodes and five Byzantine nodes are placed in the network 
separately for OLSR protocol with different scenarios in 
implementing the network attacks on MANET nodes 
network. The data dropped statistics are shown for the 
whole network in the same graph. 
Figure 8 shows the normal network data dropped 
statistics average value as 22,577 bits/sec. For the network 
with jamming nodes, the average data dropped value is 
recorded as 23.074 bits/sec; with misbehaving nodes the 
data dropped statistics is 24,437 bits/sec and with Byzantine 
nodes its value is 28,353 bits/sec.  
It is seen that the largest increment of the data dropped 
statistic is represented for the network with misbehaving 
nodes and the least increment is represented for the network 
with jamming nodes with respect to the OLSR protocol. 
That means that the OLSR protocol is more vulnerable to 
the network with misbehaving nodes.  
 
 
Figure 8.  Data dropped results of the normal network with and without 
network attacks for OLSR 
I. Performance of AODV under Pulse Jammer Attack, 
under Misbehavior Node Attack and under Byzantine 
Attack  for IEEE 802.11g Standard  with respect to 
“Network Load” Statistics 
In this section, different network attack scenarios were 
designed for the AODV routing separately under Byzantine 
nodes, misbehaving nodes and jamming nodes in order to 
examine the IEEE 802.11g standard. For each network 
attack scenario, five malicious nodes are placed in the 
normal network. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Network load results of the normal network with and without 
network attacks for AODV with respect to the IEEE 802.11g standard 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

As seen in Figure 9, the network load performance of the 
network nodes with normal traffic is 3,376,409 bits/sec and 
with misbehaving nodes in the network it is represented as 
3,262,975 bits/sec. The network load of the network with 
Byzantine nodes is noted as 2,480,452 bits/sec and with 
jamming nodes it is recorded as 150,486 bits/sec.  
The largest reduction of the network load statistic is 
represented for the network with jamming nodes and the 
least reduction is represented for the network with 
misbehaving nodes with respect to the IEEE 802.11g 
standard for AODV routing protocol. Hence, networks using 
802.11b standard are more vulnerable to jamming nodes in 
the network. 
Compared to the networks using IEEE 802.11b and 
802.11g standards, networks using IEEE 802.11b standard 
are more vulnerable to networks with jamming nodes. On the 
other hand, networks using IEEE 802.11g standard are the 
least affected from the network with jamming nodes for 
AODV routing protocol.           
VIII. 
CONCLUSION  AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, the routing protocols GRP, Proactive 
Routing Protocol (OLSR), and Reactive Routing Protocols 
(AODV and DSR) are studied in IEEE 802.11b networks. 
The network performance under Pulse Jammer attack, 
Misbehavior Node attack and Byzantine attack is 
investigated. The network contains http (heavy browsing), 
ftp (high load), email (high load), voice (PCM Quality 
Spech) and video conferencing (low resolution video) 
applications. The normal network is compared with the 
networks which contain jamming nodes, misbehaving nodes 
and Byzantine nodes in terms of performance metrics, i.e., 
delay, network load, throughput, data dropped, jitter and 
traffic received by using different routing protocols. Then, 
the IEEE 802.11b and 802.11g standards, which share the 
same propagation characteristics, are compared for networks 
with and without security attacks using the AODV routing 
protocol. Results show that routing protocols are more 
vulnerable to networks with jamming nodes, and placing the 
intruder nodes in the network reduces the reliability, 
availability and the performance of the network. Networks 
using the IEEE 802.11b standard are more vulnerable in 
networks with jamming nodes for the AODV routing 
protocol. Jammer attack generates noise on the wireless 
radio frequency medium to stop the communication in order 
to trigger the network. Jamming nodes cause corruption of 
the packets or they cause packet lost. Misbehavior Node 
attack stops forwarding packets to the other nodes and drop 
the packets, it stop performing the basic task and the 
network performance degrades. Also, Byzantine attack 
drops the routing forwarding table or drops the forwarding 
packets to the other nodes. Several security breaches are 
represented under these three attack models using OPNET. 
They provide useful insight in understanding MANET in 
terms of the network security.  
Future work encompasses extending results to other 
security attacks and wireless protocols, and adding detection 
and defense mechanisms that can protect the network from 
the intruders. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by ITEA2 ADAX Project No. 
10030 and TUBITAK TEYDEB Project No. 9130016. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Liu and J. Kaiser, “A Survey of Mobile Ad Hoc Network Routing 
Protocols,” The University of Magdeburg, October 2005. 
[2] S. Vrutik, D. N. Modi, and P. Ashwin, "AODVGAP-An 
Acknowledgement Based Approach to Mitigate Selective Forwarding 
Attacks in MANET," International Journal of Computer Engineering 
and Technology (IJCET), vol. 3, no. 2, July-September 2012, pp. 458-
469. 
[3] S. Salim, "Mobile Ad hoc Network Security Issues," M.Sc. Thesis, 
University of Central Lancashire, 2010, pp. 1-81. 
[4] D. J. Thuente and M. Acharya, “Intelligent Jamming in Wireless 
Networks with Applications to 802.11b and Other Networks,” North 
Carolina State University. 
[5] C. E. Perkins, E. M. Royer, S. R. Das, and M. K. Marina, 
"Performance Comparison of Two On-Demand Routing Protocols for 
Ad Hoc Networks," IEEE Personal Communications, February 2001, 
pp. 16-28. 
[6] S. Ehrampoosh and A. K. Mahani, "Secure Routing Protocols: 
Affections on MANETs Performance," First International Conference 
on Communications Engineering, 22-24 December 2010, pp. 77-82. 
[7] A. Tamizhselvi and Dr. R. S. D. W. Banu, "Performance Evaluation 
of Geographical Routing Protocol under Different Traffic Scenario," 
International Journal of Computer Science and Telecommunications, 
vol. 3, no. 3, March 2012, pp. 64-67. 
[8] J. A. Sanchez, P. M. Ruiz, and R. Marin-Perez, "Beacon-Less 
Geographic Routing Made Practical: Challenges, Design Guidelines, 
and Protocols," IEEE Communications Magazine, August 2009, pp. 
85-91. 
[9] R. K. Jha, I. Z. Bholebawa, U. D. Dalal, and A. V. Wankhede, 
"Detection and Fortification Analysis of WiMAX Network: With 
Misbehavior 
Node 
Attack," 
International 
Journal 
on 
Communications, Network and System Sciences, vol. 5, April 2012, 
pp. 353-367. 
[10] N. K. Pani, “A Secure Zone-Based Routing Protocol for Mobile Ad 
Hoc Networks,” Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
National Institute of Technology, May 2009. 
[11] B. Awerbuch, D. Holmer, C. Nita-Rotaru, and H. Rubens, "An On-
demand Secure Routing Protocol Resilient to Byzantine Failures," 
Proceedings of the ACM Workshop on Wireless Security (WiSe), 
September 2002, pp. 21-30. 
[12] H. Paul and P. Sarkar, "A Study and Comparison of OLSR, AODV 
and ZRP Routing Protocols in Ad Hoc Networks," International 
Journal of Research in Engineering and Technology (IJRET), vol. 2, 
no.8, August 2013, pp. 370-374. 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-373-5
INNOV 2014 : The Third International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

