Smart Data Pricing Model for Intelligent Transportation Systems 
 
 
S. Emre Alptekin 
Galatasaray University  
Department of Industrial Engineering 
Istanbul, Turkey 
email: ealptekin@gsu.edu.tr 
 
 
 
Abstract- Internet of Things is a novel paradigm that foresees 
Internet-connected devices generating constantly new data 
using sensors/actuators. The gathered data from various 
sources facilitates new ways of integration and operations that 
are essential for developing systems, such as intelligent 
transportation 
management. 
Intelligently 
managing 
an 
infrastructure like traffic systems is expected to contribute to 
overall safety, economical development and environmental 
sustainability. However, its success depends on users’ 
willingness to share with and use data provided by the platform. 
Therefore, there should be mechanisms to be put in place, which 
will motivate latent customers/contributors and furthermore 
manage efficiently the flow of data on possibly stringent 
network conditions. Smart data pricing, a concept that aims to 
give users the right economic incentives and manage network 
congestion in high demand periods, is providing an effective 
solution for this problem. In this paper, models based on game 
theory is used to deal with data pricing.  The applied model 
takes into account the level of service quality and the sensitivity 
of the customers on price levels and quality. The applicability of 
the proposed methodology is demonstrated via a case study. 
Keywords- Internet of Things; dynamic pricing; game theory; 
mobile cloud computing.  
 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Internet of Things (IoT), a revolutionizing approach 
foreseeing “smart, connected” products is promising its early 
adaptors new competitive opportunities and is seen as a 
disruptive technology [1]. There are several prominent 
organizations, such as Google, General Electric, Amazon, 
Samsung, etc. coming with their own view of the concept. It 
is basically a new model that has its roots based on ever 
advancing wireless communications along with the artificial 
intelligence framework that is expected to enhance the 
experience of the users. From the end users’ perspective, the 
whole experience of IoT should contribute especially in areas 
of assisted living, e-health, enhanced learning and from the 
business users’ perspective in fields, such as automation, 
industrial 
manufacturing, 
logistics, 
business/process 
management, intelligent transportation of people and goods 
[2]. 
As it is with every newly emerging technology, the IoT 
vision requires that organizations should develop beyond 
traditional mobile computing scenarios and propose products 
that should connect everyday existing objects and embed 
somehow intelligence into their offerings [3]. As proposed by 
[3], IoT demands: (1) a shared understanding of the situation 
of its users and their appliances, (2) software architectures and 
pervasive communication networks to process and convey the 
contextual information to where it is relevant, and (3) the 
analytics tools in the IoT that aim for autonomous and smart 
behavior. If the organizations are able to deliver in all these 
aspects the desired smart connectivity and context-aware 
computation should be the outcome. 
Intelligent transportation systems enriched with IoT as 
suggested by Ibanez et al. [4] aim to achieve goals, such as 
safety and personal security, access and mobility, 
environmental sustainability, and economical development 
through minimizing CO2 emissions, improving traffic 
efficiency, and road safety, as well as reducing vehicle wear, 
transportation times and fuel consumption.  However, 
developing such a framework necessitates integration of 
information and communication technologies that are usually 
treated as independent silos of automation. Prospects of 
possible integration anticipates large amount of data to be 
collected, processed and fed back on real-time if possible to 
the users’ of the system. The main challenge for the adaptation 
of intelligent transportation systems is in the implementation 
of adequate and necessary technologies and infrastructures in 
vehicles, roads, streets and avenues [4].  
However, new business opportunities created through 
processed information and delivered as a service to customers, 
may establish new revenue streams for service providers [5]. 
Effectively managing information and keeping quality of 
service levels under control in case of constrained network 
conditions necessitates new approaches, such as smart data 
pricing. Smart data pricing, a mechanism aiming to 
understand users’ behaviors and adapting to different network 
traffic conditions is believed to be a solution for creating 
economic models for computing optimized prices [6]. 
Accordingly, service providers will have to develop economic 
models for price competition that should adapt to customers’ 
expectations and network conditions. 
 
In this work, an economic model for price competition 
among service provider in transportation networks is 
proposed. The model aims to analyze consumers’ behaviors 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

to changing prices and quality levels and tries to optimize 
service providers’ revenues. The proposed framework is 
based on mathematical models of game theory.  
 
The case study used to demonstrate the effectiveness of 
proposed methodology defines different scenarios. The aim 
is to examine the effect of different behaviors on the pricing 
and depict actions that should maximize revenue of the 
service providers. 
 
The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows: 
in Section 2 related literature is given. Section 3 briefly 
describes the methodologies that constitute the proposed 
framework. The steps and details of the implementation into 
the intelligent transportation management problem is given 
in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the study.  
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Internet of Things related literature covers different 
aspects of the topic, ranging from enabling technologies to 
protocols and possible application scenarios. Similarly, 
intelligent transportation systems related problems and 
propositions are very popular among research community. 
Some of the recent work that constituted the base of this study 
is presented in this section. 
In their work, Ibáñez et al. [4] presented emerging 
technologies, 
such 
as 
connected 
vehicles, 
wireless 
technologies, 
etc. 
that 
will 
complement 
intelligent 
transportation systems. They showed using examples how 
cloud 
computing 
complements 
the 
development 
of 
transportation systems. They also discussed how IoT will 
contribute to seamless integration of different systems with 
the intention of more sustainable transportation solutions and 
improved road safety. 
Niyato et al. [7] introduced an overview of IoT, its 
architecture, benefits and business models and proposed smart 
data pricing for IoT systems and services. They suggested a 
pricing scheme for IoT service providers taking into account 
sensing data buying and service subscription with bundling. 
They found out that in case of a coalition, multiple service 
providers could achieve a higher profit level. 
Hoang and Niyato [5] developed an economic model for 
competitive pricing problem among information service 
providers in an Internet-of-Vehicle environment. They 
proposed a competitive repetitive game model to obtain prices 
for providers through Nash equilibrium solution. Using 
simulation results, they assessed the efficiency of their 
solution. 
Sen et al. [6] proposed smart data pricing mechanisms to 
avoid network congestion by creating incentives to modify 
user behavior or shift demand to less congested times or to 
supplementary networks. They discussed two different 
scenarios: time-dependent pricing and traffic offloading and 
foreseen smart data pricing applied to machine-to-machine 
communication and IoT setting. 
 
THE METHODOLOGY 
Smart data pricing concept describes pricing options 
applied by service providers to replace traditional flat-rate 
model. Typical models make use of mechanisms, such as, 
usage-based pricing / metering / throttling / capping, time / 
location / congestion-dependent pricing, app based pricing / 
sponsored access, Paris metro pricing, quota-aware content 
distribution, reverse billing or sponsored content [6]. Dynamic 
pricing approach as part of smart data pricing enables real-
time pricing changes and ability to respond to network 
congestion and fluctuations in quality of experience of the 
users’ of the system.  
However, setting prices without considering the reactions 
of competition possibly underoptimizes the market share and 
utilities of service providers. However, answering questions 
like: “How can we decide what action to choose in a 
competitive environment?” and “What are other companies 
doing?” requires study of market conditions and behaviors of 
actors in the market [8]. 
Game theory defined as the formal study of conflict and 
cooperation provides a language to formulate, structure, 
analyze and understand strategic scenarios [9]. Game theory 
framework consists of theoretical methods of microeconomic 
origin and are used in many other areas of the economy and in 
a range of other social and behavioral sciences [10]. 
The basic requirements for establishing a game theoretical 
model necessitates definition of players, their preferences, 
their information, strategic actions available to them, and how 
they influence the outcome. At this point whether or not the 
players have the inclination or possibility of cooperation 
should also be defined.  
There are several assumptions made at this stage and one 
of the most common one is that players are considered as 
rational. A rational player is defined as the one who always 
chooses an action that gives the result that is most preferred 
considering the expected reactions of its opponents. 
The approach applied in this paper assumes non-
cooperative games with rational actors. In game theory, 
typically solution approaches are based on Nash equilibrium 
concept, which is used to analyze the outcome of the strategic 
interaction of several decision makers. The Nash equilibrium 
tries to predict what will happen if several persons or 
institutions are making decisions at the same time, and if the 
result depends on the decisions of others. After having chosen 
strategies, no player should benefit by reconsidering his 
strategy while the other players keep all their strategies 
unchanged. If this is the case, the current set of strategic 
choices 
and 
corresponding 
utilities 
represent 
Nash 
equilibrium. 
 
DATA PRICING FRAMEWORK 
A. Proposed Model 
The game theoretical framework used in this paper is 
based on researches of Işıklar Alptekin and Bener [11] [12] 
and Demirci and Alptekin [13], who applied the same 
framework to revenue management in e-commerce. In their 
work Işıklar Alptekin and Bener [11] [12] considered short 
term sub-lease of unutilized spectrum bands to different 
service providers using a non-cooperative game theoretical 
model. As outcome of the game, they calculated the optimum 
prices of the offered frequency bands subject to QoS 
constraints. They concluded that the demand models must be 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

chosen with great care, since the choice of its parameters has 
profound implications for the market equilibrium. Based on 
their 
research, 
the 
pricing 
problem 
for 
intelligent 
transportation system is formed as follows: 
 
Players: data based service provider in intelligent 
transportation network 
Actions and strategies: The choice of the price offering 
based on quality of experience levels 
 
The main assumption of the model is service providers are 
competing 
with 
each 
other 
non-cooperatively 
and 
independently. The possible actions are defined as: the price 
of the service provided along with its quality level. The 
decision of the service providers and also the consumers are 
affected by the action of other service providers. The aim for 
the providers is typically profit maximization.  
As mentioned in the previous section, game theoretical 
models are in search of a focal point, from which no player 
would deviate, i.e., a Nash equilibrium. 
The pricing strategy set consists of a set of N service 
providers, SPi, designated by i = {1,2, ..., N}. Each company 
has to define two sets of parameters: ሺ݌,ݍሻ ∈ ࣬ା
ଶே . ࢖ ൌ
ሼ࢖૚࢑, ࢖૛, … , ࢖ࡺ࢑ሽ is the price vector and pik is the price that 
SPi charges for each service provided to kth customer. The 
prices may be based on cloud resources used or value-added 
data services provided. ࢗ ൌ ሼࢗ૚࢑, ࢗ૛࢑, … , ࢗࡺ࢑ሽ , is the 
experienced quality level of the services, where qik measures 
the quality offered by SPi to kth customer. 
The demand for each service provider is represented with 
ܦ௜ሺ݌,ݍሻ:  ࣬ା
ଶே → ࣬ା. The model assumes that the demand of  
SPi depends not only on its own parameters pi and qi, but also 
on the prices and quality level offered by its competitors. The 
utility function is defined as ܷ௜௞ሺ݌,ݍሻ: ࣬ା
ଶே → ࣬ା . The 
strategy space of ܵ௜௞ ∈ ࣬ଶis defined as the subset of : [11] 
 
ܵ௜௞ ൌ ൛ሺ݌௜௞,ݍ௜௞ሻ: 0 ൑ ݌௜௞
௠௜௡ ൑ ݌௜௞ ൑ ݌௜௞
௠௔௫ ; 0 ൑ݍ௜௞
௠௜௡൑
ݍ௜௞൑ݍ௜௞
௠௔௫ൟ  
 
 
 
 
      (1) 
 
As suggested by [11] beyond some maximum price, 
demand will be zero whatever the prices and QoS levels of 
competitors are. Accordingly, the service provider has to 
define an upper bound on price. The lower bound is set so as 
to keep the net profit of the SP positive. 
In this model, we assume that the average demand is linear 
in prices and thus given as a linear demand function in the 
following form [11]: 
 
ܦ௜௞ሺ݌,ݍሻ ൌ ܽ௜௞ െ ܾ௜௞. ݌௜௞ ൅ ∑
௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜ ܿ௜௝௞௟. ݌௝௞ ൅
ߚ௜௞.ݍ௜௞ െ ∑ߛ௜௝௞௟.ݍ௝௞൒0௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜
   
 
       (2) 
 
with ܽ௜௞ defined as the base demand of kth customer from 
ith service provider and ܾ௜௞, ܿ௜௝௞௟,ߚ௜௞,ߛ௜௝௞௟ are positive 
constants representing the extent to which customers are 
affected by changes in the price and quality. ܿ௜௝௞௟  is the 
measure that shows how the lth customer is influenced by the 
price of ܵܲ௜ to the kth costumer when lth customer is served by 
ܵܲ௞ . The constants b and c should satisfy the following 
condition: 
 
ܾ௜௞ ൐ ∑
ܿ௜௝௞௟, ݅, ݆ ∈ܫ௝ஷ௜
and ݇, ݈ ∈ܫ  (3) 
 
The condition requires that the influence of a service 
providers’ own price is larger on its own demand than the 
prices of its competitors. This is the typical scenario under the 
assumptions of loyalty or the imperfect knowledge of 
competitors' prices. 
The demand function defined in the model assumes that 
the customers are aware of the service quality they are 
receiving and therefore are sensitive to quality changes. The 
parameters reflecting the sensibility to experienced quality 
levels are defined with parameters ݍ௜ and ݍ௝, respectively. An 
objective calculation of the quality parameters should include 
service related performance metrics, such as bandwidth, 
response times, and resources dedicated to user, etc. In this 
paper, an experienced service level will be used for 
demonstration purposes. 
Having defined the quality related parameters, the revenue 
of a service provider is calculated by multiplying its price with 
its demand: 
 
ܷ௜ሺ݌,ݍሻ ൌ ݌௜.ܦ௜ሺ݌,ݍሻ 
(4) 
 
When the demand function is replaced with the equation 
2: 
 
ܷ௜ ሺ݌,ݍሻ ൌ ݌௜ ሺܽ௜௞ െ ܾ௜௞. ݌௜௞ ൅ ∑
௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜ ܿ௜௝௞௟. ݌௝௞ ൅
ߚ௜௞.ݍ௜௞ െ ∑ߛ௜௝௞௟.ݍ௝௞௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜
  
(5) 
 
At this stage, the existence and uniqueness of the 
equilibrium among service providers has to be proven.  
As defined by [11], a single-parameter Nash equilibrium 
in p at q is the vector p* that solves for all i: 
 
ܷ௜ሺ݌∗,ݍሻ ൌ
max
௣೔ೖ,௤∈࣬೔ ܷ௜൫݌ଵ௞
∗ , ⋯ , ݌ሺ௜ିଵሻ௞
∗
, ݌௜௞
∗ , ݌ሺ௜ାଵሻ௞
∗
, ݌ே௞
∗ ,ݍ൯  
(6) 
In 
order 
to 
prove 
the 
Nash 
equilibrium 
the 
supermodularity of the game has be to shown. Supermodular 
games require that when a player takes additional actions, 
others want to do the same. The game G is defined to be 
supermodular if the following conditions are met [11]: 
 
ܵ௡ is an interval of ࣬ே, where  
 
ܵ௡ ൌ ቂݕ௡,ݕ௡ቃ ൌ ቄݔቚݕ௡൑ݔ൑ݕ௡ቅ   
(7) 
 
݂௡ is twice continuously differentiable on ܵ௡ ; 
 
డమ௙೙
డ௫೙೔డ௫೘ೕ ൒ 0 for all ݊ and all 1 ൑ ݅ ൏ ݆ ൑ ܰ ; 
 
డమ௙೙
డ௫೙೔డ௫೘ೕ ൒ 0 for all ݊ ് ݉, 1 ൑ ݅ ൑ ܰ and 1 ൑ ݆ ൑ܯ. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

A pure Nash equilibrium is a strategy tuple ݔ ൌ
ሺݔ௡;݊∈ܰሻ, such that each ݔ௡ maximise ݂ሺݔො௡,ݔି௡ሻ  over 
ܵ௡. The strategic feasible set of the game is defined using the 
following formulation [11]:  
 
ܵ௜ ൌ ሼ݌௜: 0 ൑ ݌௠௜௡ ൑ ݌௜ ൑ ݌௠௔௫; ݅ ൌ 1,2, … , ܰሽ  (8) 
 
The partial derivatives of the utility function for prices and 
quality levels are calculated and given as: 
 
డ௎೔ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௣೔
ൌܦ௜ሺ݌,ݍሻ െ ܾ௜. ݌௜  
(9) 
 
డమ௎೔ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௣೔
మ
ൌ െ2ܾ௜ ൑ 0 
(10) 
 
డ௎೔ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௤೔
ൌߚ௜.݌௜ (11) 
 
డమ௎೔ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௤೔
మ
ൌ 0 ൑ 0 
(12) 
 
డమ௎೔ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௣೔డ௣ೕ ൌ ∑
௜ஷ௝ ܿ௜௝
൒ 0 
(13)  
 
In order to find the prices that maximizes revenue, the 
derivative of the utility function is taken and set equal to zero: 
 
డ௎೔ ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௣೔
ൌܦ௜ሺ݌,ݍሻ ൅ ݌௜ሺെܾ௜ሻ ൌ 0 
 (14) 
 
డ௎೔ ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௣೔
ൌ ܽ௜ െ ܾ௜. ݌௜ ൅ ∑
௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜ ܿ௜௝. ݌௝ ൅ߚ௜.ݍ௜ െ
 ∑ߛ௜௝.ݍ௝௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜
െ ܾ௜. ݌௜ ൌ 0  
 (15) 
 
డ௎೔ ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௣೔
ൌ ܽ௜ െ 2. ܾ௜. ݌௜ ൅ ∑
௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜ ܿ௜௝. ݌௝ ൅ߚ௜.ݍ௜ െ
 ∑ߛ௜௝.ݍ௝ ൌ 0
௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜
  
 (16) 
 
2. ܾ௜. ݌௜ െ ∑
௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜ ܿ௜௝. ݌௝ ൌ  ܽ௜ ൅ߚ௜.ݍ௜ െ
 ∑ߛ௜௝.ݍ௝௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜
  
 (17) 
 
As a linear system of equation in p, the equations can be 
represented in a matrix form. 
 
ܣ݌ ൌ ൣܽ௜ ൅ߚ௜.ݍ௜ െ ∑ߛ௜௝.ݍ௝௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜
൧ 
 (18) 
 
ܣ ൌ ቌ
2ܾଵ 
െܿଵଶ ⋯
െܿଵே
െܿሺேିଵሻଵ ⋮
⋱
െܿሺேିଵሻே ⋮
െܿேଵ
െܿேଶ ⋯
2ܾே
ቍ ൌ
                         ൌߔሺ1 െ ܶሻ  
 (19) 
 
ߔ ൌ ݀݅ܽ݃ሺ2ܾଵ, 2ܾଶ, … , 2ܾேሻ  
 (20) 
 
ܶ ൌ ൮
0
⋯
௖భಿ
ଶ௕భ
⋮
⋱
⋮
௖ಿభ
ଶ௕ಿ
⋯
0
൲ 
 (21) 
 
Hence, ܣିଵ ൌ ሺܫ െ ܶሻିଵ.ߔିଵ and optimum price at the 
equilibrium is defined as:  
p*=ܣିଵ. ܺ ൌ ሺܫ െ ܶሻିଵ.ߔିଵ. ܺ  
(22) 
 
with  
 
ܺ ൌ ܽ௜ ൅ߚ௜.ݍ௜ െ ∑ߛ௜௝.ݍ௝௝∈ூ,௝ஷ௜
  
 (23) 
 
݌௜
∗ ൌ ∑ܣ௜௝
ିଵ. ܽ௜ ൅ ሺܣ௜௜
ିଵ.ߚ௜ െ ∑ܣ௜௝
ିଵ.ߛ௝௜ሻ.ݍ௜൅௜ஷ௝
ே
௝ୀଵ
∑
ሺܣ௜௝
ିଵ.
௝ஷ௜ߚ௝ െ ∑ܣ௜௟
ିଵ.
௟ஷ௝ߛ௟௜ሻ.ݍ௝  (24) 
 
The contraction approach that proves the uniqueness of the 
equilibrium defines the sufficient condition as below [11]:  
 
డమ௎೔ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௣೔
మ
൅ ∑
ฬ
డమ௎೔ሺ௣,௤ሻ
డ௣೔డ௣ೕ ฬ
௜ஷ௝
൏ 0  
 (25) 
 
െ2ܾ௜ ൅ ∑
௜ஷ௝ ܿ௜௝
൏ 0 
 (26) 
 
Therefore, if the conditions are met, the equation 24 will 
result in the optimum prices for SPi. 
 
B. Numerical Application 
The applicability of the proposed model is demonstrated 
through a demonstrative example where two intelligent 
transportation system service providers with different 
experienced quality levels are competing in the same market.  
The perceived quality levels along with the parameters 
used in the calculations are given in Table 1. NP denotes the 
service providers, C denotes the customers. 
The parameters defined in Table 1 try to model a typical 
customer’s sensitivity to the quality and prices of the services 
offered by the service providers given the quality and price of 
the competitors. Solving the formula given in 24, the Nash 
equilibrium price is ݌∗ obtained.  
TABLE I.  
THE VALUES OF THE PARAMETERS OF THE DEMAND 
FUNCTION 
 ࡺࡼ૚ ࡺࡼ૛ 
 ࡯૚ ࡯૛ ࡯૚ ࡯૛ 
ࢼ 4.5 4.5 3 3 
ࢽࡺࡼ૚→࡯૚ 0 1.5 0.8 0.5 
ࢽࡺࡼ૛→࡯૚ 1.5 0 0.5 0.8 
ࢽࡺࡼ૚→࡯૛ 1.3 1.4 0 1.1 
ࢽࡺࡼ૛→࡯૛ 1.4 1.3 1.1 0 
࢈ 4.5 4.5 7 7 
ࢉࡺࡼ૚→࡯૚ 0 1.5 2.2 1.9 
ࢉࡺࡼ૛→࡯૚ 1.5 0 1.9 2.2 
ࢉࡺࡼ૚→࡯૛ 1.1 1.6 0 1.5 
ࢉࡺࡼ૛→࡯૛ 1.6 1.1 1.5 0 
ࢗ 0.75 0.75 0.85 0.85 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

For demonstrative purposes, the parameters used in the 
case study assume two customer profiles: a high profile 
customer ሺܥଵሻ and a low profile customer ሺܥଶሻ. The base 
demand (a) is assumed to be the same for both customer 
profiles and is set at 20 for each. The base demand represents 
average demand of different customer profiles.  
The following matrix is used to calculate the values of 
demand (D), the price (݌∗), and the utility (ܷ∗).  
 
࡭ ൌ ൮
9
െ1.5
െ1.1
െ1.6
െ1.5
9
െ1.6
െ1.1
െ2.2
െ1.9
14
െ1.5
െ1.9
െ2.2
െ1.5
14
൲ 
 
The formula given in 24 is used to obtain the results 
presented in Table 2. 
TABLE II.  
OPTIMUM RESULTS FOR PRICE, DEMAND AND UTILITY  
 ࡺࡼ૚→࡯૚ ࡺࡼ૛→࡯૚ ࡺࡼ૚→࡯૛ ࡺࡼ૛→࡯૛ 
ࡰ 16.65 16.90 19.94 20.12 
࢖∗ 3.70 3.76 2.85 2.87 
ࢁ∗ 61.62 63.53 56.80 57.83 
 
The effect of the changes in experienced quality level is 
shown in Table 3, where the quality level of the first service 
provider is increased to %100 and the quality level of the 
second service provider is decreased to 1%. 
TABLE III.  
OPTIMUM RESULTS WITH THE CHANGE OF QUALITY LEVEL 
OF THE FIRST SERVICE PROVIDER 
 ࡺࡼ૚→࡯૚ ࡺࡼ૛→࡯૚ ࡺࡼ૚→࡯૛ ࡺࡼ૛→࡯૛ 
ࡰ 17.96 15.43 20.77 18.99 
࢖∗ 3.99 3.43 2.97 2.71 
ࢁ∗ 71.68 52.88 61.65 51.57 
 
When the sensitivity for quality of the low profile 
customer is set as high profile customer, the following 
optimum results are obtained (Table 4). 
TABLE IV.  
OPTIMUM RESULTS AFTER VARIATION OF THE SENSITIVITY 
FOR QUALITY OF THE LOW PROFILE CUSTOMER 
 ࡺࡼ૚→࡯૚ ࡺࡼ૛→࡯૚ ࡺࡼ૚→࡯૛ ࡺࡼ૛→࡯૛ 
ࡰ 16.83 17.08 20.67 20.92 
࢖∗ 3.74 3.80 2.95 2.99 
ࢁ∗ 62.94 64.85 61.03 62.49 
 
In the opposite case where high profile customer is no 
longer sensitive to the quality, the following optimum results 
are obtained (Table 5). 
The results of demonstrative examples show that demand 
and accordingly prices are changing when different sensibility 
values for quality are used. However, in real life scenarios 
setting the correct values for quality and price sensibility to 
different customers requires that their profile should be 
extracted from the relationship between customer and service 
providers using techniques, such as customer relationship 
management, big data analysis, etc. If correct profiles could 
be identified, the resulting pricing mechanism and hence the 
prices will be realistic. 
TABLE V.  
OPTIMUM RESULTS AFTER VARIATION OF THE SENSITIVITY 
FOR QUALITY OF THE HIGH PROFILE CUSTOMER 
 
 ܨଵ →ܣଵ ܨଶ →ܣଵ ܨଵ →ܣଶ ܨଶ →ܣଶ 
ܦ 14.30 14.36 18.69 18.87 
݌∗ 3.18 3.19 2.67 2.69 
ܷ∗ 45.43 45.84 49.92 50.85 
 
When the results presented in tables are analyzed, several 
conclusion could be drawn. For example, Table 3 reveals that 
demand of high profile customers to the first service provider 
has increased and the demand of the same customer to the 
second service provider has decreased, when the quality level 
of the first provider is increased and the second provider is 
decreased. Moreover, the price of the first service provider is 
increased for all customer profiles. Hence, the first service 
provider with its increased experienced quality level is able to 
increase its total utility, whereas the second service provider 
with its decreased utility potentially also lost revenue. 
The effect of sensitivity levels of customer profiles is 
explored in Table 4 and Table 5. Here, the most striking 
finding is when a customer sacrifices his/her desire for quality, 
prices are falling. On the other hand, if all customers are 
becoming more sensitive to the quality, prices are increasing. 
Final finding is that the revenues of the service providers are 
increasing when all customers demand for a higher 
experienced level of quality and also accept paying more 
money. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Intelligent transportation systems with their expected 
benefits will shape the future traffic flow and contribute to 
sustainability of the communities and will be a potential life 
saver in cases of accident prevention. The proposed 
methodology in this paper aims to approach the intelligent 
transportation 
system 
from 
the 
service 
providers’ 
perspective. As the system requires high amount of 
investment, pricing mechanisms that will contribute to the 
utilities of service providers and also manage the quality 
levels experienced by the system’s customers are of great 
importance. Simple usage-based pricing mechanisms will be 
potentially infective under these circumstances. Pricing 
models related to time, related to demand or related to 
sensitivity/loyalty have the ability to respond to ever 
increasing awareness of customers of prices and quality 
levels in the marketplace. 
However, setting the right price for different consumer 
profiles requires that the market properties are well captured. 
Especially, in order to know the customers, all necessary data 
about their buying habits, their sensitivity on certain factors 
and what they seek in the market should be explored 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

meticulously. This process requires extensive data mining, 
which should produce the data needed to create efficient 
algorithms for pricing and setting the correct levels of quality. 
Future work could explore more realistic scenarios where 
prices of services are accepted with different possibility 
levels by different customer profiles, which should reveal the 
dynamic structure of pricing mechanism better. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been financially supported by 
Galatasaray University Research Fund, with the project 
number 15.402.005. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M.E. Porter, and J. E. Heppelmann, “How Smart, Connected Products 
Are 
Transforming 
Competition”, 
Harvard 
Business 
Review, 
November Issue, pp. 1-23, 2014. 
[2] 
L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A 
Survey”, Computer Networks, Vol. 54, pp. 2787-2805, 2010. 
[3] 
J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, “Internet of 
Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, future directions”, 
Future Generation Computer Systems, Vol. 29, pp. 1645-1660, 2013. 
[4] 
J. A. G. Ibáñez, S. Zeadally, and J. C. Castillo, “Integration Challenges 
of Intelligent Transportation Systems with Connected Vehicle, Cloud 
Computing, and Internet of Things Technologies”, IEEE Wireless 
Communications, December, pp. 122-128, 2015. 
[5] 
D. T. Hoang, and D. Niyato, “Information Service Pricing Competition 
in Internet-of-Vehicle (IoV)”, International Conference on Computing, 
Networking and Communications (ICNC), pp. 1-5, 2016. 
[6] 
S. Sen, C. J. Wong, S. Ha, and M. Chiang, “Smart Data Pricing: Using 
Economics to Manage Network Congestion”, Communications of the 
ACM, December, Vol. 58(12), pp. 86-93, 2015. 
[7] 
D. Niyato et al., “Smart Data Pricing Models for the Internet of Things: 
A Bundling Strategy Approach”, IEEE Network, March/April, pp. 18-
25, 2016. 
[8] 
K. S. Moorthy, “Using Game Theory to Model Competition”, Journal 
of Marketing Research, 22(3), pp. 262-282, 1985. 
[9] 
L. Theodore, and B. V. Turocy, “Game Theory”, CDAM Research 
Report LSE-CDAM, London: London School of Economics, 2001. 
[10] M. J. Osborne, “An Introduction to Game Theory”, Oxford University 
Press, 2002. 
[11] G. Işıklar Alptekin, and A. Bener, “An efficient spectrum management 
mechanism for cognitive radio networks”, IFIP/IEEE International 
Symposium on Integrated Network Management, pp. 653-660, 2009. 
[12] G. Işıklar Alptekin, and A. Bener, “Spectrum Trading in Cognitive 
Radio Networks with Strict Transmission Power Control”, European 
Transactions on Telecommunications, pp. 282-295, 2011. 
[13] B. Demirci, and S. E. Alptekin, “Revenue Management in E-
Commerce: A Case Study”, International MultiConference of 
Engineers and Computer Scientists, Vol II., pp 1-6, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

