Cloud Applications Versus Web Applications:  A Differential Study 
 
Alargam Elrayah Elsanhouri, Mahmoud Ali Ahmed 
Department of Computer Science 
Faculty of Mathematical Sciences 
University of Khartoum 
Khartoum, Sudan 
Alargam@uofk.edu , Mali@uofk.edu 
 
Abdul Hanan Abdullah  
Department of Computer Systems and Communication 
Faculty of Computer Science and Information System 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
Johor, Malaysia 
hanan@utm.my 
 
 
Abstract-Cloud computing revolution started reshaping the 
entire ICT industry and adding new concepts; cloud 
application is one of these new concepts. This paper aims at 
differentiating 
between 
cloud 
applications 
and 
web 
applications and to position on the question “what are the 
differences between cloud applications and web applications?” 
The paper gives an overview of cloud applications and web 
applications and discusses differences between both of them. 
The paper emphasizes that although there are overlapped 
between cloud applications definitions and web applications 
definitions; there are also many differences in their 
characteristics. This work aims to promote the new services 
that cloud computing is providing nowadays due to its ability 
to offer many new characteristics through its cloud 
applications services. 
Keywords-cloud 
computing; 
cloud 
applications; 
web 
applications. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The terms "Cloud Applications" and "Web Applications” 
are being used almost interchangeably, but there are real 
fundamental differences between the cloud applications 
which are cloud solutions and the web applications which are 
hosted solutions. 
Cloud applications are developed and designed to be 
hosted by software as a service (SaaS), which is one of a 
cloud computing service delivery models. 
 So, what are cloud applications? What are Web 
Applications? How do they differ from each other? What are 
the general challenges and issues for both of them? 
In answering these questions, this paper will explore the 
key 
concepts 
and 
characteristics 
surrounding 
cloud 
applications and web applications and will be focusing at 
differences between them.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
shows related work. Section III discusses cloud computing 
definition and its five essential characteristics. Section IV 
describes cloud computing service models. Section V 
focuses on the software as a service model (SaaS). Section 
VI presents cloud applications and its characteristics. Section 
VII presents web applications and its characteristics. Section 
VIII analyses the differences between cloud applications and 
web applications. Finally, Section IX is the conclusion from 
the finding. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are many technical challenges involved in 
applications development. One of them is multi-tenancy, 
which allows a single instance of software to serve multiple 
organizations by accommodating their unique requirements 
through configuration at the same time [1]. 
Xuesong et al. [2] analyzed the similarities and 
differences between multi-tenancy and isolated tenancy 
applications and showed that both of them share several 
features in common. They are both spanning several layers 
from bottom to top: database, data access, business logic and 
web user interface. But, Multi-tenancy applications 
distinguish itself from isolated tenancy applications by their 
service pattern. The differences of their service patterns 
result in the differences of their technical implementations: 
 
The data model in isolated tenancy applications is 
designed for describing the business requirement, 
while for multi-tenancy applications besides catering 
to business requirement, its data model should also 
be able to accommodate dozens of tenants and 
ensure data isolation among these tenants. 
 
Isolated tenancy applications conduct authentication 
and access control just for users in single tenant, 
while 
multi-tenancy 
applications 
should 
also 
safeguard against intrusion among tenants. So tenant 
authentication is indispensible in multi-tenancy 
applications. 
 
Multi-tenancy 
applications 
need 
a 
tenant 
management console for tenant management, which 
does not exist in isolated tenancy applications. 
The above mentioned publication discussed only the 
multi-tenancy and the isolated tenancy characteristics, and 
showed how these characteristics affect the applications 
development and design, and how these characteristics differ 
from each other, which is not enough to focus only in two 
characteristics. In this paper, we focus not only on the 
mentioned 
characteristics, 
but 
also 
on 
the 
other 
characteristics that make differences between cloud 
applications and Web applications. 
III. 
 CLOUD COMPUTING 
As mentioned in Section I, cloud applications are 
developed and designed to be hosted on one of the cloud 
computing service delivery models. This section presents an 
overview of cloud computing. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Figure 1.  Cloud Computing Service Model [7]. 
The overarching goal of cloud computing is to provide 
on-demand computing services with high reliability, 
scalability and availability in distributed environments [3]. 
Cisco Systems [3] described cloud computing as: “IT 
resources and services that are abstracted from the 
underlying infrastructure and provided “on-demand” and “at 
scale” in a multitenant environment.” Recently, the 
Information Technology Laboratory at the National Institute 
of Standards and Technology (NIST) [4] has posted a 
working definition of cloud computing: “Cloud Computing 
is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and 
services) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with 
minimal management effort or service provider interaction.” 
This definition includes five essential characteristics of 
cloud computing:  
 
On-demand 
self-service. 
A 
consumer 
can 
unilaterally provision computing capabilities, such as 
server time and network storage, as needed 
automatically without requiring human interaction 
with each service provider.  
 
Broad network access. Capabilities are available 
over the network and accessed through standard 
mechanisms that promote use by heterogeneous thin 
or thick client platforms (e.g., mobile phones, 
tablets, laptops, and workstations).  
 
Resource 
pooling. 
The 
provider’s 
computing 
resources are pooled to serve multiple consumers 
using a multi-tenant model, with different physical 
and virtual resources dynamically assigned and 
reassigned according to consumer demand. There is 
a sense of location independence in that the 
customer generally has no control or knowledge over 
the exact location of the provided resources but may 
be able to specify location at a higher level of 
abstraction (e.g., country, state, or datacenter). 
Examples of resources include storage, processing, 
memory, and network bandwidth.  
 
Rapid elasticity. Capabilities can be elastically 
provisioned 
and 
released, 
in 
some 
cases 
automatically, to scale rapidly outward and inward 
commensurate with demand. To the consumer, the 
capabilities available for provisioning often appear 
to be unlimited and can be appropriated in any 
quantity at any time.  
 
Measured service. Cloud systems automatically 
control and optimize resource use by leveraging a 
metering capability at some level of abstraction 
appropriate to the type of service (e.g., storage, 
processing, bandwidth, and active user accounts). 
Resource usage can be monitored, controlled, and 
reported, providing transparency for both the 
provider and consumer of the utilized service [5]. 
IV. 
CLOUD COMPUTING SERVICE MODELS 
One of the important characteristics of cloud computing 
is its ability to deliver information technology (IT) 
capabilities or resources as a services. As shown in Fig. 1, 
these services are broadly divided into three service models: 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service 
(IaaS), 
Platform-as-a-Service 
(PaaS) and Software-as-a-Service (SaaS). This models are 
not new but cloud computing integrate and combine these 
approaches together.  
1. Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): Products offered via 
this mode include the remote delivery (through the internet) 
of a full computer infrastructure (e.g., virtual computers, 
servers, storage devices, etc.); 
2. Platform as a Service (PaaS): To understand this cloud 
computing layer one needs to remember the traditional 
computing model where each application managed locally 
required hardware, an operating system, a database, 
middleware, web servers, and other software. One also needs 
to remember the team of network, database, and system 
management experts that are needed to keep everything up 
and running. With cloud computing, these services are now 
provided remotely by cloud providers under this layer; 
3. Software as a Service (SaaS): Under this layer, 
applications are delivered through the medium of the Internet 
as a service. Instead of installing and maintaining software, 
simply it can be accessed via the Internet, freeing the 
customer from complex software and hardware management. 
This type of cloud service offers a complete application 
functionality that ranges from productivity (e.g. office-type) 
applications to programs such as those for Customer 
Relationship Management (CRM) or enterprise-resource 
management [6].[7] 
V. 
SOFTWARE AS A SERVICE (SAAS) 
As mentioned before, cloud applications are hosted by 
SaaS, which is just one of the multiple kinds of services 
available through the cloud computing. These include 
Infrastructure as a Service, or IaaS (available through both 
Public 
and 
Hosted 
Private 
Communication 
Service 
Providers), Platform as a Service, or PaaS, Cloud-based 
Storage, and even Cloud Based Communications. 
The U.S. Information Technology Laboratory at the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
defines Software as a Service (SaaS) as [8]: The capability 
provided to the consumer is to use the provider’s 
applications running on a cloud infrastructure. The 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Figure 2.     SaaS Structure [8]. 
 
Figure 3.    An overview of a general multi-tenancy cloud architecture [10].
applications are accessible from various client devices 
through either a thin client interface, such as a web browser 
(e.g., web-based email), or a program interface. The 
consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud 
infrastructure including network, servers, operating systems, 
storage, or even individual application capabilities, with the 
possible exception of limited user-specific application 
configuration settings. 
SaaS is a web-based software deployment model that 
makes the software available entirely through a web browser 
as shown in Fig. 2. The users of SaaS software do not care 
where the software is hosted, what kind of operating system 
it uses, or whether it is written in PHP, Java, or .NET. And, 
Also, there is no need to install a single piece of software 
anywhere [9]. 
SaaS is basically a term that refers to application in the 
cloud. Although not all SaaS systems are cloud application, 
but most of them are. 
One of the essential attributes of SaaS model is multi-
tenancy, which is defined as an architecture in which a single 
instance of a software application serves multiple customers; 
each customer is called a tenant. Tenants may be given the 
ability to customize some parts of the application, such as 
color of the user interface (UI) or business rules, but they 
cannot customize the application's code. Multi-tenancy 
enables sharing of resources and costs across a large pool of 
users thus allowing for centralization of infrastructure in 
locations with lower costs and peak-load capacity increases 
and utilization and efficiency improvements for systems that 
are often only 10–20% utilized. 
VI. 
CLOUD APPLICATIONS 
Cloud applications are developed and hosted by the SaaS 
services providers, accessed by the user customers over the 
Internet. The SaaS services providers own the software and 
run it on computers in their data centers. The customers do 
not own the software, but effectively rent it; usually for a 
monthly fee. Cloud applications are sometimes also known 
as hosted software or by its more marketing-friendly cousin, 
“on-demand”. 
 The essence of cloud applications is that the customer 
does not buy the software, but pays for the service which it 
provides. The customer does not install software on the 
servers, but uses capacities of the developer, needing only to 
pay for the service, cloud server maintenance and 
consultation services. As a result the customer gets access to 
the necessary application on a cloud server of the developer 
which allows saving money and quickly introducing the 
software to the business. It is needless to say that as a result 
everyone wins: customers do not need to spend money on 
system administration, and suppliers, thanks to software 
installation on their cloud hosting, quickly provide the clients 
with the necessary service [9]. 
Mäkilä et al. [10] mentioned five characteristics which 
are associated with the cloud applications definitions: 
1) The application is used through a web browser. 
2) The application is not tailored made for each 
customer. 
3) The application does not include software that needs 
to be installed at the customer’s location. 
4) The application does not require special integration 
and installation work. 
5) The pricing of the application is based on actual 
usage of the software. 
Multi-tenancy is becoming a key technology for the 
success of cloud applications since clients reduce the cost of 
software use by sharing expenditures, whereas software 
vendors maximize sales profits. As shown in Fig. 3, multi-
tenancy Architectures (MTA) allows multiple customers 
(tenants) to be aggregated into the same application. Tenants 
share not only application, but also capital and operational 
expenses. Moreover, tenants are also able to customize their 
applications both in endpoint presentation and data structure 
according to their particular needs but they cannot customize 
the application's code [11]. 
VII. WEB APPLICATIONS 
A web application is an application that is invoked with a 
web browser over the Internet. Ever since 1994, when the 
internet became available to the public, and especially in 
1995, when the world wide web put a usable face on the 
Internet, the internet has become a platform of choice for a 
large number of ever-more sophisticated and innovative web 
applications. In just one decade, the web has evolved from 
being a repository of pages used primarily for accessing 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
Figure 4.     Web application Model. 
static, mostly scientific, information to a powerful platform 
for application development and deployment; see Fig. 4. 
New web technologies, languages, and methodologies 
make it possible to create dynamic applications that 
representing a new model of cooperation and collaboration 
among 
large 
numbers 
of 
users. 
Web 
applications 
development has been quick to adopt software engineering 
techniques 
of 
component 
orientation 
and 
standard 
components [12]. 
Also, web applications can be defined as applications that 
are accessed over a network such as the internet or an 
intranet. The term also mean a computer software application 
that is coded in a browser-supported language (such as 
JavaScript, combined with a browser-rendered markup 
language like HTML) and reliant on a common web browser 
to render the application executable.  
It is utilizing web browser technologies to accomplish 
one or more tasks over a network, typically through a web 
browser. 
Web applications are popular due to the ubiquity of web 
browsers, and the convenience of using a web browser as a 
client, sometimes called a thin client. The ability to update 
and maintain web applications without distributing and 
installing software on potentially thousands of client 
computers is a key reason for their popularity, as is the 
inherent support for cross-platform compatibility. Common 
web applications include webmail, online retail sales, online 
auctions, wikis and many other functions [13]. 
Web applications software and database reside on a 
central server rather than being installed on the desktop 
system and is accessed over a network. 
The benefits of a web applications start with relieving the 
developer of the responsibility of building a client for a 
specific type of computer or a specific operating system. 
Since the client runs in a web browser, the user could be 
using an IBM-compatible or a Mac or mobile device. They 
can be running Windows XP or Windows Vista. They can 
even be using Internet Explorer or Firefox, though some 
applications require a specific web browser. 
Web applications commonly use a combination of 
server-side script (ASP, PHP, etc.) and client-side script 
(HTML, Javascript, etc.) to develop the applications. The 
client-side script deals with the presentation of the 
information while the server-side script deals with all the 
hard stuff like storing and retrieving the information [12]. 
VIII. THE DIFFERENCES 
A cloud application has an architecture that has the data 
and the majority of the compute cycles happening in a data 
center somewhere; all the components of a cloud application 
are supported by a sophisticated back-end that ensures 
uptime, security and integration with other systems and 
supports as many access methods as necessary [14], while a 
web application is an application program that is stored on a 
remote server and delivered over the Internet or an intranet 
through a browser interface. 
The following major characteristics play a primary role 
in the success of the cloud applications, but they are not 
available in the web applications: inherently scalable and 
very high uptime. 
 
Inherently Scalable is an absolute requirement for 
cloud applications. The cloud applications are 
written in such a way that it takes full advantage of 
the underlying platform to be scalable; it must not 
have limits on number of users or workloads. On the 
other hand the web applications are generally written 
for a given platform and are limited by the 
scalability. 
 
Very high Uptime is also extremely important for 
the cloud applications. With a mirrored installations 
in multiple locations the cloud applications are been 
deployed, so that the applications are always 
available (~100% uptime). This high availability 
architecture calls for hardware redundancy, data 
mirroring and rapid data synchronization. On the 
other hand the web applications installed in one 
location and limited by the availability (uptime). 
Most of the web applications - online banking, e-
ticketing, flight status checking etc. are really web 
applications and are limited by scalability and availability. 
The cloud applications is essentially a platforms that 
provide a particular services while the web applications are 
essentially services that can be accessed over the internet 
from anywhere on any device. 
The cloud applications can be installed on a public cloud 
or a private cloud and accessed there; conversely, the web 
applications can be installed on Internet or intranet and 
accessed there. 
Although web applications share some of the same 
characteristics of cloud applications, they are located 
elsewhere and are accessible from almost anywhere. Web 
applications may help in accessing cloud services, but this 
does not mean they are the same as shown in Table 1. They 
can be standalone things, too, like applications that allow 
converting bitmaps to vectors, add drop shadows to images 
or find out who's stopped following you on Twitter. 
Box [15], Dropbox [16], ShareFile [17] and Sugar Sync 
[18] are almost universally considered cloud apps and, while 
they have a web interface, they are in no way web 
applications. They run on back-end systems designed to 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

TABLE I.  
COMPARISON BETWEEN CLOUD APPS AND WEB APPS 
Cloud Application 
Web Application 
1 
The application is accessed 
through the internet or other 
computer network 
The application is accessed 
through the internet or other 
computer network 
2 
All cloud applications are 
web applications 
Not all web applications are 
cloud applications. 
3 
Majority of the compute 
cycles happening in a data 
center somewhere 
Located elsewhere and are 
accessible from almost 
anywhere 
4 
Inherently Scalable 
Limited by scalability 
5 
Very high Uptime 
Limited by availability 
6 
User Data & Business 
Process store in a multiple 
replicated data centers 
User Data & Business Process 
store in single data center 
7 
Can run on the users' 
computing systems or the 
provider's web servers. 
Only run on the provider's web 
servers. 
8 
The provided application is 
standardized for all 
customers 
Each customer uses its own 
instance of the application. 
9 
Multi-tenancy solution. 
Isolated -tenancy solution. 
 
scale and support many users with different requirements. A 
web interface is just another way to use these services. 
Email is also a cloud application. In fact, it was a cloud 
application back when it was called E-Mail, even though we 
did not know it. We use Outlook, Mail.app and other mail 
applications that allow us to access our email stored in Gmail 
(widely considered a cloud application), Exchange (almost 
never considered one), Zimbra (if work for VMware) and all 
the other back ends out there.  
Let us consider SalesForce.com;  it is accessed primarily 
over the web, like many other solutions that could be 
considered web applications, but if the access method is what 
determines the classification of the application, then you 
cannot ignore the mobile applications designed to make it 
easier to use SalesForce or an expense tracking and travel 
system like Concur [19] (which owns TripIt). 
In both cloud applications and web applications, the 
application is accessed through the Internet or other 
computer network and the vendor charges service fees [10]. 
One of the differences is that in cloud applications the 
provided applications are standardized for all customers, 
whereas in web applications each customer uses his own 
instance of the application. 
The main difference between cloud applications and web 
applications is the multi-tenancy. Without the multi-tenancy 
the solution cannot get the cost efficiencies of true cloud 
computing, and truly cost effective elasticity and reliability. 
Web applications could provide elasticity and reliability in a 
hosted environment, but in practice this is often not truly 
provided as the costs are too great without multi-tenancy. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
Although the cloud applications definition is overlapping 
with many web applications concepts, this paper discussed 
the major features of cloud applications that make them 
different from web applications. The locations where we can 
store the "user data" and the "business process" is one of the 
key factors for differentiate between cloud application and 
web application. Scalability is the key enabler technology of 
clouds, as it is the basis for cloud application features. 
Availability is also an important property of cloud 
applications. Also, the security enhancements for sensitive 
data which have been added to cloud environments make the 
cloud applications different from the web applications.  
The simple rule is that if a solution is not multi-tenant, it 
is not a cloud application and it will not give all the benefits 
that flow from being true cloud application. 
Cloud computing has the potential to transform the way 
information technology (IT) departments relate to, and even 
think about their role as providers of computing services to 
the rest of the enterprise. The emergence of cloud computing 
as an effective software delivery mechanism creates an 
opportunity for IT departments to change their focus from 
deploying and supporting applications to managing the 
services that those applications provide. Successful cloud 
applications providers produce more value for the business 
by providing services that draw from both internal and 
external sources and align closely with business goals. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Aghera, S. Chaudhary, and V. Kumar, "An Approach to Build 
Multi-tenant SaaS Application with Monitoring and SLA," ed, 2012, 
pp. 658-661. 
[2] 
Z. Xuesong, S. Beijun, T. Xucheng, and C. Wei, "From isolated 
tenancy hosted application to multi-tenancy: Toward a systematic 
migration method for web application," ed, 2010, pp. 209-212. 
[3] 
B. Rimal, A. Jukan, D. Katsaros, and Y. Goeleven, "Architectural 
Requirements for Cloud Computing Systems: An Enterprise Cloud 
Approach," Journal of Grid Computing, vol. 9, pp. 3-26, 2011. 
[4] 
H. Takabi, J. B. D. Joshi, and G. Ahn, "Security and Privacy 
Challenges in Cloud Computing Environments," Security & Privacy, 
IEEE, vol. 8, pp. 24-31, 2010. 
[5] 
NIST, "The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing," NIST,  
September 2011. 
[6] 
N. Sultan, "Cloud computing for education: A new dawn?," 
International Journal of Information Management, vol. 30, pp. 109-
116, 2010. 
[7] 
K. Stanoevska-Slabeva and T. Wozniak, "Cloud Basics – An 
Introduction to Cloud Computing," in Grid and Cloud Computing: A 
Business 
Perspective 
on 
Technology 
and 
Applications, 
K. 
Stanoevska-Slabeva, T. Wozniak, and S. Ristol, Eds., ed: Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 47-61. 
[8] 
C. Rong, S. T. Nguyen, and M. G. Jaatun, "Beyond lightning: A 
survey on security challenges in cloud computing," Computers & 
Electrical 
Engineering, 
2012,  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng, in press. 
[9] 
G. Kulkarni, J. Gambhir, and R. Palwe, "Cloud Computing-Software 
as Service," International Journal of Computer Trends and 
Technology, vol. 2, pp. 178-182, 2011 2011. 
[10] T. Mäkilä, A. Järvi, M. Rönkkö, and J. Nissilä, "How to Define 
Software-as-a-Service – An Empirical Study of Finnish SaaS 
Providers Software Business." vol. 51, P. Tyrväinen, S. Jansen, M. A. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Cusumano, W. Aalst, J. Mylopoulos, M. Rosemann, M. J. Shaw, and 
C. Szyperski, Eds., ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 115-
124. 
[11] A. Rico Ortega, M. Noguera, J. L. Garrido, K. Benghazi, and L. 
Chung, "Multi-Tenancy Multi-Target (MT2): A SaaS Architecture for 
the Cloud Advanced Information Systems Engineering Workshops." 
vol. 112, M. Bajec, J. Eder, W. Aalst, J. Mylopoulos, M. Rosemann, 
M. J. Shaw, and C. Szyperski, Eds., ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2012, pp. 214-227. 
[12] M. Jazayeri, "Some Trends in Web Application Development," in 
Future of Software Engineering, 2007. FOSE '07, 2007, pp. 199-213. 
[13] Wikipedia. (2012, 20 - 6 - 2012). Web application. Available: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Web_application 
[14] G. Knuth. (2012, 20 - 6). Cloud app vs. Web app -- what's the 
difference? 
Available: 
http://searchvirtualdesktop.techtarget.com/tip/Cloud-app-vs-Web-
app-whats-the-difference 
[15] Box. (2012, 1 Oct). Business Without Boundaries. Available: 
https://www.box.com/ 
[16] Dropbox. 
(2012, 
1 
Oct). 
Dropbox 
Available: 
https://www.dropbox.com/ 
[17] ShareFile. (2012, 1 Oct). Securely transfer files. Available: 
http://www.sharefile.com 
[18] SugarSync. (2012, 1 Oct). Access all your data.Anytime. Anywhere. 
Available: http://www.sugarsync.com 
[19] Concur. (2012, 1 Oct ). Integrated Travel and Expense. Available: 
http://www.concur.com 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

