An Implementation of MAC Protocol for Underwater Cellular Networks 
Junho Cho, Hee-won Kim and Ho-Shin Cho 
School of Electronics Engineering, Kyungpook National University 
Daegu, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {jh_cho, hwkim, hscho}@ee.knu.ac.kr 
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a communication system 
that implements a Medium Access Control (MAC) protocol for 
underwater acoustic cellular networks. To evaluate the 
network’s performance between the underwater base station 
controller (UBSC) and the underwater base stations (UBS), we 
implemented a protocol stack on the commercial ARM Linux 
based hardware platform. We implemented the physical layer 
interface considering underwater channel characteristics and 
designed underwater MAC protocol on the data link layer. By 
testing the implemented system, we can evaluate the network 
performance and eventually can optimize the protocol 
performance.
Keywords- Medium Access Control Protocol; Underwater 
Networks; Underwater Acoustic Communication. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
For reliable underwater communications, acoustic waves 
are preferred over Radio Frequency (RF) waves owing to the 
extensive attenuation and fading losses experienced by the 
RF waves imposed by the unique underwater channel 
characteristics [1]. However, underwater acoustic channel is 
limited in operational bandwidth, higher Bit Error Rate 
(BER), and introduce a relatively large propagation delay 
compared to terrestrial RF channel [2]. Therefore, to achieve 
better performance in underwater acoustic network, it is 
pertinent to consider the underwater channel characteristics 
in the design of an efficient underwater Medium Access 
Control (MAC) protocol [3].  
In this paper, we present a commercial-platform based 
communication system to implement an underwater MAC 
protocol designed for underwater acoustic cellular networks. 
II.
PROTOCOL DESIGN
We consider an underwater cellular network which 
consists of an underwater base station controller (UBSC) and 
underwater base stations (UBS). Figure 1 shows the network 
architecture. The UBSC is deployed on the surface of the 
ocean while the UBSs are deployed underwater. UBSC 
registers and controls the UBSs and thus, each UBS is 
connected through acoustic wireless links to the UBSC. That 
is, the network has a UBSC centric cellular network 
configuration.  
The proposed MAC protocol comprises of the three 
phases— network initialization, parameter setting, and data-
transfer.  In the network initialization phase, UBSC discovers 
the UBSs and estimates the distance by exchanging control  
Figure 1.  Underwater cellular network architecture. 
messages. This is followed by the parameter setting phase 
where the UBSC, based on UBS information and following 
data transfer mode, allocates the suitable up/down link 
frequency channels for each UBSs and forwards system 
parameters that are used to specify the communication 
between UBSC and UBS.  
On the completion of the parameter setting phase, the 
data-transfer phase begins immediately. Data-transfer phase 
consists of three modes: mode 1, 2, and 3, depending on call 
procedure. Data-transfer mode 1 uses a 4-way handshaking 
method to start the uplink or downlink session and delivering 
data frames. In this mode, if there are no uplink and 
downlink sessions for a period of time, the UBSC orders 
UBS to enter the sleep mode in order to save energy 
consumption. UBS which enters the sleep mode, cannot 
receive or transmit any frames during that time duration. 
Data-transfer mode 2 operates similar to mode 1, however 
there is no procedure for sleep mode setting. Thus, all the 
UBS remain in the active mode, allowing them to deliver the 
data immediately. Data-transfer mode 3 creates an ad-hoc 
communication between the UBSC and an underwater 
mobile node (e.g., diver, Autonomous underwater vehicle). 
In this mode, the UBSC and the mobile node transmit the 
data frames continuously and simultaneously through the 
uplink and downlink channel after call setup procedure. 
III.
PROTOCOL IMPLEMENTATION 
To evaluate the performance and verify the operation of 
underwater MAC protocol, we implemented the protocol on 
the commercial platform. Xilinx Zynq 7000 series DSP 
board based on ARM Linux system was used as the 
hardware platform. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Figure 2. Architecture of the system 
Figure 2 shows the architecture of the system. We 
implemented the protocol stack, which consists of physical 
and data link layer, on the Linux operating system. As a 
physical layer, a modified wired interface was used to 
replicate the underwater acoustic channel characteristics. To 
apply the realistic underwater channel such as available 
bandwidth and propagation delay depending on internodal 
distance, we modified the frame transmission time and the 
propagation delay by using a delay function. This physical 
layer interface is designed to be replaced by OFDM based 
underwater acoustic modem, which will be our final version 
of the implementation.  
As a data link layer, we implemented the proposed MAC 
protocol mentioned in section 2. Data link layer operates on 
one downlink and multiple independent uplink channels. 
Each channel is separated in the frequency domain; hence, 
there are no inter channel interference or collision and it 
supports full duplex communication.  
A node plays a role as one of UBSC, UBS, or mobile 
node according to user’s input parameters that include node 
type, unique node ID and underwater channel specification. 
As a data traffic for testing, we used an image on both up- 
and downlinks.  And, as a way of diagnosing the procedure, 
we made every event happening during the call procedure 
displayed on the monitor.  In addition, for the purpose of 
further examination later, all events along with timing 
information are logged.  
IV.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
System parameters used for performance evaluation are 
listed in Table I. We tested communication scenario between 
UBSC and mobile node which sends 51.4kb size image data 
to each other by using data transfer mode 3. Considering 
underwater acoustic OFDM PHY frame, transmission time 
of control and data frames are set to 7s. 
Figure 3 shows the call procedure diagram and event 
time figured out based on the event log. By analyzing the 
event log, we can verify that it takes 30s for network 
initialization and parameter setting. In data transfer phase, it 
takes 287s for the call setup procedures, 102.8kb data 
transfer and call terminates. 
TABLE I. 
SYSTEM PARAMETERS
Parameter 
Value 
Iinternodal distance
1km 
Propagation speed 
1500m/s 
Data rate 
214.29bps 
Payload size 
1500bits 
ERP
UBSC
UBS
ERQ
SPC
SPCC
CS
CSC
DATA
DATA
DATA
DATA
. . .
CT
CTC
04:22:22
04:22:29
04:22:37
04:22:43
04:27:55
04:27:02
04:22:30
04:22:36
04:21:52
04:21:59
04:22:07
04:22:15
Data 
transfer
(Mode 3)
Network 
initialization
Parameter
setting
Figure 3. Protocol procedure of data-transfer mode 3 
Thus, total network throughput is 358.2bps. 
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a commercial platform based 
communication system to implement an underwater MAC 
protocol designed for underwater acoustic cellular networks. 
By using the proposed system, we evaluated the network’s 
performance, such as throughput or latency, which can be 
used to improve or optimize the protocol performance. 
For further work, we will verify the designed protocol 
operation and measure the network performances in real 
underwater environment by using an underwater OFDM 
based modem physical layer interface. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was a part of the project titled 
“Development of Distributed Underwater Monitoring & 
Control Networks,” funded by the Ministry of Oceans and 
Fisheries, Korea. 
REFERENCES
[1]
I. F. Akyildiz, P. Dario, and M. Tommaso, “Underwater acoustic 
sensor networks: research challenges.” Proc. Ad Hoc Networks, 
Elsevier, May 2005, pp. 257-279, doi: 10.1016/j.adhoc.2005.01.004. 
[2]
M. Stojanovic and J. Preisig, “Underwater Acoustic Communication 
Channels: Propagation Models and Statistical Characterization,” 
IEEE 
Commun 
Mag., 
vol. 
47, 
pp. 
84-89, 
Jan. 
2009, 
doi:10.1109/MCOM.2009.4752682.  
[3]
X. Lurton, An Introduction to Underwater Acoustics: Principles and 
Applications. London, UK; Springer Science & Business Media, 
200 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

