Transition From IPv4 To IPv6: A Method for Large Enterprise Networks 
Nguyen Phu Minh Nguyen, Nguyen Quynh Anh, Torsti Rantapuska, Jari Utriainen, Marianne Matilainen 
Lahti University of Applied Sciences 
Lahti, Finland 
Emails: {mnguyentc@gmail.com, quynhanh89@gmail.com, torsti.rantapuska@lamk.fi, Jari.Utriainen@lamk.fi, 
Marianne.Matilainen@lamk.fi}
Abstract - This study analyzes experiences of several large 
enterprises that had deployed IPv6 addresses. Key factors on 
the success and failure of IPv6 addresses deployment were 
synthesized from findings from those enterprises. This 
research utilizes qualitative method, both inductive and 
deductive reasoning along with design science approach. Seven 
guidelines of design science method are followed strictly for 
better end results. Open-ended interviews will be data 
collection methods of the study. Documents, such as articles, 
books, and websites also provide lots of information. Content 
analysis helps the authors to look directly into context of 
documents to find the core meaning. The content of this study 
was examined on two scales: technical side and managerial 
side. Findings upon data collected reveal several significant 
factors, which affect IPv6 addresses implementation project. 
Hence, a solution, the most applicable transition method was 
concluded. This method was then tested on a virtual 
environment simulating a large network model. It was proven 
to be working. 
Keywords-Internet protocol; IP, IPv4; transition; 
transition method; IPv6; large enterprise; network; IPv6 
readiness. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
On 8 June 2011, over 1000 top websites in the world 
took part in an event called “World IPv6 Day”. As IPv4 
addresses are running out, the need for changing to IP next 
generation, IPv6, is obvious. This study aims at finding the 
best method of transition from IPv4 addresses to IPv6 
addresses for large enterprise networks. 
Since the birth of Internet in 1960s [5], it has completely 
changed the way of communications forever. With its 
capabilities, the Internet has already become a world-wide 
broadcasting capability, a mechanism for information 
dissemination, and a medium for collaboration and 
interaction between individuals and their computers 
regardless of geographic location [20]. However, despite the 
uncountable Internet's phenomenal impact on business and 
its reach across all sectors, there is still no model which 
valuing companies' Internet efforts correctly [1]. Besides, 
according to its nature in the structure of Internet, the TCP/IP 
has also played an important role in the global expansion of 
communications. As a result, the more users join the Internet, 
the better it would be to spread knowledge in every field 
around the world. However, this is also the problem as the IP 
address is not unlimited and the Internet community is 
witnessing the exhaust of IPv4 addresses not year by year 
but day by day, which calls for a proper solution. The first 
group of Internet users that would be affected is Internet 
Service Providers (ISPs), large enterprises, companies, etc. 
The reason is that they hold the most number of IPv4 for 
operation and management and before the IPv4 runs out, 
they will need an appropriate act to handle the exhaustion, 
and otherwise, the collapse of the worldwide Internet is 
foreseeable [17]. 
This study is conducted to answer the question, which is 
the best method for large enterprise networks to transit from 
IPv4 addresses to IPv6 addresses? Currently, there have been 
many papers, documents, or reports about IPv4 addresses 
exhaustion; the invention of IPv6 addresses and the way 
administrators can apply IPv6 addresses to existing 
networks, known as transition. However, there are still very 
few documents for applying the transition from IPv4 
addresses to IPv6 addresses in large enterprise networks with 
many different geographical branches around the world. 
Therefore, with this paper, we would like to give our 
suggestion on a solution for a complete implementation of 
IPv6 addresses into large enterprise networks with no 
influence on its current operation. Furthermore, this paper 
does not only focus on the technical aspects, but also the 
management side. It would provide an insight into the 
importance of IPv6 address transition, as well as a careful 
analysis on its influence to the enterprise network and its 
operation. For all the information above, this research could 
be used as a source of reference for network administrators, 
board of directors, information executives, or students and 
network researchers who have an interest in the network 
communication and would like to join the community of 
IPv6.  
Therefore, we will have two main parts: the theoretical 
and the practical. For the first part, we would propose the 
research question, our approaches with the qualitative 
method, and also the data collection. In addition, we would 
give an introduction about computer network, Internet 
protocol, especially all the main features of IPv4 addresses 
and IPv6 addresses to indicate the differences between them. 
For the second part, we would like to apply the Design-
Science 
method 
to 
analyze 
the 
current 
network 
infrastructure, IPv6 readiness in large enterprises to 
acknowledge the reasons and willingness for changing to 
IPv6 addresses. Moreover, this method is also deployed in 
the IPv6 address implementation for its effectiveness and 
risks. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
This section provides the research question and research 
methodology of our study. Research approach will be 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

presented in detail so that readers will comprehend our 
research model. 
A. Question and Objectives 
The most important and also initial step of a research is to 
define the research question. Based on the nature of that 
question, proper methods will be applied to find the 
expected answers. The research question of this paper is: 
“Transition from IPv4 to IPv6: What is the best method for 
large enterprise networks?” 
 
These following actions are taken to find the answers: 
• 
Conducting a thorough literature review 
• 
Interviewing some specific large companies which 
have deployed IPv6 addresses 
• 
Analyzing their experiences and attitudes towards 
IPv6 address deployment 
• 
Analyzing and comparing some transition methods 
to find the best one (inductive) 
• 
Building a network model and testing the method 
• 
Concluding the result from data and theory 
(deductive) 
The results from above actions are main objectives of this 
paper, which include: 
• 
Acquiring thorough understanding about IP as well 
as definitions, ideas, and arguments IPv6 addresses 
transition methods. 
• 
Getting better understanding of IPv6 addresses 
deployment in real life project and experiences 
from companies who had deployed IPv6 addresses. 
• 
Proposing the best method for transitions from 
IPv6 addresses to IPv4 addresses for large 
enterprise networks. 
The type of this study’s research question is “solution” 
which means to find a way to solve a problem. Therefore, the 
purpose of this paper is to define and test the most applicable 
method for large enterprise networks to transit their current 
IPv4 network to IPv6. 
B. Research approach and Strategy: Design Science 
Design science, as the other side of the IS research cycle, 
creates and evaluates IT artifacts intended to solve identified 
organizational problems. Such artifacts are represented in a 
structured form that may vary from software, formal logic 
and rigorous mathematics to informal natural language 
descriptions [10]. Those artifacts are broadly defined as 
constructs, models, methods, and instantiations to meet with 
the business strategy, information technology strategy, 
organizational 
infrastructure 
and 
information 
system 
infrastructure, which is presented in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Organizational design and information systems design activities 
[14] 
Therefore, the reason for using design science method is 
that it is a problem solving process.  The fundamental 
principle of design-science research combines seven 
guidelines whose knowledge and understanding of a design 
problem and its solution are acquired in the building and 
application of an artifact.  That is, design-science research 
requires the creation of an innovative, purposeful artifact 
(Guideline 1) for a specified problem domain (Guideline 2).  
Because the artifact is "purposeful," it must yield utility for 
the specified problem.  Hence, thorough evaluation of the 
artifact is crucial (Guideline 3).  Novelty is similarly crucial 
since the artifact must be "innovative," solving a heretofore-
unsolved problem or solving a known problem in a more 
effective or efficient manner (Guideline 4).  In this way, 
design-science research is differentiated from the practice of 
design.  The artifact itself must be rigorously defined, 
formally represented, coherent, and internally consistent 
(Guideline 5).  The process by which it is created, and often 
the artifact itself, incorporates or enables a search process 
whereby a problem space is constructed and a mechanism 
posed or enacted to find an effective solution (Guideline 6).  
Finally, the results of the design-science research must be 
communicated effectively (Guideline 7) both to a technical 
audience (researchers who will extend them and practitioners 
who will implement them) and to a managerial audience 
(researchers who will study them in context and practitioners 
who will decide if they should be implemented within their 
organizations) [10]. 
C. Research Method 
Quantitative methods are often used to process random 
sampling data into numbers and statistics [21]. Quantitative 
research concerns with testing hypotheses, considers cause 
and effect, and calculates the size of a phenomenon of 
interest [19]. The end-results are usually statistical report 
including 
both 
descriptive 
and 
inferential 
statistics. 
Descriptive method summarizes and presents data in an 
informative way while inferential method generalizes about a 
population based on a sample. As such nature of quantitative 
method, data collection often includes closed-ended 
questionnaire, surveys that classify various experiences into 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

categories, recording numerical data through observing 
events etc… [42]. 
On the other hand, the purpose of qualitative method is to 
understand and interpret processes underneath an observed 
event and evaluate people’s perception involved in the event 
[18]. It concerns people, objects, words, images not numbers 
and statistics. In qualitative research, personal feelings and 
experiences are analyzed. Qualitative research is often used 
to construct a new theory from the data collected. For that 
reason, qualitative data collection methods are interviews 
with open-ended questions, observation, and document 
review [42]. This paper aims at studying current network 
conditions of some large enterprises as well as their attitudes 
toward the transition from IPv4 addresses to IPv6 addresses. 
Thus, qualitative research method is applied to this paper. As 
observation was unable to be carried out, interviews and 
document reviews were done as data collection method in 
this paper. 
D. Scope and Limitation 
The scope of this research mainly discusses the most 
applicable transition method from IPv4 addresses to IPv6 
addresses 
for 
enterprises 
with 
large 
network. 
The 
presentation of the method includes literature review, 
advantages, and configurations as well as simplified models 
of the method. As this research aims at large networks, large 
enterprises with big network traffic may find it more useful 
than small and medium sized network. There are some 
transition procedures that may not be suitable for small and 
medium sized networks due to their complexity. Therefore, 
this paper is most applicable and limited to large networks. 
E. Validity and Reliability 
Presently, there are various definitions of validity and 
reliability in qualitative research method from perspectives 
of 
many 
different 
researchers. 
In 
this 
paper, 
the 
understanding of validity and reliability will be considered 
and measured by the idea of trustworthiness to establish 
confidence in the findings. Moreover, Johnson [19] stated 
that reliability and validity can also be understood as 
“defensible” [11]. Multiple perspectives from various 
sources should be compared and tested before the conclusion 
to strengthen the results and enhance “trustworthiness” [11]. 
This study relies on a variety of sources, which are from 
technical papers of leading telecommunication companies. 
Conclusion is drawn in reference to those data. All the 
chosen enterprises had carried out IPv6 address deployment 
with large networks which fall into class B to class A based 
on IP classes. All the interviewees are people who were in 
charge of or involved in IPv6 addresses deployment in their 
companies. All data sources are listed in reference and can 
be verified. Data collected will be analyzed by proper 
methods in the right procedures so that the study remains 
stability, reproducibility and accuracy. It means that data can 
be analyzed and classified in the same way over a period of 
time [29]. 
III. 
EVALUATION OF CURRENT TRANSITION 
METHODS 
The transition from IPv4 addresses to IPv6 addresses is 
not a one-day step and involves a lot of changes in network 
structures with the use of IP addresses. For the future success 
of IPv6 addresses, the next step in deploying IPv6 addresses 
is to vote for the most suitable transition methods and their 
management. Although many kinds of transition mechanisms 
have been invented to help with the process such as NAT64, 
Stateless IP/ICMP translation, NAT-PT, 6over4, and Teredo, 
the implementation of IPv6 addresses is never said to be easy 
and simple, even for experienced administrators. As a result, 
the most difficult problem to make decisions for is which 
method will be chosen for the implementation process to 
achieve a smooth and seamless [31]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Different transition technologies [38] 
According to Figure 2, there are different kinds of 
technologies which can be applied such as dual stack, 
tunneling mechanisms, and translation techniques. Firstly, 
dual stack means to support IPv4 addresses and IPv6 
addresses at the same time on all network nodes. Secondly, 
translation means to convert directly IPv4 addresses to IPv6 
addresses or vice versa. Finally, tunneling means to create a 
tunnel for IPv6 addresses native networks across IPv4 
network. Over sixteen transition techniques have been used 
and tested for the communications between different 
networks to ensure IPv4 addresses and IPv6 addresses 
interoperability. Therefore, to make decision on the best 
suited transition methods, it is really important to have an 
overview of the current IPv4 networks. In addition, 
enterprises must analyze needed functionalities, scalability, 
and securities in the corporation. Besides, “one size does not 
fit all” and a network can be applied different transition 
mechanisms together to support a complete distributed 
system.  
In this section, based on the information from the 
research and literature review, we would present an overview 
of some major transition methods as well as relevant matter 
to opt out the best methods for large enterprise networks. 
Each technique possesses individual attributes and plays an 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

important part in the transition process. In general, we can 
classify various transition techniques into three categories 
with respect to connectivity and necessary elements for the 
implementation.  
The first category is Dual Stack which uses two IPv4 and 
IPv6 stacks for operating simultaneously, which enables 
devices to run on either protocol, according to available 
services, network availability, and administrative policies. 
This can be achieved in both end systems and network 
devices. As a result, IPv4 enabled programs use IPv4 stack 
and this goes the same for IPv6. The IP header version field 
would play an important role in receiving and sending 
packets. In other words, this kind of IPv6 transition is the 
encapsulation of IPv6 within IPv4. 
Next, is the translation category, which means to convert 
directly protocols from IPv4 to IPv6 or vice versa, which 
might result in transforming those two protocol headers and 
payload. This mechanism can be established at layers in 
protocol stack, consisting of network, transport, and 
application layers. The fundamental part of translation 
mechanism in transition process is the conversion of IP and 
ICMP packets. 
Finally, the last category is tunneling which means to 
transfer data between compatible networking nodes over 
incompatible networks. It utilizes a protocol whose function 
is to encapsulate the payload between two nodes or end 
systems. This encapsulation is carried out at the tunnel 
entrance and the payload will be de-capsulated at the tunnel 
exit. 
A. Summary of three methods 
Table I below is the summary table containing the 
advantages and disadvantages for three main methods 
 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF THREES METHODS 
 
Advantages 
Disadvantages 
Tunnel
ing 
-­‐ Configure tunnel endpoints 
only 
-­‐ Simple deployment  
-­‐ No additional management 
-­‐ Face another problem of NATs 
-­‐ Take more time and CPU power 
-­‐ Harder to troubleshooting and 
network management  
-­‐ Have single points of failure 
-­‐ Vulnerable to security attacks 
Transl
ation 
-­‐ The router is used as a 
translation communicator 
-­‐ Solve network 
interoperability problems 
-­‐ Limitations similar to IPv4 NAT 
-­‐ Reduction in the overall value 
and utility of the network.  
-­‐ Harder to control on a larger 
scale  
-­‐ Complexity increases in IP 
addresses 
Dual 
Stack 
-­‐ Easy to implement 
-­‐ Low cost 
-­‐ Greatest flexibility 
-­‐ Already supported in all 
OSs and devices 
-­‐ Two routing tables 
-­‐ Additional memory and CPU 
power 
-­‐ Two firewall sets of policies 
B. Conclusion 
Based on the above overview of all mechanisms and 
current practices in researched enterprise networks, nearly all 
deployments of IPv6 addresses in enterprise networks apply 
dual stack mechanism as it gives us a way to know more 
about IPv6 addresses as well as to improve practical 
experience with a new address family, which plays an 
important role in the success of transition implementation. 
Therefore, in this paper, we choose the dual stack 
mechanism to build a simulated model for large enterprise 
networks. 
C. Simulated Enterprise Network Design 
To support the transition process, we will use the Cisco 
Packet Tracer program [48], which is a powerful network 
simulation software from Cisco, to create a visual model of 
an enterprise network. Our model has three main areas. At 
first, the headquarter network area consists of four groups 
which are the Demilitarized Zone, the Intrusion Prevention, 
the Service Provision, and the Client Group. Secondly, a 
branch network area is a division of the business that can be 
located in various geographic areas. Therefore, the network 
model of each branch is similar to the headquarter model 
only without the DMZ. Thirdly, the network area of ISP 
routers with VPN users who perform the work outside the 
enterprise network still needs to get access to data from 
protected servers inside the network. 
After successfully building the simulated network model, 
we implemented the chosen Dual Stack method [47] with 
specific technologies such as Dynamic Host Configuration 
Protocol (DHCP) [49] to assign IP addresses automatically 
for end devices, Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) [50] as an 
IP routing protocol, Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) [52] for 
the simulation of Internet among ISPs, Virtual Private 
Network (VPN) [51] for simulating the group of mobile 
users, and finally the security establishment, as illustrated in 
Figure 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 42 is the configured and final model of the whole network. Based on the 
green dots, the model has been configured and ready to be used. 
FIGURE 42. Configured model 
 
Figure 3.  Simulated Enterprise Network Design 
Based on practical results from the simulated network 
model, we have an opportunity to put our chosen method to 
test and prove that it is the best choice for large enterprise 
networks to switch from IPv4 to IPv6. 
IV. 
RESEARCH DATA 
This research collected data by interviews with several 
specific organizations and documents review.  
Standardized, opened-ended interviews were conducted 
with people in charge of IPv6 addresses deployment or 
network maintenance to find out their experiences on this 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

topic. The questions are made so that answers are open-
ended; which means participants can fully express their 
points of views [41]. The same questionnaire was provided 
to the interviewees to make the process of analyzing and 
comparing more easily. Before the interviews were 
conducted, emails concerning the issues were sent to all 
appropriate organizations asking for permissions. Those 
organizations were several large Vietnamese enterprises and 
Finnish organizations listed in the list of IPv6 addresses 
deployment 
status 
of 
Finland 
(derived 
from 
www.vyncke.org/ipv6status/detailed.php?country=fi). 
The 
authors contacted sixty companies and universities; however, 
only five of them answered back or gave permission for the 
interview. It means that interview answer percentage was 
only 8.3 %. 
Overall, the most common reasons for deploying IPv6 
addresses were testing, preparing for the future, and 
gathering user experiences. The organizations that the 
authors had the permission to conduct the interview are 
university, Internetworking consulting company, training 
center, and Telecom Corporation. At the moment, those 
organizations are running well with IPv4 addresses, they 
have not hit the wall of IPv4 addresses shortage yet. Since all 
the organizations mentioned above are related to networking 
sector, training, and service providers, they were aware of 
the need for IPv6 addresses preparation. IPv4 addresses 
exhaustion is obvious and it causes future addressing 
problems. Our interviews also revealed IPv4 addresses 
exhaustion as the most common reason stated. As we know 
that IPv4 addresses free pool is out, new Internet connections 
are rising fast in developing countries. Once those remaining 
IPv4 addresses are out, new connections will be provided 
with IPv6 addresses. If enterprises do not prepare for such 
parallel existence of IPv4 addresses and IPv6 addresses, they 
may lose a number of customers who cannot access them on 
Internet. 
As inferred from the interview with the Internetworking 
Consulting Company, the most important aspect to an 
enterprise is cost saving. Technical features above may not 
sound very interesting to them. On cost-saving scale, the 
transition to IPv6 addresses may offer many benefits for 
large enterprises. It promises to bring better routing 
performance, improve security and auto-configuration, 
which generate lower implementation cost, and daily 
maintenance basic cost. Therefore, it may save long-term IT 
cost for enterprises. 
The interviews revealed that the most commonly used 
transition method is Dual-Stack. It is because networking 
devices nowadays already support IPv4 addresses and IPv6 
addresses at the same time. Transition technologies are also 
important factors of IPv6 addresses transition process. There 
are several common techniques that will be discussed further 
in this paper. 
Moreover, IPv6 is a certain future that it may bring 
opportunities to early service provider. Since many 
enterprises are new to IPv6 addresses, service provider can 
be a consultant in decision making while making some 
profit. Chip Popoviciu [12] emphasized the value that early 
adoption can get. Service providers can sell various services 
if they can play a role in helping enterprises deploy IPv6 
addresses. 
On the other hand, the research has found out that the 
most common issue in an IPv6 addresses deployment project 
was user training. Firstly, training cost was not considered 
properly in the project planning phase. Then, IP maintenance 
staffs were lack of IPv6 addresses experiences and 
knowledge. It not only raised the cost but also lowered the 
efficiency of the project. 
Lastly, there is no backwards compatibility in transition 
to IPv6 addresses. Microsoft has no intention to implement 
IPv6 addresses for older Window OS such as Windows 98 or 
Windows Millennium Edition or Windows 2000 [23]. 
Therefore, there are some concerns with the cost of replacing 
a variety of application, which needs to be IPv6 addresses 
compatible. However, most of the networking software 
support IPv6 addresses comes as an upgrades based on old 
software version, thus there is not much extra cost, even no. 
Nevertheless, specific software tailored for company is much 
more different. If an enterprise wishes to transit all software 
to IPv6 addresses compatible and eliminate IPv4 addresses, 
it may come up with huge costs. It also costs a lot of time 
and efforts of applications developer to change the 
applications according to information from the interview 
with employee from Telecom Corporation. 
A request for Comments (RFCs) is a document system 
invented by Steve Crocken in 1969 to keep the record as well 
as improve technology being used on the ARPAnet. An RFC 
describes a research or applications on networking 
technology or define a new one. TCP/IP was developed by 
the RFC method of development. In this research, we 
consulted RFCs as our data on technical issues. RFCs are the 
most 
updated 
and 
trustable 
papers 
on 
networking 
technology. A set of RFC, which will be used in this paper, 
consists of: RFC 2373, RFC2647, RFC2765, RFC2766, 
RFC2767, RFC3022, RFC4057, RFC4861, RFC5735, 
RFC6343, and RFC791. Besides RFCs, a set of journal 
papers on networking technology is also used as technical 
data in this study. 
V. 
RECOMMENDATION OF IPV6 TRANSITTION 
FOR ENTERPRISES 
“Readiness is a state of preparedness of persons, 
systems, or organizations to meet a situation and carry out a 
planned sequence of actions. Readiness is based on 
thoroughness of the planning, adequacy and training of the 
personnel, and supply and reserve of support services or 
systems” (BusinessDictionary). 
In expression of IPv6 addresses, this means being ready 
for the implementation of IPv6 addresses into a network 
when business requirements arise. 
The University of Helsinki, Axu TM Oy, and FPT 
Telecom Corporation have already taken initial steps to 
implement IPv6 addresses into the network system based 
answers gathered from the research. Although these efforts 
are now just meant for testing, the message from the 
international community is clear. The transition from IPv4 
addresses to IPv6 addresses will become a must for 
enterprises, especially ones that currently provide online 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

services based on IP addresses. They must be able to handle 
large requests from internal and external customers who are 
applying their emails or web or other services to everyday 
working lives over the Internet. It is impossible to predict 
exactly when IPv6 addresses will become mandatory for 
most companies. However, in accordance with Mr. 
SeppoSyrjanen, Data Network Specialist from IT Center of 
University of Helsinki, although IPv6 addresses adoption is a 
need for current companies to prepare for the future, aside 
from the exhaustion of IPv4 addresses for stakeholders to 
take into consideration, it is not an easy and single step that 
can be achieved in a short time but this requires a great 
amount of thorough planning and preparation to develop and 
adjust an IPv6 business case. Therefore, it is not when IPv4 
addresses come to the point of complete exhaustion, IPv6 
addresses have already been considered as purely strategic 
because this is not only to establish global connectivity of 
enterprise networks for the future, but also to guarantee 
growth as well. 
In this part, based on information from the interviews 
with large companies and enterprises, we would like to 
categorize different preparation activities that can be applied 
as a plan in this IPv6 addresses implementation. This part 
would become a great asset to assure that a common method 
is ready to make plans and to check IPv6 readiness when it 
falls into place for each enterprise network. It is an outline of 
phases which have both technical infrastructure and business 
readiness taken into account for an enterprise to initiate the 
transition to IPv6 addresses. 
A. Business Side 
Phase 1: The determination of business grounds and 
demands to implement IPv6 addresses   
An enterprise must have strong and reasonable desires to 
initiate the IPv6 addresses transition project. They need to 
realize business requirements, motives and mark the features 
of IPv6 addresses to those particular objectives. Five main 
conditions that need to be acutely considered are business 
operations after the depletion of IPv4 addresses, support for a 
great amount of network devices, enterprise policies for IPv6 
addresses transition, requests from customer, partners, 
suppliers, and the global-scaled trade, said by Nguyen Dac 
Thuan, from FPT Telecom. 
Phase 2: The analysis of profits, expenses, and risks  
Enterprises need to assess the impacts of IPv6 addresses 
transition and which kinds of benefits it brings to the 
business. Specifically, they need to perform thorough 
analysis to decide which certain line of business or programs 
can be benefited from IPv6 addresses transition. In addition, 
Aleksi Suhonen, from Axu TM Oy, has said that there were 
other relevant subjects that also need to be taken into serious 
consideration such as enhancement of new services as well 
as the maintenance of existing services, development of 
network efficiency and cost savings (the elimination of NAT 
or other work-around methods), the high performance of 
large enterprise network, simple configuration of online 
operations, and the supply of tactical advantages.  
Phi Long, from Nhatnghe Network Traning Center, has 
said that costs estimation is the most important part and it 
can decide the progress of the implementation based on his 
own experiences from many concerned network projects. 
Therefore, once enterprises would like to initiate the IPv6 
addresses transition, they also need to be prepared for the 
budget that can be used for planning, design (infrastructure 
upgrades if needed), implementation testing, deployment, 
personnel training as well as operational costs. 
In IPv6 addresses transition, risk includes business, legal, 
privacy, security, reliability, interoperability and technical 
risks. Only when we can identify risks and its impact, will 
we be able to apply action plans to prevent or reduce the 
influence on the whole project. These plans should put 
emphasis on major program activities, specific solutions, and 
impacts. 
Phase 3: The settlement of a supervised group (SG) for 
administration of IPv6 addresses transition project. Nguyen 
Dac Thuan, from FPT Telecom, indicated that the supervised 
group would temporarily act as a centralized management 
office (CMO) to make plans, administer, and control the 
progress of IPv6 addresses transition throughout the entire 
enterprise. Furthermore, the SG will arrange sufficient 
resources such as staffing, training, and budget to support the 
IPv6 project successfully. Specifically, the SG will be 
responsible for recruiting suitable members to the group for 
different roles and responsibilities; gaining authority rights 
within the enterprise to support financial matters for the 
transition project and set policies to become the priority in 
case of shortage of resources; organizing an administration 
structure to guarantee the success implementation of IPv6 
addresses transition. The SG will be the leader to set the 
milestones and targets for the working team and control the 
progress through successful results. 
B. Technical Side 
Phase 4: The assessment of all assets of current network 
infrastructure  
As shown by by Head of IT center, from the University 
of Helsinki, we suggest that before starting to implement the 
IPv6 transition project, the enterprises need to carry out a 
complete analysis of current networks to get an overview of 
components that may need to be changed or upgraded to be 
suitable for transition to IPv6 such as address allocation, 
networks services (IP, wireless, VoIP, DNS, DHCP, 
NTP…), network management, applications, operational 
systems and support. 
Phase 5: The establishment of architecture for IPv6 
project  
When implementing the transition from IPv4 addresses to 
IPv6 addresses, there must be an overall IPv6 architecture for 
various impacted areas.  It should be standard based and 
support IPv4 to perform a smooth transition.  Moreover, this 
architecture should also expect new networks and services as 
well as foreseeable traffic growth after the implementation. 
There are some concerned major areas such as IPv6 
addressing plan, IPv6 routing, IPv6 interconnection, IPv6 
foreseeable traffic, IPv6 enabled systems, IPv6 deployment 
plan, transition mechanism (dual stack, tunneling, and 
translation), 
network 
services, 
security, 
management, 
scalability & reliability, and service level agreements [32]. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Phase 6: The outline of a specific structure on the 
influence of IPv6 project 
The IPv6 project, once established, will place influence 
on every platform and service in the network. As a result, 
IPv6 capability and its influence will be decided according to 
enterprises’ standard for each platform and service, which 
consists of commercial and industry standards. This includes 
the required resources (devices, personnel, budget, etc.) and 
the communication between system integrator and vendor, 
said by Nguyen Dac Thuan, from FPT Telecom.  
Phase 7: The development of an IPv6 project plan   
In this phase, the SG is required to gather all information 
and resources to design a final plan for IPv6 addresses 
transition in the enterprise network. Because of its 
importance, this plan is required to contain a schedule of 
small projects to be implemented along with dependencies 
and priority. Furthermore, in accordance with Phi Long, 
from Nhatnghe Network Training Center, there should be a 
testing environment for members to gain experience with 
new IPv6 addresses features and also to demonstrate the 
architecture, plans, and policies... One more thing is that the 
SG should perform trials on the real enterprise network as 
well as operational processes to ensure that all devices and 
services acquired or developed are IPv6 capable. 
Phase 8: The provision of a personnel-training program   
This IPv6 addresses transition project involves either 
business or technical aspects and this also means the 
attendance of many users from the board of directors to 
ordinary staff to maintain IPv6 readiness. As a result, 
training is required to update knowledge and skills for users 
to familiarize with the new system [36]. However, based on 
the position of users in the enterprise, there will be many 
types of training programs to be suitable for all. Based on the 
information of Nguyen Dac Thuan, from FPT Telecom, we 
divide the training into four categories:  
General training program aims to give normal users 
primary information about IPv6 addresses and its related 
issues.  
Engineer training program 
is 
to 
give 
detailed 
information about IPv6 addresses technologies and this is 
suitable for staff members who are responsible for analyzing, 
planning, designing, testing and deploying IPv6 addresses.    
Operational training program presents specific IPv6 
education to employees who take care of the support for an 
IPv6 network.  
Special training program includes advanced information 
in certain technology are, which is suitable for technical 
specialists or experts in a certain technology area such as 
security, mobile, etc. 
C. Stages of Readiness 
In this part, based on the information from literature 
review and interviews, we have combined that information to 
create a checking tool for enterprises to assess IPv6 readiness 
level in the network. Based on the result from this tool, the 
board of directors can have an overview of the current 
network and make decisions or plans according to the result. 
The stages of IPv6 readiness can be arranged into six ranks, 
which 
represent 
the 
work 
to 
be 
achieved 
before 
implementing IPv6:   
Rank 1: The enterprise has no intention to implement 
IPv6. 
At this stage, enterprises have no business requirements 
and decide not to integrate IPv6 into the system as they 
analyze that the expenditure for IPv4 addresses shortage is 
lower than the effort and budget spent for transition to IPv6 
addresses while IPv4 addresses exhaustion will not place 
influence on their business.  
Rank 2: The enterprise has taken IPv6 into consideration 
but is still unprepared to initiate it. 
At this stage, enterprises may hire IT experts to advice on 
the IPv6 project or methods to prevent IPv4 addresses 
exhaustion. Moreover, there may be discussions within the 
executive group (CIO, CEO, CTO…) to collect information 
in relation with IPv6 project such as business and technical 
requirements as well as cost and risk for transiting to IPv6. 
Rank 3: The enterprise has an IPv6 program in place and 
is determining important issues. 
At this stage, enterprises may establish a business case 
and a budget for the IPv6 migration. A supervised group is 
also formed to control and manage the progress of IPv6 
implementation. The members and roles of the IPv6 
Transition Group should be identified. Furthermore, a 
thorough analysis of current network infrastructure should be 
done to check the IPv6 capabilities.  
Rank 4: The enterprise possesses an IPv6 project 
associated by a final plan.  
At this stage, enterprises may already have a sponsored 
IPv6 project that includes a detailed report of current 
infrastructure and a tested architecture design of IPv6 
implementation. 
Rank 5: The enterprise is in possession of an IPv6 
project without any unresolved crucial issues.  
At this stage, enterprises, supported by all detailed 
documents such as an IPv6 deployment plan, training plan, 
architecture design, may actively put into practice those 
plans and design to perform the first testing on the real 
networks.  
Rank 6: The enterprise has successfully accomplished 
the IPv6 addresses transition project. 
At this stage, enterprises have deployed IPv6 addresses 
into the system and finished the testing part. Furthermore, 
the training programs are also provided for every user. The 
system is ready to communicate with other IPv6 networks 
from customers, partners, and suppliers.  
Table II below describes the phases that are suitable for 
each rank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

TABLE II.  
RANK DESCRIPTION 
Phase 
Description 
Rank 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
1 
The 
determination 
of 
business 
grounds and demands to implement 
IPv6 addresses 
 
X X X X X 
2 
The analysis of profits, expenses, 
and risks 
 
X X X X X 
3 
The settlement of a supervised 
group (SG) for administration of 
IPv6 addresses transition project 
 
 
X X X X 
4 
The assessment of all assets of 
current network infrastructure 
 
 
 
X X X 
5 
The 
establishment 
of 
an 
architecture for IPv6 project 
 
 
 
X X X 
6 
The outline of a specific structure 
on the influence of IPv6 project 
 
 
 
 
X X 
7 
The development of an IPv6 
project plan 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
8 
The provision of a personnel 
training program 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
In general, it is necessary for enterprises to thoroughly 
analyze and implement an IPv6 addresses transition with 
clear instructions to serve expectations. However, because of 
the specific expectations may change from time to time, and 
they can be different by various enterprises, a complete 
approach with careful planning and preparation as listed in 
this part, accompanied by the details for each phase will 
allow the IPv6 addresses implementation project to be 
achieved successfully, which will open a new path for each 
enterprise to be ready for the next generation of 
communication networks. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Research result 
There are three transition methods that were most applied 
i.e. dual stack, translation and tunneling. Each of them has its 
own advantages and disadvantages. 
The second objective was to analyze real life experiences 
of enterprises that had deployed IPv6 addresses. We learned 
that the reasons for starting IPv6 could be: 
• 
Preparing for IPv4 addresses shortage coming in 
near future 
• 
Testing the transition process 
• 
Better features 
• 
Getting support from top executives on the 
project 
On the other hand, some enterprises were not interested 
in IPv6 addresses transition for the following reasons: 
• 
Business is still going on well 
• 
Training costs 
• 
No instant advantages 
• 
No solution from service providers 
• 
No backward compatibilities 
For those above reasons, dual stack seems to be the best 
method 
B. Recommendations 
Understand the situation. Most companies are running 
well with IPv4 addresses. They won’t have troubles until 
several years. What will come then? Developing countries 
with increasing numbers of new computers and devices 
connecting to the Internet will need their IPs, which will be 
IPv6 addresses. Being slow to adopt new technology will 
lead to losing access to these potential customers. Besides, 
IPv6 addresses have new features that promise to bring better 
management and administration as well as improve security. 
Moreover, service providers who can offer enterprises 
services in transition obviously can make profit out of it. 
Be prepared. Proper budget must be considered in 
advance including planning, design, testing, deployment, 
personnel training and operational costs. IPv6 support 
products should be integrated into product lifecycle 
replacement. The reason is that the network will still be able 
to communicate with IPv6 addresses from the outside world 
and it makes the transition process much more fluent in case 
the organization needs to deploy IPv6 addresses later on. 
Software or a system tailored for specific organization 
should be considered an IPv6 matter, as it is very difficult to 
change in the future. 
Pay attention to human factor. The human factor 
includes staffs of project teams and the operational 
administrator. Project team members must be people who 
really understand internal network structure because they 
will decide which method of transition to apply. Choosing 
the right method will avoid many troubles for administration. 
The operational administrator must be the one who has 
knowledge of IPv6.  
C. Methodology 
The paper followed seven guidelines of design science 
method. It was an inductive study looking for a solution to a 
problem. The interviews in this study were conducted with 
people who are involved in IPv6 addresses deployment 
projects in large network enterprises in Vietnam and Finland. 
Additionally, document review was essential for this study 
since this paper concerned a lot of technical issues and 
evaluated situations based on existing techniques, which 
were documented in various published sources. It was 
important to study documents on technical experiences of 
previous projects as well as new technology coming. 
Content analysis was the right choice for analyzing those 
documents and interviews’ transcripts. 
D. Limitation and Further Study 
The authors of this study are Vietnamese students who 
are studying in Finland. Finland is a developed country in 
technology. For that reason the authors intended to focus on 
Finnish enterprises. However, very few companies had 
answered back. Then, Vietnam was chosen as the author had 
more relations to companies in Vietnam and hoped that there 
would be some more companies participate. About 60 
organizations were contacted and there were only five 
enterprises answered. Four of that were large network 
enterprises. Half of enterprises that answered back had 
successfully carried out IPv6 project while the other half had 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

failed.  That number might not be representative. The author 
had reference other sources to synthesize a model of 
enterprise network. Because there was no specific answer of 
people who administrate the enterprise network, this study 
could not give more details. It is the biggest the limitation of 
this study. 
This study was limited to large enterprises that had a 
network size of over 1000 computers. Consequently, the 
research results may not be true for smaller network. 
Finally, there are various areas for further study based on 
this research. Firstly, a study with a larger sample or more 
cases could be done for better results. Another topic could be 
transition method for small and medium network enterprises. 
Or it is possible to find the critical factors for the failure of 
IPv6 deployment in general or large network size enterprises 
in particular (or small and medium sized ones). Additionally, 
further study on IPv6 for mobile devices can be considered. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Afuah, A. and Tucci, C. L. (2001). Internet Business Models 
and Strategies: Text and Cases. Irwin/McGraw-Hill. 
[2] Bi, J., Wu, J., and Leng, X. (2007). IPv4/IPv6 Transition 
Technologies and Univer6 Architecture. IJCSNS International 
Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.7 
No.1. 
[3] Bouras, C., Karaliotas, A., and Ganos, P. (2003). The 
development of IPv6 in an IPv4 world as trasittion strategies. 
Internet Research, Vol. 13 Iss: 2, pp. 86-93. 
[4] BusinessDictionary. From address 
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/readiness.html 
[retrieved: November 2011] 
[5] Cerf, V. (1993). How the Internet Came to Be. 
[6] Chen, M., Liu, X., Yan, C., and Huang, H. (11. March 2002). 
IPv6 Tunnel Broker Design and Implementation. Beijing. 
[7] Cho, K., Luckie, M., and Huffaker, B. (September 2004). 
Identifying IPv6 network problems in the dual-stack world. 
SIGCOMM 2004. 
[8] Cisco. (20. February 2010). The ABCs of IP version 6. 
[9] Daniel G.Waddington, F. C. (2002). Realizing the Transition 
to IPv6. IEEE Communications Magazine, 139. 
[10] Davis, G, and M Olson. Management Information Systems: 
Conceptual Foundations Structure and Development, Second 
Ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill,Inc., 1985. 
[11] Golafshani, N. (December 2003). Understanding reliability 
and vallidity in qualitative research. The Qualitative Report. 
Toronto, Canada: http://www.nova.edu/ssss/QR/QR8-
4/golafshani.pdf. [retrieved: November 2011] 
[12] Grossetete, P., & Ciprian Popoviciu, F. W. (2008). Global 
IPv6 Strategies. Cisco Press 
[13] H3C. (2003). H3C Technologies Co., Limited. From address 
http://www.h3c.com/portal/res/201108/15/20110815_123998
3_image005_722543_1285_0.png [retrieved: November 
2011] 
[14] Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., and Ram, S. (2004). 
Design Science in Information Systems Research. MIS 
Quarterly. 
[15] Hirorai, R. and Yoshifuji, H. (13. February 2006). Problems 
on IPv4 - IPv6 network transition. IntecNetCore, Inc. 
[16] Huang, S.-M., Quincy, W., and Lin, Y.-B. (25. April 2005). 
Tunneling IPv6 through NAT with Teredo mechanism. 
Taiwan: National Chiao Tung University. 
[17] Huston, G. (October 2008). The Changing Foundation of the 
Internet: Confronting IPv4 Address Exhaustion. The ISP 
Column: A monthly column on things Internet. 
[18] InSites. (5 2007). CLIP - Communities of Learning, Inquiry, 
and Practice. From address InSites: 
http://www.insites.org/CLIP_v1_site/downloads/PDFs/TipsQ
ualQuanMthds.4B.8-07.pdf [retrieved: November 2011] 
[19] Johnson, B. and Christensen, L. (2008). Educational research: 
Quantitative, qualitative, and mized approaches. California: 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
[20] Leiner, B. M., G.Cerf, V., Clark, D. D., Kahn, R. E., 
Kleinrock, L., and C.Lynch, D.(October 2009). A Brief 
History of the Internet. ACM SIGCOMM Computer 
Communication Review, Volume 39, Number 5, pp. 22-31. 
[21] Lichtman, M. (2006). Qualitative research in educaction: A 
user's guide. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publication. 
[22] Mackay, M. and Edwards, C. (n.d.). Transitioning from IPv4 
to IPv6 - A Technical Overview. Lancaster: Computing 
Department, Faculty of Applied Sciences, Lancaster 
University. 
[23] Microsoft. (1. January 2012). Technet. From address 
http://i.technet.microsoft.com/dynimg/IC348167.gif 
[retrieved: January 2012] 
[24] Microsoft. (2011). TechNet Library. From address 
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/cc772973(WS.10).aspx [retrieved: October 2011] 
[25] Nakajima, M. and Kobayashi, N. (2004). IPv4/IPv6 
Translation Technology. FUJITSU sci. Tech. J., 159-169. 
[26] Netnam Ltd. (2011). Tunnel Broker. From address 
http://tunnelbroker.netnam.vn/media/upload/tunnel_broker_m
edium.png [retrieved: December 2011] 
[27] Nokia. Developer. From address 
http://library.developer.nokia.com/topic/S60_3rd_Edition_Cp
p_Developers_Library/GUID-D81EAF75-EF8C-4B62-8866-
439E29325E8A_d0e11389_href.png [retrieved: December 
2011] 
[28] Oracle Corporation. (2001). Oracle. From address 
http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19455-01/806-
0916/images/dual.epsi.gif [retrieved: December 2011] 
[29] Palmquist, M. ischool. From address 
http://www.ischool.utexas.edu/~palmquis/courses/content.htm
l [retrieved: December 2011] 
[30] Qing-weil, S. and Lin, Z. (2007). Analysis of IPv4/IPv6 
Transition Technology Based on Tunnel. Anhui: Anhui 
Institute of Aechitecture and Industry. 
[31] Raicu, I. and Zeadally, S. (02. April 2003). Evaluating IPv4 to 
IPv6 transition mechanisms. Dept. of Cumput. Sci., Purdue 
University. 
[32] RFC2373. (July 1998). From address IETF: 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2373 [retrieved: December 2011] 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

[33] RFC2765. (February 2000). IETF. From address IETF: 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2765 [retrieved: December 2011] 
[34] RFC2766. (February 2000). IETF. From address IETF: 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2766 [retrieved: December 2011] 
[35] RFC2767. (February 2000). From address IETF: 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2767 [retrieved: December 2011] 
[36] RFC4057. (June 2005). From address IETF: 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4057 [retrieved: December 2011] 
[37] RFC6343. (August 2011). From address IETF: 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6343 [retrieved: December 2011] 
[38] Subramanian, S. (November 2003). IPv6 Transition strategies. 
[39] TechTerms. From address 
http://www.techterms.com/definition/ [retrieved: December 
2011] 
[40] TechWeb. (20. April 2009). The business technology 
network. From address 
http://i.cmpnet.com/networksystemsdesignline/2006/o4/IPv6F
igure4.gif [retrieved: November 2011] 
[41] Turner, Daniel W. “Qualitative Interview Design: A Practical 
Guide for Novice Investigators.” The Qualitative Report, 
Volume 15 Number 3, 2010. May: 754-760. 
[42] University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire. University of Wisconsin-
Eau Claire - People Pages. From address 
http://people.uwec.edu/piercech/ResearchMethods/Data%20c
ollection%20methods/DATA%20COLLECTION%20METH
ODS.htm [retrieved: November 2011] 
[43] Vienna University of Technology. (10. January 2012). 
Institute of Telecommunications. From address 
http://www.ibk.tuwien.ac.at/~ipv6/images/siit.png [retrieved: 
January 2012] 
[44] Waddington, D. and Chang, F. (2002). Realizing the 
transition to IPv6. Communications Magazine, Vol. 40 Iss: 6, 
pp. 138-147. 
[45] Wedel, F. (2008). FHWedel University of Applied Sciences. 
From address http://www.fh-
wedel.de/~si/seminare/ws08/Ausarbeitung/08.ipv6/images/dst
m_konzept.png [retrieved: December 2011] 
[46] Yin, R. K. (2011). Qualitative Research from Start to Finish. 
New York: The Guilford Press. 
[47] Cho, Kenjiro, Luckie, M., & Huffaker, B. (2004). Identifying 
IPv6 network problems in the dual-stack world. SIGCOMM 
2004. 
[48] Cisco. (n.d.). Cisco Packet Tracer. From address 
http://www.cisco.com/web/learning/netacad/course_catalog/P
acketTracer.html [retrieved: December 2011] 
[49] RFC2131. (1997, March). IETF. From address 
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2131.txt [retrieved: December 
2011] 
[50] RFC2328. (1998, April). IETF. From address 
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2328.txt [retrieved: December 
2011] 
[51] RFC4026. (2005, March). IETF. From address 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4026 [retrieved: December 2011] 
[52] RFC4271. (2006, January). IETF. From address 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4271 [retrieved: December 2011]
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

