A Study on the Improvement of National R&D History Data Management 
   
Eungyeong Kim, Chulsu Lim 
National Science & Technology Information Service Center 
Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: {eungyeong, cslim}@kisti.re.kr
 
Abstract—In order to share and open national R&D 
information to researchers, providing user-participation 
service is required. With the integrated service of the National 
Science & Technology Information Service (NTIS), it is 
available to check information on R&D projects including 
human resources and outcomes. However, researchers are not 
able to see research history (research outcome) due to the 
possibility of the leak of personal data. Thus, this study 
distributed and implemented API for issuing and verifying 
research number (RN), which would eventually contribute to 
constructing national one-stop project application service and 
unify DB of researchers. Using the RM, it is feasible for NTIS 
to provide one-stop service of checking and applying for 
national R&D projects. Therefore, to manage the process of 
announcing and applying for R&D projects, this paper 
conducted 
research 
on 
examining 
ways 
to 
improve 
management of information on research history.  
Keywords-Linkage of Research History Data; Project 
Management System; National R&D; Project Application and 
Submission. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The NTIS is a national R&D portal system designed to 
support the efficiency of R&D throughout R&D life-cycle, 
from R&D planning to the utilization of research outcome 
[1]. It has gradually evolved from 2006 (from NTIS1.0 to 
NTIS4.0) under the influence of external environment, 
changes in governmental organization, and entities of 
research management. By integrating with 17 national 
departments and agencies and constructing DB, NTIS set a 
goal of sharing and proliferating information on national 
R&D including projects, human resources, outcomes, and 
facilities. 
As a part of ‘Government 3.0 for science and technology’, 
the purpose of this study is to construct national one-stop 
project application service and unify DB of researchers. Thus, 
we conducted research on distributing and implementing API 
for issuing and verifying RN. We focused on RN, as it 
allows researchers to use one-stop service of checking and 
applying for national R&D projects [2]. While [2] suggested 
how to provide service of integrating research history data to 
representative research management institutes (RRMIs), this 
paper expanded the subjects of the service by including 
research management institutes (RMIs) where there were no 
research management systems. 
Information on participants, equipment & facilities, 
research outcome and collaborative research are available in 
the NTIS website through linkage with 17 government 
departments and agencies. This study was able to check 
research history data in the NTIS, but the one (research 
outcome) linked with other researchers was not. In NTIS, a 
researcher can search for his or her own research history 
(research outcome), but cannot search for others’. Therefore, 
user-participating services need to be developed for the 
opening and sharing of national R&D information. 
II. 
THE CURRENT STATE OF NATIONAL R&D 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 
Similar to NTIS, Japan and Europe also manage national 
R&D information. Japan’s national R&D data system is 
called ‘Japan Science and Technology (JST)’. The projects 
are approved by the government or implemented by the JST 
internally. The national R&D data system in the EU is called 
Community Research and Development Information Service 
(CORDIS). CORDIS provides R&D and technology 
innovation-related data [3]. 
TABLE I.  
NATIONAL R&D DATA SYSTEMS AND DATA ITEMS 
National R&D Data 
Systems 
Data Items 
NTIS 
Projects, 
participants, 
research 
results, 
equipment & facilities, research outcome, 
science & technology statistics, etc. 
JST 
Science & technology report, researcher career 
management service, Bio information service, 
patent & research outcome data, etc. 
CORDIS 
R&D expense support, research outcome, 
projects, programs, R&D agencies, researchers, 
latest trends, etc. 
 
Table 1 above summarizes what data items NTIS, JST, 
and CORIDS manage and provide. 
III. 
IMPROVEMENT IN THE MANAGEMENT OF RESEARCH 
HISTORY DATA 
 At present, RMIs transfer information to the NTIS 
through information integration once an agreement for 
projects/programs is signed. Then, project serial numbers are 
given to each project or program, linking to the transferred 
information. Accordingly, on the NTIS website, one can 
search for the information on national R&D, such as 
participants, 
equipment 
& 
facilities, 
outcomes, 
or 
collaborative research.  
In case of retrieval of information on research history of a 
researcher, due to the concern of leaking personal 
information, a researcher is allowed to access to only his or 
her own R&D history, implying that he or she has no 
authority to access to others’. However, in order to share and 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

publicly open national R&D information, the user-
participation service is required.  
Thus, this paper developed alternative solution to 
improve the management of information on research history 
by promoting NTIS to integrate with both RRMIs and RMIs 
so that the process of announcing, applying, and conducting 
national R&D projects can be managed. 
A. Integrating with RRMIs with SSO 
To integrate research history data, this study constructed 
a single channel to let the procedures of announcing, 
applying and modifying the R&D projects to be performed in 
one-stop process. For the single channel, however, a 
heterogeneous login solution exists, which causes the 
problem of multi-login when integrating NTIS with the 
RRMIs. Hence, single sign on (SSO) was interlocked 
between the NTIS and the institutes. As the resident 
registration 
number 
cannot 
be 
used 
for 
personal 
identification, by using the RN, a token is issued and verified 
in the SSO server.  
As the result, SSO interlocking was designed to be 
flowed in both ways between RRMIs’ research management 
system and NTIS. In the NTIS, furthermore, DB of 
announcement and application of R&D was interlocked with 
the RRMIs, and the systems were linked to allow researchers 
to be able to apply for, edit and submit a project through the 
single channel. It indicates that RRMIs administer and 
manage the procedures of applying and modifying R&D 
projects, whereas NTIS presents the current status of 
application and provides the channel (‘Go To’) to modify. 
B. Developing Process to Integrate with RMIs 
In South Korea, there are RMIs where research 
management systems are not used as RRMIs do. Thus, this 
paper constructed another single channel for RMIs to 
integrate research history data. Unlike the RRMIs, due to the 
absence of the research management systems, researchers 
have to send mails to RMIs when applying for R&D projects. 
Thus, as shown in Figure 1, this study developed the 
process of applying and receiving the projects on online by 
using NTIS. 
 
 
Figure 1.  NTIS Project Application-Submission Process. 
The program (reception) manager selects the program 
announcement from the NTIS R&D announcements and 
inputs management information that is needed for the 
reception. Then, researchers upload their business plan to 
apply for the projects. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
This study examined on integration of research history 
data for the purpose of managing and monitoring the data. 
As a result, the management of ongoing projects, applied 
projects, researchers and participating agencies has become 
more convenient. Figure 2 below shows the result of this 
research, demonstrating the state of a researcher’s 
participation and application project. In the table of the 
figure, there are names of projects, the amount of 
government fund, research period, and participation rate. 
 In sum, this paper developed one-stop project service 
using RN to improve the management and utilization of 
R&D information. The result indicates that researchers will 
able to check and manage such projects in ‘My Project’ from 
the NTIS. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Management of My Project 
However, further research is needed for NTIS to provide 
user-participation service to researchers. In details, to 
manage research history data, RN needs to perform duties of 
identifying individuals and managing the information linked 
to them. Also, more studies are needed to strengthen the 
security of personal information. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Construction of National 
Science and Technology Information Service (NTIS) funded 
by the Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Information (KISTI). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] National Science & Technology Information Service (NTIS), 
www.ntis.go.kr [retrieved: July, 2017]  
[2] E. Kim, C. Lim, and H. Jeong, “Integration of National R&D 
Information Management Systems to Enhance Research 
Productivity”, International Conference on Convergence 
Technology, Vol. 6, pp. 492-493, 2016. 
[3] K. Choi, M. Park, and Y. Kim, “A Study on Construction of 
Integrated National R&D”, Journal of the Society of Korea 
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Vol. 32, No. 4, pp.25-37, 
2009. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-596-8
INNOV 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

