AMBTC-Based Data Hiding Using Intra- and Inter-Block Embedding Strategy 
 
Yu-Hsiu Lin 
Dept. Electrical Engineering  
Southern Taiwan University of Science and Technology  
Tainan 710, Taiwan 
email: yhlin1108@stust.edu.tw  
Chih-Hsien Hsia 
Dept. Computer Science and Information Engineering 
National Ilan University 
Ilan 260, Taiwan 
email: chhsia625@gmail.com
Bo-Yan Chen 
Graduate Inst. Automation Technology  
National Taipei University of Technology  
Taipei 106, Taiwan 
email: t105618004@ntut.edu.tw  
Yung-Yao Chen 
Graduate Inst. Automation Technology  
National Taipei University of Technology  
Taipei 106, Taiwan 
email: yungyaochen@mail.ntut.edu.tw
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a novel data hiding approach 
for image compression with Absolute Moment Block 
Truncation Coding (AMBTC). Hiding data in digital images 
has 
widespread 
security 
uses, 
which 
include 
image 
authentication, prevention of malicious forgery, copyright 
protection, and so on. On the other hand, for transmission 
efficiency and storage space concerns, image compression 
techniques are commonly used in Internet-based applications. 
To achieve these two purposes simultaneously, we integrate 
AMBTC, 
a 
low 
computation 
complexity 
block-based 
compression technique, in the proposed data hiding scheme. 
First, five parameters are separately extracted from individual 
image blocks. By manipulating these parameters, secret data 
are embedded in the blocks without excessively degrading 
overall image quality. A halftoning method is incorporated to 
quickly identify optimal parameters. In addition, the 
interblock hiding scheme is proposed to embed extra data by 
exploiting the relevance between adjacent blocks. From the 
experimental results, it validates the effectiveness of the 
proposed method. 
Keywords-Absolute Moment Block Truncation Coding 
(AMBTC); inter- and intra-block embedding; direct binary 
search. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With advances in wireless communication techniques 
and the popularity of personal smart phones, transmitting 
images over the Internet has become simple. However, the 
security of public networks such as those in hotels and coffee 
shops, which anyone can access, remains a great concern. 
Although there may be a password for specific users, such 
passwords are usually shared with other, unknown people. 
Data hiding methods address this problem by increasing the 
security level of Internet-based image itself. In addition, 
AMBTC is known as a high computation efficiency 
compression technique and has been improved by 
researchers in the past decade [1]. Therefore, the idea of 
combining AMBTC with data hiding, has received 
considerable research attention recently [2][3]. 
As shown in Figure 1, this work performs data-hiding 
and compression jointly. The AMBTC compression 
technique is selected because of its high compression 
efficiency. Therefore, this solution is suitable for real-time 
embedded system applications. By hiding data in the original 
image (usually referred to the host image), image quality is 
almost inevitably degraded. However, for applications, such 
as painting maintaining and photography preservation, image 
quality is regarded as paramount. Consequently, the aim of 
data hiding schemes is to not only embed additional secret 
data but also preserve host image quality. 
Data hiding methods are usually classified into two 
categories, namely, frequency domain data hiding and spatial 
domain data hiding methods. In frequency domain data 
hiding, the host image is manipulated in its frequency 
domain to embed secret data. For example, Parah et al. [4] 
proposed a discrete cosine transform (DCT) modification 
scheme that utilizes the difference between DCT coefficients 
to hide data. In spatial domain data-hiding methods, the 
pixels of the host image are manipulated to embed 
authentication data. For example, Wahed and Nyeem [5] 
proposed a least significant bits substitution scheme to 
embed authentication data in the host image, where the 
correlation between those embeddable pixels is utilized to 
avoid the use of flag bits. In addition, their method has the 
advantage of reversible data hiding. The proposed method 
belongs to the spatial domain category because of its use of 
AMBTC. 
 
Fig. 1. Comparison between conventional compression methods (top) and 
the proposed method (bottom).  
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

II. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
This section presents the proposed method, which hides 
data using two methods (namely, intra- and interblock 
embedding) sequentially, to increase payload as much as 
possible.  
First, in intrablock embedding, five parameters are 
extracted from each block: high mean (HM), low mean (LM), 
number of high-mean bits (NH), number of low-mean bits 
(NL), and block size (BS). By tuning the parameters of this 
parameter set, a weighted function (namely, the secret data 
function 
sd
f ) is defined as follows: 
(
1)
(
2)
(
3)
(
4)
(
5)
fsd
HM
LM
NH
NL
BS










. 
(1) 
Meanwhile, the secret bits to be embedded are converted to 
their decimal representation S , e.g. , 
(10011)2
19
S 

 in the 
case of 5-bit secret data. The goal of intrablock embedding is 
to adjust the parameter set so that: 
mod2n
fsd
 S
, 
(2) 
where n is the size of the secret bits hidden in each block. In 
this work,  n is set as 5. 
However, it is difficult to identify an optimal parameter 
set that simultaneously satisfies (2) and retains sufficient 
image quality. Many combinations of the parameters can 
lead to the result of (2) for a given 5-bit secret data. However, 
most of them might degrade the image quality severely. To 
solve this problem, a two-step search scheme is proposed. 
First, we set search constraints for the variation of HM, LM, 
and BS, because compared with NH and NL, these three 
parameters usually have a considerable effect on output 
image quality. Second, we adopt a halftone method, namely 
Direct Binary Search (DBS) method [6], to improve quality 
by applying a swap operation to adjust the location of high-
mean and low-mean bits. In addition, also inspired by [6], 
the cross-correlation function is applied to accelerate the 
computation speed of the search procedure. 
Subsequently, in interblock embedding, the difference 
between adjacent high-mean and low-mean values is 
calculated as follows: 
1
1
i
i
i
i
i
i
DH
HM
HM
DL
LM
LM









 , 
(3) 
where the subscripts i  and 
1
i   denote the locations of two 
adjacent blocks. An additional two-bit payload is achieved 
by controlling the odd–even parity of 
i
DH  and 
i
DL . That is, 
if the parity of  
i
DH  (or 
i
DL ) is odd, the secret code “1” is 
indicated, and if it is even, code “0” is indicated. Unlike 
using intrablock 
embedding alone, 
integration 
with 
interblock embedding can prevent discontinuity among 
adjacent blocks and provide extra payload with negligible 
quality loss. 
 
III. 
PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
This section presents the evaluation and the experimental 
results of the proposed method. Six test images were selected 
from the online medical image database [7]. For the 
preliminary experiments, our experiment involved hiding 
data in medical images because such images are confidential 
and usually require security protection. As shown in Figure 2, 
compared with the original grayscale image (Figure 2a), the 
output data-embedded AMBTC image (Figure 2b) exhibits a 
very close visual resemblance. For the result of Fig. 2b, the 
Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) value is 51.23. As can 
be seen in the enlarged version, the details are preserved and 
the image distortion is hardly distinguished, which validates 
the effectiveness of the proposed method. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents a novel data hiding scheme for the 
AMBTC compressed images. In the past, “seeing is 
believing” may have been a disputable claim. Today, 
however, tampering or counterfeiting digital images using 
current technologies presents no difficulty. Large numbers of 
digital images are transmitted over public and non-secure 
networks every day, thus increasing the risk of image 
tampering and the scatter of untrue information. This study 
provided a solution for increased security in image signal 
transmission. In our further research, we plan to select other 
test image types (other than medical images) and conduct 
more experiments on state-of-the-art comparison methods. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Y. Liu, J. Guo, and Y. Cheng, “Adaptive block truncation 
coding image compression technique using optimized dot 
diffusion,” IEEE Int. Conf. Image Processing (ICIP), pp. 
2137–2141, Sept. 2016. 
[2] 
Y. Hu, K. Choo, and W. Chen, “Tamper detection and image 
recovery for BTC-compressed images,” Multimedia Tools 
Appl., vol. 76, pp. 15435–15463, July 2017. 
[3] 
N. Huynh, K. Bharanitharan, C. Chang, and Y. Liu, “Minima-
maxima preserving data hiding algorithm for absolute 
moment block truncation coding compressed images,” 
Multimedia Tools Appl., vol. 77, pp. 5767–5783, March 
2018. 
[4] 
S. Parah, J. Sheikh, N. Loan, and G. Bhat, “Robust and blind 
watermarking technique in DCT domain using inter-block 
coefficient differencing,” Digital Signal Processing, vol. 53, 
pp. 11–24, June 2016. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 2. Experimental results of the proposed methods using the Artifix test 
image in [7]. (a) Original grayscale image. (b) Result of the proposed 
method. 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

[5] 
Md. A. Wahed and H. Nyeem, “Efficient LSB substitution for 
interpolation based reversible data hiding scheme,” 20th Int. 
Conf. Computer and Information Technology, pp. 1–6, Dec. 
2017. 
[6] 
D. Lieberman and J. Allebach, “A dual interpretation for 
direct binary search and its implications for tone reproduction 
and texture quality,” IEEE Trans. Image Processing, vol. 9, 
pp. 1950–1963, Nov. 2000. 
[7] 
Online available (the last access date: July 2018). 
http://www.osirix-viewer.com/  
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-674-3
INNOV 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

