Back to the Future: Evaluation Model for Wearables
Based On the Past Experience
Marta Piekarska and Shinjo Park and Altaf Shaik
Security in Telecommunications
Technische Universit¨at Berlin
Berlin, Germany
Email: marta OR shinjo OR altaf@sec.t-labs.tu-berlin.de
Abstract—Today every user has a plethora of devices to choose
from, depending on the task. In addition to omnipresent laptops,
smartphones and tablets, we have recently seen an expansion
of a new type: the wearables. Wearable devices vary from
ﬁtness trackers, through watches and glasses, all the way to
medical-grade equipment. This Systematization of Knowledge
paper investigates the historical shift in the security and privacy
considerations when smartphones started replacing laptops, and
tries to predict how the change will look like this time. We
examine the categories of attacks on laptops and mobile devices
and analyze how those will work on wearables. We also recognize
the additional threat layers when these elements are combined
into Internet of Things. Finally, we propose mitigations and
potential defenses to some of the biggest challenges. In summary
this paper contributes to the ﬁeld by a thorough systematization
of knowledge of the attack vectors on various devices and
proposes a method of predicting the security threats to new device
types.
Index Terms—privacy, internet of things, wearables, system-
atization of knowledge
I. INTRODUCTION
Personally Identiﬁable Information is a concept describing
linking of attributes (has cancer or is in a certain location)
to a particular person. It ranges from strictly private data like
phone number or address, through common locations all the
way to browser ﬁngerprinting [1].
The market of wearable technology is predicted to rise
to over $37B by the end of 2020 [2]. It is not yet well
understood what will be the consequences of such expansion
on privacy and security. One is sure: nowadays computer
security impacts everyone, even if they don’t use what they
think of as a ”computer” [3]. In fact, any modern computer
is a system far too complex for any individual to grasp it as
a whole. The problem of securing every element of the stack
gets additionally complicated when we grow it by connecting
several devices into Internet of Things. The number of attack
vectors does not simply become a sum of attacks on each
device included.
With our work we contribute by:
1) Systematization of Knowledge
2) Possible Attack Vectors for Wearables
3) Security of Internet of Things
4) Countermeasures and defenses to the identiﬁed prob-
lems
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next
section talks about the history: what were the threats that
were common to laptops and smartphones, and what were
the problems previously unknown that emerged with the
popularization of the smartphones. Section II describes the
model that we built to evaluate any new device. We then
apply this model to present the evaluation of wearables in
Section III. Next, in Section IV we spent some time to point
out the elements very speciﬁc to the nature of Internet of
Things. Finally, in Section V we present some of the suggested
defenses and mitigations, and conclude in Section VI.
II. BUILDING A MODEL
We have found very few approaches that try to systematize
the evaluation of the devices. Among them there is [4] where
the authors tried to predict the future of mobile phones by an-
alyzing the models, algorithms, applications and middleware.
In their followup work from 2014 [5], they note however,
that the approach did not prove to be useful, and they failed
to predict certain developments. Another notable paper was
written by Delac et al [6], in which authors summarize the
mobile security threats. It is a good but post-factum analysis,
and their model does not scale to other device types.
We assume that the technology moves in an upward spiral
manner and every new device is build on top of the previous
ones, which makes the assessment simpler. Moreover, we
believe we can build a universal security stack where each
layer is protected by the previous ones. Lastly we think a
complete analysis can be performed by naming the assets,
identifying the threats, looking at historical vulnerabilities and
attacks, and deﬁning the risks.
Security assessment can be seen as a cycle of 6 steps.
Initially, we deﬁne the assets a device can hold, next we try
to ﬁnd the threats, identify the vulnerabilities, and ways to
exploit them, ﬁnally predicting the risks connected to those
we can focus on designing countermeasures and implementing
defenses. However, looking just at the big picture might not be
enough for a complex system. That is why we deﬁne layers
of security stack that need to be inspected. On the bottom
there is the Network Infrastructure - everything that allows a
device to stay connected. Next comes the hardware - physical
elements that comprise a device, like sensors, memory etc.
Together with it we need to consider the drivers that allow
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Fig. 1. Model for security evaluation of a new device.
for access and manipulation of the device. The layer above
that is the Operating System(OS) that governs the behavior
of the device, and manages access control to the ﬁle systems.
On top of the OS, in most cases, sit the applications - some
devices, like the ﬁtness trackers will not allow for third party
applications, but still there is a software installed in addition
to the OS. Finally we come to the user data which is all the
information that an owner of the device generates, everything
that can be considered PII. We put privacy on top of the stack,
as protecting it mostly means protecting from leakage of user
data. The model we build based on the above assumptions is
presented in Figure 1.
III. SECURITY EVALUATION OF WEARABLES
Having a model and some hints on what are the differences
and commonalities between security challenges on laptops and
mobile devices, we now move to evaluation of the wearables.
A. Assets
We consider four types of wearable devices: ﬁtness track-
ers, smartwatches, headmounted devices and medical de-
vices(IMDs).
Each layer of the security stack has many assets connected
to it. In case of mobile devices and smartwatches we ﬁrst have
the network: the contents of communication that goes over the
channels and the infrastructure. Next, there is the hardware:
sensors the device has. The more sensors there are, the more
possibilities of attacks.
On the software side, we start with the drivers: ensuring
the integrity of the binary ﬁles so that the attacker cannot
manipulate the hardware. In the Operating System we have
its integrity, access to the memory, availability. Next, come
the applications. What is protected is again thier integrity and
availability of the services.
We then come to the third big part - the user data and
privacy. In case of ﬁtness trackers data includes ﬁtness level
that comes from monitoring the heart rate – the pulse, estima-
tion of calories burned etc, location over time, sleep patterns
and user-input data like their age, weight, height and so on.
In terms of smartwatches in addition to the above we have
much more elaborate health data that can be tracked either
with the watch itself or by connecting other monitors to it.
These include e.g. nutrition facts, reproductive health, blood
pressure, temperature and so on. Additional data contain things
we normally think of in terms of mobile devices: recordings
and photos, contacts, passwords, list of applications, emails
and messages and so on. Lastly, protecting the integrity and
conﬁdentiality of the data stored.
B. Threats
Wearables have the same set of sensors, are connected,
quite powerful, very personal. Depending on the category,
the threat models will be slightly different: ﬁtness trackers
and medical devices are less powerful, thus will not be used
for heavy computations, while smartwatches and glasses are
almost identical in construction to mobile devices and will be
exposed to threats.
On the network level the threats are similar, as the assets are
also fairly identical: the Golden Graal is to be able to intercept
and possibly modify data that come from and to the wearable.
The impact and incentive, however, is higher as the data is
more valuable. Most of the wearables use the same connectiv-
ity methods as mobile devices: Bluetooth, ANT radio, cellular
data and Wi-Fi. Some devices, use proprietary protocols or
advance of software-deﬁned radio (SDR) enabled decoding
of proprietary wireless communication standards. [7]. The
threats include: stealing the contents of communication, gain-
ing access to the elements of a network (eg., Wi-Fi hotspots,
Base transceiver station (BTS) etc.), modifying the contents
of communication and altering the message path (forwarding
the message to unauthorized person).
Most of the wearables, are still dependent on a ”bigger
brother” - be it a smartphone, a laptop, or a dedicated terminal
- to process data and perform heavier computations. Thus an-
other threat is intercepting or modifying that communication.
That requires compromising the OS or gaining access to the
hardware. As wearable devices almost always have a full OS
installed, in these terms, again the threats popular in mobile
devices will also apply to them. Thus, poor user authentication
due to the form factor and lack of secure key storage can be
seen as big challanges.
Finally, threats to privacy on wearables are more signiﬁcant.
Data is collected unconciously and becones very valuble. Its
improper protection of the data may also lead to leakages
that can be dangerous (revealing information about location),
embarrassing (search history), or cause ﬁnancial losses (access
to payment information). Moreover the stealth capturing of
scenes can be abused by either the attacker or the owner spying
on the surrounding. Until today many companies have ot yet
included Wearables into their Mobile Device Management
policies.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Final threat to privacy is based on the correlating data.
What happens if the increased heart rate is combined with
information that the user is in a hotel during work hours?
What is in addition to it we can also ﬁnd the sounds in the
room? Can we then accuse them of adultery?
Due to the form factor of the screens the way we inteact
with wearables has changed compared to other devices. Voice
recognition became more popular way of navigating these
devices which means more data transmitted and stored over
potentaily insecure channel. Lack of proper displays also
impairs the way we can inform users about the privacy policies
and warnings, which means poor transparency. Wearable de-
vices are powerful, have access to a lot of information about
their owners, yet present no transparency of what tasks are
being executed.
Laptops gather information about our activity, mostly things
we download, history of usage. Smartphones have the ability
to record elements like our position, movement, things that
happen around us - through camera applications. Wearables go
further. More than any others, these devices are able to collect
more precise data over time - gathering a detailed description
of the owner’s life. They can also be better instrumented
to understand the context in which user is. Without good
diversiﬁcation it is easy to gain access to information about
user’s whole life just by attacking this singe element.
Wearables as a new category of devices are not yet subject
to any standardization procedures. We still lack policies that
would describe how to deal with the authentication problems
- what are good ways to implement secure storage on devices,
how to manage the Personally Identiﬁable Information(PII),
and most importantly - what to do with very sensitive data,
like health results. The threat is that without such standards
every manufacturer will implement their own, possibly faulty,
mechanisms.
C. Vulnerabilities and Attacks
One of the earliest attack on ﬁtness tracker is done by
Rahman et. al [8] using Fitbit. It presents attack on spooﬁng
device sensor, eavesdropping and injecting data between base
and web services.
1) Smart Watches: A good overview is provided by HP
Fortify and the Internet of Things report [9]. They have
evaluated top 10 smartwatches and found that 70% of the
ﬁrmwares is sent through unencrytpted channels, 30% of
the devices were vulnerable to Account Harvesting, allowing
attackers to guess login credentials and gain access to user
account, and as much as 90% of communication(!) could be
easily intercepted.
One of the earliest attacks on MDs is presented by Halperin
et. al [7] in 2008. This work covers security of externally
controllable implanted pacemaker. Kune et. al [10] presented
EMI injection attack on medical sensors inside pacemaker,
which could trigger unintended operation of medical devices.
In October 2011 Barnaby Jack managed to override the
insulin pump’s radio control and its vibrating alert safety
feature, enabling to dose a an unaware patient with a lethal
Fig. 2. Attack Sophistication vs. Intruder Technical Knowledge.
amount of insulin [11]. Li et. al [12] also presented an attack
on insulin pump with similar result.
The conclusion can be drawn that a signiﬁcant problem with
medical wearables comes from the fact that we are still in the
phase of patching together existing devices with embedded
computers rather than designing them from the scratch. We
have little to no “Security by Design” approach, which is
crucial as we are speaking of things that when exploited, more
than any others, can threaten human lives.
Wearables mostly inherit Operating Systems from smart-
phones. That means that whatever could be exploited on one
can also be done on the other. Thankfully manufacturers tend
to improve their systems and patch the bugs which means that
old problems cannot be revisited. However we have already
seen report that Google Glass runs Android 4.0.4, which is
subject to the adb restore race condition [13].
D. Risks
In his report from 2002, Lipson, presented how the so-
phistication of attacks developed while the intruders technical
knowledge dropped over time [14]. Figure 2 is an extension
of the original one with attacks that have become biggest risks
to smartphones, like rootkits or location tracking. As can be
seen, we believe that there was a brief spike in the requirement
in the knowledge of an intruder when a new device type was
introduced - it was no longer as obvious as before how to
attack it. But we quickly got back to repackaging everything
into simple tools and today, it is enough to go on a website
that will give you those information, or download a simple
package to jailbreak your iPhone.
The risks are directly proportional to what the attacker can
gain. In the era of laptops the goal was gaining access to
computing power. Distributed attacks were created so that
viruses could spread in millions of copies and allow intruders
to create a network of computers working to their advantage.
Today even the attacker model changed: one is Malfoy, who
owns a device and wants to root it. He becomes a hostile actor
towards his own device. Second is Mark, who tries to steal data
off other devices. And Mark in the world of smartphones will
not seek computing power. It is too cheap to buy otherwise.
He will want to gain access to PII, most probably to later sell
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

it to advertising companies or governments. Today it is the
information that brings money and is most valuable.
IV. WHEN IT ALL COMES TOGETHER: IOT
Internet of Things(IoT) is not just a combination of various
devices connected with each other. The attack surface is not
calculated by a simple addition of all attacks known to each
of the elements of IoT but a multiplication.
A. Assets
For the purpose of this paper we will focus on a ”single
user IoT”: what happens when we connect wearables with
smartphones and laptops. On top of what each of those
”things” brings to the table additional assets include:
• communication between devices,
• ability to control one through the others,
• ability access data over another device,
• pervasiveness - even if one device is not there, another
will be,
• permissions given to each device.
On the last point: there is no clear way how to negotiate and
see sharing data between the devices. It is not necessarily the
case that user will agree to tracking on every element of IoT
- if so, how should that communicate to the other ”things”?
B. Threats
The problem with IoT is that each of its elements is
different, yet a security solution must cover it all. The design is
inﬂuenced by the threat model, device architecture, protocols
and interfaces required and power and performance targets. In
addition to protecting each element separately, a mechanism of
ensuring trust between them has to be deployed. Now, the CIA
– Conﬁdentiality, Integrity and Availability has a second level.
Each ”thing” has to have an identity that can be proven to other
devices, it has to act in a predictable way that cannot be altered
by an attacker to change the behaviour of the whole system.
What follows is that the communication channels between
the elements have to be protected from unauthorized access,
as well as the data on the devices. Most importantly, it is
crucial to ensure a certain separation – so that failure of one
”thing” does not compromise the whole system. The devices
that comprise IoT are often produced by various vendors and
need to communicate, which may create various problems with
the protocols: they need to be well examined and understood.
C. Vulnerabilities and Attacks
Security of IoT is a big problem. 80 percent of Amazon’s
top 25 best-selling SOHO wireless router models have security
vulnerabilities [15]. What is more scary, the same report states
that almost one third of IT professionals and 46% of employ-
ees do not change the default administrator password on their
wireless routers. A big part of IoT threat is that whatever
happens the impact will be bigger. There are more devices,
more computing power, more data, thus more incentives and
more vulnerabilities.
IoT devices are operating in non-traditional area of net-
work, like personal area network (PAN), body area network
(BAN) or controller area network (CAN). Like Ubertooth for
Bluetooth, KillerBee can decode ZigBee and IEEE 802.15.4
packets. [16] ZigBee and/or IEEE 802.15.4 is used in home
appliances, thermostats, manufacturing systems, medical de-
vices, retail, transportation, etc. KillerBee provides tools to
capture and decode 802.15.4 signals, with custom ﬁrmware
on AVR RZ Raven USB stick as radio device. Choi et. al [17]
presented reverse engineering IEEE 802.15.4 based home and
transportation appliance using KillerBee.
IoT devices communicating with BLE or other insecure
channel share the communication privacy and identity prob-
lems [3], [18]. Unlike wearables, IoT devices are designed
with infrequent human interaction and longer continuous op-
eration in mind. As a result, security incident reported by IoT
devices might not be handled in timely manner, and software
patching for security problem could not be possible in some
cases where parts are discontinued or a manufacturer has been
closed.
V. DEFENSES AND MITIGATIONS
We will now discuss technical countermeasuers and design
considerations of wearable devices which allow the users to
monitor and control the exposure of their private data from
the wearable device.
A. Authentication and encryption techniques
Although the main focus of existing literature is on securing
MDs [19], we believe that the same defence measures can be
applied to other types of wearable devices. One of the ﬁrst
concepts proposed was symmetric-key based authentication
methods for distributed access control in wearables [20]. By
pre-distributing the keys, the device and any authorized body
can easily generate pairwise keys to perform authentication.
However, Symmetric Key Cryptography (SKC) based methods
suffer from numerous disadvantages [21].
There are SKC-based techniques that do not depend on pre-
distributed keys and require additional hardware devices [22].
This out of band secure channels inlude USB connections [23],
infrared [24], visual [25], audio but mean adding extra hard-
ware. This requirement is unrealistic and is against the global
trend of device miniaturization.
In Identity Based Encryption (IBE) technique where no
prior key distribution is necessary between the users and
devicescite [26]. On the other hand, traditional IBE techniques
demand heavy computation and are not appropriate for body
area networks. To solve this problem authors of [27] provide
a lightweight IBE-based access control mechanism built using
elliptical curve cryptography (ECC). Its main limitation is that
once a certain number of secret keys are leaked, the master key
can be compromised. Besides IBE, Attribute Based Encryption
(ABE) is also studied in the literature. For example, ciphertext
policy ABE was introduced in [28] to allow role-based access
control on encrypted data in WBAN’s.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Authentication with non-cryptographic methods such as
proximity based, biometric based and channel based methods
are also studied in the literature. By extending the Difﬁe-
Hellman (DH) key exchange protocol the authors in [29]
could develop authentication mechanism for co-located de-
vices. Ensemble technique [29] and co-location based pair-
ing scheme [30] also propose proximity based authentication
scheme. Ramussen et al. [31] use ultrasonic sound signals
to compute the distance between the programmer and IMD.
Capkun et al. [32] proposed integrity code which protects
the integrity of the messages sent over insecure wireless
channel. Gollkota et al. [33] proposed tamper-evident pairing.
It assumes infeasibility of signal cancellation, and exploits uni-
directional error detection codes to provide message tamper-
evidence.
The use of physiological signals (biometric data) for secur-
ing wireless medical devices was ﬁrst introduced in 2003 [34],
and later adopted for electro-cardiogram(ECG) and photo-
plethysmogram (PPG) signals by Poon et al. in 2006 [35].
Further, in [36], inter-pulse intervals (IPIs) and heartbeats
are potential source for generating secret keys. Besides that,
a more robust usage of IPIs with measurement noise for
authentication is presented in [37]. However, encryption based
on ECG signals is more prominent in the literature [38],
[39], because of its higher randomness as compared to other
physiological signals (PVs)such as heart rate, glucose level
in blood, blood pressure and temperature along with the
preceding ones.
In general, due to their unique, random and time-sensitive
nature, physiological information can serve as a reliable
source for authentication and secret key derivation among
the wearable devices. Nevertheless the major drawback is
that physiological information is usually accompanied with
high amounts of noise and variability. Hence it is difﬁcult to
guarantee consistent physiological measurements with same
accuracy for sensors located on different positions on human
body. Moreover, all physiological parameters do not have the
same level of entropy for key generation.
B. Design Considerations
Hitachi’s Business Microscope identity badge, which con-
tains embedded infrared sensors, an accelerometer and a
microphone sensor, purports to capture the interaction patterns
in the workplace but also the quality of employee collabora-
tion [40]. Monitoring of our emotions, health status and the
quality of our human interactions strikes at the very core of
our most intimate selves. The interaction medium with the
wearable device also has an impact on the user’s privacy. The
users capability to modify, perhaps switching the input mode
from audio to text would be a possible design modiﬁcation to
enhance privacy.
User privacy is one aspect but the privacy of others around
the user is another. With wearable devices, that are seamlessly
embodied into undistinguished objects, such as shirt buttons,
eyeglass frames, watches it is quite effortless to gather infor-
mation about others without their awareness [41]. Similarly,
users have privacy concerns about location information, pri-
marily because wrist-mounted devices are able to track their
position and immediately publish it online in social media
applications to a network of contacts. To combat this issue
users must be able to choose their desired level of privacy.
Roesner et al. identiﬁed potential security issues with wear-
able devices and explored the problems these devices create
in terms of law and policy [42]. Further, researchers have
studied several methods to protect privacy in an IoT scenario.
Examples of such works include frameworks to design for pro-
tocols for communication, privacy focused designs, protocols
for anonymous communication, evaluation metrics for privacy
and its models. At the same time, the legal frameworks need
to adapt to the use of wearables, as they put new requirements
on the protection of personal integrity and privacy as well as
information security.
It is essential to abide by certain design principles enumer-
ated below, for protecting privacy in the wearable computing
environment, as the characteristics of today’s wearables evolve
in tandem with the Internet of Things.
• transparent authentication and security mechanisms and
device functionalities
• dynamically calibrated privacy rules that provide tight
control of what the device does
• user controlled network connection and disconnection
• privilege escalation on the device
Finally, practical implementation of security measures in
wearable devices depends on several factors. There is no single
method that suits all situations. One needs to collectively con-
sider the application security requirements, system security re-
quirements, hardware/software/physical/power restrictions and
the possible tradeoffs among them.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we built a general model to evaluate any new
device on the market based on the past experiences rather than
from the scratch. We observed how did the attacks change
when smartphones took over the market. We applied the model
to predict the future problems that we will see in the wearables.
We also presented what we see as the biggest challenges that
Internet of Things will face - the multiplication rather than
addition of attack vectors. Finally, we discussed what could
be the possible defense mechanisms that we should build prior
to the attacks.
Among various security measures, authentication and en-
cryption are the crucial steps in building secure communica-
tions with the wearables. Additionally we need to develop dy-
namically calibrated privacy rules to meet individual’s privacy
needs and expectations, integrate simple design features so that
the wearable device can reﬂect personal privacy preferences,
and call on organizations to enhance their privacy policies with
dynamic and interactive data maps and infographics to show
relationships in the wearable computing device ecosystem.
Finally, it is important to touch on the question of transparency.
While security is a problem that can be boiled to meeting a
certain standard, sometimes the best we can do in terms of
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

privacy is being clear about what and when happens on the
device. We are lacking mechanisms that inform users that their
data is being collected and uploaded in the real time. We see
that as the next challenge to the academia.
REFERENCES
[1] E. McCallister, T. Grance, and K. A. Scarfone, “Sp 800-122. guide
to protecting the conﬁdentiality of personally identiﬁable information
(pii),” Tech. Rep., 2010.
[2] Research and Markets, “Global smart wearables market forecast
and opportunities, 2020,” Tech. Rep., 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/j7fhxw/global smart
[3] F.
Stajano,
Security
for
Ubiquitous
Computing,
2002.
[Online].
Available: http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/∼fms27/secubicomp/
[4] G.-C. Roman, G. P. Picco, and A. L. Murphy, “Software engineering
for
mobility:
A
roadmap,”
ser.
ICSE
’00.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/336512.336567
[5] G. P. Picco, C. Julien, A. L. Murphy, M. Musolesi, and G.-C.
Roman, “Software engineering for mobility: Reﬂecting on the past,
peering
into
the
future,”
ser.
FOSE
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2593882.2593884
[6] G. Delac, M. Silic, and J. Krolo, “Emerging security threats for mobile
platforms,” in MIPRO, 2011 Proceedings of the 34th International
Convention.
[7] D. Halperin, T. S. Heydt-Benjamin, B. Ransford, S. S. Clark, B. Defend,
W. Morgan, K. Fu, T. Kohno, and W. H. Maisel, “Pacemakers and
Implantable Cardiac Deﬁbrillators: Software Radio Attacks and Zero-
Power Defenses,” Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Security and
Privacy, 2008.
[8] M. Rahman, B. Carbunar, and M. Banik, “Fit and vulnerable:
Attacks
and
defenses
for
a
health
monitoring
device,”
Privacy
Enhancing Technologies Symposium, 2013. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1304.5672
[9] C.
Smith
and
D.
Miessler,
“Internet
of
things
security
study:
Smartwatches,” Tech. Rep., 2015. [Online]. Available: http://go.saas.hp.
com/fod/internet-of-things
[10] D. F. Kune, J. Backes, S. S. Clark, D. Kramer, M. Reynolds, K. Fu,
Y. Kim, and W. Xu, “Ghost talk: Mitigating EMI signal injection attacks
against analog sensors,” Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Security
and Privacy, 2013.
[11] D. Goodin, “Insulin pump hack delivers fatal dosage over the air,” The
Register, 27 Oct 2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.theregister.co.
uk/2011/10/27/fatal insulin pump attack/
[12] C. Li, A. Raghunathan, and N. K. Jha, “Hijacking an insulin pump:
Security attacks and defenses for a diabetes therapy system,” 2011 IEEE
13th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and
Services, HEALTHCOM 2011, 2011.
[13] [Online].
Available:
https://twitter.com/saurik/status/
327857009754001408
[14] H. F. Lipson, H. F. Lipson, P. D, and P. D, “Tracking and tracing cyber-
attacks: Technical challenges and global policy,” 2002.
[15] T.
Vulnerability
and
E.
R.
Team,
“Soho
wireless
router
(in)security,”
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.tripwire.com/
register/soho-wireless-router-insecurity/showMeta/2/
[16] J. Wright, “KillerBee: Practical ZigBee Exploitation Framework,” 2009.
[17] K. Choi, Y. Son, J. Lee, S. Kim, and Y. Kim, “Frying PAN : Dissecting
Customized Protocol for Personal Area Network?” Proceedings of
the 16th International Workshop on Information Security Applications,
2015.
[18] D. Kozlov, J. Veijalainen, and Y. Ali, “Security and Privacy Threats in
IoT Architectures,” International Conference on Body Area Networks,
2012.
[19] M. Rushanan, A. D. Rubin, D. F. Kune, and C. M. Swanson, “SoK:
Security and Privacy in Implantable Medical Devices and Body Area
Networks,” Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy,
2014.
[20] M. Mana, M. Feham, and B. A. Bensaber, “A light weight protocol
to provide location privacy in wireless body area networks.” [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1103.3308
[21] M. Li, W. Lou, and K. Ren, “Data security and privacy in wireless
body area networks,” Wireless Commun., 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MWC.2010.5416350
[22] M. Li, S. Yu, W. Lou, and K. Ren, “Group device pairing based secure
sensor association and key management for body area networks,” ser.
INFOCOM’10. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
1833515.1833857
[23] F. Stajano and R. Anderson, “The resurrecting duckling: Security issues
for ad-hoc wireless networks.”
[24] D. B. Smetters, D. Balfanz, D. K. Smetters, P. Stewart, and H. C. Wong,
“Talking to strangers: Authentication in ad-hoc wireless networks,”
2002.
[25] C.-H. O. Chen, C.-W. Chen, C. Kuo, Y.-H. Lai, J. M. McCune,
A. Studer, A. Perrig, B.-Y. Yang, and T.-C. Wu, “Gangs: Gather,
authenticate ’n group securely,” ser. MobiCom ’08. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1409944.1409957
[26] C. Rong and H. Cheng, “Authenticated health monitoring scheme for
wireless body sensor networks,” ser. BodyNets ’12. [Online]. Available:
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2442691.2442700
[27] C. C. Tan, H. Wang, S. Zhong, and Q. Li, “Ibe-lite: A lightweight
identity-based cryptography for body sensor networks,” Trans. Info.
Tech. Biomed., 2009. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
TITB.2009.2033055
[28] J. Bethencourt, A. Sahai, and B. Waters, “Ciphertext-policy attribute-
based encryption,” ser. SP ’07. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/SP.2007.11
[29] A. Varshavsky, A. Scannell, A. LaMarca, and E. De Lara, “Amigo:
Proximity-based authentication of mobile devices,” ser. UbiComp ’07.
[Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1771592.1771607
[30] S. Mathur, R. Miller, A. Varshavsky, W. Trappe, and N. Mandayam,
“Proximate: Proximity-based secure pairing using ambient wireless
signals,” ser. MobiSys ’11. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/1999995.2000016
[31] K.
B.
Rasmussen
and
S.
ˇCapkun,
“Realization
of
rf
distance
bounding,”
ser.
USENIX
Security’10.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1929820.1929854
[32] S. Capkun, M. Cagalj, R. Rengaswamy, I. Tsigkogiannis, J.-P. Hubaux,
and M. Srivastava, “Integrity codes: Message integrity protection and
authentication over insecure channels,” Dependable and Secure Com-
puting, IEEE Transactions on, 2008.
[33] S. Gollakota, N. Ahmed, N. Zeldovich, and D. Katabi, “Secure in-band
wireless pairing,” in In USENIXSecurity Sym.,2011.
[34] S. Cherukuri, K. Venkatasubramanian, and S. Gupta, “Biosec: a biomet-
ric based approach for securing communication in wireless networks
of biosensors implanted in the human body,” in Parallel Processing
Workshops, 2003, 2003.
[35] C. C. Poon, Y.-T. Zhang, and S.-D. Bao, “A novel biometrics
method to secure wireless body area sensor networks for telemedicine
and
m-health,”
Comm.
Mag.,
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCOM.2006.1632652
[36] S.-D. Bao, C. C. Poon, Y.-T. Zhang, and L.-F. Shen, “Using the
timing information of heartbeats as an entity identiﬁer to secure body
sensor network,” Trans. Info. Tech. Biomed., 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TITB.2008.926434
[37] M. Rostami, A. Juels, and F. Koushanfar, “Heart-to-heart (h2h):
authentication for implanted medical devices,” ser. CCS ’13. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2508859.2516658
[38] K. Venkatasubramanian, A. Banerjee, and S. Gupta, “Pska: Usable and
secure key agreement scheme for body area networks,” Information
Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, 2010.
[39] F. Xu, Z. Qin, C. Tan, B. Wang, and Q. Li, “Imdguard: Securing
implantable medical devices with the external wearable guardian,” in
INFOCOM, 2011 Proceedings IEEE.
[40] R. G. of the Ofﬁce of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada, “Wearable
computing: Challenges and opportunities for privacy protection,” 2014.
[41] K. Krombholz, A. Dabrowski, M. Smith, and E. Weippl, “Ok glass, leave
me alone: Towards a systematization of privacy enhancing technologies
for wearable computing,” in 1st Workshop on Wearable Security and
Privacy, 2015.
[42] F. Roesner, T. Denning, B. C. Newell, T. Kohno, and R. Calo,
“Augmented reality: Hard problems of law and policy,” ser. UbiComp
’14 Adjunct. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2638728.
2641709
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

