Highlights on a Study of Bicriteria Routing Methods with Protection
for WDM Networks with Dynamic Trafﬁc
Carlos Simões
Polytechnic Institute of Viseu/
INESC Coimbra
Viseu, Portugal
e-mail: csimoes@ipv.pt
José Craveirinha and Teresa Gomes
Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Coimbra / INESC Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
e-mail: jcrav@deec.uc.pt; teresa@deec.uc.pt
Abstract—Dedicated path protection is a robust and efﬁcient
way to increase the resiliency of a telecommunication network.
Two variants of a bi-criteria dedicated path protection model for
wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) networks in a dynamic
trafﬁc scenario, are presented. The proposed routing approach
is based on a bi-criteria optimization model for the calculation
of disjoint lightpath pairs in WDM networks with dedicated
protection. A performance analysis study of the proposed routing
method considering two different metric pairs as objective
functions and using an exact resolution approach, in a reference
test network, is highlighted. The presented simulation results
show the potential advantages of this approach when compared
with single criteria optimization approaches.
Keywords-optical networks; multicriteria optimization; routing;
protection.
I. INTRODUCTION
Given the enormous transfer rate available in the links of
a WDM network, a single failure potentially results in huge
data losses and service disruptions to many customers. To
circumscribe this potential problem and ensure a high de-
gree of availability, network operators adopt protection and/or
restoration schemes [1]. In protection mechanisms, an optical
connection (or lightpath) can be protected against failures
by a precomputed backup route. Alternatively, in restoration
schemes, the necessary resources to recover a failed connec-
tion are only determined and reserved after a failure occurs.
Usually, restoration mechanisms are more resource efﬁcient
since they do not reserve resources in advance, and provide
recovery against different types of failures (including multiple
failures), but they need more time for resource determination
and reservation, and the recovery will only be successful
if there are sufﬁcient resources in the network. Conversely,
protection schemes have faster recovery times and can insure
resource availability in the failure scenarios for which they
have been designed, at the expense of more resources.
In path protection against any single failure, it is necessary
to calculate a pair of disjoint paths - the Active Path (AP) to
be used in normal conditions and the Backup Path (BP) to
be used if a failure occurs. With dedicated path protection,
both the resources of the AP and the BP are assigned to the
connection and will only be released when connection ends.
The problem of ﬁnding two link disjoint paths can be solved
in polynomial time using Suurballe’s algorithm [2].
Optical WDM networks consist of optical ﬁber links, inter-
connected by optical nodes (routers). Each ﬁber link comprises
several channels, with different wavelengths, and each optical
node supports wavelength based switching or routing. The
conﬁguration of these optical nodes allows the establishment
of point-to-point optical paths (lightpaths), between node pairs.
A lightpath may span several links and consist of a wavelength
channel in each of these links, interconnected at the nodes
by means of optical routing. In order to set up a lightpath,
the network needs to decide on the topological path and the
wavelength(s) assigned to the lightpath - the so-called Routing
and Wavelength Assignment problem (RWA). In the absence
of wavelength converters at the optical nodes, a lightpath
must use the same wavelength on all the links of its route
(the wavelength continuity constraint), but wavelengths can
be reused by different lightpaths in the network, as long as
they do not share any ﬁber link.
In a dynamic trafﬁc scenario (Dynamic Lightpath Establish-
ment problem – DLE), a lightpath is set up for each connection
request as it arrives, and is released after some ﬁnite amount
of time. The objective is usually to choose routes and assign
wavelengths in a manner that minimizes the overall blocking.
To overcome the high complexity of this problem, the routing
sub-problem and the wavelength assignment sub-problem are
solved separately.
Concerning dedicated path protection in WDM networks
(Survivable Routing and Wavelength Assignment – SRWA),
the problem of ﬁnding a pair of disjoint paths under the
wavelength continuity constraint is NP-complete [3].
Even though, in general, the routing methods try to optimise
only one metric, typically using some variant of a shortest
path algorithm, optical networks are characterised in terms of
performance by multiple metrics. Furthermore, the design of
real networks involves multiple, often conﬂicting objectives
and constraints.
In this context, it seems potentially advantageous to develop
multicriteria models that explicitly represent the different
performance objectives to be optimised, enabling to treat in a
consistent manner the trade offs among these objectives. In this
type of models, the concept of optimal solution is replaced by
the concept of non-dominated solution. A feasible solution is
said to be non-dominated if it is not possible to ﬁnd any other
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-315-5
INNOV 2013 : The Second International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

feasible solution which enables one criteria to be improved
without sacriﬁcing, at least, one of the remaining criteria.
Reference [4] presents a state-of-art review on multicriteria
approaches in communication networks and includes a section
dedicated to routing models. A survey of multicriteria routing
models can be seen in [5].
In this paper, we focus on the problem of dedicated path
protection against link and node failures with dynamic trafﬁc,
and present a performance analysis study of two variants of
a bicriteria model for the route calculation problem using an
exact resolution approach. The ﬁrst variant of the model was
initially proposed in [6], but in a context of incremental trafﬁc.
The two major contributions of this work in progress will
be: i) the consideration of speciﬁc variants of a bi-criteria
model for dynamic trafﬁc instead of incremental trafﬁc (which
is a fundamental change in the underlying assumptions of
the model) using an exact resolution method; ii) an extensive
performance comparison of the bi-criteria model variants with
the associated single-criterion models using reference test
networks. The analysis in this paper considers relevant network
performance measures, namely, the global blocking proba-
bility, the carried trafﬁc and percentage of used bandwidth.
A dynamic trafﬁc model in a benchmark network will be
considered.
The remaining of this paper is organised as follows. In
Section II, the bicriteria model is presented, the metrics
are introduced and two versions of the bicriteria model are
considered. Section III identiﬁes the relevant parameters for
performance assessment of the model, presents the simulation
results and a comparative study of the models. Finally, some
conclusions are drawn in Section IV.
II. MODEL DESCRIPTION
In this section, we describe the features of the proposed
bicriteria routing model associated with the Dynamic Light-
path Establishment problem (DLE) with dynamic trafﬁc in
WDM networks. The model was developed for application in
large WDM networks, with multiple wavelengths per ﬁber and
multiﬁbers per link. Network reliability is improved through
dedicated path protection, so a node disjoint path pair must
be obtained for each connection request. In order to cover
a wide variety of networks, different types of nodes are
considered (with complete wavelength conversion capability,
limited range conversion or no wavelength conversion capabil-
ity) in the model. Due to the real-time nature of the intended
application, solutions should be obtained in a short time. This
requirement lead to the separation of the routing and wave-
length assignment problems, also having in mind an automatic
selection of the solution (among the non-dominated solutions,
previously identiﬁed). The wavelength assignment problem is
solved separately, after the bicriteria routing problem.
Let the WDM network be represented by R = {N, L}
where N is the set of nodes and L is the set of links. A
topological path, p, in the network is deﬁned by: a source
node s, a destination node t and an ordered sequence of nodes
and links from s to t. In addition to the ordered sequence of
nodes and links, a lightpath pλ also comprises the ﬁber used
in each link and the wavelength in each of the ﬁbers.
A. Bicriteria Model
In a ﬁrst variant of the model (BiC_A Model), we consider
two additive metrics for the active and the protection paths
as objective functions (o.f.). The ﬁrst o.f. is the sum of the
inverse of the free bandwidth in the links of each path:
min
z∈D


c1(z) =
X
l∈z
1
bT
l
=
X
l∈p
1
bT
l
+
X
l∈q
1
bT
l



(1)
where D represents the set of topological path pairs z ≡ (p, q)
for the origin–destination node pair (s, t) such that p and q
are node disjoint and correspond to viable optical lightpaths
(taking into account the availability of wavelengths in the
links and the wavelength conversion capabilities of the nodes),
and bT
l
is the total available capacity in link l, in terms of
free wavelengths. This criterion aims to avoid more congested
links, promoting a balanced distribution of the trafﬁc through-
out the network, hence decreasing the blocking probability and
increasing the expected revenue.
The second objective consists of minimizing the number of
links of the two paths (hop count), and is intended to avoid
bandwidth waste, hence favouring global efﬁciency in the use
of network resources:
min
z∈D {c2(z) = h(p) + h(q)}
(2)
In many cases, whenever the objective functions are con-
ﬂicting, there is no feasible solution which optimises the two
o.f. simultaneously. The algorithmic approach described in
section II-B is used to obtain a good compromise solution
among the non-dominated solutions of the bicriteria problem:
(PA)
(
minz∈D
n
c1(z) = P
l∈p
1
bT
l + P
l∈q
1
bT
l
o
minz∈D {c2(z) = h(p) + h(q)}
(3)
Another version of the bicriteria model (BiC_B Model) was
also implemented. As in the previous model, the second o.f. is
the hop count, but the ﬁrst one is a load cost function suggested
in [7] for IP/MPLS networks. This load cost function is an
additive metric where the cost of a link is modeled through a
piecewise linear increasing and convex function, the value of
which is inversely proportional to the free capacity. The main
goal of this metric is to avoid congestion, i.e., overloading
of links, and obtain a balanced distribution of the trafﬁc
throughout the network.
The load cost, LCl, of a link l is deﬁned by [7]:
LCl =







ρl
if
0 < ρl < 1
3
3ρl − 2
3
if
1
3 ≤ ρl < 2
3
10ρl − 16
3
if
2
3 ≤ ρl <
9
10
70ρl − 178
3
if
9
10 ≤ ρl < 1
(4)
where ρl denotes the relative occupancy of the link (the ratio
between the occupied bandwidth and the total bandwidth on
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-315-5
INNOV 2013 : The Second International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

the link). The second bicriteria problem, considering dedicated
path protection, is now:
(PB)
(
minz∈D
n
c1(z) = P
l∈p LCl + P
l∈q LCl
o
minz∈D {c2(z) = h(p) + h(q)}
(5)
B. Resolution Approach
Reference [8] proposes an exact algorithm for ﬁnding non-
dominated shortest pairs of disjoint paths that uses the k-
shortest path algorithm MPS [9]. Given an origin-destination
node pair (s, t), the algorithm starts by making a network
topology modiﬁcation, where all nodes and links of the graph,
(N, L), representing the network topology are duplicated and
a new link, with null cost, is added between node t and node
s′ (the duplicate of s). In this new modiﬁed graph, (N ′, L′),
each path from s to t′ (the duplicate of the destination node
t) will correspond to a pair of paths from s to t in the original
topology [8]. Finally, the adapted version of MPS is used for
ranking by non-decreasing order of cost the pairs of paths
z ≡ (p, q), such that p and q are node disjoint. In order
to select the best compromise solution, priority regions are
deﬁned in the objective function space [10]. The ﬁnal solution
is chosen among the non dominated solutions in the highest
priority region, by using a weighted Chebyshev distance to
a reference point (bottom left corner of the region). Further
details of the topological path pair selection can be seen in
[6].
C. Wavelength selection
Having selected a node disjoint path pair, we use the
maximization of the wavelength bottleneck bandwidth, which
corresponds to the choice of the Least Loaded wavelength
(LL) along the links of each of paths in the pair, to make
the wavelength and ﬁber selection. Further details and an
illustrative example of this selection heuristic can be seen
in [11]. Note that, if all the nodes of the network enable
full wavelength conversion, once a viable topological path
is chosen, the choice of the wavelength(s) to be used is
irrelevant in terms of network performance. If the nodes have
no conversion capability, the proposed criterion of wavelength
selection is known in the literature (see, e.g., [12]) to give good
results. In any case, it is also known that in these cases the
critical factor in terms of network performance is the selection
of topological paths, the choice of wavelength having a minor
impact [12].
III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS STUDY
A. Network Performance parameters
Highlights of the results obtained using the two variants
of the bicriteria model, BiC_A corresponding to PA (3) and
BiC_B corresponding to PB (5), will be analysed and com-
pared with the results obtained using single objective formula-
tions, namely, the shortest path in terms of either the number
of hops SP_hop (2), the inverse of the free bandwidth SP_BW
(1), or the load cost SP_LC (c1(z) in (5)), by recurring to
relevant network global performance metrics. The considered
network metrics are: the global blocking probability (fraction
of connection requests that are blocked); the carried trafﬁc; the
percentage of used bandwidth in the network and the point-
to-point blocking probabilities.
B. Comparative Study
This section presents the simulation results in the NSFNET
network [13], with 14 optical nodes and 21 multiﬁber links
(with 16 wavelengths per ﬁber). The results were obtained
from discrete events stochastic simulations, with Poisson traf-
ﬁc generated with intensities proportional to the trafﬁc matrix
presented in [13], which takes into account the distance and
population of the nodes. Concerning the wavelength conver-
sion capabilities, simulations were conducted considering three
different scenarios: all nodes without conversion capability,
ﬁve nodes with total conversion capability, (central nodes were
chosen with this capability), and total conversion capability in
all the nodes.
Figure 1 shows the global blocking probability and the
percentage of used bandwidth for several values of the offered
trafﬁc, with no conversion capability in the network. Clearly,
the single criterion routing model based on hops (SP_hop) has
the worst performance, which conﬁrms that choosing the path
pair based only on the hop count is a poor strategy, in this
type of networks. Model BiC_A presents the lower blocking,
and hence more carried trafﬁc and expected revenue. Thus,
BiC_A outperforms SP_hop and SP_BW, the corresponding
single objective formulations. Concerning BiC_B, its blocking
is quite similar to that presented by SP_LC. However, BiC_B
uses slightly less bandwidth (see Figure 1).
Although not shown here, the results with total wavelength
conversion in the network or with 5 nodes with conversion
exhibit the same behavior pattern: BiC_B and SP_LC have
similar performance, which is better than SP_BW, but worse
than BIC_A. Again, the single objective SP_hop exhibits
the worst performance. As expected, it turns out that the
presence of wavelength conversion enables a slight improve-
ment in the global blocking probability. Furthermore, much
more important than this improvement in global blocking, an
additional advantage provided by the conversion capability is a
substantial improvement in QoS fairness. Indeed, comparing
the point-to-point blocking probabilities in both cases, it is
noted that, for 1000 Erlangs of offered trafﬁc, BIC_A has mean
blocking probability of 0.63% without wavelength conversion
and 0.53% with total conversion, but the maximum point-to-
point blocking probability (usually observed between farther
away nodes) is 2.44% in the former case and 1.42% with total
conversion. For higher values of the offered trafﬁc, without
wavelength conversion, the QoS among node pairs is even
more unbalanced. For example, with BIC_A and 1050 Erlangs
the global blocking probability is 3.16% without conversion
and 2.67% with total conversion, but there are pairs of nodes
for which blocking is 11.8% without conversion and 6.21%
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-315-5
INNOV 2013 : The Second International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

1000
1050
1100
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 
Offered Traffic
Global Blocking (%)
 SP_hop
 SP_BW
 SP_LC
 BiC_A
 BiC_B
1000
1050
1100
90.0
90.5
91.0
91.5
92.0
92.5
93.0
93.5
94.0
94.5
95.0
 
Offered Traffic
Used BW (%)
Figure 1. Global Blocking and Used Bandwidth.
with total conversion.
The maximal point-to-point blocking
is even worse in single criterion models.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER STUDY
A multicriteria approach of the type proposed can explicitly
represent the different performance objectives, enabling to
address, in a mathematically consistent manner, the trade offs
among the various criteria. Two variants of a bicriteria model
for obtaining a topological path pair for every lightpath request
in a WDM network with dynamic trafﬁc were presented. The
proposed resolution approach uses an exact bicriteria shortest
path pair algorithm and an automated solution selection proce-
dure. Having obtained a non-dominated topological path pair,
a heuristic procedure was then used to assign wavelengths to
the links.
The performance of two variants of the bicriteria model
was analysed in comparison with the corresponding single
objective approaches. The model BiC_B did not show a
signiﬁcant advantage in comparison with SP_LC. But the
BiC_A exhibits better performance than any of the single ob-
jective models. Furthermore, in conjunction with wavelength
conversion, BiC_A also allows a higher fairness regarding the
point-to-point blocking probabilities.
Further experimental studies of similar type, with other
reference test networks, will be carried out.
It is important to note that, from a methodological point
of view, the used modeling approach, as indeed any other
shortest path based approach, is a ﬂow oriented optimization
approach. That is, the path pairs are calculated for each node-
to-node connection request at a time, so that the objective
functions do not integrate explicitly the combined effect of
all possible connections offered to the network. This is an
inherent limitation of this type of approaches, as analysed in
depth in [14] in the context of multicriteria routing models
for MPLS networks. This is an additional reason why it is so
important to make extensive performance analysis studies with
ﬂow oriented models, using relevant network performance
global metrics as in the present work. A more in depth
analysis of these issues in the context of WDM networks,
both at methodological and experimental level (considering
different objective functions and other networks), deserves
further research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially supported by programme
COMPETE of the EC Community Support Framework III
and cosponsored by the EC fund FEDER, by Fundação
para a Ciência e a Tecnologia (FCT) under project grants
PTDC/EEA-TEL/101884/2008 and PEst-C/EEI/UI0308/2011,
by Project CENTRO-07-0224-FEDER-002003, by FLAD
2013/CON29/CAN9 - PROJ 277/12 and by the PhD schol-
arship SFRH/BD/49739/2009, granted by Instituto Politécnico
de Viseu.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Zhang and B. Mukherjee, “A review of fault management in WDM
mesh networks: Basic concepts and research challenges,” IEEE Network,
vol. 18, no. 2, March/April 2004, pp. 41–48.
[2] J. W. Suurballe and R. E. Tarjan, “A quick method for ﬁnding shortest
pairs of disjoint paths,” Networks, vol. 14, no. 2, 1984, pp. 325–336.
[3] S. Yuan and J. P. Jue, “Dynamic lightpath protection in WDM mesh
networks under wavelength-continuity and risk-disjoint constraints,”
Computer Networks, vol. 48, no. 2, Jun. 2005, pp. 91–112.
[4] J. Clímaco and J. Craveirinha, Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis: State
of the Art Surveys, ser. International Series in Operations Research &
Management Science.
New York: Springer Science, 2005, vol. 78,
ch. Multicriteria Analysis in Telecommunication Planning and Design -
Problems and Issues, pp. 899–951.
[5] J. C. N. Clímaco, J. M. F. Craveirinha, and M. M. B. Pascoal,
Advances in Multiple Criteria Decision Making and Human Systems
Management.
IOS Press, 2007, ch. Multicriteria Routing Models in
Telecommunication Networks - Overview and a Case Study, pp. 17–46.
[6] C. Simões, T. Gomes, J. Craveirinha, and J. Clímaco, “Performance
analysis of a bi-objective model for routing with protection in WDM
networks,” Journal of Telecommunications and Information Technology,
vol. 2010/3, Oct. 2010, pp. 25–35.
[7] B. Fortz and M. Thorup, “Optimizing OSPF/IS-IS weights in a changing
world,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 20,
no. 4, May 2002, pp. 756–767.
[8] J. C. N. Clímaco and M. M. B. Pascoal, “Finding non-dominated bicri-
teria shortest pairs of disjoint simple paths,” Computers & Operations
Research, vol. 36, no. 11, Nov. 2009, pp. 2892–2898.
[9] E. Martins, M. Pascoal, and J. Santos, “Deviation algorithms for rank-
ing shortest paths,” International Journal of Foundations of Computer
Science, vol. 10, no. 3, 1999, pp. 247–263.
[10] L. Martins, J. Craveirinha, J. Clímaco, and T. Gomes, “On a bi-
dimensional dynamic alternative routing method,” European Journal of
Operational Research, Advances in Complex Systems Modeling, vol.
166, no. 3, November 2005, pp. 828–842.
[11] T. Gomes, J. Craveirinha, J. Clímaco, and C. Simões, “A bicriteria
routing model for multi-ﬁbre WDM networks,” Photonic Network
Communications, vol. 18, no. 3, Dec. 2009, pp. 287–299.
[12] H. Zang, J. P. Jue, and B. Mukherjee, “A review of routing and
wavelength assignment approaches for wavelength-routed optical WDM
networks,” Optical Networks Magazine, vol. 1, no. 1, Jan. 2000, pp.
47–60.
[13] A. Betker et al., “Reference transport network scenarios,” MultiTeraNet
Report, Tech. Rep., Jul. 2003.
[14] J. Craveirinha, R. Girão-Silva, and J. Clímaco, “A meta-model for
multiobjective routing in MPLS networks,” Central European Journal
of Operations Research, vol. 16, no. 1, Mar. 2008, pp. 79–105.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-315-5
INNOV 2013 : The Second International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

