A Scheme Improving Performance of IEEE 802.11 Multicast Protocol 
 
Bokyung Yoon 
Dep. of Information Communication and Engineering 
Sejong University 
Seoul, Korea, 143-747 
yoonyang77@naver.com 
Hyung Seok Kim 
Dep. of Information Communication and Engineering 
Sejong University 
Seoul, Korea, 143-747 
hyungkim@sejong.edu
 
 
Abstract—The IEEE 802.11 multicast protocol is proper to 
send data to multiple recipients. Nowadays, Wi-Fi equipped 
smart phones are in the access of almost every person which 
increases amount of data transmissions. In this paper, we 
discuss the flaws in existing IEEE 802.11 multicast protocol 
and propose an efficient way to improve its performance. The 
proposed system has an assisting station (AS) and the stations 
that want to join a multicast group have radio frequency 
monitoring 
(RFMON) 
modules 
which 
help 
themselves 
overhear the data. Thus, for multicasting, the access point (AP) 
transmits unicast data to AS by the fixed Internet protocol (IP) 
address while stations in multicast group can also receive the 
data. The proposed system improves efficiency and reliability, 
while reducing delay for multicast transmissions. 
Keywords-IEEE 802.11; Multicast; Wireless Network; 
RFMON mode. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Unicast transmission is to send a message to a single 
destination identified by a unique address in the network. 
Multicast transmission is the delivery of a message or 
information to a group of destinations simultaneously in a 
single transmission from a source. In unicast transmission, a 
sender transmits data frame to a receiver which in turn sends 
back acknowledgment (ACK) to notify the sender of its 
successful reception. If the sender does not receive ACK 
during a fixed time interval, it automatically transmits data 
again. Thus, the unicast can guarantee reliable data 
transmission by feedback whereas multicast does not assure 
reliability as it lacks such ACK process. For this reason, 
multicast transmission has the lowest data transfer rate in 
IEEE 802.11[1]. Using multiple unicast transmissions as an 
alternative for multicasting incurs an overhead problem 
because of multiple ACKs. In this paper, we propose an 
efficient method to improve the performance of multicasting 
by introducing the concept of an assisting station (AS) and 
radio frequency monitoring (RFMON) module.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
describes background and related work. Section 3 presents 
the proposed scheme in detail. Section 4 describes 
performance evaluation and the achieved results. Section 5 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
A. IEEE 802.11 
IEEE 802.11 is a set of standards for implementing 
wireless local area network (WLAN). Wi-Fi is a wireless 
communication protocol specification used to exchange data. 
The 802.11 medium access control (MAC) layer has two 
major modes of operation, namely, the Distributed 
Coordination Function (DCF) and the Point Coordination 
Function (PCF). The DCF is the most popular mode of MAC 
operation in 802.11. The DCF uses carrier sense multiple 
access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) based scheme 
for its operation.  
In unicast transmission, after channel assignment, a 
sender transmits a request to send (RTS) frame to reserve 
access of channel. The receiver replies with a clear to send 
(CTS) frame. Other stations avoid collision by listening the 
RTS/CTS and refrain from sending data for a given time.  
After receiving data successfully, the receiver sends an ACK 
to the sender. If the data transmission does not take place 
successfully, the sender retransmits that data.  
In multicast, a single sender transmits data packet to 
multiple recipients at the same time. The multicast is an 
efficient way to transmit data packets to multiple stations 
that need them. However, unlike unicast, there is no 
feedback process, i.e., sending ACK, and therefore it does 
not guarantee reliability. On the other hand, assuring 
maximum reliability to multiple recipients causes multicast 
data to be transmitted at the lowest data transmission speed. 
In [2], BMW (Broadcast Medium Window) method is 
proposed to solve the problems of multicasting by 
performing multiple time unicast for multicast transmission. 
In BMW, each station has three lists, i.e., NEIGHBOR, 
SEND BUFFER and RECEIVER BUFFER lists. The 
NEIGHBOR is a list of current neighboring stations, SEND 
BUFFER stores multicast frames to be forwarded and 
RECEIVER BUFFER maintains the sequence numbers of 
the data frames received from neighboring stations. After a 
sender that has multicast data to send takes channel, it sends 
RTS and receives CTS as a response. After sending the data 
frame and receiving ACK, it moves on to the next recipient 
in the NEIGHBOR list. This process is repeated until entire 
data are transmitted successfully. However, the main 
drawback of BMW is that if the sender has n neighbors to 
send, there are n time contention phases per multicast 
operation, which increases delay. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

In [3], the Batch Mode Multicast MAC (BMMM) 
method is proposed to solve the problem of [2]. In BMMM, 
in order to send a multicast frame, the sender sends RTS to 
each station individually and waits for CTS from each of 
them. Upon reception of CTSs from all the intended 
recipients, the sender starts to send the multicast data. 
Following this, it sends a special frame called Request for 
ACK (RAK) to each station, and each station responds to the 
RAK with an ACK. Upon receiving ACKs from all intended 
recipients, the transmission is said to be done successfully. If 
one of ACKs is missed, then the sender again contends for 
the medium and repeats the above procedure. The RAK 
frame format is shown in Fig. 1. 
Frame Control
Duration 
RA
FCS
2
2
6
4
Octets:
MAC Header
 
 
Figure 1. RAK frame format. 
 
In BMW, nodes contend for channel assignment to send 
a control frame to each station. The sender transmits RTS 
and receives CTS, after which it transmits the data. Upon 
receiving the data, the receiver sends back ACK. Above 
procedure is repeated for all intended receivers, which causes 
overhead. In BMMM, after taking a channel, the sender 
sends RTS and the receiver which receives the RTS sends 
back CTS. This RTS/CTS procedure is repeated for all 
intended receivers. After finishing the RTS/CTS procedure, 
the sender transmits the data, by multicast, to those stations 
from which it has received CTS. In this way, BMMM tries to 
solve the delay and overhead problem of BMW and also 
improves multicast reliability by sending RAK. However, 
BMW and BMMM use multiple unicast transmissions and 
multiple RTS/CTS procedures respectively for multicasting, 
which increases reliability but incurs delay and overhead. 
In other case of studies, they proposed some methods to 
improve multicast efficiency based on ad-hoc networks [4]-
[6]. 
 
III. 
PROPOSED SCHEME 
In this paper, we propose an efficient method to 
overcome the aforementioned problems of multicasting. The 
proposed method has an assisting station (AS) and the 
stations that intend to receive the multicast data and have the 
RFMON mode. 
For multicasting, AP transmits unicast data to AS 
through the fixed IP address and stations in the multicast 
group can also receive the data with the help of RFMON 
mode. Stations with RFMON mode as a way of monitoring 
WLAN can collect the entire WLAN packets and monitor 
the existence of network effectively [7]-[9]. It is receive-only 
mode for data.  
A. Assisting station (AS) 
The AS receives multicast frames from AP and sends back 
ACK which ensures reliability. It has the fixed known IP 
destination address. Usually AP transmits multicast data to 
multiple recipients. However, in the proposed method, AP 
sends the multicast data to AS by using the fixed IP address. 
The stations that want multicast data can also receive that 
data simultaneously by using the RFMON mode. Because of 
that, the proposed method can solve the overhead problem. 
The AS can be located at the edge of AP radio coverage, 
which can guarantee that every station can receive the data if 
AS responds to data by ACK. 
In the proposed method, even though AS is a special 
station, AP recognizes it as an ordinary station. Therefore, 
the proposed method can be used while compatible with 
IEEE 802.11 without any change in its infrastructure. The 
AP sends the multicast data to the AS by using a fixed IP 
address. If the AP assigns IP address to the other stations 
except the AS, the AP assigns one of the remaining IP 
addresses except the IP address assigned to the AS. 
 
AS
Station
Station
Station
AP
RFMON 
mode 
Station
RFMON 
mode 
Station
  
 
Figure 2. The AS receives multicast data from the AP 
by using the proposed method. 
 
B. Use of RFMON mode 
In the proposed scheme, in order to become a member of 
multicast group, a station should be equipped with a module 
or dongle that supports the RFMON mode. The module or 
dongle is programmed to monitor the packets in the network 
which AS joins. In this way, the stations equipped with the 
RFMON module can also receive and process the multicast 
data. If a station does not want to receive the multicast data, 
the RFMON mode can be disabled. Thus, owners of the 
stations can make a decision about data reception by either 
installing or removing the RFMON mode. 
Fig. 2 illustrates multicast transmission using the 
proposed method. The AP sends the multicast data to one 
destination, i.e., AS using the fixed IP address, while the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

multicast group equipped with RFMON module receives the 
data simultaneously together with AS. Other stations that are 
not in the multicast group cannot receive the data because 
they are not equipped with the RFMON module. 
 
IV. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
To evaluate the proposed scheme, we conducted 
simulations in QualNet 5.0, which provides a platform to test 
protocol 
design, 
analysis 
and 
verification 
prior 
to 
implementing the system in practice. The complete set of 
simulation parameters is shown in Table 1.  
TABLE I.  
PARAMETERS FOR SIMULATION 
PARAMETERS FOR SIMULATION 
Parameters 
Values 
PHY/MAC 
IEEE 802.11g 
Packet Size 
512 bytes 
Antenna model 
Omnidirectional 
Total number of station 
50 
RFMON mode station  
5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 
Assisting Station 
1 
Application data type 
CBR 
Simulation time 
500sec 
Number of total packets 
100 
 
  
 
 
Figure 3. Network model for simulation. 
 
The network model for simulation is shown in Fig. 3. 
Simulation shows that there are 10 RFMON-mode stations. 
RFMON-mode stations are randomly chosen and the number 
of them is increased from 5 to 30. The AS is located around 
the edge of AP radio coverage. 
Fig. 4 shows the average end-to-end delay for the 
legacy multicast of IEEE 802.11 protocol and the proposed 
scheme. Evidently, IEEE 802.11 multicast performs poorly 
in comparison with the proposed scheme.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Average end-to-end delay. 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Delay and overhead are major issues in multicast 
transmission in IEEE 802.11. This paper proposes an 
efficient method to overcome these issues. The simulation 
results show that the proposed scheme has 70~80% less 
delay than IEEE 802.11 multicast and there is no packet loss 
in the proposed scheme. Thus, it ensures reliability in 
multicast 
transmission 
without 
incurring 
overhead. 
Furthermore, it does not need to set up or replace the 
infrastructure but simply needs to change the IP address 
assignment. The stations can decide to receive multicast data 
by either enabling or disabling the RFMON mode.   
REFERENCES 
[1] IEEE 802.11, Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access 
Control(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, 
IEEE Std. 802.11-2007 
[2] K. Tang and M. Gerla, “Random access MAC for efficient 
broadcast support  in ad hoc networks,” Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference, 2000. WCNC. 
2000 IEEE, 2000, pp. 454-459, vol. 1 
[3] A M. T. Sun, L. Huang, A. Arora, and T. H. Lai. Reliable 
MAC layer multicast in IEEE 802.11 wireless networks. In 
Proc. the International Conference on Parallel Processing 
(ICPP) 2002 
[4] M. Torrent-Moreno, D. Jiang, and H. Hartenstein, “Broadcast 
reception rates and effects of priority access in 802.11-based 
vehicular ad-hoc networks,” Preceedings of the first ACM 
workshop on Vehicular ad hoc networks – VANET ’04, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA: 2004, p. 10. 
[5] Shweta Jain and Samir R. Das, “MAC layer Multicast in 
Wireless Multihop Networks,” Apr. 2009. 
[6] H. Gossain, N. Nandiraju, K. Annad, and D. Agrawal, 
“Supporting MAC layer multicast in IEEE 802.11 based 
MANETs: issues and solutions,” 29th Annual IEEE 
International Conference on Local Computer Networks, 
Tampa, USA, pp. 172-179. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

[7] P. Reddy, H. Sharma, and D. Paulraj, “Multi channel Wi-Fi 
Sniffer,” Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile 
Computing, 2008. WiCOM’08. 4th International Conference 
on. 
[8] M.A. Qadeer, M. Zahid, A. Iqbal, and M.R. Siddiqui, 
“Network Traffic Analysis and Intrusion Detection Using 
Packet Sniffer,” Communication Software and Networks, 
2010. ICCSN’ 10. Second International Conference on, 
pp.313-317. 
[9] S.B.R. Rajan, R.A. Nirmelt, S.A.A. Rahuman, S.M.A. Kader, 
and S. Ganesh, “Active Worm Early Detection Using 
Network Sniffer,” Advances in Computing, Control, & 
Telecommunicatino 
Technologies, 
2009. 
ACT’09. 
International Conference on, pp. 784-786. 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-244-8
INNOV 2012 : The First International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

