StayActive: An Application for Detecting Stress
Panagiotis Kostopoulos, Tiago Nunes, Kevin Salvi, Mauricio Togneri and Michel Deriaz
Information Science Institute, GSEM/CUI
University of Geneva
Geneva, Switzerland
Email: {panagiotis.kostopoulos, tiago.nunes, kevin.salvi, michel.deriaz}@unige.ch, mauricio.togneri@gmail.com
Abstract—In today’s society, working environments are becom-
ing more stressful and people working in these environments
become prone to various illnesses. But, work should be a source of
health, pride and happiness, in the sense of enhancing motivation
and strengthening personal development. In this work, we present
StayActive, a system which aims to detect stress and burn-
out risks by analyzing the behaviour of the users via their
smartphone. In particular, we collect data from people’s daily
phone usage gathering information about the sleeping pattern,
the social interaction and the physical activity of the user. We
assign a weight factor to each of these three dimensions of
wellbeing according to the user’s personal perception and build
a stress detection system. We evaluate our system in a real
world environment and in a daily-routine scenario. This paper
highlights the architecture and model of this innovative stress
detection system.
Keywords—Stress Detection; Smartphone; Sleeping Pattern; So-
cial Interaction; Physical Activity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Today stress is omnipresent as never before and it is one
of the major problems in modern society. Detecting stress in
natural environments is beneﬁcial to avoid developing burn-out
situations and illness.
The most common method to quantify stress is to simply
ask people about their mood ﬁlling in questionnaires. There
are standard methods for doing so like the Perceived Stress
Scale questionnaire [1]. Questions in the perceived stress scale
(PSS) assess to what degree a subject feels stressed in a given
situation.
Nowadays wearable devices such as mobile phones and
wearable sensors are ubiquitous in our lives. Several re-
searchers have tried to understand personality from mobile
phone usage [2][3]. Our stress detection system aims to use
technology to recognize stress levels using data from the
devices that users always carry and wear.
Sleeping patterns, social life and physical activity are con-
nected with the presence of stress in people’s lives [4]. We
take into account these three dimensions for building our stress
detection system.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
our designed stress detection system is described in detail.
Experimental results using real data are reported and discussed
in Section III. Future work to be done on StayActive is
presented in Section IV. Finally, a brief conclusion is drawn
in Section V.
II. SYSTEM DESIGN
StayActive is an Android application running on a smart-
phone. We have chosen the Android based solution because
it is an open source framework designed for mobile devices.
The Android Software Development Kit (SDK) provides the
Application Programming Interface (API) libraries and devel-
oper tools necessary to build, test and debug applications for
Android. We implemented the prototype in Java using the
Android SDK API 19.
A. System overview
Although there are still several open questions regarding
the links between the behaviour of a person and their stress
level, in StayActive we take a pragmatic approach and build
an initial stress detection system which can be extended and
reﬁned.
The general architecture of our stress detection system is
given in Figure 1.
Figure 1. StayActive system architecture.
1) Providers: The ﬁrst layer is the one that collects and pro-
vides the data to upper layers. The provider module contains
all the implemented data providers, which are responsible for
collecting a speciﬁc type of data from the device. They are free
to implement the data monitoring behaviour as they wish. The
currently implemented providers collect the following type of
data: type of physical activity, calls and SMS, ambient light
and temperature, location, battery level, screen on/off intervals,
Wi-Fi, step counter, number of screen touches and ﬁnally type
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

of applications launched. We give some examples of the results
of these providers in Figures 2- 6.
Figure 2. Step counter provider.
Figure 3. Call provider.
Figure 4. SMS provider.
2) Server: The server module is responsible for receiving
data from the mobile devices and storing it in a database. We
aggregate all the data and we process it in order to extract a
relaxation score for each user as explained in the next section.
3) Detection: This module contains analyzers for each data
provider, which extract useful information and patterns from
the raw data to output a partial relaxation score. The core
detector module will aggregate the results of these individual
analyzers and compute a ﬁnal stress level, as explained in the
next section.
B. Stress detection
Simply collecting the patterns of people’s behaviour is in-
sufﬁcient for helping them improve their personal wellbeing. It
Figure 5. Physical activity provider.
Figure 6. Screen touch provider.
is important to use different dimensions of people’s wellbeing
and compute their stress level. That way, we will be able to
help them by giving advice for reducing their stress level and
therefore improving their quality of life. Our stress detection
module takes into account three main dimensions of wellbeing:
the sleeping pattern of the users, their social interaction and
their physical activity as reported in Table I.
TABLE I. Factors measuring stress.
Sleeping pattern
Social interaction
Physical activity
sleeping hours/day touches of the screen/day number of steps per/day
1) Sleeping pattern: There is a big body of research work
which analyzes the link between sleep hygiene and the mood
of people [5][6]. People usually exchange sleep for additional
working hours as a coping mechanism for busy lifestyles. In
our stress detection module we take into account the user’s
duration of sleep. We set the number of normal sleeping hours
at 8 and penalize insufﬁcient sleep and oversleeping. We set
the lower threshold of normal sleeping hours at 7 and the upper
threshold at 9 hours according to [7]. For any extra missing
or more hours of sleep we penalize the behaviour of the user
with a weight factor per hour. In order to compute the sleeping
pattern of the user we take into account the Screen analyzer.
Between 6 p.m. and 10 a.m. we compute the biggest time
interval that the user did not touch his screen and we compute
the duration of his sleep. An example of the sleeping pattern
of a user for some days is depicted in Figure 7.
2) Social interaction: The daily social interaction of people
has a serious impact on many dimensions of wellbeing [6].
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Figure 7. Sleeping pattern.
People who maintain dense social connections are more likely
to have resilient mental health. They tend to be able to cope
with stress and often are better able to manage chronic illness.
On the other hand regarding communication, researchers
are hypothesizing that perhaps people become so used to
and even dependent on receiving constant messages, emails,
and tweets, that the moment they do not receive one, their
anxiety increases. People feel compelled to check their phone
constantly, which can then lead to disappointment when there
are no new messages, and increased stress about why no one
is messaging them, or when the next message might come.
Repetitive checking of mobile phones is considered a com-
pulsive behaviour [8]. People who are highly dependent on the
Internet for interaction act impulsively, avoid emotions, and
fail to keep up a proper planning or time management [9]. We
identify features which are relevant for detecting problematic
phone usage and therefore increase the stress level of the user.
For the moment in our system we take into account the num-
ber of touches of the screen as a factor for the social interaction
of the users using their smartphones. The accumulated result
per day is multiplied with the corresponding weight factor
and therefore it is accumulated in the total relaxation score. In
the next StayActive version we plan to take into account per
day, the number of calls and SMS’s that the person received,
the number of touches of the screen, the number of times
the screen was turned on and off and the number of social
applications the person used.
3) Physical activity: Several studies have linked exercise
to improved depression, self-esteem and stress [10][11]. Our
system monitors the physical activity of the user, making the
distinction between the type of activity (e.g. walking, running,
bicycling). We have also implemented a step counter which
gives us the opportunity to ﬁnd the number of steps that each
user took per day. The American Heart Association uses the
10,000 steps metric as a guideline to follow for improving
health and decreasing risk of heart disease, the leading cause
of death in America. 10,000 steps a day is a rough equivalent
to the Surgeon Generals recommendation to accumulate 30
minutes of activity most days of the week.
In our model we assign the maximum value of wellbeing,
and therefore the lowest stress level, when reaching the goal of
10,000 steps per day. If someone reaches less than this number
we penalize (decrease relaxation factor) with a weight factor
per 1,000 steps.
III. EVALUATION WITH REAL DATA
For the evaluation of our data, we followed an empirical
model. We monitored the behaviour of the user in the above
mentioned three dimensions (sleeping pattern, social interac-
tion and physical activity) collecting data for a week.
A. Relaxation score
At ﬁrst we compute a relaxation score for each individual
user for every day of the monitoring week. The relaxation
score is in the scale of [0-10] where the more stressed you
are, the lower your score will be (so the more relaxed you
are the higher your relaxation score). The idea of the scoring
procedure is the following. We assign a weight factor to each
of the three dimensions of wellbeing that we have taken into
account in our study. This factor is based on the response of the
participants to the following question which was asked in the
beginning of the experiment. Which of the three dimensions
do they personally consider as the most important for their
wellbeing? To the most important dimension we assign a
weight of w1 = 0.4 and to the rest we assign a weight of 0.3
respectively (w2 = w3 = 0.3), so that w1+w2+w3 = 1. Based
on these factors we are able to calculate the per day relaxation
level of each person as depicted in Figure 8 according to the
Equation 1. Therefore we compute a result per dimension and
adding them we calculate the ﬁnal daily relaxation factor of
the user. For each of the three dimensions we normalize the
results in the scale of [0-10] and then multiply each of them
with the respective factor. Adding the three results per user,
per day we extract the daily relaxation level of each user.
relaxation
score = w1 ∗ dm1 + w2 ∗ dm2 + w3 ∗ dm3
(1)
TABLE II. Dimensions of Equation 1.
Dimension 1 (dm1)
Dimension 2 (dm2)
Dimension 3 (dm3)
sleeping hours/day
touches of the screen/day
number of steps/day
B. Preliminary results
The three participants of our ﬁrst tests were young adult
members from our research group. The evaluation of the
results takes place by asking the people who participated in
the experiment how they felt on each day corresponding to the
monitoring week when data was collected, without knowing
the outcome. Then, we compare their personal perception
with the relaxation score that we have computed using the
StayActive application for each individual day. The more score
you have the less stressed you are. This is the ﬁrst step
of evaluating the accuracy of the relaxation score that we
produced through our empirical model. Secondly, we extract
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

Figure 8. Relaxation scores.
a pattern for the behaviour of the user based on the data that
we collected during the testing week and then we compare
this pattern with the average daily activity of the user for this
week. We calculate the deviation from the normal behaviour
that we have extracted from the seven-day experiment and
based on that we characterize the user as stressed or not. We
also calculate the mean of the stress factor for each person
during a week in order to have more robust and accurate data.
IV. FUTURE WORK
This is a ﬁrst model of our stress detection system. We are
still enhancing and improving it. The immediate steps after the
work that has been presented are the following. Further use
of the application collecting data for a month and comparison
of the different stress results of each individual day with the
means that we have extracted from the initial testing period.
In the long term, we are targeting a ﬁnal machine learning
approach which will take more features into account in order
to improve the accuracy of stress detection. We will create
a pattern per user based on his behaviour for a month and
a possible deviation from this pattern because of the sleeping
hours, the social interaction or the physical activity of the user
should agree with the respective decrease in the relaxation
score (more stressed). The long term idea of StayActive is to
provide older adults with a personalized, adaptable tool which
can also monitor some changes to biological signals like skin
conductance and heart rate, using wearable sensors and link
them to a low relaxation score (increased stress level). Then
it will recommend and present various relaxation activities
just-in-time in order to allow the users to carry out and solve
everyday tasks and problems at work.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Stress detection is a research ﬁeld that has a big impact
on the improvement of people’s daily life. In this paper we
present a ﬁrst prototype which takes into account three main
dimensions of wellbeing. The sleeping pattern, the physical
activity of the users and their social interaction are accumu-
lated with different weight factors and give an estimation of
the daily stress level of the user. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the ﬁrst system that computes a relaxation score based
on different dimensions of human wellbeing.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was co-funded by the State Secretariat for Educa-
tion, Research and Innovation of the Swiss federal government
and the European Union, in the frame of the EU AAL project
StayActive (aal-2013-6-126).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Cohen, T. W. Kamarck, and R. Mermelstein, “A global measure of
perceived stress,” in Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 1983, pp.
1027–1035.
[2] A. Sano and R. W. Picard, “Stress recognition using wearable sensors
and mobile phones,” in Humaine Association Conference on Affective
Computing and Intelligent Interaction, 2013, pp. 671–676.
[3] A. Muaremi, B. Arnrich, and G. Trster, “Towards measuring stress
with smartphones andwearable devices duringworkday and sleep,” in
BioNanoSci, 2013, pp. 172–183.
[4] R. Norris, D. Carroll, and R. Cochrane, “The effects of physical activity
and exercise training on psychological stress and well-being in an
adolescent population,” in Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 1992,
pp. 55–65.
[5] S. Moturu, I. Khayal, N. Aharony, W. Pan, and A. Pentland, “Sleep,
mood and sociability in a healthy population,” in 33rd Annual Interna-
tional Conference of the IEEE EMBS, 2011, pp. 5267–5270.
[6] N. L. et al., “Bewell: A smartphone application to monitor, model
and promote wellbeing,” in 5th ICST/IEEE Conference on Pervasive
Computing Technologies for Healthcare IEEE Press, 2011, pp. 23–26.
[7] G. Alvarez and N. Ayas, “The impact of daily sleep duration on health:
A review of the literature,” in Progress in Cardiovascular Nursing, 2004,
pp. 56–59.
[8] A. Oulasvirta, T. Rattenbury, L. Ma, and E. Raita, “Habits make smart-
phone use more pervasive,” in Personal and Ubiquitous Computing,
2012, pp. 105–114.
[9] S. Li and T. Chung, “Internet function and internet addictive behavior,”
in Computers in Human Behavioor, 2006, pp. 1067–1071.
[10] K. Fox, “The inﬂuence of physical activity on mental well-being,” in
Public Health Nutritionl, 1999, pp. 411–418.
[11] A. W. R.S. Paffenbarger, R. Hyde and C. Hsieh, “Physical activity,
all-cause mortality, and longevity of college alumni,” in New England
journal of medicine, 1986, pp. 605–613.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

