Application Scenario of BIM-GIS Test-bed Implementation for  
Facility Management 
 
Ji-Eun Kim       Chang-Hee Hong
ICT Convergence and Integration Research Institute 
Korea Institute of Civil engineering and Building Technology 
Gyeonggi-Do, Korea 
e-mail: jekim@kict.re.kr       chhong@kict.re.kr
 
 
Abstract—According to 
people stay inside longer, 
an 
importance of Facility Management (FM) is getting higher. 
This is one of main factor relating a cost reduction. Building 
Information Modeling (BIM) contains object-based geometry 
& property data, and it is able to offer the personalized data 
with 3D viewing. This research relates BIM what is dealing 
with indoor data to Geographic Information System (GIS) 
what is dealing with outdoor data. Based on this, the research 
proposes an application scenario of BIM-GIS test-bed 
implementation for FM. 
Keywords-Building Information Modeling (BIM); Geographic 
Information System (GIS); Open platform; Test-bed; FM. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recently, the cost of maintenance after completion in a 
life cycle of building has been significant as to building 
owner and resident as well as the cost until completion. Even 
the well-constructed building, which is substantial and 
designed fashionably is important, to manage and operate 
building effectively after completion is one of the main 
factors relating to the long-term cost directly [1]. So, the 
various cases and studies about Facility Management (FM) 
system of existed buildings have been increasing.  
The integration between Building Information Modeling 
(BIM) data including geometry/property information and 
Geometry Information System (GIS) including location 
information is appropriate to operate FM data based on 
city/building. It offers an object-based 3D visualization data 
and supports an easy operation management for sites, which 
includes several facilities on map-based system. BIM on GIS 
platform, which has been developed at Korea Institute of 
Civil Engineering and Building Technology (KICT), 
provides these services and it can handle the securement of 
data interoperability BIM and GIS, the visualization of 3D 
data, the light-weight algorithm for large scale data, and 
others  [2][3]. 
This study builds the test-bed for substantiation of 
developed technology, and proposes the scenario for FM 
with BIM on GIS platform, as shown in Fig. 1. It aims four 
goals; BIM-GIS DB structure, BIM-GIS based 3D BIM 
modeling, Application scenario using BIM-GIS test-bed and 
verification & test-bed operation. These technologies are 
implemented on ‘BIM on GIS platform’, in Section 3. 
     
 
Figure 1.  Research overview 
In Section 2, we analyzed a research trends: BIM/GIS 
integration and BIM-based FM in domestic/abroad. In 
Section 3, BIM on GIS platform was introduced, which has 
been developed at KICT for 5 years, and it is a foundation of 
this research. In Section 4, we constructed BIM/GIS test-bed, 
and it was processed as follow, 1) modeling of geometry and 
property data, 2) construction of BIM/GIS FM DB, and 3) 
shooting UAV and construction of true ortho-images. In 
Section 5, we designed of use-case scenario for facility 
management, firefighting and energy consumption. Finally 
Conclusion and Future work were proposed.  
II. 
RESEARCH TRENDS 
This study analyzed the research trends of BIM/GIS 
integration and BIM-based FM in domestic/abroad. Kang, T. 
W. et al [4] studied the software architecture for effective 
BIM/GIS based facility management data integration. For 
interoperability between two different data, it proposes 
BIM/GIS-based information for Extract, Transform, and 
Load architecture and tested it. Berlo, L. van et al [5] 
developed the CityGML GeoBIM Extension to get semantic 
IFC data into GIS context for integration of BIM and GIS. 
Niu, S. et al [6] proposed the solutions for data conversion of 
integration between BIM and GIS, and developed a 
BIM/GIS integrated web-based building energy data 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

visualization system. Wetzel, E. M. et al [7] studied a BIM-
based framework to support safe maintenance and repair 
practices for facility management. It also proposes the data 
processing and rule-based decision making with safety 
attribute identification and classification. Lee, K. S. [8] 
deducted BIM applicable elements according to related legal 
system, present technical level of BIM, and the requirement 
of FM for BIM utilization in the maintenance of urban metro 
facility.  
Most 
of 
above 
researches 
approaches 
focus 
preponderantly the development of algorithm for enhancing 
interoperability BIM/GIS and the process or framework of 
BIM-based FM. According to increase of the importance for 
maintenance, there are various attempts to improve the 
problem about existing inefficient FM process. Thus, in this 
study, we have two goals, one is to construct the test-bed 
targeting real site by BIM modeling software (Revit 
Architecture) and verify it with BIM on GIS platform [2][3]. 
The next step is to extend availability of FM with scenarios. 
III. 
INTRODUCTION OF BIM ON GIS PLATFORM 
ICT Convergence and Integration Research Institute, 
KICT has been performing the study “Development of 
Open Platform for Interoperability between BIM and GIS” 
(2012.01~2016.12, total 5 years), which is one of main 
researches in KICT. This study develops BIM on GIS 
platform based on open source. Also, the element technology 
and information flow, which can apply indoor/outdoor 
spatial data effectively to the phase after construction are 
developed through 3D spatial data establishment for facility 
management and operation (Fig. 1, Fig. 2). 
 
 
A. Maintaining the Integrity of the Specifications 
 
In Korea, recently, several government agencies and 
institutions like Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and 
Transport, Seoul Metropolitan Government, Ministry of 
Public Safety and Security, Korea Land & Housing 
Corporation, and so on have made plans and tried to offer 
useful services integrating BIM for indoor spatial data and 
GIS for outdoor (city) data. As there are growing interests in 
the availability of BIM on GIS platform technology, and the 
use-case and possibility are required through this study. 
IV. 
CONSTRUCTION OF BIM/GIS TEST-BED 
For location of test-bed, we decided three places: main 
headquarter of KICT where is mainly composed of official 
buildings and facilities, and Fire Research Institute and Ricer 
Experiment Center where are composed of test laboratories 
& test buildings. Each place was planned for BIM/GIS 
modeling, working process of DB construction and 
development of operating technology. 
First of all, 3D architectural modeling data was designed 
with data gathering and field survey based on existing 2D 
drawing plan, documents of facility history management. 
Also MEP and main research equipment were modeled with 
3D BIM/GIS data. Then to visualize the effective 3D model, 
we shoot aerial images and built DSM data, and completed 
the test-bed modeling. The architecture of BIM/GIS test-bed 
was processed as follow, 1) modeling of geometry and 
property data, 2) construction of BIM/GIS FM DB, and 3) 
shooting UAV and construction of true ortho-images. 
A. Modeling of BIM/GIS geometry/property data and FM-
DB Construction 
Beginning construction of satellite/aerial image, which 
was based on the platform, we worked the confirmation of 
site boundary/name, POI, standard classification system, 
basic property data, site survey, and actual images. Then 
based on these, we modeled BIM main data and building 
shape data with texturing according to Level of Detail (LOD). 
After that, main MEP and structure BIM modeling was 
worked, and all data was exchanged to Industry Foundation 
Classes (IFC), which BIM standard format for data 
verification. Finally through data converting, last data was 
loaded on BIM on GIS platform with inner format for 
interoperability. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3 shows the modeling process of BIM/GIS property 
data based on 3D architectural drawing. 3D BIM data was 
designed by 2D drawing and existed FM data. About the 
parts of non-updated like newly-built, extension, remodeling, 
we took photos with camera and drone. In the case of 
property data, we selected the main tasks among various FM 
works (space, clean and security, outsourcing, energy, 
material, movement, etc.), and connected data for operation, 
maintenance, asset with FM code system based on object and 
space. The DB structure was built with managing data 
Figure 2. Overview of BIM on GIS platform 
Figure 3. BIM/GIS Property data modeling process based on 3D 
architectural drawing 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

(position data, spatial data, property data, equipment data, 
history data, etc.) by object and space, and saved at 
integrated DB for FM. Fig. 4 is an output of mapping images. 
 
 
 
B. Mapping UAV and True ortho-images 
The texturing of building shape like Google Earth, V-
World makes BIM modeling image more realistic than 
before. To relate Image data by drone, shooting UAV and 
field survey to above BIM/GIS modeling data, we produced 
texture map with edited photography/distorted images. 
Finally, BIM/GIS modeling data and well-made image data 
were matched together. 
V. 
DESIGN OF USE-CASE SCENARIO 
Test-bed for BIM on GIS platform is able to manage by 
BIM object unit. This study reflected user requirements from 
KICT FM manager in priority to develop the system, which 
is adaptable in working-level. We discussed with FM team 
periodically about a current working process and designed 
the useful scenario based on this. 
Data acquisition and deduction of requirements were 
much important to object-based FM system. We adopted 
many issues from analysis of other FM systems; therefore, 
designed the scenarios for long-term application. The 
scenarios would be proposed for three phases: FM, 
Firefighting, and Energy. 
A. Facility Management 
The scenario for facility management is as follows. To 
design it, we checked current KICT situation and FM 
process targeting KICT headquarter with FM manager. DB 
was constructed according to each work based on field 
survey, 
and 
FM 
data 
would 
be 
managed 
by 
space/floor/building unit (Fig. 5). 
 
 
Figure 5. User Interface of BIM on GIS platform for FM 
 
 
This can search and show data depending on user’s 
objective systematically by applying hierarchical order of 
space-floor-building-area (Fig. 6). And also based on 
existing KICT portal system, the scenario makes FM 
manager to Search/Read/Edit/Check with fundamental basic 
functions. The general users including FM manager can 
control a room schedule, a history management of joint 
equipment, site navigation, remodeling plan of institute, and 
so on because of object-oriented BIM modeling data. This 
FM process and FM system based on platform will be 
affiliated with KICT main system. 
B. Firefighting 
The scenario for facility firefighting can provide data of 
relevant building and site to fire department before they 
arrive at site, and it makes them to handle the place quickly 
with advance information. When a fire breaks out in the 
KICT headquarter, the alarm and warning sign operate, and 
firefighting system in BIM on GIS platform shows the spot 
(building) where the accident takes place automatically. 
 
 
 
 
To understand clearly for firefighters, the platform turns 
out and shows from general architectural 3D model to 
structural 3D model, (Fig. 7). In the event of fire, firefighters 
generally should figure out the building structure with 2D 
drawings and analyze which objects are bearing structure for 
evacuation route and a rescue operation. These information 
Figure 4. Output of mapping images to BIM/GIS modeling data 
Figure 6. Searching facility lists by building unit 
Figure 7. Visualization of firefighting objects 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

are transmitted from BIM on GIS platform to firefighters as 
soon as case of fire.  
This special model is composed of main structure objects 
from general 3D model with algorithm. As the purpose of 
data application, the structural model is able to visualize by 
objects and 2D/3D drawing of relating floors. Also this 
system analyzes and informs the path of emergency exit 
route from the spot to people. The simulation for fire drill 
usually can be worked. 
C. Energy consumption 
This scenario is for visualizing the energy consumption 
of each building in test-bed through sensors, which are 
situated at buildings before. When user converts a default 
mode into an energy consumption mode, basically the 
number of consumption is shown by sites with table or graph 
(Fig. 8). As selecting the site where the user wants to manage, 
the 
results 
are 
monitored 
in 
real 
time 
with 
space/floor/building/site for usage. 
 
 
 
 
When a problem of sensor, energy manager can confirm 
the position of sensors with 3D model directly and take a 
measure soon. Also in case of unusual symptom for some 
building, this system can help the manager figuring out 
reasons with last statistics data (consumption number, 
records, etc.). 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study designed the test-bed for verification of BIM 
on GIS platform application and considered the use-case 
scenario for FM, firefighting, and energy consumption. In 
the future, as well as BIM on GIS platform, the needs of 
indoor spatial data are expected to rise integrating with 
VR/AR, smart city, etc. The most important thing is what 
users want to do. Considering the specific purposes of users 
as well as various fields requiring indoor-outdoor spatial data, 
the system has to apply and develop. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was supported by a grant from a Strategic 
Research Project (Development of BIM/GIS Interoperability 
Open-Platform 2016) funded by the Korea Institute of Civil 
engineering and Building Technology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Autodesk, “AS10660: How a Data Center Facility Owner 
Changed the Failing BIM Project into a Successful Project”, 
Technical report, http://au.autodesk.com/au-online/classes-on-
demand/class-catalog/2015/revit-for-construction/as10660, 
2015. 
[2] Korea Institute of Civil engineering and Building Technology, 
“Development of Open Platform for Interoperability between 
BIM and GIS”, Research report, 2015. 
[3] Korea Institute of Civil engineering and Building Technology, 
“Establishment of Test-bed and Pilot Model for Application 
Demonstration using BIM/GIS Platform”, Research report, 
2015. 
[4] T. W. Kang and C. H. Hong. “A study on software 
architecture for effective BIM/GIS-based facility management 
data integration”, Automation In Construction, vol.54, pp. 25-
38, 2015. 
[5] L. van Berlo and R. Berlo, “Integration of BIM and GIS: The 
development of the CityGML GeoBIM extension”, Advances 
in 3D Geo-Information Sciences, pp. 211-225, 2011. 
[6] S. Niu, W. Pan, and Y. Zhao, “A BIM/GIS Integrated Web-
based Visualization System for Low Energy Building Design”, 
Procedia Engineering, vol.121, pp. 2184-2194, 2015. 
[7] E. M. Wetzel and W. Y. Thabet, “The use of a BIM-based 
framework to support safe facility management processes”, 
Automation In Construction, vol.60, pp. 12-24, 2015.  
[8] K. S. Lee, “(A)study on the application of BIM elements in 
the procurement phase for BIM utilization in the maintenance 
of urban metro facility”, Master thesis, Hanyang University, 
Korea, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Searching for energy consumption of buildings 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-503-6
INNOV 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

