 
 
Wireless Sensor Technologies in Food Industry: 
 Applications and Trends 
  
Saeed Samadi, Hossein Mirzaee 
Food Machinery dept. 
 Research Institute of Food Science and Technology (RIFST) 
Mashhad, Iran 
email: s.samadi@rifst.ac.ir, h.mirzaee@rifst.ac.ir  
 
 
Abstract— Wireless Sensors Networks (WSNs) have emerged 
as an exciting new computing technology in food industry, 
particularly 
with 
the 
proliferation 
in 
Micro-Electro-
Mechanical Systems (MEMS) technology providing advanced 
development 
of 
smart 
sensors. 
Such convergences 
of 
technologies which involve deploying self-contained sensor 
devices that sense and process data have opened up a 
revolution in the application domain of sensors in food 
industry. This includes the realization of more versatile 
systems 
in 
food 
industry 
regarding 
measurements, 
instrumentation and automation of functions. The vision of this 
technology is to develop a real time monitoring of in-door and 
outdoor environments. WSNs are deployed in various 
applications which enhance interaction between users and the 
physical environment. This has allowed physical environment 
in systems, such as in food industry, to be measured using a 
high resolution with the aim of increasing and monitoring the 
quantity and quality of real-time data and information 
collected for the applications. This paper reviews the 
application of wireless sensor technologies in food industry, 
looks into its application in real-time monitoring of food supply 
chain, food security and food intelligent packaging while 
discussing various challenges that should be addressed in order 
to push the technology further. 
Keywords- food industry; Wireless Sensor Networks;  RFID; 
packaging.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The food industry is known to be receptive to the use of 
information systems in all aspects. For many years, 
technology in food industry had focused on Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP) software. However, this has 
recently changed as many companies in the food industry 
have started adopting state-of-the-art technologies to provide 
solutions in areas such as traceability and logistics. With 
recent incidents in food safety issues, there has been an 
inevitable increase in interest in Production Life Cycle 
Management Software in combination with Radio Frequency 
Identification Technology (RFID) focusing on providing 
solutions for addressing food safety [1].  The potential 
applications of Smart Sensor Networks are diverse, 
especially in external systems in which Bluetooth has proven 
to be the communication standard between sensors. Wireless 
sensor networks consist of tiny devices referred to as sensor 
nodes that are battery-powered and equipped with sensing 
devices, a data processing unit and a communication unit [2]. 
Depending on the external interface in application, sensors 
for an attended wireless network, when randomly deployed 
in the field, are able to collect and aggregate data as well as 
communicate with electronic devices, such as PCs, PDAs 
and Laptops through which data can be transmitted to any 
network [3]. Regarding food security as a pressing issue in 
the food industry globally, wireless sensor networks can be 
used to detect contaminants in the food supply chain, provide 
real time monitoring of the cold chain industry [4], pest 
detection and control in farms [3] and food intelligent 
packing through the use of RFID and Surface Acoustic Wave 
(SAW) [5].  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
summarizes a review of literature. Section III discusses some 
important applications of WSN technologies in the food 
industry. Section IV discusses in finer detail, the aim of the 
paper. Section V includes an acknowledgement and 
conclusions. 
II. 
 LITERATURE REVIEW 
A.  Overview of Wireless Sensor Networks  
Wireless sensors consist of small devices called sensor 
nodes which are powered and equipped with self-contained 
sensing, data processing, data storage and communication 
unit. When deployed to any environment, the sensor nodes 
create a random wireless network in which data can be 
collected, aggregated and packaged for further fusion 
through other devices such as PCs and PDAs. Increasing 
capabilities of sensor nodes have led to the realization of 
wireless sensor networks. Advancements in wireless sensor 
node technology have been targeted by universities and 
research laboratories in experiments and development tests. 
However, there is increasing interest by many companies 
globally which intend to use the technology in building and 
industrial automation markets [1]. 
A sensor network is composed of thousands of small 
devices known as sensor nodes that are deployed inside or 
close to the phenomenon. Sensors are generally devised to 
sense information and transmit the same to a mote. The 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
information collected is used to measure changes in the 
physical environment such as pressure, humidity, sound and 
vibration.  A mote consists of a processing unit, storage unit 
and power source, which can be a battery and a radio 
transmitter which it uses to form an adhoc network. 
Combining a mote and a sensor forms a sensor node. A 
typical wireless sensor node is composed of a sensing unit, a 
processing unit, a communication and power unit. 
Advancements have also been made to include location 
finding systems, power generators and mobilizers into sensor 
node.  Recent technology advancements have enabled the 
development of self-contained motes [2]. High power 
density batteries are commonly preferred to achieve longer 
lifetime of the sensor nodes. Future wireless sensor nodes 
trends focus on smaller node size as well as very low energy 
consumption [6]. WSN differs from RFID in that it is able to 
integrate with other network devices in the field while an 
RFID tag can only be read with the RFID tag reader. WSN is 
comprised of Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and ZigBee. The latter two 
operate within the Industrial Scientific and Medical (ISM) 
band of 2.4 GHz, which provides license-free operations, 
enormous spectrum allocation, and global compatibility [7].  
Table I provides a comparison between these WSN 
technologies.  
TABLE I.  COMPARISON OF WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS TECHNOLOGIES 
AND STANDARDS 
Feature 
Technology 
Wi-Fi 
Bluetooth  
ZigBee  
Physica 
Layer 
Standard  
IEEE 802.11 
802.15.1 
802.15.4 
Data rate 
11 Mbps 
1Mbps 
250kbps 
Node 
per 
master 
32 
8 
64000 
Range  
10 to 100 m 
10 m 
10 to 300 m 
Data type 
video, audio, 
graphics, pictures, 
files 
video, audio, 
graphics, 
pictures, files 
Small data 
packet 
Topology 
star 
Star 
Mesh,stsr,tree 
Complexity 
complex 
very complex 
simple 
Battery life 
hours 
1Week 
1year 
 
 
There are thousands of sensor node platforms developed 
with varying components and operating systems depending 
on the categories of their research groups. Current WSNs are 
deployed on land, underground and underwater, which 
presents different challenges depending on the environment. 
The common types of wireless sensor networks in the market 
include; terrestrial WSN, Underground WSN, Underwater 
WSN, Multi-media WSN and Mobile WSN [6]. In terrestrial 
WSNs, a large number of wireless sensor nodes are deployed 
by placing them in the target area by a plane using 2-d, 3-d 
placement models. This enables multi-hop optimal routing, 
shorter transmission ranges and low data redundancy as well 
as minimal delays. Underground WSN is a group of nodes 
whose means of data transmission and reception is 
completely underground. It may be completely embedded in 
dense soil or rock.  
B. Challenges to be addressed in order to push the WSN 
technology further  
In underground WSNs, underground sensor nodes are 
supported by additional sinks nodes above ground to boost 
information relay from the sensor nodes to the base station. 
This presents a challenge in wireless communication due to 
frequent signal losses and high level of attenuation. Sensor 
nodes deployed underground require longer battery life due 
to lack of recharging media beneath surface. In underwater 
WSNs, the sensor nodes rely on acoustic wave transmissions 
which 
are 
challenged 
by 
limited 
bandwidth, long 
propagation, delays and signal fading. Multi-media WSNs 
consist of sensor nodes equipped with cameras and 
microphones, which interconnect over wireless networks to 
be able to retrieve the process and compress data. The main 
challenge in this model is a high bandwidth demand, high 
energy consumption and quality of service provisioning [6].    
Power consumption is the main challenge that all 
wireless sensor networks consider during design. Since 
wireless sensors are powered by battery or energy harvesters, 
hardware that uses power intelligently is critical in 
determining the longevity of the devices. Development of 
ultra-low power networks is one of the developments being 
undertaken in wireless sensor technologies.  With the current 
development of ultra-low power transceiver radio chips, it is 
now possible to develop low power wireless sensor 
applications with efficient energy harvesting, conversion and 
usage.  Hardware costs also pose a challenge through 
increasing the overall expenditure in wireless sensor network 
developments. Most of the systems being used in wireless 
sensor applications and networking architecture are vertically 
integrated to be able to utilize performance. This can be 
improved through the development of more stable and 
mature systems and networking architecture. The use of low 
power radio frequency transceivers are affected by poor 
wireless reception in indoors environment such as buildings 
Energy management in WSNs is another critical 
viewpoint because of the resource constraints. Remotely 
deployed energy stringent sensor nodes are typically 
powered by attached batteries. Also, resource constraints are 
addressed utilizing the diverse equipment units, protocols, 
and radio. Data transmission, in particular, is one of the most 
power consuming aspect. Hence, the power efficiency of 
communication between the base station and surrounding 
components is of paramount importance. Another issue may 
be that WSNs, due to their continuous monitoring nature, 
make tremendous amounts of data that are hard to manage, 
bringing about a colossal increment in the daily volume of 
information stored in a corporate data warehouse system. 
B  WSNs for real time monitoring of the food supply chain 
With increasing strict regulations in the food supply 
chain management with the aim of increasing higher product 
quality and public safety, the need to track and trace the 
treatments of all ingredients and the use of wireless sensor 
network technology has become prevalent in most 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
researches. Traceability, global standards and adoption of 
radio frequency (RF) technologies have been widely 
investigated through scientific experiments in universities 
and by companies in food industry. It is now possible to 
track food products in the market in the entire food supply 
chain using RFID tags, which is a more superior technology 
to barcodes and labels. RFID tags have sensors equipped 
with unique ID for products or their batches. The sensors 
attached on tags are able to form a sensor network, which 
monitors food temperature and humidity. This provides 
continuous monitoring of data throughout the food supply 
chain, which provides assurance to retailer requirements such 
as maintaining the required temperature throughout the 
delivery and storage process of products.  
WSN technology  is used in  agriculture industry for 
monitoring and surveillance of crops within a farm. 
However, weather variation is the sole challenge that affects 
performance of WSN in this industry. The technology 
utilizes radio frequencies that can be interfered byweather 
conditions. The technology is used in maintenance and 
monitoring of farmlands. This is achieved through 
installation of sensors and cameras on the field. These 
devices are linked to the control station on the farm via the 
mentioned wireless technology. Monitoring fields enables 
identification of severe conditions of the soil and weather; 
with such information, farmers may make comprehensive 
decisions concerning planting activities. Wireless technology 
also enables pest control and irrigation activities that are 
essential when pursuing maximum yield. Sensors deployed 
on the soil are able to determine moisture content of the soil. 
When soil moisture content is below the minimum, the 
information is transferred to the control that commands the 
irrigator to sprinkle the soil. Phytophotra is a disease that 
affects potatoes and is influenced by temperature and 
humidity conditions. Between 868MHz and 916MHz, motes 
can be used in determining moisture content on air and 
temperature [8]. Extreme temperatures can be reflected and 
relayed to the control station, which initiates spray of 
pesticides. 
III. 
 SELECTED APPLICATIONS OF WSNS IN FOOD 
INDUSTRY  
WSNs have proved to be vital in certain applications that 
require data to be monitored in real time. Particularly, such 
networks have been widely used in precision agriculture. In 
this regard, agricultural sector has recently made use of 
WSNs in an attempt to enhance the monitoring operations 
associated with this sector. In light of this, precision 
agriculture refers to 
the 
science 
involving precise 
comprehending, approximating as well as evaluating the 
crop condition with the intent of determining the real 
irrigation needs, and correct utilizers during harvesting and 
sowing seasons.  
Precision agriculture is actually an integrated product-
based farming system and information specifically designed 
to boost productivity and minimize unintended effects of 
equipment failure, the environment and wildlife. Figure 1 
depicts WSN deployment for agriculture. 
Since wireless sensor network is an ad-hoc kind of 
network, it does not need infrastructure as it is the case for 
other technologies. It can contain several nodes (unassisted 
embedded components) which are used in processing and 
transmitting data gathered from various onboard physical 
sensors such as soil moisture, humidity, pressure wetness 
and temperature. It also entails base section which serves as 
the gateway between end users and nodes or between nodes.  
 
  
 
Figure 1.  WSN deployment for the agricultural applications 
 
Wireless sensor network technology has a variety of 
advantages as well as limitations. For instance, proper 
utilization of fertilizers and controlled irrigation can preserve 
resources and reduce wastage.   Additionally, proper 
utilization of pesticides can minimize losses and improve and 
maintain the quality of product as well as enhance 
profitability. However, limitations associated with the 
deployment of WSNs for agricultural applications include 
security challenges concerning routing operations, physical 
security of software and hardware, and limited power [3].     
Precision agriculture assists in reducing carbon dioxide, 
methane, nitrogen as well as other harmful liquid and gases 
emission. On the other hand, crop surveillance mainly 
focuses on understanding and monitoring the needs of crops 
in accordance to weather, as well as managing the available 
resources. Wireless sensor network also assists in preserving 
precious resources, effective utilization of such resources, 
and reducing wastage. This is referred to as proficient 
resource distribution [9].       
Generally, wireless sensor networks have been employed 
in agriculture for pest control. In this regard, it is argued that 
“sensor network-based 
decision 
support 
system 
for 
agriculture” is used to conduct an experiment regarding pests 
and crop-weather [3]. Researchers are further trying to 
comprehend the hidden correlation between weather and pest 
and disease. In this case, a corrective prediction model has 
been developed that could be used to understand the 
correlation between such parameters in the future. The 
proposed model is shown in Figure 2. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
  
 
Figure 2.  Proposed corrective prediction model for understanding the 
correlation between weather and pest and disease [3] 
The proposed model is to offer ultra-low cost to the 
remote node because the user can only maintain a remote 
node rather than the primary node at the farm. The central 
server can then be accessed via web applications in order to 
obtain the relevant details regarding disease forecast and 
weather conditions [10].  
 
On the other hand, the technology referred to as 
food intelligent packaging (IP) are currently under review 
with a special focus on the likelihood of using SAW and 
RFID technologies. According to [5], passive SAW and 
RFID technologies are more likely to attain a food intelligent 
packaging which can be used to wirelessly communicate to 
the food chains’ different agents.  
  
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
Quality wireless sensor networks are required at different 
stages of food production and marketing. There are different 
types of wireless sensor networks including terrestrial WSN, 
underground WSN, underwater WSN, multimedia WSN and 
mobile WSN. All these WSNs are crucial in maintaining 
food security and quality throughout the supply chain. It is 
necessary for all companies in the food chain to adopt WSN 
to ensure that products can be traced, beginning from the 
producer to the consumer. This ensures that food products 
are clean, well labeled, and of good quality. Despite the fact 
that WSNs have had a positive impact on the agricultural 
sector, there are some visible constrains that inhibits their 
adoption in many countries. These challenges are both 
technically and culturally based. 
Agronomists have been in opposition of WSN and 
distrust them with the belief that they are more informed and 
experienced in managing food production process. Secondly, 
there is still a big over-reliance on 1D optical barcodes, 
which inhibits successful application of other technologies. 
 The third challenge emerges from the costs of acquiring 
and setting up WSN [11]. For instant, many people around 
the world and more importantly in developing countries still 
practice small scale farming. As such, setting up WSN 
would offset other benefits such as low costs of farming. 
Still, the benefits associated with WSN regarding food 
security are immense and many countries are struggling to 
ensure a strong industrial adoption. 
TABLE II.  APPLICATIONS OF WSNS IN AGROFOOD INDUSTRY 
Main Field of 
Application 
Technology 
Used 
Specific 
Function 
Sensing Parameters 
Environmental 
monitoring 
Surface 
Acoustic 
Waves 
Resonator 
(SAW) 
Weather 
monitoring 
Geo-referenced 
environment 
monitoring 
Temperature, moisture, 
sunlight intensity 
Advantage/ 
Functions 
Easy to organize and process parameters 
Precision 
Agriculture 
-Silage 
yield 
mapping 
system 
- 
Wireless 
infrared 
thermometer 
system 
-Automatic 
irrigation 
system 
Spatial 
Data 
Collection 
Precision 
irrigation 
Variable 
rate 
technology 
Supplying data 
to farmers 
Automated 
fertilizer 
applicator 
for 
tree crops 
 
Soil water availability, 
soil compaction, soil 
fertility, biomass yield, 
leaf area index, leaf 
temperature, 
leaf 
chlorophyll 
content, 
plant 
water 
status, 
insect 
disease 
weed 
infestation, grain yield. 
Advantage/ 
Functions 
-The system provides accurate field survey data enabling farm 
managers and engineers to monitor performance 
-The system is proved to have saved between 30-60% water 
usage 
Machine and 
process 
control 
M2M 
technology 
Wireless 
personal safety 
device 
(WPSRD) 
Remote service 
system 
for 
agricultural 
machinery 
-Wireless Probe 
System (WPS) 
Vehicle 
guidance 
Machinery 
management 
Robotic control 
Process control 
State and condition of 
machinery, 
seamless 
remote 
control, 
cost 
efficiency  
Advantage/ 
Functions 
-The system prevents collision between human and motor 
vehicle properties in farms 
-The systems maximized production through ensuring minimum 
breakdown time 
-WPS improves accuracy and efficiency of food drying process 
and cost of data collection 
Facility 
automation 
RF link (458 
MHs), 
Solar 
Power 
data 
acquisition 
stations 
(SPSWAS) 
Greenhouse 
control 
Animal feeding 
facilities 
HVAC, 
Lighting, 
energy, access control, 
risk management, 
 
Advantage/ 
Functions 
- Improved productivity and reduce labor requirement 
Traceability 
system (RFID 
biosensor tags) 
Smart collars  
Acoustic wave 
systems 
Hobo Pro data 
loggers (Onset 
computer 
corporation, 
Pacaset, MA) 
Animal ID and 
health 
monitoring 
Food packaging 
Transportation 
Food inspection 
Temperature, humidity, 
noise, 
light 
and 
ammonia content in the 
air 
-smart 
packing, 
automatic checkout and 
smart 
recycling, 
Vibration and animal 
behavior, 
bacterial 
concentration in food,  
 
Advantage/ 
Functions 
Improved security, traceability, productivity, inventory control, 
savings in capita and operational costs. High food monitoring 
quality 
      
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

 
 
Together with other forms of precision agriculture such as 
integration of scattered pieces of land, WSN had the ability 
of improving the quality of food products, enhancing 
sustainability, protecting the environment, and improving 
rural development [12]. Table II provides a comparison of 
main applications of wireless sensor networks in agrofood 
industry. Selected field of applications presents how this 
technology can be integrated to enhance safety and quality 
of food products and provide advantages such as mobility, 
transparency and autonomy. The WSN technology is mainly 
built on networked devices or utilizes networks for 
communication. However, much additional work still 
should be done for a large scale integrated communication 
and scalable coordination throughout the agro-food 
networks [13]. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
WSNs have gained increasing popularity over the last 
couple of years; they have helped revolutionize industrial 
operations starting with production to manufacturing to 
retailing. The agricultural sector has also seen an increased 
use of WSN to track the history of food products beginning 
from cultivation to post-harvest activities. Using WSNs, the 
history of food product starting from production to 
harvesting to marketing can be traced.  The use of WSNs has 
seen improved food security around the globe. There are 
various benefits associated with WSNs despite the fact that 
there are still many challenges to overcome. For instance, 
there is a huge opposition from agronomists who believe that 
they have the knowledge and experience to manage fields. 
Further, the costs associated with acquiring and setting up 
WSNs is also a challenge to be addressed, particularly in 
developing economies where land is scattered and small 
scale farming is the major form of agriculture. Consolidation 
of such land is needed to ensure that the cost of using WSNs 
in agriculture is less compared with the gains. Furthermore, 
there is a need to address cultural issues such as the belief 
that food security cannot be fully achieved as well as the 
need for a vast campaign in a bid to educate stakeholders of 
the benefits of using WSN in the food production and 
marketing chain. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Connolly and F. O’Reilly, "Sensor networks and the 
food industry, Workshop on Real-World Wireless Sensor 
Networks,RealWSN, 2005, pp. 20-21. 
[2] C. B. D. Kuncoro, "Miniature and Low-Power Wireless 
Sensor Node Platform: State of the Art and Current 
Trends," IPTEK Journal of Proceedings Series vol.1, no.1, 
2015, pp 355-367. 
[3] S. Azfar, A. Nadeem, and A. Basit,  "Pest detection and 
control techniques using wireless sensor network: A 
review," Journal of Entomology and Zoology Studies, vol. 
3, no.2, 2015,  pp 92-99. 
[4] C. Rhee, S. Berkovitch, Y. Kaufmann, and D. Wiseman, 
"USN applied to Smart Cold Chain based on the mesh 
wireless sensor network," In Industrial Engineering 
Proceedings, 2011,  pp. 786-789. 
[5] A. López-Gómez,  et al. "Radiofrequency Identification and 
Surface Acoustic Wave Technologies for Developing the 
Food Intelligent Packaging Concept," Food Engineering 
Reviews vol.7, no.1, 2015, pp11-32. 
[6] N. Srivastava, "Challenges of next-generation wireless 
sensor networks and its impact on society," Journal of 
Telecommunications, vol. 1, no.1, 2010, pp 128-133.  
[7] A. Testa, A. Coronato, M. Cinque, and J. C. Augusto, 
“Static verification of wireless sensor networks with formal 
methods,” In Signal Image Technology and Internet Based 
Systems (SITIS), 2012 Eighth International Conference on , 
IEEE, November 2012, pp. 587-594. 
[8] A. Baggio, “Wireless sensor networks in precision 
agriculture,” ACM Workshop on Real-World Wireless 
Sensor Networks (REALWSN 2005), Stockholm, Sweden. 
2005. 
[9] M. Keshtgary and A.  Deljoo, "An efficient wireless sensor 
network for precision agriculture," Canadian Journal on 
Multimedia and Wireless Networks, vol. 3, no.1, 2012, pp 
1-5. 
[10] S. Methley and C.Forster, "Wireless Sensor Networks Final 
Report," An Article of Plextek Limited, United Kingdom, 
2008. 
[11] L. Mainetti, L. Patrono, M. L. Stefanizzi, and R. Vergallo, 
"An innovative and low-cost gapless traceability system of 
fresh vegetable products using RF technologies and 
EPCglobal standard," Computers and electronics in 
agriculture, vol.98, 2013, pp 146-157. 
[12] B. Talebpour, U. Türker, and U. Yegül, "The Role of 
Precision Agriculture in the Promotion of Food Security," 
International Journal of Agricultural and Food Research,  
vol. 4, no. 1, 2015, pp. 1-23. 
[13] S. Samadi, "Applications and Opportunities for Internet-
based Technologies in the Food Industry," In The Sixth 
International Conference on Advances in Future Internet, 
AFIN 2014, Lisbon, Portugal, Nov. 2014, pp 67-71. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-444-2
INNOV 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Communications, Computation, Networks and Technologies

