Multi-Agent Technology in Real-time Intelligent Resource Management Systems 
Igor Mayorov 
Samara State Technical University 
Smart Solutions, Ltd 
Samara, Russia 
e-mail: imayorov@smartsolutions-123.ru 
Petr Skobelev 
Samara State Aerospace University 
Samara, Russia 
e-mail: petr.skobelev@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—The article describes the main principles of 
intelligent real-time resource management systems based on the 
use of multi-agent technology. Features of the new generation of 
systems are demonstrated that implement the full cycle of 
autonomous resource management, from reaction to real-world 
to monitoring deviations between the plan and the fact on the 
basis of the developed multi-agent platform. The article also 
presents several applications of scheduling systems in various 
areas, including cargo flow management for the International 
Space Station, workshop management in machine-building 
enterprises, 
railway 
traffic 
and 
cargo 
transportation 
management. Adaptability of multi-agent systems to external 
disruptive events is demonstrated. Finally, the similarities 
between 
multi-agent 
systems 
and 
non-equilibrium 
thermodynamics of Ilya Prigogine are described. 
 
Keywords-multi-agent technology; resource management; 
dynamic scheduling; real-time; demand-resource network; 
adaptability 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Methods for enterprise resource planning, which would 
give the possibility to quickly, flexibly and effectively make 
smart decisions reflecting a balance between interests of 
many participants in the conditions of growing complexity of 
the modern world, play a crucial role in a variety of different 
applications. 
In this regard, it is not surprising that development of 
computational algorithms for allocation, planning and 
optimization of resources is moving towards development of 
adaptive resource management systems suitable for rapidly 
changing conditions of the modern environment, although the 
software market is still dominated by batch systems in which 
orders and resources are known in advance and do not change 
in the course of computation. 
In contrast to the classical large, centralized, indivisible 
and sequential software programs, multi-agent systems 
(MAS) are set up in the form of distributed groups of small 
autonomous software objects running asynchronously but 
concurrently in order to produce the result. 
Multi-agent technologies are increasingly gaining the 
position of one of the most innovative tools for real-time 
planning for a wide range of tasks. Scientific and practical 
bases of multi-agent approach to solving complex problems 
and building distributed systems began to take shape in the 
last decades of the 20th century at the junction of artificial 
intelligence, object-oriented and concurrent programming, 
Internet technologies and telecommunications. 
Multi-agent technologies are at the heart of recent 
developments [1]-[4] making it possible to respond to the 
challenges which modern systems are facing nowadays. They 
give the possibility to present the process of solving any 
complex problem (in this case – resource management) as a 
process of self-organization and searching for a balance 
between opposing interests of basic demand agents and 
resource agents, implemented through mechanisms of 
negotiation with concessions on the basis of market 
mechanisms of service delivery. 
The article is organized as follows. Section II describes 
the multi-agent approach which is applied in Smart Solutions 
products, and summarizes modern state of traditional and 
multi-agent approaches to resource planning. Section III 
deals with application of the developed multi-agent methods 
to scheduling of cargo flow and flight program of 
International Space Station, planning of a group of 
spacecrafts for Earth remote sensing, real-time railway traffic 
management of Russian Railways, and cargo transportation 
management. Implementation efficiency of multi-agent 
systems in these domains is proved. Section IV provides a 
method of adaptability evaluation of real-time multi-agent 
systems. Section V outlines a thermodynamic approach to 
description of multi-agent systems. In Conclusion results of 
successfully implemented methods by Smart Solutions are 
given as well as further steps in multi-agent system 
development. 
II. MULTI-AGENT APPROACH TO SOLVING THE PROBLEMS 
OF ADAPTIVE PLANNING BASED ON DEMAND-RESOURCE 
NETWORKS  
Solving traditional resource planning tasks  is usually 
formulated as a batch process, where all orders and resources 
are known in advance and do not change in the process of 
work [5][6]. At present, traditional ERP-systems (Enterprise 
Resource Planning) has included more and more resource 
schedulers often called ASP methods (Advanced Scheduling 
and Planning), which are developed by such companies as 
SAP, Oracle, Manugistic, i2, ILOG, J-Log, etc. 
However, such systems implement, as a rule, batch linear 
and dynamic programming, constraint programming, and 
other methods based on combinatorial search of variants [6], 
which appear to be of little use in practice. To reduce 
complexity of combinatorial search, new heuristic and 
metaheuristic methods are used [7], which give the 
opportunity to obtain appropriate results in a reasonably short 
period of time due to reducing combinatorial search variants. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Besides, one can use “greedy” local search methods, 
simulated annealing, constraint programming, taboo search, 
genetic and ant colony algorithms, etc. 
The stated methods also use batch processing. They are 
hardly extended by additional target criteria and do not allow 
considering various factors which are often used in real life, 
which can  be set not only by formulas and in equations, but 
also by tables and diagrams. 
Moreover, search of variants in real data takes up too 
much time, though the results are usually quite improbable 
and hardly comparable to decisions made by people in real 
life. 
From the very beginning multi-agent technology has been 
used for solving traditional optimization tasks with the use of 
distributed decision making approaches, for example, 
Distributed Constraint Optimization task (DCOP) [8]. 
Besides, several bio-inspired methods have been developed 
for solving resource scheduling problems, for example 
swarm optimization, hybrid methods based on artificial 
immune system and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [9] 
[10]. 
One of the new approaches is built on bio-inspired 
distributed problem solving of resource scheduling problems 
based on multi-agent technology with economic reasoning 
[11][12]. 
Despite the fact that PSO is a powerful stochastic 
evolutionary algorithm, its disadvantage is that it can lead to 
a local optimum. In order to increase algorithm productivity, 
various methods are suggested, for example, improvement of 
initial swarm characteristics [13][14]. In the multi-agent 
optimization method with adaptive parameters [15], it is 
suggested to modify the range of speed changes to avoid 
speed increase, which will allow for reducing search time of 
the optimal decision. 
Besides, PSO algorithm modification – Two-swarm 
Cooperative Particle Swarm Optimization (TCPSO) [16] that 
uses two swarms “driving” and “driven” will give the 
opportunity of increasing adaptability level of swarm 
intelligence.  
The application of evolutionary algorithms and swarm 
optimization algorithms, in particular, in multi-agent systems 
allows to solve problems of high complexity that cannot be 
solved by other ways, due to the combinatory rising 
computations complexity [17].  
The multi-agent approach is used primarily for solving 
multi-criteria planning tasks, including quality of products or 
services, time for their implementation, price (prime cost), 
risks, etc. In the proposed approach, the system itself chooses 
goals for improving the vector of its parameters, based on the 
achieved results and the current situation with orders and 
resources. As its primary objective for improving its 
condition the system chooses the criterion having the worst 
indicator values. Implementation of multi-agent approach in 
development of an intelligent system for dynamic planning is 
based on the concept of demand-resource networks and the 
method of conjugated interactions for real-time enterprise 
resource management on the virtual market [1]-[3]. 
According to this concept, each request, order or other 
demand as well as each resource (production resource, 
machinery, equipment, vehicles, personnel) are assigned to 
software agents that negotiate with other agents and plan 
order fulfillment "just-in-time" (JIT) or "as soon as possible" 
(ASAP). This ensures support of collective coordination and 
decision-making in real time at various stages of planning and 
production plan execution in the various subdivisions 
working together to solve common problems. 
Planning is done in several interrelated stages: if changes 
are made at one of the stages, it is necessary to make 
adjustments at all subsequent stages. Some examples of such 
external influences are changes in the cost of resources and 
orders, changes in the schedule of materials deliveries, 
equipment failure and so on. But on the other hand, the 
resource itself receives proposals from various claims 
(demands) and decides which of the orders are more suitable 
for it. 
These decisions can not be made once and for all and are 
not made that way. They can be reviewed and modified as the 
situation is changing and new events are happening in real 
time. At the same time, new connections established between 
agents cause changes in operating conditions for other agents, 
and thus define the process of system self-organization 
leading to restructuring of the schedule in response to 
emerging events. The result is considered to be achieved and 
the system completes its work only when none of the agents 
have opportunities to improve their state, the time for finding 
a solution has run out, or the user has interrupted the process 
in order to enter interactive mode. 
Multi-agent technology makes it possible to create 
software agents that are trying to optimize their target 
parameters. For example, an order in a factory or in a cargo 
company wants to be executed just in time and at minimal 
cost, or a resource (machine, truck, etc.) wants to be used as 
efficiently as possible and have no downtime or overwork. 
Agents at first do it "selfishly" (independently), without 
asking anyone – that is why they manage to do it very quickly 
if resources are available. However, if the decisions of other 
agents create conflicts, they are able to negotiate, make 
concessions and seek a solution (consensus) in favor of the 
mutual interest that unites them (for example, a worker or a 
driver, a workshop or a car fleet). 
This approach can be considered an example of 
Disrtibuted Problem Solving, in which a complex task is 
decomposed into subtasks that can be solved independently, 
but then the solutions obtained are combined and detected 
conflicts are solved. 
III. INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS OF MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS 
IN SMART SOLUTIONS DURING 2010-2015 
A. Multi-Agent System for Scheduling of Flight Program, 
Cargo Flow and Resources of International Space 
Station 
This project was commissioned by S.P. Korolev Rocket 
and Space Corporation (RSC) “Energia” with the goal of 
solving the challenges of flight program and cargo flow 
planning for the International Space Station (ISS) [4]. The 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

multi-agent system provides interactive support for the 
following tasks [18]: 
Flight program design, that results in distribution of space 
ships’ docking to ISS across modules and time considering 
various constraints: 
 
Cargo flow strategic and operational scheduling that 
results in distribution of deliveries of units, blocks 
and systems across transportation flights and manned 
spacecraft; 
 
Fuel deliveries and both strategic and tactical 
scheduling based on a forecast of ISS position 
changes, Sun activity, operations plan and flight 
program; 
 
Water, food and other supply delivery scheduling 
based on information about the expeditions and flight 
program; 
 
Scheduling of items returned to the surface and 
disposal of waste items; 
 
Flight crew time scheduling. 
The main feature of the system is the adaptive scheduler 
of cargo flow following the real time changes in demand. 
New cargo orders may displace those already allocated, but 
with lower priority or delivery deadline.  
The system constructs the flight and cargo plan after 
taking into account the availability of space on the next 
spacecraft to be launched, available space on board of the 
station, disposal of existing cargo, which provides more 
available and other factors, while allowing the user to adjust 
the results manually. 
The results of the implementation are as follows:  
 
The system made it possible for the first time to keep 
track of redundant or missing equipment aboard the 
station.  
 
The time required for scheduling cargo flow for a 
duration of one year has decreased from 176 to 8 
hours, and the time for its approval - from 264 to 88 
hours.  
 
Keeping the current cargo plan up to date saves up to 
200 hours per year.  
 
Preparation of reserve flight plans for emergencies 
takes 320 hours less per year. 
 
The time for allocation of one spacecraft’s cargo 
aboard the station went from 264 down to 128 hours, 
for a total of 544 hours per year for "Progress" 
spacecraft and 320 hours per year for "Soyuz" 
manned capsule. 
 
Automatic verification of lists of cargo for disposal 
eliminates duplicates and saves about 312 hours per 
year.  
Fuel balance planning, water and other supply balance 
planning and crew’s working schedule allocation all take 
10%-15% less time, for a total of 270 hours per year. 
B. Smart Satellites: System for Management of a Group of 
Spacecrafts for Earth Remote Sensing 
A multi-agent system for management of target usage of 
spacecraft groups for Earth remote sensing has been 
developed. Smart Satellites makes it possible to adaptively 
redistribute sensing tasks among the spacecrafts within 
groups [19][20]. 
The space system is represented as a heterogeneous multi-
agent system in which agents are represented by spacecrafts 
for Earth remote sensing, satellites-retranslators which serve 
to ensure operational communication between agents and, 
finally, ground stations. Management is implemented 
through coordinated interaction of spacecrafts: the satellites 
dynamically form a team, distribute among themselves the 
task and solve it in parts, depending on their location and of 
on-board 
equipment 
capabilities. 
To 
formalize 
the 
description of the desired object an ontology is used which is 
presented in the form of a semantic network. 
 The experimental results showed that the use of multi-
agent management can reduce the total time of sensing in 
complex dynamic environments, and ensure viability of the 
system in case a number of spacecrafts leave the group. 
C. Smart Railways:Railway Traffic Management System  
Smart Railways, a distributed intelligent system for real-
time railway traffic management, commissioned by the 
Russian Railways, is aimed at building and adapting  
multilinked and multilevel schedules for operation of Russian 
Railways subdivisions  in case of unforeseen events, 
including the schedules for high-speed, passenger and cargo 
trains, locomotives , stations, crews of locomotive drivers 
[21]. Intelligent system for management of passenger railway 
traffic is developed to control the traffic of high-speed 
“Sapsan” trains. The system builds the initial master-plan and 
then makes adjustments under the influence of occurring 
events, such as, for example, maintenance work on track 
sections. The logics of reaction to events is implemented as 
follows: each event starts a chain for rescheduling of 
resources in the system. Moreover, proactive optimization of 
plans is carried out in order to search for better options while 
there is still time for the system operation. 
The developed system makes it possible to achieve the 
following important indicators:  
 
almost no delays of high-speed “Sapsan” trains;  
 
building the whole schedule takes up to 45 minutes; 
 
reaction to events - up to 30 seconds.  
 
All the main safety requirements are met (intervals 
between trains, no crossing of bulk cargo trains and 
high-speed trains, etc.) - 99%, 
 
technical requirements (acceleration and breaking 
time, choice of platforms, standing times) - 97%.  
 
The average delay became less than 8% (up to 30 
trains in conflict);  
 
the average time for return to the master-plan became 
1.5 times less. 
 
Productivity of dispatchers’ work increased by more 
than 2 times. 
D. Smart Factory: Multi-agent System for Workshop 
Management in Machine-building Enterprises  
The multi-agent system “Smart Factory” is designed to 
increase productivity and efficiency of factories by means of 
adaptive resource allocation, planning, optimization and 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

monitoring of machine assembly workshops in real time [22]. 
The system gives managers the opportunity to input 
information on new events and start rescheduling, as well as 
to connect or divide operations and adjust the plan, 
initializing a chain of automatic changes to the plan. 
These solutions increase efficiency of the factory in the 
following way:  
 
machine load is increased by 20%,  
 
output per 1 worker is increased by 30%, 
 
observation of contracts and terms of product output 
as well as transparency of production processes are 
increased by 90%,  
 
operational cost control is increased by up to 100% 
in real-time mode, 
 
actual production cycle is reduced by up to 30%,  
 
stocks of finished goods and stock reserve are 
reduced by up to 15%,  
 
complexity of scheduling and forecasting results of 
the factory operation is also reduced. 
E. Smart Trucks: Multi-agent System for Cargo 
Transportation Management  
Smart Trucks, a multi-agent system 
for cargo 
transportation management, was designed for a customer 
with its head office in Moscow and more than a dozen 
branches across the country. The customer organizes cargo 
transportation using its own fleet of over 100 trucks and more 
than a hundred outsource carriers involved [23]. The system 
implements the full cycle of resource management in real 
time and provides the capability to automatically control the 
business process of application receipt, loading and 
unloading of cargo through communication with the driver 
via a cell phone. The driver must input the start and end 
signals for corresponding operations (loading, transportation, 
unloading). 
 As a result of implementation of the system during the 
first year of its operation 
 
the number of completed orders has increased by 
about 4.5%, 
 
utilization ratio of the trucks belonging to the 
customer’s own fleet has also been increased, 
 
the number of delays to the customer has been 
reduced by 3.5%,  
 
complexity of calculations and the number of errors 
has been reduced, 
 
idle run of each truck has been reduced by 3-5%, 
 
downtime of trucks has been reduced by 5-7%, 
 
fines and penalties have been reduced by 2-4%, 
 
and there was also growth of other important 
indicators of resource utilization. 
 
IV. ADAPTABILITY OF MULTI-AGENT SYSTEMS 
 
Agents interacting with each other in the demand and 
resource system, form a solution of a complex general 
dynamic schedule task by dividing it into simple parallel 
tasks of placing orders at resources. When the current state is 
getting worse, the agents focus on mitigating the impact of 
negative external effects. Agents of demand and resource 
network improve their own states locally and, thus, provide 
an increase in indicators of the whole system, for example, 
overall satisfaction. 
When a new order, not distributed by the system, appears, 
the system satisfaction decreases at first, as the coming agent 
does not find the best position immediately. Only some time 
later, the general satisfaction starts increasing due to 
rescheduling and improvement of agent states. The system 
enters the state of non-equilibrium, and then agents aim at 
achieving a new local equilibrium state. In order to assess 
dynamics of multi-agent system, calculating the average 
satisfaction of demand and resource agents is suggested 
depending on time. 
The adaptability degree of multi-agent system γ is 
introduced, which reflects the rate of local equilibrium 
recovery 
 
γ=(y2-y1)/T, 

where γ is a minimal value of satisfaction after impact, y2 
is the average satisfaction of system agents after impact, T is 
the time needed for equilibrium recovery of the average 
satisfaction y2, see Figure 1: 
 
 
Figure 1. Adaptability of the system depending on partial resource switch 
off. 
After maximum decrease of the average satisfaction to y1 
level, the system turns to a new quasi-equilibrium state y2 
after the time period T, and z is nonrecoverable lost 
satisfaction. 
Partial recovery effect can be observed not only when 
resources are switched off, but also when new task flows 
occur discontinuously. The higher the adaptability rate, the 
higher the ability of agents to self-organization in elimination 
of negative effects. 
V. THERMODYNAMIC DEMAND – RESOURCES NETWORKS 
SCHEDULING MODEL 
Even scheduling for a small organization is a much more 
complex and dynamic task than it may first seem. Processes 
of self-organization are very similar to those described in the 
works of Ilya Prigogine and they play a very important role 
in scheduling within the developed systems [24][25]. 
Schedules in complex systems are to be considered as 
"unstable equilibriums" which means that they have different 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

strength in different directions. Each new order brings in the 
money that plays the role of energy in the system. The system 
demonstrates such non-linear events as order and chaos, 
autocatalytic reactions, fluctuations, etc. When the number of 
conflicts waiting for resolution increases and so does the 
number of messages in the system, it is assumed that the 
temperature of the schedule in this section is increasing as 
well. In order to support the schedule structure, agents pay 
some tax that dissipate part of input energy. 
If the orders stop coming into the system, the schedule 
will later gradually break down starting with the weakest 
connections between the agents. Then the system will 
transition into the state of chaos having zero energy and 
eventually it will cool completely. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
 
The paper contains a review of multi-agents systems 
developed by SEC “Smart Solutions” from 2010 to 2014. It 
demonstrates that even today multi-agent systems make it 
possible to solve complex tasks and design industrial systems 
for resource management of a fundamentally new class, 
which are based on the main principles of self-organization 
and evolution. The developed methods and instruments for 
designing multi-agent systems can be applied for solution of 
a wide range of complex tasks – from cargo delivery to the 
International Space Station to railway transportation. This 
proves the high efficiency of the developed approach. 
Implementation results confirm evaluations made earlier 
which are the evidence of increase in efficiency of using 
resources by 20-40% by means of real-time decision-making. 
Implemented projects illustrate important advantages of the 
approach, such as service level increase, opportunity to solve 
very complex tasks of scheduling and resource optimization 
in real time, high operational efficiency and flexibility of 
solutions, reliability and viability of developed systems as 
well as minimization of risks for enterprises. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The study was supported by the Ministry of education and 
science of Russian Federation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Skobelev and V. Vittikh, “Models of Self-organization for 
Designing Demand-Resource Networks,” Automation and Remote 
Control, Journal of Russian Academy of Science, no 1, 2003, pp. 177-
185.  
[2] V. Vittikh and P. Skobelev, “The compensation method of agents 
interactions for real time resource allocation,“ Avtometriya, Journal of 
Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Science, no 2, 2009, pp. 78-
87.  
[3] P. Skobelev, “Multi-Agent Systems for Real Time Adaptive Resource 
Management,” in Industrial Agents: Emerging Applications of 
Software Agents in Industry, P. Leitão and S. Karnouskos, Eds. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2015, pp. 207-230.  
[4] P. Skobelev, “Multi-Agent Systems for Real Time Resource 
Allocation, Scheduling, Optimization and Controlling: Industrial 
Applications,“ Proc. 5th Int. Conf. on Industrial Applications of 
Holonic and Multi-Agent Systems (HoloMas 2011), Springer, vol. 
6867, 2011, pp. 1-14. 
[5] Y. T. Leung, “Handbook of Scheduling: Algorithms, Models and 
Performance Analysis”, CRC Computer and Information Science 
Series, Chapman & Hall, London, 2004.   
[6] S. Chaleshtari and Sh. Shadrokh, “A Branch and Bound Algorithm for 
Resource Constrained Project Scheduling Problem subject to 
Cumulative Resources.” World Academy of Science, Engineering and 
Technology, vol. 6, 2012, pp. 23-28.  
[7] S. Vos, “Meta-heuristics: The State of the Art”. In Local Search for 
Planning and Scheduling, eds A Nareyek, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 
2001, pp.1-23. 
[8] C. R. Rolf and K. Kuchcinski, “Distributed constraint programming 
with agents”. In Proceedings of the second international conference on 
Adaptive and intelligent systems, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2011, pp. 
320-331. 
[9] L. Gongfa, “A hybrid particle swarm algorithm to JSP problem.” IEIT 
Journal of Adaptive & Dynamic Computing, 2011, pp. 12-22. 
[10] Q. Xueni and  Y. Lau, “An AIS-based Hybrid Algorithm with PSO for 
Job Shop Scheduling Problem”. In Proceedings of the tenth IFAC 
Workshop on Intelligent Manufacturing Systems, Lisbon, (IFAC’ 
2010), vol. 10, 2010, pp. 350-355. 
[11] M. Pinedo, “Scheduling: Theory, Algorithms, and System”, Springer, 
Berlin, 2008. 
[12] P. Leitao and  P. Vrba, “Recent Developments and Future Trends of 
Industrial Agents.” In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference 
on Holonic and Multi-Agent Systems, (HoloMAS 2011), Springer, 
Berlin, pp. 15-28. 
[13] T. Dong, “A Review of Convergence Analysis of Particle Swarm 
Optimization.” Int. Journal of Grid and Distributed Computing, vol.6, 
no.6, 2013, pp.117-128. 
[14] M. Imrana et al., “An Overview of Particle Swarm Optimization 
Variants.” Procedia Engineering, vol. 53, 2013, pp. 491-496.  
[15] A. Oliinyk, “The Multiagent Optimization Method with Adaptive 
Parameters.” Artificial Intelligence journal, no.1, 2011, pp. 83-90. 
[16] S. Sun and  J. Li, “A two-swarm cooperative particle swarms 
optimization.” Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, vol. 15, 2014, 
pp. 1-18. 
[17] M. Tasgetiren et al., “Particle swarm optimization and differential 
evolution algorithms for job shop scheduling problem.” International 
Journal of Operational Research, vol. 3, no. 2, 2008, pp. 120-135. 
[18] A. Ivashenko, I. Khamits, P. Skobelev P and M. Sychova, “Multi-
Agent System for Scheduling of Flight Program, Cargo Flow and 
Resources of International Space Station.“ In Proceedings of the 5th 
Int. Conf. on Industrial Applications of Holonic and Multi-Agent 
Systems (HoloMas 2011), Springer, vol. 6867, 2011, pp. 165– 174. 
[19] P. Skobelev, E. Simonova, A. Ivanov, I. Mayorov, V. Travin and A. 
Zhilyaev, “Real time scheduling of data transmission sessions in the 
microsatellites swarm and ground stations network based on multi-
agent technology.“ In Proceedings of the 6th Int. Conf. on Evolutionary 
Computation Theory and Applications (ECTA 2014), SciTePress, 
2014. – pp. 153-159.  
[20] I. Belokonov, P. Skobelev, E. Simonova, V. Travin and A. Zhilyaev, 
“Multiagent planning of the network traffic between nanosatellites and 
ground stations,” Procedia Engineering: Scientific and Technological 
Experiments on Automatic Space Vehicles and Small Satellites,  vol. 
104, 2015, pp. 118-130. 
[21] A. Belousov, P. Skobelev and M. Stepanov, “Network-centric 
approach to adaptive real-time train scheduling.” In ProcProccedings 
of the Sixth Int. Conf. on Swarm Intelligence (ICSI 2015), Springer, 
LNCS 9141, Part II, 2015, pp. 290-299. 
[22] V. Shpilevoy, et al., “Multi-agent system “Smart Factory” for real-time 
workshop management in aircraft jet engines production.” In 
Proceedings of the 11th IFAC Workshop on Intelligent Manufacturing 
Systems (IMS’13), IFAC, 2013, pp. 204-209. 
[23] P. Skobelev, A. Lada and I. Mayorov, “Finding an initial plan of 
transport resources FTL allocation in a special VRP problem using 
linear programming methods.” In Proceedings of the 19th World 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Multi-Conference on Systemics, Cybernetics and Informatics 
(WMSCI 2015), in press. 
[24] I. Prigogine and I. Stengers, Order out of Chaos: Man's new dialogue 
with nature. Flamingo,1984.  
[25] G. Rzevski and P.Skobelev, Managing complexity. WIT Press, 
London-Boston, 2014. 
 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

