Towards Semantic Facility Data Management
Ilkka Niskanen, Anu Purhonen, Jarkko Kuusijärvi
Digital Service Research
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland
Oulu, Finland
{Ilkka.Niskanen, Anu.Purhonen, Jarkko.Kuusijarvi}@vtt.fi
Esa Halmetoja,
Senate Properties
Oulu, Finland
Esa.Halmetoja@senaatti.fi
Abstract—Nowadays, facility management is realized with
different information systems, which provide a comprehensive
view for the management. Building Information Modelling (BIM)
encompasses a computer model of a facility, which is utilized
throughout the life-cycle of the building. To enable a more
holistic view on facilities’ conditions (e.g., energy efficiency,
indoor environment, maintenance and repair) we present an
approach which enhances the BIM model with semantic indoor
measurement data. The enhanced semantic information provides
more contextual information about the building; history of
conditions, current conditions, and even predictions about the
future conditions. In addition, the system ties facility users into
the process of facility management by allowing them to view the
current indoor conditions and give feedback about the conditions
of the building. The resulting semantic facility data management
approach was tested in an experiment in which the system was
applied in a school building environment.
Keywords—facility management, semantic technologies, BIM,
user-awareness, indoor conditions, sensor measusrements
I.
INTRODUCTION
The field of facility management refers to the coordination
and maintenance of physical spaces and infrastructures such as
office buildings, schools, hotels and government institutions.
Efficient facility management requires understanding and
engaging different stakeholders including building users,
owners and operators. Additionally, although good facility
management is traditionally measured by a reduced operating
cost, more attention has been given to the impact of the overall
qualitative aspects of the work environment on users’
perceived satisfaction and ability to work [1].
The requirements of facility management have increased
tremendously during the recent years. Especially the growing
role of computerized support systems has led to more
complicated facility management operations. For example,
Building 
Information 
Modelling 
(BIM) 
has 
attained
widespread attention [2]. BIM represents the process of
development and use of a computer generated model to
simulate the planning, design, construction and operation of a
facility [3]. BIM models are computer generated data-rich and
object-oriented representations of facilities from which views
and data appropriate to various users’ needs can be extracted
and analysed to generate information that can be used to make
decisions [4]. For facility management’s perspective, the BIM
models are useful especially for renovations, space planning
and maintenance operations [3].
The recent technological advances in pervasive computing
and wireless sensors have enabled also new types of facility
services. The examples of applications are span from security
and surveillance to monitoring of consumption of facility
resources (e.g., measuring, logging and comparing water and
electricity 
consumptions). 
Novel 
types 
of 
building
performance measurement methods such as sensor network
systems allow extensive heterogeneous information generated
within facilities providing valuable information about the
current state of a building. While extensive sensor data is
collected from different environments there are still significant
challenges in converting such data into useful information
needed by different facility stakeholders [5].
   The utilization of semantic technologies facilitates the
management and interpretation of data collected from
facilities. For example, the use of resource describing
metadata 
enables more 
intelligent 
machine-to-machine
interactions, such as reasoning, deduction and semantic
searches 
[6][21]. 
Moreover, 
the 
abilities 
to 
merge
heterogeneous data and derive high-level context information
from low-level measurement data expand the scope of use of
semantic technologies in the domain of facility management.
While 
the 
quantity 
of 
data 
represented 
with
semantic techniques has increased enormously, powerful
database techniques for storing, managing and querying
semantic 
data 
have 
been 
developed 
both 
by
research community and industry [7][8][9].
 
Although there have been several approaches to utilize
semantic technologies in the field of facility management
[10][11][12], the potential of semantics is still yet to be fully
realized. For example, the benefits deriving from the
integration of static BIM data to dynamic facility monitoring
data are not extensively exploited or understood. Additionally,
more information about field tests and experiments in which
these emerging technologies are applied in practical real-world
settings taking into account the users’ satisfaction perspective
is sorely needed.
  In this paper, a novel approach for semantic facility data
management is introduced. The approach integrates and
interprets facility information collected from heterogeneous
sources and represents it for different stakeholders, including
facility users, maintenance workers and owners. Furthermore,
the approach allows facility users to give feedback about the
conditions of a building.
 
The semantic data management approach was tested in an
experiment in which it was applied in the Tervaväylä School.
Tervaväylä is a state-funded special school and centre for
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

development in special needs education and it is located in
Oulu, Finland.
 
Besides the semantic data management approach, the test
environment included a building automation system and a
wireless 
sensor 
network 
that 
provided 
sensor-based
measurement data, a server machine that hosted a semantic
database and a tablet computer that held a Graphical User
Interface (GUI) that allowed the users to examine the
visualized facility information and interact with the approach.
 
The results of the experiment show that with the semantic
facility data management approach it is possible to effectively
merge and interpret heterogeneous facility data and produce
interactive 
visualizations 
for 
different 
stakeholders.
Furthermore, field tests conducted as a part of the experiment
indicate that the possibility of examining sensor-based
condition (temperature, energy consumption, etc.) information
is perceived as a useful feature by the facility users. Moreover,
the user interface that allows users to navigate through the
school building and give feedback on the conditions of
different rooms were found to increase user satisfaction.
Additionally, the facility maintenance workers perceived the
system as a valuable information resource that offers potential
to support their daily activities, work processes and interaction
towards the facility users. The suggestions for improvements
that were derived from the experiment include fine-tuning the
GUI and the visualizations provided by the approach.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. Section II gives a
description of the test environment. In Section III the results of
the field tests are discussed in more detail. Section IV
concludes the paper.
II.
TEST ENVIRONMENT
In Fig. 1, the different components of the test environment are
presented.
Fig. 1. The test environment used in the experiment
A. Building automation system
The building automation system in Tervaväylä School was
accessed via RAUInfo [13], which is a service designed for the
owners and maintenance workers of properties and which
provides continuous monitoring data accessible via web-
service interface. RAUInfo offers comprehensive monitoring
data on, for example, heating, cooling and water and energy
consumption of Tervaväylä School.
B.  Wireless sensor network
The facility data acquired from the building automation
system is augmented with additional measurement data
provided by sensors mounted to selected rooms in Tervaväylä
School. The sensors were installed to spaces that were
uncovered by the building automation system but are actively
used by the facility users. The additional sensors provide the
following measurement values: temperature, illuminance,
carbon dioxide level, moisture, and humidity.
C. BIM model of the school
The BIM model of the Tervaväylä School contains
information about physical and functional characteristics of the
facility. The BIM model represents the design of the building
including spaces, objects and other building components. The
integration of the BIM model into the overall system
architecture provides several benefits. For example, by using
the BIM model the different data providing sensors can be
located and discovered more easily.
D. Virtuoso RDF database
The semantically described facility data is stored to
Virtuoso [9], which is a database management system for RDF
[14] data. Virtuoso offers numerous data access and storage
mechanisms and interfaces. Virtuoso has been widely used
platform and is continually developed further and is thus
mature enough solution as the RDF database for the facility
data. In addition, Virtuoso supports the storage and querying of
very large datasets, which is essential in this context, since
building automation and additional sensors can provide a large
amount of information.
E. Semantic facility data management approach
The architecture of the semantic facility data management
approach contains three main layers: a data collection and
storing layer, a data processing layer, and a data representation
layer. The data collection and storing layer is responsible for
acquiring, semantically annotating and finally storing the
facility-related data into the semantic database. The data
processing layer enables interpreting semantically described
facility data into more meaningful context information. For
example, it realizes SPARQL [15] querying functionalities,
manages different user profiles and provides necessary
information for visualization views. The semantic data
processing capabilities provided by the data collection and
storing layer as well as the data processing layer are enhanced
by the extensive utilization of ontologies.
Ontologies are commonly used to formally represent a set
of concepts within a domain and the relationships between
pairs of concepts. Ontologies support modelling a domain and
performing reasoning about different entities. Ontologies also
specify a shared vocabulary and taxonomy which represent a
domain including its concepts and their properties and relations
[17]. In semantic facility data management approach,
ontologies are utilized for formally representing domain
specific concepts and their relationships, and metadata that
enables the system to better understand, and reason about the
structure and purpose of the data. Moreover, ontologies enable
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

the integration of various data sources by resolving semantic
heterogeneity between them.
To support the functionality of the framework, three novel
ontology definitions were constructed: Building ontology,
Sensor ontology and Feedback ontology. The ontologies are
described in more detail in the following sub-chapters.
a) Building ontology
To enable the semantic modelling of data contained within
BIM models a new ontology was developed. The resulting
ontology for semantically storing BIM data is sketched in Fig.
2.
Fig. 2. Building ontology
As presented in Fig. 2, the Building ontology contains four
main classes – Storey, Space, Object and Feedback. The next
level of the ontology contains subclasses that represent
different types of objects, for example, devices. Moreover,
each sub class holds its own object type specific properties that
provide more specific characteristics about the entities they
represent. The Sensor and Feedback classes represent linkages
to the other ontologies which are described in more detail later
in this section.
Currently, there exist some [18][19][20] approaches that
define their own ontologies for semantically describing BIM
models. However, for this study it was decided to design a new
BIM ontology that adopts some elements from the existing
approaches but is especially adapted and optimised for
visualisation and monitoring purposes. This more lightweight
and flexible ontology is unencumbered by the burden of
semantically describing all the concepts and content contained
by BIM models. On the other hand, the defined ontology
structure 
offers 
enough 
expressiveness 
for 
providing
comprehensive visualizations and performing sophisticated
diagnosis and analysis operations. Additionally, the BIM
ontology is general enough to be easily expandable for future
needs.
b) Sensor ontology
The system defines a sensor ontology to enable semantic
modelling of sensor-based measurement data. Additionally, the
sensor ontology facilitates the extraction of high-level context
information from various streams of continuous sensor data. In
Fig. 3, the designed sensor ontology is presented in more detail.
Sensor
hasID
Class
subClassOf
Property
ID
Measurement
hasMeasurement
Value
hasValue
IlluminanceSensor
TemperatureSensor
HumiditySensor
CO2Sensor
Measurement
hasCurrentMeasurement
Timestamp
hasTimestamp
Unit
hasUnit
Fig. 3. Sensor ontology
The ontology contains the different types of sensors and
their measurements. Every measurement has a timestamp, unit,
and value, which are used, e.g., in visualizing the
measurements. Each sensor is attached to a specific location in
a room in the Building ontology. The location of the sensor can
be used in analysing the indoor environment of the target
building and to make reasoning about possible events, e.g.,
heating failure, that would need maintenance
c) Feedback ontology
The feedback provided by facility users is modelled and
stored using an ontology description. In Fig. 4 the feedback
ontology is presented in more detail.
Fig. 4. Feedback ontology
The feedback ontology includes values for the specified
feedback attributes: lighting, temperature, air, energy, and free
text. The free text field can be used to give plain text feedback
about the space. The other fields are numerical values ranging
from 0 to 100. For example, in the temperature field a value of
0 corresponds to very cold and a value of 100 corresponds to
very hot. The end-user uses a slider with visual cues and a text
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

describing the situation.  The feedback is tied to a specific
location target (e.g., room) in the building. The feedbacks are
given a timestamp so that they can be easily compared to the
measured indoor conditions from the building automation and
additional sensors.
d) Graphical User Interface
The role of the data representation layer is to implement
the GUI, which is responsible for creating visualization views
and managing interaction between the end-users and the
system. The GUI is implemented with HTML5 [16] utilizing
graphical libraries optimized for mobile devices. The
application is a full web-based application run with a web
browser; no native programming language was used. Thus, the
application can be used in multiple platforms and devices
ranging from computers to tablets and mobile phones. In this
experiment, a Samsung Galaxy Tab 10.1 and a laptop were
used.
The objective of the GUI is to enhance user awareness by
providing means to explore building-related data through
visualizations that represent different aspects of the building.
Different spaces of the building are represented from an
isometric perspective, which provides an overview of the
contextual environment and facilitates the discovery of spatial
relationships between objects. Moreover, the isometric
visualization contains a summary of the measurement
information that is provided by the different sensors that are
monitoring the conditions of spaces in real-time. The Isometric
visualization of a space is shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5. A visualization of a space
From the isometric visualization the user is able to access a
feedback section in which the user can give either general
feedback or feedback concerning the existing indoor
conditions of a certain space. The approach enables giving
either verbal or scaled feedback. Scaled feedback is given by
using special sliding clutches in estimating the current status
(e.g., from too warm to cold) of four parameters that are
temperature, air quality, lighting and energy consumption.
The facility maintenance workers are able to see indoor
environment conditions (e.g., temperature, humidity, etc.) of
the selected room in line chart visualizations over a selected
period of time, e.g., a day or a week (see Fig. 6). Additionally,
the facility maintenance workers can view the received
feedbacks from the facility users to specific locations in the
building.
Fig. 6. A historical condition data representation
III.
FIELD TESTS
The field tests were conducted in order to achieve the
following objectives:
x
To validate the functionality of the semantic facility
data management approach in real-world settings.
x
To examine the usage rate of the semantic facility
data management approach among the users.
x
To study the effects of the semantic facility data
management approach on facility user satisfaction.
x
To provide information about how the facility users
perceive the existing conditions of the school.
A. Experiment execution
During the field test periods the tablet running the GUI of
the system was located in the school employees’ break room,
where it was available for the personnel to use. The number of
people involved in the experiment was approximately 55. In
total, three separate test periods were performed and between
each period the semantic facility data management approach
was improved according to the received user feedback. The
times of the test periods are shown below.
 Field test 1: 4/12/2012 – 4/1/2013
 Field test 2: 1/2/2013 – 15/2/2013
 Field test 3: 26/3/2013 – 12/4/2013
B. Experiment results
After the field tests the usage metrics were analysed.
Furthermore, an additional questionnaire was prepared in order
to measure the perceived ease-of-use and perceived usefulness
of the approach. The questionnaire used a five level grading
system, where five is the best and one the worst grade, three
being the average. Users were able to answer the questionnaire
anonymously.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

1) Results of usage metrics
The usage metrics indicate that the interest towards the
approach was at its peak during the first field test period, in
which the different features were used the most frequently.
During the second and the third field test periods the users
were probably more familiar with the approach and hence
used it only when they were interested in the conditions of a
certain room or wanted to give feedback about a specific
deficiency, for example. A condensed summary of the data
obtained from the usage metrics are shown in Table I.
TABLE I.
SUMMARIZED USAGE METRICS DATA
Field test 1
Field test 2
Field test 3
Main 
page
opened
164
12
11
Info 
page
opened
102
40
21
Feedback sent
18 (of which
7 written)
2 (0)
5 (3)
1)
Results of the numerical feedback
According to the numerical feedback received the school
employees were mainly satisfied with the indoor environment.
However, temperature conditions in different spaces received
some negative feedback. When comparing the negative
feedback to other facility data managed with the approach it
was discovered that the outside weather had an effect on how
people perceived the indoor temperature. More precisely,
during a cold winter day the indoor temperatures were usually
perceived too low whereas a sunny day had an opposite impact.
Additionally, when analysing the visualizations of different
spaces it was discovered that the negative temperature
feedbacks were focused on rooms that contained large
windows, which apparently strengthen the effect of warm or
cold outside temperatures.
2) Results of the questionnaire
To summarize the questionnaire results, the visualizations
offered by the semantic facility data management approach
were considered as an important and useful information source
by the facility users. However, the usability of the approach
was found to require improvements. Moreover, it was
perceived as difficult to give written feedback with the tablet.
In addition, some data representation techniques used by the
visualizations were regarded as difficult to understand. The
background knowledge of the end-users on using tablets
probably has an effect on the overall satisfaction on the user
interface.
The possibility to give feedback anonymously was
considered a very positive feature. In more detail, the users felt
more convenient to give feedback with a tablet than, e.g., a
bigger info screen (if the user wanted to give textual feedback,
he/she could do so privately with the tablet). However,
according to the questionnaire results a small portion of the
employees were not interested in learning to use the tablet PC
or the GUI of the approach, which hindered their participation.
3) Feedback from the facility maintenance workers
Besides the field test periods, the approach was introduced
to the facility maintenance workers of the Tervaväylä School.
The facility maintenance workers were familiarized with the
approach and they were given an opportunity to test it.
Afterwards, the facility maintenance workers answered a
questionnaire that measured the perceived ease-of-use and
perceived usefulness.
According to the questionnaire results, the tablet was
considered as a useful tool and the user interface of the
approach was perceived as clear and easy to use. The
possibility to receive feedback directly from the users of the
building was considered as an interesting feature. However, the
facility maintenance workers were a bit concerned whether
they have enough resources to react on every comment made
through the system. A suggestion made by the facility
maintenance workers was to use some kind of filter to extract
the most important notices of defects or service requests from
the received feedbacks.
In general, the facility maintenance workers appreciated the
idea of having a single interface that is used for observing the
information of the building. Currently, the information that
they need is scattered in three different systems. Also graphical
representations of sensor-based measurement data received
positive comments. However, according to the facility
maintenance workers the approach should offer more
flexibility in setting the time range for observing different
sensor 
data 
measurements. 
The 
final
conclusion that
emerged from the questionnaire was that more advanced means
to give additional information through the approach should be
provided. For example, it would be useful to inform the facility
users about the water or heating system outages or the testing
of fire alarms.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, a novel approach for facility data management
was introduced. The approach utilized semantic technologies
to integrate heterogeneous facility data and interactive
visualizations to improve user awareness. The approach also
offered efficient and easy-to-use mechanisms for providing
feedback. Moreover, the approach aimed at aiding the work of
facility maintenance workers by offering a unified interface to
examine building data and to interact with the facility users.
Results of an experiment, in which the approach was used
in real-world settings, were also presented in the paper. The
results indicate that by providing real-time information about
indoor environment in a meaningful form and by offering
convenient ways to give feedback, the customer experience for
the facility users can be improved. Furthermore, with the
approach the facility maintenance workers are able to better
adjust the conditions according to the needs of the users and
be aware on users’ perceived satisfaction and ability to work.
Moreover, semantic techniques were found to be adequate in
terms of performance and scalability in real world facility data
management activities. Finally, it was discovered that the
existing indoor conditions in Tervaväylä School are in a
satisfactory level.
The future work includes improving the deficiencies found
during the experiment as well as further developing the
approach. The possible developing activities include, for
example, integrating the approach with existing energy
management systems, providing enhanced visualizations that
facilitate the visibility of maintenance services to the facility
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

users and utilizing the collected information in the proactive
prevention of problems. Furthermore, in order to improve the
abilities of the approach to support the tasks of different
stakeholders (e.g., maintenance workers, facility owners) a
more throughout analysis of their needs and requirements
should be conducted.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Leifer, “Evaluating user satisfaction: case studies in
Australasia,” Facilities, vol. 16 no. 5/6, pp. 138-142, 1998.
[2]
U. Isikdag, J. Underwood, and M. Kuruoglu, “Building
Information Modelling,” in A. Akintoye, J.S. Goulding, and G.
Zawdie, 
(Eds.), 
Construction 
Innovation 
and 
Process
Improvement, Wiley Blackwell, UK, 2012.
[3]
A. Salman, M. Hein, and B. Sketo, "Building information
modeling (BIM): Benefits, risks and challenges," Proc. 44th
ASC National Conference, 2008.
[4]
Associated General Contractors Guide, “AGC Contractors’
Guide 
to 
BIM”, 
2006. 
(Available 
online 
at:
http://www.tpm.com/wp-
content/uploads/2013/02/AGC_Guide_to_BIM.pdf) [retrieved:
May 2014]
[5]
S.  D.  Glaser  and  A.  Tolman,  "Sense  of  sensing: From  data to
informed decisions for the built environment," Journal of
infrastructure systems vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 4-14, 2008
[6]
L. Baolin and B. Hu, "HPRD: a high performance RDF
database." In Network and Parallel Computing, pp. 364-374,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007.
[7]
OpenRDF, http://www.openrdf.org/index.jsp [retrieved: May
2014]
[8]
StarDog RDF database, http://stardog.com/ [retrieved: May
2014]
[9]
Virtuoso RDF data store, http://virtuoso.openlinksw.com/rdf-
quad-store/ [retrieved: May 2014]
[10] Q. Z. Yang and Y. Zhang, "Semantic interoperability in building
design: Methods and tools," Computer-Aided Design vol. 38 no.
10 pp. 1099-1112, 2006.
[11] R. Vanlande, C. Nicolle, and C. Cruz, "IFC and building
lifecycle management," Automation in Construction, vol. 18, no.
1 pp. 70-78, 2008.
[12] H. Schevers, J. Mitchell, P. Akhurst, D. Marchant, S. Bull, K.
McDonald, R. Drogemuller, and C. Linning, "Towards digital
facility modelling for Sydney opera house using IFC and
semantic web technology," ITcon vol. 12, pp. 347-362, 2007.
[13] RAUInfo, http://www.rauinfo.fi/Intro.do [retrieved: May 2014]
[14] Resource 
Description 
Framework 
(RDF),
http://www.w3.org/RDF/ [retrieved: May 2014]
[15] SPARQL specification, http://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/
[retrieved: May 2014]
[16] M. Pilgrim, HTML5: Up and running, O'Reilly, 2010.
[17] T. Gruber, Toward “Principles for the Design of Ontologies
Used for Knowledge Sharing,” International Journal Human-
Computer Studies Vol. 43, Issues 5-6, Novemer 1995, pp. 907-
928.
[18] C. Lima, T. El-Diraby, and J. Stephens, "Ontology-based
optimization of knowledge management in e-construction,"
Journal of IT in Construction, vol. 10, 2005, pp. 305-327.
[19] P. Pauwels, R. De Meyer, and J. Van Campenhout,
"Interoperability for the design and construction industry
through semantic web technology," Semantic Multimedia.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 143-158.
[20] P. Pauwels, D. Van Deursen, R. Verstraeten, J. De Roo, R. De
Meyer, R. Van de Walle, and J. Van Campenhout, "A semantic
rule checking environment for building performance checking,"
Automation in Construction, vol 20, 2011, pp. 506-518.
[21] R, Albertoni and M. De Martino, "Semantic similarity of
ontology instances tailored on the application context," On the
Move to Meaningful Internet Systems, CoopIS, DOA, GADA,
and ODBASE, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006. pp. 1020-
1038.
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

